By NATE CHINENOCT. 16, 2015
The first BRIC JazzFest reached peak solidarity near midnight on Thursday, during a relentlessly ecstatic performance by Kamasi Washington. Roaring through his tenor saxophone against the rolling tumult of his band, Mr. Washington imparted an air of mystic urgency to the BRIC House ballroom in Downtown Brooklyn. The room was at capacity, and the crowd felt perfectly tuned in to his message, calling out with congregational fervor.This was the superheated closing set of a five-hour jazz marathon that formed the festival’s core attraction. Though BRIC JazzFest encompassed a few stand-alone concerts earlier in the week, by the bassist Ron Carter and others, it put most of its stock in the multistage, roving-audience model, with nine bands in overlapping sets on Thursday, and nine more planned for Friday.The bounty suited an event presented in association with the CMJ Music Marathon (that word again), and by and large, it was a remarkably smooth success. Tickets were $30 at the door, with a capacity of 700. (Thursday’s marathon sold out.)Yet the experience felt comfortable and manageable, rather than cramped or harried. The sound was first-rate at each of three stages, and drifting among them was easy. (The coziest, the Artist Studio, had been configured like a club, and there was often a line to get in the door. Call that a problem, if you like.) The music ran strictly on time. A lot of musicians stuck around after their sets to hear their peers. None of this should be taken for granted.AdvertisementBut, in a sense, it might have been expected. The powers behind BRIC JazzFest have experience with this sort of thing: BRIC is the nonprofit that presents Celebrate Brooklyn! at Prospect Park every summer, among much else. And one of the producers of the festival is Brice Rosenbloom, who founded the Winter JazzFest, and has more or less turned the marathon ideal into a prevailing standard for jazz festivals in New York.AdvertisementThe Winter JazzFest happens in mid-January in Greenwich Village — its 2016 lineup has just been announced, as was often mentioned from the stage at BRIC House — but when it began in 2005, it was contained within the Knitting Factory, then a three-story structure in TriBeCa. So the BRIC marathon felt like a fond look back (with, it should be noted, brighter, cleaner facilities) as well as a welcome new development.Just how welcome? Given what’s still a limited infrastructure for jazz in Brooklyn, BRIC JazzFest could be an important force for good. Near the start of his festival set, the bassist Ben Williams introduced his band, Sound Effect, and said they’d played many times in Manhattan but never in Brooklyn, until now.Their performance — on a gallery floor that BRIC House calls the Stoop, with stadium seating sloping down from the lobby — was pleasing, crisp and relaxed. Mr. Williams and his partners, especially the saxophonist Marcus Strickland and the keyboardist David Bryant, made their cooled-out version of jazz-funk feel inarguable, like a fait accompli.But then, maybe that was the effect of the booking on Thursday, which suggested a tyranny of style. I heard parts of every set, encountering an abundance of contemporary genre-blending, an overspill of smart proficiency and very little music that seems likely to stay with me.At its least convincing — as in the tart, mugging jazz-R&B of the Los Angeles singer Dessy Di Lauro, who calls her style neo-ragtime — the lineup felt calculating, pitched to an imagined crossover base. Even some of the stronger sets, like one by the trumpeter Takuya Kuroda, whose band sounded like the Brecker Brothers with a new operating system, were hobbled by context: What could be so special about one more group hunkering down with a groove?So there could have been more variety, more call to introspection, more art that challenged the audience. (Friday’s scheduled lineup, which included the bands Thumbscrew and Boom Tic Boom, had the upper hand in that regard.) One of the more distinctive offerings came from the harpist Brandee Younger, who led a quartet with poise and commitment. Her set included compositions by two of her personal touchstones, Alice Coltrane and Dorothy Ashby, and was stronger for it.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.There was also high-impact fusion from the tenor saxophonist Donny McCaslin, and indie-stylized jazz-rock from the keyboardist Kris Bowers and, in a separate set, the guitarist Nir Felder. And Dawn of Midi enacted its signature transfiguration of electronic music by acoustic means, in a hypnotic, muted-percussive performance whose dimensions kept morphing — sometimes by accretion, sometimes by subtraction, always with an icy sobriety. It was an impressive feat of concentration that stayed almost entirely near the surface.A similar condition plagued the much more expansive set by Mr. Washington, who has been the subject of more glowing press this year than any new arrival in jazz’s recent history. Flanked, as usual, by two churning drummers, he muscled through a series of anthems from “The Epic,” his triple album on Brainfeeder. His fellow saxophonist, Terrace Martin, joined the band for a sustained sprint through “Final Thought,” and the trombonist Ryan Porter had his say.Almost every solo, including one on keytar by the pianist Brandon Coleman, held to a frantic, filibustering cadence. And the band dynamic, which has come across well at other recent shows, felt rote in its clamor: superhero jazz without a clear mission, except the will to draw applause.A version of this article appears in print on October 17, 2015, on Page C4 of the New York edition with the headline: 9 Bands, 3 Stages, One 5-Hour Marathon   .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.