By KATHRYN SHATTUCKAPRIL 6, 2015
8:10 P.M. (Starz Cinema) THE LUNCHBOX (2014) When a delivery service sends a lunch intended for her husband astray, a neglected Mumbai housewife (Nimrat Kaur, above left, with Yashvi Puneet Nagar) finds herself communicating through handwritten letters and home-cooked meals with a widowed office worker (Irrfan Khan) nearing retirement in this debut feature from Ritesh Batra. “This is not a new conceit,” A. O. Scott wrote in The New York Times, citing “You’ve Got Mail” and “The Shop Around the Corner.” But, he wrote, “the idea of two lonely souls connecting in a vast, modern metropolis, and remaining strangers even as their intimacy grows, has a durable charm. As do Mr. Khan and Ms. Kaur, islands of melancholy calm surrounded by silliness and noise. Their performances are not exactly subtle — nothing in ‘The Lunchbox’ is exactly subtle — but they are graceful and dignified in the manner of movie stars in an earlier, less aggressive age, ennobling the ordinary lives they explore. And Mr. Batra makes their story touching and credible, an urban fable of hope in the face of disappointment.”10:50 A.M. (Cinemax) ANNA KARENINA (2012) In Joe Wright’s stagy adaptation of this Tolstoy novel, Keira Knightley, left, stars as Anna, the bored wife of a government official (Jude Law) in mid-19th-century Russia, who travels from St. Petersburg to Moscow to calm a storm in the household of her philandering brother (Matthew Macfadyen). Aaron Taylor-Johnson plays the man who captures her heart: Count Vronsky, a military officer with a domineering mother (Olivia Williams) and the eyes of a poet. And Alicia Vikander is Kitty, a lovely woman adored by Levin, the gloomy landowner (Domhnall Gleeson) widely understood to be Tolstoy’s alter ego, whose idea of love is a rebuke to festering urban amorality. “Pious Tolstoyans may knit their brows about the stylistic liberties Mr. Wright and the screenwriter, Tom Stoppard, have taken,” A. O. Scott wrote in The Times, “but surely Tolstoy can withstand (and may indeed benefit from) their playful, passionate rendering of his masterpiece.” Jacqueline Durran won an Oscar for the film’s sumptuous costumes.9 P.M. (CW) JANE THE VIRGIN Jane (Gina Rodriguez) worries that Rafael (Justin Baldoni) might not be a hands-on father. Alba (Ivonne Coll) has a hard time accepting the living arrangement of Xo (Andrea Navedo). And Petra (Yael Grobglas) uncovers a big secret.9 P.M. (Nat Geo) THE BIG PICTURE WITH KAL PENN In “Sex Drive,” Mr. Penn travels to Hurley, Wis., known as the strip-club capital of America; interviews residents at retirement communities in Delray Beach, Fla., home to the fastest-growing group of sexually active people in the country; and cruises up to a drive-in brothel in Zurich.Advertisement9 P.M. (Fox Business) STRANGE INHERITANCE Jamie Colby journeys to Palmdale, Fla., where some children are fighting for control of their inheritance: an alligator and crocodile ranch. At 9:30, she visits a man in Portales, N.M., whose mother bequeathed him 5,000 dolls, including 500 never-opened boxes containing vintage Barbies.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.9 P.M. (A&E) BATES MOTEL Norma (Vera Farmiga) discovers herself in an unexpected position of power and seeks guidance from Sheriff Romero (Nestor Carbonell). Norman (Freddie Highmore) and Dylan (Max Thieriot) come unraveled after a revelation.12:30 A.M. (Starz) LEAVING LAS VEGAS (1995) An alcoholic screenwriter (Nicolas Cage, in an Oscar-winning role) decides to drink himself to death in Las Vegas, where he falls in love with a prostitute (Elisabeth Shue) in this drama by Mike Figgis, which Janet Maslin, writing in The Times, called “passionate and furiously alive.” She added, “For all Ms. Shue’s warmth, in the kind of gutsy, unflinching role that often goes to Jennifer Jason Leigh, ‘Leaving Las Vegas’ never rings entirely true as a bleak love story.” Still, “Mr. Cage digs deep to find his character’s inner demons while also capturing the riotous energy of his outward charm. The film would seem vastly more sordid without his irrepressible good humor.” Ms. Shue received an Oscar nomination for best actress; Mr. Figgis, for best director and best adapted screenplay.AdvertisementWhat’s Streaming NowA PLACE TO CALL HOME Momentous changes await Sarah Adams (Marta Dusseldorp), a nurse with a mysterious past in Europe, and the Blighs, a wealthy family with secrets of its own, in Season 2 of this sweeping drama, set in rural Australia in the 1950s. New episodes are available for streaming each Monday. (acorn.tv) KATHRYN SHATTUCKA version of this schedule appears in print on April 6, 2015, on Page C6 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Monday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.