AdvertisementSupported byCritic’s NotebookBy Zachary WoolfeBERLIN — It’s impossible to chat with a music lover here these days without the conversation eventually turning to a single question: What will the Philharmoniker do?Who, in other words, will the storied, headstrong Berlin Philharmonic choose when its membership votes on May 11 for a chief conductor to replace Simon Rattle, who is stepping down in 2018? Though the Philharmonic has been out of town since March 27, playing its annual Easter festival in Baden-Baden, Germany, the Philharmonie, its home base, hasn’t gone empty. Daniel Barenboim, the music director of the Berlin Staatsoper and its resident orchestra, the Staatskapelle, have been there for the Festtage festival. Seeing so much of Mr. Barenboim on the Philharmonie’s podium naturally led to discussions in the audience about whether he might end up with the prize next month.In this secretive process, nothing is certain. Some say that Mr. Barenboim, widely believed to have been favored by some players when Mr. Rattle was selected in 1999, is once again the front-runner. He said in a recent interview that he wouldn’t reconsider his previous denials of interest in the position.With speculation abounding, this Festtage festival, dedicated to the 90th birthday of Mr. Barenboim’s longtime collaborator, Pierre Boulez, took on the feel of an audition, a kind of season in miniature. If nothing else, it was an impressive feat of endurance for Mr. Barenboim, who is 72: In just over a week, he conducted three concerts, featuring three different orchestras, and led not only a new production of Wagner’s “Parsifal” but also a revival of his “Tannhäuser.”But Mr. Barenboim did not just get through the week; he aced it. The two operas were rigorously paced, their structures exposed. There were compelling, even sensational, renditions of the standard repertory.Most significant was the immersion in the work of Mr. Boulez, whose reputation as a purveyor of unlistenable noise still precedes him. But the week revealed the sensuous, sensitive, ceaselessly experimenting qualities that have always been there, persuasively placing him in the Viennese and French traditions.It is hard to imagine a more luxurious performance of Mr. Boulez’s “Livre pour cordes” than that given by the Vienna Philharmonic’s strings section on March 27, with tremolos that seemed to melt away rather than merely ending. Mr. Boulez’s body of work is an investigation in sound — searching for the numerous ways a single note can come across when produced by different instruments, or for the distinct effects of a tone that’s cut off curtly versus one that’s allowed to reverberate — and this orchestra inhabited that laboratory with easy precision.Following “Mémoriale” (1985) with another piece for solo flute and ensemble, “... explosante-fixe ... originel,” in a version from a few years later, elegantly showed Mr. Boulez’s perpetual reworkings of his material; his catalog is a labyrinth of revisions and new editions. The horns made a hazy halo of sound around the buttery flute playing of Karl-Heinz Schütz, while the cello added body to the flute lines.But the clearest demonstration of Mr. Boulez’s habit of letting musical material proliferate over years and decades was the unusual juxtaposition of five of his succinct solo piano “Notations” (played, with flair, by Mr. Barenboim) with their sprawling orchestral counterparts, performed by the Staatskapelle — lither and more direct than the Viennese — on March 29. As if drops of water had been stretched to the size of oceans, these versions have the same DNA as the piano pieces, while opening up new ecosystems, tides and currents.The Staatskapelle’s concert also featured too-rare performances of “Le visage nuptial,” a simmering, shimmering cantata for soprano, alto, women’s chorus and orchestra set to poems by René Char, and “Anthèmes 2,” in which a violinist is surrounded by electronic sounds that are produced in real time and ricochet around the hall. On Saturday, the young artists of the West-Eastern Divan Orchestra brought out the kaleidoscopic sense of wonder in the challenging “Dérive 2,” 45 minutes of antic, unsettled music for 11 players, pairing it with similarly colorful, changeable works by Ravel and Debussy.The stolidity for which some criticize Mr. Barenboim sometimes crept into these performances. But there was nothing heavy about his vital take on Schubert’s Ninth Symphony with the Viennese musicians, its scherzo conveying tender, lilting nostalgia without a hint of syrupy sentimentality.It was the right kind of music-making, in the right kind of repertory, to keep bringing back thoughts of Mr. Barenboim’s possible future with the Berliners. Of course, anything can happen on May 11. But consensus seems to be building that younger stars, like Andris Nelsons, Gustavo Dudamel and Yannick Nézet-Séguin, will get their moment in the future. Christian Thielemann, superb in the Austro-German standards, vexed many by publishing an opinion piece in a German newspaper in January sympathetic with the concerns, if not the tactics, of the anti-Islam, anti-immigration group Pegida.That leaves a small group of veterans like Riccardo Chailly or Mariss Jansons. Or, of course, Mr. Barenboim.Advertisement