By KATHRYN SHATTUCKAPRIL 5, 2015
“Maybe it’s shocking for an actor to admit to being overweight,” said Candice Bergen about the tabloid response to “A Fine Romance,” her new memoir, in which she writes that she’s fat — and doesn’t really care.What perplexes her is that out of 350 pages, it is Chapter 30 — a sort of glib afterthought about her affinity for food (“I live to eat,” she writes. “No carb is safe — no fat either.”) and ambivalence toward Hollywood beauty standards — that has gotten the most attention.Ms. Bergen, who will turn 69 on May 9, is O.K., more or less, with the 30 pounds she has gained above her fighting weight as a professional beauty.But “I am not going to be the patron saint of overeaters, let me tell you,” she nearly roared, glowing from her morning workout as the noon sun beamed into her airy former duplex — now her daughter’s — at the Gainsborough Studios on Central Park South on Thursday. “I draw the line.”AdvertisementMs. Bergen’s physique is the least intriguing part of “A Fine Romance,” to be released on Tuesday, in which she interweaves 35 years of love affairs — with her first husband, the French director Louis Malle; their daughter, Chloe; and her second husband, the real estate developer and philanthropist Marshall Rose. She also parses the nation’s infatuation with the CBS sitcom “Murphy Brown,” in which she starred for a decade as a take-no-prisoners, formerly booze-guzzling television reporter.Advertisement“I saw it first as a love letter to my daughter, and I was very grateful to be given the opportunity to do that,” she said of “A Fine Romance,” her second memoir, a surprisingly frank and even bawdy mélange of celebrity fairy tale, marriage confessional and accounting of the mundane. (Her 1984 best seller, “Knock Wood,” recounted her relationship with her father, the ventriloquist Edgar Bergen, and his dummy, Charlie McCarthy.)But the story really begins on Sept. 27, 1980, when, after a six-month courtship, Ms. Bergen, who brought her heady blend of California warmth and Scandinavian cool to Sidney Lumet’s “The Group” and Mike Nichols’s “Carnal Knowledge,” married Mr. Malle, the brilliant auteur behind “My Dinner With Andre” and “Au Revoir les Enfants,” at Le Coual, his home in southwest France. It was his second marriage and her first. “Both of us thought it was a miracle,” she wrote.They’d circled each other socially for four years with scarcely a word between them. Then Mr. Malle called Ms. Bergen out of the blue from Toronto and asked her to lunch at the Russian Tea Room in New York. Four hours into the meal, they were still babbling away, enraptured by each other’s company, in a banquette.Two weeks after that, on March 17 — the day they considered their anniversary — they went to see “Manon Lescaut,” Puccini’s tale of a fatal beauty torn between love and money, at the Metropolitan Opera.“That night I wrote in my journal: ‘Uh-oh,’ ” she recalls in the book. “It was understood. We knew what we had.”“It moved very quickly; we were older,” Ms. Bergen said. She was 34 and he was 47 when they exchanged their vows. “And I had sort of given up finding anybody I wanted to marry, so when you make a connection at that point, you move on it.” For the next five years, the couple divided their time among New York, France and movie locations, devouring opera houses, museums, cloisters and cathedrals in what Ms. Bergen called “cultural clinics.”Then two women interrupted their reverie.The first was Chloe, born Nov. 8, 1985, when Ms. Bergen was 39.AdvertisementThe second, born three years later, was “Murphy Brown.”Ms. Bergen was 41 when she received the script. The role felt created specifically for her.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“A lot of people think I wrote it for her because it fit so well, but that actually wasn’t the case,” Diane English, the creator of “Murphy Brown,” said by telephone from Los Angeles on Friday. “She wasn’t on any list of actresses for the part. But as soon as her name was mentioned it was like a light bulb went off and I was like, ‘Jeez, she would just fit so well into this if she wanted to do it.’ ” Ms. English flew to New York and was met by a kindred spirit wearing the same outfit, lipstick and even perfume.And despite a botched audition and the network’s preference for someone like Heather Locklear, Ms. English stood firm.“I pulled out the list of potential actresses and said, ‘I want you to point to one name who would be better than Candice Bergen,’ ” Ms. English remembered. “And nobody could do it.”In the November 1988 pilot, Ms. Bergen sang along — boldly and off-key — to Aretha Franklin’s “(You Make Me Feel Like) A Natural Woman” and a hit was born, with John J. O’Connor of The New York Times comparing her to Rosalind Russell and Mary Tyler Moore.Then Vice President Dan Quayle, in a 1992 speech, castigated Murphy’s decision to become a single mother in her 40s as irresponsible and blamed her for mocking the importance of fathers — landing Murphy in the headlines, and leaving Ms. Bergen and Ms. English shellshocked.“That isn’t something that I in the least encourage; fathers are not dispensable,” Ms. Bergen said, though she defended her character’s decision. She did, however, feel strongly that Murphy not make it look easy.“It’s like, ‘You can have it all,’ ” she said. “Well, you can’t quite. It costs your child or your job or your husband. When they were writing the scripts for Murphy, I fought tooth and nail that she not look like someone whose child was second priority to her career.”In November 1995, Mr. Malle died of lymphoma at their Beverly Hills home after an excruciating and rapid decline. Three years later Ms. Bergen was set up on a blind date with Mr. Rose, whom she described as capable of great depths of love and incapable of dishonesty. The couple married in 2000.AdvertisementWhile writing “A Fine Romance,” Ms. Bergen struggled to find an ending that could bring her life’s passions full circle on the page. Though it didn’t make it into the book, in July she will return to Le Coual in France to watch Chloe marry Graham Albert, a financial analyst.“There will be cocktails in the field, dinner in the garden and dancing in the barn,” she said. “I’ll peek from the corner for a while.”Doesn’t she dance?“Oh, I love to dance,” she said, chortling. “But you don’t want to crowd the kids.”A version of this article appears in print on April 6, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: The Great Loves of Her Life.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.