By GIA KOURLASAPRIL 5, 2015
In her program note for “The Blues Project,” the tap dancer and choreographer Michelle Dorrance refers to Toshi Reagon, her musical collaborator, as “a revolutionary, but simultaneously an artist who honors and embodies tradition.” Ms. Dorrance, as full of vivacity as she is fiercely technical, could be describing herself. All worthwhile artists are rebels; the best grasp and revere their history, which, in tap especially, is its lifeblood.On Saturday at the Joyce Theater, Ms. Dorrance presented “The Blues Project,” choreographed with Derick K. Grant and Dormeshia Sumbry-Edwards, who are also exceptional dancers. Weaving on and off the stage is an ensemble of six — they look a little like 1950s teenagers at a country club — who mirror Ms. Dorrance’s elation for movement, while Ms. Reagon leads BIGLovely, an aptly named quintet performing on a raised platform behind the dancers. The setup reveals a deep merging of forms: As Ms. Reagon’s music envelops the dancing, the dancing seeps through to the last chord and sometimes even beyond it.“The Blues Project” is an exploration of the solo body and the group — how the two compose music alongside Ms. Reagon’s expansive definition of the blues. Her voice, as she strums an acoustic guitar, is a resonant, searing counterpart to Ms. Dorrance’s succinct pacing, which keeps “The Blues Project” moving forward like a greatest-hits album: a spirited, saucy Lindy Hop number is followed by an improvisation by Mr. Grant, whose sinuous shape belies the lightness of his feet in a powerfully hushed solo turn.There are two other fascinating solos in the piece, one for the agile Ms. Dorrance, who starts with simple walks and ends quietly as her feet turn out and click back into parallel; in between, her fleet steps react like sparks to Ms. Reagon’s rich sound, filling the pauses with a pulse of her own. In the other, the brilliant Ms. Sumbry-Edwards is more forthright as her heels and toes — striking fast, smooth, impossibly concise — play with tone and timbre.As for Ms. Dorrance, gangly must be a word she’s sick of hearing, yet the long stretch of her legs or the heel that catches the floor when she’s slid past the point of comfort reveal that and more: fearlessness. Her lean body — sharp elbows, loose hips, an earthy plié — creates a spidery grace so compellingly unusual that you can’t help but pine when she’s been off the stage for too long. In “The Blues Project,” Ms. Dorrance plays the crowd as well as her feet: She leaves you wanting more.A version of this review appears in print on April 6, 2015, on Page C4 of the New York edition with the headline: Fleet Steps Adding Music to Expansive Blues.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.