SummerStage, the annual free concert series organized by the City Parks Foundation, will celebrate its 30th season this year with an expanded schedule, hosting more than 140 music, film, dance and theater events across the city’s parks from May through October. The performances begin in Central Park, where it all started in 1986, with a concert by the Tedeschi Trucks Band on May 18. Additional outdoor locales for the season include East River Park and Marcus Garvey Park in Manhattan; Red Hook Park, Brooklyn Bridge Park and Herbert Von King Park in Brooklyn; Queensbridge Park in Queens; and St. Mary’s Park in the Bronx. Among the entertainment highlights are Meshell Ndegeocello and Roy Hargrove, as part of the Blue Note Jazz Festival on June 6 in Central Park; George Clinton and Parliament Funkadelic at Queensbridge Park on July 15; and songs from “Beautiful: The Carole King Musical” on Aug. 3 in Central Park.The Metropolitan Opera Summer Recital Series will travel from Central Park, on June 15, to Brooklyn Bridge Park on June 17; Socrates Sculpture Park on June 24; Jackie Robinson Park in Manhattan on June 26; Crotona Park in the Bronx on June 28; and Clove Lakes Park on Staten Island on June 30. And for those seeking some Shakespeare, the Classical Theater of Harlem will stage “The Tempest” at Marcus Garvey Park in Manhattan throughout July. Hip-hop history will be represented at a screening of “Time Is Illmatic,” a documentary about the rapper Nas, on July 19 at Queensbridge Park, near where Nas grew up, as well as on Aug. 8 in Central Park, where the D.J.’s Gilles Peterson, Quantic and Afrika Bambaataa will spin.Benefit concerts in Central Park, which are not free, include the hard-rocking Mastodon on May 19, the Kooks on June 24, and some light indie-folk from Father John Misty and Angel Olsen on Aug. 5. Ian Noble, the director of arts and cultural programs for the City Parks Foundation, said in a statement that SummerStage “truly celebrates New York City.” He added, “From the iconic to the avant garde, from opera to hip-hop, film to circus, there is no other festival like it.”More information is available at SummerStage.org.A version of this article appears in print on 04/09/2015, on page C3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Tedeschi Trucks Band to Kick Off SummerStage.