Season 6, Episode 12: “Collateral”We’re all Constable Bob.We all want to believe that we are cooler than we are. We are brave and loyal. We continue to admire Raylan Givens despite his flaws.In this penultimate episode of “Justified,” it is Raylan’s affection for Constable Bob that pricks his conscience and diverts him from his monomaniacal hunt for Boyd Crowder. We can argue whether or not that is a good thing since, as the episode ends, Raylan is being held at gunpoint by two deputy sheriffs.Raylan, a deputy United States marshal, has been making it a little tough for the fans who see him —  as Constable Bob does — as a hero. He’s angry and violent. He ignores the law when it is convenient. He justifies each shooting or act of violence (and we do, too). His obvious itch to kill criminals is a subject of many sardonic comments by his partner. He says he is trying to rescue Ava Crowder from Boyd and from Avery Markham, but it is Boyd he wants and Boyd he wants to kill.I have long lamented that this series has not caught on with the cultural tastemakers that popularized other TV series. For six seasons “Justified” has had great writing, great plotting and great acting. It could easily have become a “Hillbilly Law and Order,” but instead it artfully wove classic western movie themes into a modern cop show. It has a wry sense of humor and has been skillful at making every act of violence shocking.There might be no greater theme in crime fiction than the conflicting urges of the lawman to seek justice or wreak vengeance. Raylan  seemed to cross the line when he took off the badge at the end of the last episode. That Raylan aborted a gunfight with Boyd and let him slip away in order to rescue Constable Bob suggests he may have crossed back. At first, when Boyd tells Raylan that he shot Constable Bob and left him to die, Raylan says, “Bob can take care of himself.” Boyd responds with one choice line from an episode full of them: “Why, hell, Raylan. Then I have already won.”This episode did not let us down. It gave us more of Raylan than usual as he scoured the hills. His encounter with a destitute mountain man is the heart of the episode as Raylan rids himself of the last bit of his criminal family’s legacy. He bequeaths his father’s house to the man and his kin. “I don’t need the money from selling it. I need to find Boyd and get to Florida.” It’s a nice summation of his frame of mind. He wants to get back to his family, but duty comes first for a man hunting outlaws.The episode also tied up some loose ends and unraveled a few more to set up the final episode. Wynn Duffy tells the authorities he is leaving Kentucky, never to return, but he buys a used dog-grooming van with a hidden compartment for duffel bags full of money. And he wants a topographical map of the county. He is obviously going after the $10 million, which is somewhere up in the mountains. That he pays for it with a diamond tennis bracelet and engagement ring he obviously stole from Katherine Hale’s corpse is a nice touch.
Where that money is hidden is anyone’s guess. Ava’s Uncle Zachariah blew himself up in an attempt to kill Boyd. Only he and Ava know where it is. And Ava is now in the hands of Markham.Markham also has finally persuaded Loretta, the aspiring pot mogul, to throw in with him. That it took having her boyfriend shot by Boon, Markham’s gun thug, and finished off by Markham to persuade her suggests this may not be a completely solid partnership.How this show will end is anyone’s guess. Other popular long-running series have had no problem killing off the hero in the final episode. Many of the commenters are betting that Boon also will be killed, either by Raylan or Loretta. Jonathan Tucker, who plays Boon, has made his character so frightening that I want him to live on. After all, someone will have to fill the vacuum and run the criminal enterprises.A few mysteries. The sequence involving Boyd and the hijacked truck was oddly moving. But what was the driver trying to tell Boyd when he asked if the name Hut McKean, if I heard it right, meant anything to him? Boyd’s response: “I’m an outlaw.” And then he shot the driver in the head.Was the Gremlin really so poorly manufactured that the safety handle could be wrenched off so easily?And please, can someone tell us the brand and style of that hat Boon is wearing.The show drink: Once again, it’s a dry episode. Did the Buffalo Trace distillery run out of bottles to send the show’s crew?Next week, the show’s finale. Bring bourbon.