AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael CooperAfter financial woes led to a brush with death, the San Diego Opera turned for leadership to David Bennett, who as executive director of Gotham Chamber Opera in New York had seemed to prove that opera need not be done on a grand scale to succeed.But just months after Mr. Bennett left New York for the West Coast, it is Gotham, not San Diego, that is suddenly shutting down. The company’s board said that it learned the true extent of Gotham’s debts only when his successor went through the books. Just as Mr. Bennett begins his first full season as the general director of the still-fragile San Diego Opera, new details are emerging about Gotham’s final days, raising questions about his management.Board members at Gotham, which announced its closing this month, said they were told at a meeting in May that the company, whose budget was $1.9 million in the 2013 fiscal year, had $116,758 in outstanding liabilities. But its new executive director, Edward Barnes, said in a recent interview that the figure climbed to more than $600,000 by July, after he found invoices and debts that had not been on the company’s books.Officials said that some artists have yet to be fully paid, including Luca Veggetti, the director and choreographer who helped create Gotham’s well-reviewed production of “The Tempest Songbook” in March at the Metropolitan Museum of Art. (Mr. Veggetti declined to comment.) The company’s 2013 tax returns, which originally showed a small surplus, were amended last month to reflect a small deficit. A workers’ compensation insurance policy was allowed to lapse, leading to a fine. And Mr. Bennett acknowledged in an interview that he had spent on operating expenses money given to Gotham as a restricted gift to create a new composing prize — something that New York State law seeks to discourage.Mr. Bennett said that he had regularly briefed Gotham’s board about its finances and that he believes some of the growing liabilities were for expenses for the now-canceled 2015-16 season. He noted that in recent years the company regularly had to take out loans from board members to mount its productions. “We were without cash for basically two to three years,” he said. “And when that happens, certainly, you pay things as you can.”The San Diego Opera’s board is supporting Mr. Bennett. Carol Lazier, its president, who helped to revive the company after it decided last year to shut down, said in a statement that the board was “very pleased with the work David has done for us and stands behind him.”She said that at the San Diego Opera “strong internal financial controls are in place” and that Mr. Bennett is assisted by a chief operations officer and a three-person finance department. She said that the company’s top financial officials meet with the board’s finance committee every month to review the company’s expenditures and financial obligations.Gotham, by contrast, operated on a shoestring, with only four full-time employees. Its board reviewed financial information provided by Mr. Bennett on a quarterly basis, Johnnie Moore Hawkins, the board’s vice president, wrote in an email. He said that in recent years there had typically been a one-year lapse before audits were done.But Gotham’s implosion — just as Mr. Bennett, who had been with the company since 2006, left for a higher-profile job whose $200,000-a-year salary is more than twice what he made in New York — has dismayed some at the company. Gotham enjoyed a reputation for collegiality and had established an outsize presence in New York’s opera scene with creative productions led by its artistic director, the conductor Neal Goren, who founded the company in 2000.Mr. Bennett was known in the New York arts world as an affable, charming and enthusiastic promoter of opera. Before joining Gotham, he was the managing director of Dance New Amsterdam, a dance center in Manhattan that filed for bankruptcy in 2013. He is on the board of directors of Opera America, a national service organization for opera companies.One transaction that has raised eyebrows since Mr. Bennett’s departure involved his handling of a restricted gift: a $25,000 grant Gotham received in 2013 from the Jarvis & Constance Doctorow Family Foundation to establish the Catherine Doctorow Prize for Music, a competition to commission a work for voice and chamber ensemble. The grant application called for awarding the composer $15,000 — David Hertzberg, a young composer, was chosen as its first winner — and stated that the rest of the money could be used to administer the prize.The application, a copy of which was reviewed by The New York Times, states that in accepting the grant Gotham agreed to use the money “solely to support the specific activities” it mentions. But Mr. Hertzberg, who wrote a setting of Wallace Stevens’s “Sunday Morning” for soprano, string nonet and harp, was paid only $5,000 of the $15,000 he was promised, company officials said. Gotham officials said they discovered that Mr. Bennett had apparently spent the rest of the grant money on operating expenses, which he acknowledged.“We did receive the prize money, and the whole award was not given, so certainly that was spent,” Mr. Bennett said. “Generally, as money is fungible, we intended to have that paid back, the rest of it — by the time that the second half of the prize was awarded.”Several lawyers who specialize in the laws governing nonprofits said that while they could not comment on the specifics of the Gotham case, New York State law contains provisions that seek to ensure that the recipients of restricted gifts use them as their donors intended. Jason R. Lilien, a partner at Loeb & Loeb and a former chief of the Charities Bureau of the New York State Attorney General’s office, wrote in an email that “under New York law, restrictions imposed by donors on gifts may generally be released or modified only by obtaining the donor’s consent or by obtaining court approval, upon notice to the Attorney General.”Suzanne Larson, the executive director of the Doctorow Family Foundation, said in an email that Gotham had “never asked permission to use the money in any way other than for the Catherine Doctorow Prize for Music.” The gift involved a small amount of money for the company, but the episode highlights what some former workers at Gotham described as a chaotic environment in which money was tight, contracts were often entered into at the last minute and payments in recent years were often delayed.The composer, Mr. Hertzberg, is not only losing out on money he was promised, but also on a performance of his piece: Gotham’s sudden closing means that a premiere of the work that had been planned for later this fall, and which was supposed to be supported with money from another grant, has now been canceled.“This news came as a complete shock to me,” Mr. Hertzberg wrote in an email.Advertisement