The Fox comedy “New Girl” isn’t known for its commentary on world affairs — in fact, its stories are largely confined to the apartment its four main characters share. But on Tuesday’s episode, “Par 5,” the plot took an unexpected dive into a conversation about race relations. After meeting a woman who invites him to an anti-police rally, Winston (Lamorne Morris) discussed the inner conflict he felt as an African-American cop. In a conversation with roommate and childhood friend Nick (Jake Johnson), Winston says: “I love you but, you’re white, I’m black. I understand where she’s coming from. When I was a kid we used to run from the police. Even if we did nothing wrong, it was just out of habit.”Mr. Morris, who co-wrote the episode, spoke about bringing the idea to “New Girl” executive producers Elizabeth Meriwether, Dave Finkel and Brett Baer — and about balancing the desire to address the topic with the responsibility to be funny. What made you want to bring this conversation to “New Girl?” I had been getting tweets from fans about Winston being a black cop, like, “What’s up with that?” But it was around the Darren Wilson verdict that I got really upset and thought I should address this, without being too preachy or too militant. I grew up on the south side of Chicago, where we really did run from the police when we saw them, so this issue has always been on my mind.  What experiences of yours inspired the writing? I’ve had run-ins with the police good and bad. When I was 23 and hosting for BET, I went home to Chicago to visit family and friends. I was out with my buddy, who’s black, and my girlfriend at the time, who’s white. We were walking down the street when two cops pulled us over and asked where we were going. I said we were going to my car and they asked me to point to it. It was a new car. They handcuffed and frisked us, put us up against the car. I told them “It’s my car—check the glovebox.” They asked my girlfriend if she was O.K., and when she told them it was my car, they let us go. What were you expecting when you pitched the writers and producers your idea? I didn’t know where everyone stood, but I thought that since I was the only black person in the writers’ room on that day, they’d at least have to listen to me. To my surprise, they were all feeling the same way about wanting to say something. Liz, Dave and Brett said, “Why don’t you write it?” Did you struggle with the task of making a statement while maintaining the tone of a comedy? There was some stuff I wrote that we couldn’t use. I had written a line for Winston to say to Nick, something like: “I’m black, and I’m a police officer, and as I sit here, comfortable in this loft with you, my white buddy, black people are being slaughtered.” The conversation Winston ends up having with Nick and Coach (Damon Wayans Jr.) about race and the cops is the pivotal moment in this story line — but there are some big laughs, thanks to Nick doing a terrible Eddie Murphy impression. How did you land on that bit as a means of lightening the scene? We had worked on a bit about a comedy race war in the house — Nick and Schmidt go around doing Eddie Murphy and Richard Pryor impressions, and Coach and I are arguing that Jerry Seinfeld is funnier. Liz loved that so much, we decided to add Nick doing Eddie Murphy into the scene. In the end, Winston remains troubled by police violence, but he’s proud to be a cop. What’s the takeaway you were going for?  We wanted to take a neutral stance. I have friends that are police officers and they’re great individuals. When one officer does something wrong, law enforcement as a group takes the fall, because the media attention is so intense now. I’m old enough to know not everyone’s like that, but I’m smart enough to know you still have to be careful. Winston’s beloved cat is named Ferguson — a word that now doubles as a reference point for these ongoing events. Did you consider working him in somehow? I originally had an idea that involved me keeping my cat after the apartment complex made a no-animal rule, and other tenants accusing me of being on a power trip as a cop. Looting was involved. It came off a little bit insensitive, so we had to switch it up.