AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn Shattuck10 P.M. (Starz Cinema) THE PAINTED VEIL (2006) An unhappily married 1920s British couple, Kitty and Walter Fane (Naomi Watts and Edward Norton, above), move to Shanghai, where they drift into a steamy state of liberated coexistence in this third screen adaptation of the W. Somerset Maugham novel. Liev Schreiber plays Charles Townsend, the married charmer who brings Kitty to life — and then close to death when Walter, a doctor, discovers their affair and hustles her into the countryside during a cholera epidemic. “As nicely directed by John Curran and adapted to the screen by Ron Nyswaner, this version of the story lulls you by turning Maugham’s distaff bildungsroman into a fine romance,” Manohla Dargis wrote in The New York Times. “Even better, the new film gives us ample opportunity to spend time with Ms. Watts, whose remarkable talent helps keep movie faith and love alive, even in the tinniest, tiniest vehicles.” Mr. Norton, she added, “is very fine here, especially early on, before his billing gets the better of the story.”8 P.M. (Sundance) BEHIND THE STORY WITH THE PALEY CENTER The stars, writers and producers of some of television’s biggest hits discuss their shows, starting with Amy Poehler, left, and the NBC sitcom “Parks and Recreation.”8 P.M. (13, 49) TWICE BORN — STORIES FROM THE SPECIAL DELIVERY UNIT This mini-series ventures inside the special delivery unit of the Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, where rare surgeries are performed on fetuses in the womb. In this second episode a Boston couple must decide whether to have surgery done on their baby’s spine, while parents-to-be from Houston receive devastating news about their twins.9 P.M. (Oxygen) FUNNY GIRLS Six female comedians break into the male-dominated stand-up scene in Los Angeles with the help of guest mentors including Margaret Cho, Bill Burr, Loni Love, Janeane Garofalo and Horatio Sanz.9 P.M. (13, 49) INSIDE THE COURT OF HENRY VIII Peter Chinn parses the intrigue, politics and legacy of King Henry VIII — and provides factual context to the “Masterpiece” presentation “Wolf Hall” — through expert commentary and dramatic re-enactments against the backdrop of Hampton Court; Lambeth Palace; the Tower of London; and Hever Castle, the childhood home of Anne Boleyn, Henry’s second wife.10 P.M. (TBS) YOUR FAMILY OR MINE A couple (Kyle Howard and Kat Foster) living in Seattle with their two children alternate visits each week with his parents (Richard Dreyfuss and JoBeth Williams) or hers (Ed Begley Jr. and Cynthia Stevenson) in this new sitcom, adapted from the popular Israeli series “Savri Maranan.”10 P.M. (Esquire) THE RUNNER-UP The Oscar-winning producer Simon Chinn (“Searching for Sugar Man,” “Man on Wire”) and his Emmy-winning cousin, Jonathan Chinn (“American High”), follow the improbable — and ultimately failed — congressional campaign of Clay Aiken, a gay Democrat, single father and Season 2 runner-up on “American Idol.”10 P.M. (13); 11 P.M. (49) THE FIGHT FOR YEMEN In this “Frontline” and BBC Arabic production, Safa al-Ahmad reports on the violent sectarian conflict in Yemen, home to one of the most powerful branches of Al Qaeda and its rival, the anti-American rebel group Houthis.What’s Streaming NowREEL WORKS Avan Jogia and Erinn Westbrook host this series of short films made in association with the Brooklyn-based Reel Works, which provides free filmmaking workshops to more than 500 teenagers from the five boroughs of New York, pairing them with professionals to help tell their stories. New episodes drop each Tuesday, starting here with shorts by Dexter Dugar, Martin Vasquez and Juliana Negron. (reelworks.org) MAN ON WIRE (2008) As a young man, the French aerialist Philippe Petit, left, was flipping through a magazine in a doctor’s office when he saw an article about plans to build the tallest skyscrapers in the world side by side in Lower Manhattan. He became obsessed with the idea of walking between them on a tightrope. This documentary from James Marsh describes the planning behind Mr. Petit’s daredevil (and illegal) feat on Aug. 7, 1974, when for nearly 45 minutes he danced back and forth on a metal cable strung between the World Trade Center towers. Writing in The Times, A. O. Scott called the film, which won the Oscar for best documentary feature, “thorough, understated and altogether enthralling.” (netflix.com) KATHRYN SHATTUCKAdvertisement