By JON CARAMANICAAPRIL 6, 2015
SHLOHMO“Dark Red”(True Panther/WeDidIt)On the plus side, everyone has access to everything now, but on the downside, most people can’t figure out what to do with all the information. In electronic music, producers often borrow glibly from a range of styles and eras to show off their libraries, but mainly come off as dance-floor tourists.Shlohmo could have gone down this road. For about six years, he’s been releasing music that’s rooted in hip-hop but tempered with the reserve of the moody electronic music of the 1990s. On his 2011 debut album, “Bad Vibes,” the results were slippery and sometimes sleepy. But on a series of EPs since then — including “No More,” a rousing collaboration with the fluttery R&B singer Jeremih — he’s refined his approach, making music that’s both more elegant and more driven.He’s also refining his source material. “Dark Red,” his sometimes emphatic, sometimes meandering second full-length album, has moments that underscore just how much Shlohmo — real name Henry Laufer — has evolved. The peak here is “Slow Descent,” which nods to both the hard slap of late ’90s drum and bass and also the bleary droops of Portishead. “Meet Ur Maker” channels flickers of Depeche Mode-style melancholy. And “Fading” features hard, fast, clinical percussion that recalls the rigor of Squarepusher.Shlohmo can toggle among those styles because he remains, even among them, firm in his own sound: a sort of slow low-end, a liquid melt. In places where that’s the primary ingredient, like “Buried” or “Ditch,” he can get lost. (The song titles are also more austere than the music is.) But when he refracts an idea of old through his certain sense of the now, he shines.A version of this review appears in print on April 7, 2015, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline: Review: Shlohmo’s ‘Dark Red’ Puts a Spin on the 1990s.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.