By ALASTAIR MACAULAYOCT. 16, 2015
CHICAGO — This city has two dance companies famous beyond here: the Joffrey Ballet and Hubbard Street Dance Chicago. Hubbard Street, formed in 1977, has been here longer; the Joffrey, founded in 1956 in New York, moved here in 1995. Each performs on a memorable Chicago stage: the Joffrey at the 1889 Auditorium Theater (Prokofiev’s opera “The Love of Three Oranges” had its world premiere there in 1921; it can seat 3,737), and Hubbard Street at the 2003 Harris Theater which, with two raked tiers, both subterranean, has a capacity of 1,525.Though I had seen Hubbard Street elsewhere, this visit was my first to the Harris Theater, in Millennium Park, which was built partly to the company’s specifications. Thursday’s audience was strikingly youthful and enthusiastic.By strange chance, the two companies this week present works by American choreographers whose careers began in Germany and, despite international acclaim, have largely remained there — John Neumeier (Joffrey) and William Forsythe (Hubbard Street). The Joffrey opened Mr. Neumeier’s “Sylvia” on Wednesday. Thursday brought Hubbard Street’s first Forsythe triple bill: “N.N.N.N.” (2002), “Quintett” (1985) and “One Flat Thing, reproduced” (2000). (“N.N.N.N.” was being performed for the first time by any American company; in 2012, this was the first American troupe to dance “Quintett.”)The Hubbard Street dancers — 15 performed on Thursday — are attractive, skilled, personable. I imagine many will praise them more warmly yet; in other repertory I hope I would, too. But Mr. Forsythe’s dances all become hollow studies in dancerliness, with exaggerated dynamic contrasts. (A slow-stretched gesture in one direction, for example, is followed by a pow! impulse that takes the dancer another way.) In “Quintett,” I admired the powerful purity of Andrew Murdock, a Canadian dancer who joined this troupe in 2013; but early in “One Flat Thing,” he showed the same mannered switches between lingering and attack, both showy.AdvertisementAnyone can see and hear the differences among these three pieces. “N.N.N.N.” is a quartet — two women, two men, working closely together, largely in pedestrian vocabulary, notably swings of arm and leg, touch, clap and interrupted gesture — in which breath sounds created by the dancers themselves are amplified and mixed with faint sound effects by the composer Thom Willems. “Quintett,” set to Gavin Bryars’s arrangement of the chant “Jesus’ Blood Never Failed Me Yet,” features three men and two women in various (often simultaneous) solos, duets and trios; at one point, a film — seemingly of passing clouds — is switched onto the backdrop. “One Flat Thing” is for 20 steel-framed tables that occupy most of the floor space and 14 dancers, who lie beneath, lean over, lie on top of or pass between these tables; the score, by Mr. Willems, sounds like garbled radio noise with lots of static.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.To me, however, all three feel just the same. Each is an exercise in absurdism that (unlike the important dramas of the Theater of the Absurd) lacks depth and cultivates surface display. The audible use of breath in “N.N.N.N.” may be fun at first, but it, too, becomes shtick, often louder and faster than needed for cues. And I have never enjoyed the rhythmic structure of any Forsythe dance. The emphasis on heightened dynamic contrasts makes the time values of each piece feel like overused elastic.Mr. Forysthe’s work is taken seriously by many, including friends I love and respect. And I keep trying to see what lures them. But it still eludes me. Just to concentrate on what’s happening onstage always involves professional effort.AdvertisementThese three Hubbard Street acquisitions show none of the sensationalist effects of off-balance pointwork and hyperextension that for some years in the late 20th century made Mr. Forsythe the darling of several prestigious ballet companies; but that style, too, was mere surface, and he has not tried to sustain it. This year he has been appointed associate choreographer at the Paris Opera Ballet. Will this open a new chapter in his work? Here’s hoping. The response of the Hubbard Street audience showed that its older chapters still cause excitement.A dance review on Oct. 17 about a performance by Hubbard Street Dance Chicago that included “Quintett” by William Forsythe misstated the year the company became the first American troupe to perform that work. It was 2012, not 2002.­Hubbard Street Dance Chicago performs its William Forsythe program through Oct. 18 at the Harris Theater in Chicago; hubbardstreetdance.com.A version of this review appears in print on October 17, 2015, on Page C2 of the New York edition with the headline: In Chicago, a Feast of Forsythe.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.