AdvertisementSupported byCritic’s NotebookBy Mike HaleSeason 4 of “Louie” was Louis C.K.’s art house phase. One moment he seemed to be channeling David Lynch, the next Woody Allen, the next Paul Mazursky. His half-hour comedy, always on the dark and fantastical side, took on a whole new weight — a seriousness that was simultaneously impressive and a little wearing. At times the only laughter it inspired was the nervous kind. That felt funny, you thought — is that where I was supposed to laugh?In Season 5, which begins on Thursday night on FX, Louis C.K. signals right away that he’s aware of how the previous season might have played to his small but loyal audience. At least that’s how I read the first sketch, a therapy session in which Louie’s disclosures start to sound more and more suicidal — he’s not sure “how to live a life anymore” — but are completely undercut by the therapist’s reaction. (Describing any 30 seconds of “Louie” is a minefield of spoilers.) He does it again in Episode 2 when what looks like a detour into Louie’s childhood traumas, complete with the beginning of a flashback to the young Louie of Season 4, is cut off by his girlfriend, Pam (Pamela Adlon).The new season is a more straightforward affair over all, reminiscent in tone and structure of the show’s brilliantly mordant first three years. In the typical episode, a bit of stand-up, a short, low-key absurdist sketch and a longer, more intricate story share space and a set of tangentially related themes and images. Through four of the eight episodes, there’s no grand narrative arc, no weekslong excavation of Louie’s youth or his insecurities about sex and loneliness, as there were last season. Everything is compact, self-contained. That doesn’t mean, however, that Season 5 takes us all the way back to the freewheeling, explosive humor of the old “Louie.” We’re still in dark and occasionally very heavy territory, with long stretches (sometimes entire episodes) that are more sweaty, uncomfortable and even scary than obviously funny. The situations develop in even stranger ways than before, and the laughs still burst out of you at odd moments for reasons you don’t necessarily understand. This time around, as Louis C.K. reinvents the classic sitcom in his own elliptical, cerebral style, he seems to be in his absurdist theater phase, or his surrealist short-story phase — Kafka on the Hudson. (Louis C.K. still writes, directs and edits every episode.)At that level of ambition, some things work and some don’t. Episode 2 is a good example: A short opening sketch in which Louie suddenly realizes he needs to go to the bathroom while he’s at the market with his daughters is a gem, spiraling into a subtly hilarious moment equating embarrassment and death. The longer story that follows, about Louie and Pam’s movie date and their acrimonious attempts to define their relationship, is more routine, something we’ve seen before.But you can trust Louis C.K. to show you something new before long. An episode with Michael Rapaport (in a fine performance) as a high school acquaintance of Louie’s who’s now an overbearing, lonely New York cop takes a familiar situation and spins it in a novel, eerie way. A second with Pam, involving sexual role-playing, goes to a place we probably haven’t been before in mainstream, live-action American television, then turns it into an occasion for bittersweet comedy.The real opening of the season, before the therapist sketch, is a snippet of stand-up in which Louie talks about how we shouldn’t go looking for aliens who will just subjugate us when we find them. In a sense, the series, and particularly the new season, is about a well-meaning (if gloomy and slightly misogynistic) Everyman’s journeys among the aliens — the crazy cop, the angry lesbian at the school potluck, the young Asian woman who pre-emptively shames him for being a creepy old man, the girlfriend who won’t love him as much as he loves her. His moments of victory, and redemption, come when he’s alone, onstage, working a funny voice and a dumb joke. The whole room laughs, and Pam, sitting in the audience, looks around in surprise.Advertisement