AdvertisementSupported byBy Brian SeibertWhat is the Dance Apocalypse and should you fear it? Least ambiguously, it is the name under which Nicole Bindler and Gabrielle Revlock, Philadelphia performers, work together. But what was “The Dance Apocalypse/Solos,” the show they presented on Friday at Jack, in Clinton Hill, Brooklyn?The evening started as a fund-raiser for a film project and ended as a class in “clitoral embodiment.” There were confessions, apologies, hula hoops, nakedness, spankings and talking bellybuttons. Was this a dance show? Was it a parody of fringe performance unraveling?Those are questions that Ms. Bindler and Ms. Revlock want their audience to ask. On Friday, the women took turns pretending to be an audience member who asked questions like that. Their hourlong presentation was divided in half, with Ms. Revlock running the fund-raiser and Ms. Bindler teaching the class, but each infiltrated the other’s solo interaction with the audience, and their bickering and rivalry bound the halves together.First came a trailer for a yet-to-be-completed film “with dance sensibilities” called “Chicken Fight.” Then Ms. Revlock’s character, while awkwardly sharing embarrassing moments from her childhood, hit up the audience for money, offering amusingly cheap gifts as incentives. Throughout the performance, her neurotic tics (futzing with the foil wrapped around her pretend microphone) magnified until she became a contorted figure, loudly sucking on her thumbs, a nightmare of oral fixation. What had been somewhat funny became repulsive and then a little funnier as she hula-hooped while reading from a list of apologies (a 12-step variation on the speech thanking supporters) and heroically kept the hoop spinning as she exited through a string curtain.As caricature, this was almost too accurate. And that problem was exacerbated during Ms. Bindler’s half. Her “clitoral embodiment class,” during which she directed audience members to imagine themselves as eggs and sperm and also to initiate movement from the erectile tissue in their pelvises, was more dull than discomforting. Not even the spanking and nudity or the desperation of making her bellybutton complain in a ventriloquized lisp about being objectified let loose the anarchy that might have pushed past the vaguely comical. “The Dance Apocalypse/Solos” felt like a lot of setup with not enough payoff, an apocalypse deferred.Advertisement