AdvertisementSupported byBy Brian SeibertIf you can’t make it to Spain this week, Joe’s Pub will do. On Saturday, Noche Flamenca returned to that club, where you can experience the troupe’s celebrated take on traditional flamenco up close and in a congenial atmosphere. A guitarist, a singer, a handful of dancers: that’s all this stage can fit, and that’s all this party needs. And when one of those dancers is Soledad Barrio, this company’s burning star, the experience is pretty much guaranteed to be memorable.The program is titled “Cambio de Tercio,” a Spanish idiom, derived from bullfighting, which can connote “a change of subject.” But the only change here is in location. To anyone who has seen Noche Flamenca, the evening is one of familiar pleasures.On Saturday the troupe came closest to a surprise early on, with a staged dance battle between Juan Ogalla and the guest hip-hop dancer David Thomas (who appeared in the company’s “Antigona” in November). The incongruity of this pairing earned a laugh, but there was no real contest, no exchange, and before bewilderment could develop into anything else, it was over. The guitarist Eugenio Iglesias played a meditative, beautifully rippling solo, and we were firmly back in Noche Flamenca territory.That territory can be light and playful, as in a flirtatious exchange between the vocalist Emilio Florido and three of the company’s female dancers. Mr. Ogalla attacked his solo “Farucca” with his customary verve, slapping his thighs and snapping around as if angry. His over-the-top peacocking verges on silly, yet there’s something endearing about his ardor. Lately, it looks as though he has been borrowing steps from tap dancers. These earned another laugh: not quite convincing, but fun.Ms. Barrio’s “Solea” is something else. What can seem merely conventional in Mr. Ogalla’s solo feels necessary in Ms. Barrio’s. With him, the many pauses between eruptions are structural techniques for creating suspense; during her solo, the audience needs the breaks as much as she does, such is the intensity of her performance. On Saturday, she suggested a widow whose flowing grief intermingled with sexual energy. She thrust a hand at her viewers as if to plunge in a knife. The knife was imaginary, but Ms. Barrio never misses. Noche Flamenca runs through Friday at Joe’s Pub, 425 Lafayette Street, at Astor Place, East Village; 212-967-7555, joespub.com. Advertisement