Season 3, Episode 11: ‘One Day in the Life of Anton Baklanov’Товарищи, как много вы знаете о ваших предках?
(Comrades, how much do you know about your ancestors?)Elizabeth, as hardboiled as a Russian egg, seems to get a little more human with each episode this season. And we can see the fine cracks in her shell. This reflective, regretful Elizabeth is less a martinet, and less a marionette, than the unswerving woman we met in Season 1.Philip, on the other hand, gets more cynical and dispirited, but he no longer appears soft for appreciating the life he has and the freedom his children might be permitted. He tries to explain to Gabriel just how hard it is to live his life. Annelise is the unfortunate example he chooses. No matter how much it hurt Philip to pack up her corpse after a three-year affair, Philip still came out ahead. Paige, in the meantime, has become a little interrogator, confronting her parents at every turn with questions and challenges. So far she has avoided, or perhaps not even thought about, the most sensitive and revealing dimensions of her parents’ careers.In response to Paige’s rapid-fire, early morning questions, Elizabeth and Philip begin to categorize some slivers of their lives as “real” as opposed to the false trappings their trade requires. At least now we know the travel agency is not a spy shop. Unless that’s a lie, as well.Gabriel, arriving home, is surprised to find Philip and Elizabeth waiting in his house. He seems pleased by their revelations to Paige but he offers no goodies, and no game of Scrabble. Gabriel scarcely gets his (quite jaunty) hat off.This episode emphasizes how alone each character really is, and how little they can rely on. Each is full of longings, but no matter what they are seeking as individuals, they are being drawn in the same direction — toward the motherland. Paige haltingly repeats her parents’ Russian names, tasting their foreignness and perhaps not disliking it altogether.Even as Elizabeth tries frantically to paper over the abyss that has opened between her and Paige, she never utters a word that could not be construed as having a dual purpose. She begins to weave an extended family for her daughter, who has already wondered at the lack of relatives. Elizabeth sketches in the outlines of the grandmother in Russia, recounting memories of her mother that do not seem to coincide with the flashbacks we have seen of their life together. And she speaks of Paige’s grandfather, saying he was killed in the war when she was 2 years old, glorifying the father who was condemned as a coward. It goes without saying, of course, that Elizabeth’s mother might have been lying as well when she revealed his true fate. Elizabeth stitches up her dissembling neatly by sharing with Paige the idea that the granddaughter embodies the spirit of her grandmother.When Paige accosts her parents in their bedroom, demanding to know what they are talking about, Philip chimes in to explain that Paige’s grandmother is very ill, and he says again how much he wants Elizabeth to see her mother again. So, what’s in store? Will Gabriel relent and come through with an all-expense-paid family vacation for the Jenningses? After all, if you want to win back the hearts of lonely kids, who better to give them a sugar-coated sense of security — and roots, and belonging and loyalty — than a loving grandma? Of course a trip like that would be hard to conceal from Stan, but he could just go undercover for a while, or abduct his soon-to-be ex-wife, or quit the Bureau and devote himself to looking for Nina.  First date spots in Soviet government outposts.Nina, however, is otherwise engaged and working hard for her freedom. There must be something in the gruel at the compound cafeteria. Anton Baklanov begins to lock eyes with Nina over their trays. After partaking of a parade of women supplied by the government, and offerings of luxurious food unavailable to the masses, he says he is now rejecting the enticements, even as he begins to fall for Nina. And Nina has already found the weakness that can be used against him.Baklanov is not so brilliant when it comes to other people, and not so brave or strong or morally consistent. He seems a little self-absorbed and pouty for such a high-value target. None of these shortcomings will dissuade Nina, however.Americansky football.At the Rezidentura, Oleg and Tatiana assiduously attack the piles of transcribed intelligence delivered by the remarkable listening device that now roams the corridors of the F.B.I. It must be none other than the return of the mail robot, unless someone has implanted a miniature listening device in a wad of gum stuck to the sole of Agent Gaad’s shoe. And what gems the robot has collected. The agents get punchy just reading the mundane details of toilet paper shortages and malfunctioning vending machines, the U.S.F.L. and the beep-counter. A sexual security lapse.Elizabeth is serving the Soviet cause in Afghanistan by getting close to the manager of the not-the-Hilton hotel where the C.I.A. will be putting up the mujahedeen visitors. She quickly and skillfully gains his trust and access to the dinosaur of a computer in his office so she can to look up some room numbers. Then, she employs the old compact-full-of-plaster trick to make an impression of a room key (but just one? The C.I.A. has budget concerns, certainly; that was why they downgraded the hotel. Still, surely these guys don’t bunk together. Maybe it was a housekeeping passkey?)On the nose.Tell the truth now. How many of you practiced the stare-at-the-nose technique that “Clark” so earnestly taught Martha, even as his insurance, Hans, was waiting outside? If nothing else, Hans has proved his ruthlessness as a killer. We don’t know the extent of Martha’s ruthlessness.Comments on the comments. You Kremlinologists are tightly wound as the season approaches its close, making wild and wishful predictions. Dennis from New York asks: “Was anyone able to translate the note from Willow? On pause it’s completely readable but my Russian is so rusty that I couldn’t make out most of it.” I hear you, comrade. I spent way too much time pausing and backing up and taking screen shots of the note and the code key. What I could see made no sense to me, but then my Russian is nonexistent. Maybe at the end of the season we can get the decoder ring from the show and find out if it was gibberish or not.Amy from Denver, a keen observer, writes that Henry “has secret stashes and can leave the house for hours without anyone noticing. The K.G.B’s inability to notice talent like this is why the U.S.S.R. fell.”MTF Tobin, I will not touch your comment on the derivation of the codename Willow with a 10-foot birch twig.Improv, your mock quote has us convulsed with laughter— “Tatiana: ‘Willow reports she was threatened by one of our people … and that Tootsie is the feel-good movie of the year.’”CG’s projection of Walter Taffet spying on Martha and “getting an eyeful of Clark” through his hidden camera is too funny.  CG also remarked on that pesky floorwalker at the lab who is always glaring at Nina. My take on her was that once she too was a Nina, and that she is there as a cautionary emblem of the career path laid out for the extraordinary women whose usefulness as spies is thought to diminish in direct proportion to their appeal as seductresses. So, what is the significance of the title? Have the lives of Philip and Elizabeth become a private gulag from which there is no escape? And who is their jailer?Товарищи, чувствовали ли вы когда-либо, что ваша жизнь тюрьма?
(Comrades, does your life ever feel like a prison?)