With the season finale looming and a third season on the way, it’s re-evaluation time for “Broadchurch,” a show that seemed destined to be a quiet one-off and then unexpectedly achieved tremendous success. The writers seem to be asking: How in the world do we tell this Sandbrook story? What is the most intriguing and devastating end to this trial, and how do the two stories relate? The result, for this episode at least, is equivalent to a deep breath, measured and soulful, with a warmth that makes up for the slightly confused storytelling. The show plunges back into the  murky depths of the Latimer marriage, which has oscillated between bad and catastrophically bad. When Mark, now casting himself as the golden boy of the town, takes the stand, he admits that right after he slept with Becca Fisher, he wrote a letter to his wife, Beth, with the intent to end their marriage. The news devastates Beth, who asks him bluntly why they’re still together. It gets very existential:  If Beth and Mark have no future as a family, then how much closure and peace can the trial really provide? The Gillespies, who can barely stand breathing the same air, represent one possible scenario for the couple. It’s difficult not to root for the Latimers, but even more difficult to trust Mark with anything.While one marriage splinters, Alec Hardy tries to pick up the pieces of his own. His play here — after his first, halfhearted come-on is tossed aside by his ex-wife, Tess  — is the wounded soldier card. She bites, bringing him home from the hospital after his pacemaker surgery and nursing him to health, to Ellie’s obvious alarm. (They’re still really not ready to give up on the possibility of an Ellie-Hardy hookup.) He’s mostly irritating, as always, but when on the telephone with his daughter, griping about her modern-day education, his charming-curmudgeon routine comes through.Olivia Colman has a whale of an episode here, both asserting her position as a top-rate CopMom-MomCop and completely shattering the novelty of that premise. She’s naturally compelling in every aspect — from chewing out her son, Tom, in front of the whole court, to  getting under Claire’s skin slyly and demurely, to carrying on her always-biting banter with Hardy (“I’ll give you more money to be less of a knob”). Emmy nomination, please. Ah, yes, the plot. There’s still a bit of confusion, it seems, as to how to present new information. Last season, we generally found out details as Ellie and Hardy did. Now, perhaps fed up with the lack of progress the odd couple is making, the show is jumping the gun. We get fragments of Lee and Claire’s past, where they stand in gorgeous locales saying ominous out-of-context phrases, as if they’re shooting a “Mad Men” promo; full memories from Sandbrook, some weirdly lucid and some weirdly parabolic; and the entire scene of Claire’s car robbery. For such a high-stakes reveal, my reaction was less “Her??” than “Why am I seeing this right now?” Knowing this show, however, the fact that Claire stole the necklace practically rules her out as a murder suspect. Whether she’s helping out Ricky, Lee, Lisa or someone else remains to be seen, although the whole situation looks more and more like some sort of elaborate revenge plot.While the rollout of the Sandbrook plot may be dicey, Claire’s outing as a villain produces some gorgeous camerawork. The 30-second scene of Claire going ballistic, throwing cereal like confetti and smashing furniture with alarming force, is beautiful and chilling. So are most moments with Claire and Lee together, whether they’re having violent, ecstatic outdoor sex or gazing out over the barren British landscape like Adam and Eve.On a related note, props to Ollie Stevens for stumbling into sleeping with yet another whipsmart, beautiful Londoner — this time the junior defense lawyer  Abby Thompson. But while he had his fun, it appears he’s about to be played very badly. The most affecting scene in this episode doesn’t involve any plot at all. It’s simply a gorgeous montage of everyone across the town, forlorn and isolated: Sharon looking at photos of her son, Ellie and Tom painting over their old memories, Maggie and Jocelyn sitting in rapt silence. The show has had its ups and downs  but still manages to capture its town in a very moving way. 