In Joanna Murray-Smith’s play “Switzerland,” the American writer Patricia Highsmith (played by Laura Linney) is near the end of her life. She’s living in self-imposed exile in the Locarno district of Switzerland, having already achieved acclaim for her novels “Strangers on a Train” and “The Talented Mr. Ripley.” One day an assistant (Seth Numrich) from the office of her New York publisher shows up at her front door and tries to persuade her to write another Ripley book. She being an eccentric novelist obsessed by tales of sociopaths and murder, and he being a stranger with possibly shady intentions, tension builds fast in the weapon-filled room where the show is set.So why did the Geffen Playhouse, the Los Angeles theater where the production is now playing, choose for its show poster a giant Swiss flag, an image that usually screams neutral?“There’s a lot in the play that talks about Switzerland in all different forms,” said Brian Dunning, the Geffen’s in-house graphics designer, who came up with the concept. “She talks about how she’s neutral as a writer because she creates a world, and she wants the reader to interact.”Under the Swiss flag is a photo of an angry-looking Highsmith, her eyes glaring from under a section of the flag’s white cross. “Switzerland” is spelled with a knife as the letter I.“To bring in that aggression and sense of danger in the art, we wanted to make sure we had the silhouette of that knife,” Mr. Dunning said.Mr. Dunning recently spoke with Erik Piepenburg about other elements that inspired his work. The following are excerpts from the conversation. Why the flag?In reading the play, we knew we wanted to incorporate the Swiss flag as a main image, to use the Swiss cross as almost a crosshair to highlight Patricia Highsmith’s expression.Was there something about its design that appealed to you?The flag is such a strong visual. It’s a simple and interesting shape. We loved the color of the red. I think we changed the color a little bit to darken it slightly from the actual red of the Swiss flag.There’s also talk of the Swiss aesthetic in the play. We wanted it to be a Swiss font. It’s called Univers. Ultra Condensed Light is one of the versions we used. That’s been around since the 50s. We decided to go with a classic look.Why did you choose this photo of Patricia Highsmith?We got this photo from Robert Schlatter. We wanted to find something of her later in life. We liked this photo because she’s sort of annoyed. It sets up the tone of how she feels when this stranger shows up at her place. She’s basically telling him to leave the entire play. She allows him to stick around because she’s interested in him.I like the knife in the title.The set is decorated with weapons. That specific knife is brought to her as a gift by Seth’s character. She needed it for her collection. It’s called a Bob Dozier Fighter. After people see the play they’ll look back at the knife and say, “Oh, yeah, that’s the knife.”

“Switzerland” continues through April 26 at the Geffen Playhouse. More information is at geffenplayhouse.com.