After months of guessing and contests on Facebook, are you ready for “The Met Breuer”?On Wednesday, the Metropolitan Museum of Art finally revealed its new name for the Brutalist concrete building that will be its contemporary art outpost for the next eight years — and in so doing it re-enshrined the starchitect Marcel Breuer.With the Met’s temporary move into the former home of the Whitney Museum, on Madison Avenue at 75th Street, it will gain 28,000 square feet of space to highlight modern and contemporary art, often considered its weak link. The museum also announced its inaugural season at its new location, beginning March 10, 2016.As yet there is no Jeff Koons-style blockbuster show, or trend-makers on a par with the Guggenheim Museum’s surveys of the Gutai collective or Germany’s Zero group. But the Met has come up with a quietly ambitious and thoughtful program of recent gifts, global names and enough old favorites from its encyclopedic holdings — Albrecht Durer, Manet and Giacometti — to preserve its brand.Among the highlights of the 2016 season are a retrospective of the contemporary painter Kerry James Marshall, known for his powerful images of black identity (it will be organized with the Museum of Contemporary Art, Chicago), and an exhibition of work by the Indian modernist Nasreen Mohamedi (1937-1990). Holland Cotter, co-chief art critic for The New York Times, has written that Ms. Mohamedi “broke essentialist ideas of what Indian art should look like” and “engaged with the advanced international art of her day.”In addition the Met will feature roughly 100 rarely seen early photographs by Diane Arbus, the majority acquired in 2007 from the Arbus estate and taken over a six-year period from 1956 to 1962 while she was still developing her unsettling style.New commissions include John Luther Adams’s “Soundwalk 9:09.” The title refers to the time it took Mr. Adams to stroll from the Met’s main building, on Fifth Avenue at 82nd Street, to the Met Breuer. People will be able to submit their own sound elements and Mr. Adams will incorporate 100 of them into his own piece, which can be downloaded from the Met’s website.In March, the Met announced that it had hired the architect David Chipperfield to redesign and rebuild its Southwest Wing for modern and contemporary art. The museum is now in what Thomas P. Campbell, the director and C.E.O. of the Met, called the “conceptual design phase,” which he said could also include an expansion of the Met’s roof garden, the site of its popular sculpture exhibitions.Are the exhibitions at the Met Breuer likely to draw lines around the block?  “Generally speaking we’re not setting out to schedule blockbusters,” Mr. Campbell said in a telephone interview. “We want to have thoughtful, meaningful programs that grow out of our encyclopedic scholarship.” “Success,” he added, “is not measured purely by footfalls.”He mentioned “Unfinished: Thoughts Left Visible, ” an exhibition next spring that will  raise the question of when a work of art is finished. It draws inspiration from the work of artists from Titian through Turner, Cézanne, Andy Warhol and Luc Tuymans, all of whom explored what the Met calls “the incomplete, unresolved.”“The whole premise behind the expansion of the modern and contemporary program into the Breuer building,” Mr. Campbell said, “is that the Met can do what our peers cannot: show modern and contemporary art that stretches across a much longer continuum than MoMA, the Whitney and the Guggenheim, which show art in the context of the 20th century.”But the Met Breuer’s 2016 lineup also shows the museum’s keen awareness of the competition it  faces from the new downtown Whitney and MoMA, among others. Visitors to the Madison Avenue site will find a performance “artist-in-residence,” Vijay Iyer, who will inhabit the Met Breuer’s Lobby Gallery, with other musicians, over 18 days to create a sound environment that the museum surely hopes will make the Met Breuer the coolest place to be.A version of this article appears in print on 04/09/2015, on page C3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: The Met Names the Home for Its Modern Art.