LONDON — Neil MacGregor will retire as director of the British Museum at the end of December, the museum announced Wednesday.The announcement leaves open a position at one of the world’s leading museums of art and anthropology. Under Mr. MacGregor, who came to the British Museum in 2002, attendance has increased by about 45 percent, to 6.7 million visitors per year. It is now the second-most visited museum in the world after the Louvre, the institution said in a statement.Mr. MacGregor has been praised for widening the museum’s appeal while maintaining its quality, staging well-reviewed shows with broad appeal like the current ‘‘Defining Beauty: The Body in Ancient Greek Art,” an exhibition on classical sculpture. In 2014 the institution opened a new large-scale extension to house research facilities and major exhibitions. And late last month it announced that it would open a new space dedicated to Islamic art.In 2010 Mr. MacGregor developed “A History of the World in 100 Objects,” a popular radio series (later made into a book) that examined the broad scope of history through off-kilter objects from the museum’s collection, like a two-million-year-old tool and a Victorian tea set. The series inspired a string of spin-off books.Mr. MacGregor’s tenure has not been without controversy, including wrangling over the fate of the Elgin marbles, works that once stood in the Parthenon. The museum has refused to return them despite Greece’s appeals. Mr. MacGregor plans to work part-time on a number of projects after he steps down, including developing a radio series; consulting on projects at the Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj Vastu Sangrahalaya, or CSMVS, Museum in Mumbai; and leading an advisory board for the Humboldt Forum, a new large-scale civic and cultural space planned for Berlin’s city center. Mr. MacGregor was born in Scotland in 1946. He ran the National Gallery from 1987 until 2002, when he moved to the British Museum. A team of headhunters has been hired to help the museum’s trustees recruit his successor.A version of this article appears in print on 04/09/2015, on page C3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: British Museum Director to Retire in December.