AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn Shattuck8 P.M. (13, 49) ANIMAL HOMES In this three-part “Nature” special, the ecologist Chris Morgan evaluates and deconstructs various animal dwellings, from their materials and aesthetics to their neighborhoods and locations — and tries to build a few himself. He begins with the nest, works of art constructed — with just a beak — from fur, grasses, twigs, bones and spider silk as well as colorful twine, bits of wire and even plastic bags. After examining nests at the Yale Peabody Museum of Natural History, Mr. Morgan tours Connecticut, visiting ospreys in Greenwich and salt marsh sparrows in Madison, before returning to New Haven, where he subjects his own nest to a stress test. (A blueprint is above.)11:30 A.M. (Sundance) SHINE (1996) Geoffrey Rush, right, in a role that earned him an Oscar for best actor, portrays the piano prodigy David Helfgott, who triumphs over his painful past. Mr. Helfgott also performed the score of this drama, directed by Scott Hicks. Armin Mueller-Stahl plays David’s father, Peter, who is determined to help his son succeed at any cost. “Films hitting that note of uplift rarely play it as powerfully or, finally, as tenderly as ‘Shine,’ ” Janet Maslin wrote in The New York Times. David Shire composed the evocative solo piano score for “The Conversation” (1974), Francis Ford Coppola’s tale, shown at 1:45 p.m., about Harry Caul, who has been hired to eavesdrop on a married woman (Cindy Williams) and her lover (Frederic Forrest) by her husband, known as the Director (Robert Duvall). But three people have died because of Harry’s work, and now he’s worried that two more may soon die. Writing in The Times, Vincent Canby called “The Conversation” haunting and bothersome: “Haunting because its suggestion that technology has gotten out of hand, though not exactly new, is so convincingly and fastidiously detailed. It’s bothersome because Mr. Coppola, the writer as well as the director, has nearly succeeded in making a great film but has, instead, made one that is merely very good.” 7:30 P.M. (BBC America) THE LAST OF THE MOHICANS (1992) Daniel Day-Lewis portrays Hawkeye, a frontiersman and adopted son of the Mohican chief Chingachgook during the French and Indian War in 1757, in Michael Mann’s adaptation of the James Fenimore Cooper novel. Madeleine Stowe is Cora, an Englishwoman trying to make her way through enemy-filled forests, and Hawkeye’s romantic interest. “It’s to the credit of Mr. Day-Lewis’s performance that a character best known for his tracking skills and derring-do will now be thought of, first and foremost, as a hot-blooded leading man,” Janet Maslin wrote in The Times. 9 P.M. (Cooking) EXTRA VIRGIN Gabriele Corcos, who has dreamed of living on a farm, and his wife, Debi Mazar, a city girl, buy some chickens and a coop for their property in Italy.9 P.M. (NBC) LAW & ORDER: SPECIAL VICTIMS UNIT An investigation into pornographic photos taken at a party hosted by a 15-year-old (Hayden Tweedie) stalls when several suspects come down with the measles, leading Sergeant Benson (Mariska Hargitay) to a group of mothers who may have falsified their children’s medical records.9 P.M. (Lifetime) LITTLE WOMEN: TERRA’S LITTLE FAMILY Terra Jolé and Joe Gnoffo, left, of “Little Women: LA” — she has performed with Miley Cyrus; he plays drums in a Nirvana tribute band — document Ms. Jolé’s high-risk pregnancy as she prepares to give birth this month. “Terra’s Little Family Special,” leading in at 8, looks back at their journey to this point.10 P.M. (ABC) NASHVILLE Drama erupts over a baby shower for Juliette (Hayden Panettiere). Bucky (David Alford) and Luke (Will Chase) each try to sign the singer-songwriter Ron Pope (playing himself). And the closer Scarlett (Clare Bowen) grows to Dr. Rand (Nick Jandl), the more upset Gunnar (Sam Palladio) becomes.What’s Streaming NowGUSTAVO DUDAMEL AT THE PHILHARMONIE DE PARIS In a concert taped in January just days after the hall’s opening, Mr. Dudamel conducts the Simón Bolívar Symphony Orchestra of Venezuela, of which he is the music director, in Mahler’s Symphony No. 5 and works by the Spanish-born Cuban composer Julián Orbón. (medici.tv)IT TAKEIS TWO  George Takei and his husband, Brad, share some partially scripted moments from their domestic lives in an effort to “take over the Internet” in this new reality series. (youtube.com) KATHRYN SHATTUCKAdvertisement