By DAVID ALLENOCT. 16, 2015
Benjamin Grosvenor might be just 23, but he commands a stage with aristocratic ease. As he sits at the piano, a slight figure, though not without presence, his handkerchief dabs the keys free of sweat. The cloth tossed calmly away, he begins.And how. The darling of British pianophiles since his victory in the keyboard finals of the BBC Young Musician of the Year competition in 2004, Mr. Grosvenor, in his Carnegie Hall recital debut, at Zankel Hall on Thursday, proved a boy lord of the piano. In a program of remembrances (of Bach, Couperin and Italy), he recalled a distant age of pianism, playing with a judgment far beyond his years and a tone so achingly antique it sounded as if it ought properly to be heard through the crackle and hiss of an old monophonic record.It is said that the greatest sportsmen are so secure in their talents that they appear to have more time, at the plate or on the court, than anyone else. They err, but they are unafraid to. A similar patience distinguishes Mr. Grosvenor from the pack of young pianists touring concert halls today, and perhaps elevates him above them. For all that Daniil Trifonov, Yuja Wang, Khatia Buniatishvili and others can wow with speed or daring, Mr. Grosvenor makes you sigh with joy.In Busoni’s reimagination of Bach’s “Chaconne,” he refused to show off, instead displaying a noble confidence of purpose in the shape of a phrase or the unfolding of a variation. In Liszt’s “Venezia e Napoli,” “Gondoliera” glimmered, each dapple of reflected light subtly different, and while the “Tarantella” had its demonic side, it was the astonishing tension of line in silken, peaceful moments that made the double-octave thunder all the more shocking.Time and again in this recital, Mr. Grosvenor less surmounted hurdles than waved them nonchalantly away. In the chorale of Franck’s “Prélude, Chorale et Fugue,” chords that drop like spots of rain on a lake are spread over four octaves and more, the left hand floating over the right. Most pianists are content simply to reach that top note, but Mr. Grosvenor sang them with a gossamer caress. Ravel’s “Le tombeau de Couperin,” too, was unusually gripping, immaculately poised in the Forlane, touched with porcelain delicacy in the Fugue and Toccata.Yet most exquisite were two of Mendelssohn’s Opus 35 Preludes and Fugues, a demonstration of perfect balance between the hands, of immaculate clarity of voicing, of pliability of tempo — above all of a temperament rare in yesteryear, let alone now.Benjamin Grosvenor performs in Paris on Nov. 25 and in Miami on Jan. 17; benjamingrosvenor­.co­.uk.A version of this review appears in print on October 17, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: The Boy Lord of the Piano Shows Confidence at Carnegie Hall.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.