Review by JON PARELESAPRIL 9, 2015
Crashes, whooshes, sampled screams. Mournful minor chords, dissolving into distortion or receding into single notes and silence. Deep throbs of bass under splintery percussion. Ghostly processionals. Zaps of static, metallic scrapes, hovering insectlike buzzes. Slowed-down, half-melted hip-hop beats. Floating falsetto melodies under siege from stop-and-start chords. A synthesized cumbia mixed as if its tune were being intermittently obscured by clouds. Breakneck drum programming under orchestral strings.Those were all part of the set by Arca at the Bowery Ballroom on Wednesday night. The show was sold out. Arca, the stage name of the Venezuelan musician Alejandro Ghersi, has emerged as a valued collaborator for avant-minded pop musicians. He was among the many producers on Kanye West’s album “Yeezus,” and he went on to produce most of Bjõrk’s new album, “Vulnicura.”But he is no mere facilitator; he has a disorienting aesthetic of his own, best heard on his 2014 debut album, “Xen” (Mute), which supplied most of the makings of the live set.Onstage, Arca’s music unfolded alongside videos, by his longtime collaborator Jesse Kanda, that featured human bodies turned abstract and surreal: silhouetted, elongated, shadowed, given new anatomy, undulating in liquid motion. Every so often, Arca stepped out from behind his equipment to flaunt a striking outfit — a low-cut black dress (more or less), chaps that revealed part of his derrière, glittery thigh-high platform boots and, with the dress removed, a chiseled torso, revealed in a spotlight as he danced in sync with a figure on screen. At one point, Arca climbed down into the audience and shouted his way through a rap in Spanish while his equipment delivered irregular electronic jolts and intermittently galloping drumbeats.AdvertisementArca was making body music far removed from the repetitive, coercive drive of typical electronic dance music. Instead, it was moody, unregimented, associative, metamorphosing. In the music and in the videos, flesh was sensual but also potentially grotesque, sculptural but fragile, human and posthuman, androgynous and unpredictable: resisting quantization.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Arca’s classical background showed up in his ease with stately tempos and elegiac melodies. But he was just as likely to toy with timbral possibilities that suggested analog synthesizers, edgeless tones, detuned sounds, notes turned backward or inside-out and to wield the blunt, bass-driven impacts and harsh outbursts of hip-hop.He could use a beat, evade it or take it apart; his tracks had the rhythms of respiration, not digital clocks.AdvertisementIntrospection shaded into aggression and back; the music was perpetually self-questioning, craftily precarious and full of suspense. Arca was making body music for the active mind.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.