By ROSLYN SULCASOCT. 16, 2015
FRANKFURT — Sixty pendulums swayed in silence. William Forsythe, the choreographer, frowned slightly, his eyes closed, thinking. His expression would have been familiar to the thousands of dancers he has worked with in his 40-year career, but Mr. Forsythe was not using performers in this large, white room at the Museum of Modern Art here. A sharp cracking sound was followed by a sudden accumulation of rhythmic knocks, then more silence. Some pendulums, animated by the pistons making the knocking sounds, swung faster as others stilled. “That’s better,” Mr. Forsythe said. “You want to keep the brain engaged.”It was just a few days before the opening of Mr. Forsythe’s first major museum show, “The Fact of Matter,” which opened Saturday and runs through Jan. 31. It is not about dance, and — apart from two films of Mr. Forsythe illustrating ideas about line — does not feature dance. The exhibition, which encompasses all three floors of the museum’s famously quirky triangular design by Hans Hollein, shows the large-scale installation work that Mr. Forsythe has been creating for nearly 20 years, which he calls “choreographic objects,” and a number of the museum’s holdings that he has organized along thematic lines.Susanne Gaensheimer, the director of the museum (known as MMK, for Museum für Moderne Kunst), said she became aware of Mr. Forsythe’s importance soon after moving here in 2009.“Early on, I said to my colleagues that we should definitely do an exhibition because he was creating work that was not just choreography or just visual art, but somehow both,” she said.AdvertisementThis is a major moment for Mr. Forsythe, 65, whose three-decade-long career in Frankfurt has gone a long way to putting the city on the cultural map. After a lifetime of running companies — first the ground-breaking Frankfurt Ballet from 1984 to 2004, then the Forsythe Company from 2005 until this year — he is now a solo agent. He holds the position of choreographic associate at the Paris Opera Ballet, a professorship at the University of Southern California, and with this solo exhibition confirms a place in the world of visual arts.Advertisement“I think this is a very timely transition for Bill because of the overtures the visual art world has made toward choreography recently,” said Louise Neri, a director at Gagosian in New York, who said the gallery was planning to exhibit his installation work “Black Flags” in Paris next year. “There has been a relative storm of institutional interest in his work.” (In the next year, Mr. Forsythe will show pieces in Copenhagen; Dresden, Germany; Madrid; and at the Sydney Biennale.) Ms. Neri showed a film by Mr. Forsythe, “Solo,” when she co-curated the 1997 Whitney Biennale. Also that year, he made his first foray into installation work at the Roundhouse in London with “White Bouncy Castle,” which had spectators bounding and falling in a giant rubber courtyard.He described it at the time as “a choreography that is incapable of being false.” It’s a description that fits a subsequent substantial body of work that generates movement in spectators — by navigating between the swinging pendulums (“Everywhere and Nowhere at the Same Time”), clambering through 200 gymnastic rings without touching the floor (“The Fact of Matter”), moving extremely slowly in order not to disturb a whirlpool of fog (“Additive Inverse”) or testing just which kind of movements create the most surreal effects on an enormous video screen (“City of Abstracts”); all of which are featured in the show.“With choreography, the audience sits still and ideas are moved in front of them,” Mr. Forsythe said over lunch in the museum’s restaurant. “In this case, the audience circulates among the ideas. The public must move or the work doesn’t speak.”He said that when he was first approached by Ms. Gaensheimer and Mario Kramer, the museum’s head of collections, he was delighted by their request to pair his work with items from its extensive holdings.“I am not particularly interested in simply putting dance works in a museum context,” he said. “But I am very interested in the correspondences you can find between artistic practices. In objects, films, sculptural pieces throughout the collection, there is what you might call choreographic thinking.” Citing pieces in the show by Santiago Sierra, Ai Weiwei and Bruce Naumann, he said that it was the viewer who must make sense of the piece through evaluating changes in motion or having to move themselves.Although he knew the museum’s collection well, Mr. Forsythe said Mr. Kramer had provided invaluable guidance in finding works that would “create correspondences” with the ideas in his pieces.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We discussed themes like line, movement, volume, compression, limitations,” Mr. Kramer said in an interview in his office. “It was so interesting for me how he looked at works in the collections. I was totally surprised by some choices, then I would understand. His theme is to bring people to the realization or the edge of physical possibilities. His thinking is very much a momento mori, the fragile existence of life and energy in the body.”Notions of mortality and physical limitation are certainly present in the exhibition, particularly in the first section, which includes Teresa Margolles’s “Aire” (2003), a room containing humidifiers filled with water used to wash corpses in a Mexico City morgue. (Her film of the activity is shown in an upstairs gallery.) “It’s quotidian or mundane,” Mr. Forsythe said, “but Margolles’s genius is to make us aware that we live with those who have died and carry them with us.”AdvertisementBut the exhibition is also playful, from the sculptural balls of interwoven limbs created by two dancers in the film “Stellenstellen” (echoed in a nearby glass case by Jens Risch’s ball of knotted silk thread, compressed from 1,000 meters to palm-of-hand tininess), to “City of Abstracts” and an extremely heavy door with the instruction: “If you have difficulties opening the door, please persist.”The door leads into an empty room, in which the viewer is asked to keep a distance of at least one meter from the walls and everyone else. The work, “Aufwand,” invokes the spirit of Marcel Duchamp, whose influence is subtly apparent throughout the show. (And obviously present too: David Hammons’s “The Holy Bible: Old Testament,” a gilded Duchamp catalogue raisonné, is on view in a glass case.)“When Duchamp dropped one-meter long threads on the floor,” Mr. Forsythe said, “and they took up other shapes, he created a choreographic practice and challenged all assumptions about artistic procedure.”Please persist. It might be Mr. Forsythe’s motto, but also the message he sends to the museum-goer. “The spectator is the most important element in the exhibition,” he said. “As Duchamp suggests, you must move in order to know.”A version of this article appears in print on October 17, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.