AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn Shattuck10 P.M. (FX) THE COMEDIANS Billy Crystal is a comedy legend whose best work may be behind him and Josh Gad is a rising star in this new series, which ventures behind the scenes at “The Billy & Josh Show,” a semifictional late-night sketch series. Stephnie Weir plays the long-suffering producer caught between the men, who agree on almost nothing; Matt Oberg is the show’s head writer; and Megan Ferguson is the no-nonsense production assistant. “Semifake Billy and semifake Josh drop references to these real-life résumés constantly in ‘The Comedians’ as they try to one-up each other while battling over the show they’re supposed to be creating together,” Neil Genzlinger wrote in The New York Times. How meta is it? In Episode 4, Mel Brooks “advises his friend Billy not to try to book a big-name guest on ‘The Billy & Josh Show’ because it would distract the audience from the title characters. Mr. Brooks, of course, steals the episode.” In the Season 5 opener of “Louie,” at 10:30, Louie (Louis C.K.) admits in therapy that he’s not sure “how to live a life anymore” and encounters an angry lesbian at a school potluck. “This time around, as Louis C.K. reinvents the classic sitcom in his own elliptical, cerebral style, he seems to be in his absurdist theater phase, or his surrealist short-story phase — Kafka on the Hudson,” Mike Hale wrote in The Times. “His moments of victory, and redemption, come when he’s alone, onstage, working a funny voice and a dumb joke.”8 P.M. (13) NYC-ARTS Philippe de Montebello, the former director of the Metropolitan Museum of Art, and the journalist Paula Zahn host this program, which looks at the Theater for a New Audience; Ralph Fasanella’s “Subway Riders,” at the American Folk Art Museum; “Hamilton” at the Public Theater; and Ballet Hispanico at the Joyce. On “MetroFocus,” at 8:30, Dan Slepian, a “Dateline NBC” producer, talks about “Voices From Within,” a short video that addresses gun violence through stories from inmates at the Sing Sing Correctional Facility in Ossining, N.Y. And the violinist Itzhak Perlman talks about “Jascha Heifetz: God’s Fiddler,” a coming “American Masters” documentary.8 P.M. (CBS) THE BIG BANG THEORY Sheldon (Jim Parsons) and Amy (Mayim Bialik) build a blanket fort. Wolowitz (Simon Helberg) meets the half-brother he never knew. And Leonard (Johnny Galecki) and Penny (Kaley Cuoco-Sweeting) have an on-air blowup on Wil Wheaton’s podcast. In “The Odd Couple,” at 8:30, Felix (Thomas Lennon) finds his hypochondria acting up when Oscar (Matthew Perry) begins dating Felix’s doctor (Erinn Hayes). And in “Mom,” at 9, Bonnie (Allison Janney) does whatever necessary to keep a secret from Christy (Anna Faris).8:30 P.M. (TV5Monde) LE SAUVAGE (1975) Martin (Yves Montand), a middle-aged Frenchman, flees the stress of Paris for an island in Latin America. One day, on his way to Caracas, he meets Nelly (Catherine Deneuve), a Frenchwoman who is running away from her engagement. He takes her to the airport, only to discover upon his return to his island that she has beaten him there. Now he can’t get rid of her. Jean-Paul Rappeneau directed this César Award-nominated comedy, shown in French with English subtitles.9 P.M. (ABC) GREY’S ANATOMY Meredith (Ellen Pompeo) erupts when she learns that Owen (Kevin McKidd) and Amelia (Caterina Scorsone) have been seeing each other. Catherine (Debbie Allen) treats a philanderer whose wife has sought revenge. In “American Crime,” at 10, Barb (Felicity Huffman) brings her fight for justice to the media after Carter (Elvis Nolasco) and Aubry (Caitlin Gerard) are captured while trying to flee the country. Tony (Johnny Ortiz) sets out to make his sister’s attacker pay. And the district attorney seeks damning testimony from Hector (Richard Cabral). Then a piece of evidence is discovered that changes everything.10:30 P.M. (Fuse) SKEE TV DJ Skee interviews celebrities, parses the latest trends and presents live musical performances in this new series, which begins with Machine Gun Kelly at the Ivar Theater in Los Angeles.What’s Streaming NowRITA Mille Dinesen plays an outspoken, freewheeling private-school teacher adored by her students but scarcely tolerated by the adults she encounters in this Danish television series, Season 2 of which is now available for streaming. (netflix.com)Advertisement