By JON CARAMANICAAPRIL 8, 2015
Not all wounds scab. Sometimes they remain red, raw, gaping. Sometimes, after a while, the wound is the thing. If it healed, it wouldn’t feel real.That’s what a Katie Crutchfield song is like — a gash that never closes up, a cancer that stubbornly refuses to wither, normalized to the point of dullness.Listen to the stark, beautiful damage on “Ivy Tripp” (Merge), the third album she’s released under her solo project Waxahatchee, all of them searing. It’s full of extremely nervy storytelling, the type that indicts the narrator far more than the target. It is so comparatively easy to heap scorn on others, but Ms. Crutchfield has never been one to let herself off the hook. In her songs, the protagonists are almost always causing suffering, and they’re almost always shrugging and saying, in essence, such is life.“You look at me like I’m a rose” — those are the first words she sings on the album, in a song called “Breathless.” The tone is one of exhaustion and pity. This isn’t a woman who wants to be wanted. She continues: “If I was foolish I would chase/A feeling I long ago let fade/And we could be good for days.”AdvertisementLike many of Ms. Crutchfield’s songs, “Breathless” isn’t about defined feeling, positive or negative. Rather, it’s a treatise on the haze that sets in when one state is decaying into the other. The end of the song is a sloppy, almost Björk-like cacophony of ooohs and laaaas over a synthesizer dirge, her hoots competing against each other for attention, distracting from the emotional assassination that just preceded them.Much of “Ivy Tripp” goes in this fashion. By and large, her universe is populated with people who do damage and then don’t run, but rather laze around and regard the fallout, unwilling or unable to create closure. The album’s savage core is “Air,” full of muscled, distant guitar and shuddering, angry drums. Here, Ms. Crutchfield is again the sighing antagonist: “I left you out like a carton of milk.” Again, she sings with the easy determination of someone who has made a decision but is in no rush, concluding with fatigue: “You are patiently giving me/Everything that I will never need.”“Ivy Tripp” was produced by Ms. Crutchfield with Kyle Gilbride and Keith Spencer. For a long while, Mr. Spencer has been her boyfriend and collaborator (as a producer, and also in the side project Great Thunder), but by the end of making this album, the relationship was solely professional.That a breakup happened somewhere amid this elegant debris is noteworthy, but it doesn’t define the album. “Ivy Tripp” is of a piece with what Ms. Crutchfield has been doing with Waxahatchee for four years. The only sort of comfort she has ever offered is cold.AdvertisementThat began with “American Weekend” (Don Giovanni), from 2012, the first Waxahatchee album and still the best one. Recorded in just a few days, it was a traumatic bloodletting, songs sung in intimate confidence about relationships that go nowhere, until they’re put to sleep.That album’s anchor was “Bathtub,” a song both cleareyed and teary:Take my word for it, I’m not worth itI ignored you all night and you don’t deserve itMorning, bathtub, my skin soft and hotI was sure you were right but you’re notI contemplate my ruined fateSomeone will hurt me so bad one dayAnd you’ll resonate or I’ll apologizeOr maybe I’ll make the same mistake twiceOn each subsequent album — “Cerulean Salt,” from 2013, and “Ivy Tripp,” her first album on the major indie label Merge — she’s slightly retreated from full emotional transparency and begun to gesture at music that’s less fragile than her heart.“Ivy Tripp” begins and ends with songs that open not with Ms. Crutchfield’s lonely, nervous, determined whisper or her lonely, nervous, determined guitar, but big streaks of brawny feedback, immediate jolts out of the universe she’s previously created for herself. And within the album, she tries out new approaches, mostly successful. There’s a sweet new wave air to “La Loose,” and “Half Moon” is melancholy in a new way, with bracing, stately piano leading the way.Her voice doesn’t quaver quite as it used to, and that matters on the songs here where she’s not indicting herself, like “Poison”: “What do you want? What do you need?/A welcome mat.” Here, and everywhere else on the album, Ms. Crutchfield does all her own background and harmony vocals, though the effect isn’t homogeneity as much as a conversation, a sort of internal tsk-tsk dialogue in which the ego and the superego try to talk each other down.Even though “Ivy Tripp” is grander in sonic ambition than any of her previous work, it’s this vocal complexity that has real impact. On “Breathless,” a gang of Katies sing “You take what you want/You wear it out,” and it sounds as if they’re trying to console one another. On “Under a Rock,” she opens both verses with a spiky “Maybe,” somehow combining girl-group optimism, early ’90s indie-pop reluctance, and brassy defiance.The effect is most moving on “Stale by Noon.” Here, again, she’s in retreat, without actually retreating. “We are not that alike/I can be a ray of light,” she sings, with sweet canon, following herself with high harmonies that read as optimistic but really feel achy, especially when she closes the thought: “But you are always in my head/Down on earth, rest in bed.”Ms. Crutchfield’s astute sense of resignation is still the beating heart of Waxahatchee, and ultimately, the layers of this album don’t obscure or reshape that gift. And in a few places, she doesn’t bother trying, like “Summer of Love,” the barest song, and the one most like her “American Weekend” sparseness. (She mentioned in a recent interview that her next album might be a return to these sorts of songs.)“I didn’t think, now I’m here/Treading water without you,” the song begins, over a wash of white noise, or maybe wind through a window. She sounds steady, maybe because she’s as confident as ever in her liminality. Eventually, she lands on a lovely line that encapsulates the tension between her severe emotional vigilance and her cold distance: “Playing alert but I’m sleeping.”A version of this article appears in print on April 9, 2015, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline: Tales of Pain Inflicted and Wounds Forever Raw.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.