AdvertisementSupported byBy Alastair MacaulayThe history of the leading figures of American modern dance can sound like lines from the Book of Genesis. Senior choreographers nurtured company dancers who in due course became choreographers in their own right. To adapt the King James Version, Ruth St. Denis and Ted Shawn begat Doris Humphrey and Martha Graham; Humphrey begat José Limón while Graham begat Merce Cunningham and Paul Taylor; Mr. Taylor begat Twyla Tharp. ... Usually, however, the next generation has substantially rejected its progenitors’ achievements. There have been exceptions: notably, Limón kept the Humphrey repertory going. The new Paul Taylor’s American Modern Dance project is an effort, as yet half-baked, to include choreographers older and younger than Mr. Taylor; so far it exhibits vague ideas of taste rather than any actual lineage. Lineage, however, is the overt subject of the project started at the Joyce Theater this week by the choreographer Stephen Petronio. Hence its name: “Bloodlines.” It’s as admirable as it is ambitious.In the 1980s Mr. Petronio was both a memorable dancer with the choreographer Trisha Brown’s troupe and a passionate enthusiast for Merce Cunningham’s work. Ms. Brown is among the dance auteurs, along with Lucinda Childs, Anna Halprin, Yvonne Rainer and Steve Paxton, whom he has announced for future “Bloodlines” seasons. But for his first season, he has begun with Cunningham, a revival of “RainForest” (1968). It shares a double bill with the premiere of Mr. Petronio’s own “Locomotor/Non Locomotor,” which is deliberately presented as an essay in Cunningham-connected dance-making. In an enthusiastic program essay, he writes, “What a teacher Merce continues to be!” “Locomotor/Non Locomotor,” opening the program, is an energetic pure-dance work, serious and witty at the same time. If you’re acquainted with Cunningham’s work, you can see much of what Mr. Petronio has learned from it (and not just from “RainForest”). You see a vocabulary often related to ballet but with altered phraseology, more pronounced use of gravity and stronger use of the torso. As in Cunningham’s work, movement itself is singularly exposed. You can sense how it alternates between stillness and movement, slowness and speed. And structural ambiguity, so characteristic of Cunningham, pervades basic compositional factors of Mr. Petronio’s piece. These two couples are dancing at the same time, but is this a quartet? Are they couples? The answers keep changing.There are eight dancers: seven from Mr. Petronio’s company and the guest artist Melissa Toogood (a former Cunningham company member). All eight appear in the initial “Locomotor,” only four in “Non Locomotor.” (The curtain descends between the two parts, and there is a short pause.) Mr. Petronio asks them to begin by dancing backward: They stride, jump, step in paths moving rapidly around the stage. Steps that ballet would address to the front are shown from the side or rear. The unusual beginning, as we see dancers sweep around the stage in briskly retrograde paths, is exciting and boldly done. The attack and sweep shown by Davalois Fearon and Jaqlin Medlock are especially fine, while Joshua Tuason, with his strikingly long, full legs and handsome but cautious face, emerges as the company’s most gifted if least mature artist. (He’s given rich solo material.) And Ms. Toogood is breathtaking throughout: incisive, exact, impetuous.Inevitably, the Petronio performers have their own non-Cunningham accentuations. Some of them strike several still poses with the aggressive chic of a fashion model; and the articulation of the torso, foot and leg (especially the men’s) does not have the full rigor of Cunningham-trained dancers. There is, at several junctures, a coarsening of emphasis in Mr. Petronio’s Cunningham-related movement, and it returns in the company’s “RainForest.” But “Locomotor/Non Locomotor” has terrific velocity and force; these dancers don’t hold back. I find it impressive, interesting, but patchy. I suspect it shows that both Mr. Petronio and these dancers are in transition; this is a work I hope we see again in some months’ time.What amazes in the company’s account of “RainForest” is its wealth of drama and nuance. These performers know not just that this work is about the wild but that wildness has many facets. I remember at least one revival of this piece with Cunningham’s own company that was more guarded and demure than this. And at Tuesday’s opening performance, the celebrated Andy Warhol helium-filled silver pillows put on an unequaled display, sailing steadily out into space more beautifully than I have ever known them to do. (At least six entered the auditorium.)In dance terms, more firmness and cleanness of attack are needed, apart from the blazing Ms. Toogood. All kinds of emphases have changed. But “RainForest” is alive. These performers evidently relish its challenges.The Stephen Petronio Company performs through Sunday at the Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea; 212-242-0800, joyce.org. Advertisement