AdvertisementSupported byBy Stephen HoldenEliane Elias breezed into Birdland on Tuesday on the heels of a lush new album, “Made in Brazil,” which reaffirms the South American roots of this singer, songwriter, pianist and arranger, who was born in São Paulo but has lived in the United States since 1981. Recorded in São Paulo, this appealing album is her first made in Brazil since moving to the States, though seven cuts include strings that were recorded in London. A mixture of aural dreaminess and percussive drive gives Ms. Elias’s natural friskiness a soft focus. It might be described as make-out music with a beat. At the first of two sets on Tuesday evening, Ms. Elias was joined by a trio made up of Marc Johnson on bass, Rubens de La Corte on guitar and Rafael Barata on drums. They played six original songs but concentrated mostly on the new album, a collection of standards by three generations of Brazilian composers, among them Antonio Carlos Jobim, Ary Barroso and Roberto Menescal. Because her voice is not ideally suited to whispering sweet nothings, Ms. Elias, even at her most introspective, likes to keep things moving. The rapturous slow-dance approach to bossa nova associated with singers like João Gilberto and Diana Krall was supplanted by more insistent samba rhythms and more forceful and direct vocals. Ms. Elias delivers songs in short, clipped phrases, the better to maintain the momentum of arrangements that ride on a steady pulse. Two of the strongest selections were Barroso’s “No Tabuleiro da Baiana,” popularized in the mid-1930s by Carmen Miranda, and “Brasil (Aquarela do Brasil),” an unofficial national anthem since its introduction in 1939. Her English-language version of “Embraceable You,” from her 2013 album, “I Thought About You: A Tribute to Chet Baker,” was good-humored and sexy.Her piano solos allowed little room for dawdling and lyrical rumination. The entire concert celebrated the vitality of a culture overflowing with life and natural beauty. Eliane Elias performs through Saturday at Birdland, 315 West 44th Street, Clinton; 212-581-3080, birdlandjazz.com. Advertisement