By ZACHARY WOOLFEAPRIL 8, 2015
VIENNA — Most sopranos in the demanding title role of Strauss’s “Elektra” go heavy on the oil-stick makeup. The character ends up looking like a wild-eyed, wild-wigged vagrant in a soiled overcoat, with harsh high notes to match.What these singers forget is that Elektra is a princess, the daughter of the Mycenaean king Agamemnon and Klytaemnestra, the wife who kills him. Elektra is marginalized and homicidal, but a princess nonetheless.Nina Stemme never lets you forget Elektra’s royalty. Ms. Stemme is singing the role for the first time in a new production by Uwe Eric Laufenberg at the Staatsoper here before bringing it to the Metropolitan Opera next season in a traveling staging by Patrice Chéreau, who died in 2013. Wearing a black men’s suit and looking a bit tired but otherwise none the worse for wear, this reserved Elektra, despite penchants for waving an ax and careening her mother’s wheelchair into a wall, could even be said to have it together.Once again Ms. Stemme, among the great Brünnhildes, Isoldes and Turandots of our time, actually sings a role that others screech. Her voice rounded and evenly produced, penetrating yet soft-textured, Ms. Stemme, despite some fade in lower registers, makes Elektra sound almost easy. On Tuesday evening even a sneering exclamation of “Pfui!” was caressed more than spat out, and she lovingly sustained lyrical phrases after recognizing her long-lost brother, Orest.She is always impressive. (As Isolde, she’ll open the Met’s 2016-17 season.) But my reservation about her past performances holds here: While Ms. Stemme gamely mimes passionate gestures, her voice remains warm-toned yet oddly cool to the touch, its effect muted. She prefaces high notes with a split second of preparation, symbolic of a performance that hits its marks conscientiously, not blazingly. This is an Elektra to make you nod your head in admiration rather than to quicken your pulse.AdvertisementNot that Mr. Laufenberg’s production is one to make the heart beat faster. Set in a modern building’s cavernous, shadowy basement, its elevators dotted with bloodied mannequins, it makes its points with dull obviousness. When her brother returns, Elektra changes into a black dress; she can stop wearing the pants now.AdvertisementEven an intriguing moment like the seemingly sincere mother-daughter hug at the end of a vicious scene between Elektra and Klytaemnestra (the bland mezzo-soprano Anna Larsson) isn’t set up clearly enough to have emotional impact. By the finale, when smiling, dancing youngsters join the triumphant Elektra on stage, as in a Rodgers and Hammerstein dream ballet, Mr. Laufenberg’s work has descended to muddled farce.Dressed in girlish white, the soprano Gun-Brit Barkmin sounded limpid as Chrysothemis, Elektra’s sister. The doomed Aegisth, usually sung by over-the-hill tenors, went to the fresh, young Norbert Ernst. The bass-baritone Falk Struckmann, a veteran Orest, was in rich, comfortable voice.After some disjointed stodginess early on, Mikko Franck’s conducting took on more grandeur and urgency, and the Staatsoper’s orchestra, as ever, brought out dazzling details. Sounding velvety even while screaming, these players were the ideal accompanists to Ms. Stemme’s performance, unflappable both for better and worse.An opera review on Thursday about “Elektra,” at the Staatsoper in Vienna, misspelled the surname of a member of a world-renowned musical writing team in comparing a scene in the opera to one from its work. He was Richard Rodgers — not Rogers — of Rodgers and Hammerstein.“Elektra” continues through April 16 at the Staatsoper in Vienna; wiener-staatsoper.at. A version of this article appears in print on April 9, 2015, on Page C4 of the New York edition with the headline: An Ax Wielder With Royal Bearing.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.