By ROBIN POGREBINAPRIL 8, 2015
Filling the chair that for 34 seasons was occupied by Glenn Dicterow, its longest-serving concertmaster, the New York Philharmonic on Wednesday announced the appointment of Frank Huang, currently concertmaster of the Houston Symphony.Mr. Huang, 36, will take over in September, beginning with the opening gala concert of the Philharmonic’s 2015-16 season. Mr. Dicterow stepped down last June.“The concertmaster, more than any other member, really shapes the persona of the orchestra,” Alan Gilbert, the Philharmonic’s music director, said. “I’ve made a lot of appointments, but this is obviously the most crucial.”The appointment comes two months after Mr. Gilbert announced that he would step down in 2017, after eight seasons. The orchestra has started the search for his successor.AdvertisementIn an interview, Mr. Huang said he was not unsettled by coming aboard just as Mr. Gilbert winds down his tenure. “Whoever is the director will make a big impact,” Mr. Huang said. “But a great orchestra will sound great no matter who’s conducting. With such talented musicians, you’re going to get committed and convincing playing regardless of the interpretation.”Mr. Huang said he had great respect for the orchestra’s musicians, with whom he played this season as guest concertmaster in three programs conducted by Mr. Gilbert, including works by Bartok, Bruckner and Mozart in October and the Verdi Requiem in January.He also said he was comfortable with Mr. Gilbert’s emphasis on contemporary programming.“It’s only fitting that they’re presenting these challenging works sometimes,” Mr. Huang said. “I’m excited to work with a lot of these contemporary composers and to get to know some of these newer pieces that I haven’t had the chance to play yet.”Born in Beijing, Mr. Huang began studying violin with his mother when he was 7, after moving to Houston. But he resisted the instrument when he was young, he said. “I never understood why it was important when I was little — I did not love music the way I do now,” he said in a telephone interview. “There were some years when I was close to giving up on the violin. Even though I was technically good at the instrument, I never felt it was something I could not live without.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He commenced studying with Fredell Lack at the University of Houston and at 16 he enrolled in the precollege program at the Cleveland Institute of Music, where he studied with Donald Weilerstein and earned a bachelor’s degree in music in 2002. He also studied with Robert Mann at the Juilliard School in New York.“I’m lucky to have had fantastic teachers who helped me not only improve on the instrument but helped me develop this love of what music can do, how it can change your life,” he said. “Teaching has become a huge part of what I love to do.”AdvertisementMr. Huang won first prizes in the 2003 Walter W. Naumburg Foundation’s violin competition and the 2000 Hannover International violin competition.He was first violinist of the Ying Quartet before joining the Houston Symphony, where he became concertmaster in 2010.Mr. Huang has also performed as a chamber musician at the Marlboro Music Festival, the Ravinia’s Steans Music Institute, the Seattle Chamber Music Society’s festival and at Caramoor. He frequently takes part in Musicians From Marlboro tours and was selected by the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center to be a member of its Chamber Music II program.On Friday, Mr. Huang is to be married in Houston to Sarah Ludwig, a violinist with the Houston Grand Opera. Somehow, he said, they would manage the long-distance relationship.Mr. Huang said his favorite works tend to be whatever piece he is working on at the moment. “If you really understand it, and really understand the reasons for making it convincing,” he said, “you can’t help but fall in love with it a little bit.”A version of this article appears in print on April 9, 2015, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline: Philharmonic Recruits Concertmaster in Houston.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.