AdvertisementSupported byBy the numbersBy Stephen HeymanIf you want to succeed in fashion, consider moving abroad — ideally for the rest of your life.That’s a lesson drawn from a new study by scholars at the international business school Insead in France and the Columbia Business School in New York who examined the career trajectories of designers at 270 top fashion houses over more than a decade. On average, the designers who spent part of their lives working in a foreign milieu produced collections that scored much higher marks for creativity than those of their homegrown peers. And the longer these expatriate designers worked abroad, the better their collections became.The study, published in the latest issue of the Academy of Management Journal, was written by Frédéric Godart, William Maddux and Andrew Shipilov of Insead and Adam Galinsky of the Columbia Business School. Mr. Godart said the advantages of working abroad were both psychological (in terms of being exposed to new ideas and freed from local conventions) and social (in terms of being connected to new collaborators and audiences).The researchers used ratings from the French fashion trade newspaper Le Journal du Textile to measure each designer’s creative output. (At the end of each season, the newspaper asks buyers, fashion professionals and established journalists to evaluate collections shown during fashion week in Milan, Paris, New York and London.) These ratings were then combined with other variables including depth (the amount of time spent abroad), breadth (the number of different countries a designer had worked in), and distance (how different a designer’s home culture was from the one he or she moved to).“We thought that the effects would be simple, or linear. The more time abroad the better, the more countries the better, the farther away the countries were the better,” Mr. Godart said. “But in real life, the effect is more complicated.”Depth had the most straightforward correlation with creativity: The longer a designer worked abroad, the higher his or her creative marks would be. By contrast, Mr. Godart said, there seemed to be “a sweet spot” for the other two variables — breadth and distance. Designers who had worked in just two or three countries had the best creativity ratings on average. Similarly, the most successful designers tended to work in a country that was culturally distinct — but not totally alien — from the one they grew up in. (The researchers used an established scale to measure the distance between cultures.)In their study, the researchers singled out a number of expatriate designers who found success after spending long periods abroad. They included Karl Lagerfeld, who was born in Germany but achieved fame in France; and Alber Elbaz, who was born in Morocco, grew up in Israel and worked in New York before becoming the creative director of the Parisian fashion house Lanvin in 2001. Mr. Godart said that opportunity may have sent some of these designers abroad in the first place, but that ambition and talent could not account for all their success. “Personal drive may have brought Marc Jacobs to Paris,” he said. “But Paris made Marc Jacobs more creative than he would have been had he stayed in New York.” Advertisement