By MATT WOLFAPRIL 8, 2015
LONDON — Whatever your assessment of the National Theater premiere of Sam Holcroft’s “Rules for Living” — which strikes me as familiar terrain here given a pretty fabulous makeover — one thing seems certain. It’s been a while since you’ve seen an onstage food fight that matches the free-for-all at the conclusion of this study in domestic disarray.Whether cooked or raw, a spice or a sauce, scarcely an item in the open-plan kitchen of Chloe Lamford’s set escapes use as a weapon. Six family members and assorted partners — plus a seventh, younger cast member who makes an 11th-hour appearance — are brought together for a crisis-laden Christmas and exhaust all linguistic ammunition, leaving no choice but to look to the spread laid out before them to intensify their attacks. The gala meal, too, has been compromised by the mounting conflagration, having kept on for so long that the gravy is reported to be “getting a skin on it.”The result is that an adult cast must indulge each performance in the sort of all-stops-out anarchy one finds far more often in film. Following the curtain call, who, one wonders, gets to the showers first?A gloppy denouement notwithstanding, Ms. Holcroft’s play uses a tidy governing conceit: two scoreboards on either end of the rectangular playing space announce the “rules” by which the various characters operate. The strictures are seen by the audience but go unnoticed by the characters, including Edith, who “must clean to keep calm.” And so Deborah Findlay, in magisterial form as Edith, the toxic matriarch of an unhappy brood, throws herself into wiping down all available counter surfaces with a vengeance, pausing long enough to refer to one of her two sons as “Matthew my martyr” because he has agreed to mash the potatoes.AdvertisementThe director, Marianne Elliott (a Tony-winner for “War Horse”), fielded similar material in her 2010 revival, also for the National, of “Seasons Greetings,” the Alan Ayckbourn play about a holiday gathering headed directly for hell, and Ms. Holcroft seems at times to overreach in ways that her masterly forebearer would not. Matthew’s girlfriend Carrie (Maggie Service), for example, is too exaggerated by half — the character is a manically chirpy actress who wears us down well before Edith has lobbed a withering glance her direction.But for much of the evening, the sense that we have been here before counts less than the gusto brought to bear on this rising dramatist’s playful reckoning with the wreckage that the festive season can bring. Nor does it hurt that a gifted ensemble, including Stephen Mangan (a 2009 Tony nominee for “The Norman Conquests”), all look as if they are having a ball on the way to their goo-spattered finale.AdvertisementAfter this family in meltdown, the revival of Hugh Whitemore’s 1977 play “Stevie” seems especially becalmed. The director Christopher Morahan’s production at the Hampstead Theater is a staged anatomy of a life of the mind — specifically of the English poet Stevie Smith, who died of a brain tumor in 1971 at the age of 69.Glenda Jackson originally played the singular Stevie on stage and screen, and the part here proves a nice fit for Zoë Wanamaker, who brings a flinty wit that can’t disguise a gathering sadness borne out in a literary output that also included three novels. Born in Yorkshire but resident most of her life in north London, where she coupled writing with caring for her so-called “dearest lion aunt” (Lynda Baron), Stevie chronicled the vagaries of solitude while enjoying the odd tipple and pondering a career that encompassed “sudden fame and then oblivion.”That last phrase is spoken by the lone male in the cast, who is billed simply as Man and is played with quiet aplomb by Chris Larkin. The stout actor’s singular inflections at times recall his mother, Maggie Smith, opposite whom Mr. Larkin acted on the London stage in “The Lady from Dubuque” in 2007.You could argue, I suppose, that Mr. Whitemore’s play could explain itself rather less — Stevie, we’re informed, “needed to be cherished” — and that the piece is a monodrama at heart tricked out to allow others on to the stage: the purpose of Ms. Baron’s redoubtable aunt, for instance, seems to be to push the narrative along so that Stevie can muse aloud on matters ranging from sex to friendship to suicide. (Of her own carnal impulses, Stevie remarks twice that she’s “not the marrying kind.”)Still, the English theater has always found room for middlebrow offerings whereby gentility comes inflected with melancholy — “Shadowlands” and “84 Charing Cross Road,” to name just two — and “Stevie” proves a vigorous example of that subgenre. When Ms. Wanamaker sweeps her large eyes across the auditorium while letting slip Stevie’s assertion that humankind invented God as a defense against loneliness, your heart aches along with that of a heroine who believed that “happiness is silent” whereas sadness, in its own way, sings.One can only begin to imagine the impatience with which Stevie Smith might have greeted the stillborn West End revival of “Harvey,” the Pulitzer prize-winning comedy from 1944 that made a sensation out of the playwright Mary Chase who, strangely, never went on to write anything of note again. The same play earned some warm reviews on Broadway in a separate 2012 production that starred Jim Parsons in the defining role of Elwood P. Dowd, the quietly defiant eccentric whose best friend happens to be a towering white rabbit called Harvey that exists entirely as a figment of Elwood’s imagination.AdvertisementLindsay Posner’s current staging finds the often-manic James Dreyfus cast against type as a bland Elwood in a performance that doesn’t locate the preternatural innocence of a drink-happy character who would like his delusions to be given their due. I dimly recall James Stewart loping about in a 1975 West End revival of the same play that I saw as a teenager on my first trip to London, and even his star wattage couldn’t kickstart the evening. (Stewart had of course starred in the 1950 film of “Harvey.”)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Maureen Lipman gets the occasional second-act laugh as Elwood’s older — on this evidence, much older — sister, Veta, and the supporting cast includes such reliable stalwarts as David Bamber and Desmond Barrit, the latter appearing as a booming-voiced judge who seems inclined to throw such sustained whimsy out of court. But whatever “Harvey” may have to tell us these days about the limitations of normalcy doesn’t land. “The evening wore on,” Elwood reports several times after the intermission. On that topic, if not the existence of his bunny-buddy, there can be no doubt.Rules for Living.  Directed by Marianne Elliott. National Theater / Dorfman. Through July 8.Stevie. Directed by Christopher Morahan. Hampstead Theater. Through April 18.Harvey. Directed by Lindsay Posner. Theater Royal Haymarket. Through May 2.A version of this review appears in print on April 9, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.