The highest-profile guest on Wale’s “The Album About Nothing,” which currently sits at No. 1 on the Billboard chart, is a 60-year-old white man with no experience rhyming. Instead, Jerry Seinfeld serves as a mentor and spirit-guide for Wale, the Washington, D.C., rapper and “Seinfeld” obsessive, who has mined the series for inspiration since his “The Mixtape About Nothing,” featuring Julia Louis-Dreyfuss, in 2008.For the subsequent commercial release – on which the track titles once again mirror the “Seinfeld” convention for naming episodes (“The White Shoes,” “The Middle Finger,” “The Matrimony”) – Wale managed to snag Mr. Seinfeld himself as the narrator between songs.Following the successful release of “The Album About Nothing” (Maybach/Atlantic), which sold 100,000 units in its debut week, Mr. Seinfeld weighed in over the phone on his new friend’s creative process and a recent visit with Kanye West.Congrats on hitting No. 1. Your comedy album, “I’m Telling You for the Last Time,” only peaked at No. 59 on the Billboard chart. Is this some sort of sweet vindication? Absolutely. I’ve been waiting for this for a long time. This is a dragon I have long wanted to slay.When did you first hear about Wale’s “Seinfeld”-inspired mixtape, and how did your relationship evolve from there?I think I met him even before I knew about the mixtape. My wife was a fan and she plays his music in the house all the time. I liked it, too — I don’t spend much time putting together playlists, but that’s what’s nice about being in a family is people just inflict it on you. I absorb it that way.So I had heard his name and then he came to a show and asked if he could say hello, so he came backstage. I thought he was a very charming young man. And then I heard about the mixtape, and he came up with the idea of doing the whole album. It just felt so offbeat and that’s what appeals to me.A lot of people have tried to ride the “Seinfeld” wave over the years. Why participate in this one?This guy’s a real artist and I thought he would be inventive and creative with it as opposed to just pilot fishing, as I call it. You know how that little fish hangs onto the shark and just goes for the ride but doesn’t do any of the work?What was it like in the studio? Did you indulge in any of the late-night session high jinks or was it strictly professional?I would not drink any of the champagne. They like to drink champagne while they work, which is insane to me. They like to enjoy themselves — I like to just grind it out.Wale is a bit of an underdog in hip-hop, bouncing between the underground and the mainstream and trying on different personas. For this album, he calls you his “conscience” — where did you guide him?Young people who become successful like that very young — which I wasn’t when I was young — these forces are very potent and challenging to them. I love talking about managing a public image. I was older when it happened to me — I was in my late 30s, so I think it was easier for me to see what was real and what was just perception.What kind of advice do you give him about fame and success?
That it’s irrelevant. It’s a fantastic byproduct of doing good work, but you have to keep it in its place. It’s like a dog — it’s gotta be trained. You can’t let this thing run all over the house.Have you made any other friends in rap through Wale?
No, but I know some rap people. I’ve known Puffy for a long time. And I met Kanye a few weeks ago. He was very nice. It was at the “SNL 40” thing. We were in the garage and we were all freezing. He invited Mrs. Seinfeld and I onto a bus that he was in. He seemed like a nice young man.Who of the original “Seinfeld” cast had the most interest in hip-hop? Does Larry David have a ton of hidden knowledge?No. No one. No.What other rap have you been listening to lately?
It’s just whatever the kids play. They always want to know if I like it. I always like it or I don’t like it, but Wale, to me, he has a little bit of hypnotic sound in his voice.There’s a richness to his emotion. When you listen to the music, you can feel what he’s feeling and I like that. Great singing always has that.In the strip club scene from Chris Rock’s “Top Five,” you list Sugarhill Gang, Eminem, Wale, Ice Cube and Sir Mix-A-Lot as your top M.C.s of all time. Care to amend that now? No, I’m fine with that.