By MIKE HALEOCT. 18, 2015
Last things first. We’re going to jump to the end of Sunday night’s episode of “The Affair” because that’s where the news was. Noah and Alison, in the future timeline, met with Noah’s lawyer, Gottlief, who announced, “So, ladies and gents, it’s time to talk about that night.” Long past time, you could argue. In any case, we find out a few things. Scotty Lockhart died the night of his brother Cole’s wedding (we didn’t know that, right?), though the bride is not identified. Noah’s account of his actions: He didn’t want to be there, he drank too much, he and Alison fought, she left, he went to look for her and he — hit a deer.This isn’t a satisfying alibi either for us or for Gottlief, who asks, quite reasonably, whether Scotty Lockhart was riding the deer at the time. Alison, meanwhile, is giving Noah the arched-brow side-eye. Gottlief continues: what about the bribe you offered the mechanic to lie about your damaged car (caught on tape) and your public threat at Planned Parenthood to kill Scotty (also caught on tape)? Noah rationalizes the bribe by saying that when he heard of Scotty’s death in a hit and run with no suspects, on the same night that he himself happened to get deer blood and guts all over his bashed-up car, he was afraid he would be suspected — in part because his second book (the one he’s still working on in the show’s main timeline) alienated the locals in Montauk. Of course he is now the main suspect, so we know how that worked out. The episode ended with Noah declaring that while he would have liked to kill the lowlife creep Scotty (who got Noah’s oldest child, Whitney, pregnant), he didn’t, “Because I’m a civilized human being.” But as usually happens when Noah gets riled up, he didn’t look very civilized.Back in the present, it was an “Affair”-classic episode, the first one this season that was one part Noah, one part Alison. (With no appearances by Maura Tierney as Helen or Joshua Jackson as Cole.) We saw another highly charged few days in the life of the Cold Spring guesthouse from their alternate points of view.Noah’s outline: Sex in the morning. He tries to get Alison to go swimming, she gets upset. Noah proposes to Alison (although he’s still married to Helen). Dinner with the landlords, Yvonne and Robert, at which the engagement ring is admired. Whitney bursts into the house, having Ubered from the city (a direct parallel to her mad dash to Montauk in Season 1). Whitney is not happy to see a ring on Alison’s finger. Alison and Noah have a heart-to-heart in which she admits to having sex with gross Oscar in Montauk and to trying to drown herself. Noah goes into the city with Whitney the next day and meets Max, who doesn’t admit to sleeping with Helen and gives Noah $50,000 to speed up the divorce mediation process. Noah is served with divorce papers by Helen, who’s apparently had second thoughts about the whole mediation thing.AdvertisementAlison’s outline: Dinner with the landlords, at which Noah says he doesn’t want more children. The Whitney incident. The heart-to-heart, which takes a very different shape. Breakfast the next morning, cooked by Whitney, who’s all fake-friendly because she wants Alison to give her Scotty’s new phone number (we knew from last season’s finale that he was trying to avoid Whitney). Alison doing her new job for Yvonne, during which she observes an argument between Yvonne and Robert about Robert’s half-wild dog, Pete. A walk in the woods with Robert, who’s carrying a bolt-action rifle he’s supposed to use to shoot Pete. Alison telling Robert the story of her son’s death from secondary drowning and her own culpability in it, after which Robert comforts Alison and decides not to shoot Pete. And finally Alison getting up the courage to jump into the swimming pool, at which point Noah comes home, takes off his clothes (surprise!), joins her and initiates some unprotected aquatic sex which has future-timeline-baby written all over it. Alison’s chapter ends with her looking over Noah’s shoulder at Robert, who’s come out of the main house and is watching them.AdvertisementIn the dinner scene, recounted from both points of view, Noah saw Alison as decidedly confident, even aggressive — quickly making up a romantic story about how they met, telling Yvonne that Noah didn’t want his unfinished manuscript read, gladly accepting a glass of wine after Noah turned it down. When Yvonne told Alison, “What a beautiful story,” about her account of meeting Noah, Noah sarcastically interjected, “Yes, it was somewhat unreal.” Alison, on the other hand, saw herself being as insecure and awkward as always, with Noah the ebullient one. In Noah’s memory, they sat next to each other; in Alison’s, they were on different sides of the table, and Noah was leaning in to talk to Yvonne.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Their memories of the conversation they had after Whitney’s stormy entrance shared a few details — Alison offering the engagement ring back to Noah, and telling him that she had secrets. But otherwise they diverged wildly. Noah remembered Alison flatly stating, “I think we’re making a terrible mistake,” while Alison remembered asking, “Do you think we’re making a mistake?” In Noah’s chapter, Alison recited a litany of lies and omissions, from sleeping with Oscar to not telling Noah about Cole’s visit to Cold Spring; in Alison’s chapter, she says, “I’ve done a lot of things” but doesn’t elaborate. From Alison’s point of view Noah is equivocal, answering her “mistake?” question with “Do you?” In his version he’s passionately committed to her, telling her he wants to start his life over with her.The episode benefited from the jolt of energy and humor that Julia Goldani Telles, as Whitney, always supplies — one of its few funny moments was when Whitney, on being told that her father was living in a cabin and not in Yvonne and Robert’s mansion, loudly pleaded: “Why can’t we just stay in this house? Can we stay here?”It also had its share of solemn moments of thumb-sucking self-reflection and morose foreboding, mostly apportioned to Yvonne and Robert. Discussing the disputed ending of Noah’s book, Yvonne told him: “If you’ve laid all your cards out in the right order, the ending should flow. It should feel inevitable. At some point fate takes over a story and even the author himself loses control.” (The episode was written by Alena Smith, who was a staff writer on “The Newsroom,” and directed by Anna Boden and Ryan Fleck, the team behind the recent film “Mississippi Grind.”) Counseling Alison on her grief and isolation, Robert told her that life is a lonely proposition “but in marriage things get less lonely. Just a little, but it makes a big difference.”Give us your thoughts on the third episode of the second season of “The Affair,” and whether you buy Noah’s deer-in-the-headlights alibi.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.