“Game of Thrones” is returning for its fifth season on Sunday, you might have heard, riding a wave of the kind of intense anticipation usually reserved for royal offspring and new Apple products.Potential snag: It’s been 10 months since the last episode and this story is complicated, overstuffed with oddly named characters and labyrinthine alliances that shift from week to week.So below, in the name of service journalism, we offer a primer on where things currently stand with most of the show’s major characters. (Other significant active characters are marked in bold. Check here for a look at some of the new faces and places in Season 5.)Please check back Sunday night at 10 p.m. for a recap of the season premiere. Tyrion Lannister
Last seen: Crated in King’s Landing.
A lifetime of cruelty from his father, Tywin, including a fixed murder trial last season, culminated in crossbow patricide in the Season 4 finale. The episode happened to fall on Father’s Day, which was fun for everyone (except Tywin, presumably). Varys, the slyest operator in the royal court, smuggled Tyrion onto a ship out of King’s Landing in a crate.Jaime Lannister
Last seen: Freeing his brother Tyrion from prison.
The Kingslayer briefly reconnected with his on-again, off-again twin-cest partner Cersei in the season finale, but things figure to sour between them if she learns that he was the one who sprung their condemned brother out of the dungeon. For one thing, Tyrion is one of Cersei’s least favorite people. For another, he killed their dad afterward.Cersei Lannister
Last seen: Seducing Jaime.
See above.Arya Stark
Last seen: On a boat for Braavos.
The nascent warrior ditched her season-long escort, the Hound, who was mortally wounded by her would-be protector, Brienne of Tarth, whom Arya also eluded. The young Stark is crossing the Narrow Sea in search of the Faceless Men, a monastic order of assassins. (You may remember one of them, Jaqen H’ghar, from previous seasons.)Sansa Stark
Last seen: In the Vale with Littlefinger.
Sansa, long a confused victim of circumstance, finally came into her own after Littlefinger killed her nutty Aunt Lysa, cagily defending him in a trial and making herself over as a more mature operator, in general.Brandon Stark
Last seen: In a cave with the Three-Eyed Raven.
Go ahead and backburner Bran for a while. He won’t be showing up in Season 5.Jon Snow
Last seen: Cremating Ygritte beyond the Wall. 
Snow handled himself nicely during the Battle of Castle Black and was saved, along with the rest of the Night’s Watch, from Mance Rayder and the invading Wildlings, by Stannis Baratheon. He then tearfully torched his beloved ex Ygritte, killed during the battle, just north of the Wall.Stannis Baratheon
Last seen: Fireside at Castle Black.
After several seasons of glowering in Dragonstone, Stannis finally found an investor, hired an army and swooped in to save the Night’s Watch, merely the first stop in his campaign for the Iron Throne. He has his red priestess and occasional mistress, Melisandre, in tow along with his wife and child, which is just as awkward as it sounds.Daenerys Targaryen
Last seen: Holding court in Meereen.
The Dragon Queen spent most of Season 4 mired in a campaign to conquer the cities of Slaver’s Bay, which probably deserved conquering, considering the name of their bay. But she is wrestling with the complications of occupation, and her dragons keep scorching livestock and little kids.The Dragons
Last seen: Chained in catacombs in Meereen.
The two smaller of Dany’s three dragons were locked up after the big one, Drogon, incinerated a shepherd’s daughter. Drogon is M.I.A., presumably soaring in parts unknown.Roose Bolton
Last seen: Heading for Winterfell.
Bolton, who took over the Stark ancestral home after betraying and killing Robb Stark at the Red Wedding, now controls the north.Ramsay Bolton (née Snow)
Last seen: Savoring his de-bastardization.
The sadist Ramsay was legitimized by his father, Roose, after claiming Moat Cailin for House Bolton, expanding the clan’s territory. He is terrible.Theon Greyjoy/Reek
Last seen: Cowering somewhere near Ramsay.
Reek did Reek, which amounts to whatever degrading thing Ramsay orders.Margaery Tyrell
Last seen: Bewitching her betrothed in King’s Landing.
After the death of her husband, Joffrey, at their wedding, Margaery snared herself another regal fiancé: Joffrey’s little brother, Tommen. The new king is out of his depth, which is just fine by the power hungry Margaery. Her brother, Loras, is engaged to her future mother-in-law Cersei, but that could be off after Tywin’s death. (Tywin arranged the union for political reasons, but neither party is into it, to put it mildly.)Lancel Lannister
Last seen: Wounded at the Battle of the Blackwater.
This lesser Lannister cousin has been little mentioned since the Battle of the Blackwater in Season 2, but he returns this season. He was the sexual plaything of Cersei and also the squire who plied King Robert Baratheon with wine during the hunt that led to the king’s death. Tyrion blackmailed him into being his spy leading up to the Battle of the Blackwater, during which he took an arrow to the chest and fell out of favor with Cersei.Hodor
Last seen: Hodor.
Hodor.