Festival of International New Drama
Schaubühne.
April 17-26.Marius von Mayenburg, a sly social satirist and one of Germany’s leading young playwrights, will show the premiere of “A Piece of Plastic” here. The play follows a house cleaner whose employer places her in an art installation. Other plays in this international festival’s lineup include “Saddam Hussein — A Mystery Play” by the HaZira Performance Art Arena from Israel; “The Apple Family Plays” by the American playwright Richard Nelson; and “La Imaginación del Futuro” by the Chilean company La Re-sentida. The piece tracks a group of consultants as they try to prepare President Salvador Allende of Chile for his last public appearance.World Press Photo 15
De Nieuwe Kerk.
April 18-July 5.The winners of this year’s World Press Photo competition will appear in this show, opening in Amsterdam before traveling to cities including Bucharest, Romania; Perth, Autstralia; and Macau. This year’s top prize went to Mads Nissen, for an image of two gay men in bed in Russia. That image will show alongside photos that document top news stories, such as the conflict in Ukraine, the Ebola epidemic and fighting in Gaza. The prize met with controversy this year when Giovanni Troilo, the winner of the Contemporary Issues category, had his award stripped for misrepresenting the location of a photo.The Tudors
Musée du Luxembourg.
Through July 19.This exhibition includes artwork from the time of the Tudors (1485-1603), focusing primarily on portraits of the ruling classes. Many artworks hail from little-known artists from France and the low countries, a mark of England’s internationalism at the time.Billowing Light: Ishida Takashi
Yokohama Museum of Art.
Through May 31.Mr. Ishida, a Japanese artist (born 1972), creates video works and installations, sometimes painting directly onto the floors and walls of his exhibition spaces. This show brings together works from across his career — like “Burning Chair,” a stop-motion video piece for which the artist poured water on chalk drawings and tracked the effect as it evaporated.BallettFestwoche
Nationaltheater.
April 18-26.The American choreographer Richard Siegal will present “In a Landscape,” a premiere, in “Portrait Richard Siegal,” an evening dedicated to his work. Other performances in the festival, which marks the Staatsballett’s 25th anniversary, include highlights from the company’s repertoire and a guest performance by the Ballett am Rhein Düsseldorf Duisburg.A selection of arts events taking place across the world in the coming week.State of Play
White Rabbit Gallery.
Through Aug. 2.“Cigarette Ash Landscape,” an installation by Yang Yongliang that features a giant suspended cigarette with ashes made of black-and-white photographs; and “The Empire,” a scalable dome by Jian Jun Xi, are among the playful artworks on view in this group exhibition. Thirty Chinese artists are showing in all, with relative unknowns on view alongside China’s biggest names, like the installation artist Xu Zhen (who currently has a solo show running in Shanghai ) and the filmmaker Yang Fudong.Love Bites: Caricatures by James Gillray; Great British Drawings
Ashmolean Museum.
Through June 21; Aug. 31.The British cartoonist James Gillray (1757-1815) was one of the country’s great caricaturists, prolific on a range of the leading concerns of the day (he took particular issue with the radicalism that emerged in France after the French Revolution). This exhibition assembles a broad range of his hand-colored prints. It runs alongside “Great British Drawings,” which features works that have never gone on public display.Various shows
Pinacoteca do Estado de São Paulo.
Through spring.The Irish-born painter Sean Scully — whose layered works evoke Mark Rothko’s art, with an emphasis on geometric shapes, will show work in one of three solo exhibitions opening here this month. The others center on Nelson Felix and José Resende, contemporary Brazilian artists who focus on installation and multimedia.Leonardo 1452-1519
Palazzo Reale.
April 15-July 19.A collection of drawings and paintings by the Italian artist and scientist will go on view in this show, a major exhibition timed to coincide with Expo Milano. Artworks include well-known paintings, like “The Annunciation,” “John the Baptist” and some of his famous nude sketches. Works by other artists, ranging from Bellini to Andy Warhol, are also on view.Werther
Teatro Colón.
April 14-21.Hugo de Ana — who has worked here steadily as a director — oversaw this opera production, based on Goethe’s tragic epistolary novel of love. (Jules Massenet set the work to music in the late 19th century.) Gustavo López Manzitti plays the enamored Werther and Clémentine Margaine plays Charlotte, the woman who spurns him.