By KATHRYN SHATTUCKAPRIL 10, 2015
7:25 P.M. (HBO Signature) GOOD NIGHT, AND GOOD LUCK (2005) George Clooney, who directed from a script he wrote with Grant Heslov, burnishes the legend of Edward R. Murrow, the CBS newsman known for his journalistic integrity. In an Oscar-nominated performance, David Strathairn portrays Murrow during the political turmoil that journalists coped with in the 1940s and ’50s — particularly Murrow’s war of words and images with Senator Joseph R. McCarthy of Wisconsin. Mr. Clooney plays Murrow’s producer and professional partner, Fred Friendly; Frank Langella is his boss, William Paley; and thanks to archival footage, Senator McCarthy plays himself. “ ‘Good Night, and Good Luck’ is a passionate, thoughtful essay on power, truth-telling and responsibility,” A. O. Scott wrote in The New York Times. “The title evokes Murrow’s trademark signoff, and I can best sum up my own response by recalling the name of his flagship program: See it now.”11 A.M. (HBO2) SIX BY SONDHEIM (2013) The director James Lapine explores the development of Stephen Sondheim as a songwriter through six of his most defining songs: “I’m Still Here,” from “Follies”; “Being Alive,” from “Company”; “Something’s Coming,” from “West Side Story” (written with Leonard Bernstein); “Send In the Clowns,” from “A Little Night Music”; “Sunday,” from “Sunday in the Park With George”; and “Opening Doors,” from “Merrily We Roll Along,” which Mr. Sondheim considers his most autobiographical.9 P.M. (13) NORM LEWIS: WHO AM I? In this “Live From Lincoln Center” presentation, Mr. Lewis, the first African-American to play the title role in “The Phantom of the Opera” on Broadway, performs classics from the Great American Songbook, including “Wouldn’t It Be Loverly?,” “I Got Plenty o’ Nuttin’, ” and “No One Is Alone.”9 P.M. (Showtime) ELVIS COSTELLO: MYSTERY DANCE (2015) In interviews taped in New York, London and Liverpool, England, Mr. Costello talks about his childhood as the son of a dance-band singer, his swift success and subsequent disenchantment with the music business and his collaborations with Burt Bacharach, Allen Toussaint and Paul McCartney, with whom he recorded unreleased demos included here. He also performs with the Brodsky Quartet, Kris Kristofferson and Rosanne Cash.Advertisement10 P.M. (HBO) REAL TIME WITH BILL MAHER Senator Elizabeth Warren, Democrat of Massachusetts, and the humorist Dave Barry are the interview guests. Christina Bellantoni, the editor in chief of Roll Call; the CNN host Fareed Zakaria; and Ross Douthat, a columnist for The New York Times, are at the round table.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.1 A.M. (13) THEATER TALK The playwright Robert Askins, the director Moritz von Stuelpnagel and the actor Steven Boyer, accompanied by his sock-puppet alter ego, Tyrone, discuss their play “Hand to God,” at the Booth Theater. “Mr. Boyer’s performance as Jason is tender and touching, his performance as Tyrone outlandish and hilarious; put them together and you have that rarely seen (although often hailed) acting achievement: a true tour de force,” Charles Isherwood wrote in The Times.What’s Streaming NowMARVEL’S DAREDEVIL Charlie Cox stars as the lawyer turned blind vigilante crime fighter Matt Murdock — who, at night, uses his senses of hearing, touch and smell, intensified by the same toxins that destroyed his sight, to whup bad guys — in this first installment in a five-show deal between Netflix and Marvel focusing on “street-level heroes.” Vincent D’Onofrio plays Wilson Fisk, Murdock’s lug of an alter ego; Elden Henson is Murdock’s law partner, Foggy Nelson; Deborah Ann Woll is their secretary; Rosario Dawson is the nurse who discovers the masked hero’s identity; and Scott Glenn is Stick, in the comic book the ninja who teaches Murdock how to use his abilities. Perhaps the show’s creator, Drew Goddard, and supervisor, Steven S. DeKnight, “felt that street-level heroics called for a straightforward, largely realistic treatment,” Mike Hale wrote in The Times. “The result, while eminently watchable, isn’t the Daredevil some of us remember.” (netflix.com)AdvertisementFAR FROM VIETNAM (1967) The directors Jean-Luc Godard, Claude Lelouch and Alain Resnais, among others, protest American military involvement in Vietnam through footage shot in North and South Vietnam and at antiwar protests in the United States; interviews with Ho Chi Minh, Fidel Castro and Anne Morrison, the widow of Norman Morrison, a Quaker who burned himself to death in front of the Pentagon in 1965; and reflections from the French journalist Michèle Ray. (fandor.com)A version of this schedule appears in print on April 10, 2015, on Page C19 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Friday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.