ARLINGTON, Va. — Trevor Noah’s first stand-up comedy show since being named the next host of “The Daily Show” was about racism and the trials of coming to America. He talked about everything, audience members said, except for the deluge of criticism that has followed his selection as heir to Jon Stewart’s satirical throne on Comedy Central.For longtime fans who saw the first of seven sold-out shows on Mr. Noah’s “Lost in Translation” tour at the Arlington Cinema and Drafthouse on Thursday, he didn’t have to. “I think everyone makes mistakes and those were a long time ago,” said Sierra Meade, a student at George Washington University, referring to satirical tweets that some considered offensive to women and Jews. “I don’t think he meant anything. His heart’s in the right place overall.”Brittany Davis, who traveled from Boca Raton, Fla., for the inaugural American tour date, couldn’t stop smiling after the show, shouting, “I loved it!” when asked how it went. Both she and her friend, Kwame Edusei, said that the maelstrom over his Twitter posts had been overblown. There were even rumors that protesters would be staking out the Drafthouse on Thursday, but there wasn’t a picket sign or bullhorn in sight on the cold, drizzly evening. Jacob Williams, a comedian performing at the same site and a regular on MTV2’s “Wild ‘N Out,” said that situations like these can hold back potentially great stand-ups. “When you’re developing as a comedian, the whole goal is to get better, and to do that you have to push the boundaries and try lots of different things,” he said. “It’s hard to be as funny if you’re always censoring everything.” No press was allowed into the show, and that  seemed consistent with Mr. Noah’s apparent focus on moving forward and letting the jokes fall where they may. Instead of performing at a large space perhaps more fitting of a “Daily Show” host, he chose the Arlington  Drafthouse, about a half-hour drive outside Washington, with drinks far cheaper than most places in the District. The G and the T in the vertical “Arlington” sign flickered as though they might go dark at any minute. It was intimate, which could be one of the reasons that  audience members at both shows arrived early and were willing to stand in the dreary weather to see him perform.“I think that’s the difference,” Mr. Edusei said. “He’s just usually himself.”