AdvertisementSupported byArt in ReviewBy Roberta SmithFoxy Production 623 West 27th Street, Chelsea Through April 18 Sascha Braunig, an inspired reanimator of Surrealism, stands out in the New Museum’s Triennial partly because she persists in making small portable paintings but mainly because she does so in concentrated, hallucinatory celebrations of light, color and space. Her semiabstract canvases center on featureless heads and truncated bodies that match and usually fuse with their backgrounds, wreaking havoc with the modernist ideal of non-illusionistic monochrome paintings. Ms. Braunig’s images here seem to comprise odd, almost tangible things: for example, the undulant white beads or Ping-Pong balls in “Saccades,” the gently inflated knitted or leaf patterns in shades of yellow in “Troll” and the greige claylike coils in “Feeder.” In fact, most are painted from small sculptures and models made by the artist, although painting them adds a transformative artifice. In “Feeder,” for example, the coils become translucent conduits for brightly colored pills being consumed by a female silhouette, also made of coils. To acknowledge Ms. Braunig’s three-dimensional sources, a clay mask, “Chur,” hangs in the gallery’s small second space looking slightly sinister, like a hunting trophy. (It is the model for the painting of the same name in the Triennial.) It accentuates the mood of confinement and regret that permeates the paintings, despite the jewel-like colors. Ms. Braunig’s ultimate subject could be the unease of our time. She may be taking hints from Dalí and Tamara de Lempicka (and also from the undulating patterns of the 1980s artist Peter Schuyff), but her paintings seem lighted by a monitor’s glow. And the future she envisions doesn’t look good. One of the most recent paintings is “Hide,” which suggests a human silhouette in drastically perforated leather stretched across a shallow container lined with pink fabric accented by dashes of gray and blue. Whether box, crib or coffin, it is not an entirely pretty sight. ROBERTA SMITH Advertisement