By MARTHA SCHWENDENERAPRIL 9, 2015
ALISON ROSSITER ‘Paper Wait’ Yossi Milo 245 10th Avenue, near 24th Street, Chelsea Through May 2 Alison Rossiter’s project is conceptual abstraction par excellence since it relies as much on what we know, or what we are told about an object, as what we see. The first part of her process involves acquiring unexposed, expired photographic paper, generally from eBay. Then she pours liquid developer on the paper and exposes it to light. The results are abstract compositions that blur the boundaries between photography and painting. They look like photograms but also like graphite drawings or gray-scale versions of paintings by artists known for staining their canvases, like Helen Frankenthaler and Morris Louis. The current show also includes more ambitious constructions made from multiple sheets of paper that recall Ellsworth Kelly or Suzan Frecon compositions.Ms. Rossiter’s work relies on chance, a method cherished by countless creators, including Dada and Fluxus artists, and the retrieval and recycling of ready-made materials. There are also dormant histories in the paper, however, which Ms. Rossiter reveals in the titles. The series “Latent Eastman Kodak Velox, expired May 1919, processed 2014” employs paper that expired just after World War I, while other works use papers with bold and curious names like “Haloid Military,” “Defender Argo” and “Agfa Cykora.”Ms. Rossiter has grown more deft at coaxing a range of tonality and effects from the paper and at asserting the connection between technology, aesthetics and time. The demise of chemical photography becomes a metaphor for the fate of defeated and exhausted empires. But she also suggests that expired materials, like forgotten people, have poignant memories and stories to reveal. MARTHA SCHWENDENERA version of this review appears in print on April 10, 2015, on Page C24 of the New York edition with the headline: Alison Rossiter: ‘Paper Wait’.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.