AdvertisementSupported byBy Charles McGrathCan you hear it? It’s the sound of a rumble readying in the Bronx. At least it would have been in years past. The Yankees meet the Red Sox on Friday for their first series in the post-Jeter era. There was a time when the teams’ rivalry was considered by many to be the greatest in sports — and a ticket to a game one of the hottest in town. Things have changed. Two reporters for The New York Times, one a a die-hard Red Sox fan, below, and the other a die-hard Yankees fan, weigh in on whether the flame can be rekindled. It’s up to you.WHEN I moved to New York in the early ’70s, my mother took me aside and made me swear never to root for the Yankees. That’s how seriously we Bostonians took our feud with New York back then, and it only intensified. During some of the epic Red Sox-Yankees battles of the ’90s I would get so nervous that I thought I might need to be tranquilized.Sadly, the storied old rivalry has lost some of its edge of late. I certainly don’t mind when the Sox beat the Yankees these days, especially if it’s a drubbing, but neither does a loss to the Pinstripes or even a slew of them, as happened last year, send me to my bed. Partly this is the fault of the people who make up the schedule. The Red Sox and Yankees now play each other 19 times a year, far too often, turning what used to be memorable encounters into overly familiar ones. It’s like spending too much time with disagreeable relatives. Eventually you get used to them.And partly, I have to admit, it’s the fault of the Red Sox themselves. For the past three or four years, with the exception of the miraculous 2013 World Championship season, the team has been its own worst enemy, undermined by clubhouse dissent and front-office maneuvering. The team seems to have embarked on a new philosophy of blowing itself up and starting over every couple of seasons.But mostly I blame the Yankees for this sorry state of affairs. They’re not the Yankees anymore. With the departure of Mariano Rivera and Derek Jeter, they’re just another mediocre baseball team, and an aged one at that. Even C. C. Sabathia (whose uniform these days is off the extra-portly rack again) isn’t as scary as he used to be.Most disappointing of all, the owner Hank Steinbrenner has proved to be just what he promised: not his father. He makes you yearn for the grand old days of the Evil Empire. George Steinbrenner, were he only alive today, would surely have fired the reasonable, decent and very competent manager, Joe Girardi, by now, and brought in some fiery change agent. (Maybe not Bobby Valentine — that’s too much to hope.) And he would have flung around duffel bags of money at the free-agent auction, snagging Max Scherzer for sure, and maybe even Jon Lester, whose re-signing the Sox so unaccountably botched. That would have been something to melt the phone lines at Station WEEI (the southern New England equivalent of WFAN, only more passionate) and stir the rivalry’s embers again. As long as we’re handing out blame here, by the way, let’s not forget Alex Rodriguez. His very expensive example is presumably what has made the Yankees wary of the kind of long-term, high-profile spending that used to incite the resentment of Boston fans, who liked to imagine that their own organization practiced old-fashioned New England penury.The Sox can no longer pretend to be among baseball’s poor relations, and this, too, has taken some steam off the rivalry. It was more fun to imagine ourselves as virtuous underdogs, unable to keep up with Big Apple profligacy.This year’s Red Sox have so many good-hitting outfielders that there’s a logjam out there, but after letting go of Lester and John Lackey, another starting pitcher, they’re counting on a lot of question marks to fill the rotation. The pitching staff is as shaky-seeming as I can remember, going back to my boyhood, when the Yankees were really the Yankees and the rivalry the most lopsided it has ever been. The team’s new strategy — blessed, I assume, by Bill James, the resident stats guru of the Red Sox — seems to be to win with hitting, not pitching, and I imagine a lot of games ending 9-8 (or, considering how anemic baseball scoring has been the last few years, maybe 5-4, which is the new 9-8). Might be fun to watch, especially if the Yankees, as could easily happen, find themselves in the same boat. Sometimes the people you hate most are the ones who most remind you of yourself.Advertisement