
Friday File By                     
 MARY JO MURPHY
 
OCT. 1, 2015
Is the pope a pop star? Time and the Billboard charts will tell. A papal prog-rock album, “Wake Up!,” will drop on Nov. 27. That’s Black Friday, as it happens, but you can’t stuff it into the Christmas stocking because it’s digital only, at least for now.The Vatican has already released one of the 11 tracks on the album, “Wake Up! Go! Go! Forward!” It’s made up of excerpts from a papal speech, set to electric guitars and drums, with some guest vocalists singing.The song is not, it should be noted, an earworm.One of the earwormiest songs ever written, however, also came from someone who took sacred vows in the Roman Catholic Church. The singer was a Dominican nun, and the song was “Dominique.”Here is the 1963 account in The Times:“A guitar-strumming 30-year-old Belgian nun is creating a new legend in the teen-age record market with a French song whose rhythm is neither slop, twist, dog, surf nor rock and roll,” Michael J. Bandler wrote. “She is Sister Sourire (Smile), whose recording of ‘Dominique’ has sold 500,000 copies since its American release on Oct. 14.”AdvertisementThe article went on to say that “the history of the recording is a Cinderella tale.” The nun, Sister Luc-Gabrielle, as she was known in the convent, had bought a guitar before entering the convent, near Brussels, where she played and sang her songs to the other nuns and to girls who visited on retreats. “One group of girls asked the sister to record her songs, so that they could take her messages home with them.”AdvertisementThe result was an album, and “Dominique” rose to No. 1 on the American charts, where it spent several weeks just after President Kennedy’s assassination.Jump ahead to 1966, when the Cinderella tale had already begun to unravel, although not before Hollywood made a movie.In his review in The Times, Bosley Crowther wrote:“It takes a soft heart and a strong stomach to absorb the amount of saccharine that is studiedly and shamelessly dished up in Henry Koster’s ‘The Singing Nun.’ ”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Most of the mawkish elements that have been previously tried in nun-priest films and have been found to have a penetrating impact on susceptible moviegoers have been gathered and gilded in this picture, which has Debbie Reynolds in the role of a sparkling nun in a Belgian Dominican hospice who oozes sweetness and sentimental song.”The review continues: “Do you want to go on with this recital of the mawkish elements? All right, there’s the bittersweet meeting of the young sister and her old boy friend. He — Chad Everett — is the part owner of the recording company where she goes to cut a record of herself and two other sisters harmonizing the hit song ‘Dominique.’‘It will sell a million!’ the young man hollers the first time he hears it — and he’s right, because that’s what the song, which was first sung by a nun in Europe, has reputedly sold.”“There follow heavy sales of an album, a spot on Ed Sullivan’s television show and a great deal of delicate courtship of the singing nun by her old friend. But, of course, she finally denies him, after ‘praying,’ as she puts it, with her guitar, and away she goes to Africa to attend the natives — and thank God nightly for Mr. Sullivan.”As is so often the case, Hollywood served up its own cocktail of fact and fiction. In real life the singing nun left the convent, but not with a boyfriend. (She did appear on the Ed Sullivan show, in a clip filmed at her convent.) She lived with a woman for decades before the two, destitute and depressed, committed suicide in 1985.“Dominque” was introduced to a new generation when the song was featured repeatedly, and creepily, during the second season of the FX series “American Horror Story.” No saccharine there.A version of this article appears in print on October 2, 2015, on Page C30 of the New York edition.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »