AdvertisementSupported byBy Bruce WeberCan you hear it? It’s the sound of a rumble readying in the Bronx. At least it would have been in years past. The Yankees meet the Red Sox on Friday for their first series in the post-Jeter era. There was a time when the teams’ rivalry was considered by many to be the greatest in sports — and a ticket to a game one of the hottest in town. Things have changed. Two reporters for The New York Times, one a die-hard Yankees fan, below, and the other a die-hard Red Sox fan, weigh in on whether the flame can be rekindled. It’s up to you.IN 20 years as the Yankee shortstop, Derek Jeter never made a play quite so stupid as Didi Gregorius, his successor, did in his very first game on Monday. I’m sorry to pick on the kid; he’s unenviably replacing a hero and has a good glove (better than Jeter’s), but why would you try to steal third with two outs in the eighth, your team down by five and your cleanup hitter at bat? A Little Leaguer knows better.My point is this: I don’t recognize the Yankees, a team I’ve been rooting for since before their manager, Joe Girardi, was born. A naïf at short and too many of his teammates not only old — Gregorius, at 25, is the only everyday starter under 30 — but borrowed from somewhere else.So now the Red Sox come to the Bronx for the first time this season, opening a three-game series Friday night, and the rivalry between the teams, intense for most of my baseball life and especially so for much of the past quarter-century, has gone tepid. Sox fans may not feel that way; they’ve probably got the better prospects this year, and though some of my most fearsome bêtes-noires (Manny Ramirez and Curt Schilling, for example) are long gone, they’ve still got Dustin Pedroia and David Ortiz, Yankee killers of longstanding. But the Yanks — Jeter-less, Mariano Rivera-free — have whom? No one who inspires me, I’ll tell you that, or more to the point scares the Sox. (Mark Teixeira? Now? Please.) For the first time in decades the team has an identity problem.Brian McCann, the guy who is supposed to be the leader in the clubhouse now that Jeter is gone, is more of an Atlanta Brave than a Yankee. Chase Headley? A San Diego Padre. Carlos Beltran? A Cardinal or (gasp) a Met. Stephen Drew and Jacoby Ellsbury (double gasp) — actual Red Sox. These are all guys that the Yankees wildly overpaid for in the last couple of years (and who have all more or less underperformed since getting here); meanwhile they failed to overpay for their marvelous second baseman, Robinson Cano, a legit star who can still hit and field, as he is now proving for Seattle.Brett Gardner is a nice player, but when he’s the face of your franchise — well, if you’re, say, a Pittsburgh Pirate fan, do you even know who he is? This is the team of Ruth, Gehrig, DiMaggio, Mantle, Berra, Ford and Mattingly, the most accomplished historical roster in sports, remember? Let’s not even discuss the exasperating Alex Rodriguez or the fact that he may be the most representative Yankee of all right now.It pains me to consider this, but even though the Yanks won the World Series in 2009 — and even though the Red Sox have had a handful of uninspired seasons as ownership rejiggered the roster — over the last dozen years Boston has had not only the better team but the better franchise. They attend to their problems assiduously; when their clubhouse was in an uproar in 2012 and the team in last place, they cleaned house in a heartbeat. That was impressive. The next year they were Series champions. More impressive.By my lights, the Yanks keep making things worse. While Boston has made some modernizing improvements in Fenway Park, the team’s delightful downtown ballyard, New York tore down Yankee Stadium and built a shiny new one next door, a mercenary theme park where the ballgame seems incidental, where they’ve actually tried to charge more than $2,000 for some tickets and where there are 444 concession stand locations, up from 298 in the old stadium. You can’t turn around without another opportunity to open your wallet for a bobblehead or a beer. From my perspective, this is a milk-the-fan strategy: They might make a lot more money, but they don’t seem to know how to spend it.As a baseball watcher, I’m an old crank, I know that. I’ve been older than the players I root for for a good long time. But this year I look at the creaky Yankee lineup (the pitchers are, over all, a little younger, though fragile and far from confidence-inspiring), and I wish I were even older than the players than I am. Let’s at least hope Gregorius learns from his mistake. I’d like to get to know him. I’d like him to stick around and intimidate the Red Sox. And when he does, I’d like him to have friends.Advertisement