By ANTHONY TOMMASINIAPRIL 9, 2015
Not many concertos for violin and oboe have entered the standard repertory. The best-known, as Alan Gilbert remarked during a New York Philharmonic concert on Wednesday, is Bach’s splendid Concerto in C Minor for Oboe, Violin and Strings.So, when Thierry Escaich, a leading French composer, set about writing a concerto for the brilliant violinist Lisa Batiashvili and the elegant oboist François Leleux (who happen to be married), he had the savvy idea to use Bach’s concerto as “a launching path,” Mr. Gilbert explained, for his own work. His Concerto for Violin, Oboe and Orchestra, jointly commissioned by the Philharmonic, received its American premiere on Wednesday at Avery Fisher Hall. Mr. Escaich uses snippets of the Bach as motifs in his new piece. The result is not a pastiche but a lavishly orchestrated score that weaves threads from Bach into a striking, moody, playful three-movement concerto of roughly the same length, about 15 minutes.The program opened with the Bach, played by the soloists and an ensemble of about two dozen strings and continuo. Mr. Leleux’s rich, reedy sound and slightly cool allure combined beautifully with Ms. Batiashvili’s melting lyricism and articulate grace in the bantering exchanges and interplay. Mr. Gilbert drew clear, buoyant playing from the ensemble.With the Bach fresh in mind, the audience was primed for Mr. Escaich’s concerto, which received its premiere in December at the NDR Symphony Orchestra in Hamburg with these soloists, to whom it is dedicated, and with Mr. Gilbert conducting. It opens with an upwardly slicing orchestra burst that crash-lands on a pedal tone in the low strings. Weird chords erupt, and, true to Mr. Escaich’s penchant for coloristic sounds, waves of hazy sonorities seem to hover. Then the soloists play fleeting bits of the jumpy theme from the last movement of the Bach, which segue into spiraling riffs, establishing the quizzical mood of the music. The solo flights sometimes seem impish, but other times turn frenetic, even desperate.AdvertisementLuminous cluster-like chords unfold in steady rhythmic patterns during the slow movement, though the soloists and groups of orchestra instruments keep injecting squirrelly, creepy things into the tranquillity. The last movement begins with a whiplash sound and becomes a stew of crackling Bachian vitality.As an artist in residence with the Philharmonic this season, Ms. Batiashvili has become a familiar and welcome presence. She, along with Mr. Leleux, Mr. Gilbert and the composer, received enthusiastic ovations. I can imagine many orchestras following Mr. Gilbert’s example by pairing these concertos together. A smart move by Mr. Escaich.AdvertisementI could devote a whole report to the wrenching, blazing and vehement account of Shostakovich’s Symphony No. 10 in E minor that Mr. Gilbert conducted after intermission. The composer completed this hourlong symphony months after the death of Stalin. How explicitly it was intended as bitter commentary on Stalinist repression is a topic of debate. Whatever one’s take, Mr. Gilbert led a commanding performance, especially the spacious gravity he summoned during the expansive opening movement and the intensity bordering on sheer terror of the short Allegro.[This program will be repeated on Friday and Saturday at Avery Fisher Hall, 212-875-5656, nyphil.org] A version of this article appears in print on April 10, 2015, on Page C2 of the New York edition with the headline: From Snippets of Bach, a Grand Tapestry Unfurls.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.