By LAUREL GRAEBERAPRIL 9, 2015
‘Spring Wings’New Yorkers who spent the winter in warmer, sunnier climes are now flocking back to the city. So many need new homes that you can expect a small construction boom — although, to these residents, a skyscraper is a tree branch.That’s because these neighbors happen to be birds, which Wave Hill, the Bronx garden, will salute in “Spring Wings,” a weekend of activities with avian themes.“We’ve done so much bird programming in the fall that this time we decided to highlight the spring, when the birds are coming back, rather than leaving,” said Laurel Rimmer, the garden’s assistant director of public programs.On Saturday only, at noon and 2 p.m., Volunteers for Wildlife, a nonprofit center on Long Island that rehabilitates injured animals, will visit with birds that have become educational ambassadors. Potential guests include an Eastern screech owl, a barred owl, a red-tailed hawk and an American kestrel.AdvertisementThe center’s representatives will discuss the birds’ adaptations, life cycles and diet, and display artifacts like feathers and skulls. From 2 to 4 p.m. that day, intrepid visitors can even dissect owl pellets: undigested clumps of fur, teeth, claws and bones that the birds cough up after eating — a hairball’s wild equivalent.Advertisement“The kids love it,” Ms. Rimmer said. “Often, the parents are a little squeamish, but we tell people right away that the pellets are sterilized.” Each participant will be given a tray and a diagram of what might be discovered. “It’s usually mice and voles,” Ms. Rimmer said. “You can almost reconstruct the creatures they’ve eaten by pulling out all these separate little bones.”On Saturday and Sunday, at 9:30 a.m., the garden will offer a 90-minute Spring Birding walk for adults and children 10 and older (advance registration is advised) and, at 1 p.m., the Chirps and Tweets Family Walk, briefer and for a younger crowd. In addition to seeking melodious species like the Eastern phoebe, the red-winged blackbird and the song sparrow, family-walk participants can add their own tweets (no mobile devices required).If sounding like a warbler isn’t enough, children can make bird masks and join a family art project that they can literally get into. On both days, from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m., Matt Bua, an artist who specializes in found materials, will lead young visitors in collecting leaves, twigs and feathers and constructing a giant bird’s nest — at least five feet across — outdoors. If only Horton had had one like that.(249th Street and Independence Avenue, Riverdale, 718-549-3200, wavehill.org. ) LAUREL GRAEBERFor Children‘Alexander and the Terrible, Horrible, No Good, Very Bad Day’ (Sunday) A decade or so ago, Judith Viorst turned her children’s picture book classic “Alexander and the Terrible, Horrible, No Good, Very Bad Day” into a terrific, happy and really very good musical. (Shelly Markham wrote the score.) Now Theatreworks USA is bringing this production to the Queens Theater. The show focuses on the elementary school student of the title and the comical side of his misery-filled moments, from the gum in his hair in the morning to his broken nightlight at bedtime. At 1 and 3 p.m., 14 United Nations Avenue South, near Grand Central Parkway, Flushing Meadows Corona Park, 718-760-0064, queenstheatre.org.‘The Amazing Max’ (Friday and Saturday) Max Darwin, a.k.a. the Amazing Max, may come across like the M.C. at a raucous bar mitzvah party, but he does know his craft. In this hourlong magic performance, he performs feats like mind reading, making objects disappear and then reappear, and sending coins raining from various parts of the body. The show, ending this weekend, includes lots of audience participation. Friday at 1 p.m. (sold out); Saturday at 11 a.m. and 1 p.m.; the McGinn/Cazale Theater, 2162 Broadway, at 76th Street, fourth floor, 866-811-4111, theamazingmax.com.‘Archaeology Zone: Discovering Treasures From Playgrounds to Palaces’ (Sunday through Tuesday, and Thursday) Children will step into the shoes of an explorer like Indiana Jones in this permanent exhibition at the Jewish Museum, but the adventures will be purely scholarly. Still, there is plenty of excitement in analyzing artifacts like a jar handle, a clay jug and a bangle and figuring out the purpose behind ancient pieces like a Greek helmet and a bull-shaped vessel. This interactive show, for ages 3 to 10, also includes a recreated room from the Ottoman period (about 1900), where young archaeologists can dress in costume. From 11 a.m. to 5:45 p.m.; until 8 p.m. on Thursdays; closed this Friday for Passover; 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92nd Street, 212-423-3200, thejewishmuseum.org.Advertisement‘The Bully’ (Saturday and Sunday) Vital Theater Company has revived this ever-topical musical, by John Gregor and David L. Williams, which refreshingly avoids the trap of bullying its own audiences with heavy moralizing. Instead, the many pitfalls of the typical middle school relationship of victimizer and victim are revealed through wit, humor and a killer of a sly twist. (Through April 26.) At 3:30 p.m., McGinn-Cazale Theater, 2162 Broadway, at 76th Street, fourth floor; 212-579-0528, vitaltheatre.org.‘Camp Kappawanna’ (Friday through Sunday) This fresh and funny new musical from Atlantic for Kids, a division of the Atlantic Theater Company, focuses on a pivotal first summer at camp for the shy heroine, Jenny (Mara Measor), who tends to hide behind Lou, her guitar. The show, closing this weekend, involves a contest with a rival camp and plenty of middle school antics. Ms. Measor and the creative team, which includes the Grammy-nominated singer and songwriter Lisa Loeb, excel at making Jenny believable as both an unpolished musician and a budding talent: Maybe this is how Liz Phair sounded at 12. At 10:30 a.m. (the Saturday and Sunday shows are sold out), Linda Gross Theater, 336 West 20th Street, Chelsea; 866-811-4111, atlantictheater.org.‘Catch Me!’ (Friday through Sunday) Flip FabriQue is the French Canadian troupe performing this circus show at the New Victory Theater, and you’d better believe that its members do a lot of catching: They fly through the air as acrobats, aerialists and athletes. They also literally bounce off the walls: One of their signature acts combines a vertical surface and a trampoline. (Through April 19.) Friday at 2 p.m.; Saturday and Sunday at noon and 5 p.m.; 209 West 42nd Street, Manhattan, 646-223-3010, newvictory.org.‘Celebrate Earth Week’ (Friday through Sunday) What better way to celebrate the earth than by taking care of it? In this spring break festival at the Brooklyn Children’s Museum, little visitors will learn all about environmentalism. Each day is packed with programs, but some of the highlights include “Butterfly Boogie,” an insect-themed performance by Wildlife Theater, part of the Wildlife Conservation Society, on Saturday at 2 p.m., and “Bicycle Power,” on Sunday from 11 to 4:30 p.m., in which children can learn how to generate electricity by pedaling a bike. Daily activities include making art from trash and learning about ocean species through a touch tank. Open daily from 10 a.m. to 5 p.m., 145 Brooklyn Avenue, at St. Mark’s Avenue, Crown Heights, 718-735-4400, brooklynkids.org.‘A Child’s View of Life in 19th-Century New York’ (Saturday) No smartphone, no computers, no TV. How did a kid in the 1850s cope? Today’s children — the recommended ages are 8 through 12 — are invited to find out in this interactive family tour at the Merchant’s House Museum, which was built in 1832. Among the points to consider: dealing with hoop skirts; carrying a bucket of coal up steep stairs; taking a bath when no one had running water. And just imagine: you were supposed to have beautiful handwriting. At 3 p.m., 29 East Fourth Street, East Village, 212-777-1089, merchantshouse.org. Reservations not required.‘Dig! Plant! Grow!: Wake Up, Garden!’  (Saturday, Sunday, and Tuesday through Thursday ) No garden could stay asleep after all that exhortation. In the Ruth Rea Howell Family Garden at the New York Botanical Garden, children will help get things up and growing by sowing seeds, planting seedlings and spreading compost; they can also observe germinating seeds through magnifiers and microscopes. (Through May 3.) New York Botanical Garden, Bronx River Parkway (Exit 7W) and Fordham Road, Bedford Park, the Bronx, 718-817-8700, nybg.org. (Search under calendar).Family Films: ‘Picture This! Books on Film’ (Saturday) Young visitors to the Museum of Modern Art are invited to meet some creative mice and an artistic little girl in this collection of American films, which all had their origins in children’s picture books. Giulio Gianini’s “Frederick” (1987), inspired by Leo Lionni’s book of the same name, features a mouse who writes poetry, while the title character of Don Freeman’s “Norman the Doorman” (1971), which Mr. Freeman adapted from his own book, is a museum mouse who moonlights as a sculptor. “Sky Color” (2012), an animated adaptation of Peter H. Reynolds’s children’s book, by Mr. Reynolds, Gary Goldberger and John Lechner, focuses on the quandary of child named Marisol: How can she complete the sky for a mural without any blue paint? The program is free, and a discussion will follow. At noon, Celeste Bartos Theater, Lewis B. and Dorothy Cullman Education and Research Building, 4 West 54th Street, Manhattan, 212-708-9805, moma.org. Tickets are required. They can be picked up in the building’s lobby or at the information desk in the lobby of MoMA on Saturday, first come first served.Family Programs at the Rubin Museum of Art (Saturday and Sunday) It’s time to explore the Himalayas. That region is the specialty of the Rubin Museum of Art, and children can investigate it in two programs this weekend. On Saturday, from 2 to 4 p.m., Family Art Lab will present “Traditional Tibetan Felting,” a workshop for ages 5 and older that will use the exhibition “Gateway to Himalayan Art” as a springboard. After examining the clothing and colors there, young participants will make felted crafts. On Sunday, from 1 to 4 p.m., the museum will host its continuing Family Sundays program, a series consisting of gallery exploration (there’s a guided tour at 2 p.m.) and art making. April’s theme is masks, and children can gain inspiration for their own creations in the show “Becoming Another: The Power of Masks.” At 150 West 17th Street, Chelsea, 212-620-5000, rubinmuseum.org.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.‘The Gazillion Bubble Show: The Next Generation’  (Friday through Sunday, and Thursday) Children love bubbles, and this interactive show promises not just a gazillion but also some of the largest ever blown, along with light effects and lasers. The stars are the members of the Yang family: Fan and Ana Yang and their son Deni and others, who rotate as M.C.s for the production. Audience members may even find themselves in bubbles of their own. (The run is open-ended.) Friday at 7 p.m.; Saturday at 11 a.m. and 2 and 4:30 p.m.; Sunday at noon and 3 p.m.; Thursday at 11 a.m. and 2 p.m.; 340 West 50th Street, Clinton, 212-239-6200, gazillionbubbleshow.com.Advertisement‘Hello From Japan!’ (Friday through Sunday, and Tuesday through Thursday) Japanese culture comprises both unbridled whimsy and serene seriousness. Young visitors can get acquainted with these two sides at the Children’s Museum of Manhattan, which recreates different aspects of Tokyo in this new exhibition. One-half of the show, Kawaii Central, captures the fun of the city’s Harajuku district with the opportunity to sing karaoke, serve a Japanese meal and create cute, cartoonlike family mascots. The exhibition’s other half includes a Shinto shrine park, where young visitors can build a bridge, meet kami (spirits) and express their desires at a wishing tree. Programs, free with museum admission, accompany the show. (Through May 17.) Museum hours: 10 a.m. to 5 p.m.; to 7 p.m. on Saturdays; also open free from 5 to 8 p.m. on the first Friday of every month. Tisch Building, 212 West 83rd Street, 212-721-1223, cmom.org.Hot Peas ‘N Butter (Saturday) This serving is the kind that will please musical appetites. A band often seen on Nickelodeon and Noggin, Hot Peas ‘N Butter offers a blend of Latin tunes, Afro-Caribbean rhythms, jazz, folk and rock, all intended to get children 3 to 8 on their feet and dancing. At 1:30 p.m., TriBeCa Performing Arts Center, Borough of Manhattan Community College, 199 Chambers Street, near Greenwich Street, 212-220-1460, tribecapac.org.‘Jack and the Beanstalk’ (Friday through Sunday, and Tuesday through Thursday) Many plants grow in Central Park, so why not a beanstalk? This one sprouts indoors at the Swedish Cottage Marionette Theater, which has revived Michael Alogna’s adaptation of the classic fairy tale about Jack, the Giant (here named Milford), Dolly the Cow and the famous Golden Goose. Bruce Cannon, the theater’s artistic director, has revised the script, and a human actor now stars in the show along with the company’s hand-built marionettes. (Through June 28.) Friday at 11 a.m. and 1 p.m.; Saturday and Sunday at 1 p.m.; Tuesday through Thursday at 10:30 a.m. and noon, with an additional performance on Wednesday at 2:30 p.m. (Some shows are sold out.) Reservations required. 79th Street and the West Drive, Central Park; 212-988-9093, cityparksfoundation.org/arts.‘The Land of Musical Opposites’ (Saturday) Kaleidoscope, an ensemble of teaching artists from the New York Philharmonic, will turn an early spring morning into a midsummer’s night in this program for children 8 to 12. Inspired by the music Mendelssohn created for the Shakespearean comedy “A Midsummer Night’s Dream,” the program will show how that composer and Schumann and Mozart all used the idea of opposites to create drama and tell stories. The audience will be invited to sing along with the fairies in Shakespeare’s magical universe. At 11 a.m., Greene Space, 44 Charlton Street, at Varick Street, SoHo, thegreenespace.org.‘The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe’  (Saturday) If the children of the Pevensie family could travel to the magical land of Narnia through something as simple as a wardrobe, why shouldn’t two hard-working actors be able to play them and all the characters found there? That’s what Abigail Taylor-Sansom and her husband, Rockford Sansom, are attempting in the Off Broadway Family Theater’s first production, le Clanché du Rand’s adaptation of C. S. Lewis’s classic novel. (The run is open-ended.) At 11 a.m., St. Luke’s Theater, 308 West 46th Street, Clinton; 212-239-6200, narniaoffbroadway.com.MoMA Art Lab: Places and Spaces (Friday through Thursday) What’s an art lab? These interactive spaces for children at the Museum of Modern Art, free with museum admission, help introduce the institution’s collection through activities related to a theme: this time it’s Places and Spaces. Young visitors can design, draw and build as they explore spaces both real and imagined — landscapes, cityscapes, seascapes — as they appear in Modern art. (Through Aug. 31.) Daily, from 10:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.; to 6:30 p.m. on Fridays; Lewis B. and Dorothy Cullman Education and Research Building, 4 West 54th Street, Manhattan; 212-708-9805, moma.org/momaartlab.‘The Pinkertonian Mystery’ (Sunday) Young detectives should get their notebooks and magnifying glasses ready. The DiMenna Children’s History Museum at the New-York Historical Society is asking them and their families to help solve a Victorian-era crime. Live In Theater, known for its interactive murder mysteries, will present the case, a premiere production that unfolds throughout the museum galleries. Young visitors will portray members of the Pinkerton National Detective Agency, out to capture a crook called El Diablo in 1875. (Also on April 26.) From 3 to 5 p.m., 170 Central Park West, at 77th Street, 212-873-3400, nyhistory.org.‘Rapunzarella White: A Fairly Fractured Tale’ (Saturday and Sunday) Yes, it’s fractured, but it’s also blended: In this creative musical retelling, by June Rachelson-Ospa and Daniel Neiden, Rapunzel, Cinderella and Snow White are infant triplets abducted by an ill-tempered witch. These heroines aren’t like their traditional selves — Snow White, for instance, is allergic to apples — and neither are their princes, who may be more clumsy than charming. (Through May 10.) Saturday at 1 p.m., Sunday at noon, 13th Street Repertory Theater, 50 West 13th Street, Greenwich Village, 212-352-3101, rapunzarellawhite.bpt.me.AdvertisementSchool Vacation Week at the New-York Historical Society (Friday through Sunday) Soaring seems to be a theme these days at the historical society’s DiMenna Children’s History Museum, where young visitors will be invited to fly paper planes and make kites. Through Sunday, from 1 to 3 p.m., they can draw inspiration from the show “Audubon’s Aviary: The Final Flight” to design paper aircraft based on bird species, then pilot their winged creations into a target wall of clouds. Freedom is also in the air: All day, through Sunday, the society will offer a museumwide scavenger hunt devoted to civil rights history, with children searching for artifacts like a letter from Lincoln and an antique ballot box. New-York Historical Society, 170 Central Park West, at 77th Street, 212-873-3400, nyhistory.org.A Taste of Magic (Saturday) Would you like a side of sleight of hand with that burger? This show, developed by Magnets, a collective of local magicians, brings wizardry to the dinner table. Taking place at various restaurants, the presentation includes acts like mind reading and card tricks, which professionals perform close-up for guests; there’s also a cabaret-style show. And the admission price includes a full meal. (Also on April 18 at Docks Oyster Bar & Seafood Grill.) At 8 p.m., Gossip Bar and Restaurant, 733 Ninth Avenue, between 49th and 50th Streets, Clinton, atasteofmagicnyc.com.‘Tiny Giants’ (Friday through Thursday) The heroes of this film may be small, but they’re mighty in their will to survive. Inspired by the BBC television series “Hidden Kingdoms,” this new Imax movie at the American Museum of Natural History uses 3-D cameras to peer into the universes of two diminutive creatures: a forest chipmunk and a grasshopper mouse from the Arizona desert, noted for its ability to prey on scorpions. Narrated by Stephen Fry, the film allows viewers to see the world from their perspectives. (Through July 5.) Hourly from 10:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., with 2-D screenings at 11:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m.; all other screenings are 3-D. Central Park West and 79th Street, 212-769-5200, amnh.org.‘Tunes With Tina’ (Sunday) That’s Tina deVaron, a jazz musician and singer, whose musical brunch for young people at the Measure Lounge at Langham Place, Fifth Avenue, a hotel in Midtown Manhattan, has returned. Ms. deVaron, who often sings show tunes for children, also improvises and gears her performances to the audience. On selected Sundays throughout the season, she will be accompanied by Broadway performers. Singing along is encouraged. (Through May 31.) At noon, 400 Fifth Avenue, at 36th Street, 212-695-4005, measurenyc.com.‘¡Viva Pinocho!’/’A Mexican Pinocchio!’ (Saturday) This Pinocchio is more than a wooden boy who longs to be human; he’s also a Mexican immigrant in search of his identity in a new land, the United States. Presented by Teatro Sea, which specializes in Latino theater for children, this show is the work of Manuel Antonio Morán, the company’s founder and director. Incorporating music, masks and several types of puppetry, it opens this weekend, running on Saturdays through May 23. At 3 p.m., Teatro Sea, Clemente Soto Vélez Cultural Center, 107 Suffolk Street, at Rivington Street, Lower East Side, 212-529-1545, teatrosea.org.‘A Voyage Through Jewish History’  (Sunday through Thursday) This journey involves not just miles, but years. In this permanent interactive exhibition at the Jewish Children’s Museum, young visitors can travel from Abraham and Sarah’s tent to the Western Wall in contemporary Jerusalem and beyond. Activities along the way include giving water to Rebecca’s camels, playing the strings on David’s harp (a high-tech version with beams of light that emit sounds when struck) and taking part in the exodus from Egypt. This Sunday, at 1:30 p.m., the museum will also offer a game show for children on Jewish life and history. Usual museum hours: 10 a.m. to 4 p.m.; to 5:30 p.m. on Sundays; 792 Eastern Parkway, at Kingston Avenue, Crown Heights, Brooklyn; 718-907-8833, jcm.museum.Witness Theater (Wednesday and Thursday) The memories of Holocaust survivors risk dying with them, but now an unusual program is helping to give their experiences new life onstage. Witness Theater, introduced in New York City in 2012 by Selfhelp Community Services, a Jewish aid organization, pairs survivors with high school students, who work together to create a dramatic production. Those who experienced the Holocaust serve as narrators, while their young collaborators re-enact incidents from the survivors’ lives. The results will be displayed in a variety of free performances in different locations on Wednesday — Yom HaShoah, Holocaust Remembrance Day — and on Thursday. Wednesday at 6:30 p.m., JCC in Manhattan, 334 Amsterdam Avenue, at 76th Street, and Thursday at 6:30 p.m., Abraham Joshua Heschel School, 30 West End Avenue, near 61st Street. Manhattan. Reservations required for both (Wednesday is sold out), 646-505-5708, jccmanhattan.org/programs/?grp=witnesstheater. Also on Wednesday at 7 p.m. at Yeshivah of Flatbush Joel Braverman High School, 1609 Avenue J, at 17th Street, Midwood, Brooklyn (reservations are advised via email to sshatzkes@flatbush.org), and at 7 p.m., at SAR High School, 503 West 259th Street, Riverdale, the Bronx. Reservations are required at sarhighschool.org/witnesstheater. More information on all the performances: 212-971-7764 or selfhelp.net.‘The Wizard of Oz’ and Family Workshops (Friday through Sunday) Since many children have been off from school this week, what better time to go off to see the wizard? Coinciding with the city public school break, the Museum of the Moving Image has scheduled daily 12:30 p.m. screenings of Warner Bros.’ remastered 3-D version of the 1939 classic ”The Wizard of Oz.” In addition to spending their vacations in the Emerald City, young visitors can also reimagine and redesign a character from the film. Daily, at 2:30 p.m., a workshop will provide art materials for re-envisioning a role in it. 35th Avenue at 37th Street, Astoria, Queens, 718-784-0077, movingimage.us.LAUREL GRAEBERA version of this schedule appears in print on April 10, 2015, on Page C30 of the New York edition with the headline: Spare Time: For Children.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.