By MIKE HALEAPRIL 9, 2015
Winter may always be approaching in “Game of Thrones,” but as Season 5 of this HBO fantasy hit begins on Sunday night, it feels like springtime in the known world.Despite one of the larger production budgets in television, the look of the series can get a little monochromatic with so much time spent among the rocky landscapes and gloomy castles where a good chunk of the action takes place, with occasional side trips to the forbidding deserts where Daenerys Targaryen tends to her dragons.So it’s a nice change that Season 5 quickly adds a couple of picturesque new locations to the mix. Braavos, temporary home of the fugitive princess Arya Stark, is a quaint, sunny seaport, filmed on the Croatian coast near Split. (Which is a few hours up from Dubrovnik, where the King’s Landing scenes have long been filmed.) Dorne, home of the ill-fated Oberyn Martell from Season 4, is a Moorish fantasy of castles and gardens filmed in southern Spain, partly at the Alcázar of Seville.There’s an overall feeling of recharging and regeneration about the generally grim show (through four episodes, anyway), after a couple of years marked by slaughter and the grisly murders last season of various members of the Lannister clan. Deaths are at a minimum. Several central characters are on the run, but none appears likely to have his or her head imminently removed. On the other hand, there is a proposed marriage that seems even worse than death.AdvertisementBeing on the move is a constant motif in “Game of Thrones,” and the new season doesn’t shirk. Jaime Lannister (Nikolaj Coster-Waldau) is on the road to Dorne to retrieve his niece-daughter. Brienne of Tarth (Gwendoline Christie) and Podrick Payne (Daniel Portman), currently the show’s most interesting pair, are chasing Sansa Stark (Sophie Turner), who’s still in flight under the somewhat dodgy protection of Petyr Baelish (Aidan Gillen).AdvertisementAnd between seasons, two of the show’s fleeing heroes, Arya (Maisie Williams) and Tyrion Lannister (the wonderful Peter Dinklage), have actually hopped continents, crossing the Narrow Sea to Essos. This promises finally to put an end to television’s longest-running buildup, in which a major character, Daenerys (Emilia Clarke), has spent 40 episodes and counting completely cut off from the rest of the main cast, dawdling toward a confrontation that’s been talked about since Episode 1.Of course the job of David Benioff and D. B. Weiss, who wrote the first three episodes of the new season and are the series show runners, is made more difficult by the fact that George R. R. Martin hasn’t gotten to that confrontation yet in his “Song of Ice and Fire” books, on which “Game of Thrones” is based. And you can see what may be other effects of continually negotiating between the thousands of pages of the novels and the much more limited world of the TV series. The Cersei Lannister (Lena Headey) of Season 5 is suddenly a more sympathetic — or at least more relatable — character in a way that feels abrupt and a little implausible on screen. And Arya, newly arrived in Braavos, takes a course of action that makes sense by the dictates of the plot but is hard to reconcile with the headstrong, single-minded character we’ve seen before.Quibbles aside, “Game of Thrones” is still remarkable for both the scrupulousness and the lavishness of its production, beautiful to look at and mostly engaging to follow, though there is something of the accountant’s method in Mr. Martin’s fantasy — progress through constant addition — that transfers into the television show. The beginning of Season 5 is a building period, putting stones into place, without the big jolts that came early in Season 4, when the story was in a more frenzied mode. But we can trust that the blood will flow more copiously before long.A version of this article appears in print on April 10, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: To Start a Season, More Travel, Less Blood.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.