By JOSHUA BARONEAPRIL 9, 2015
Museums and SitesAmerican Museum of Natural History: ‘Culture Salon: Rice Wine and Sake’ (Thursday) Chris Johnson, a “sake samurai” and sommelier, leads an after-hours tasting at the museum’s Hall of Asian Peoples. He’ll talk, with help from information in the museum’s collections, about how sake has been made and drunk throughout Asia over hundreds of years. At 6:30 and 7:30 p.m., Central Park West and 79th Street, 212-769-5200, amnh.org.American Museum of Natural History: ‘Countdown to Zero’ (through July 12) Smallpox is the only human disease to have been eradicated, but what about Guinea worm, polio, malaria and other diseases? This exhibition, presented in collaboration with the Carter Center, examines international efforts to control and wipe out diseases. Daily from 10 a.m. to 5:45 p.m., Central Park West and 79th Street, 212-769-5200, amnh.org.BRIC and the Brooklyn Historical Society: ‘Mapping Brooklyn’ (through Sept. 6) This exhibition features artworks that incorporate themes of mapping and cartography in historical maps. The artists here are exploring the ways maps represent the practical and metaphoric aspects of life. The show is on view at BRIC House through May 3. Tuesdays through Saturdays from 10 a.m. to 8 p.m., Sundays to 6 p.m., 647 Fulton Street, at Rockwell Place, Fort Greene, Brooklyn, bricartsmedia.org. The show will also be at the Brooklyn Historical Society through Sept. 6. Wednesdays through Sundays from noon to 5 p.m., 128 Pierrepont Street, near Clinton Street, Brooklyn Heights, 718-222-4111, brooklynhistory.org.Brooklyn Historical Society: ‘Personal Correspondents: Photography and Letter Writing in Civil War Brooklyn’ (through spring 2016) The historical society’s new exhibition tells the personal stories of Brooklyn soldiers and their families during the Civil War. Some of the tales, told through photos and letters, are funny; others are tragic. The show’s opening on April 9 coincides with the 150th anniversary of Robert E. Lee’s surrender that ended the war. Brooklyn Historical Society, 128 Pierrepont Street, near Clinton Street, Brooklyn Heights, 718-222-4111, brooklynhistory.org.Advertisement‘Diné Spotlight: A Showcase of Navajo Film’ (Saturday) The National Museum of the American Indian partners with New York University’s Center for Media, Culture and History to present screenings of recent movies by Diné (Navajo) filmmakers. It closes Saturday with Blackhorse Lowe’s “Chasing the Light.” At various times, National Museum of the American Indian, 1 Bowling Green, Lower Manhattan, 212-514-3700, nmai.si.edu; free.AdvertisementGrolier Club: ‘Aldus Manutius: A Legacy More Lasting Than Bronze’ (through April 25) To celebrate the quincentennial of Aldus Manutius’s death, the Grolier Club has assembled over 130 rare books, called Aldines, from that scholar-printer’s Italian Renaissance press. The exhibition explores the ways in which, to this day, Manutius influences how we preserve and disseminate knowledge. As Jennifer Schuessler wrote in The New York Times, “Anyone who has ever sat in a cafe, or in the bath, with a paperback owes a debt to Aldus and the small, cleanly designed editions of the secular classics.” 47 East 60th Street, Manhattan, 212-838-6690, grolierclub.org; free.Metropolitan Museum of Art: ‘Beethoven: The Complete Works for Cello and Piano’ (Saturday) Christopher O’Riley, the concert pianist and host of NPR’s “From the Top,” performs Beethoven’s works for cello and piano with the cellist Matt Haimovitz. Mr. O’Riley will play a reproduction of a six-and-a-half-octave Viennese fortepiano, which would have been used around the time of the composer’s death. There will be two performances with different programs, both of which blend sonatas and shorter chamber pieces. At 3 and 7 p.m., Grace Rainey Rogers Auditorium, Metropolitan Museum of Art, 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org/events.Morgan Library & Museum: ‘Lincoln Speaks: Words That Transformed a Nation’ (through June 7) This exhibition, which is presented thematically and chronologically, homes in on Abraham Lincoln’s leadership and its relationship to language. In his exhibition review for The New York Times, Neil Genzlinger wrote: “For Lincoln admirers, simply being in the same room with so many artifacts he touched will be a delight. And if they give the exhibition the time it requires, they will certainly come away with a fuller appreciation of the man.” 225 Madison Avenue, at 36th Street, 212-685-0008, themorgan.org.Museum of the Moving Image: ‘Matthew Weiner’s “Mad Men” ’ (through June 14) As one of the most critically acclaimed TV shows in recent years nears its finale, “Mad Men” gets the exhibition treatment in this look at the series’s creative process. On display are large-scale sets, such as Don Draper’s office, as well as costumes, art and research material used by the show’s staff. Viewers should expect not only a look behind the scenes of the show, but also, like “Mad Men” itself, a peek into the era it depicts. 35th Avenue at 37th Street, Astoria, Queens, 718-784-0077, movingimage.us.New-York Historical Society: ‘Audubon’s Aviary: The Final Flight (Part III of the Complete Flock)’ (through May 10) The third installment of “Audubon’s Aviary: The Complete Flock” comprises nearly 130 plates from the watercolors in John James Audubon’s “The Birds of America” collection, engraved by Robert Havell Jr. The exhibition, as William Grimes wrote in an article for The New York Times, “underlines the natural wealth of the American land, and Audubon’s remarkable talent for producing art as varied as his subject matter.” 170 Central Park West, at 77th Street, 212-873-3400, nyhistory.org.New-York Historical Society: ‘Chinese American: Exclusion/Inclusion’ (through April 19) In his review for The New York Times, Edward Rothstein called this show a “vigorous and imaginative new exhibition,” that includes a look at “how Chinese-American identity came to be, how immigration and discrimination were followed by recrimination and conflict, and how, finally, a people’s trials give way to celebration.” Tuesday through Thursday and Saturday from 10 a.m. to 6 p.m., Friday until 8 p.m., Sunday from 11 a.m. to 5 p.m., 170 Central Park West, at 77th Street, 212-873-3400, nyhistory.org.New York Transit Museum Grand Central Terminal Gallery Annex: ‘New York’s Transportation Landmarks’ (through Nov. 1) It’s been 50 years since New York passed its Landmarks Law, which covers over 30,000 buildings and structures around the city. To celebrate the anniversary, the New York Transit Museum has created an exhibition that explores the history of development, use and even rescue of these landmarks. More information: 212-878-0106, web.mta.info/mta/museum.AdvertisementNew York Transit Museum: ‘Spanning the Narrows: The Verrazano Bridge at 50’ (through next fall) Photographs, maps, drawings, models and other archival materials related to the construction of the bridge (including correspondence from Robert Moses, who oversaw the project) are part of this exhibition commemorating its 50th anniversary. Tuesdays through Fridays from 10 a.m. to 4 p.m.; Saturdays and Sundays from 11 a.m. to 5 p.m.; Boerum Place and Schermerhorn Street, Brooklyn Heights, 718-694-1600, mta.info/mta/museum.Red Bull Studios: ‘Alone Together’ (through Sunday) The artist Ryder Ripps has created a site-specific work that acts as sculpture and performance. It’s a system that covers two floors: Below are six performers whose computer activity is sent above to a collective, frenzied display. Visitors to the exhibition play the part of voyeurs. Mr. Ripps’s idea is that the Internet creates a paradox in which the more connected we are, the more physically withdrawn we become. Thursdays through Sundays from noon to 7 p.m., 220 West 18th Street, Chelsea, redbullstudios.com/newyork; free.‘Signs of Life: In and Out of Time and Place’ (Friday through April 24) The works of the Pratt Institute’s second-year M.F.A. candidates are on display in this show, organized by Sara Reisman, artistic director of the Shelley & Donald Rubin Foundation, which supports the arts. The pieces span a variety of media, with two themes running throughout: a desire for movement and attempts to capture time. The show will open on Friday with a reception from 7 to 9 p.m. Afterward, it is open from Thursdays through Sundays, from noon to 6 p.m. At the Boiler, 191 North 14th Street, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, pratt.edu; free.Tavern Night (Sunday) The National Museum of Mathematics celebrates its latest addition to the Tavern Puzzle Collection: the Jack of Hearts, a mind game made of interwoven metal pieces. Tavern Night will feature drinks, candy and games — including a puzzle race with a Jack of Hearts game as the prize. Beer and wine will be available for the 21-plus crowd, though minors and families are welcome. At 7 p.m., National Museum of Mathematics, 11 East 26th Street, Manhattan, 212-542-0566, tavern.momath.org.Arturo Vega: ‘American Treasure’ (through April 25) Howl! Happening, a new gallery and performance space in the East Village, presents an exhibition with paintings by Arturo Vega, a Mexican-born artist who worked in New York from 1971 until his death in 2013. Many of his paintings depict open palms holding a silver dollar — what exactly that means is open to interpretation. Howl! Happening, 6 East First Street, howlarts.org.Events‘Bascove/Bridges: Transporting the Metropolis’ (through July 12) This exhibition features more than 30 paintings and drawings of city bridges by the artist Anne Bascove, including the Brooklyn Bridge, the Outerbridge Crossing and the George Washington Bridge. Thursdays through Sundays from 1 to 5 p.m.; also by appointment; Noble Maritime Collection, Snug Harbor Cultural Center and Botanical Garden, 1000 Richmond Terrace, Livingston, Staten Island, 718-447-6490, noblemaritime.org.New York International Auto Show (through Sunday) This event, which bills itself as the largest automobile show in North America, comes to the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center to showcase concept vehicles, models planned for 2016 and 2017, and special exhibitions. The show takes place over multiple floor levels and includes a food court. More information, along with the schedule, is at autoshowny.com. 655 West 34th Street, Manhattan; 212-216-2000.Pop Art Picnic  (Saturday) This Families Play Day offers a chance for lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender parents (and prospective parents) to connect with one another and their children while picnicking and learning from educators from the Whitney Museum of American Art. The day includes crafts, games and plenty of snacks. Reservations are required via an email to centerpark@fremontblueevents.com. At 11 a.m., the Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Transgender Community Center, 208 West 13th Street, West Village, 212-620-7310, gaycenter.org.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Videology Presents Movie Trivia (Tuesdays) Videology, the Brooklyn bar and cinema, hosts a free film-themed trivia contest every week. The game varies; you will want to know theme songs, facts, quotes (especially ones from Nicolas Cage) and more. The winning team receives a free round of drinks, and there are chances to win drinks each round. At 8:30 p.m., 308 Bedford Avenue, at South First Street, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, 718-782-3468, videology.info.AdvertisementSpoken Word‘Abolish the Death Penalty’ (Wednesday) Intelligence Squared Debates addresses the death penalty, which six out of 10 Americans support, according to a recent Gallup poll. Capital punishment has come under increased scrutiny because of problems with drug supplies and botched executions, and a panel of four will consider whether it should be abolished. John Donvan of ABC News will moderate. At 6:45 p.m., Kaufman Music Center, 129 West 67th Street, Manhattan, 212-501-3300, intelligencesquaredus.org.David Brooks (Tuesday) David Brooks, an Op-Ed columnist for The New York Times, discusses his latest work, “The Road to Character.” The book tells the stories of 10 great lives and explores what lessons everyone can take away from them. At 7 p.m., Barnes & Noble Union Square, 33 East 17th Street, Manhattan, 212-253-0810, barnesandnoble.com.‘Capital Dames: The Civil War and the Women of Washington 1848-1868’ (Monday) Cokie Roberts, the journalist of NPR fame, discusses her latest book, “Capital Dames: The Civil War and the Women of Washington 1848-1868,” about the Rosie the Riveter types of that era. The book continues Ms. Roberts’s exploration of the vital roles women play in history, such as in her other works “Founding Mothers” and “Ladies of Liberty.” At 6:30 p.m., Brooklyn Historical Society, 128 Pierrepont Street, near Clinton Street, Brooklyn Heights, 718-222-4111, brooklynhistory.org.Grace Hightower De Niro (Sunday) Grace Hightower De Niro, the philanthropist and founder of Grace Hightower & Coffees of Rwanda (and, yes, Robert De Niro’s wife), discusses her book, “The Women of Rwanda.” She will talk about how her company emphasizes direct sourcing, fair trade and ethical practices. A coffee tasting will follow. At 2 p.m., Book Culture on Columbus, 450 Columbus Avenue, near 82nd Street, 212-595-1962, bookculture.com.A Fantasy Salon (Tuesday) Pen Parentis’s April salon features the fantasy writers Kelly Link, Lev Grossman and Marly Youmans. They will read from their works, and a book signing will follow. Afterward, there will be a Q. and A. moderated by Pen Parentis’s founder, M.M. De Voe, and the salon’s curator, the novelist Christina Chiu. Registration is required. At 7 p.m., Hotel Andaz, 75 Wall Street, at Pearl Street, Lower Manhattan, penparentis.org; free.Frédéric Lenoir and Alexandra Schwartz (Tuesday) Frédéric Lenoir, a French-Madagascan philosopher, set out to answer one of life’s fundamental questions: Is real, lasting happiness possible? The result was his book “Happiness,” a best seller in Europe that is now available in English. He will discuss it with Alexandra Schwartz of The New Yorker. At 7 p.m., Strand Book Store, 828 Broadway, at 12th Street, East Village, 212-473-1452, strandbooks.com.Poetry Festival  (Sunday) The poet Anne-Marie Fyfe reads her work, which has been featured on programs on CNN and BBC Radio 3. She will be introduced by another poet, J. Chester Johnson, whose “St. Paul’s Chapel” has been used for the church’s memento card for more than 10 years. Attendees are welcome to read original works, as well as their favorite poems. At 1:30 p.m., St. Paul’s Chapel, Broadway at Fulton Street, Lower Manhattan, trinitywallstreet.org; free.Michael Shnayerson and Sue Craig (Wednesday) Mr. Shnayerson, a longtime contributing editor at Vanity Fair, discusses “The Contender,” his portrait of New York’s governor, Andrew Cuomo. He and Sue Craig, the Albany bureau chief of The New York Times, will talk about Mr. Cuomo’s life. At 7 p.m., Strand Book Store, 828 Broadway, at 12th Street, East Village, 212-473-1452, strandbooks.com.AdvertisementMichael Walzer in Conversation With Anne-Marie Slaughter  (Monday) The political theorist Michael Walzer discusses his new book, “The Paradox of Liberation,” about national liberation movements in India, Israel and Algeria. He will be joined by Anne-Marie Slaughter, a professor emerita at Princeton University and former director of policy planning for the State Department — and, recently, the author of a widely read Atlantic magazine article, “Why Women Still Can’t Have It All.” Registration is required. At 6:30 p.m., Elebash Recital Hall, the Graduate Center, City University of New York, 365 Fifth Avenue, at 34th Street, 212-817-7000, gc.cuny.edu; free.’Women of Letters’ (Thursday) “Women of Letters,” an Australian literary salon, comes to New York for an event hosted by Marieke Hardy and Michaela McGuire. Selected New York writers, entertainers and artists will share letters they’ve written related to a theme. Guests include Adelle Waldman, author of “The Love Affairs of Nathaniel P.,” and the comedic polymath Jena Friedman. At 7 p.m., Joe’s Pub, at the Public Theater, 425 Lafayette Street, at Astor Place, East Village, 212-967-7555, joespub.com.Walking ToursFlatiron District Walking Tour (Sundays) This free tour meets at 11 a.m. on the southwest corner of Madison Square Park, at 23rd Street and Broadway, in front of the William Seward statue. Sponsored by the Flatiron/23rd Street Partnership; discoverflatiron.org.The Ghosts of Grand Central (Saturdays) This tour offers shelter from the cold, though discovering the ghosts of Grand Central Terminal may bring a different sort of chill. There will be history of the Vanderbilts, as well as August Belmont, Franklin Roosevelt and his dog, Fala. The tour meets west of the M.T.A. information booth under the four-faced clock in the station’s Grand Concourse. (Through April 25.) At 7:30 p.m., 646-493-7092, ghostsofny.com.Ghosts of the Titanic (Saturday and Tuesday) The Titanic was bound for New York before it hit an iceberg on April 14, 1912, and sank shortly thereafter. This ghost tour follows locations in Greenwich Village and along the Hudson River waterfront related to the doomed ship’s journey. Stops include a haunted hotel and the place where survivors were brought ashore. The tour meets at Astor Place and Cooper Union. Saturday at 3 and 7:30 p.m., Tuesday at 7:30 p.m., Astor Place, at Cooper Union, 646-932-0680, boroughsofthedead.com.History of Wall Street Tour (weekdays) Stops on this tour, led by Wall Street Walks, include the New York Stock Exchange, Trinity Church, the Wall Street Bull, and ground zero and the Sept. 11 memorial. The tours last 90 minutes and begin at 11 a.m. and 1:30 p.m. (Also at 3 p.m. on Tuesdays and Fridays.) More details: wallstreetwalks.com.Seaport Historic District Tour (Sunday) The South Street Seaport area is still recovering from Hurricane Sandy, but that’s just one chapter in the area’s history that dates back to the earliest days of New York. This tour explores the neighborhoods architecture and landmarks, with stops that include the Old Fulton Fish Market and Schermerhorn Row. The tour meets at the northeast corner of Broadway and Fulton Street. At 11 a.m., Broadway, at Fulton Street, 888-606-9255, bigonion.com.A Taste of Jewish New York (Sundays) Participants in this tour will get an insider’s look at Borough Park, Brooklyn, by learning about the customs of its Hasidic residents. There will also be the chance to try a range of food. This tour includes a stop at a lively shopping area, as well as at a matzo bakery — with free samples, of course. The tour meets at 9:45 p.m. at Fort Hamilton Parkway and 44th Street; 718-339-2302, timelinetouring.com.Union Square: Crossroads of New York (Saturdays) Sponsored by the Union Square Partnership, this free year-round tour focuses on the area’s political and social histories. The walk, led by guides from Big Onion Walking Tours, meets at 2 p.m. by the statue of Lincoln in Union Square Park, near the 16th Street transverse. 212-517-1826, unionsquarenyc.org.An entry in the Spare Times listings in some editions on Friday about a discussion at 2 p.m. tomorrow by Grace Hightower De Niro about her book, “The Women of Rwanda,” misidentified the Book Culture store at which the event will be held. It is the one at 450 Columbus Avenue, not 536 West 112th Street, and the telephone number is 212-595-1962.Information on events for possible inclusion in Spare Times should be sent to weekend@nytimes.com by Monday at 5 p.m. for publication that week. Longer versions of Around Town and For Children listings are in a searchable guide at nytimes.com/events. A version of this schedule appears in print on April 10, 2015, on Page C30 of the New York edition with the headline: Spare Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.