APRIL 9, 2015
JazzFull reviews of recent jazz performances: nytimes.com/jazz. A searchable guide to these and other shows is at nytimes.com/events.Scott Amendola at the Stone  (Through Sunday) Mr. Amendola is a drummer equally committed to exploration and groove, and he has crowded his residency at the Stone with like-minded colleagues. On Friday, he connects with the Hammond B-3 organist Wil Blades, welcoming the guitarist Jeff Parker in the 10 p.m. set. On Saturday, he features his own music with the Nels Cline Singers, one of his regular sideman appointments. And on Sunday, Mr. Cline will be the guest guitarist with the ABC trio, consisting of Mr. Amendola, the bassist Nate Brenner and the pianist Michael Coleman. At 8 and 10 p.m., Avenue C and Second Street, East Village; thestonenyc.com. (Nate Chinen)‘Billie and the Boys: A Centenary Celebration of Billie Holiday’  (Through Sunday) This Billie Holiday tribute features a big band of up-and-coming musicians backing a half-dozen vocalists, including Shenel Johns, Michael Mwenso and Elena Pinderhughes. The musical director is Riley Mulherkar, a smart young trumpeter, and the focus is on Holiday’s unimpeachable work in the 1930s, with bandleaders like Count Basie and Artie Shaw. At 7:30 and 9:30 p.m., Dizzy’s Club Coca-Cola, Frederick P. Rose Hall, Jazz at Lincoln Center, 60th Street and Broadway, 212-258-9595, jazz.org. (Chinen)‘Bird Lives! A Salute to Charlie Parker’ (Saturday) The pianist Bill Charlap, who has proved himself a reliable steward of midcentury jazz and songbook traditions, leads his trio in this tribute to Charlie Parker, the bebop paragon. Standing in for Parker on alto saxophone are three prominent inheritors: Phil Woods, Charles McPherson and Jesse Davis. At 7:30 p.m., New Jersey Performing Arts Center, One Center Street, Newark, 888-466-5722 njpac.org. (Chinen)AdvertisementJames Carter Organ Trio  (Tuesday through April 18) As he does on “At the Crossroads,” his most recent album, the irrepressible saxophonist James Carter spearheads this purposefully gritty soul-jazz trio, with Gerard Gibbs on Hammond B-3 organ and Leonard King Jr. on drums. At 8:30 and 11 p.m., Birdland, 315 West 44th Street, Clinton, 212-581-3080, birdlandjazz.com. (Chinen)Advertisement★ ‘Celebrating Lady Day’  (Friday and Saturday) Three generations of jazz vocalists — Andy Bey, Molly Johnson and Sarah Elizabeth Charles — team up to interpret songs associated with Billie Holiday, working with sterling accompaniment. The band, led by the pianist Peter Martin, will feature Melissa Aldana on tenor saxophone, Robert Hurst on bass, and Ulysses Owens Jr. on drums. At 8 p.m., Rose Theater, Frederick P. Rose Hall, Jazz at Lincoln Center, 60th Street and Broadway, 212-721-6500, jazz.org. (Chinen)★ ‘Celebrating Joe Temperley: From Duke to The JLCO’  (Thursday through April 18) Joe Temperley is a gallant Scottish baritone saxophonist who, as the title of this concert implies, has been a member of both the Duke Ellington Orchestra and the Jazz at Lincoln Center Orchestra. At 85, he still works for the second of those institutions, which will pay him homage with a three-part concerto composed by its artistic director, Wynton Marsalis. (The program will also feature some choice Ellingtonia, in brand-new arrangements.) At 8 p.m., Rose Theater, Frederick P. Rose Hall, Jazz at Lincoln Center, 60th Street and Broadway, 212-721-6500, jazz.org. (Chinen)Eliane Elias  (Friday and Saturday) A pianist and singer with achievements in a range of jazz and chamber-esque settings, Ms. Elias is never more sumptuously at home than when she turns to bossa nova: the subject of her new album, “Made in Brazil,” whose premise she revisits here. At 8:30 and 11 p.m., Birdland, 315 West 44th Street, Clinton, 212-581-3080, birdlandjazz.com. (Chinen)Joe Fiedler Trio  (Friday) The trombonist Joe Fiedler has a new album, “I’m In,” that captures his feeling for a rugged but jaunty experimentalism, often carried along on a funk groove. His partners on the album, and here, are the bassist Rob Jost and the drummer Michael Sarin. At 8 and 10 p.m., the Jazz Gallery, 1160 Broadway, at 27th Street, fifth floor, 646-494-3625, jazzgallery.org. (Chinen)Jonathan Finlayson’s Sicilian Defense  (Friday) Mr. Finlayson is an incisive and often surprising trumpeter, as he has demonstrated in groups led by the alto saxophonists Steve Coleman and Steve Lehman. He leads a version of Sicilian Defense, his agile band, featuring the guitarist Miles Okazaki, the pianist David Bryant, the bassist Keith Witty and the drummer Craig Weinrib. At 8 p.m., Brooklyn Conservatory of Music Concert Hall, 58 Seventh Avenue, at Lincoln Place, Park Slope, Brooklyn, 718-622-3300, bqcm.org. (Nate Chinen)Roy Hargrove Quintet  (Tuesday through April 19) Hard bop has few more charismatic torchbearers than the trumpeter Roy Hargrove, who inhabits the style without rigidity or stifling nostalgia. He’s also a shrewd bandleader with a disciplined crew, typically including the saxophonist Justin Robinson. At 8 and 10:30 p.m., Blue Note, 131 West Third Street, Greenwich Village, 212-475-8592, bluenote.net. (Chinen)★ The Heath Brothers  (through Sunday) Jimmy Heath, a saxophonist and composer, and Albert Heath, better known as Tootie, a drummer, have been staples of the postbop landscape from the beginning. This group used to include another brother, the great bassist Percy Heath, who died a decade ago; its lineup, still sturdy, now typically includes David Wong on bass and Jeb Patton on piano (although Michael Weiss is the pianist for this engagement). At 8:30 and 10:30 p.m., Village Vanguard, 178 Seventh Avenue South, at 11th Street, West Village, 212-255-4037, villagevanguard.com. (Chinen)AdvertisementGilad Hekselman  (Friday and Saturday) Mr. Hekselman is an Israeli guitarist who has demonstrated an appealingly fluid approach to modern jazz. On Friday, he presents ZuperOctave, his hard left turn into electronics, with Mark Turner on tenor saxophone, Dayna Stephens on EWI (electronic wind instrument) and Henry Cole on drums. On Saturday, he leads his quartet with Mr. Turner, the bassist Joe Martin and the drummer Justin Brown. At 9 and 10:30 p.m., Cornelia Street Café, 29 Cornelia Street, near Bleecker Street, Greenwich Village, 212-989-9319, corneliastreetcafe.com. (Chinen)J. C. Hopkins Biggish Band  (Friday and Saturday) Led by the bandleader, songwriter and producer for which it’s named, the J.C. Hopkins Biggish Band has always been a friend to vocalists, and in this engagement, the group pays a centenary tribute to Billie Holiday. Among the many singers assembled are Brianna Thomas, Charenee Wade, Charles Turner and Jazzmeia Horn. From 6 to 11 p.m., Minton’s, 206 West 118th Street, Harlem, 212-243-2222, mintonsharlem.com. (Chinen)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Javon Jackson Quartet  (Tuesday through April 19) Javon Jackson, a tenor saxophonist whose style has long suggested deep immersion in Joe Henderson and John Coltrane, leads a band with Jeremy Manasia on piano, David Williams on bass and Willie Jones III on drums. At 8:30 and 10:30 p.m., Village Vanguard, 178 Seventh Avenue South, at 11th Street, West Village, 212-255-4037, villagevanguard.com. (Chinen)★ Kirk Knuffke Trio  (Thursday) Like many musicians in his peer group, the cornetist Kirk Knuffke has a dual commitment to formal experimentation and bedrock tradition. On his excellent new album, “Arms & Hands,” he courts both sides, leading a trio with veteran players from different scenes, both of whom rejoin him here: the bassist Mark Helias, an avant-garde exemplar, and the drummer Bill Goodwin, a straight-ahead stalwart. At 8:30 p.m., Cornelia Street Café, 29 Cornelia Street, near Bleecker Street, Greenwich Village, 212-989-9319, corneliastreetcafe.com. (Chinen)★ Julian Lage Trio  (Tuesday and Wednesday) The guitarist Julian Lage is one of jazz’s breezier virtuosos, possessed of an unflappable technical facility and a seemingly boundless curiosity. He recently formed a trio featuring the bassist Scott Colley, who rejoins him here with a prominent drummer, Eric Harland. At 7:30 and 10 p.m., Jazz Standard, 116 East 27th Street, Manhattan, 212-576-2232, jazzstandard.net. (Chinen)Lost Jazz Shrines 2015: ‘Celebrating the Royal Roost and Miles Davis’  (Friday) This concert pays double homage: to the Royal Roost, a jazz club formerly on Broadway, near the edge of Times Square, and to Miles Davis, who introduced his “Birth of the Cool” nonet there in 1948. Leading the festivities is the saxophonist and arranger Bob Belden — also a longtime marshaler of Miles Davis reissue material — with a plugged-in ensemble he’s calling the Birth of the Cool Reimagined. At 8:30 p.m., TriBeCa Performing Arts Center, Borough of Manhattan Community College, 199 Chambers Street, near Greenwich Street, 212-220-1460, tribecapac.org. (Chinen)Harold Mabern Trio with Eric Alexander  (Friday through Sunday) On his new album, “Afro Blue,” the veteran hard-bop pianist Harold Mabern enlists an impressive array of vocalists, along with a band including the tenor saxophonist Eric Alexander. One of the singers, Alexis Cole, rejoins him for this weekend run, along with Mr. Alexander, the bassist John Webber and the drummer Joe Farnsworth. At 7, 9 and 10:30 p.m., Smoke, 2751 Broadway, at 106th Street, 212-864-6662, smokejazz.com. (Chinen)★ Rob Mazurek: São PAULO Underground and Black Cube SP  (Saturday and Tuesday) Rob Mazurek is a cornetist and electronics artist capable of finding the serenity in turbulence, and sometimes vice versa. His trio São Paulo Underground makes a rare appearance here on Saturday, with Guilherme Granado on keyboards and vocals, and Mauricio Takara on percussion and cavaquinho. Then, on Tuesday, Mr. Mazurek resurfaces with Black Cube SP, a newer group featuring the same musicians along with Thomas Rohrer, a virtuoso of the rabeca, or Brazilian viola; they’ll draw from Mr. Mazurek’s most recent album, “Return the Tides,” an outpouring of psychedelic fusion made shortly after his mother’s death. Saturday at 8 and 10 p.m., the Jazz Gallery, 1160 Broadway, at 27th Street, fifth floor, 646-494-3625, jazzgallery.org. Tuesday at 8 p.m., ShapeShifter Lab, 18 Whitwell Place, Park Slope, Brooklyn, shapeshifterlab.com. (Chinen)Kojo Roney Residency  (Friday and Saturday) Kojo Roney is a drummer of evident promise, worth keeping an eye on for more than the novelty of his age. (He’s 10.) He’s appearing in a group with his father, the tenor saxophonist Antoine Roney, and the bassist William Parker. They’ll be joined on Friday by the multi-instrumentalist Cooper-Moore, and on Saturday by Cooper-Moore and the trumpeter Nate Wooley. At 8 p.m., Jack, 505 1/2 Waverly Avenue, near Fulton Street, Clinton Hill, Brooklyn, jackny.org. (Chinen)Advertisement★ ‘Cécile McLorin Salvant Sings Billie Holiday’  (Friday and Saturday) Of the many memorial offerings to Billie Holiday this season, you’d be wise to bet on this one, featuring Cécile McLorin Salvant, a savvy young jazz vocalist who released one of the most commanding debut albums in recent memory, and who has never met a throwback melody she couldn’t reanimate with style. At 7 and 9:30 p.m., Appel Room, Frederick P. Rose Hall, Jazz at Lincoln Center, 60th Street and Broadway, 212-258-9595, jazz.org. (Chinen)Samba Jazz and the Music of Jobim  (Thursday through April 19) Duduka Da Fonseca, a drummer, and Helio Alves, a pianist, have carved out a strong niche together, often working under the banner of Samba Jazz. Next week, they pay tribute to Antônio Carlos Jobim, with another regular partner, the vocalist Maucha Adnet. At 7:30 and 9:30 p.m., Dizzy’s Club Coca-Cola, Frederick P. Rose Hall, Jazz at Lincoln Center, 60th Street and Broadway, 212-258-9595, jazz.org. (Chinen)★ SFJazz Collective  (through Sunday) The SFJazz Collective divides its repertory each year between original music and the oeuvre of someone else, usually a postbop luminary. The tenor saxophonist Joe Henderson is a great fit, not least for the hint of Latin rhythm in much of his work — a driving interest for the collective’s saxophonists, David Sánchez and Miguel Zenón, and its pianist, Edward Simon. The rest of the roster, no less savvy about blending styles, features the trumpeter Avishai Cohen, the trombonist Robin Eubanks, the vibraphonist Warren Wolf, the bassist Matt Penman and the drummer Obed Calvaire. At 7:30 and 10 p.m., with an additional 11:45 p.m. set on Friday and Saturday, Jazz Standard, 116 East 27th Street, Manhattan, 212-576-2232, jazzstandard.net. (Chinen)Thar  (Wednesday) The saxophonist Andrew Rathbun and the trumpeter Taylor Haskins have long history together, and a back-and-forth custom of appearing in each other’s bands. In this semi-collective, they also have a fine, assertive rhythm team, with Matt Pavolka on bass and Tom Rainey on drums. At 8:30 p.m., Cornelia Street Café, 29 Cornelia Street, Greenwich Village, 212-989-9319, corneliastreetcafe.com. (Chinen)★ Cassandra Wilson: ‘A Celebration of Billie Holiday’  (Friday) On her new record, “Coming Forth by Day,” Ms. Wilson offers her shadowy, genre-blind spin on a Billie Holiday repertory album, made with the arranger Van Dyke Parks and members of the Bad Seeds, Nick Cave’s band. She’ll draw here from the album, at once paying homage to Holiday, who appeared many times at the Apollo Theater, and making her own long-overdue debut there. At 8 p.m., 253 West 125th Street, Harlem, 212-531-5305, apollotheater.org. (Chinen)A version of this schedule appears in print on April 10, 2015, on Page C17 of the New York edition with the headline: The Listings: Jazz.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.