APRIL 9, 2015
PopFor full reviews of recent concerts: nytimes.com/music. A searchable guide to these and other shows is at nytimes.com/events.Nick Cave  (Friday) The noir-rock outfit Nick Cave and the Bad Seeds celebrated its 30th anniversary in 2013 with the release of one of its most confidently sparse discs in years, “Push the Sky Away,” which also became one of its most commercially successful. Mr. Cave performs here in support of “The Sick Bag Song,” a new book about the band’s 2014 North American tour that began, yes, as jottings on the airsickness bags found in planes. At 8 p.m., Gould Hall, French Institute Alliance Française, 55 East 59th Street, Manhattan, ticketmaster.com. (Stacey Anderson)‘Dig Deeper Presents: Renaldo Domino’  (Saturday) Each month this cult-hit soul party invites veteran musicians to share their original hits with young audiences, leaving all involved with full hearts and sore feet. This installment includes a rare area set by Renaldo Domino, a Chicago funk and soul singer who released the radio hit “Don’t Go Away” in the late 1960s and plucked his stage surname from his local reputation for sugar-sweet crooning. At 9 p.m., Littlefield, 622 Degraw Street, between Third and Fourth Avenues, Gowanus, Brooklyn, littlefieldnyc.com. (Anderson)José González  (Friday) Wanderlust runs deep on “Vestiges & Claws,” the first solo album in seven years by this Swedish singer-songwriter and erstwhile frontman of Junip; it is a lovely, hushed effort obsessed with naturalistic splendor and escape to misty, far-flung landscapes. The record ties in seamlessly to his last high-profile project: several pop songs for the soundtrack of the winsome adventure film “The Secret Life of Walter Mitty.” With Olof Arnalds. At 8 p.m., Webster Hall, 125 East 11th Street, East Village, 800-745-3000, websterhall.com/events. (Anderson)Advertisement★ Colleen Green  (Friday) Enthusiasts of ‘90s grunge-rock will find solace in “I Want to Grow Up,” Ms. Green’s third album. However, the young Ms. Green is more than just a nostalgic, flannel-era fabulist; her singsong hooks are conduits to lyrics of shrewd self-awareness and insouciant honesty, and her distorted guitars have palpable strength. With Upset and Charly Bliss. At 9 p.m., Shea Stadium BK, 20 Meadow Street, between Waterbury and Bogart Streets, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, ticketfly.com. (Anderson)AdvertisementThe Juan Maclean  (Thursday through April 18) The disco-house D.J. John MacLean and the former LCD Soundsystem member Nancy Whang have found their groove in a steady stream of mixes and outtakes in recent years. Last fall, they released their first album in several years, “In a Dream,” a punk-synth excursion of charming call and response. At 8 p.m., Cameo Gallery, 93 North Sixth Street, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, 718-302-1180, cameony.net. (Anderson)Liturgy  (Wednesday) The black-metal band Liturgy, from Brooklyn, has swept many unlikely musical genres into its recently released third album, “The Ark Work,” from electronica beats to angular math-rock. The group returns to the gothically inclined St. Vitus Bar, an increasingly less hidden gem for the dark-art music set. With Mivos Quartet and Psalm Zero. At 8 p.m., 1120 Manhattan Avenue, at Clay Street, Greenpoint, Brooklyn, ticketfly.com. (Anderson)The Month in Cabaret (through May 2) The spring cabaret season has arrived in New York with a saucy Brazilian accent and a whisper of bossa nova as the pianist and singer Eliane Elias continues her engagement at Birdland, through Saturday, performing songs from her recent album, “Made in Brazil.” This lushly arranged collection includes six original songs, along with standards by Roberto Menescal, Ary Barroso and Antônio Carlos Jobim. At 8:30 and 11 p.m., 315 West 44th Street, Clinton, 212-581-3080, birdlandjazz.com. At Café Carlyle, the guitarist John Pizzarelli reunites with Daniel Jobim, Antonio’s son, who played with his father on many of his recordings, from April 21 through May 2. Tuesdays through Fridays at 8:45 p.m.; Saturdays at 8:45 p.m. and 10:45 p.m. The cafe also continues to showcase nontraditional nightclub acts with an engagement, through April 18, by Lena Hall, recently seen in the Broadway revival of “Hedwig and the Angry Inch.” Tuesdays through Fridays at 8:45 p.m.; Saturdays at 8:45 p.m. and 10:45 p.m. Café Carlyle, 35 East 76th Street, Manhattan, 212-744-1600, thecarlyle.com. The Midtown club 54 Below is hopping with divas from different generations. Patti LuPone has brought back her popular show of standards, “The Lady With the Torch,” through Tuesday. Nellie McKay’s new show, “My Weekly Reader,” looks back at the 1960s from a playful 21st-century perspective, from Monday through April 18. The venerable Marilyn Maye’s new show, “Her Way: A Centennial Tribute to Frank Sinatra,” from next Friday through April 30, is another birthday celebration of Ol’ Blue Eyes. At various dates and times, 254 West 54th Street, Manhattan, 646-476-3551, 54below.com. (Stephen Holden)★ The Mountain Goats  (Saturday and Sunday) The Mountain Goats’ happily eccentric frontman, John Darnielle, has long established himself as a font of verbosity with a keen ear for emotionally gutting hooks. On “Beat the Champ,” the band’s new record, he also unmasks himself as a zealous fan of professional wrestling, which gives this concept album its theme. The song “Werewolf Gimmick” finds Mr. Darnielle gleefully yelping, “Let him who thinks he knows no fear/Look well upon my face.” With Ides of Gemini. At 8 p.m., City Winery, 155 Varick Street, near Spring Street, South Village, 212-608-0555, citywinery.com. (Anderson)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.OK Go  (Saturday) These chipper pop-rockers have an innovative eye for music video concepts. In their new clip for the slippery nü-disco track “I Won’t Let You Down,” off their fourth record, “Hungry Ghosts,” they zip around on motorized scooter chairs, weaving among choreographed dancers, as the action is filmed above by a drone. The footage recently was shown as part of the New York City Drone Film Festival, an appropriate setting for such lofty and left-of-center minds. At 8 p.m., Terminal 5, 610 West 56th Street, Clinton, 800-745-3000, terminal5nyc.com. (Anderson)RJD2  (Friday) The modest fame of this electronica D.J. and producer belies his true ubiquity: He is the creator of “A Beautiful Mine,” best known as the “Mad Men” theme song. Perhaps he needs to hire an advertising agency on his behalf, though he does remain a reliable commodity in dance circles. This Philadelphia artist (whose real name is Ramble Jon Krohn) recently dispatched “More Is Than Isn’t,” which leaned into hip-hop with cameos from the rappers Phonte Coleman and Blueprint. He headlines the Girls and Boys Party with support from Alex English, Dali and Hiyawatha. At 10 p.m., Webster Hall, 125 East 11th Street, East Village, 800-745-3000, websterhall.com/events. (Anderson)Alice Smith  (Sunday and Monday) This soul singer is a beautiful talent: Her jazzy odes are passionately delivered and effortlessly inclusive, strapped to a Patti LaBelle-worthy belt that would shatter windowpanes were it not so controlled. “Ocean,” the biggest single from her album “She,” toys with folksy guitar before gliding into a peppy, delightful soul-pop refrain. At 9 p.m., Bowery Ballroom, 6 Delancey Street, near the Bowery, Lower East Side, 800-745-3000, boweryballroom.com. (Anderson)Stars  (Saturday) These Canadian electro-poppers claim that the title of their new album, “No One Is Lost,” is meant to be facetious. But their insistent pessimism has ground into the otherwise bright synth melodies. Eventually we are encouraged to dance in the face of such nihilism, but it’s hard to shake off the grim undercurrent, especially with lyrics like “Put your hands up because everybody dies.” With Vérité. At 8 p.m., Webster Hall, 125 East 11th Street, East Village, 800-745-3000, websterhall.com/events. (Anderson)Advertisement★ Sufjan Stevens  (Saturday) This ambitious baroque-pop singer-songwriter once vowed to write an album about every state in the country; he abandoned this musical manifest destiny after releasing albums about Michigan and Illinois. His newest, “Carrie & Lowell,” is titled after his mother and stepfather, and it is his most gorgeous effort to date — a dauntlessly intimate song cycle that wrestles with the specters of abandonment and disconnection, all inside transcendent electro-meets-acoustic pop arrangements. With Cold Specks. At 8 p.m., Beacon Theater, 2124 Broadway, at 74th Street, 800-745-3000, beacontheatre.com. (Anderson)★ Sunflower Bean  (Saturday and Monday) Made up of old souls in photogenic forms, this teenage psychedelic rock trio mixes metal-influenced guitar squall with Arctic New Wave vocals; its bassist-vocalist, Julia Cumming, also moonlights as a model for Saint Laurent. The group, based in Bushwick, Brooklyn, released its debut EP, “Show Me Your Seven Secrets,” in January. With Honduras. Saturday at 9 p.m., Elvis Guesthouse, 85 Avenue A, at East Sixth Street, East Village, ticketfly.com. Monday at 7:30 p.m., Baby’s All Right, 146 Broadway, near Bedford Avenue, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, ticketfly.com. (Anderson)★ Stevie Wonder  (Sunday) “Sir Duke” will ride again when the venerable Mr. Wonder visits Barclays Center, continuing his first national tour since 2009. He will perform his quintessential 1976 record, “Songs in the Key of Life,” the double album that has inspired scores of R&B dreamers; in 2005, the Library of Congress added it to the National Recording Registry. The fortunate audiences of his recent festival performances — including sets at the Global Citizen Festival and Bonnaroo — can assert to his charisma, still broad onstage. At 8 p.m., 620 Atlantic Avenue, at Flatbush Avenue, Brooklyn, 800-745-3000, ticketmaster.com. (Anderson)A version of this schedule appears in print on April 10, 2015, on Page C16 of the New York edition with the headline: The Listings: Pop.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.