
The Walking Dead By                     
 JEREMY EGNER
 
OCT. 18, 2015
Last week’s “The Walking Dead” season premiere spent 90 minutes on a zombie herding plot and execution and still ended on a cliffhanger, with a mysterious air horn thwarting the effort by drawing the walkers toward Alexandria.We learned the source of that noise on Sunday: the Wolves truck driver, who did a nose dive onto the horn after catching a cab full of machine gun fire. The good news is that Spencer, Deanna’s kid, managed to stop him despite being, like the rest of Alexandria, generally unprepared to combat the invasion.But here’s the bad news: The walkers are still coming! That’s all I could think about even as the Alexandrians contended with more human threats. They either grew up, hid or died on Sunday as the Wolves finally began their salvo, targeting men, women and children with a cultish fervor. “We’re freeing you — you’re trapped,” one Wolf told Morgan and Gabriel, seconds before Carol added him to her impressive kill tally. “You need to know people don’t belong here anymore.”That the survivors presumably will have to face another mortal attack next week seems deeply unfair, but I assume that’s the point. That’s been Rick’s point, anyway: Safety doesn’t exist. This week he didn’t even have to be around to be validated.AdvertisementSince Rick and the gang arrived at the gates of Alexandria last season, “The Walking Dead” has been obsessed with the sheltered suburbanites’ failure to face that reality. Like many themes on this show, it has been hammered to the point of exhaustion, but this one has an interesting double edge. As veteran viewers, we agree with the core survivors’ frustration and contempt, but in truth most of us probably have more in common with the soft-handed Alexandrians. When Rick and Carol complain about their weakness, their lack of practical survival skills, they could just as easily be talking about us.AdvertisementThe episode, titled “JSS,” opened by flashing back on the story of Enid, whose parents were eaten in front of her. Soon she was eating tortoises (more on that in a minute) and tracing “JSS” on every available surface. “Just survive somehow” it meant, which we learned later from her Dear Carl letter. Did her “somehow” include collaborating with the Wolves at some point? Her fragmented timeline included plenty of gaps, but we’ll have to wait to find out what some of them might hold, if anything.Whatever the case, Enid’s story and message presaged the struggle awaiting the Alexandrians this week. Early on we saw what figures to be the last glimpse of the old normalcy in the neighborhood, as the gals sifted through the pantry and lauded Carol’s recipe for something called a cola canned ham. “Ms. Peletier, you are an honest-to-goodness hero,” one said. (Foreshadowing alert.) Soon Shelley, she of the pastamaker obsession, was being hacked to death as she puffed a butt outside Carol’s place. (See, kids? Smoking kills.)In a blink Dirty Carol was up to her old tricks, camouflaging herself with blood à la her Terminus infiltration and wasting everyone in sight. Carol’s a veteran at this sort of thing, of course, but for others it was a trial by fire, with mixed results. Denise, the new doctor played by Merritt Wever (“Nurse Jackie”), lost her first patient and took it pretty hard. (Don’t forget to skewer her brain, Tara said helpfully.) Jessie, perhaps channeling all the retribution she never got to direct at Pete, dispatched her attacker with a handy pair of scissors.Elsewhere the Wolves made lambs of anonymous Alexandrians. (Pro tip for the survivors: Find yourself a name, stat, and don’t be a jerk.)As Carol racked up the kills, Morgan hit people with his magical stick. When Morgan arrived at the end of last season, I posited that he represented a middle path — he was cleareyed about the dangers but determined to address them with his humanity intact. (The Buddhist staff is a little much, but it gets the point across.)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He embodied his role on Sunday, doing his best to keep the death count low. Sometimes that worked out for the attackers — he persuaded one group to flee — and sometimes Carol just killed them anyway. But he tried, at least.Morgan’s final face-off, with the Wolf he met last season, was intriguing, because of its suggestion that there may be something more than mere decency behind Morgan’s mercy. You can’t kill anyone, can you? he said, reminding us of how little we know about Morgan’s recent history. But what followed was sort of confusing, when Morgan apologized to the off-camera bad guy and did one of his swivel moves, producing the trademark “Walking Dead” kill-splatter sound.Were we supposed to conclude that he did in fact kill his opponent? With a mere poke of his stick? Maybe that thing’s more magical than we thought.Advertisement• So how long do we think it took Enid to reach the raw-tortoise-eating phase of her survival instinct? The opening montage made it seem like not long at all but surely it was at least — what? A week? A month? How long would it take you to bite the head off a tortoise?• With Father Gabriel trying to rehabilitate his image, young Ron is looking like the favorite to replace him as both Most Loathsome and Most Likely to Cause Tragedy Through His Own Incompetence. This was the second week in a row a Grimes had to save Ron from certain death, and then he churlishly refused Carl’s offer of safety and almost got his mom killed as a result. Seriously, Ron, I’m sympathetic to your angst over your dead dad, even though he apparently ruined your arm at some point. But “feckless liability” is a bad enough look on this show without your throwing attitude on top of it.• So I guess Olivia’s still in the armory, ready to shoot anyone who opens the door? Good luck with that, everybody. I thought she might wing Morgan there toward the end, but he had a different date with destiny.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »