By KAREN ROSENBERGAPRIL 9, 2015
NEW HAVEN —  In the popular imagination, the Romantic artist is a dreamy, introverted type. Picture Turner lashing himself to a ship’s mast, Delacroix whipping up feverish harem scenes or Caspar David Friedrich planting his solitary wanderers in misty landscapes.Now “The Critique of Reason: Romantic Art, 1760-1860,” a sweeping, 300-piece survey of the movement at the Yale University Art Gallery here, is rethinking Romanticism and presenting a very different sort of figure: a critical, political artist. A fantasist, to be sure, but one with a kind of intellectual hangover from the Enlightenment (that hard-thinking era of reason and science, 1650s to the 1780s, that took its inspiration from Bacon, Descartes and Locke).The show, the first collaboration between the Yale University Art Gallery and the Yale Center for British Art just across Chapel Street, gives many works from the British art center a temporary home while that museum is closed for building conservation. Not surprisingly, then, it’s a strongly British take on Romanticism, rich in Turners, Blakes and Constables but short on some major artists such as Friedrich and his fellow Germans.Nonetheless, its revisionist theme is persuasive. The Romantics emerge as deliberate “critics of reason,” in the Kantian mold, rather than the impulsive rebels we know from, say, the recent film “Mr. Turner.” The exhibition (organized by a five-person team of Yale curators and scholars) begins with the powerful example of Goya, who used his Romantic imagination to attack religious and political institutions. A complete set of his 81-piece “Disasters of War” etchings series is here, a relentless catalog of human cruelty and amorality. Nearby, in a less violent but still biting form of critique, Honoré Daumier’s expressive caricature busts ridicule members of King Louis-Philippe’s court.AdvertisementThis section of the show, titled “The Artist as Social Critic,” even makes the visionary religious poet and watercolorist William Blake into something of a political artist. In his 1793 illustrated poem “America a Prophecy,” he hails the American Revolution as the start of a global liberation movement.AdvertisementThe curators also uncover many examples of covert criticism in Romantic art, even in paintings that look like nature studies or overheated Orientalist fantasies. George Stubbs’s 1762 monumental painting “A Lion Attacking a Horse,” for instance, is rooted in the comparative anatomy studies of the Enlightenment but could also be taken as a comment on human-on-human violence. (It seems significant that it’s of a size more commensurate with history painting.)Similarly, James Ward’s “Man Struggling With a Boa Constrictor” (circa 1803), which depicts a black man wrestling with a snake, is revealed to be an allegory of the struggle to end slavery. (The wall label notes that Ward was part of an abolitionist circle and that slave owners, in the 19th century, were often described as greedy serpents.)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Landscape painting, the defining genre of the Romantic movement, was not as much of an arena for social criticism. But it was certainly a laboratory for philosophical and scientific inquiry, a place for artists to test out new concepts such as the picturesque and the sublime and new disciplines such as meteorology.Landscapes also make up the core of the Yale Center for British Art’s collection of Romantic art, and so the section of the exhibition titled “Landscape and the Perceiving Subject” contains some majestic Turner and Constable canvases (as well as more intimate sketches, watercolors and cloud studies).A stunning group of three Turner seascapes, in particular, paints the Romantics as inquisitive students of nature whose awe-triggering sublime vistas were firmly grounded in empiricism. Turner seems to open up new avenues of perception, plunging viewers into clouds of iridescent mist, sometimes mingled with black smoke from a passing steamship, as in “Staffa, Fingal’s Cave.” Fingal’s Cave, on an island off Scotland, was both the setting of a poetry collection by Sir Walter Scott and a geologic marvel that fascinated late-18th-century scientists; it’s hard to think of a better bridge between Romanticism and the Age of Enlightenment.The show’s last couple of sections include some of Romanticism’s most famous visionaries and mystics, while trying to make the point that the movement was not limited to mystical visions. The most convincing gallery is probably the one of religious art, in which the curators argue that the philosophy of the sublime led artists to explore more personal expressions of faith.Plates from Blake’s illustrated prophetic poem “Jerusalem” are here, as is John Martin’s ponderously dark and stormy painting “The Deluge.” But the most transporting work is a small sketch, “The Crucifixion” by Delacroix, with a deeply empathic Christ whose direct gaze is accentuated by a fiery halo.Enlightenment rationalism plus empathy: That, in a nutshell, is the show’s philosophical new definition of Romanticism. Most viewers will probably go on imagining the Romantic artist as an isolated, brooding fantasist; the myth is just too strong, and it’s been reinforced in the work of contemporary artists who fancy themselves Romantics,  like   Martin Kippenberger and  Karen Kilimnik. But anyone who likes to take the long view of art history, rather than plodding along movement by movement, is in for an eye-opening, intellectually stimulating treat. “The Critique of Reason: Romantic Art, 1760-1860” runs through July 26 at the Yale University Art Gallery, 1111 Chapel Street, at York Street, New Haven; 203-432-0600, artgallery.yale.edu. A version of this review appears in print on April 10, 2015, on Page C27 of the New York edition with the headline: Romantic Hearts With Rational Souls.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.