AdvertisementSupported byFull reviews of recent classical performances: nytimes.com/classical. A searchable guide to these and other performances is at nytimes.com/events.Opera‘Aida’  (Monday) Not one to ignore an opportunity to multitask, Plácido Domingo conducts the Metropolitan Opera’s revival of Verdi’s great Egypt opera as he continues a run in that composer’s “Ernani.” The cast includes Oksana Dyka, Violeta Urmana, Marco Berti, Mark Delavan and Stefan Kocan. At 7:30 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Zachary Woolfe)‘Cavalleria Rusticana’ and ‘Pagliacci’  (Tuesday) David McVicar’s recent Metropolitan Opera productions, including Verdi’s “Il Trovatore” and Donizetti’s “Anna Bolena” and “Maria Stuarda,” have been grimly realistic, a quality that will serve him well in the Met’s first new production since 1970 of this red-blooded verismo double bill. With the action updated to 20th-century Sicily — “Cav,” as it is known, to 1900, and “Pag” to just after World War II — Marcelo Álvarez will sing both operas’ leading tenor roles, opposite Eva-Maria Westbroek in “Cav” and Patricia Racette in “Pag.” George Gagnidze sings both baritone roles and Fabio Luisi conducts. At 8 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Woolfe)★ ‘Don Carlo’ (Saturday and Wednesday) For this revival of Nicholas Hytner’s 2010 production of Verdi’s profoundly great “Don Carlo,” the Metropolitan Opera has assembled a strong cast and an exceptional conductor. The Korean tenor Yonghoon Lee brings melting sound and youthful impetuosity to the title role. The soprano Barbara Frittoli as Elisabeth, and the mezzo-soprano Ekaterina Gubanova as Princess Eboli, give winning performances. The suave Russian baritone Dmitri Hvorostovsky excels as Rodrigo, and the great Italian bass Ferruccio Furlanetto owns the role of the isolated, ruthless Philip II. Best of all is the stylish, exciting conducting of Yannick Nézet-Séguin. (There are cast changes for Wednesday evening’s performance, including Ricardo Tamura as Don Carlo and Lianna Haroutounian as Elisabeth.) Saturday at noon and Wednesday at 7 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Anthony Tommasini)‘Ernani’ (Saturday) Plácido Domingo, seemingly determined to prolong his career, has taken on another baritone role: Don Carlo, in the Metropolitan Opera’s revival of Verdi’s “Ernani.” This once-glorious tenor’s many fans cheered him on opening night, but his singing these days is compromised, his sound leathery. He was also notably careless in execution. There were still flashes of the great Domingo vocal charisma, but Verdi had a baritone in mind for this music. The rest of the cast is excellent, especially the sumptuous soprano Angela Meade as Elvira, and the youthful Italian tenor Francesco Meli in the title role. Paul Nadler conducts. At 8:30 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Tommasini)‘Lucia di Lammermoor’  (Friday) The ardent tenor Joseph Calleja is the strongest element in the Metropolitan Opera’s bland revival of Donizetti’s moody masterpiece. The potent Russian coloratura soprano Albina Shagimuratova has accuracy but little passion. The baritone Luca Salsi sings her brother, Enrico, and Maurizio Benini conducts. At 7:30 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Woolfe)★ ‘Lucrezia Borgia’ (Friday and Saturday) Loft Opera, an enterprising start-up, has quickly proved a vital addition to the city’s roster of small opera companies, showcasing gifted young singers in Brooklyn lofts and other nontraditional locations. The lineup this week features this Donizetti work. At 8 p.m., LightSpace Studios, 1115 Flushing Avenue, between Porter and Varick Avenues, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, loftopera.com. (Vivien Schweitzer)Classical MusicArtemis Quartet  (Wednesday) This excellent ensemble offers a program featuring two autobiographical masterpieces by Czech composers: Dvorak’s “American” quartet and Smetana’s “From My Life” quartet. The lineup also features a recent piece by the Latvian composer Peteris Vasks, which alludes to the struggles of his homeland. At 7:30 p.m., Zankel Hall, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Vivien Schweitzer)★ Boston Symphony Orchestra  (Wednesday through next Friday) The Boston Symphony’s youthful, brilliant new music director, Andris Nelsons, leads three programs with his re-energized orchestra. On Wednesday, there’s Mozart’s Piano Concerto No. 27 (with Richard Goode), the local premiere of Gunther Schuller’s “Dreamscape,” and a Nelsons party piece, Strauss’s “Ein Heldenleben.” Thursday sees two works by Shostakovich, including the Symphony No. 10, plus Christian Tetzlaff in Beethoven’s Violin Concerto. But next Friday there’s just one work: Mahler’s mighty, tragic Symphony No. 6. At 8 p.m., Stern Auditorium, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (David Allen)Jay Campbell & Conor Hanick (Wednesday) Jay Campbell, an adventurous, prizewinning young cellist who has collaborated with musicians ranging from Pierre Boulez to members of Radiohead, has an equally inquisitive partner for this recital at SubCulture, the brilliant pianist Conor Hanick. They will play shorter works by Carter and Stravinsky, the New York premiere of David Fulmer’s “Original Wood” and Brahms’s Cello Sonata No. 2. Wednesday at 7:30 p.m., SubCulture, 45 Bleecker Street, near Lafayette Street, East Village, 212-533-5470, subculturenewyork.com. (Tommasini)Cantata Profana  (Thursday) This inventive chamber ensemble describes “Dreams and Visions,” its coming program at Symphony Space, as a “haunting musical nightscape” of songs and string quartets. There will be works by Webern, De Falla, Berio and Kaija Saariaho. At the core of the program is Schoenberg’s Second String Quartet, which features a prominent part for soprano. At 7:30 p.m., Leonard Nimoy Thalia Theater at Symphony Space, 2537 Broadway at 95th Street, 212-864-5400, cantataprofana.com.(Tommasini)Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center  (Thursday) Artists including the clarinetist Romie de Guise-Langlois and the pianist Soyeon Kate Lee performs works by Vivaldi, Ginastera, Poulenc and Villa-Lobos in the intimate Rose Studio, an ideal space for chamber music. Thursday at 6:30 p.m., Rose Studio, 165 West 65th Street, Lincoln Center, 212-875-5788, chambermusicsociety.org. (Schweitzer)Le Concert des Nations  (Thursday) The Catalan early-music specialist Jordi Savall leads this period-instrument ensemble in a vivacious program of French baroque music by composers including Lully, Couperin, Rameau and Marais. At 7:30 p.m., Zankel Hall, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Corinna da Fonseca-Wollheim)★ Sarah Connolly  (Sunday) This velvet-voiced, effortlessly communicative mezzo-soprano is joined by the pianist Joseph Middleton in an exquisite program: Schubert’s three “Ellens Gesang” (the third is his classic “Ave Maria”), Mahler’s “Rückert-Lieder,” selections from Copland’s “12 Poems of Emily Dickinson” and Elgar’s “Sea Pictures.” At 5 p.m., Alice Tully Hall, Lincoln Center, 212-721-6500, lcgreatperformers.org. (Woolfe)★ ‘Crash’ (Wednesday) The inventive American composer Robert Ashley died last year at 83, shortly after finishing “Crash,” his final opera, which had its premiere at the 2014 Whitney Biennial. Mr. Crash’s unconventional operas blend spoken dialogue; meditative, surrealist scores; surrealist dramatic elements; and experimental vocal idioms. “Crash,” which explores the attitudes and prejudices of an older man, features six voices and a score accompanied by photo projections. At 8 p.m., Roulette, 509 Atlantic Avenue, near Third Avenue, Boerum Hill, Brooklyn, 917-267-0363, roulette.org. (Schweitzer)‘The Lord of the Rings’ in Concert  (Friday through Sunday) Howard Shore’s score for this blockbuster film trilogy gets the live symphonic treatment at Lincoln Center. A full orchestra and the Brooklyn Youth Chorus will perform while the movies are screened. At 7:30 p.m. on Friday and Saturday, and 1 p.m. on Saturday and Sunday, David H. Koch Theater, Lincoln Center, 212-496-0600, davidhkochtheater.com. (Woolfe)MATA Festival  (Monday through Thursday) Zany, adventurous and polyglot, this essential festival of very new music returns, this time presenting 30 composers from 17 countries, all under the age of 40. The opening week’s highlights include Tuesday’s program by the Curious Chamber Players, from Sweden, and Wednesday’s “Mad Filaments and Ungovernable Shoots,” an evening that includes a piece scored for table lamps and Megan Grace Beugger’s “Liaison,” performed by a dancer connected, through a pulley system, to a prepared piano. Full details are online. (Through April 18.) Most events take place at the Kitchen, 512 West 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-255-5793, thekitchen.org. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)Mutter-Bronfman-Harrell Trio  (Tuesday) The violinist Anne-Sophie Mutter’s Perspectives series continues apace, this time joined by the pianist Yefim Bronfman and the cellist Lynn Harrell. Just two piano trios on the billing, but important ones: Beethoven’s last, the “Archduke,” and Tchaikovsky’s impassioned memorial for the pianist Nikolai Rubinstein. At 8 p.m., Stern Auditorium, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Allen)New Juilliard Ensemble  (Friday) Five recent works, including two world premieres by the Juilliard composers Simon Frisch and Max Grafe, are on the lineup here. Joel Sachs conducts the energetic young band, as well as soloists including the clarinetist Miao Zhao and the countertenor Eric Jurenas. At 8 p.m., Alice Tully Hall, Lincoln Center, 212-721-6500; events.juilliard.edu; free. (Schweitzer)New York Philharmonic (Friday and Saturday) The brilliant, inquisitive Georgian violinist Lisa Batiashvili continues her tenure as artist in residence with the New York Philharmonic in an enticing program featuring a Philharmonic co-commission: Thierry Escaich’s Concerto for Violin and Oboe. The other soloist is an artist Ms. Batiashvili knows well: the eminent oboist François Leleux, her husband. They will also be the soloists in Bach’s Concerto for Violin and Oboe. Alan Gilbert conducts the program, which includes Shostakovich’s powerful 10th Symphony. At 8 p.m., Avery Fisher Hall, Lincoln Center, 212-875-5656, nyphil.org. (Tommasini)Orpheus Chamber Orchestra  (Saturday) The guest artist Fazil Say appears in two roles for this Orpheus concert: as pianist, in Mozart’s Piano Concerto No. 23, and as composer, for the world premiere of his own Chamber Symphony. Wagner’s “Siegfried Idyll” and Haydn’s Symphony No. 80 fill out the program. At 7 p.m., Stern Auditorium, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Allen)Riverside Symphony  (Saturday) The violinist Dan Zhu headlines this program made up of quirky, brilliant and engaging works, including Kabalevsky’s spirited Violin Concerto and Waxman’s “Carmen Fantasie” based on Bizet; Poulenc’s Sinfonietta and the New York premiere of George Tsontakis’s “Comet” round out the evening. At 8 p.m., Alice Tully Hall, Lincoln Center, 212-721-6500, riversidesymphony.org. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)Jordi Savall  (Monday) Many fans of Jordi Savall were introduced to the beauty of his viola da gamba through the film “Tous les Matins du Monde”; here he reprises some of that profoundly expressive music by composers including Marais and Sainte-Colombe along with arrangements of English and Scottish traditional tunes. At 7:30 p.m., Weill Recital Hall, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)★ Les Violons du Roy  (Sunday) An all-Purcell program, part of the Before Bach festival at Carnegie Hall, leads ineluctably to a concert performance of “Dido and Aeneas.” Dorothea Röschmann sings Dido, and Henk Neven, Aeneas. Also on the program are instrumental and vocal excerpts from “The Fairy Queen” and “King Arthur.” Richard Egarr conducts. At 2 p.m., Stern Auditorium, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Allen)Advertisement