By KEN JOHNSONAPRIL 9, 2015
Miguel de Cervantes’s “Don Quixote,” whose first volume was published in 1605, has inspired and challenged illustrators from Goya to Dalí. Few have captured the paradoxical essence of a book in which fantasy and reality collide to farcical effect over and over. It’s a hard problem: How would you picture simultaneously the narrator’s vividly realistic, warts-and-all description of his hapless protagonist’s adventures and Don Quixote’s own delusional view of himself as a knight errant in a simplified world of heroes, villains, giants and damsels in distress? How would you make visible such a contradictory double vision?“Coypel’s Don Quixote Tapestries: Illustrating a Spanish Novel in 18th-Century France,” at the Frick Collection, presents an ambitious but not entirely successful case in point. An exceptionally interesting investigation of a less well-traveled art historical byway, the exhibition is devoted to a set of mural-scale tapestries depicting episodes from the novel that were woven at the Gobelins Manufactory in Paris. The show includes three of the Gobelins tapestries; five of the original 28 paintings, or cartoons, that the artist Charles Coypel (1694-1752) produced for weavers to copy; and 18 engravings by which Coypel’s terrifically popular images were disseminated throughout Europe and beyond. Two enormous Flemish tapestries inspired by Coypel’s images round out the show so that all 28 of his original depictions are represented in one form or another.The stars of the show, the three Gobelins tapestries, are impressive objects. Measuring about 12 feet by 13 feet, each has its central scene surrounded by a wide, grandiose, decorative border consisting of trompe-l’oeil gilded frames one within another, floral garlands and sheep, a dog and a peacock. The extravagant border, known as an alentour, was originally designed not by Coypel but by the artists Jean-Baptiste Belin de Fontenay the Elder (1653-1715) and Claude Audran III (1658-1734). Coypel’s central scenes seem to expand into the distance as if seen through windows. They represent, according to their titles, “The Cowardice of Sancho at the Hunt,” “Sancho Arrives on the Island of Barataria” and “Don Quixote Delivered From Folly by Wisdom.” The colors of the tapestries have faded somewhat, but you can imagine how spectacularly sumptuous they would have appeared when new. They were produced mainly as gifts from the king of France to other heads of state and their ambassadors.Painting under the Rococo influence of artists like Watteau and Boucher, Coypel envisioned events from the novel as if they were scenes in theatrical productions. By this time “Don Quixote” had been translated into numerous plays, ballets and operas. A playwright as well as an artist (and son of Antoine Coypel, the chief painter to Louis XV, a position he eventually inherited), Coypel wrote two plays inspired by the novel.AdvertisementThe busily eventful images are amusing, but much is lost in translation from the novel. While repeatedly picturing Don Quixote and his loyal squire, Sancho Panza, as clownish figures in complicatedly choreographed, multifigured tableaus, Coypel made less visible how things appear in Don Quixote’s own deluded mind. In the painting “Asleep, Don Quixote Fights the Wineskins” (1716), we see that old man in his nightshirt wielding a sword while two men try to contain him in the room of an inn, but we don’t see the giant he thinks he’s battling.Coypel’s pictures will be most meaningful for viewers who know and love the Cervantes novel. Happily, the exhibition comes with a neat little hardcover catalog in which a reproduction of each tapestry, painting and print is paired with appropriate brief passages from the novel. Herein, the first image, an engraving titled “Don Quixote, Led by Folly, Sets Out From His Home to Become a Knight Errant” (1723-24), shows our hero dressed in shining armor atop his skinny nag. It’s one of the most effectively imaginative of all the illustrations. The mythic figures of a demigoddess — Folly — and a cherub floating overhead point the way forward. In the distance is the windmill he will soon battle: The windmill has the head of a giant man attached to its roof and gigantic hands wielding a club and a sword extending from its blades.What this picture doesn’t tell you is what precipitated Don Quixote’s madness: the excessive consumption of cheap novels about knightly chivalry. A passage from the novel quoted in the catalog elaborates, explaining that “it seemed reasonable and necessary to him” that he should “become a knight errant and travel the world with his armor and his horse to seek adventures and engage in everything he had read that knights errant engaged in, righting all manner of wrongs and, by seizing the opportunity and placing himself in danger and ending those wrongs, winning eternal renown and everlasting fame.”AdvertisementThis is what makes Don Quixote a distinctively modern character and Cervantes’s centuries-old novel forever relevant. Who is not, after all, driven at least partly by idealistic fantasies gleaned from the common lore of his or her community? These days quixotic idealists around the world are causing troubles far worse than any wrought by poor Don Quixote. But even the peaceable among us are not immune to this sort of insanity. As George Eliot observed in “Middlemarch,” another of the world’s great novels, “For we all of us, grave or light, get our thoughts entangled in metaphors, and act fatally on the strength of them.”“Coypel’s Don Quixote Tapestries: Illustrating a Spanish Novel in 18th-Century France” runs through May 17 at the Frick Collection, 1 East 70th Street, Manhattan; 212-288-0700, frick.org. A version of this review appears in print on April 10, 2015, on Page C25 of the New York edition with the headline: A Hapless Idealist’s Tale, Woven Into Culture and Art.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.