AdvertisementSupported byInside ArtBy Graham BowleyThe blue-blooded Park Avenue Armory has announced the next stage of its modernization. The architecture firm Herzog & de Meuron will restore the building’s opulent Veterans Room, which has one of the few surviving interiors designed by Louis C. Tiffany and Company, the firm identified with the American Aesthetic Movement, led by Louis Comfort Tiffany, working with Samuel Colman, Lockwood de Forest, Candace Wheeler and Stanford White.The work, which began in January, is part of a $200 million renovation of the landmark, and it follows the 2013 restoration of  its Board of Officers Room.Most of the main architectural features, dating to 1881-82, remained, including its original wood and metalwork, gas light fixtures and art objects. But many surfaces had been painted over, and the wooden walls darkened by century-old “hair oil and pomade,” where men’s heads had brushed against the wainscoting, said Rebecca Robertson, president of the Armory.The renovation is focusing on the lighting (to recapture what was historically described as the “glow” of the room) and the wallpaper (by Tiffany and Wheeler, which was removed in the middle of the last century). Herzog & de Meuron will provide a contemporary interpretation of the wallpaper design. “It is just going to be glistening,” Ms. Robertson said.Last summer renovators discovered that the ceiling, covered by brown paint, was made of California redwood that had been “hacked with axes,” she said. They also discovered a remnant of the intricate wallpaper made of multiple layers, which will guide the reconstruction.“This room is probably one of the most important rooms in the United States in terms of design,” Ms. Robertson said, adding that its decline was one reason the Armory was named among the “100 Most Endangered Sites” in the world in 2000.Artwork being restored includes a frieze by Francis Millet and George Yewell, and decorative glass by Tiffany. The room is expected to open in December.GALLERY TO SELL DRAWINGSIn yet another example of the world’s biggest galleries moving into auction-house territory, the David Zwirner gallery is selling 150 works on paper from the Sarah-Ann and Werner H. Kramarsky drawings collection, by artists including Ellsworth Kelly, Agnes Martin, Ed Ruscha, Jasper Johns and Brice Marden.Zwirner has sold large collections in the past, including the postwar art collection of Helga and Walther Lauffs, but those works were not as widely shown. The Kramarsky group has a particular emphasis on Minimal, Post-Minimal, Conceptual and process-oriented styles.Kristine Bell, a senior partner at Zwirner, said the collection had been the subject of many regional and university museum shows but that this was the first time a broad selection of works from the collection would be seen in New York. “The pedigree of works on view will speak to the decades” of the pair’s collecting, she said. According to the gallery, the drawings trace “the evolution of abstract tendencies in American art-making over half a century,” from Minimalism forward. Of special note are six drawings by Eva Hesse from the 1960s. Some of the 150 works will be on view at the Zwirner gallery, 537 West 20th Street in Chelsea, from May 2 to June 20 and in a collection catalog.SPLASH OF COLOR IN DESERTSeven neon stone totems may soon rise in the desert just south of Las Vegas. The project, “Seven Magic Mountains,” is by the Swiss-born artist Ugo Rondinone, who in 2013 took nine 20-foot-tall bluestone figures to Rockefeller Center. Those figures were rough and primitive in an urban setting; the new ones will be painted in artificially bright yellows, purples and other colors and placed in a natural, remote environment. They will be constructed from car-size stone cut from a Nevada quarry and stacked 32 feet high.The public installation, along Interstate 15, may open late this year or in early 2016, and will remain on display for two years. The project is the largest undertaking yet by the nonprofit Art Production Fund, also responsible for Prada Marfa, a permanent sculpture in West Texas. “Seven Magic Mountains” is being produced in partnership with the Nevada Museum of Art in Reno.David B. Walker, the museum’s executive director, is still raising funds from corporate and private donors to pay for the project, which he said was expected to cost “north of $3.5 million.”“There is so much poetry in Ugo’s work,” he said. “To see it on display in these large, beautiful colored rocks in contrast to this mountainous background, I just feel it is beautiful and is going to be a game-changer.”BIG SUE WORK AT AUCTIONA Lucian Freud work of Big Sue returns to Christie’s on May 13, with the auction house offering another portrait from that painter’s “Benefits Supervisor” series during its postwar and contemporary art sales in New York.Seven years ago, at the height of the last art market boom, Christie’s sold Freud’s monumental 1995 “Benefits Supervisor Sleeping” for $33.6 million to Roman Abramovich of Russia.On the block next month will be “Benefits Supervisor Resting” (1994), one of four painstakingly observed nude studies of the amply proportioned Sue Tilley, then a government employee. It will carry an estimate of $30 million to $50 million. This roughly 5 feet by 5 feet depiction of Ms. Tilley sitting on a battered sofa with her head thrown back is owned by the Boston collector Barbara Lee, whose foundation supports women’s representation in politics and in the arts. Ms. Lee has been guaranteed an undisclosed minimum price. The thickly worked canvas can be seen at Christie’s London from Saturday to April 23. Mr. Freud died in July 2011, and this piece is the first work of his valued at more than $20 million to have come to auction since then. In recent years the auction market for contemporary art has been increasingly dominated by abstraction.“This will be a good test of where his market is going,” said James Holland-Hibbert, a London dealer who held a loan exhibition of Freud’s early works in 2008. “It will be interesting to see if this style of painting appeals to the buyers who support these sales. Is Freud still a big enough brand?” SCOTT REYBURNAdvertisement