By HOLLAND COTTERAPRIL 9, 2015
Symbolically, the Civil War ended when Robert E. Lee surrendered to Ulysses S. Grant in a Virginia parlor on April 9, 1865, a century and a half ago this week. Officially, it concluded a year later, when President Andrew Johnson issued a proclamation of peace. For many people who lived through it, the war never ended at all.In his 1882 book, “Specimen Days,” which he called “a batch of convulsively written reminiscences,” the poet Walt Whitman was still locked in mourning. “The dead, the dead, the dead — our dead — or South or North, ours all (all, all, all, finally dear to me) — or East or West — Atlantic Coast or Mississippi Valley,” he wrote in a distraught stutter. Almost two decades after the events had passed, the presentness of his loss is plain.Many Americans felt the way Whitman did, including his neighbors in Brooklyn, where he grew up. And many wrote about their feelings, not in public memoirs but in letters sent to and from the battlefront during the war. Thousands of these ended up half-forgotten in attics and bureau drawers. (My family had some stashed away.) And a bunch temporarily come to light in “Personal Correspondents: Photography and Letter Writing in Civil War Brooklyn” at the Brooklyn Historical Society.The show is small, one little room with a lot in it, including letters, period souvenirs and printed texts, and with everything readily accessible, as in a well-packed suitcase. The mood is not entirely grim, despite the subject. The war started, as wars often do, on an adrenaline high, after the government of South Carolina had shocked the nation, first by pulling out of the Union (it declared the election of Abraham Lincoln “a hostile act”), and then, in the spring of 1861, by bombarding federal troops at Fort Sumter.AdvertisementLincoln called for a muster of volunteer troops; recruitment stations went up near City Hall in Brooklyn. More men signed up than anyone knew what to do with, and soon they were all streaming southward, toting guns, wearing stylish kepi-style caps and “leaving weeping eyes behind,” as reported by The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. People expected the conflict to be brief. Meanwhile, there was adventure to be had and roles to be played: Boys flexed; girls sighed; families veered between worry and pride.You get a sense of this from letters, some displayed in their original handwritten form, others quoted in printed labels or heard on audiotapes. Washington A. Roebling, son of the designer of the Brooklyn Bridge, flirts with his fiancée via mail from the front: “I have often wondered how two lovers can be true to each other if they don’t know how to write.”Alfred Cranston, of Brooklyn’s “Fighting Fourteenth” regiment, sends his sweetheart a pencil sketch of the camp he’s at near Washington, a bosky scene with the Capitol on the horizon. Daniel Underhill, a new recruit, reports home about a fine camp meal — “beefsteak, onions and roast potatoes” — as if Army life were a lark.It wasn’t, and that reality soon sank in. What was supposed to be a quick war stretched into years. Patience, along with patriotism, wore down. The numbers of deaths in battle were appalling, and so were the injuries. Amputations became common; Whitman remembered seeing discarded limbs stacked like firewood. The procedures were crude, as a set of surgical instruments on display in the show — basically, two carving knives and a handsaw — suggests. In the days before germ theory was known, infection was rampant.AdvertisementSo was disease. In her 2008 book, “The Republic of Suffering: Death and the American Civil War,” the historian Drew Gilpin Faust estimated that twice as many soldiers died of illness than died in combat. Epidemics of typhus, malaria, measles, smallpox and dysentery swept through the camps, taking a toll on both bodies and psyches. Death from one cause or another was omnipresent. The stress comes through in the letters. “I saw a great many soldiers’ graves with their bones all bare,” wrote Daniel Underhill in another, far more somber account of Army life.Whitman, who is part of the show in spirit if not in fact, spent much of the war as a volunteer in military hospitals, working as the equivalent of a modern psychiatric nurse. One of his self-assigned duties was to transcribe messages from sick soldiers to be sent to their families, and to write to loved ones himself, describing the spiritual condition and physical appearance of soldiers in their last hours.Keeping familiar faces in sight across distance and time was possible in the Civil War era in a way it had never been before. One of the innovations in what could be called the social media of the period was the introduction of the snapshot-size portrait photograph, printed on paper, called the carte de visite. Cheap to produce and easy to carry and mail, these images became popular supplements to the written word, and were in huge demand among soldiers away from home. An ensemble of 136 such photographs, culled from the Brooklyn Historical Society’s collection, is at the show’s center and captures a large slice of the war’s demographic: young men in uniform; young women at home; mothers with children; and children alone. The photographs also include widely distributed celebrity portraits (Lincoln, Grant).AdvertisementAll but missing from the group are portraits of African-Americans. There’s just one, of a young man, maybe a teenager, in a work apron. The position of blacks in the North during wartime was precarious, to say the least. Letters in the show from two Irish-American brothers from Fort Greene, Brooklyn, given a dramatic reading in a recording by the actor Ed Walsh, are laced with racist anger. Like other members of the white working class, they saw, in the freeing of slaves, a threat to their underdog economic status.A war, fought at least nominally for the cause of racial justice, exacerbated this standing resentment. When the Union government, increasingly short of Army volunteers, instituted a draft in July 1863, the fury exploded. Riots broke out in New York City, with white mobs burning property owned by wealthy citizens (who could buy their way out of the draft) and attacking and killing blacks, many of whom fled to African-American communities like Weeksville in Brooklyn, where they stayed.It was a savage episode, far from the last of its kind. Yet despite the violence against them, and endless subtler discrimination, African-Americans had an important role in the war, particularly after the Emancipation Proclamation in 1863, picking up the slack in terms of the Army’s numbers and, often in segregated units, filling the front lines. In the historical record, however, they have yet to find full visibility. Just as their images are missing from the historical society’s holdings in cartes de visite, their words are missing from its archives of letters.The one example of a letter by an African-American has been borrowed from a collection at Duke University. It’s written, in a fine small hand, by Edgar Dinsmore, a private in the Massachusetts 54th Infantry of black soldiers, to Carrie Drayton, a Brooklynite whom he met as a pen pal through a newspaper notice. Dinsmore’s letter dates from 1865, late in the war, after enthusiasm for the conflict’s causes had long since been exhausted. And his words are exceptional for their assertive idealism.“When Rebellion is crushed who will be more proud than I to say ‘I was one of the first of the despised race to leave the free North with rifle on my shoulder and give the lie to the old story that the black man will not fight.’ And now that he will fight no one dare deny,” he wrote.Whether he and Drayton ever spoke face to face, we don’t know. The show, organized by Julie Golia, the society’s director of public history, inevitably leaves us with many such questions. To Whitman this would have made sense. “The real war will never get in the books,” he wrote, meaning even into his own book, because it was a drama so colossal, terrible and perpetual as to be beyond writing and speaking. Yet you can read it and hear it, heartbreakingly incomplete and crystal clear, in the single voices here.“Personal Correspondents: Photography and Letter Writing in Civil War Brooklyn” runs through Spring 2016 at the Brooklyn Historical Society, 128 Pierrepont Street, at Clinton Street, Brooklyn Heights; 718-222-4111, brooklynhistory.org. A version of this review appears in print on April 10, 2015, on Page C21 of the New York edition with the headline: Snapshots of Wounded Limbs, Pride and Psyches.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.