By JASON ZINOMANAPRIL 9, 2015
If an announcement of a presidential candidacy were as rocky as Comedy Central’s introduction of Trevor Noah, “The Daily Show” would have a field day with it.Since Mr. Noah, a 31-year-old South African comic, was named to succeed Jon Stewart as that show’s host, he has been embroiled in a controversy over jokes he posted on Twitter about women and Jews that some viewed as offensive and others as merely lame. (He was the subject of a brief defense by Mr. Stewart.)Now there’s a new dust-up: Russell Peters, a popular and well-traveled Canadian stand-up comic, called Mr. Noah “a thief” in a television interview in Singapore. “He’s stolen material from David Kau,” he said, referring to another South African comic. “He’s stolen material from myself.”Mr. Peters did not provide specifics, and he backtracked on Twitter on Wednesday, referring to his comment as a “prank.”AdvertisementMr. Noah addressed the criticism merrily on the social media network, saying to Mr. Peters: “You just cost me the presidency of South Africa. Lol.”AdvertisementThe latest accusations involve a joke that paved the way to Mr. Noah’s success in a “Tonight Show” set, and along with a series of joke-stealing controversies in recent years, raise questions about what constitutes originality in humor.There’s also the issue of whether Mr. Noah’s response to controversy can wipe away any doubts about his ability to host “The Daily Show,” which is built around puncturing the pretensions of politicians and news media personalities.According to interviews with several South African comics, the accusations have been well known in the country’s comedy circles for years, first gaining prominence in 2010, in an article in a now-defunct entertainment magazine called Heat. “Is Trevor a Joke Thief?” the headline asked.Two years later, Mr. Kau cracked pointed jokes about the issue at South Africa’s first Comedy Central roast (hosted by Mr. Noah). Mr. Kau, who has a well-regarded comedy show called “Blacks Only,” quipped that he had appeared on “The Tonight Show” because Mr. Noah used one of his jokes there.Some interpreted the criticism as a sign of envy of a comedian on a meteoric rise. “Trevor had some people say he stole material, but I don’t think he did,” Loyiso Gola, who hosts “Late Nite News,” a satirical South African television show, said in an interview. “It’s just the nature of being in a small industry. People are precious about subject matter.”He added that Mr. Kau was “jealous, straight up.”Mr. Russell’s assertion that he was pulling a prank seems implausible. (Why is taking shots at another comic’s reputation in a small market supposed to be funny?)But it also may have backfired, as only hours later, Mr. Kau, who declined to comment for this article, posted two tweets that linked to old stand-up performances of his with the defiant hashtag #IDidTheseJokes1st. One of the jokes, which Mr. Kau told at a Johannesburg club in 2006, was very similar to one that Mr. Noah performed on “The Tonight Show” with Jay Leno in 2012. That assured performance was Mr. Noah’s breakthrough on American television.AdvertisementTold from a South African perspective, the joke pokes fun at African-Americans who, in an effort to get in touch with their roots, give their children African names. In Mr. Kau’s telling, he gesticulates while announcing a series of African-sounding names, then says pointedly, “Hey, my name is David, I’m from Africa.” He ends by cursing in mock swagger.Mr. Noah’s version has a similar setup to explain how black Americans try to reconnect with Africa. Three characters share their African names (with gesticulations), but his joke ends with a conversation between an American and himself: “Oh, brother, where you from?” “South Africa.” “What’s your name?” “Trevor.”These jokes share a premise, structure and point of view. But they don’t use exactly the same words, and they have slightly different spirits. Mr. Noah’s punch line is more polished, patiently established and less confrontational, underlining the silliness of the situation.So was this joke stolen?It’s hard to say. Mr. Noah may have been telling it for many years, or the two comedians could have developed the idea independently. But when he was asked about such accusations in an interview in 2013, Mr. Noah did not make the case that two paths can lead to the same joke. “Nobody owns comedy,” he said. “Nobody owns a premise, nobody owns an idea.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Technical questions aside, his argument is out of step with mainstream comedy today. Joke-stealing controversies over the past decade have damaged the reputations of comedians like Carlos Mencia and Dane Cook, and hardened the norms of stand-up, which are now enforced in the court of the Internet.But the standards for stealing don’t necessarily match up with those for originality. You can take another comedian’s style, delivery or even persona without any fear of a backlash, but if you tell a similarly written joke, then you might have transgressed.The moral dividing line can be hard to determine, but it can also lead one to think that joke writing is far more important than performance in comedy, which is not always true, particularly when it comes to choosing the best successor to Mr. Stewart.After all, “The Daily Show” has a team of excellent writers who will supply jokes for Mr. Noah. His calling cards are intelligence, charm, quickness and ability to get across a sharp point of view in an ingratiating manner. These controversies judge him by a measure that may be peripheral to the job. And the furor surrounding him online does seem out of proportion.At the same time, one of the triumphs of “The Daily Show” has been its coverage of political campaigns, and if Mr. Noah is to succeed, he will need to react quickly and forthrightly to cut through the nonsense of the news cycle. Mr. Noah has largely avoided the uproar, digging in, playing down and dodging on social media.But at some point, he will need to respond in detail, forcefully, bluntly and with humor. And maybe he should do so somewhere other than on Twitter. While watching him joke with Mr. Peters about the “prank,” I couldn’t help but think that this is the kind of damage control that Mr. Stewart has been skillfully skewering for years.A version of this article appears in print on April 10, 2015, on Page A3 of the New York edition with the headline: For ‘Daily Show’ Successor, Another Dust-Up.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.