Season 5, Episode 3: “Super Powers”Aren’t you relieved to see the old Carrie back? And the old Quinn, and the rekindling of their romance, as they reunite in the forest in an (admittedly one-sided) embrace around the neck, loving words from Quinn marking the moment before the screen goes black?Big sigh. Carrie and Quinn really give new meaning to the concept of codependency. She shoots him (unsuccessfully) with an assault rifle; he shoots her (successfully) with a hypodermic needle. Disobeying orders, most likely, in the process. Which means that now our two heroes are in a pretty pickle. But at least they’re back together, where they belong.Because really — Jonas the lawyer (Alexander Fehling) has got to go.  He looks great in his T-shirts, but beyond that, mad Carrie is right: He’s “boring, boring, boring.” There’s no way those two could have a future. Even Otto Düring (Sebastian Koch), patchy cheek stubble now denoting a dark sort of inner growth, seems a more likely candidate for a meaningful connection. Or would, were he not, like the curiously named Numan.We really saw the point of demarcation Sunday night between normal people like Jonas — or Carrie’s sister, Maggie, (Amy Hargreaves) or even poor, dead Aayan (Suraj Sharma) — and the sort who fill the C.I.A. and its international counterparts, friendly or otherwise. It appeared in the moment when Jonas learns that his son, Stefan, has been “arrested” — falsely, by Quinn — and Carrie (Claire Danes) quickly figures out that it’s a ruse to flush her boyfriend out of hiding and reveal their location to her would-be killers. “Stefan will be fine,” she says, explaining that he has likely been kidnapped. “He’s just a pawn.” But Jonas doesn’t find that comforting. Are you kidding me? he responds. “He’s my son!”In the world of Carrie, Quinn, Saul (Mandy Patinkin), Dar (F. Murray Abraham), and Allison (Miranda Otto), compartmentalization is the name of the game. People are moving pieces to be forever rearranged, even sacrificed sometimes, always in service to the larger good of the mission. For Jonas, there are no pawns, just as there’s no acceptable human level of collateral damage. You can’t be kidnapped, and be “fine.” There is no larger game.Speaking of compartmentalization: Allison and Saul? Did anybody see that coming? I most certainly did not. When that hairy arm reached out to stroke the pretty head which, notably, did not “explode” midday, because of some very mindful deep breathing, I half-expected it to belong to Quinn (Rupert Friend) who was, after all, made to look pretty darn seductive in his alleyway encounter with the German agent Astrid (Nina Hoss).“Who’s the guy?”/”A friend”/”Yeah right” — their bitterly resigned sexual banter is its own sort of poetry. Will there, at some point, be a woman-to-woman conversation between Astrid and Carrie about Quinn? (Note that Astrid, speaking to Quinn, refers to Carrie as “your girlfriend.”) Will we, at long last, pick up some biographical information to span his years between Harvard, his discovery of Dickens, German lessons, and his facility with a StingRay (a device that functions like a cell tower and can, particularly if handheld, indicate very precisely the location of a known cellphone)? I sure hope so.There’s a great deal more I’m itching to know now, too: What happened to Saul’s wife, Mira (Sarita Choudhury)? Last season, she was there for him as he emerged, full of shame, from captivity. Has she, like Carrie, deserted him? Or is he settling scores by cheating while she waits back home?What, in general, has happened to Saul in the couple of years since he came back to Washington and accepted Dar Adal’s devil’s bargain with his former captor, Haissam Haqqani? According to Carrie, he’s a changed man. “He wasn’t like that before,” she says, in response to Düring’s indictment: “He seems like a man too used to getting his way.” Surely, Saul is much colder now, and much more angry, than when we last met. What went wrong for him back at Langley? Was it the change in Saul that ultimately led Carrie to opt out? And where does Allison come in? When did she and Saul get together? And how together are they really? Did they dream up the whole knife-in-the-back scheme and play it out so loudly and well that it turned into their truth, à la Carrie’s mental ward “play” of Season 3? Or was it all real?But then, is anything real when you’re a spy?I am very curious to know if readers think that Carrie’s willed trajectory from dulled stability to manic hyperarousal looks and rings true. And to ask those who have experienced, witnessed or studied those altered states: Are the creative fruits of those periods of burgeoning mania generally as good as they seem in the moment? In real life, would Carrie truly be more insightful when unmedicated, or would she just feel that way?
Judith Warner, a contributing writer for The New York Times Magazine, is the author, most recently, of “We’ve Got Issues: Children and Parents in the Age of Medication.”