Season 1, Episode 10: “By the Pricking of My Thumbs”To say that a series built around a woman who is trapped between two eras and two men lives and breathes duality would be an understatement. But it seems to regard the duality of Jamie and Claire very differently from how it addresses it in every other character.While watching “By the Pricking of My Thumbs,” the 10th episode of the show’s first season, my mind kept returning to something a friend had said to me earlier in the week. She said, in essence, that caring to the extent of incapacitation isn’t that different from not caring at all. Some version of that applies here. Week after week, Jamie and Claire are driven to make rash decisions, fueled by raging passions and their shared interest in helping others without giving a moment’s thought to the potential ramifications of their actions. It’s wonderful that Jamie and Claire are such spirited and outgoing people, but at some point caring so much that you fail to consider how your choices may hurt yourself, or others, result in actions that are careless. In the midseason finale, Claire disobeyed Jamie’s orders and, as a result, was captured by the British, putting both herself and members of the MacKenzie clan in the line of fire. She was punished for those actions in last week’s episode and the reason Jamie gave was that she didn’t abide by his orders and, as a result, endangered many men. It more or less makes sense from his point of view, if corporal punishment is something you can support, but it does little to deter Claire’s future actions, as evidenced by the fact that Claire this week disobeys Jamie’s orders yet again and rushes to Geillis’ side when she receives an urgent message suggesting she’s needed.But Claire isn’t the only person who doesn’t think before acting. Jamie, too, finds himself knee-deep in unnecessary conflict because he can’t keep his mouth shut. After agreeing to be Duke Sandringham’s second in a duel involving the MacDonald clan, Jamie ends up spilling the blood of three separate brothers, all because he can’t take the implication that he may be sexually involved with Sandringham. In return, he suggests the brothers slept with their mother, and the fight escalates from there. Impulse and passion superseded the much harder choices of turning the other cheek and being mindful of what truly matters. Stranger still is the fact that Jamie isn’t punished for his actions, which potentially undermine the MacKenzie clan’s relationship with the MacDonalds. All the more egregious — Jamie isn’t even a member of clan MacKenzie. Yes, Jamie is sent away to babysit Dougal, who’s being actually punished for his illicit liaison with Geillis, but that’s hardly a sanction that matches the potential disaster his actions could potentially result in. Passion is a key component of what makes “Outlander” work, but passion for its own sake is empty, soon suggesting that it’s much more about ego than empathy. The show seems to prize these contradictions as ways to add depth and humanity to its often too-good-to-be true leads, while viewing similar contradictions as less endearing in others.Take Dougal, for example. Distraught to the point of being inconsolable at the sudden death of his wife (despite the fact that she may well have been mystically murdered by his mistress), Dougal is so bereft that it takes the potions of Claire and wits of Murtaugh to medically subdue him. However, only days later, that same man is bursting with love for Geillis and anticipates the chance to be with her and raise their child. It seems almost sinister that a man would be able to turn on a dime and devote himself wholly to someone else in the wake of such a personal tragedy, but hasn’t “Outlander” urged us time and again to embrace the idea of purely loving two different people simultaneously? If one sympathizes with the plight of Claire and aches for the thought of her poor heart bisected between two men, shouldn’t that same concession be afforded to Dougal?The other place the series seems to struggle with duality is in its portrayal of homosexuality. As I mentioned last week, there is a burden on adaptations that forces them to make the best of bad situations, and this is an area where the series must do just that. This week, we finally meet Duke Sandringham, a man whose sexuality serves as an open secret to all. But it’s not just that Sandringham is interested in men but, as Jamie’s story implies, he seems to have a decided taste for younger men, likely younger than generally deemed acceptable. This means that the only homosexual that exists in the show’s universe makes untoward advances to young men and tries to take advantage of his powerful position. That said, Sandringham’s not actually the first suggestion of homoerotic interests the show has seen, though the other example may have been easily overlooked. Upon arriving to rescue Claire from the clutches of Captain Randall, Jamie was met with a torrent of unsavory commentary from Randall, including some curiously pointed statements offering Jamie the opportunity to partake in the proceedings, followed by the observation that he never understood why someone would take a wife. Perhaps these were just words said to enflame an already volatile situation, but if they do serve as more than just surface insults, it implies that Randall has a second hidden face, one that entails an even wider scope of sexual interest than just his sadism. This would mean that of the two characters presenting as not purely heterosexual, one is a lecherous old fart and the other is a complete sadist.Unfortunately for the Starz series, these are problems that are inherent to the text and, perhaps, to the burden of societal change. Clearly, homosexuality in Scotland in 1743 was regarded as profoundly different than it is today, even as the jeers and jokes and punchlines speculating on a man’s sexuality aren’t so different from those one might expect to find in a typical modern day locker room. But where the series is handicapped the most may be in how homosexuality was regarded when the novel “Outlander” was written in 1991, a full three years before the American Medical Association finally stopped viewing homosexuality as an illness. As a novel, “Outlander” is very much of its time, and the series seems to be having some trouble fully extricating itself from the politics of the early ‘90s.The duality that stands as the bedrock for “Outlander” is what makes it brilliant and complicated, far from the shallow romance it could easily devolve into, but the key to the show becoming a lasting success centers around whether or not they embrace the complexity of the concept for all characters equally. Jamie and Claire will always be nuanced characters, let’s see what happens if everyone else is allowed to do the same.Other Gossip• Thanks to a fortuitous memory, Claire recalls that Duke Sandringham is a secret Jacobite and uses that bit of information to attempt to blackmail him into accepting Jamie’s petition of complaint against Captain Randall. It works, though time will tell if it’s enough to clear Jamie’s name. • Colum is incensed at Dougal and sends him away, ordering him to stay away from Geillis and disallowing him from claiming paternity of her child. Jamie is sent to accompany him and Claire is left at the castle.• Claire confronts Laoghaire over the ill wish she left in her room and the two argue, eventually escalating to a point where Claire strikes the girl. She delivers the most lackluster apology of all time and is unsurprised to realize, upon being arrested for witchcraft alongside Geillis Duncan, that she had been set up by the young woman.Note: Be kind to those who haven’t read the books. Comments that unnecessarily reveal future plot points will not be approved.