INDIO, Calif.— I looked it up:  AC/DC was not the oldest headliner in the history of Coachella. It was Roger Waters in 2008.  (I remember that: The year of the flying pig.)  Roger Waters is now 71. The oldest member of AC/DC now is the new drummer, Chris Slade, who is 68; the second oldest is the singer Brian Johnson, who is 67. But as I recall, Roger Waters was singing about grand psychodramas and political nightmares, with complicated video backdrops and serious visual totems — kind of hepped-up, interdisciplinary, undergraduate stuff.  AC/DC, Thursday night, represented the virtue of low-innovation, high-consistency specialization, like a restaurant that keeps its clientele for a hundred years by only making one sandwich. “I hope you guys like rock ‘n’ roll,” Mr. Johnson said to the crowd. “Because it’s all we do.”  There is something a little strange about having this band headline this festival, because it is from a distance so un-teacherly and unglamorous, not a part of the conversation about the evolution of cultural anything.  But at some point when you are attending a festival like this, the poses and arguments and personas of the dozens of different acts you see start to wobble and dissolve, and you start thinking on a more basic level about sound.  You can file through what you heard Thursday on that basis. Azealia Banks: Her high voice started to clash against the instruments in her band and some of her excellent words got lost. Flying Lotus: Meticulously composed post-hip-hop, rendered through his laptop, with lots of breadth and not quite enough depth; given the system, the dimensions of the tent, or whatever, you could not listen as deeply as you wanted. Todd Terje: A slow-growing, additive set of disco and Europop sounds, thoughtful but kind of thin. DJ Snake: A totally assaulting bass-end, a strategy of build-explode-repeat, excite and expel, that never quite let you climb into the song and stay there.But AC/DC: You could listen into that sound, gauge its depth entirely, hear the epidermal stickiness of Angus Young’s picking fingers on his guitar in giant proportions, feel the sturdy, slower-than-they-have-to-be tempos as if they were your resting pulse.  You could get the whole thing in clear detail — no wasted notes, no overspill, every bit of the music embodied and present and clear such that you could catch and process every note and detail and know, really know, what was going on in the music.  This kind of unanxious, knowing-one’s-tools performance can be a function of age and experience; Steely Dan had some of it going on last night in its set, as did Raekwon and Ghostface Killah.  But AC/DC represented the power of boiling down and delimiting better than any of them.  It went over well on the field.  My own perceived disjunction between the band and the spirit of the festival vanished after about four minutes, during “Shot Down In Flames,” about the time I realized that this deeply self-knowing sound would not get any worse or any better over the course of the set: It would stay at precisely the same level. 