AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn Shattuck8 P.M. (HBO) X-MEN: DAYS OF FUTURE PAST (2014) This franchise’s latest entry finds Professor X (played as an older man by Patrick Stewart) and Magneto (Ian McKellan) besieged by the Sentinels, human-designed robots who travel in coffin-shaped airships and are able to neutralize the mutants’ genetic advantages. Enter Wolverine (Hugh Jackman) and Kitty Pryde (Ellen Page), who are sent back to the 1970s, when the Paris peace talks are ending the Vietnam War, to prevent the things from being invented. But first they’ll have to rouse Charles Xavier (James McAvoy), the future Professor X, from a drug-addled stupor; spring Erik Lehnsherr (Michael Fassbender), the future Magneto, from prison, where he’s been languishing since being blamed for the Kennedy assassination; and track down the angry bright-blue, shape-shifting Mystique (Jennifer Lawrence), also known as Raven. “The logic of the story — a time-travel pretzel that strains after the brain-teasing power of an old ‘Star Trek’ episode — requires too many variables” — and too much thought from the audience, A. O. Scott wrote in The New York Times. But “the actors tackle the roles without winking or condescension, and it is nice to see them together again, however distracting the circumstances. They will, of course, return, since in the superhero world, as in the real one, some problems can never really be solved, only put to rest in between episodes.”8 P.M. (TCM) THE ESSENTIALS: STARTING OVER Robert Osborne and Sally Field explain why Martin Scorsese’s “Alice Doesn’t Live Here Anymore” (1975) — starring Ellen Burstyn in an Oscar-winning performance as Alice Hyatt, who sets off from New Mexico to California with her 12-year-old son (Alfred Lutter) to pursue her passion after her husband’s sudden death — is required viewing. Among the reasons: Harvey Keitel as the small-town sadist who traps Alice for a while; Kris Kristofferson as the rancher who finally wins her; and Diane Ladd and Valerie Curtin as the waitresses in a diner where she works. “Their marvelous contributions in small roles are a measure of the film’s quality and of Mr. Scorsese’s fully realized talents as one of the best of the new American filmmakers,” Vincent Canby wrote in The Times. Francis Ford Coppola’s “The Rain People” (1969), starring Shirley Knight as a pregnant housewife who deserts her husband and takes up with a brain-damaged football player (James Caan), follows at 10:15.9 P.M. (CUNY) KILLER OF SHEEP (1978) City Cinematheque’s tribute to the 25th anniversary of Milestone Films continues with this series of interludes, directed by Charles Burnett, about a slaughterhouse worker whose bloody occupation wreaks havoc on his emotions and those of his family. Shot in the Watts section of Los Angeles in the early 1970s by Mr. Burnett as an M.F.A. thesis project, the film was never meant for commercial release. “He operated the 16-millimeter camera himself, edited the black-and-white images into a visual poem and added the ballads, the jazz and the moody blues that seep into your head like smoke,” Manohla Dargis wrote in The Times in 2007, seven years after the film was restored to shimmering black and white and blown up to 35 millimeter by Milestone. The result, she added, “is an American masterpiece, independent to the bone.”9:30 P.M. (Reelz) POLKA KINGS The Cleveland-based Chardon Polka Band tries to go mainstream by mixing traditional music with works by Justin Bieber and Lady Gaga at Ukrainian summer camps, Oktoberfests and even National Football League games.10 P.M. (Discovery Life) NEW GIRLS ON THE BLOCK This five-part series follows a group of transgender women in Kansas City, Mo., as they navigate everyday life with the support of Caroline Gibbs, the founder and director of the Transgender Institute. The participants include Robyn and Andrew, who have gone from best friends to lovers; Macy, who decided to transition five years into her marriage to Sharon; and the best friends Kassidy and Chloe, both of whom are searching for romance.11:30 P.M. (NBC) SATURDAY NIGHT LIVE Taraji P. Henson brings shades of Cookie, her “Empire” matriarch, to the stage in her hosting debut; Mumford & Sons are the musical guests.What’s Streaming NowSTAR WARS SAGA All six “Star Wars” films — “The Phantom Menace,” “Attack of the Clones,” “Revenge of the Sith,” “A New Hope,” “The Empire Strikes Back” and “Return of the Jedi” — are available for streaming. (amazon.com)Advertisement