INDIO, Calif. — Notes from a hip-hop afternoon on the first day of Coachella, a concentrated dose of it in an edition of the festival which otherwise doesn’t have much of it. In reverse order:Raekwon and Ghostface Killah of the Wu Tang Clan, tag -teaming again, two heavy-set men in baseball caps shaking their heads at the ground, telling noirish, baleful stories of crime and bad conscience. The weight of tension and sorrow in their music suited them 20 years ago and suits them now. They haven’t changed a bit, and that’s something when you see it from the context of this festival audience, which is deeply invested in repackaging, upgrading and glamor.Azealia Banks, with a backing band, punctuating a series of dance-diva tracks with hard, on-the-beat, sardonic rapping about identity and ambition, sometimes through an orange megaphone pointed at the sky. Everything about her was alert, competitive, almost militant, and she had a hard uphill battle against the main-stage crowd, who seemed to want to reduce her to entertainment for a sunny day.Lil B, with a messy and familiar patter of self-love and positivity pushed to surreal dimensions, interrupting his own show to exult — in the moment, in the music, in himself. The breaks from his set were as good as the primary content: he sang along to a recording of the Psychedelic Furs’ “Imitation of Christ” and at another point did the same with one of his own songs, cued by his DJ — not one that he meant to perform, just one he meant to listen to and publicly admire.Action Bronson, the Queens rapper, also turning a set’s negative space into a virtue. He performed on the main stage — the notion of him as close to the rap mainstream would have been hard to predict three years ago, given his rap classicism and verbal absurdism — and he took a few leisurely, barreling walks down along the front of the crowd, interacting with it as much as possible without actually crossing the barrier and diving into it. “Why you think I’m out here actin’ crazy?,” he rapped. “Opportunity be knockin’!”