By GIA KOURLASAPRIL 10, 2015
Artists change. The Katie Workum behind the whimsical “DanceOff!” cabaret series, which she organized along with Terry Dean Bartlett for several years starting in the early 2000s, seems to have little to do with the Katie Workum of today. In recent years, she’s distanced herself from that good-time vibe to present works that place female dancers in slippery, dreamlike settings where movement relates to deep sensations.She takes that evanescent quality further in her latest work, “Black Lakes,” presented at Danspace Project on Thursday night. At the start, Ms. Workum walks resolutely and briskly to center stage before standing quietly with her eyes closed. A heavy exhale sends shudders from her shoulders to her belly; she shifts from side to side in profile. It’s almost as if she’s an artist’s model, yet her body, with minuscule jolts or waves of motion, refuses to succumb to stillness. Instead of mind over matter, the body is in charge.Ms. Workum bases her choreography on the improvisational practice known as authentic movement, in which the mind and the body work in tandem — slippery as it sounds — to delve into deep states of kinesthetic awareness. Try this out: close your eyes and witness the impulsive movements of your body.In “Black Lakes,” set to a spare score by James Lo featuring crackling sounds, bits of conversations and bells, Ms. Workum and her two dancers, Eleanor Smith and Weena Pauly, close their eyes frequently. Ms. Workum writes in a program note, “My choreography is no longer me giving you ideas that I have told my dancers to do, striving to present a perfect hour of dance.”But no hour of dance is ever perfect, and “Black Lakes,” which changes each night, rarely rises above its improvisation-practice roots. The dancers possess considerable virtues — from Ms. Workum’s cool power to Ms. Smith’s feline grace and Ms. Pauly’s plush openness — yet as they tangle their bodies together, scurry across the floor in off-kilter hops or press their heads together while circling the stage, their movement phrases read like exercises.Later performances might be different; the one I saw felt like an exploration of the mundane, which, however purposeful, didn’t reveal an authentic-movement experience as real or as roughly hewn as the practice itself. “Black Lakes” creates an impression of a feeling; for all its intimacy it’s like watching a dance behind glass.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.