AdvertisementSupported byBy Brian SeibertThere was talk of history and of homecoming at City Center on Wednesday, as Dance Theater of Harlem returned to a site of its glory days, some decades ago. Virginia Johnson, who was the company’s star ballerina back then and who has served as its artistic director in the two years since it restarted after a long debt-caused hiatus, reminisced some but directed attention to the present group and to works on the program that were new or new to the company. The august Carmen de Lavallade, appearing in a tribute to her husband, Geoffrey Holder, a legend from the troupe’s past who died in October, encouraged the audience to embrace the new generation of dancers. “It’s their turn,” she said.One of the new pieces was titled “Coming Together.” That’s a phrase I would like to apply to the company as it struggles to rebuild and redefine itself, but “holding together” seems more apt. As in its last two New York seasons, the troupe is still visibly getting its footing, brilliant here, wobbly there. Problems of technique and repertory show neither deterioration nor much progress. The dancers earned the ovations of a supportive crowd through grit and pluck. As before, the more classical the piece, the more weakness it exposed. Samuel Wilson and Ashley Murphy attempted “Tchaikovsky Pas de Deux,” a challenging traditional showpiece that George Balanchine choreographed for his own company on this stage in 1960. They made it through, but barely, with Ms. Murphy’s charm and fire hidden behind a fixed smile of effort. Only the final overhead lift had a sense of release, a triumphant note of “We made it!” Also as before, the company appeared freer and happier in contemporary works. In “Dancing on the Front Porch of Heaven,” which Ulysses Dove created for the Royal Swedish Ballet in 1993, the dancers fiercely attacked the overheated phrases, not giving up even as the work’s repetitions palled. They took the same approach to the company premiere of Nacho Duato’s “Coming Together,” a go-go-go dance that runs to the repetitions of Frederic Rzewski’s score while appending eccentricities like a soccer ball and a plate. “Vessels,” which Darrell Grand Moultrie made for this troupe last year, also opts for the insistent drive of a minimalist score (this one by Ezio Bosso). This dance, too, is composed of effects, some of them striking, that don’t quite add up. The evening’s unevenness derived from the choreography as much as from its execution. All of the dancers had bright moments, though Chyrstyn Fentroy was the most consistent: supple, buoyant, with an elegance of line recalling Ms. Johnson in her prime. As the company rushes forward, Ms. Fentroy was a reminder of qualities it should not leave behind. Dance Theater of Harlem continues through Saturday at City Center, 131 West 55th Street, Manhattan; 212-581-1212, nycitycenter.org.Advertisement