AdvertisementSupported byBy Elise Czajkowski“Of course it’s a gimmick!” Adrienne Truscott said emphatically. “It’s also a really relevant, loaded, successful gimmick.”The performance artist was talking about her stand-up show, “Adrienne Truscott’s Asking for It,” which dives deep into the world of rape jokes and the controversies they incite, and about why she performs naked from the waist down.The show, which plays on Saturday and on April 18 at Joe’s Pub at the Public Theater, was already in the development phase when the comedian Daniel Tosh flippantly responded to a heckler at a show who disliked his jokes about rape. His comment — “Wouldn’t it be funny if that girl got raped by, like, five guys right now?” — set off a firestorm in the comedy scene about whether rape was an appropriate stand-up topic or whether this was a line that shouldn’t be crossed.In the hourlong show and in conversation, Ms. Truscott comes down firmly against any sort of censorship: she’s not trying to stifle comedians’ freedom of speech, she said in an interview at a bar in Midtown. Instead, she is reappropriating the rape joke as a feminist tool, challenging entrenched cultural attitudes surrounding rape and parts of the stand-up scene that have failed to move beyond a misogynistic past. The punch lines of her jokes are never the victims themselves. Instead she is aiming at the targets like the onstage antics of Mr. Tosh and the sexual assault accusations leveled against Bill Cosby, as well as politicians like Todd Akin, who made an infamous comment about “legitimate rape.” In character as a ditsy, boozy stand-up in a bright blond wig, a cropped denim jacket, teetering high heels and nothing else, she wanders into the audience while swigging cans of beer. The idea is to confront the old notion that a woman who drinks too much or dresses too provocatively is bringing sexual assault on herself: If that were the case, she is saying, shouldn’t she be raped every time she performs the show?“The fact that I’m not ‘naked naked’ is also relevant,” she said. “And I would never have done this show naked. Then, there are layers of art history, of the nude, the naked women. But I wear a jacket and shoes, which is the dumbest outfit ever. It’s also the most explicitly asking-for-it outfit ever.”After more than a decade as part of the vaudeville duo the Wau Wau Sisters, Ms. Truscott made her stand-up debut with the show, a quick leap considering that comics generally work for years before trying a full 60 minutes. She took “Asking for It” (which includes a longer, not family-friendly subtitle) to the Edinburgh Festival Fringe in 2013 and hit a nerve, winning multiple awards and earning rave reviews. “It’s so exhilarating to see the ugliness of rape discourse taken on, and bested, not with humorlessness or censoriousness, but with firecracker wit, sophistication and luminous humanity,” The Guardian raved when the show transferred to London last year.She continued performing it in Britain and Australia, though she says she never anticipated that she would still be doing it 18 months after its debut. “To my delight and horror, it remains relevant,” she said.And she knows how strongly even the word rape affects people, which can make it difficult for them to consider the artistic value of her work. “In the moment, because the combination of comedy and rape is so startling, they can’t imagine anything except the worst,” she said.But, she added, she didn’t fully expect the conversations the show would prompt. She finds herself constantly talking with audience members “who still are offended by my material because they’re triggered, and then I find myself, in some ways, ironically in the same position that Daniel Tosh was in when he made a joke,” she said. “But I’ve come at it from a very different angle, with a different intent.”Shanta Thake, the director of Joe’s Pub, said she was drawn to performers like Ms. Truscott who have a transgressive side and “are able to open up new conversations and be funny in a way that’s really uncomfortable.”“Asking for It” played at Joe’s Pub once before, in 2013, when Ms. Truscott and Ms. Thake first discussed the possible incongruity of serving dinner during the performance, which they ultimately decided they could make work.“She was like, ‘Eh whatever, it’s fine,’ ” Ms. Thake said. “ ‘People can eat their calamari while I talk about rape.’ ”Advertisement