Bob Costas will write his autobiography for HarperCollins, drawing on a career that has included hosting the Olympics in prime time 10 times; calling baseball, basketball and football games; delivering commentaries at halftime during N.F.L. games and during the Olympics, and interviewing personalities as diverse as Martin Scorsese and Jerry Sandusky, a former Penn State assistant football coach who was convicted of sexually abusing young boys.“As you look at it, and you’re much closer to the end of the most prominent portion of my career than at the beginning, then a memoir makes sense,” Mr. Costas said in an interview Saturday. “It just seemed to me like a good time to do it and I’d have more to say.” The book is expected to be published in 2017 and will be written with Mike Lupica, a sports columnist at The Daily News and an author of young adult novels. “Mike has a very distinctive voice and it’s a voice I like, but if it sounds more like him than me, we haven’t accomplished what I wanted and he knows that,” Mr. Costas said. “At the same time, you want some of the wit and bite and ability that he will bring to it.”Al Michaels, who works at NBC Sports with Mr. Costas, last year wrote a best-selling autobiography, “You Can’t Make This Up.” But Mr. Costas said that he was not motivated by Mr. Michaels’s success and did not talk to him before deciding to write his memoir. “I read the book,” he said. “I liked it and thought Al accomplished exactly what he set out to do.”Mr. Costas — who also works for MLB Network and formerly worked at HBO — had signed with Broadway Books to write his autobiography in 1997. But he backed away, believing it was too early to look back on his life and career. Instead, he wrote about the state of baseball in “Fair Ball: A Fan’s Case for Baseball,” for a smaller advance.The memoir will let Mr. Costas reflect on a childhood where his father, a serious gambler, helped nurture his love of sports, as well as early jobs calling hockey for $30 a game in the old Eastern Hockey League, which was the backdrop for the comedy film “Slap Shot,” and basketball for the Spirits of St. Louis, a rambunctious team in the American Basketball Association that introduced the 3-point line and a red, white and blue ball.“I’d been to the circus by the time I was in my mid-20s,” he said. “And I had a ringside seat to events that haven’t been fully told.”David Hirshey, the senior vice president and executive editor of HarperCollins, said that several years ago he gauged Mr. Costas’s interest in writing a book about how the Internet has changed the media landscape — a subject Mr. Costas speaks frequently about.But Mr. Costas said he was not ready. “Then, a couple of months ago,” Mr. Hirshey said, “I heard he had teamed up with Mike Lupica, whom I’ve known for 30 years, and I just knew this was a book I had to publish.”A version of this article appears in print on 10/19/2015, on page C3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Bob Costas Plans an Autobiography.