AdvertisementSupported byBy Rachel DonadioMOSCOW — In February, Odin Biron, an American actor who plays a naïve American son of two gay fathers in the hugely popular Russian medical sitcom “Interns,” took a calculated risk. He disclosed that he was gay.At first, there were a few tense weeks. His colleagues were shocked. His agent advised him not to talk to the tabloid media. On the show’s fan pages, some viewers wrote of their disgust or cried conspiracy theory. Mr. Biron said he was advised not to take the metro.“That first week was very weird,” Mr. Biron said recently in an interview in a cafe here. “There was a sense of physical danger, political danger.” Shaken, he left the country until things calmed down. Then he came back.Mr. Biron’s coming out took guts. That an actor is gay is hardly news, even in Russia. But what is rare is that he went public. In recent years, the nation’s ingrained “don’t ask, don’t tell” culture has run up against a 2013 law that criminalizes so-called gay “propaganda,” and another law against offending the sensibilities of religious believers. One of Mr. Biron’s co-stars on “Interns” — Ivan Okhlobystin, a former Russian Orthodox priest who said last year that gay people should be burned alive in ovens — called Mr. Biron “a sodomite.” He also said that Mr. Biron was crazy to come out and cause an unnecessary scandal for the show.But Mr. Biron, a fresh-faced 30-year-old from Duluth, Minn., who peppers his speech with exclamations of “gosh” and “my goodness,” said he knew exactly what he was doing. “I wanted to utilize my position, the stardom capital, the fame capital that I’d built up here — I wanted to use that for good,” he said.“Especially since Vanya had made those comments,” he added of Mr. Okhlobystin. “I wanted to balance that out some way.”The effects of Mr. Biron’s coming out, in an interview with New York magazine, are still playing out. For now, his announcement doesn’t seem to have ended his career in Russia — although he said he made his disclosure already prepared to leave the country later this spring. His talent agency says he has gotten new work offers in Russia. He says people still stop him on the street to pose for photos. He is back on the set shooting the next season of “Interns.”“Everyone’s been incredibly positive,” Mr. Biron said. “Work supported me immediately.”“It’s a really awesome way for things to work out,” he added.Since the show made its debut in 2010, Mr. Biron has played Phil Richards, a likable American medical intern. The twist of having two gay fathers, who are only alluded to, makes Mr. Biron complicit in both mocking and shoring up Russian stereotypes about the West as a decadent, gay-friendly place — a theme of the push toward family and religious values under President Vladimir V. Putin in recent years.In real life, Mr. Biron — who bears a passing resemblance to another American in Russia, Edward J. Snowden — lives in Moscow with his boyfriend, a Kazakh film director. He first arrived as an undergraduate on an exchange program with the Moscow Art Theater School, the home of the Stanislavsky method of acting, eventually graduatingfrom its intensive degree program.“He joined us without knowing a word of Russian, and in a year and a half he was already playing Hamlet in Russian,” said Konstantin Raikin, a theater director and a former teacher of Mr. Biron’s. Mr. Raikin said he knew Mr. Biron was gay and wasn’t surprised by his coming out. “The most important thing to me is that he’s a good person and a great actor,” he said.Still, “I think he underestimated this issue in Russia,” Mr. Raikin added. “If he had known what the attitude toward it in Russia was, he might have been more careful.”Outside Russia, some advocates of equal rights for gay people regard him as a hero, but in Russia, the reactions to Mr. Biron’s coming out seem to have ranged from indifference to some tabloid interest. Word traveled quickly on news websites and via social media, but television news stations barely blinked. It’s hard to know whether that’s because they weren’t interested or because his talent agent had advised him against appearances that might hurt his career.In Russia, “you have to be responsible with every word,” said Elena Filippova, a spokeswoman for the Sevensense talent agency, which represents him. “One wrong word can harm your career in the future.”The producers of “Interns,” which on average draws 3.7 million viewers per episode and is one of the biggest hits on Gazprom Media, a subsidiary of the energy giant and the country’s largest media conglomerate, do not seem eager to call attention to Mr. Biron.Vycheslav Dusmuhametov, one producer, said through a spokeswoman that the show had no concerns about ratings related to Mr. Biron’s coming out.But it is clear that Mr. Biron’s disclosure has caused tension on the set. The dynamic with Mr. Okhlobystin is a Dostoyevskian drama in its own right — a clash of two men with deeply held, irreconcilable beliefs. After Mr. Biron came out, Mr. Okhlobystin, who plays the interns’ boss, Bykov, wrote in a tweet: “Bykov will never know that Phil is a pervert. But Okhlobystin, when he learned that his friend Odin is a sodomite, bashed his head against the wall and cursed fate.”In a phone interview last week, Mr. Okhlobystin said he was still in shock. “He wasn’t discussed or judged, but everyone was wondering, ‘Why? Why now?’ ” Mr. Okhlobystin said. “This scandal is embarrassing. It would be better if it never happened.”He said he could no longer remain friends with Mr. Biron. “Of course not,” he said.“It put us in an idiotic position,” he continued. “A sodomite is working near us, and then he confesses that. It would be better for us not to know.” He added that as professionals, they would finish shooting the rest of the season.Still, Mr. Okhlobystin had some praise for Mr. Biron. “He’s a beautiful person, he’s a talented person, he knows Russian really well,” he said. He said his comments last year that gays should burn in ovens had been overblown, but that he stood by them. “As an Orthodox Christian, I have to hold a certain opinion about gays,” he said. “For us they’re not people, homo sapiens, they’re like aliens.” But he said he also believed that “we hate the sin, not the sinner.”“Odin is absolutely safe, and his life will be comfortable, please don’t worry,” Mr. Okhlobystin added.For his part, Mr. Biron called Mr. Okhlobystin “a performance artist” who likes pushing buttons and whose words shouldn’t be taken at face value. “I’d definitely say we’re very good working mates,” Mr. Biron said. “I don’t think we’re talking about endeared friendship here. I don’t think that’s possible.”Ilya Glinnikov, another “Interns” co-star, said he knew that Mr. Biron was gay but was surprised by his coming out, and did not believe that his colleague needed to call attention to his sexuality. “I don’t understand why he did it now,” he said.On an “Interns” fan page with nearly 700,000 members on Vkontakte, the Russian Facebook, reactions were split. “I respect his courage,” wrote one fan, Darina Streltsova. Others disagreed. “I personally feel disgusted by the fact that he’s gay, but I don’t have to live with him, and at the same time I enjoy watching Phil!” Kristina Misurina wrote.There’s a general sense that Mr. Biron has more freedom because he is American. “There are barely any openly gay or lesbian Russian public figures, partly because for them it can have further negative consequences in their careers,” said Igor Kochetkov, a council member of Russia’s Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender Network.In fact, Russians who have come out have not fared as well as Mr. Biron. In 2013, Oleg Dusaev, a musician and cultural journalist, came out, outraged over news that the children’s hospital where he volunteered would no longer accept blood donations from homosexuals. He lost his job and left the country after he disclosed his sexual orientation.In a Skype interview, Mr. Dusaev said he admired Mr. Biron’s courage. “When a popular actor talks about his being gay, I think it’s very important for teenagers who love him,” Mr. Dusaev said.In addition to “Interns,” Mr. Biron is starring in a sold-out production of Gogol’s “Dead Souls” at the Gogol Center, a well-regarded avant-garde theater. Kirill Serebrennikov, who directed the play and directs the theater, said that Mr. Biron’s coming out was not a major event. “In our theater, no one cared. Everyone gave him a hug and a kiss,” he said.Advertisement