AdvertisementSupported byCritic's NotebookBy Neil GenzlingerPoor, embattled Selina Meyer has finally hit the jackpot. She’s returning to television on the very weekend that a real-life politician is trying to become what she already is: the first woman to be president of the United States. You can’t buy that kind of publicity.Selina, played by Julia Louis-Dreyfus, is the title character of the acclaimed HBO comedy “Veep,” which begins Season 4 on Sunday night. She was vice president for the first three seasons, but as the new one begins, she has been elevated to the presidency by a resignation and is running for a full term. Talk about the stars aligning. On Friday morning, visitors to CNN.com who clicked on the headline “Hillary Clinton to announce 2016 bid Sunday with video” were greeted with a video advertisement for “Veep.”Another superbly caustic HBO comedy, “Silicon Valley,” also returns Sunday night in the half-hour just before “Veep,” and it, too, has to deal with the insistent intrusion of real life — not just the recent headlines about sexism in Silicon Valley, but the death of one of its stars, Christopher Evan Welch, who played an angel investor. How these shows handle their own timeliness will make for an interesting spectacle as the new seasons roll along. So much temptation in a medium where restraint is sometimes in short supply.“Veep” built its success (which includes three Emmys for Ms. Louis-Dreyfus) on bumbling. Selina, with the help of her staff of misfits, has done what vice presidents do: bungle one thing after another, to great comic effect. Now that she’s (at least temporarily) president, though, the show has set itself a higher bar. We believed Vice President Meyer as a character because we’ve been conditioned by centuries of actual politics to view vice presidents, even the competent ones, as jokes. But the presidency is another matter entirely.We expect gaffes from the Oval Office too, but more serious ones, with more at stake. The new season of “Veep” seems to realize this. It mixes the usual idiocy — there’s a mess involving the removal of an ugly painting from the White House, for instance — with serious incompetence, like illegally gaining access to a child’s medical records. That plot line may or may not be a comment on real-life privacy concerns, but it’s representative of how “Veep” needs to proceed. It will do best if it stays oblique, rather than indulge in straight-on satirizing of actual events. We don’t want this show turning into “The Newsroom.”“Silicon Valley” has its own brand of bumblers, and its own topicality issues. It’s the tale of a start-up called Pied Piper and the misfit men running it, who try to navigate the cutthroat big-money digital world as their revolutionary data-compression technology attracts attention.The show’s first season was simply great, brutally dissecting the pretension and absurdity of Silicon Valley’s culture and business practices. The core cast members meshed beautifully, led by Thomas Middleditch as Richard, the main brain, and T. J. Miller as Erlich, the cocky overseer of the house that is Pied Piper’s headquarters.In Season 1, two rival gurus with unlimited fiscal resources were courting Pied Piper: Gavin Belson, played by Matt Ross, and Peter Gregory, played by Mr. Welch. Midway through the filming of that season, Mr. Welch died of cancer.The show finished that season by turning Mr. Welch’s character into someone who was referred to from time to time but not seen. The Season 2 premiere, though, deals with the loss more directly — too directly, really. It’s uncomfortable and goes on too long, sabotaging the momentum the show had coming off of Season 1.Subsequent episodes find things back on track, though, with a new possible savior for Pied Piper materializing, played by Chris Diamantopoulos. It is his character who gets to explain the Silicon Valley rabbit hole after Richard naïvely expresses interest in having Pied Piper turn a profit.“It’s not about how much you earn,” he says. “It’s about what you’re worth. And who’s worth the most? Companies that lose money.”The show continues to exploit the average viewer’s ignorance about technology, having characters spew out mumbo-jumbo that may mean something or may just be the writers having a laugh. Same with the factoids, as when Gavin explains what he sees as a coming “data-geddon.”“Data creation is exploding, with all the selfies and useless files people refuse to delete on the cloud,” he says. “Ninety-two percent of the world’s data was created in the last two years alone. At the current rate, the world data-storage capacity will be overtaken by next spring. There will be nothing short of a catastrophe — data shortages, data rationing, data black markets.”Is any of that true? Who knows? That’s part of the fun.One subject “Silicon Valley” has not taken up directly but has been much in the  news is sexism in the high-tech world. The series has preferred to skewer its targets, including that one, indirectly, never more spectacularly than in the Season 1 finale, where an absurd debate among the Pied Piper guys involving penises led Richard to a breakthrough that saved the company.There are a few women in this show, including a new one, played by Suzanne Cryer, who settles into Peter Gregory’s chair. But so far the writers have resisted moralizing about the malecentric world their characters inhabit, preferring to let it speak for itself.That’s a good instinct. Nothing kills comedy faster than pontification. Just ask the first female president. The fake one, not the possible real one.Advertisement