Season 4, Episode 1: “Joint Session”Welcome to our first “Veep” recap (Veepcap?). This fourth season opens with Selina Meyer newly promoted to president after Season 3 ended with a twist, when her boss stepped down to care for his sick wife.I cover Congress for The New York Times, and this episode’s opening scene, which showed Selina, clad in a power-red dress, entering the House chamber to address a joint session of Congress, was a moment straight out of my day job. The only thing missing was Representative Eliot Engel, Democrat of New York, arriving early to stake out a prime seat in the room.Trouble begins early for the first female president. (A great coincidence that this season aired on the same day that Hillary Clinton announced she was running for president.) Just moments after opening with “I’d like to begin today,” Selina’s teleprompter dies, leaving a lone deranged emoticon (/:) blinking where her speech should be.In fact the very same mishap (sans emoticon) befell President Bill Clinton in 1993, when he addressed a joint session of Congress in an attempt to sell his health care plan. But Mr. Clinton, a natural politician, simply delivered his speech for the first nine minutes without any help — and no one could tell he was speaking blind.Selina is less … masterful. In one of the funniest sequences of the episode, after her vision for the nation’s future is simply shortened on the teleprompter to “future whatever,” Selina begins to ad-lib, to the horror of her aides, who are alternating between watching backstage and frantically trying to load a correct version of her speech into the prompter.“She’s bebop speaking,” says Dan Egan. “I detest jazz, but this is impressive,” adds Kent Davison.Crisis established, the episode cuts back to 24-hours earlier, when Selina’s team is racing to assemble her first major address. “So we still don’t know what’s going in her speech to the joint session,” Dan says. “What do we do? Google it, like a best-man speech?”The episode works to convey the new pace and responsibilities of being president: From everyone standing whenever Selina enters the room to a schedule that suddenly involves handling every crisis, ever, with the potential for maybe a 15-minute break. “I can sleep and you can squeeze nutrient paste in my mouth,” Selena wryly observes to her mordant secretary, Sue Wilson.At one point, the president’s chief of staff, Ben Cafferty, enters the Oval Office to brief Selina on a United States warship that just collided with a Greek fishing boat. “We’re looking at a big fat Greek funeral,” he says, explaining she’ll have to put out a statement.“Yeah, because, I’m the president, see,” she fires back. “Everything’s my fault now.”Indeed she is (the president), and indeed it is (her fault). I can remember, in early 2009, talking to an aide to President Obama shortly after he was inaugurated. What’s the biggest difference, I asked, between the campaign trail and the White House?Now that he’s president, the aide replied, we actually own all of these crises.There are smaller adjustments as well. In Selina’s new world order, her faithful, devoted body man, Gary Walsh, also finds himself struggling to understand an arrangement where he lacks the necessary security clearance and can no longer hover by Selina’s side — where he is at his most comfortable and obsequious — or follow her into most meetings.And with the vice president promoted, there is, of course, a new veep. Selina, pulling the ladder up after her, is determined to cut her Number 2 out of the inner circle, and he ends up dispatching Jonah Ryan to spy, asking him to be his “West Wing wiretap.”The original conflict over Selina’s speech stems from a real-life challenge of governing: striking a balance between spending on programs you like while offsetting them with cuts elsewhere. Welcome to Washington’s perpetually unbalanced budget.“There has got to be a way to have the cuts and have the Families First bill,” Selina moans at one point. “What about the military? Would they go for more cuts, you think?”As many actual Republican hawks in Congress would tell her, no, the military will never go for more cuts. And so it goes in her fictional world as well.But in the frantic scramble to load the correct speech into the teleprompter, Selina ends up inadvertently promising to grow by $10 billion an outdated submarine program that, just hours earlier, she had hoped to cut to the tune of $50 billion.Back in her office, as the credits start to roll, Selina berates her staff, explaining just what went awry. “You were supposed to take the submarine cuts out, not spend an extra $10 billion on them,” she says. “Whole cities of children were going to be saved from poverty; instead, now that money is going to fund obsolete metal giant dildos.”
Moments earlier, Selina wailed, “This speech was supposed to perfectly define my presidency.”And in many ways it did, setting the tone not only for her presidency but also for Season 4 — which promises, like the ones that came before it, to be harried, scrambled and chaotic, but in a charmingly madcap way.