Season 2, Episode 1: “Sand Hill Shuffle”When we rejoin the boys of “Silicon Valley” they are at the top of the world. Pied Piper, the winner of a start-up contest at the end of last season and the company at the center of Mike Judge’s comedy of ill-manners about the tech industry, is coveted by every venture capitalist in the Valley.  But the bros who run Pied can’t seem to find any satisfaction in their good fortune. It turns out that in “Silicon Valley,” like in Silicon Valley, getting a lot of free money isn’t necessarily a certain path to success. Sometimes the money weighs you down, and often, counterintuitively, there’s more success in asking for less of it.The premiere begins with a deft solution to two key problems that had dogged the show’s production last season. The first was unexpected sorrow: Christopher Evan Welch, the actor who played the socially stilted investor Peter Gregory, the show’s funniest character so far, died during filming of the first season. The other problem was the way the show mimicked real life a bit too keenly. Last year many critics observed that “Silicon Valley,” like the real place it lampoons, was populated by too few women, and that the few who had made it into the show were shunted into side roles. The only female coder we met in the first season was a bubbly blonde who flirted with the Pied Piper engineers in exchange for help creating her cupcake start-up. Monica, played by Amanda Crew, is the only recurring female character. An assistant to Peter, Monica basically does all the work and gets none of the credit—which, according to evidence in the recent gender-discrimination lawsuit between Ellen Pao and the venture capital firm Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers, isn’t really far from the truth. Monica also acts  as the show’s relatable, well-functioning straight woman; in a comedy whose currency is social awkwardness, she gets no laughs.To address both the gender problem and the hole that Mr. Evan Welch’s death left in the cast, Mr. Judge and his collaborator, Alec Berg, now usher in a female venture capitalist to head Peter’s firm. Perhaps that was the expected move. What’s surprising, though, is how hilariously strange the new investor, Laurie Bream, played by Suzanne Cryer, turns out to be. To quote her lines here would not do them justice. Laurie says rather straightforward, unfunny things, but in a kind of robotic, staccato delivery that makes her sound as if she’s reading from a delayed teleprompter. Her character marks encouraging progress for the show; it suggests that in “Silicon Valley,” a woman can be every bit as comically weird as a man.“Silicon Valley” has always gotten a lot of mileage out of the grandiosity that pervades the tech industry, and that continues here. When Gavin Belson, the founder of the tech behemoth Hooli, wants to impress on his staff the importance of beating Pied Piper, he declares, “I don’t want to live in a world where someone else makes the world a better place, better than we do.” He also paints a dark future of world without software-based compression algorithms: “There will be nothing short of a catastrophe — data shortages, data rationing, data black markets,” or, more succinctly, “Datageddon!” These were some of the funniest lines in the episode — or, to be less charitable, they were some of the few very funny lines. If there’s one thing I worry about in this show, it’s the insistence on verisimilitude. Mr. Judge and Mr. Berg believe that the facts of Silicon Valley are often funnier than fiction, and they’ve striven to make the plotline as realistic as possible. They succeed in that — the mechanics of Pied Piper’s fund-raising efforts, and the episode’s tutorial on the paradoxical danger of a start-up raising too much money from venture capitalists, is ripped from the headlines of the tech press. But sometimes, in its zeal to be real, the show falls a bit flat on the comedy. The best episodes, last season, were those that indulged flights of absurdity — like the one where Jared, Pied Piper’s hapless business manager, gets trapped in a self-driving car that shuttles him out to a robot-run warehouse on an island. That wasn’t realistic, but it was pretty funny. Here’s hoping for more of that this season. 