Here be spoilers and golden shrouds.Season 5, Episode 1, “The Wars to Come”Well, we’ve had a great run, but it couldn’t go on forever: At some point, “Game of Thrones” hype had to give way to — or at least pause for — an actual “Game of Thrones” episode.So after many weeks of outsize anticipation, speculation and … uh, this (you can find some of our own contributions here and here), on Sunday night we all gathered around our screens of choice to watch the maesters Benioff and Weiss set up the Season 5 Risk board. It was a scene-setter episode that was more chatty than bloody, with a couple of exceptions. (So long, Mance Rayder, we hardly knew ye. See you, White Rat, we knew ye not at all.) But there was a palpable sense that this time the pieces are being arranged for what will be the story’s climactic clash for the Iron Throne. (Though when that comes, obviously, is anyone’s guess.)(Interview: Ciarán Hinds discusses Mance Rayder’s demise.)The fantasy epic on HBO.In the north we have Stannis Baratheon, burning folks and spitting out demands as if they were made of the rotten meat they used to serve him back in Dragonstone. In the east, Daenerys Targaryen is still bogged down in the hard work of quasi-democracy in the lands she has conquered, contending with  gold-masked sleeper cells in Meereen and human cockfighting in Yunkai.In Pentos, Tyrion Lannister and Varys — potentially the show’s best road-show duo yet — aim to cast in with the Dragon Queen (assuming she sorts out the whole insubordinate-dragon thing and gets to keep the name). Heading west out of the Vale, we find Sansa and Littlefinger off on some scroll-fueled mission that, Littlefinger being Littlefinger, figures to have some crucial bearing on all of the above.That towheaded cream puff in the middle just waiting to be devoured? That’s Tommen. All hail King Tommen! Anyone? Hello? Not since Kathy Geiss assumed command of G.E. has there been such an overmatched TV figurehead, with Margaery Tyrell’s tender ministrations being to Tommen what those sweet, sweet Hot Wheels were to Kathy.And it figures to cost him, if Cersei’s prophecy is to be believed. Season 5 opened on a rather curious note, with the series’s first flashback scene in its history. (The creators have resisted them thus far for financial and narrative reasons, though reportedly some have been shot but not used in the past.)In a long-ago Lannister wood, we see a goth witch predicting for Cersei the future that has largely come to pass. You will have three children, she said. (Your husband will have 20, but whatevs.) “Gold will be their crowns,” she said. “Gold their shrouds.”So that’s one down, two to go. (R.I.P. Joffrey.) The daughter Myrcella, you’ll recall, is off in Dorne in the care of the brother of the late Oberyn Martell, whose head met the wrong end of a Mountain last season. Trailers and reports suggest that Jaime will be going after Myrcella this season. Also in Dorne: a group of angry illegitimate Oberyn daughters called the Sand Snakes who hope to avenge their father’s death with Lannister blood. So good luck with all that, Jaime.As for Tommen, well, the poor fragile kid could go at any time. Whether he buys it at his wedding, per usual, or just chokes on a pigeon bone or catches a bad case of cat scratch fever from Ser Pounce or whatever. Anything is plausible — his delicate eyes seem destined for stones before long.Which is to say, for all the power and riches, it’s still not great to be a Lannister. Last season the golden clan ran out of Starks to kill and turned on one another, as Jaime and Cersei continued their do-si-do of mutual abuse; Tywin falsely condemned his son (Tyrion) for the murder of his grandson (Joffrey); and Tyrion ultimately sorted out his daddy issues with a crossbow in the can.Sunday’s episode found the family members, true to form, picking up the pieces and then flinging them at one another. Cersei and Jaime, the Sam and Diane of vile dysfunction, had yet another argument over yet another dead relative, this time their father. We have to stick together, Jaime said, because our enemies want to take everything from us (not wrong). Forget it, Cersei said, it’s your fault our father’s dead (also not wrong).Meanwhile, across the Narrow Sea, Tyrion began plotting with Varys to back Daenerys even as his own nephew sat on the throne. I knew I’d missed the good ol’ dissipated Tyrion but was surprised at how thrilled I was to see him tumble out of that crate. He’s back! For the first time since early in Season 4 he’s really back and free and taking great Tyrionesque swigs of wine, pausing long enough to vomit before continuing to drown his shame!Tyrion himself didn’t share my glee, of course. He came out of that box looking like a drunk basset hound, Peter Dinklage showing us the emotional weight of Tyrion’s double-murder of his lover, Shae, and his father in last season’s finale. He was having none of Varys’s crusading. The future, he said, in his own way, is hopeless, just like the past.Later, as Varys elaborated on his plan and pitch to Tyrion, the imp doubled down on his self-pity. “A drunken dwarf will never be the savior of the Seven Kingdoms,” he said, which I suspect is the show’s way of telling us exactly the opposite.“I believe men of talent have a part to play in the war to come,” Varys said. Whatever the ultimate outcomes, I’m beyond excited for “Road to Meereen With Imp and Spider.”Out in Meereen, Daenerys and her unsullied friends are hardly being greeted as liberators. I’d rather leave politics out of a fantasy drama recap, but when you undercut statue-toppling stagecraft with violent insurrection, the recent historical parallels become sort of hard to ignore. Let’s hope the Dragon Queen’s Middle Essos adventure is shorter than real world versions. She spent plenty of time out there last season, and besides, we were promised wheel-breaking!Finally, up at the Wall two spokes of said wheel, Jon Snow and Stannis Baratheon, are subtly entering into a face-off that figures to intensify this season.Jon, torn, as ever, between worlds and allegiances, is called upon to broker a knee-bending from Mance Rayder that everyone involved knows is not going to happen. The penalty for refusing: being burned alive, which, for an ice-native Wildling like Mance, has to be especially galling. “I don’t want people to remember me like that, scorched and screaming,” he tells Jon, “but it’s better than betraying everything I believe.”Jon ultimately brings a speedy end to Mance’s execution with an arrow to the heart, an undermining act that foreshadows a rift between Snow and Stannis. One possible flash point: Melisandre the Red Priestess has taken an uncommon interest in Jon since she arrived at the Wall, perhaps for weird red-magical carnal reasons and perhaps for others that might dovetail with certain popular theories about him. (I’m reluctant to get into too much of that here, but this potentially spoilery video is a good primer, if you’re interested.) At any rate, Stannis seems likely to frown upon any sort of perceived competition or threat.Of course, he’ll have plenty on his plate even without Jon. Mance promised as much in his last words to Stannis, which echoed Varys’s earlier comment, but with a crucial tweak. Because Mance — Night’s Watch veteran, King-Beyond-the-Wall, uniter of Hornfoots and Thenns — has seen enough to know that Stannis’s plans for a speedy campaign through the North and ultimately to the Iron Throne and lasting power will hardly be the quick trip he seems to expect.“I wish you good fortune in the wars to come,” Mance tells him.As in “wars,” plural. As in check the episode title. As in there may be a power vacuum drawing everyone inexorably toward King’s Landing, but the road ahead is longer than anyone thinks.A few thoughts while we peer into the fan theory abyss• About that Cersei prophecy: Some cursory research suggests that the witch was a woman named Maggy the Frog and that the prince young Cersei was promised to was Rhaegar Targaryen, Dany’s brother and a figure who casts an enormous shadow over this entire story. If you’re tempted to go down that particular online rabbit hole, I advise you to set aside a few weeks and some nonperishable foodstuffs, and tell your family you love them. (And as always, there’s no guarantee the series will line up exactly with the books.)• I laughed at the former Suckling Robin’s flailing attempts at sword-fighting. (Shields up, people. Why is that so difficult?) But frankly I enjoy him more as a disturbing little lord (“I want to see the bad man fly!”) than as a feckless clown.• Speaking of fringe characters, did you recognize Lancel Lannister, looking buff and penitent in his humble Sparrowwear? You remember Lancel, right? Boy-toy cousin for Cersei? Squire for Robert Baratheon who overserved the king on that fateful hunt? Blackmailed into spying for Tyrion? Wounded at the Battle of the Blackwater, which won him exactly zero sympathy from Cersei? Hard to blame him for looking for a new family. With relatives like the Lannisters …• There was a mildly menacing undercurrent to Lancel’s description of the Sparrows as being ready to “dole out mercy or justice,” right? Might they amount to more trouble for Cersei? Perhaps with help from the always opportunistic Margaery? Perhaps …• Are we ready for a “Thrones” in which Stannis Baratheon is playing a major role? I enjoyed him in small doses, when he was stranded out in miserable Dragonstone, positioned awkwardly between his wife and his smokebaby-mama. But I wonder if his one-note severity will start to get tiresome. By the way, did you catch that nutty smile on Mrs. Stannis’s face as Mance burned? In a place that’s chock-full o’ crazy, she still manages to stick out.• Feels weird to not mention the dragons, the stars of a dazzling sequence that basically confirmed the obvious: Dragons are not to be trifled with. So … how about those dragons?• Poor Brienne. “All I ever wanted was to fight for a lord I believed in,” she said. “The good lords are dead and the rest are monsters.” Right there with you, Brienne. But maybe stop feeling sorry for yourself and look up for a second? Your quarry Sansa is slipping past as you speak, just as Arya did at the end of last season. Brienne is a tremendous warrior but a lousy bounty hunter.• What did you think? Was there enough action in the premiere for you? Do we really buy Varys’s altruism? Where do we think Littlefinger is taking Sansa? Please share your thoughts in the comments, but please check any book-derived spoilers at the door.