INDIO, Calif. — The temptation with a messy colossus like Coachella is to figure out its essence. There’s a theory that Coachella evolved directly from the southern-California rave and dance culture in the ‘90s. (The KCRW D.J. Jason Bentley, for instance, explains it in an interview in the Coachella Valley Independent this month.)  But it has a connection to punk, too: Goldenvoice, the promoter behind the festival, used to put on punk shows in Los Angeles in the early ‘80s.Remember punk? The supposed sound of youth and clarity? I don’t know about that. Every kind of music has the age it is and the age it wants to be. At Coachella, electronic dance music wants to be young, electro-soul wants to be late-20s and early 30s, and punk, regardless of the age of the people playing it, wants to be middle-aged or older, with mixed feelings. It’s the sound of probity, disappointment, disapproval.The visual clichés of Coachella are sunglasses and dyed blond hair and gym-rats with neon tank tops. The punk shows I’ve seen so far — there are a few of them here and there, with small crowds, like secret meetings — are where the sundresses and tank tops are not. The obstructing monolith disappears; suddenly a different festival reveals itself. Whatever the music might give you, the sight is a relieving contrast.Following a thread, I saw three of those bands in 36 hours, all from California. (Missed a couple, too: Touche Amore and Circa Survive and Brand New.) Joyce Manor, the pop-punk band from Torrance, is young and earnest and worried. It’s led by Barry Johnson, who sings about suburban insecurities — worrying about growing apart from his friends, wondering about the inevitability of posing and a lack of purpose. “In your new leather jacket, you’re somebody else,” he sang in “Leather Jacket.” “It’s not nice to meet you in a fortress of self.”   Off!, from Los Angeles, has sharper worries: drones, bombs, surveillance, being erased. The group feeds off Los Angeles punk from the early ‘80s through a direct link: its singer, Keith Morris, the was first singer in Black Flag. He performs anxiety perfectly, bug-eyed and crease-faced. It’s the second time the band has played here, and the crowd size has stayed the same. This band isn’t getting hipper, only better, which makes it different from most of the other acts here.And Drive Like Jehu, an underrated post-punk band from San Diego, played Saturday night. (It broke up in 1995, but played a run-on show in its hometown last August, and a few other California shows since then). The set was sparsely attended — and might have been even if it wasn’t competing against Jack White and the Weeknd on the main stage and SBTRKT in the dance tent. But the music was ropy and rugged and fully present, churning and repetitive, the guitars of Rick Froberg and John Reis tugging against each other, the sound of agitated aloneness. It ended with “Luau,” the closest song the band has to an hit. Number of sundresses spotted: zero.