Spoilers for the Season 5 premiere of “Game of Thrones” below.We all knew Mance Rayder wasn’t going to bend the knee, right? Well, as it turns out, Ciarán Hinds, the Irish actor who played the King-Beyond-the-Wall, knew it, too. “I had a sneaky feeling that when Stephen Dillane and Liam Cunningham showed up outside my tent” in the Season 4 finale, he said, referring to the actors that play Stannis Baratheon and Davis Seaworth, “that my time on the planet might have been foreshortened somewhat.”Sure enough, in Sunday’s Season 5 premiere of “Game of Thrones,” Mance, the Wildling king, chose to be burned at the stake rather than pledge his allegiance to Stannis, bringing an end to the veteran actor’s run on the show. “When your number’s up, your number’s up,” he said.Mr. Hinds, 62, grew up in Belfast in Northern Ireland, where much of “Game of Thrones” is shot. That fact was most of what he knew about the show before joining it in Season 3. “It started to filter back to me from home how successful it was, and what a big undertaking it was,” he said. “I was thrilled but my life being what it is, I hadn’t had time to catch up with it.”Mr. Hinds has since become a fan of the show, he said, though he’s only made it up to the beginning of Season 4. He dodges spoilers like the rest of us, with mixed results. “I heard something about the Mountain man, and I’m like, ‘Oh no, he’s gone,’ ” he said. “I don’t know how he went, but I’ll have to catch up with it some day.”Mr. Hinds is probably most familiar to American viewers for an equally fatal turn as Julius Caesar in HBO’s “Rome,” or perhaps for films like “Munich” and “Tinker Tailor Soldier Spy.” (Your grade-schooler knows him as the voice of the head troll in “Frozen.”)He called from the Shetland Islands, where he is filming a BBC series called, fittingly, “Shetland,” to discuss saying sayonara to “Game of Thrones” and “getting down” to Marvin Gaye with Roose Bolton. These are edited excerpts from the conversation.Had you ever been burned alive on screen before?Funny, no. I’ve never made a habit of that. That was my first barbecue.Do you just imagine immense pain and then go from there?Michael Slovis, who directed that episode, was very gracious. He wanted to give Mance Rayder’s storyline some kind of dignity, because the end was going to come quickly. Bang. It’s brutal. The end. He wanted to give him the breadth to leave some kind of legacy behind about his commitment to his people.Why do you think he refused to go along with Stannis?I suppose George R. R. Martin would know better than me. But I think it’s because basically he wasn’t [lying] about what he was trying to do with all those lost people, the Wildlings, who needed direction and to be corralled into some kind of positive life. I don’t want to do it,  because I know what will happen if I bend the knee here. I’m just passing these guys over to be abused by more people, and I don’t want that stain on my name. Would you, Ciaran Hinds, have bent the knee?We never know, do we?Hopefully not.What would you do in the circumstances? Morally, ethically, no, I wouldn’t bend the knee. But then you think, when it comes to it, is there any way we can forestall this for a bit more negotiation to see where we end up? Probably I would’ve done that.What was the last day on the set like?You say, “Oh, this is it. This is where you’re gonna get burnt.” And then you think, “Oh, I hope it doesn’t hurt.” And then people convince you it’s safe, and they go through the ritual of the health and safety routine.You have to emotionally lock yourself into who you believe the character is and then play it. You’re halfway up a mountain in County Antrim. It’s cold, it’s foreboding. There are these extraordinary faces all around you, focused on you. There’s this kind of eerie silence in the air. So it does create its own atmosphere. You have the fire. You play the idea of what it would be to remain dignified as your skin blisters. And suddenly it’s all over and you go softly home. It’s kind of weird. There is a moment where you go like, “That was it?” And that was it. Did you know the end was coming for Mance?It comes to you with quite a big thump, really, although it was a very courteous, witty email from David Benioff and Dan Weiss. They said something like, “Well, dear friend, as the saying goes, all men must die.” I knew from the beginning that there were no safe targets. Do you have any theories about why the show has been so popular?The tangents the stories take and the number of stories they’re juggling — they’ve done it brilliantly. That’s one of the reasons it’s so successful. People talk about the violence and sex and all that. Of course, sex is always a great pull to anybody, and certainly in the beginning, there was a lot of it. It seems, to my eye, to have found its proper place in the storyline, so the main story about humanity, plays for power, greed and politics, gets right up there.The show stars lots of veteran actors from Ireland and Britain. Is there anyone you’ve worked with previously?There was an episode that was quite horrific that went out — I think it was called the Red Wedding?Yes.At the time it went out, I was working on stage in London in a Conor McPherson play with Roose Bolton, who was responsible for a lot of the brutality in that [episode]. Michael McElhatton. So there was a moment, when that came out, where it seemed to some audience members that Mance Rayder and Roose Bolton were getting down and boogieing to Marvin Gaye’s “What’s Going On.” Something to tell our grandchildren, I suppose. I’d also worked with Indira Varma [Ellaria Sand] on “Rome,” and I’ve also worked onstage with Conleth Hill, who’s wonderful as Varys.You’ve done lots of costume dramas, but mostly of the British literary variety (“Jane Eyre,” “Persuasion”). Were there ever moments on “Game of Thrones” where, standing there draped in furs and surrounded by giants, you wondered ‘How did I get here?’I wondered that most of the time. I wondered, “How the hell did I get here, and isn’t it great?” Or “How the hell did I get here, and who put me in this direction?” But I was rather excited about it. I thought at one time, “When am I gonna get some of the action?” Because Mance is a talker and an organizer and a driver of people. I thought when it came to the war, I’d get stuck in with everybody else. But that didn’t seem to happen. They probably would’ve killed me anyway.