A rare document associated with the Declaration of Independence has been discovered in the Cincinnati History Library and Archives, which will put it on display May 15 in the exhibition “Treasures of Our Military Past” at the Cincinnati Museum Center.   The Holt Broadside, as the document is known, is a copy made by the printer John Holt immediately after New York’s provincial congress, meeting in White Plains, voted to authorize the declaration on July 9, 1776.  Twelve of the 13 colonies had already approved the Declaration of Independence on July 4, 1776, but the New York delegation, unable to act without the approval of the colony’s provincial congress, abstained. In the meantime the Philadelphia printer John Dunlap, by order of the Continental Congress, began running off an estimated 200 copies of the declaration that night, to be distributed throughout the colonies. There are 26 Dunlap Broadsides known to exist. Holt, a newspaper and job printer with an office on Water Street, included at the top of his printed sheet a White Plains dateline and a brief statement by Robert Benson, secretary of the provincial congress.  It began: “Resolved unanimously, that the reasons assigned by the Continental Congress, for declaring the united colonies free and independent states, are cogent and conclusive, and that while we lament the cruel necessity which has rendered that measure unavoidable, we approve the same, and will at the risk of our lives and fortunes, join with the other colonies in supporting it.” Copies were sent throughout the colonies to all the county districts in New York. Only four Holt Broadsides are known to have survived. The others are at the New York Public Library; the Westchester County Archives  in Elmsford, N.Y.; and the Huntington Library in San Marino, Calif.The Cincinnati copy originally belonged to Richard Fosdick, a native of New London, Conn., who moved in 1810 to Cincinnati, where he founded the city’s first pork-packing business. It is not known how he came by the document, or how it made its way to the Historical and Philosophical Society of Ohio, a predecessor of the Cincinnati History Museum.It languished, cataloged but ignored, until 2010.  That year the history museum presented a traveling exhibition, “America, I AM: The African American Imprint,” which included one of the Dunlap Broadsides. An alert curator, Barbara Dawson, began taking a closer look at the old printed copy of the Declaration of Independence in the collections. Experts from Christie’s were called in, the document was authenticated and now, after more than a century, it is set to make a belated debut.