AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn Shattuck9 P.M. (HBO) GAMES OF THRONES  A fifth season begins as Jaime Lannister (Nikolaj Coster-Waldau) takes the road to Dorne to retrieve Myrcella (Nell Tiger Free), his niece-daughter. Brienne of Tarth (Gwendoline Christie) and Podrick Payne (Daniel Portman) are chasing Sansa Stark (Sophie Turner), who is still under the protection of Petyr Baelish (Aidan Gillen, above, with Ms. Turner). And Arya (Maisie Williams) and Tyrion Lannister (Peter Dinklage) have crossed the Narrow Sea to Essos, perhaps bringing resolution for Daenerys (Emilia Clarke), who has been cut off from the main cast for 40 episodes. “Quibbles aside, ‘Game of Thrones’ is still remarkable for both the scrupulousness and the lavishness of its production, beautiful to look at and mostly engaging to follow, though there is something of the accountant’s method in Mr. Martin’s fantasy — progress through constant addition — that transfers into the television show,” Mike Hale wrote in The New York Times, referring to George R. R. Martin, on whose books the series is based. And while the beginning of Season 5 is a building period, without the big jolts that came early in Season 4, “we can trust that the blood will flow more copiously before long.” In the new season of “Silicon Valley,” at 10, Richard (Thomas Middleditch) and the rest of the Pied Piper team find their future jeopardized by big changes at their competitors, Raviga and Nucleus. And in “Veep,” at 10:30, the staff of Selina (Julia Louis-Dreyfus) has just 24 hours to figure out how she can say opposing things in her first major speech as president.10 A.M. (Fox) FOX NEWS SUNDAY Chris Wallace interviews Mitt Romney, the former Republican presidential candidate, and Senator Robert Menendez, Democrat of New Jersey, who has been indicted on charges of accepting gifts from Dr. Salomon E. Melgen, a Florida ophthalmologist, in return for lobbying for his interests in Washington.10:30 A.M. (CBS) FACE THE NATION The guests include Senator Rand Paul (left) of Kentucky, a Republican presidential candidate, and Secretary of State John Kerry. The men also appear on “Meet the Press” at 10:30 on NBC.12:30 P.M. (13) DIE MEISTERSINGER VON NÜRNBERG  James Levine conducts Wagner’s epic human comedy about the love affair between Eva (Annette Dasch), a goldsmith’s daughter, who has been promised by her father to the winner of a singing contest, and Walther (Johan Botha), a knight, who studies with Hans Sach (Michael Volle), a modest cobbler but a master of music and poetry, to get the girl in this final revival of Otto Schenk’s 1993 Metropolitan Opera production. “It is always an event to have this great opera return to the Met,” Anthony Tommasini wrote in The Times of this five-hour work, presented here by “Great Performances at the Met.”8 P.M. (Fox News) LEGENDS & LIES: THE REAL WEST This documentary-style series chronicles the lives of some of the Wild West’s greatest characters — among them, Wild Bill Hickok, Kit Carson, Billy the Kid and Butch Cassidy — through interviews with descendants and historians, archival photos, forensic science and re-enactments. The outlaw Jesse James is first, followed at 9 by Doc Holliday, gunfighter and dentist.10 P.M. (13, 49) WOLF HALL After being stripped of his powers for failing to secure the annulment of the marriage of King Henry VIII (Damian Lewis) to Katherine of Aragon (Joanne Whalley), Cardinal Thomas Wolsey (Jonathan Pryce) is forced to move to York. Thomas Cromwell (Mark Rylance) remains in London, where he seeks to return Wolsey to Henry’s favor. But as Cromwell and Henry’s relationship intensifies in this “Masterpiece” presentation, unexpected news arrives. What’s Streaming NowTHE OPEN MIND Alexander Heffner, the show’s host, interviews Howard A. Tullman, chief executive of 1871, a Chicago technology incubator, about his ideas for a data-driven economy that considers the human consequences of corporate decisions. This newly retooled website also includes more than 50 years of interviews from the archive of “Richard Heffner’s Open Mind,” which was hosted by Alexander Heffner’s grandfather until his death in 2013. (thirteen.org/openmind)Advertisement