By KATHRYN SHATTUCKOCT. 18, 2015
6:30 P.M. (Starz Cinema) THE GOOD THIEF (2003) Nick Nolte plays Bob, a majestic ruin of a gambler and heroin addict who gets pulled into a Monte Carlo casino heist by some art-swindler thugs in Neil Jordan’s variation on “Bob le Flambeur,” the 1956 film noir directed by Jean-Pierre Melville. Nutsa Kukhianidze is the beautiful Russian teenager who follows Bob; Tcheky Karyo is the detective friend he has to stay a heartbeat ahead of. “It’s quite an accomplishment,” Elvis Mitchell wrote in The New York Times. “There aren’t many American actors who have made a penchant for self-destructive behavior blossom into a fully realized gallery of performances.” The movie, with its 1950s jazz cool, “is the ultimate caper,” he added, “a work of brazen ebullience.” (Image: Ms. Kukhianidze and Mr. Nolte)10 A.M. (Fox) FOX NEWS SUNDAY Donald Trump talks about his campaign for the Republican presidential nomination. His rival Senator Ted Cruz of Texas is on “Meet the Press,” at 10:30 on NBC.8 P.M. (OWN) BELIEF Over seven consecutive nights, Oprah Winfrey examines the faith and practices behind a spectrum of religious and spiritual beliefs, starting with those seeking meaning in their lives.8 P.M. (13, 49) HOME FIRES Desperate times require desperate measures, as the women of Great Paxford discover when they’re forced to make wartime sacrifices. In “Indian Summers,” at 9, the viceroy’s visit stirs up excitement in Simla. Ralph, meanwhile, grows agitated when a vital piece of evidence disappears, and Sarah unearths a juicy tidbit about Alice’s past. And in “The Widower,” at 10, Malcolm plots to evade capture and become a bigamist.Advertisement8:30 P.M. (CBS) MADAM SECRETARY Big surprise: Elizabeth and President Dalton face hostility from the Russian government. In “The Good Wife,” at 9:30, Eli persuades Alicia and her mother to take part in a cooking show to bolster Peter’s campaign. And the broth is spoiled.Advertisement9 P.M. (Showtime) HOMELAND Carrie (Claire Danes) decides to take her mental health into her own hands with the help of Jonas and figure out who wants her dead. No word yet on what secret messages may be lurking in this week’s set dressing. In “The Affair,” at 10, Noah’s obsession with Alison leads him to make a grand romantic gesture. She, meanwhile, gets an uncomfortable lesson in the compromises required to sustain a marriage. (Image: Ms. Danes)9 P.M. (AMC) THE WALKING DEAD Just when things start to feel normal, the Alexandrians are confronted with a new problem.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.9 P.M. (HBO) THE LEFTOVERS Laura and Tom Garvey find that rescuing other people’s souls takes a toll on their own. In “Doll & Em,” at 10:30, Emily and Dolly are forced to rewrite their script just hours before the premiere of their play.9 P.M. (Comedy Central) SUPERBAD (2007) Michael Cera and Jonah Hill play high school virgins searching for lessons of love to take with them to college in this cuddly comedy from Judd Apatow and company. Manohla Dargis, writing in The Times, called it “a tickly, funny tale.” (Image: Michael Cera)10 P.M. (ABC) QUANTICO In the present, Alex endures a hostage rescue exercise that makes her consider quitting. In the future, she discovers evidence that seems to point to a confidant.10:30 P.M. (CBS) CSI: CYBER A police officer’s body camera is hacked, and a provocative video goes viral.What’s Streaming NowTHE 17TH INTERNATIONAL FRYDERYK CHOPIN PIANO COMPETITION This month, 84 pianists from around the globe converged in Warsaw for this competition, founded in 1927 to honor the best interpreters of Chopin’s works. Ten made it to this grand finale, whose jury includes Adam Harasiewicz, Martha Argerich, Janusz Olejniczak, Dina Yoffe, Dang Thai Son and Yundi, all previous prize winners. Performances are streamed live at noon Sunday through Tuesday, with the winners’ concert on Wednesday. (chopin2015.medici.tv)A version of this schedule appears in print on October 18, 2015, on Page SP12 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Sunday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.