By MARGALIT FOXAPRIL 11, 2015
Eugene Louis Faccuito, a dancer and choreographer whose physical reawakening after a paralyzing accident became the wellspring of an internationally renowned jazz dance technique, died on Tuesday at his home in Manhattan. He was 90.The cause was cancer, said Francis J. Roach, the director of Luigi’s Jazz Center, the school Mr. Faccuito founded in Manhattan in 1957.One of the world’s foremost teachers of dance, Mr. Faccuito — pronounced fah-CHEW-toe — was known familiarly by the single name Luigi. (He had the name bestowed on him while making the 1949 Hollywood musical “On the Town” by its co-star and co-director, Gene Kelly, who found the presence of two Genes on the set disconcerting.)Mr. Faccuito’s students have ranged from ordinary people seeking exercise to those needing rehabilitation after injury or stroke to marquee-name professionals in the entertainment world, including Alvin Ailey, Twyla Tharp, Donna McKechnie, Jane Fonda, John Travolta, Tony Roberts and Liza Minnelli.Advertisement“A lot of the people who came to his class had been injured — and damn it, he got all of us well,” Ms. Minnelli, who worked with Mr. Faccuito for decades, said in a telephone interview on Friday. “I broke my back a few months ago. I’ve been doing ‘Luigi’ every day, and I can walk and I can run because of that technique.”AdvertisementUntil midcentury, jazz dance technique was an ad hoc affair. Mr. Faccuito, described by The New York Times as “the father of American jazz dancing,” is widely credited with being the first person to codify its method and systematize its teaching.Starting in the late 1940s, he conceived an approach to the genre that is known for its elegance, liquidity and keen musicality. It emphasizes strength, balance, alignment, bodily freedom and above all the imperative of his oft-repeated mantra, “Never stop moving.”It was an imperative born of grueling necessity.The eighth of 11 children of immigrants from Italy, Mr. Faccuito was born in Steubenville, Ohio, on March 20, 1925. His father, a steelworker, was killed in a car accident five years later; to help his family, Eugene began singing and dancing for pennies on street corners.Eugene was soon winning amateur contests and at 13 became the lead singer with the Bernie Davis Orchestra, a busy regional ensemble. (The singer he replaced was another Italian-American lad from Steubenville, Dino Paul Crocetti, better known as Dean Martin.) Before he was out of his teens he was touring as a dancer and singer on the vaudeville circuit.During World War II, Mr. Faccuito served with the Navy in New Guinea and the Philippines. After the war he was admitted to Kent State University, where he planned to study law, but at the last minute, at the urging of an older brother, he moved to Hollywood to study dance on the G.I. Bill. There he worked with noted ballet teachers including Bronislava Nijinska, the younger sister of the eminent dancer Vaslav Nijinsky.But in 1946, a few months after arriving, Mr. Faccuito was a passenger in an automobile that stopped short on a rain-slicked Los Angeles street, skidded and slammed into a telephone pole. Thrown from the car, he hit the curb head first, suffering a basal skull fracture. He was not expected to live.He remained in a coma for some two months, waking to discover that the right side of his body and the left side of his face were paralyzed. His doctors told him he would not walk again.Advertisement“I don’t want to walk,” Mr. Faccuito remembered thinking. “I want to dance.”In the months that followed, he devised a painstaking regimen of stretching, breathing and movement, isolating the muscles needed to move each part of his body. Little by little he relearned to stand at the barre, to hold himself erect, to lift his limbs and, eventually, to let go of the barre and move unaided.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“It took three years to be able to dance,” Mr. Faccuito told The Montreal Gazette in 1994. “I was learning where the muscles begin and end and how to control the body. I didn’t want people to see my injured face, so I did things to make my body look good.”Though his face remained paralyzed to the end of his life, he regained enough mobility in his body to dance in the chorus in many Hollywood films. To stay limber between takes, he went through his accustomed stretching routine; other dancers, observing him, began to emulate it. His technique, which proved as liberating for able-bodied dancers as it did for Mr. Faccuito, lent itself naturally to jazz dance and a pedagogy was born.He opened his first school in Los Angeles in 1950, before moving to New York. Mr. Faccuito, who gave master classes round the world, also had a home in Woodcliff Lake, N.J.His other film credits include “Annie Get Your Gun” (1950), starring Betty Hutton; “An American in Paris” (1951), starring Mr. Kelly; “The Band Wagon” (1953), starring Fred Astaire and Cyd Charisse; and “Meet Me in Las Vegas” (1956), starring Ms. Charisse and Dan Dailey.On Broadway, he appeared in the 1956 musical comedy “Happy Hunting,” starring Ethel Merman and Fernando Lamas.Mr. Faccuito’s survivors include a sister, Norma Battista. His school, at 48 West 68th Street, will continue operating, Mr. Roach said.In the interview on Friday, Ms. Minnelli reflected on her long association with Mr. Faccuito, whom she first met at 3 on the film sets of her father, the director Vincente Minnelli.“He was truly one of the greatest influences on my life,” she said. “I made all my dancers that I worked with go to his class. Darling, if you watch ‘Liza’s at the Palace,’ ” — her 2009 concert film — “all of those dancers are Luigi dancers.”A version of this article appears in print on April 12, 2015, on Page A22 of the New York edition with the headline: Eugene Faccuito, 90, Creator of Jazz Dance Style, Is Dead.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.