By JOE COSCARELLIAPRIL 10, 2015
It’s complicated between modern-day independent rock bands and their ’90s progenitors, whose poorly postured shadows loom over any lyrics that might be considered “wry” or guitars called “jagged.”When Speedy Ortiz, a barbed Massachusetts four-piece led by the poet, guitarist and singer Sadie Dupuis, released its debut full-length album, “Major Arcana” (Carpark), in 2013, the comparisons to noisy, tenaciously lo-fi acts from two decades earlier were constant (and not wholly inaccurate). Reference points included Polvo, Helium and especially Pavement, given not only Ms. Dupuis’s fuzzy guitar riffs and knowing writing, but also her role in a short-lived cover band, Babement.“We only played two shows,” said Ms. Dupuis, 26, ahead of Speedy Ortiz’s second album, “Foil Deer,” out April 21 from Carpark. Yes, she loves Pavement’s Stephen Malkmus (and has opened for his band the Jicks), but as a kid — not a college student — in the ’90s, Ms. Dupuis absorbed another set of unabashedly mainstream musical influences, including No Doubt and Destiny’s Child.“Foil Deer” can sound at times as if Fiona Apple joined a punk band, with Ms. Dupuis’s cryptic, winding lines beefed up by cleaner production, electronic flourishes and even more vocal confidence. While she calls her poetry “more placid,” Ms. Dupuis, a Manhattan native with a suburban basement-scene edge, said her lyrics for Speedy Ortiz could be “a little boisterous.”AdvertisementMultiple songs mention sharp edges threateningly — “Don’t ever touch my blade, you fool,” she sings on “Dot X” — and upending gender dynamics is a common concern. “He gets why I play fight,” goes one kiss-off. “I see Mr. Difficult, then it’s easy to be Mr. Difficult too.”AdvertisementFor its last album, Speedy Ortiz jammed the recording of 14 songs into four days. This time, Ms. Dupuis and her bandmates — Devin McKnight on guitar, Darl Ferm on bass, Mike Falcone on drums — worked for a relatively lavish three weeks, carving more recognizable pop hooks into their foundation of squawking feedback without sacrificing any acuity.Ms. Dupuis, who, despite her band’s sound, is too conscientious and self-assured in her punk principles to front a group of slackers, spoke about bringing a little Beyoncé to the indie-rock underground over brunch at a vegan diner in Williamsburg, Brooklyn. These are excerpts from the conversation.Q. How did life change for the band after “Major Arcana”? A. I was a teacher [while pursuing a poetry M.F.A. at the University of Massachusetts at Amherst] and Mike was getting a master’s in library science. Eventually, it seemed we could make our lives sustainable by touring more instead of working. I make more money off music than I did teaching two classes a semester, which is sort of sad. It’s not like we’re rolling in it, but it’s enough to pay rent.What do you listen to on tour?We tour really cheap, in a minivan, and the driver decides. Clipse is probably the biggest overlap. We get so burned out on hearing rock every night that we gravitate a lot toward pop and rap.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Did Stephen Malkmus give you any good advice when Speedy Ortiz played with the Jicks?He wasn’t pedantic in any way; he just hung out with us. We both showed up on the tour really sick. A week and a half in, I went to the doctor and found out I had pneumonia. There was a day off, and we went bowling with the Jicks. I think I was quibbling about canceling some radio sessions. Steve was like, “If I had done half the amount of radio and press things that I did in Pavement, I would have a much longer career than I’m going to have.” So I’ve been a little better about not overscheduling. I’d also have all these nerdy questions for him like, “What is the lyric here?” And I would have it totally wrong. He would explain what it meant, and I would have no idea how he got to that.What other singers and lyricists have influenced your writing?Fiona Apple does things with sentences over the course of a verse that I can’t even believe. So I’ll keep that in mind: “What would Fiona Apple do?” I also sang in a children’s choir until I was 16, and we would tour internationally. I was really into stuff that was harmony-heavy because that was what I was spending 10 hours a week doing in rehearsal. I’ve always thought Beyoncé’s vocal harmonies were really weird. A lot of the stuff in the choir was really dissonant, and she’ll do that — the harmony will be in a totally different key. Another one that is obvious to me but maybe doesn’t come across is Aaliyah. There were certain things on this record where I was like: “Oh, Aaliyah wouldn’t push this. She would do it calm.” And the reverse reverb that Timbaland would apply to her vocals, we used that on a couple songs.When you come up with a line like “I’m not bossy, I’m the boss” on “Raising the Skate,” do you think of it as a rallying cry?I stole that one from the Ban Bossy campaign. But I like a lot of rap lyrics. In terms of lyrical inspiration, I’m more interested in what you can do in a rap song than what you can do in a rock song. Nicki Minaj has been a really big influence — she just covers a lot of ground. I love “The Pinkprint” — I’ve probably listened to that more than any record that’s come out in the past five years.Are you conscious of the fact that your work is inserting some swagger into indie rock that has maybe been lacking in recent years?AdvertisementSo much of indie rock is white dudes, and what are they fighting against? That says nothing about their ability to write a song, but there’s a certain amount of anger, disappointment and confusion that goes into music that I think is great that just isn’t inherent in the lives of those who have populated a lot of rock music in the last 10 years. The rallying cries and aggression have fallen to queer performers, performers of color or women to pick up that mantle. You can’t have a Kurt Cobain anymore — or you can, but it’s not going to be a white guy.A version of this article appears in print on April 12, 2015, on Page AR21 of the New York edition with the headline: An Indie Band Adds Swagger and Pop Hooks to Its Sharp Edges.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.