By NATE CHINENAPRIL 10, 2015
The jazz eminence Charles Lloyd has been many things since his rocketlike emergence in the 1960s: a breakout talent, a phenomenon, a recluse, a searcher, a rumor. On April 20 Mr. Lloyd, a tenor saxophonist and flutist, will be inducted as a National Endowment for the Arts Jazz Master, the most prestigious honor for living jazz musicians. Still there persists something of the outsider about him, not least in his own mind.“In some ways I feel that I’ve been misunderstood or overlooked,” he said last month, as morning light filled his glass-walled room at the Standard Hotel on the High Line. “And yet how could you say that, when you seem to have had some success? That’s all relative. One man’s roof is another man’s floor.”Hours earlier Mr. Lloyd had been onstage at the Village Vanguard, exuding a kingly poise. For the club’s 80th anniversary, the pianist Jason Moran had arranged a week of special programming — saving the grand finale for the band Mr. Lloyd calls his New Quartet. The performance was a casual astonishment of postbop fire, bluesy crosstalk and lucid incantation for a crowd aware of its privilege. It was Mr. Lloyd’s 77th birthday, and his first gig at the Vanguard in more than 40 years.He has lived on the California coast for almost all of that time, since his dramatic withdrawal from superstardom in search of solitude, sobriety and clarity. His return to active circulation, chronicled over the last 25 years by the ECM label, has unfolded on his own unhurried terms. Especially since the 2007 formation of the New Quartet, with Mr. Moran, the drummer Eric Harland and the bassist Reuben Rogers, he has earned the reputation of an elder with his thoughts trained inward and upward.AdvertisementHe’ll make his next New York appearance in the Sackler Wing at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, home to the Temple of Dendur. As he did in the same cavernous space two years ago, Mr. Lloyd will lead his quartet alongside musicians rooted in modes of antiquity: in this case, Sokratis Sinopoulos, who plays the politiki lyra, a bowed lute, and Miklos Lukacs, on Hungarian cimbalom, a hammered dulcimer. The concert will be the North American premiere of Mr. Lloyd’s “Wild Man Dance Suite,” a searching, ecstatic piece that takes up the entirety of his new album, out Tuesday on Blue Note.AdvertisementThe album, “Wild Man Dance,” reflects the compulsion to draw connections — between cultural ideals, between stylistic traditions, between modernity and what he calls “the wisdom of the ancients” — that has long been a priority for Mr. Lloyd. He’s a pursuer of the universal, and a charismatic embodiment of his own utopian convictions. At the height of his fame, this made him an effective jazz emissary to the psychedelic counterculture. It can still make his music feel lighted with a larger purpose.“We’ve played around the world,” Mr. Moran said, “and people salivate when they see Charles walk onstage. He’s regal. He plays with a lot of romance. But then he also plays with a lot of earthworm-in-the-soil intensity, too. He’s always finding these pathways.”Mr. Lloyd, who surfaced at the Village Vanguard in a gray sports jacket, a fedora, a knotted scarf and his round architect glasses, still carries his tall frame with a watchful dignity. Sitting in his hotel room, on a couch overlooking the Hudson River, he spoke in an amiable gush, foraging often in the realm of aphorism, parable and metaphor.“My music, it breathes,” he said. “It’s the mysticism of sound. I’m a sound seeker, and I’m enthralled with it, by what it can do to change the molecules and uplift people. They feel something when we play. I can’t take authorship for that. I can take that I’m in service.”Mr. Lloyd’s fans are familiar with his enlightenment agenda; his recent concerts have included recitations from the Bhagavad Gita. He now lives in a rustic villa designed by his wife and manager, the artist Dorothy Darr, in the mountains east of Santa Barbara. Remote in most respects, it’s less than a 10-minute walk from his local Vedanta temple.“I was a philosopher as a very young kid,” he said, recalling long hours spent wandering the orchards of his grandfather’s farm in Mississippi. He heard his earliest Delta blues then, played by a farm foreman, a moment he describes like a spark of ignition.At Manassas High School in Memphis, one of his classmates was the trumpeter Booker Little, with whom he recalls studying Bartok string quartets in the school library. “We were under the influence of Phineas Newborn and his harmonic genius,” Mr. Lloyd said, referring to a still-underrated piano virtuoso whom he regarded as a guru.The tenor saxophonist George Coleman, who was a few years ahead of Mr. Lloyd at Manassas, also happens to be in this year’s class of National Endowment for the Arts Jazz Masters. “We all played a lot,” Mr. Coleman said. “That was a good thing about Memphis during that time. We weren’t making any money, but we had the experience of being involved in jazz almost 24 hours a day.”AdvertisementAnother Memphis hallmark was a busy dialogue between jazz and rhythm and blues. Mr. Newborn had played in a trailblazing R&B rhythm section, around the dawn of rock ’n’ roll. Mr. Lloyd worked as a teenager with bluesmen like Howlin’ Wolf and B. B. King. His distaste for what he often calls “lines of demarcation” can be partly traced to this time.Partly, too, it dates to Mr. Lloyd’s experience of the 1960s, which began with several years as musical director and composer for the Chico Hamilton Quintet, a coolly chamberlike group that also featured the Hungarian guitarist Gabor Szabo. Mr. Lloyd moved into a Greenwich Village loft and fell into bohemian rhythm, associating with painters and poets as well as the likes of Bob Dylan.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.His style on tenor suggested an extrapolation of elements: the bark and brio of Sonny Rollins; the phrasing and spiritual inquest of John Coltrane; the weightless, susurrating style of an older giant on the instrument, Lester Young. But he was also working with fundamentals from the Delta, and with the stirrings of the time.His first great quartet, with the pianist Keith Jarrett, the bassist Cecil McBee and the drummer Jack DeJohnette, released its debut album, “Dream Weaver,” on Atlantic in 1966. Later that year, the band made a triumphant appearance at the Monterey Jazz Festival. Released as the album “Forest Flower,” it sold more than a million copies.“That group came together at a time when the socioeconomic and political environment of this country was opening up,” Mr. DeJohnette said. “And we had a vibe. We could play grooves or we could play abstract. Nothing was ever done the same way twice.”Mr. Lloyd’s quartet became a fixture at the Fillmore Auditorium, sharing the bill with acts like Jefferson Airplane and Janis Joplin. “I always saw him as the lead vocalist in a rock ’n’ roll band,” said the record producer Don Was, who as president of Blue Note made it a mission to sign Mr. Lloyd. “He seemed to be the first guy from the jazz idiom who, on a sociological level, had some connection to where the Grateful Dead were coming from.”But what endeared Mr. Lloyd to the Fillmore crowd had the inverse effect on some in the jazz establishment. Though DownBeat magazine anointed him “Jazzman of the Year” in 1967, the influential critic Martin Williams sniffed in The New York Times that “with wildly bushy hair, military jacket, and garishly striped bell bottoms, he looks like a kind of show-biz hippie.” Like Miles Davis around this time, Mr. Lloyd was charged with crassness; unlike Mr. Davis, he also faced suggestions of charlatanism.The bigger problem, as Mr. Lloyd remembers it, was that he began to feel like a commodity. “I would also medicate myself,” he said. “I was getting off my spiritual moorings.” He moved to Big Sur, and spent most of the next decade making music in idiosyncratic bursts — with Beat poets, or members of the Beach Boys.AdvertisementHe was coaxed out of retirement by the French pianist Michel Petrucciani, who had made a pilgrimage to see him in the early 1980s. But Mr. Lloyd didn’t resume his career in earnest until after a brush with death, because of a rare intestinal disorder, in 1986.His sound had become softer and more luminous, though he plays down the idea of a reinvention: “I’m big on tenderness sutras,” he said. “Even during the obstreperousness of the ’60s, and the so-called yelling and screaming on the horn, I was always a lyricist.”The body of work he amassed on ECM spans a small constellation of ensembles, including the devotional, shape-shifting trio known as Sangam, with Zakir Hussain on tabla and Mr. Harland on drums and piano. Mr. Moran said that while he grew up with “Forest Flower,” it was a concert by Sangam a decade ago that drew him to Mr. Lloyd.The New Quartet has had a similar effect out in the world. The pianist Gerald Clayton, who appears on “Wild Man Dance,” recalls being awed by the band several times in concert; his point of entry to Mr. Lloyd’s gifts as a bandleader had virtually nothing to do with the 1960s. “The point is to almost be child-minded,” Mr. Clayton said, “like you’re discovering music for the first time, every time you play. Then it’s a really peculiar feeling afterward, different than I get from stretching out with guys my own age.”Mr. Lloyd offered his explanation for that. “They all do something else with their own stuff,” he said of the musicians in his fold, chuckling, “but when they come here, there are other deities who are operating.” Suddenly he was choked up, tears welling in his eyes. “And every night you have to mean all of that. And it has a vibration that keeps me humble, and wanting another chance to tell the truth.”A version of this article appears in print on April 12, 2015, on Page AR21 of the New York edition with the headline: Zen Knight-Philosopher, Questing Still.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.