By ZACHARY WOOLFEAPRIL 10, 2015
For the blazing success of what became verismo opera — most famously the double bill of “Cavalleria Rusticana” and “Pagliacci,” which open at the Metropolitan Opera in a new production on Tuesday — we have a contest to thank. Its organizer, Edoardo Sonzogno, was the scion of a 19th-century Italian publishing family and the owner of the powerful newspaper Il Secolo.His company, Casa Sonzogno, made money producing inexpensive musical scores, but Sonzogno had the spirit of an impresario. He wanted to create work, not just print it. In 1883 he started a one-act opera competition for young composers that got off to a rocky start as a star-maker: While Puccini’s first opera, “Le Villi,” was one of the submissions that year, it didn’t even garner an honorable mention.The contest faded for a while, but in 1888 Sonzogno announced a second go. The composer Pietro Mascagni, then in his mid-20s, had a few years before seen a production of Giovanni Verga’s gritty, passionate Sicilian play “Cavalleria Rusticana” (“Rustic Chivalry”), starring Eleonora Duse as the wronged Santuzza. Suspecting it would be just the thing for the Sonzogno competition, Mascagni turned for help with the libretto to his friend, the poet Giovanni Targioni-Tozzetti, who in turn enlisted Guido Menasci as a co-writer.They finished the text by the end of 1888 and the score was completed a few months later. An excerpt was sent to Puccini, who gave it to his publisher, Giulio Ricordi, who decided to pass on it.AdvertisementThat turned out to be a spectacular misstep. “Cavalleria Rusticana” won the competition and had its premiere at the Teatro Costanzi in Rome in 1890. Led by the important conductor Leopoldo Mugnone and starring the soprano Gemma Bellincioni, a renowned, riveting singing actress who appeared as Santuzza opposite the Turiddu of her common-law husband, the star tenor Roberto Stagno, it was a hit.And it stayed a hit, spreading rapidly from country to country, with opera houses competing to present it. So furious was the rush to produce “Cavalleria Rusticana” that its New York premiere ended up being twofold, with rival performances on Oct. 1, 1891: an afternoon one at the Casino Theater on Broadway and 39th Street and another at the Lenox Lyceum, further uptown, that evening. Conductors as eminent as Mahler championed it. By Mascagni’s death in 1945, it had had 14,000 performances in Italy alone.AdvertisementAll this is to say that verismo, at least for a couple of decades, was king. Always an amorphous genre, difficult to define, it took its cues from “Cavalleria Rusticana” and favored sordid plots, working-class heroes, rapid pacing and the absence of the flowery coloratura that reigned earlier in the century, preferring more direct vocalism. This is the kind of passionate, melodic red-sauce style many people probably have in mind when they think of opera in general, and it’s no coincidence that the soaring orchestral Intermezzo in “Cavalleria” is one of the most popular passages in music.Umberto Giordano’s “Mala Vita,” from 1892, delved into the life of a prostitute in the dank alleys of Naples. Leoncavallo’s ingenious play-within-a-play one-act “Pagliacci,” about a traveling commedia dell’arte troupe riven by adultery and murder, arrived the same year.In 1893, the Met presented a couple of performances of “Pagliacci” on a double bill with, of all things, Gluck’s “Orfeo ed Euridice.” (“It used to be the fashion to combine Gluck’s ‘Orfeo’ with ‘Cavalleria Rusticana,’ ” W. J. Henderson sniffed in The New York Times at the time. A more interesting pairing, if you’re into couples gone homicidally awry, might be “Pagliacci” and Bartok’s “Bluebeard’s Castle.”) But on Dec. 22 at the Met, Leoncavallo’s and Mascagni’s works were combined, probably for the first time anywhere. An unsigned review in The Times put it simply: “The effect of bringing the two operas together in one night was good.” Opera’s most enduring twofer was created.“Of the core verismo pieces, I think there is always a place in the repertoire for this double bill,” Peter Gelb, the Met’s general manager, said in a telephone interview. “The stories are so gripping and powerful.”The company’s new production stars, in the Mascagni, Eva-Maria Westbroek, with Patricia Racette taking on the charming, doomed Nedda in the Leoncavallo. George Gagnidze plays the baritone roles in both, and Marcelo Álvarez takes on the two aggrieved tenor protagonists.Led by Fabio Luisi, the Met’s principal conductor, and directed by David McVicar (“Il Trovatore,” “Giulio Cesare,” Donizetti’s Tudor trilogy), the staging, which sets “Cavalleria” around 1900 and “Pagliacci” a half-century later, is part of Mr. Gelb’s continuing efforts to replace the aging Franco Zeffirelli shows that were once the Met’s bread and butter. Mr. Zeffirelli’s “Cav/Pag,” as the combo is popularly known, originated back in 1970.AdvertisementThat was a time when verismo held a more secure spot in the repertory, even if its heyday was already long since over. Giordano’s “Andrea Chénier” (1896) — set during the French Revolution but with veristic pacing — played at the Met frequently in the 1960s, ’70s and ’80s, and “Cav/Pag” showed up almost every season.But the popularity of operatic genres fluctuates. Audiences of 50 years ago would be dumbfounded to see the healthy amounts of Handel and serious Rossini that now appear on the programs of major houses. So it is perhaps inevitable that verismo’s luster faded.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Cav/Pag,” once omnipresent, hasn’t been done at the Met in six years. A glamour-deprived performance of “Andrea Chénier” last year, starring Ms. Racette and Mr. Álvarez, made some question that work’s long-heralded merits. Zandonai’s “Francesca da Rimini” (1914), based on an episode from Dante but with verismo’s streamlined linkage of libretto and music, had a rare Met revival in 2013 that flopped.“It felt a bit like an antique,” Mr. Gelb said of that “Francesca.” “The production and music felt old-fashioned. Anything that feels dated ultimately loses traction with an audience.”Mr. Luisi agreed even in the context of operatic conventions, fundamental elements of verismo may be out of sync with our times. “To be cool now is the most important thing,” he said in a telephone interview. “And those operas are not cool at all. The feelings which they express are very strong and we tend nowadays to hide our feelings, not to show if we are scared or excited or upset. Verismo is to the contrary of this.”But in the arts, anything that’s out of favor is automatically due for a renaissance, and there are glimmers of hope for verismo. Mr. Luisi speculated that audiences could be intrigued rather than put off by the emotional openness of the genre, so different from our own detached stances: “This can be the fascination of these operas. Not hiding feelings, but on the contrary expressing feelings, could be appealing nowadays.”There’s evidence that he’s right. The Met’s new “Cav/Pag” arrives on the heels of another prominent fresh production of the double bill, conducted by Christian Thielemann — a master of Wagner and Strauss not known for his forays into red-meat Italiana — at this year’s Salzburg Easter Festival, featuring the tenor Jonas Kaufmann in both leads. (Perhaps Mr. Thielemann was inspired by his mentor Herbert von Karajan’s affection for the works.) Mr. Kaufmann, who appeared in a new McVicar production of “Andrea Chénier” in London in January, released a disc of verismo arias in 2011, and the soprano Anna Netrebko follows with her own later this year, so opera’s two biggest stars are on board.Mr. Gelb said that Ms. Netrebko would bring Cilea’s “Adriana Lecouvreur” (1902) to the Met in a coming season in a production directed by — who else? — Mr. McVicar. Smaller companies, too, are keeping the torch lit, like the Teatro Grattacielo in New York, which offers concert performances of Italian obscurities, many from the verismo period and its lengthy afterglow.“The difficulty is to find the right singers and to convince them to use the right style, and not the style which was used in the ’60s,” Mr. Luisi said. “There was a very negative evolution of verismo style. If we listen to the recordings of the ’20s or ’30s, even ‘Cavalleria Rusticana’ or ‘Adriana’ or ‘Fedora’ ” — by Giordano — “how they sang the opera was much more, how can I say, elegant and stylistically a very clean kind of singing than it was done usually in the ’50s, when singers started to scream and cry. And that was terrible.”Today’s better-trained singers have the vocal resources to do these operas justice. The question is whether they have the temperament. A more coolly precise delivery is not as much of a disqualification in the Baroque or bel canto repertory than in verismo, which even if elegantly sung must be shot through with febrile emotion.AdvertisementSo is the next flowering of verismo just around the corner? It remains a style that, try as they might, people just can’t quite seem to quit. Gemma Bellincioni, for one: The star of the premiere of “Cavalleria Rusticana” retired from the stage in 1911. But she re-emerged five years later, unable to resist an offer to play Santuzza in a silent film.A picture caption with an article last Sunday about the verismo style of opera misidentified the role being performed by Jonas Kaufmann. He was playing Canio in “Pagliacci,” not Turiddu in “Cavalleria Rusticana.”A version of this article appears in print on April 12, 2015, on Page AR14 of the New York edition with the headline: Opera That’s Heavy on Red Sauce.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.