AdvertisementSupported byBy Marina Harss“I like the piece,” Mark Morris said of Stravinsky’s “The Rite of Spring” a few weeks back as he sat in his papaya-green office at the Mark Morris Dance Center in Brooklyn. “But I’m tired of the mythology, that runic Madame Blavatsky kind of stuff. I’m not interested in a virgin dancing herself to death, you know?”Mr. Morris’s reimagined “Rite,” which had its premiere at the Ojai North festival in 2013, is emphatically not a tale of sacrificial maidens, though it retains more than a whiff of the pagan. It is coming to the Brooklyn Academy of Music as part of a five-night run by the Mark Morris Dance Group, April 22-26, its first season at the house since 2012. All but two of the works on the programs date from the last three years. One dance, “Whelm,” is brand-new. Another, “Pacific,” is 20 years old but has never been performed by the company. (It was created for the San Francisco Ballet.)As is often the case with Mr. Morris, his take on “Rite” is both personal and universal. Pre-Christian ritual — flower garlands, Grecian-style tunics by Elizabeth Kurtzman — meets the exuberant Americana of “Seven Brides for Seven Brothers,” which provided the title: “Spring, Spring, Spring.” In the movie, this cheery tune sets the stage for a loopy celebration of the new season, filled with baby goats, suckling calves and smiling couples holding hands.Mr. Morris’s dancers, divided into three groups — women, men, couples — lope and tilt, crawl like beasts, and form daisy chains that trace precise, winding patterns across the stage. But the real content of the dance is its response to Stravinsky’s music, specifically the interplay of rhythms, dissonances and folk melodies. To distill these elements, Mr. Morris used the Bad Plus’s reorchestration for jazz trio, with Ethan Iverson on piano, Reid Anderson on bass and David King on percussion. (They will be playing in the pit.) In their interpretation, Stravinsky’s music is both familiar — the melodies and jagged subdivisions are clearly stated — and surprisingly new-sounding. “The biggest challenge was for Dave,” Mr. Iverson said recently by phone, “because he had to compose a part that didn’t exist in the original. But we found that Stravinsky’s rhythmic language suits the drum set. Actually, it sounds like a lot of modern jazz.”Music is the thing that drives Mr. Morris’s work; he likes to refer to himself as a musician as well as a choreographer. (He also conducts.) It’s not surprising then that he casts a wide musical net in this Brooklyn Academy season, which includes works from the early Romanticism of Felix Mendelssohn and Carl Maria von Weber to the Impressionism of Debussy and the harmonic adventurousness of the American composers Henry Cowell and Lou Harrison.“Jenn and Spencer,” on the same program as “Spring, Spring, Spring,” is something of an anomaly for Mr. Morris: an extended duet for a man and a woman. The two dancers, caught up in an ugly tangle of attraction, need and conflict, circle each other, as if bent on mutual destruction. The banging chords and biting melodies of Mr. Cowell’s Suite for Violin and Piano heighten the sense of impending violence. It’s as if, Mr. Morris said, “the real ‘Jenn and Spencer’ were happening somewhere offstage, and we were watching the parts we wish we couldn’t see.”“Whelm,” to have its world premiere at the Brooklyn Academy, is choreographed for a quartet of dancers, and set to two piano preludes and an étude, all by Debussy, a composer Mr. Morris has never before used. “I’ve been wanting to choreograph ‘La Cathédrale Engloutie’ for a long time” he said, “and I wanted another very gloomy, scary piece, so I chose ‘Des Pas Sur la Neige.’ Then I added one of the weirder études” — “Étude Pour les Notes Répétées,” a quick-paced, teasing piece built on insistent one-note ostinatos. The three pieces will be played by the company’s music director, Colin Fowler.When the troupe traveled to Southeast Asia last year under the auspices of the State Department, Mr. Fowler helped arrange the polka section of Mr. Harrison’s score for “Grand Duo” for an ensemble of traditional Cambodian instruments, and piano. The dancers performed the accompanying dance on a makeshift stage in the jungle outside of Phnom Penh. “What’s amazing about Mark’s work,” the company veteran Michelle Yard said recently by phone, “is that it’s so closely linked to the music that you can do it in New York or in Cambodia, and it just works.” The full “Grand Duo,” a company staple from 1993, is on the first program at the Brooklyn Academy.“Words,” created specifically for the Asian tour, will also return after a short run at last year’s Fall for Dance festival. Because Morris knew the company would be appearing in various settings — hotel conference rooms, schools, makeshift stages — he conceived the choreography in modules, to be performed in many combinations.The basic component of each subdivision is a duet, with other dancers weaving in and out. A certain amount of improvisation is built in: “We change at which point certain things happen, the speed, the dynamic,” the longtime Morris dancer Lauren Grant explained after a recent rehearsal, “so it’s different every time.”During the tour, the company was split; half the dancers went to Europe, half to Cambodia, Timor and Taiwan. The two halves met in China. It’s a sign of just how busy the company has become — one reason it hasn’t performed at the Brooklyn Academy, the house with which it is most closely associated, in three years. Mr. Morris is as productive ever. “It never really stops,” said the company dancer Aaron Loux. While he was making “Whelm,” he was also putting together a work for Tanglewood this summer, as well as a new ballet for Houston Ballet. But the Brooklyn Academy, just across the way from the company’s headquarters, still has a special place in the dancers’ hearts. “We love performing there,” Ms. Yard said, “I was born in Brooklyn. BAM is home.”Advertisement