By NEIL DRUMMINGAPRIL 10, 2015
Kathryn Hahn is sitting in the basement of a Roman Catholic school in the South Bronx, watching a handful of 6- to 8-year-olds sing hymns to Hashem. St. Ignatius has been transformed into a Hebrew school for a day. Sawyer Shipman, the young actor who plays Ms. Hahn’s son, Julius, on the new Showtime series “Happyish,” fidgets anxiously in her lap.“Those are called yarmulkes, honey,” she says, responding to the boy’s bafflement over all the “hats.” “They’re what Jews wear.”The question of faith and whether to pass it on to your children is one of the big midlife conundrums the show’s creator, the author and “This American Life” contributor Shalom Auslander, tries to tackle in this autobiographical dramedy, which makes its debut April 26. “Happyish” revolves around Thom Payne, a disgruntled ad man battling career obsolescence played by Steve Coogan; his artist wife, Lee, played by Ms. Hahn; and their attempt to carve out a slice of happiness in the relative wilds of Woodstock, N.Y. (Mr. Coogan took over the part after Philip Seymour Hoffman, who had been cast as the husband, died last year.)Estranged from her Jewish faith and her family, Ms. Hahn’s character wrestles with introducing Julius to Judaism. It’s an issue that the actress can relate to. “My husband is Jewish,” said Ms. Hahn, a 41-year-old mother of two. “There are big, big questions when you are a little person. I have no answers. I feel like such a child myself.”AdvertisementAnswers or no, Ms. Hahn says she is thrilled to be playing a character struggling with adult concerns.Though she has a master of fine arts from the Yale School of Drama and has had dramatic roles on TV series like “Crossing Jordan“ and in films like “Revolutionary Road,” Ms. Hahn is known primarily as a comic actress. Such roles began with what she calls her “best friend chapter,” when she played gal pal to more recognizable contemporaries like Cameron Diaz and Amanda Peet in movies like “How to Lose a Guy in 10 Days,” “A Lot Like Love,” and “The Holiday.” “The romantic comedy machine needs those to shine the light on the stars,” Ms. Hahn said. Yet she remembers the period as “not easy, not so satisfying.”Ms. Hahn solidified her reputation as a strong, funny and dependable ensemble player in working with comedy directors like Adam McKay (“Anchorman,” “Step Brothers”) and David Wain (“Wanderlust”). While she was grateful for the opportunity to work alongside “mad geniuses” like Will Ferrell and John C. Reilly, a part of her remained unfulfilled by the range of jobs she was getting.AdvertisementMs. Hahn, who speaks with her hands and laughs easily, was particularly emphatic when talking about chasing the kind of well-rounded career she always wanted. After graduating from Northwestern University — with a “B.S.,” she said, “as my dad likes to point out” — she moved to New York to pursue her dream of becoming a stage actor. Born in Ohio, Ms. Hahn spent half of her 20s auditioning for and performing in “Off Off Off Off” Broadway plays and working as a receptionist at a hair salon to pay rent. When she applied to Yale, it was not simply as a résumé builder. “I wanted to have a break from trying to survive financially and just have a monastic, creative experience for three years,” she said. “I just wanted to work.”At Yale, Ms. Hahn threw herself into roles like Polonius in “Hamlet” and Granma Joad in “The Grapes of Wrath.” “What I loved about school was that your body didn’t matter,” she recalled. “What you looked like — the exterior — didn’t matter.” After that, she was confronted with the superficiality of her field. “All of the sudden it was like, ‘Oh, do I have to fix my teeth?’ ”She soon found a path for herself by eschewing the spotlight. “Early on,” she said, “because I was so excited to be invited to the party in any capacity, the energy that I put out into the business was that I was going to be a really game supporting-character actress.”Ms. Hahn admits that she was limited by her self-image in those early years. “I never saw myself as that groomed, perfect person,” she said. “I never felt the confidence to just stand there, having a camera on my face. It’s a really vulnerable thing without” — she danced a goofy jig in her seat to signify broadly hamming it up.Eventually, though, Ms. Hahn began to think of herself differently. The turning point came, she said, when the TV writer and producer Jill Soloway cast her as the lead in her film “Afternoon Delight” (2013), about a 30-something mom mired in middle-class ennui who takes in a homeless stripper for reasons more selfish than selfless. “That’s the kind of work I wanted to get into this mess for in the first place,” Ms. Hahn said of the juicy part. “That real work of what it is to be a human being.”Ms. Soloway sang Ms. Hahn’s praises via email: ”She’s unparalleled in her beauty and stature — she looks like Stephanie Seymour,” she wrote. “But she also has an incredible way into the kind of authentic realness that made the careers of women like Diane Keaton back in the 1970s.” She added, “The industry has never really known how to handle a woman like that — a woman whose beauty is so intrinsically linked to her unique character.”“Delight” won Ms. Soloway a top award at Sundance and cemented her working relationship with Ms. Hahn. (Ms. Soloway also cast her as a rabbi in her acclaimed Amazon series “Transparent.”) “I think the fact that Jill saw that in me and really took that gamble on me for ‘Afternoon Delight’ — that unlocked something in me that I hadn’t been able to do, that I didn’t think I’d be allowed to do,” Ms. Hahn said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Auslander said he also felt that Ms. Hahn was being underused in Hollywood when he pursued her for “Happyish.” “She was clearly hilarious,” he said, “but also, to me, clearly had a deeper emotional well than I thought the work she was doing was tapping into.”By the second episode, tapping that well includes having a Yiddish-inflected, self-esteem-decimating screaming match with a cardboard box, which harangues her with her mother’s voice.Ms. Hahn says that working on “Happyish” is teaching her how to rein in her comic instincts. “If you push at all,” she said, “if you put too much gas on any joke, you can smell it.” While she’s thankful for any opportunity to flex different muscles, Ms. Hahn admits that the more developed ones still kick in pretty hard.Advertisement“That’s been a challenge,” she said. “The tap dancer in me wants to” — she paused and danced that same jig — “and that’s just not this gig.”A version of this article appears in print on April 12, 2015, on Page AR20 of the New York edition with the headline: From Antic Gal Pal to ‘Happyish’ Woman.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.