Updated, April 16 |  The contested items have been withdrawn from the auction. Original post remains below.Japanese-Americans are protesting an auction slated for Friday of hundreds of artifacts from World War II camps where Americans of Japanese descent were imprisoned.Rago auction house in Lambertville, N.J., is offering photos of internees and objects that they made, including cigarette cases woven from onion sack string and wooden family nameplates that were attached to barracks. The internees gave their artworks and furniture to the historian Allen Hendershott Eaton while he was researching his 1952 book, “Beauty Behind Barbed Wire: The Arts of the Japanese in Our War Relocation Camps.”A petition on Change.org calls the sale “a betrayal of those imprisoned people who thought their gifts would be used to educate, not be sold to the highest bidder in a national auction, pitting families against museums against private collectors.” A Facebook page for the cause has attracted almost 1,800 likes as of Monday evening. In posts, people are calling for the collection to be turned over to institutions. Internees and their descendants have also written to say that they recognize their own family members in the photos for sale.The poet Janice Mirikitani saw an image of her cousin Jimmy Tsutomu Mirikitani in a batch of 63 photos expected to bring between $800 and $1,200. “Do not commit this travesty of cheapening and ‘selling’ memories of cherished family members, and artwork which was created to survive the isolation and humiliation of the camp experience,” she wrote on the protest Facebook page.Toshi Abe, a board member of the Japanese American Citizens League and a spokesman for the group protesting the sale, said in an interview that postponing the auction would allow Japanese-Americans to research a better solution for the collection than dispersal on the market.“We want time to really sort out what to do with this artwork,” he said.A spokeswoman for Rago wrote in an email that the unnamed auction consignor, who knew the Eaton family, is “not in a financial position” to donate the material to institutions and “did not feel qualified to choose one institution over another.” The consignor has described the protests as a “social media attack” meant to “bully us into compliance with their demands.”Eric L. Muller, a historian who consulted on the catalog for Rago, has canceled a lecture at the auction house slated for Wednesday. Since the consignor has refused to donate or privately sell the artifacts to Japanese-American cultural institutions, he wrote in an email, “I did not feel that I could deliver a public lecture connected to the sale in good conscience.”A version of this article appears in print on 04/14/2015, on page C3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Auction Prompts Protests From Japanese-Americans.