Günter Grass, the Nobel Prize-winning German novelist, died on Monday at 87. Mr. Grass’s career was long, but his literary reputation is still anchored most firmly by his first novel, “The Tin Drum.” Mixed reviews in The Times haven’t aged as well as the book.In 1963, in The New York Times Book Review, Frederic Morton called it “a formidable, if formidably uneven novel” that “brings off what no German has managed or even dared to attempt,” which was to show the Nazis were not “imposing their exotic evil on the good little people” but “were the good little people themselves.”In The Times, Orville Prescott called it a “remarkable book,” “certain to be highly praised and discussed.” But he wrote: “Whether it will attract American readers is doubtful.” Praising Mr. Grass as “exuberantly inventive and imaginative,” Mr. Prescott also blanched at some of the book’s contents. “It is gross, grotesque, gruesome and horrible throughout,” he wrote. “Even those who think themselves inured to the indecencies of modern fiction will find much of ‘The Tin Drum’ excessively nasty. It is blasphemous also, deliberately and offensively blasphemous.” He concluded: “How much more effective ‘The Tin Drum’ would have been if written with a modicum of restraint, selectivity and taste!”Reviewing “Dog Years” two years later, Mr. Prescott called it a “labored, tiresome, pitilessly dull novel,” and again made mention of “offensive indecencies.” In the Book Review, Stephen Spender shared some of Mr. Prescott’s qualms. “ ‘Dog Years’ is far too long,” he wrote. “In places it is turgid. But it contains scenes more powerful than those by any other contemporary novelist.”In the last years of Mr. Grass’s life, much of the discussion about him concerned his revelation that he had served in the Waffen-SS as a teenager, which he wrote about in his 2007 memoir, “Peeling the Onion.” John Irving, a longtime outspoken admirer of Mr. Grass and his work, wrote a lengthy essay about that book, and about his relationship with Mr. Grass, in the Book Review. “It was Günter Grass who demonstrated that it was possible to be a living writer who wrote with Dickens’s full range of emotion and relentless outpouring of language. Grass wrote with fury, love, derision, slapstick, pathos — all with an unforgiving conscience,” Mr. Irving wrote. When he turned to assessing the new memoir, Mr. Irving wrote: “No one I know who’s actually read ‘Peeling the Onion’ wants Grass to give back his Nobel. The memoir is as good as the very best of Grass’s novels.”More reviews of Mr. Grass’s work in The Times: “Dog Years” (Book Review)
“Cat and Mouse” (Book Review)
“Local Anaesthetic” (Book Review)
“Local Anaesthetic” (Books of The Times)
“The Rat” (Books of The Times)
“The Rat” (Book Review)
“Two States — One Nation?” (Book Review)
“Two States — One Nation?” (Books of The Times)
“The Call of the Toad” (Books of The Times)
“My Century” (Book Review)
“My Century” (Books of The Times)
“Too Far Afield” (Book Review)
“Crabwalk” (Book Review)
“Crabwalk” (Books of The Times)
“The Box” (Book Review)Other Articles:A Talk With Günter Grass
A Tale of Two Germanys
An excerpt from “Peeling the Onion”