Season 6, Episode 19: “Winning Ugly”So the commenters who predicted that Alicia Florrick would never take office as Cook County state’s attorney may have been right. Or not! Even at the end of “Winning Ugly,” the season’s 19th episode, it wasn’t absolutely clear.The episode offered parallel crises: the perils of Alicia, as she tried to fight off a recount, and the perils of Diane, who faced jail time because of the false evidence she introduced against Detective Prima. Both appeared to win their battles, only to snatch defeat from the jaws of victory.Alicia, already glum because she kept having to lie about her relationship with Will Gardner, was even more in the dumps when she learned that a hacking device had been found in a voting machine and that her campaign was being accused of putting it there to steal votes from her opponent, Frank Prady.What followed was a tortuous trail of charges and countercharges, small lies and big lies. Frank Landau of the state Democratic Party played down the “silly investigation” Alicia faced and introduced her to the lawyer the party had hired for her, Spencer Randolph (Ron Rifkin), who was apparently very famous. In a series of exchanges before the election board, Spencer continually bested Prady’s representative, Martin Parillo (Remy Auberjonois). But then things started getting weird.We’ll skip some steps here involving the governor’s oversight of voting machines, the resurfacing of the oily operative Ernie Nolan (Michael Gaston), his blatant lies about Alicia and her surreptitious recording of him, a wholly superfluous subplot about the age of the hacking chips, and the revelation that Randolph was going after Peter for fraud in an earlier election (which never really made any sense).What it came down to, finally, was a parable about the venality of politics. Once it looked as if a recount was likely despite the best efforts of Alicia and her lawyer, she was called back into Frank Landau’s office and told, much to her chagrin, that she needed to withdraw. It wasn’t her, it was them — a recount would draw attention to another election victory that the Democrats couldn’t afford to see reversed, because it would cost them a filibuster-proof super majority in the state senate. An indignant Alicia asked what would happen if she didn’t withdraw, and was told that the party would destroy her.She wasn’t done yet — there was still the chance that Randolph could fight off the recount, which would make the whole thing go away. But that was just a setup for an even bigger indignity. After telling her, in his intellectual-avuncular style, “Let me handle it,” he stood up and, yes, blatantly lied about her to the election board, saying she’d misled him all along and that she’d stolen the election. Outside, as she brushed away tears, he owned up to the whole Machiavellian thing: the party couldn’t risk the super majority, and Alicia had to be a good Democrat and step down now.Which led to the final scene: Alicia arriving home to find Peter waiting, and falling into his arms, sobbing. An admission of defeat? Or will the iron assert itself next week? (Even though continuing the fight could hurt Peter.) Are you buying any of this? How do we feel about the way Grace’s distress over her mother’s lying (about the affair with Will) was shunted aside by Alicia’s downfall?  Or was the scene with Grace just there to make a point about how Alicia’s compromises were useless — just a squandering of her moral capital — in the face of the greater immorality of the political process?The story back at the office, meanwhile, was much more straightforward. Andrew Wiley (Tim Guinee) gave Diane the bad news about the faking of the metadata on Prima’s email (Kalinda hadn’t fessed up for legal reasons, apparently) and then delivered his report to the police review board. Before he could even finish Diane and Kalinda arrived to tell all and throw themselves on the mercy of whoever would listen. The next step was for Diane to negotiate a deal with the prosecutor Geneva Pine. (Will Geneva’s affair with the detective ever become relevant? It was referred to again, which gave me hope that it might not be left as a loose end.) Geneva’s offer: her boss, James Castro, would drop the charges — but only if Diane testified against the drug dealer Lemond Bishop.So there was Diane’s choice: three years in jail for the false evidence, or a lifetime of looking over her shoulder for one of Lemond’s hit men. While she agonized, Kalinda also agonized, and Cary told them both not to testify against Lemond. What came next was the second-most predictable thing that happened on Sunday, after Hillary Clinton’s presidential campaign announcement: Cary went to Geneva and offered to testify against Lemond, which would presumably keep Diane out of jail and Kalinda out of a shallow grave. As Diane said, right back where we started at the beginning of the season, with Cary in jeopardy.Let us know what you thought of “Winning Ugly” in the comments. Predictions accepted on what sort of drastic measures Kalinda — with only three episodes left in Archie Panjabi’s tenure on the show — will now take to get Cary off the hook. 