
The Knick By                     
 MIKE HALE
 
OCT. 17, 2015
We’re supposed to think these days that anything movies can do, television can do better. So it’s worth noting that one of the best shows on television — “The Knick” on Cinemax — stands out precisely because it’s so unlike any other drama on TV.This doesn’t disprove the premise — it just illustrates what the possibilities are for truly cinematic TV-making, and how far everyone else still has to go to catch up with Steven Soderbergh. In the second season of “The Knick” he is once again the director, the cinematographer and the editor. (He’s credited for photography and editing under his frequent aliases Peter Andrews and Mary Ann Bernard.)The writing of “The Knick” isn’t as distinguished, and the plotting can be contrived. (The decision to inflict Algernon Edwards, the trailblazing black doctor played by Andre Holland, with a detached retina in the new season just feels like piling on.) The structure is generally the familiar cable-drama hop, skip and jump among intertwined story lines. But working within those limits, Mr. Soderbergh constructs a seamless, shimmering, restlessly propulsive visual narrative that can fairly be called poetic.Some of his choices are probably practical, like the way so many dim interior sets — reflecting a time when electric power was in its infancy — are lighted by harsh white light coming through windows, which also gives a sense of the cold city outside. Some are simple but unusual for television, like the number of medium and long shots, or are simply a matter of editing skill, like the artful ways in which composition, movement and sound bridge scene changes.AdvertisementWhat stays with you, though, are the virtuoso moments, the things you simply don’t see elsewhere on TV. In the season premiere, the show’s seriously flawed hero, Dr. John Thackery, wakes and realizes he’s been kidnapped. The camera slowly pulls back and as it moves through the confined space, Thackery, and the viewer, realize that he’s in the hull of a boat — you can’t help thinking of the transportation of slaves. Then the camera goes above deck and the feeling utterly changes, in a way both magical and sinister, as you see a beautiful sailboat gliding across misty blue water, an image that could have been painted by Eakins or Homer.AdvertisementThere were other examples — the camera moving around a conference table at floor height, following Edwards as he petitioned the white members of the Knickerbocker Hospital board, emphasizing their seated, stolid postures. The way the camera stayed on the face of Cornelia Robertson as her predatory father-in-law, just off screen, droned on about moving her back to New York. The wrestling scene, which, in a favorite tactic of Mr. Soderbergh’s, was done with no sound other than the frantic synthesized music on the soundtrack.So what actually happened? We were caught up on the current situation through the narration of the nurse Lucy Elkins (the wonderful Eve Hewson), reading a letter she had written to Thackery. He remained in the clinic where he was to overcome his cocaine addiction (with the help of the new drug heroin). She remained in love with him, having spurned the attentions of the younger doctor Bertie Chickering. Sister Harriet, the abortionist, remained in jail awaiting trial. Chickering and Edwards were now doing the placenta previa surgeries Thackery pioneered. Dr. Everett Gallinger, Edwards’s bitter rival, had not returned to the Knick. Groundbreaking for the new uptown hospital location was imminent and the Knick’s director, the shifty Herman Barrow, was triumphant.The rest of the episode elaborated on these new developments. We saw that Edwards was acting chief of surgery, and was openly campaigning to keep the job on the assumption that Thackery would never return. Henry Robertson supported him but the other board members were opposed, and Gallinger went so far as to kidnap Thackery and force him to dry out at sea in his own bid to knock Edwards out of the top spot.Cornelia Robertson had moved to San Francisco with her new husband, Phillip Showalter, where her crusading spirit found an outlet in bringing food to Chinese immigrants quarantined because of an outbreak of plague. But then her father-in-law, Hobart, appeared, having taken the train from New York and proving that even in the 1900s masters of the universe would go to great lengths to stalk and sexually harass women. Hobart promised to move the couple into new apartments he was building in New York, but when they arrived the construction was incomplete and he announced that they’d be moving into his house instead. Cornelia was told this while standing next to Edwards, her very secret lover (and father of the child she aborted in Season 1).Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Sister Harriet was seen a few times in prison, being chastised as the devil by her former mother superior and being told by her former partner in abortion, the ambulance driver Cleary, that he would hire a lawyer to get her out. He’ll have the money himself, partly because of the profits he’ll make from the new motorized ambulance he persuaded Barrow to subsidize.Edwards went to a black ophthalmologist, who diagnosed the detached retina, a consequence of the beating Edwards intentionally took after Cornelia Robertson broke it off with him.Gallinger, when he wasn’t trying to restore the old order at the Knick, was supervising efforts to use cadaver teeth to replace those pulled out of his wife’s mouth in Season 1 in an attempt to cure her postpartum depression.The health inspector Jacob Speight prowled around the docks, trying to figure out why plague cases were arriving on ships at Ellis Island.AdvertisementPing Wu, having disposed of the gangster Bunky Collier in Season 1, was now installed in a much more plush brothel than the Chinatown den he used to run. He had also inherited Barrow’s gambling debts, which he used as leverage to get Barrow to agree that his prostitutes could be examined regularly at the Knick.And finally there was Thackery, watching the clock for his next “treatment” and conducting illicit plastic surgeries on society women. (Personal note: the technique he used to fix a deviated septum, which consisted of placing a long chisel in the nose and whacking it with a hammer, was exactly the same one used on me about 90 years later.) Mr. Owen was all shifty, nervous and yet softly wheedling in the scene in which Gallinger came to visit him and promised to “do something” about his situation, that something turning out to be kidnapping him. Later, having proven to Gallinger that he was clean by his ability to tie sailing knots, Thackery announced that he’d had a revelation — if the purpose of medicine was to find cures, then his new purpose was to find a cure for addiction.Let us know what you thought of the Season 2 premiere of “The Knick.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »