Season 7, Episode 9: “New Business”At its best, “Mad Men” has been a meticulously crafted and surprising show. At its worst, as in this stilted, confounding episode, it has squandered its talented core cast and flaunted symbolic messages so blunt they seem more appropriate for, well, advertising billboards.The period drama on AMC.Titled “New Business,” this week’s hour felt like an eruption of old, bad habits, choppily edited. The episode zips around so quickly and spends so much time establishing new characters that each main player can barely squeeze in a sage line (freighted with wisdom) in his or her little squib of screen time. We see so little of Pete that he only gets in a couple of good whines before suddenly blurting out his abruptly philosophical fear that he won’t be able to start over again if he can’t figure out where to start. Megan’s family acts out a Model U.N. debate over the role of divorce. Mimi Rogers, as the hustling photographer with the Susan Sontag hair, had more interesting things to wear than lines to say: Her rushed seductions of Peggy and Stan were as sudden and, oddly, superficial as Roger’s hyperspeed reunion with Megan’s mother, Marie. The period drama on AMC.We are teased with a glimpse of Betty, but she gets just a few tweets’ worth of dialogue: Going back to school. Psychology! Smiley face. She only appears in the episode so that Don can deliver that sad look over his shoulder at the family he once had. Don’s apartment is cleared out so that Megan can deliver that same look, so that the waitress Diana can serve Don’s line from his Kodak carousel pitch, about how nostalgia is “a twinge in the heart,” right back at him. It’s like an echo chamber of overwrought sentiment.Some critics have written about how “Mad Men” caters to a certain misplaced nostalgia for the Sixties. This episode suffered from a misplaced nostalgia for itself: It reminded me of the first half of a victory lap reunion show — before the stars come out, when it’s just supporting actors reminding you of characters you never got to know very well. In pre-season interviews, the show’s creator Matthew Weiner has talked about giving each character his or her little swan song of a goodbye. The previous episode felt like Ken’s last aria and it certainly seemed like this episode existed primarily to toast Megan and pay tribute to the fearsome Julia Ormond. But every loose end does not need to be tied up. Burt Cooper’s lovely song-and-dance may have been a brilliant goodbye, but if every character gets his or her own curtain call, fans will soon weary of all the forced standing ovations.And what to divine from Don’s doomy dalliance with Diana? On Twitter, at least, she seems to be the most divisive element of the show since Don’s Dick Whitman flashbacks. In the series premiere, Joan told the new secretary, Peggy, that the men in the office were “looking for something between a mother and a waitress.” Diana, the waitress, recalls Don’s mother — and all of the other women he’s fallen for too suddenly, and, perhaps, too foolishly. But their conversations seem to be taking on some other dreamy plane. Diana seems as unhinged from reality as Neve Campbell’s fellow passenger from last year’s Season 7 premiere, who said her husband “died of thirst” before she scattered his ashes at Disneyland. She was as dark-haired as both Diana and Linda Cardellini’s Sylvia Rosen, who makes a brief appearance here. (Let some other recapper tell us why it’s significant that Diana’s hometown in Wisconsin shares a name with the French tragedian Racine. I’ll pass.)Diane can’t sleep in Don’s bed, but Don has always been most comfortable with someone he doesn’t really know. Ever a romantic fantasist, Don only likes “the beginnings of things,” as Faye Miller once said. He loves the smell of Avon shampoo in her hair and the aura of her domestic bliss in a split-level ranch home. Most of all, Don sees, in her, himself — which is to say that he doesn’t see her at all, or even try to get to know her. When Diana drunkenly admits that she left a child behind, Don doesn’t leave her crummy apartment. She practically has to chase him off. He doesn’t leave because she’s withheld the truth or lied. He only leaves because she doesn’t want him there.Will the oracular Greek waitress justify her weighty dialogue and tragic back story? Will we ever see her again? Or will she return to the daughter whom we know as little more than a symbolic gesture?There were elements to admire in this episode: Harry’s blunt seduction of Megan confirmed his transformation into a lecherous creep. I’d rather have seen more of Don and Megan together, rather than Megan and her sister, but their short scene was sharp, if only for Megan’s angry rant that Don is “nothing but a liar. An aging, sloppy, selfish liar.” (It’s a line that might have turned Don on at a different time.) The surprise delivery of his million-buck check (worth about six million today) seemed to prove that power works: Don can pay to fix his mistakes. He can’t buy love, of course, but he will surely buy a load of new furniture for his new bachelor pad.Over six-plus seasons, “Mad Men” has set the bar so high and taken so many risks that a few sub-par episodes are to be expected. This odd gamble of an episode didn’t pan out, but if next week’s installment is a return to form, we’ll all forget about it: Even Don has written a few mediocre taglines.A quick note: These recaps are not intended to be exhaustive; that would be exhausting for all of us. I’ll just try to pick a theme each week and continue the conversation. So please share your thoughts in the comments. Were you as dissatisfied with this episode as I was? Do you think Diana will return? How much worse can Pete’s plaids possibly get? And wouldn’t Betty, who was forced by Don to see a therapist, be one of the world’s worst shrinks?Logan Hill is a journalist who has contributed to The New York Times, New York, Rolling Stone, “This American Life,” Cosmopolitan, Glamour, Wired and others. You can follow him on Twitter at @loganhill33.