AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn Shattuck8 P.M. (Smithsonian) LINCOLN’S LAST DAY Commemorating the 150th anniversary of the assassination of President Abraham Lincoln by John Wilkes Booth, this documentary uses computer-generated maps of 1865 Washington and artifacts from the Smithsonian’s National Museum of American History and from Ford’s Theater — among them, Lincoln’s gold watch and hat, and Booth’s diary and derringer — to piece together the movements of key players in the plot to avenge the defeated South after the Civil War and throw the future of the Union into question. In “Living With Lincoln,” at 9 on HBO, Peter Kunhardt chronicles his family’s efforts to assemble and care for one of the largest private collections of 19th-century American photography, most of it devoted to Lincoln, across five generations. The Meserve-Kunhardt Collection — more than 73,000 items, including 57,000 prints and thousands of books, among other things — was bought by the Beinecke Rare Book & Manuscript Library at Yale last month.7:50 P.M. (Starz Cinema) A SEPARATION (2011) In this Oscar winner for best foreign-language film, a couple (Leila Hatami and Peyman Moadi, left) must decide whether to leave Iran for the sake of their daughter or to stay to care for a parent with dementia. Either option could end their marriage. “It is a rigorously honest movie about the difficulties of being honest, a film that tries to be truthful about the slipperiness of truth,” A. O. Scott wrote in The New York Times about this drama, written and directed by Asghar Farhadi and starring his daughter, Sarina, as the couple’s child. “It also sketches a portrait — perhaps an unnervingly familiar picture for American audiences — of a society divided by sex, generation, religion and class.”8 P.M. (Nickelodeon) SO CLOSE AND YET SO FAR AWAY: THE KIDS OF CUBA “Nick News With Linda Ellerbee” travels to Cuba to explore the lives of that country’s children, and what its improving relationship with the United States could mean for them.8 P.M. (TCM) GUEST PROGRAMMER: MO ROCCA Mr. Rocca, the humorist, presents three films, starting with the 1933 version of “King Kong,” with Fay Wray. Peter Bogdanovich’s “What’s Up, Doc?” (1972), featuring a plaid overnight bag — and Barbra Streisand and Ryan O’Neal — at its screwball center, follows at 10, and Alfred Hitchcock’s “The Birds” (1963), starring Tippi Hedren, at midnight.9 P.M. (AMC) TURN: WASHINGTON’S SPIES Season 2 opens with the loss of Philadelphia to the British, forcing Gen. George Washington to deal with desertion, death and even conspirators within his ranks. His closest ally is the increasingly disgruntled Benedict Arnold. But Washington’s hope lies with Abraham Woodhull (Jamie Bell), the lone friendly civilian deep behind enemy lines.10 P.M. (13) THE HOMESTRETCH “Independent Lens” follows homeless Chicago teenagers trying to complete high school educations and build more stable futures.10 P.M. (FYI) OUTBACK NATION The landscape designer Jamie Durie rescues families from overgrown gardens, decaying decks and slimy pools in this new backyard makeover series. But first they’ll have to camp out among their hedges and weeds to get a better sense of the kind of outdoor oases they envision. A second season of “Tiny House Nation,” which tours a 576-square-foot Mississippi dwelling rebuilt after Hurricane Katrina, leads in at 9 p.m.What’s Streaming NowSUSAN SARANDON FAVORITES Ms. Sarandon compiled eight documentaries for the SundanceNow Doc Club: “Ai Weiwei: Never Sorry,” Alison Klayman’s exploration of contemporary China and work by this artist-activist; “The Beaches of Agnès,” Agnès Varda’s self-portrait (above); “Marwencol,” in which Jeff Malmberg chronicles the recovery of the artist Mark Hogancamp after a brutal attack; “Pink Ribbons, Inc.,” Léa Pool’s examination of that breast cancer campaign; and Tia Lessin and Carl Deal’s “Trouble the Water,” about street hustlers who became heroes after Hurricane Katrina. Ms. Sarandon and Morgan Spurlock were executive producers of two other films: “Storied Streets,” a look at homelessness in 14 cities, which was directed by Ms. Sarandon’s son Jack Henry Robbins and by Thomas A. Morgan; and “Waiting for Mamu,” Mr. Morgan’s film about Pushpa Basnet, an advocate for the shunned children of Nepalese convicts. “DamNation,” an investigation into the American attitude toward dams, will be added later this month. (docclub.com) KATHRYN SHATTUCKAdvertisement