By SIOBHAN BURKEAPRIL 12, 2015
In Gillian Walsh’s “Scenario: Script to Perform,” the dancers never look up. On Thursday at the Kitchen, Maggie Cloud, Nicole Daunic, Mickey Mahar and Ms. Walsh walked into the bright, silent space clasping sheets of paper, heads bowed and eyes fixed on those pages, to remain there for most of the next 80 minutes.Were they scripts or scripture, these handheld scores? Deeply inward and inscrutably systematic, as intriguing to watch as it is exhausting, “Scenario” is almost religious in its focus on those documents, whatever they may contain.The spartan work, Ms. Walsh’s first evening-length piece, feels at first like a rehearsal. The dancers wear various combinations of denim, sneakers, shorts and T-shirts. (The aesthetic is resolutely ’90s.) In muted voices, as if speaking only to themselves, they recite strands of letters and numbers. These correspond, or at least coexist, with a repertoire of simple, deliberate movements, repeated and rearranged. Feet, widely parted, pivot from parallel to turned out; a lunge addresses one corner of the empty room, then another. “Five. Seven. K. Five. Seven. Two. N,” is one recurring, cryptic fragment. “Ten. Twenty. Ten,” elicits a side-to-side jump, one foot slightly in front of the other.The pauses between words, varying in length, establish a lulling rhythm. Stefan Tcherepnin’s barely there sound, a buzzing that intensifies and recedes, reminds us that we’re in a theater, as does Zack Tinkelman’s lighting, which has surprising moments of deep pink and blue.AdvertisementYou can try to decode the patterns here, or not; to do so proves both absorbing and exasperating. What determines when the dancers stop in midsequence, assume new positions and start again? What dictates when they speak and move in unison or diverge from one another? Or when a fifth dancer (Jesse Hart) comes and goes? Are the sporadic mistakes (“Can we do that again?”) spontaneous? To know might be beside the point, but there are embedded secrets. Ms. Walsh has said that she was interested in “mass dance or corporate choreographies,” and the recited letters, strung together, yield lyrics from an apropos pop song. (No spoilers.)The tedium of “Scenario” periodically builds to something more sublime, a testament to Ms. Walsh’s rigor. Twice, Ms. Cloud lays down her script, raises her arms and, with her back to us, sinks into an ultraslow plié: an ordinary exercise made exquisite. When the dancers pause to do nothing but stand, the stillness is so dense it could devour us.Advertisement We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.