AdvertisementSupported byBy Brian SeibertOne thing that Dance Theater of Harlem seems to understand is how to please its public. At City Center on Friday, as the troupe presented the second program of a four-show return to a theater that had long been its home, a receptive audience expressed its approval enthusiastically and with increasing intensity through each of the four works. This beloved company is still in recovery after a hiatus from 2004 to 2013, but by the sound of it, the show was a smash. That is not to say that the troupe is what it could or should be or what it once was. The test case on Friday was the opener, George Balanchine’s “Agon.” This 1957 masterwork is central to the history of 20th-century ballet but also specifically to this company’s. The original man in the pas de deux, which was shocking not just because the casting was mixed race, was Arthur Mitchell, who founded Dance Theater of Harlem 12 years later. “Agon” should be home territory, and yet these skilled dancers don’t quite know what to do with it. They plug in to its high tension and graceful wit only intermittently. As during the company’s comeback in 2013, Chyrstyn Fentroy came closest on Friday, playing with the intimidating Stravinsky score by delaying the snap of her turning head. Emiko Flanagan, with the sure support of Fredrick Davis, found some feline glamour in the pas de deux; their every extreme position was met with gasps and applause.“Coming Together,” a 1991 Nacho Duato work that just entered the company repertory, is a thrill ride. Despite allusions to thought in the costumes, spoken text and eureka gestures, it isn’t very thoughtful, yet these dancers look good in it, going for broke, especially the sleek missile of Ashley Murphy. The main justification for Christopher Huggins’s mawkish “In the Mirror of Her Mind” (2013), in which a distressed woman runs among three men who toss her acrobatically, is as a vehicle for impassioned performance: Ms. Murphy ended hers in heaving sobs. Robert Garland’s 1999 “Return” is better stuff, letting the dancers have some irresistible fun applying ballet conventions and “Soul Train” steps to recordings by Aretha Franklin and James Brown. I wish Mr. Garland’s choreography engaged more deeply with its many-layered music, as least as rhythmically complex as Stravinsky. More, I wish this company danced “Agon” — and works of that caliber — with the same verve they bring to “Coming Together,” the same pleasure they find in “Return.” Elements of greatness are visible, in flashes, amid the appreciative noises. Advertisement