By NEIL GENZLINGERAPRIL 12, 2015
The British actor David Morrissey probably already knew from his experience playing the Governor on “The Walking Dead” that wickedness has a gravitational pull. But he learns the lesson all over again in “The Driver,” a three-part suspense series on Acorn TV starting Monday.Mr. Morrissey plays the title character, Vince, an ordinary cabdriver who, at the urging of a friend who is an ex-con, takes a job driving for a crime lord known as the Horse (Colm Meaney). The friend (Ian Hart) who recruited him makes it sound as if the job were practically the same as being a cabby.“Just driving,” he explains. “Nothing more, nothing less. Except, sometimes you might have to drive a bit faster.”Vince is reluctant at first.“I thought you said you were sick of being ordinary,” his friend prods. And Vince tells him: “I am. That doesn’t mean I want to be extraordinary in prison.”AdvertisementWe know what’s coming, of course, having seen variations of this plot repeatedly. Vince will eventually give in and walk on the illicit side, and he will soon find that minor offenses lead to major ones. He’ll also find that the lies he has to tell his wife (Claudie Blakley), his boss, the police and others to hide his shadow occupation multiply until he can barely keep track of them.This formula has been worked so often that a story like this needs to have really good acting, which this one does. It also needs to have really credible decision-making by whoever is weaving the tangled web, which is where this mini-series comes up short. Vince’s choices aren’t always believable, beginning with the one to cross the line in the first place. If you need money, sure, take a job working for mobsters. But if you’re merely bored?AdvertisementThe writer, Danny Brocklehurst, weaves in a side plot about an estranged son that never quite seems as if it belongs, and in the end a story that was absorbing early turns into a conveniently timed collision of priorities for Vince.A version of this review appears in print on April 13, 2015, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline: A Cabby Headed for Trouble.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.