AdvertisementSupported byBy Mike HaleHenry Best, a 46-year-old insurance executive from Manchester, England, is a profound portrait of self-loathing in comic form. Googly-eyed at the sight of beautiful young men, he lacks the self-confidence to pursue them. In a loving, committed relationship for nine years, he dismisses the idea of marriage — for him, the sudden availability of same-sex marriage is just an irritation.Henry is at the center of Russell T Davies’s new show, “Cucumber,” receiving its American premiere on Logo on Monday night, and his rapidly cascading midlife crisis, while gay in its details, may resonate painfully with middle-age men of all orientations. When a minor incident at the office sets a spark to the accumulated tinder of his unhappiness, he goes scorched-earth, blowing up his relationship, getting several men arrested and indirectly causing the death of another, all in the first episode.In the hourlong “Cucumber” and its half-hour companion series, “Banana,” also being shown on Logo, Mr. Davies returns to the Manchester setting of “Queer as Folk,” the 1999 series that first made him known in America and was later remade for Showtime. In between, of course, he became a science-fiction demigod by creating the modern “Doctor Who.”“Queer as Folk” focused on men in their teens to late 20s; “Cucumber” picks up the stories of gay Manchester a generation later, but in a more directly humorous, sometimes farcical, form. The plot complications occasionally feel forced, and Henry’s overwhelming dyspepsia sometimes comes off as meanspirited and a little mystifying (through two episodes, anyway).But Mr. Davies, as “Doctor Who” fans know, has perfected a style of propulsive, almost manic comic dialogue with an undercoating of melancholy, and there are plenty of hilarious and touching moments in “Cucumber.” Vincent Franklin, as Henry, delivers a wonderfully filthy monologue on the manifold attractions of Ryan Reynolds. The young men Henry befriends during his crisis break out in cackles of disbelief when they learn that he’s never participated in anal sex (the true symbol of his profound shame and anxiety).Told by one of his contemporaries that the gorgeous young cafeteria worker at his office will “never, ever” have sex with him, he replies: “I know that. But if I stand next to the most beautiful boy in the world, then one day, if I stand there for a thousand years, he will be drunk or blind or bored or bereaved. Or maybe just kind.”“Banana” fleshes out the lives of the young supporting characters of “Cucumber” in a simpler, almost fablelike style. It’s useful if only as an opportunity to see more of Fisayo Akinade’s buoyant performance as a blithely naïve teenage mailroom worker.The baldly titillating titles of the shows (an associated nonfiction Web series is called “Tofu”) are taken from the steps in a scale of male arousal — as Henry’s fortunes rise and fall, he flashes on images of firm cucumbers, soft bananas and flaccid tofu. At its frequent best, “Cucumber” isn’t nearly that obvious.Advertisement