By ROBIN POGREBINAPRIL 12, 2015
LOS ANGELES — Being the director of Eli Broad’s new museum might strike some people as a contradiction in terms.Mr. Broad is the headstrong billionaire philanthropist after all, whose influence and finances rescued the Los Angeles Museum of Contemporary Art and drove the redevelopment of Grand Avenue to revitalize downtown Los Angeles. How could someone running Mr. Broad’s private museum really have any power?But Joanne Heyler, 50, is accustomed to operating in Mr. Broad’s shadow, having run his Broad Art Foundation — which primarily lends works to other institutions — for 20 years.And as director of the Broad Museum — an institution to open here in September that will showcase some of the more than 2,000 important postwar and contemporary artworks amassed by Mr. Broad and his wife, Edythe — Ms. Heyler, by all accounts, has had an essential role in planning the museum and making it happen, though perhaps not ultimate creative control.AdvertisementThe Broads are the institution’s sole donors so far, providing at least $340 million to build and endow it.Advertisement“She’s thinking about how to nest this institution in the community, how to engage the broader culture, how to broaden its audience and what the experience is going to be like for someone going to this museum,” Lisa Dennison, a former Guggenheim director who is a chairwoman of Sotheby’s, said of Ms. Heyler. “The book shop, lighting, conservation, storage, the plan for the opening show — it’s all Joanne.”Drowned out by drilling in the 120,000-square-foot museum the other day — in pinstripes, sneakers and a hard hat — Ms. Heyler exuded a sense of authority in discussing decisions she’d had to make for the museum, like where the escalators should go and what message the building’s design by Diller, Scofidio & Renfro should convey.“Museums are becoming more compelled to be more transparent, less authoritative,” she said, adding that the architecture — which features a honeycomb exoskeleton — “meshes with that.”And in an interview afterward at a nearby cafe, Ms. Heyler described her relationship with Mr. Broad as a partnership. “It’s always a discussion; I think that’s the way it should be,” she said. “I’d be hard pressed to think of an example where I’m just informed of a decision.”Mr. Broad at first declined to be interviewed about Ms. Heyler, agreeing only to answer questions by email. Then on Sunday he called to discuss her and his new institution, saying he initially had not wanted to upstage Ms. Heyler. “I had a pretty good idea of the kind of museum directors who were out there,” said Mr. Broad, who has served on several museum boards. “So I had a pretty good sense that she was the best choice.”As for whether Ms. Heyler has any real autonomy, Mr. Broad said that, although the two meet weekly, she has acted very independently in hiring staff, budgeting and assembling the inaugural installation and programming.“Joanne has more authority than most museum directors that I know who have to report to boards,” Mr. Broad said. “She’s running the show.”AdvertisementMs. Heyler has been the Broads’ right hand as they have built a collection with holdings from the 1950s through today — works by 200 artists, including Robert Rauschenberg, Jeff Koons and Cindy Sherman.While Ms. Heyler said Mr. Broad approved every piece that entered the collection, she is known for often bringing work to his attention, including Los Angeles artists like Mark Bradford.“She encouraged him to focus more on L.A. artists,” said Michael Govan, director of the Los Angeles County Museum of Art. “She’s been a steady force of good.”And while Ms. Heyler and Mr. Broad often attend auctions together, Ms. Heyler sometimes attends and bids on her own. “She’s the ultimate professional and has a level of real ownership,” said Laura Paulson, Christie’s deputy chairwoman of postwar and contemporary art. “She’s been able to really use the collection to bring art to a larger audience.”Not everyone has agreed that Mr. Broad’s collection is a representative survey of contemporary art. In 2008, the feminist group Guerrilla Girls wrote an open letter to Mr. Broad, complaining that his art collection “contains an insignificant number of women and artists of color.” The Broad Foundation collection, the group asserted, included works by “194 artists, 96 percent white, 83 percent male.”Ms. Heyler responded, “Our trend has been to deliberately and steadily reflect diversity,” adding that she was “proud of this trend” and intended to continue it.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Broad has not announced the specifics of its inaugural show except to say that it will be a largely chronological selection from the Broads’ personal collection and that of the foundation, from Jasper Johns in the 1950s to the Icelandic artist Ragnar Kjartansson in the present, whose immersive nine-screen video piece was recently acquired.While the foundation has lent generously over the past 30 years — more than 8,000 loans to over 500 museums — Mr. Broad said he was excited to be able to demonstrate the depth of his collection, like 125 works by Ms. Sherman. “We’ve been terrific lenders,” he said. “At no time have people been able to see it all.”Reaching a larger audience is what drove the creation of the new Broad Museum, Ms. Heyler said. That is why the museum will have free general admission except for select temporary exhibitions (the parking cost is still undetermined); why it will be open six days a week; and why the building includes an auditorium that can hold about 180 people and will feature speakers and film or music presentations.Advertisement“This isn’t meant to be a jewel box,” Ms. Heyler said. “This is meant to be an institution that serves the public.”Still, the Broad is clearly not like other museums. It doesn’t have a board of directors, and it does not need to raise funds. “I often say, ‘I’m the development department,’ ” Ms. Heyler said. “I have one prospect, and I spend a lot of time cultivating that donor.”Ms. Heyler suggested that she was using this freedom to reinvent the museum experience. There is no reception desk, for example; visitors — who need to make reservations, although there can be some walk-ins — will be checked in by greeters in the lobby with iPads and iPhones à Apple retail stores.“We had the opportunity — which I wanted to seize — to do things a little differently,” Ms. Heyler said, adding that it would feel “much less formal than visits to other museums.”Elizabeth Diller, the lead architect, said that, compared with her firm’s other museum projects, “that are complex in terms of all of the stakeholders, this was relatively simple.”“Joanne had a fairly strong voice in it,” she added. “Eli was very respectful of her thoughts about how to curate.”The building, on Grand Avenue, is also part of Mr. Broad’s effort to help reinvigorate downtown Los Angeles. It is near Frank Gehry’s Disney Hall — to which he gave $15 million — and the Museum of Contemporary Art, which Mr. Broad bailed out in 2008 with $30 million.The museum will include a restaurant on its plaza, Otium — it is Latin for “leisure time” — which Mr. Broad is developing with Bill Chait of République and Bestia. It features Timothy Hollingsworth, a former head chef of the French Laundry in Napa Valley, as executive chef.AdvertisementMs. Heyler, who grew up in Los Angeles, earned her bachelor’s degree in art history from Scripps College and a master’s degree in art history from the Courtauld Institute of Art at the University of London.She joined the Broad Foundation as an assistant curator in 1989 and started running it in 1994. “I’m the antithesis of the museum director who has bopped all over the world,” she said. “I’ve had a catbird seat at the highest level of philanthropy and cultural institutional development.”There are still details to be determined before the museum opens on Sept. 20. And the Broad Foundation continues to acquire about one artwork a week. But the other day, Ms. Heyler suggested that she had it all under control. “I cannot wait to get in here and install the collection,” she said. “It’s so close now.”This cool competence, arts executives say, is what has allowed Ms. Heyler to work successfully with the Broads for so long.“That’s why she’s so valuable to Eli and Edye,” Ms. Dennison said. “I don’t think they could have achieved their goals — as well as the public purpose of the collection — without someone as steadfast, trusted, loyal and smart as Joanne.”A version of this article appears in print on April 13, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: At the Helm of a Philanthropist’s New Los Angeles Museum.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.