By MICHAEL COOPERAPRIL 12, 2015
Every so often, buried among the mezzo-sopranos, conductors and set designers, an unusual credit line jumps out of a Metropolitan Opera program.There was the Square Dance Caller when the Met did Carlisle Floyd’s “Susannah,” and the Sanskrit Adviser for its production of Philip Glass’s “Satyagraha.” This Tuesday, when the Met’s new production of “Cavalleria Rusticana” and “Pagliacci” opens, the program will contain this credit: Vaudeville Consultant: Emil Wolk.What’s a vaudeville consultant doing in an opera house? It turns out that not just anyone can choreograph a decent slosh routine, a messy staple of slapstick in which whipped cream, custard or shaving cream is wielded as a projectile, hopefully to comic effect.The new production at the Met sets the opera at a 1948 truck stop and includes vaudevillian high jinks.So when the director of the Met’s new production, David McVicar, decided to set “Pagliacci” at a 1948 truck stop and to make the traveling performers at the opera’s core more like vaudevillians than a traditional commedia dell’arte troupe, he turned to Mr. Wolk, a man of unusually broad theatrical experience, to help him mount the crucial show within the show.Advertisement“He originally wanted me over to do the slosh, which is the cream in the face,” Mr. Wolk, a well-known actor and director, explained the other day after a rehearsal. “We started discussing these old vaudevillian actors and some of the routines, and how this should be entertaining in its own right — not a token gesture.”AdvertisementHe based the opera’s prologue, sung by the baritone George Gagnidze, on an old man-versus-microphone routine by the British comic Dickie Henderson that he watched decades ago at Golders Green Hippodrome, a onetime theater in London. “I was a stagehand, and I watched him every night in the Cinderella pantomime, and I’d stand in the wings and he’d do this wonderful microphone routine,” Mr. Wolk recalled.During a stage rehearsal at the Met the other day, Donald Palumbo, the Met’s chorus master, was keeping a close eye on his charges. Fabio Luisi, the conductor, was working with the stars, Marcelo Álvarez and Patricia Racette. And Mr. Wolk had turned his critical eye to the nonsinging members of the vaudeville troupe — Andy Sapora, Joshua Wynter and Marty Keiser — as they fought with whipped cream and flour and clowned with a chicken puppet that could be a breakout star of the opera season.“I’m very chuffed — is that a word that you have here? — I’m very chuffed that the three lads have gelled so well together,” Mr. Wolk said afterward, citing a British colloquialism meaning pleased.His path to becoming a vaudeville consultant was a twisty one.Mr. Wolk, 70, was born in Brooklyn but moved to London at the age of 6 when his father, the baritone Jess Walters, became a star at the Royal Opera House. Mr. Wolk went in the opposite direction when a voice teacher was less than encouraging about his talents, and decided to study mime and circus skills in Paris. He learned many routines directly from old music hall and pantomime performers during a career as an actor and director that has taken him from experimental theater companies such as People Show to opera houses to the West End, where he co-directed a production of “Animal Crackers,” based on the Marx Brothers film.One of his teachers was Johnny Hutch — who had a long, truly unusual career as an acrobat and comedian on British musical hall stages early in his career in the late 1920s, then on “The Benny Hill Show” and later in life at the Royal Shakespeare Company, where he was a coach.“He gave me material, and would tell me the nuances of it — what made things funny, the sense of timing,” Mr. Wolk recalled. “One of the great things he really passed on was the fact that you never arrive looking like what you’re going to do — so in a sense, if you’re an acrobat, you don’t come out looking like an acrobat. It’s the element of surprise.”Of course, adapting some old routines to a stage the size of the Met poses challenges. And the comedy in the show within the opera must work without overwhelming the drama playing out around it. The delicacy of striking that right balance was evident in rehearsal the other day when Mr. Álvarez, the tenor singing the role of Canio, a murderously jealous cuckolded clown, began singing the opera’s most famous aria, “Vesti la giubba.”AdvertisementAs he approached the climax, a giant, gaudy blue-and-gold curtain, similar to the one used by the vaudeville troupe, descended behind him, apparently catching him by surprise. Mr. Álvarez, vocal in his dismay as perhaps only a star tenor can be, summoned Mr. Luisi and Mr. McVicar to the stage, where they were joined by Peter Gelb, the Met’s general manager. There was a tense consultation, followed by an agreement and an embrace or two. The rehearsal went on.The slosh routine — which involved three sous-chefs making a cake, armed with a piping bag full of icing, a bowl and a spoon — went off without a hitch. Mr. Wolk said that there were different schools of thought about what makes the best slosh. He said that he had even read a recipe that Buster Keaton used for his custard pies, but that he found shaving cream had the best consistency. “It’s very important that it sticks to the face,” he said.Some lessons he learned from  Mr. Hutch — whose acts had names like the Seven Volants, the Herculeans and the Half-Wits, and who wrote a memoir, “Somersaults and Somer-not!” — might apply to opera singers as well as acrobats and clowns.“He said that technique should not really overpower character,” Mr. Wolk recalled. “There was an idea that character was the most important, and it was the technique that underpinned the character.”A version of this article appears in print on April 13, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: Vaudeville Authenticity at the Opera.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.