AdvertisementSupported byBy Scott ReyburnLONDON — Sotheby’s and Christie’s have revealed that over the next few months they are selling highly desirable works by Francis Bacon and Lucian Freud, the two unquestionable greats of British postwar painting. But it doesn’t look as though a new wave of Britons who have been given early access to their retirement funds will be spending much money at the art sales this summer.  Private collection on the block  Private collections assembled in the 1960s and ’70s, before the cult of investing in art fully took hold, often have a distinctive character. Expressing the taste of their individual owners, rather than hired advisers, the collections of personalities such as the art critic and curator David Sylvester and Robert Sainsbury, of the grocery store fortune, reflect an engagement, eclecticism and intellectual curiosity worlds away from the calculated box-ticking that characterizes so much of today’s conspicuous art consumption.In its private viewing room in London last week, Sotheby’s put a group of some 20 works on show that were a reminder of that lost age of collecting.“The Figure & Form Collection” (as Sotheby’s calls it) combines postwar British art (Bacon, Chadwick, Moore) with French modernism (Tanguy, Vuillard, Degas) and 17th-century African sculpture. Estimated to raise at least 25 million pounds, or about $37 million, when broken up for sale at various auctions in New York and London this spring and summer, the collection is being sold by the children of Jacques Casier and his wife, according to dealers. The Casiers lived near Kortrijk, Belgium, an area renowned for its discreet and discriminating art buyers, the dealers said. The pieces, largely acquired through Marlborough Fine Art in London some 40 years ago, had been kept in the collectors’ home and have not been exhibited since, Sotheby’s said.“It’s a snapshot of a time that has stood the test of time,” said Oliver Barker, Sotheby’s senior international specialist in contemporary art. “They had a passion for combining a number of collecting categories.”Most valuable of Sotheby’s rediscoveries are two small-scale self-portraits by Francis Bacon, a single canvas from 1975 and a triptych from 1980, each of which is estimated to sell for £10 million to £15 million. The paintings will be offered in Sotheby’s contemporary art auction in London on July 1. In 2007, the Casiers sold a full-length Bacon self-portrait from 1978 for £21.6 million at Sotheby’s.Sotheby’s sale of Impressionist and modern works in London on June 24 will include Henry Moore’s “Two Women and a Child,” an imposing and previously unshown 1948 gouache and watercolor estimated at £300,000 to £400,000. A terra-cotta altar head from the Benin Kingdom, in what is now Nigeria, is valued at $400,000 to $600,000 in the May 15 auction of African, Oceanic and Pre-Columbian Art in New York. Not one of the works has been guaranteed a minimum price by Sotheby’s, Mr. Barker said.When asked whether he thought it was a shame that the collection could not be put up for sale in a single auction, Mr. Barker said, “There just weren’t enough lots to support a single evening sale.”“They were collectors who didn’t buy too many things,” he added, “and nothing was kept in storage.”  ‘Big Sue’ returns to the gavel Lucian Freud’s “Big Sue” returns to Christie’s on May 13, with the auction house offering another portrait from the painter’s famous “Benefits Supervisor” series during its postwar and contemporary art sales in New York. Seven years ago, at the height of the last art-market boom, Christie’s sold Freud’s monumental 1995 “Benefits Supervisor Sleeping” for $33.6 million to the Russian billionaire Roman Abramovich. Up for sale next month will be “Benefits Supervisor Resting,” from 1994, one of four nude studies of Sue Tilley, an amply proportioned local government officer, that Freud made over a three-year period, beginning in 1993. It will carry an estimated price tag of $30 million to $50 million. This 1.6-meter-by-1.5-meter, or roughly 5-feet-by-5-feet, depiction of Ms. Tilley sitting on a battered sofa with her head thrown back is owned by the Boston collector and philanthropist Barbara Lee. It was acquired at an exhibition of Freud paintings held by Acquavella Galleries in New York in 1995. Freud later said sales of these works to Acquavella had helped him pay off his long-standing gambling debts. Ms. Lee has been guaranteed an undisclosed minimum price by Christie’s, which is exhibiting the thickly worked canvas at its London location until April 23. The work was previously on show in Hong Kong.It is the first work valued at more than $20 million to have come to auction since Freud’s death at 88 in July 2011, according to Artnet. In recent years, the market for contemporary art has been increasingly dominated by abstract works. “This will be a good test of where his market is going,” said James Holland- Hibbert, a London dealer who held a loan exhibition of Freud’s early works in 2008. “It will be interesting to see if this style of painting appeals to the buyers who support these sales. Is Freud still a big enough brand?” Cash infusion for retirees  This month, about 7.5 million of Britain’s retirees will be able to cash in some or all of their pension savings and spend the money on whatever they want. The British government’s new “freedom and choice in pensions” measures are expected to result in an estimated 200,000 individuals cashing in their entire “defined contribution” retirement savings this year, which could bring a tax windfall of as much as £1.6 billion for the Treasury, according to a report published in October by the British investment brokerage Hargreaves Lansdown. Analysts at Hargreaves Lansdown predict that the added income could inject as much as £6 billion into the British economy in 2015. The median pension pot is valued at £29,000, they said. The question is: Will any of this money be spent on art?“I’m not aware of anyone putting two and two together at all,” said Christopher Battiscombe, director general of the Society of London Art Dealers, the trade body for London’s top-end galleries. According to a survey of retirees conducted by the firm Ipsos Mori for Hargreaves Lansdown, few Britons view art as an “alternative investment,” or even something worth buying at all. Of the 1,247 adults surveyed, who were aged 45 to 65 and living in Britain, more than half cited more prosaic uses for their cashed-in pensions: to cover everyday living expenses, pay for vacations or re-invest in property. “There aren’t going to be many people flashing their cash on art and antiques, vintage wines and classic cars,” said Paul Viney, chairman of Woolley & Wallis, an auction house based in Salisbury, England, that in recent years has sold seven lots of Asian art for more than £1 million. “You don’t get an income from art and antiques, and no one really knows what people will be buying in 20 years’ time,” Mr. Viney said.The popular success of British television programs such as the former BBC show “Cash in the Attic” and the current BBC series “Flog It!” suggests that most Britons now regard art and antiques simply as things to sell. They leave the buying, Mr. Battiscombe suggested, to those who “don’t have to free up their personal pensions to buy art.”Advertisement