Season 6, Episode 13: “The Promise”Somewhere up there in the hills of Harlan, Ky., there may be $9 million still buried. Or not. There were few loose ends left dangling as six seasons of “Justified” came to a close. The location of Avery Markham’s remaining $9 million may be one of them even though we were provided with a likely explanation. It was a satisfying ending for a series that has always been primarily about the characters. It has been, at many times, a funny show, but they never Gomer Pyle’d the rural folk for the benefit of coastal audiences. And with this final episode, unlike other shows in which the hero (or antihero) dies, the series creators showed the wise restraint they have exercised throughout by letting Raylan Givens, our hero deputy U.S. marshal not only live but thrive. But for a few moments there, we weren’t so sure.Before this episode, Raylan had killed 19 men and women. (No law enforcement agency would tolerate that record, but don’t think about it too much.) And we all expected there could be at least three more on that list: Boyd Crowder, Raylan’s criminal nemesis for the entire series; Avery Markham, the pot king; and Boon, Markham’s murderous hat-obsessed henchman. Raylan itches to kill bad guys, enjoys it even, and that doesn’t change after his boss, Art Mullen, springs him from the law enforcement officers who were holding him at the end of the last episode. Raylan never gets a chance to shoot Markham. Just as Markham was about to kill Ava in a tobacco-drying barn for stealing his money, in strides Boyd with a crooked sheriff’s deputy as a shield. Boyd, who was searching for the money, had eluded the marshals chasing him in the hills by throwing lit sticks of dynamite at them. It seemed like a bit of a miscalculation on Boyd’s part to think that Markham would even think twice about killing a lawman, even a crooked one in his employ. Markham, calling Boyd a hillbilly, shoots at him, hitting the deputy. Boyd dispatches Markham with a shot through the eye. Then he turns on Ava, but the magazine is empty. There are enough other loaded guns in that barn that it shouldn’t matter. But just then, as heroes are wont to do, Raylan strides in. He is itching to kill Boyd and provokes him, even kicks a loaded pistol his way. Boyd picks it up, but has a question for Ava first. Why, he asks, did she turn on him? (As if it wasn’t obvious.) “I put myself in your shoes and did what I thought you would do,” she says. Another loose end tied up.This scene, though only a few minutes long, is the essence of why this show has always been so good. Raylan wants to kill him, but can’t do it in cold blood. As in that first killing we witnessed in season one at the restaurant table in Miami, he needs to be provoked. He has a code even if he has an itchy trigger finger. “I ain’t doing it, Raylan,” Boyd says. “Yeah, you are,” Raylan replies. “You are going to take that gun and we are gonna end this.” The camera stays on Raylan, his holstered gun and then his face and he must be considering the consequences, as we have all season, of just gunning Boyd down. The scene cuts to Boyd led out in handcuffs and we are fine with that even though Boyd is a coldblooded killer.Raylan’s next encounter is with someone who has no code, Boon. And the showdown is a classic Western movie motif: facing off in the middle of the street — in this case a highway. Raylan has Ava in a car taking her to jail. Up comes Boon in a truck with Loretta, the aspiring teenage pot mogul, who Raylan has tried to protect since we first met her in Season 2. (Probably still the best of the series.)“I thought you were going to leave without saying goodbye,” Boon sneers. They square off, each waiting for the other guy to draw first. Boon has to go for a head shot. He explained to Loretta in the last episode he always does even though it is more difficult because people wear bulletproof vests, as Raylan does. They shoot and near as I can tell, fall simultaneously. The scene is suspenseful. Raylan isn’t moving. Boon is, though, and as he prepares to take another shot from there on the ground, Loretta steps in, putting her boot on his arm. He dies and she kicks his revolver away. Raylan, in true Hollywood cliché, is merely grazed, but his hat is ruined with a bullet hole in it. Ava, still in handcuffs, takes off in the car.The show skips forward four years to a sweet coda that works because we’ve come to care for all these characters so much. We do want to know what happened to them. Raylan has found peace and has come home to raise his daughter, and the two of them are adorable together. But he does not live with his ex-wife. She has remarried. “You are the most stubborn man,” she tells him. “Beats angry,” he replies. So Raylan is happy now. Another loose end tied up.This I found weird: He wears Boon’s hat, which, while it’s a very good-looking hat even with the nick in it, it is the hat of a man he killed. Raylan finds Ava out in Lebec, Calif., about halfway between Bakersfield and Los Angeles. (It’s near where some of the filming for the series took place.) She is no longer a criminal, she tells Raylan. He replies, “Every longtime fugitive I’ve ever run down expects me to congratulate them for not doing what no one is supposed to be doing anyhow.” But he lets her go if only because Ava has a son. We are led to believe it is Boyd’s, but it could be Raylan’s, couldn’t it? We won’t know, because Ava isn’t talking.Raylan makes sure Boyd is convinced she is dead, so he won’t ever come after her should he escape from prison. And the show ties up another loose end and leaves us with a sly joke on the series’s themes of friendship and ties to the land. Raylan didn’t personally tell Boyd the bad news that Ava was dead because they dug coal together. He personally told Boyd to make sure the con worked.  So where is the money? Yes it could be up in those hills. It was crawling with L.E.O.’s, as law enforcement officers apparently call law enforcement officers, we are told. No one went up there digging. But whoever knew the location could bide their time. That section of land wasn’t going to be watched forever. Wynn Duffy, Raylan surmises, got much of it, maybe in a split with Ava to rescue her and help her escape and afford a place that must cost at least a quarter of a million dollars. As for Loretta’s life, nothing is said. We can assume she continued her criminal life. I’d like to think she found the money.Did you catch what I think is a small homage to Elmore Leonard, the novelist whose books the series is based on? Raylan pulls out a beat up copy of “The Friends of Eddie Coyle,” by George V. Higgins. It’s a novel set in Boston about a criminal being squeezed as an informer for the government. Mr. Leonard reportedly called it the best crime novel ever written. The final show drink: Art Mullen and Raylan share a glass of Blanton’s bourbon to celebrate getting Boyd behind bars and Raylan back to Miami. It is a nice metaphor for the episode: A bit of a kick and then a smooth warm glow. 