By KATHRYN SHATTUCKAPRIL 14, 2015
7:10 P.M. (Starz) THE IDES OF MARCH (2011) George Clooney, Grant Heslov and Beau Willimon received an Oscar nomination for best adapted screenplay for this political drama, which Mr. Clooney also directed and stars in as Mike Morris, a Pennsylvania governor turned dream candidate for the Democratic presidential nomination. Ryan Gosling plays Stephen Meyers, a strategist who becomes involved with an intern (Evan Rachel Wood) with a powerful father and a secret that could derail Stephen’s career and the Morris campaign. Philip Seymour Hoffman and Paul Giamatti are advisers battling for Stephen’s loyalty. And Marisa Tomei is a reporter trying to get at the truth. “Mr. Clooney handles the plot complications with elegant dexterity,” A. O. Scott wrote in The New York Times about this adaptation of Mr. Willimon’s play “Farragut North,” loosely based on Howard Dean’s 2004 presidential primary campaign. “As an actor he works best in long, understated scenes that allow him to play with nuances of charm and menace, so it is not surprising that, as a director, he gives the rest of the cast room to work,” Mr. Scott added. “But the parts of ‘The Ides of March’ — quiet scenes between Mr. Gosling and Ms. Wood; swirling, Sorkin-esque exchanges of banter; any time Ms. Tomei or Max Minghella (as a campaign worker grooming himself to be the next Stephen Meyers) are in the room — are greater than the whole.”1:15 P.M. (FXM) THE MUDLARK (1950) A London orphan (Andrew Ray) visits a widowed Queen Victoria (Irene Dunne) at Windsor Castle, where she is hiding in her grief — and jeopardizing a new reform plan that Prime Minister Benjamin Disraeli (Alec Guinness) wants to push through. “As a piece of sentimental fiction, ‘The Mudlark’ is quite a tale,” produced in “the richest sort of port-and-mutton style,” Bosley Crowther of The Times wrote of Jean Negulesco’s adaptation of the Theodore Bonnet novel.8 P.M. (Sundance) BEHIND THE STORY WITH THE PALEY CENTER Mindy Kaling and Chris Messina discuss their Fox sitcom, “The Mindy Project.”9 P.M. (CW) IZOMBIE After devouring the brains of her murdered sorority sister, Liv (Rose McIver) is propelled into the world of extreme sports, where she meets a professional snowboarder (Ryan Hansen) with a secret.Advertisement10 P.M. (FX) JUSTIFIED Raylan (Timothy Olyphant), Boyd (Walton Goggins) and Ava (Joelle Carter) fight their last bloody battle as the series ends.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.10 P.M. (Ovation) FORD’S THEATER: AMERICA’S PLAYHOUSE Commemorating the 150th anniversary of the assassination of President Abraham Lincoln, this documentary uses rare film footage, photographs and interviews with historians, directors and actors to chronicle the theater’s history, from its first incarnation in an abandoned church to its restoration in 2009.Advertisement10 P.M. (Cinemax) SECRETARY (2002) Maggie Gyllenhaal portrays Lee Holloway, a repressed young secretary with masochistic tendencies who blossoms during spanking sessions with her boss, E. Edward Grey (James Spader), a grim lawyer who prefers the typewriter to the computer. Spelling mistakes result in corporal punishment, and soon Edward, like a cruel Pygmalion, is telling Lee how to dress, answer the telephone and even eat. But his instructions help shape and direct her life — and his advances set her aflame. “Secretary,” directed by Steven Shainberg, could be seen “as a slap in the face to orthodox feminist thinking, since the concept of sexual harassment doesn’t seem to occur to anybody,” Stephen Holden wrote in The Times. “I prefer to see ‘Secretary’ as a wacky new-wave romantic comedy in which two lonely people locked inside their private fantasies discover a miraculous erotic harmony.”10:15 P.M. (FYI) ARRANGED Three couples reared by parents from different cultures — Roma, Indian and evangelical — undertake arranged marriages.What’s Streaming NowMISERY LOVES COMEDY (2015) Tom Hanks, Jimmy Fallon, Amy Schumer, Judd Apatow, Jon Favreau, Lisa Kudrow, Larry David, Steve Coogan, Jim Gaffigan, Whoopi Goldberg and more than 50 other famous funny people talk about why they like to make others laugh in this documentary directed by Kevin Pollak. (iTunes)A version of this schedule appears in print on April 14, 2015, on Page C7 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Tuesday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.