AdvertisementSupported byOpera ReviewBy Anthony TommasiniIt’s an inevitable reaction. A good performance of Purcell’s “Dido and Aeneas” leaves you thinking of what might have been had Purcell lived longer.This 53-minute opera, a miracle of musical and dramatic inspiration, seemed especially wondrous in the elegant performance by the superb Les Violons du Roy ensemble and the La Chapelle de Québec chorus on Sunday afternoon, part of Carnegie Hall’s Before Bach festival, a monthlong focus on 16th- and 17th-century music written before the emergence of Bach and Handel, which opened last week.Alas, “Dido” is the only true Purcell opera. The first performance we know about took place in 1689 at a girls’ boarding school in Chelsea, six years before the composer died at 36. Imagine how he might have shaped the course of English opera.Yet, this Purcell program, conducted by the excellent harpsichordist Richard Egarr, also drew from the reams of music that Purcell wrote for the theater in his later years, not just incidental songs and dances but elaborate scores he called semi-operas. Mr. Egarr and his forces performed excerpts from two such works, “The Fairy Queen” and “King Arthur.” These are not just operas that might have been. They show Purcell forging a path for English musical theater.The concert began with excerpts from “The Fairy Queen,” adapted from Shakespeare’s “A Midsummer Night’s Dream.” The players of Les Violons du Roy, based in Quebec City, brought Baroque-style focused sound and appealing swing to an orchestral Air and Rondeau, which led into a scene for a drunken poet. The bass-baritone Stephen Hegedus was delightful as the poet, slurping his delivery, sometimes bellowing his lines. A chorus of spirits mocked him for his “dogrel rhymes” and prodded two fairies to “pinch him for his crimes” in music that walked a blissful line between gentle joking and intense needling.“King Arthur” is a play by John Dryden, and the musical excerpts offered here whet your appetite for a full production with Purcell’s score. Then there were more excerpts from “The Fairy Queen,” including an impassioned account of “O let me weep” sung by the great German soprano Dorothea Röschmann.It was no surprise that Ms. Röschmann was also such an affecting Dido, the Queen of Carthage, who dares to make herself vulnerable to the romantic entreaties of Aeneas, the Trojan prince, only to face death-inducing grief when her beloved leaves for Italy.The baritone Henk Neven as Aeneas, the soprano Hélène Guilmette as Belinda (Dido’s confidante) and the alto Vicki St. Pierre as the Sorceress were among the excellent soloists. Ms. Röschmann commanded the stage as Dido, especially in her nobly wrenching account of “Dido’s Lament.”Advertisement