AdvertisementSupported byCritic’s Notebook24 PhotosView Slide Show ›Kendrick Brinson for The New York TimesBy Ben RatliffINDIO, Calif. — “I hope you all realize that music is sacred,” Jack White said, near the end of his headlining set at the Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival on Saturday night. He repeated it: “That music is sacred! That music is sacred!”He preached that gospel because he’s the avant-garde preservationist, the go-backward-to-go-forward man. But he said it with purpose, like everything else he had done in the set: dedicating his performance to transgender people; darting to a piano to bang out short passages or introductions; leaning in to his drummer Daru Jones at the music’s tension points, and playing guitar solos as if grabbing at fast-moving impulses, like sketching karate.Music is sacred, like the land, like the water (more later on water), was the drift I was catching. You treat it well because it can turn on you or disappear.But in Southern California, the image is sacred, too, and can enfold and absorb the music. So if sacred communion with music is happening at Coachella, where 90,000 people bought weekend passes at $375 each in a year of not-particularly-groundbreaking programming from the headliners on down, it’s happening in a new kind of way, indirectly and more self-consciously.For instance, a lot of people showed up to see Tyler the Creator, a complicated rapper working on a bright, chaotic, imperfect aesthetic, and not only in his music. At one point in his set on Saturday, Tyler criticized the V.I.P. section as boring and pointed at Kendall Jenner, insulting her. She responded with a middle finger and a smile. It wasn’t a great set — he acknowledged as much in a tweet the next day — but I am told by a representative of Twitter that he was the most-mentioned artist of the weekend on that platform, and Zignal Labs, a media-monitoring company, said that he was the “most talked about” act of the weekend across social, TV and print media.You could say that he wouldn’t have been otherwise (that is, minus the fake fight with Kendall Jenner) but you’d be wrong because there is no otherwise. Here, music may be sacred, but only as much as social media. Also sacred: celebrity, lurking around the edges. Beyoncé was there, as were Katy Perry, Justin Bieber, Chris Brown, Leonardo DiCaprio and the two living Beatles.All of this matters. You can have a good time here, at any music festival — strengthen your relationships with friends, be crazy and stupid, dance, get into something. But you’re also simultaneously watching a representation of the story that involves you, unless you are trying hard not to watch, which feels contrary to the spirit of the event.Jack White had technology on his side — the full power of the main-stage sound system at night, rendering his noisy blues in crazily vivid detail. A guitar hero — Angus Young of AC/DC, Annie Clark of St. Vincent — can have his or her tone rendered in full.And if a musician builds any kind of narrative world through his music, that world can be rendered almost physically, and there’s your sacred communion.The world of the Weeknd, a.k.a. Abel Tesfaye, is lonely and amoral, powerfully creepy in its after-afterparty blankness, smooth and full of silence, and it was reproduced here so well that you could step inside it, as if in an interactive game. (He also sang far better than he did at his first Coachella performance in 2012.) His narrative persona, permanently high, seems one step removed from accountable reality. In a new and untitled song, he sang about driving to a rendezvous with a woman who wants to keep their relationship secret. He doesn’t have the address; he’s adrift, asking her to send him the details. But he’s fixated on her for a reason: “You look even better than the photo.”Drake, too, in his first Coachella performance, used the drift and silences in his music in much the same way: as openings to let the audience share his powerful self-absorption. At one point, he sat down before a digital fire and stroked his chin in an attitude of self-reflection in front of the horde, singing his new song “Madonna”— he’s telling a woman, “you could be big as Madonna,” as a lure. Whereupon the real Madonna emerged, sang a few songs, kissed the seated Drake on the lips from above, and left. A multiplatform moment — ask Zignal Labs about it. Also sensuously inert, aerated and flat as a pancake, like most of Drake’s set.There was a lot of smoothness, the sound of young people wanting to be slightly older and more elegant than they think they are: a touching thing, a sound of ambition. It was in Chet Faker, the Australian electro-soul singer and keyboard player, whose set wilted in the sun; in Jungle, a good and sultry English soul band with Chic ballads in their DNA; in the new disco-diva songs of Gorgon City and Azealia Banks. In FKA twigs, who played at the same time as Jack White and whose delicate music couldn’t quite break through the din, you saw the step beyond ambition: attainment. She’s done it through original choreography, and through the creation of strange new moods of languor and suspension.Hard, commercial dance music is a huge draw at Coachella, and some of what I heard, like the bright, crashing buildups and releases of David Guetta and DJ Snake, almost expelled the listener in the way that Drake and the Weeknd drew you in. It’s a music of relentless awesomeness and positivity, and it was salutary, sometimes, to move toward music of solitude, moodiness, and refusal. That meant the Weeknd; it also meant performers doing it on a smaller scale with sparser attendance, like the reunited post-hardcore band Drive Like Jehu, the countryish singer Angel Olsen and the country singer Sturgill Simpson.This was the 16th Coachella, a full-service fantasy resting on sacred resources: the Empire Polo Club, a huge plot of green amid the sand and dust and ocotillo plants. It’s green because it’s watered, and the state’s water-reduction policy will probably affect the way it looks, very soon. In its bookings, the festival has become a bit predictable: it’s not looking to the future or challenging the researched tastes of its established demographic. That’s a concern to anyone who’s there for the music. But its future may hinge just as much on whether Kendall Jenner wants to hang out on brown grass.Advertisement