
                New Music            By                     
 JON CARAMANICA
 
APRIL 13, 2015
THE-DREAM“Crown”(Contra Paris/Capitol)More than any R&B singer or songwriter working today, The-Dream knows that the better part of seduction is vulnerability. In his world, humbling yourself gets the prize. It may also explain why when he writes songs for others, like Beyoncé or Rihanna, he paints those women as conquering heroes, impervious to anything so trifling as male bravado.On “Crown,” his new EP, The-Dream is a happy underdog right from the start. The opening song, “Prime,” is a swampy digital soul number; he sings in a voice that connotes weakness, but not desperation. “Do you believe in me like I believe in you?” he asks, and not rhetorically. His target is a sunbeam; he’s just a mortal. “I know you think you’re out of my league,” he tells her, trying to disarm her with flattery, then continues, “but I’m trying to tell you, girl/I’m in my prime.”Though he’s an often astounding songwriter, The-Dream doesn’t have the carnality of Trey Songz or the athleticism of Usher or Chris Brown; he’s a singer who benefits from all the gifts that modern recording technology has to offer. But like the competition, he’s capable of bluster. On the EP’s first single, the full title of which can’t be published, he sounds like Ralph Tresvant, cooing not at a woman, but at the man whose trust she’s violating: “She don’t love you, ’cause if she did/She wouldn’t be all on my phone right now.” And on “Cedes Benz,” he’s rapping like the lost fourth member of Travis Porter.For someone who has made tenderness so central — see “All I Need,” on which he melts into a viscous sea of synthesizers and harmony vocals — The-Dream has been haunted by real-life friction. Last year, he was arrested on charges of assaulting his pregnant ex-girlfriend. (He has denied the accusation.)“Crown” is the first of two EPs planned for release this year; the second will be “Jewel,” which The-Dream has said will be more reflective of his songwriter side. Perhaps he hopes that singing those words himself might cleanse him.A version of this review appears in print on April 14, 2015, on Page C6 of the New York edition.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.