By NATE CHINENAPRIL 13, 2015
VILLAGERS“Darling Arithmetic”(Domino)Conor O’Brien, the discerning Irish singer-songwriter behind Villagers, began his career in a shroud of complicated solitude. The debut Villagers album — “Becoming a Jackal,” released on Domino in 2010 — was an impressively layered production in which he played almost all the parts, singing about appearances and perception. His 2013 follow-up, “{Awayland},” featured a proper crew of musicians, a stronger rhythmic push, and a more guarded eloquence. “It takes loss to be free,” he sang on one track, with certainty.For the third Villagers album, “Darling Arithmetic,” Mr. O’Brien has scaled back radically, turning out something that resembles an old-fashioned folk-rock confessional. On the opener and lead single, “Courage,” he strums an acoustic guitar with a country lilt that calls Neil Young’s “Harvest” to mind. “I took a little time to be honest,” he sings gently in the first verse. “I took a little time to be me.”If that sounds almost like an apology, Mr. O’Brien has his reasons. “Darling Arithmetic” isn’t just an album about falling in and out of love; it’s also an announcement of his identity as a gay man. That detail is at once incidental and central to the songs therein.Directness has never really been Mr. O’Brien’s style; not musically, not emotionally. So the startling turn here is his move toward transparency. On a song titled “Little Bigot,” he addresses would-be antagonists with a disarming empathy. In a related vein, “Hot Scary Summer” finds him rehashing old territory with an ex:Remember kissing in the cobblestonesIn the heat of the nightAnd all the pretty young homophobesLookin’ out for a fight.Mr. O’Brien made “Darling Arithmetic” completely on his own, and he’s savvy enough to understand how its bedroom scale plays up the vulnerabilities in his small, clear voice. But while the album is willfully interior and musically conservative, it doesn’t ever feel cloistered, because of the emotional stakes that he keeps clearly in sight.On “Everything I Am Is Yours,” Mr. O’Brien interrogates his own desires, finding resolution only in a vow of constancy. “Got these little walls; I couldn’t break them if I tried,” he sings. “But I promise I’ll be true.” However else progress can be measured, surely this counts, for now.A version of this review appears in print on April 14, 2015, on Page C6 of the New York edition with the headline: Review: ‘Darling Arithmetic,’ a Confessional Album From Villagers.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.