By NEIL GENZLINGERAPRIL 13, 2015
Outer space is crowded, and not just with asteroids and old weather satellites. It’s full of filmmakers and TV creators, who have been joking about space travel gone awry at least since “A Trip to the Moon” in 1902. So anyone trying to boldly go there these days has to put more effort into the venture than went into “Other Space.” The series, whose eight-episode first season becomes available in its entirety Tuesday on Yahoo Screen, gives us a group of young (too young, really) astronauts who are on a space-mapping mission when they collide with an alternate universe-ish thing and are sucked into it. The crew exhibits the usual mixture of incompetence and tension, and the central dynamic is between the captain, Stewart (Karan Soni), and Karen (Bess Rous), his older sister, who had also aspired to command the ship.Their sibling rivalry is only intermittently amusing, which pretty much describes the show as a whole. It’s telling that much of the funniest material comes from a character who technically isn’t even a person — Natasha (Conor Leslie), the manifestation of the onboard computer, who is seen on a screen.The series was created by Paul Feig, whose résumé includes the TV cult hit “Freaks and Geeks” and the box-office smash “Bridesmaids,” so it seems as if it ought to be sharper. But too many other shows and movies have worked this territory better, most recently the Cracked.com series “Starship Icarus,” introduced last fall.The plotlines are moderately intriguing, especially in the second episode, when evidence mounts that an outside entity has taken over the personality of one crew member, leading to a group interrogation that has everyone under suspicion. But the cast, a mixture of actors, comics and writers, isn’t really up to the challenge of getting the best out of this material. The whole thing is delivered sketch-comedy style, which is fine at a five-minute length but a bit wearying as a series. A version of this review appears in print on April 14, 2015, on Page C5 of the New York edition with the headline: Going Into Space to Explore Some Familiar Terrain.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.