AdvertisementSupported byBy Corinna da Fonseca-WollheimWhen the orchestra falls away for the cadenza in a bassoon concerto, the music normally pulls back to a single solo voice. But when the bassoonist and composer Brad Balliett reached the cadenza of his own Concerto in Triple Time during a recent concert with the Metropolis Ensemble at Le Poisson Rouge, the sounds filling the nightclub bore little resemblance to the bubbling joviality or lyricism usually associated with the instrument.Instead, Mr. Balliett produced buzzing, brassy tones that resembled a saxophone one moment, a ship’s horn the next. Sometimes the sounds seemed to have been digitally altered to produce a nasal drone. But most disconcerting was that the solo bassoon voice had somehow bifurcated, with discernible triads and other harmonies coming out of the lone acoustic instrument.In introductory remarks from the stage, Mr. Balliett recalled the moment he first encountered multiphonics, the technique by which a wind player can produce multiple tones at the same time. “I was smitten because I thought the bassoon could finally compete with the piano or guitar,” he said.“Of course that’s not true,” he added. “The bassoon will never be a piano. But I do feel there’s another instrument inside the bassoon screaming to get out.”Mr. Balliett is not the only performer testing the limits of his instrument and writing music that redefines those boundaries. The previous night, at the new performance space National Sawdust in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, the violinist Mari Kimura gave a midnight performance of her own compositions, which feature notes so low they should technically be unplayable on a violin. These subharmonics, made through a bowing technique of her own discovery, allow her to produce notes as low as a full octave below the bottom G, the instrument’s lowest string. Raw and throaty, they sound as if there were a cello inside the violin screaming to get out.Strange sounds are coming out of traditional instruments — and singers’ throats — all over the new-music scene. The previous weekend at the Kitchen in Chelsea, the flutist Claire Chase presented a solo recital of new works in which sustained, floating sounds of the kind prized by centuries of flutists were rare. Instead, she used different flutes as resonant bodies that amplified a wide spectrum of otherworldly vocalizations, whistle tones, sighs and tongue clicks, often blending several sounds at once.Singers, too, are in on the multiphonic game. Mastery of throat-singing techniques like sygyt and kargyraa, the first an overtone-saturated whistling style, the second a deep, droning growl, are no longer the exclusive province of Mongolian tribesmen. New-music ensembles like Roomful of Teeth include them amid a global repertory of vocal styles. Meredith Monk, a singer-composer, was awarded the National Medal of Arts last month for her work in inventing a world of mesmerizingly alien vocal sounds that have been influential on collaborators like Theo Bleckmann. Performances by the baritone Jeffrey Gavett are peppered with ingressive screams, gasps and wheezes, raspy sounds produced on the inhale that resemble involuntary expressions of distress.“Extended technique” is the umbrella term for unusual methods of sound production on traditional instruments. It has been important in new music since the mid-20th century, when European avant-garde composers took to it for its subversive and alienating potential. But much of the current wave of sound exploration seems to be driven by performers. Many work with composers to create and refine new techniques; some, like Mr. Balliett and Ms. Kimura, turn to composition to write works tailored to their own innovations.Mr. Balliett, for instance, has developed his command of multiphonics to such a degree that he can produce specific chords and intervals. In an interview he said that many composers are still unaware of the possibilities. “In many scores you see a big X over the staff and the instruction ‘Play multiphone,’ ” he said. “But which one do you want? There are hundreds.”Instrumental technique has always been in flux, pushed according to the demands of a piece. Striking a violin string with the wooden side of the bow is an extended technique codified at least since the “Witches’ Sabbath” in Berlioz’s “Symphonie Fantastique.” So is the practice of scordatura, deliberately mistuning a string, allowing for the sort of toothache-inducing double stops in Saint-Saëns’s “Danse Macabre.”In the 20th century, composers embraced extended technique in ways that often reflected the century’s political upheavals. The pained vocalizations in Peter Maxwell Davies’s “Eight Songs for a Mad King” (1969) grew out of the vocal school of Alfred Wolfsohn, a voice coach whose training was fueled by his traumatic memories of the screams of wounded World War I soldiers.The German avant-garde composer Helmut Lachenmann, who will turn 80 next month, created an entire language for string instruments out of scratch tones, growls, whistles, clicks and white noise, with some sounds produced through excessive bow pressure on the string, others by running the bow hair over various parts of the instrument’s body, bridge or scroll. In his theoretical writings, he urges musicians to use this language to extricate themselves from the constraints of bourgeois tradition.The JACK Quartet, made up of the violinists Ari Streisfeld and Christopher Otto, the violist John Pickford Richards and the cellist Kevin McFarland, has become fluent in this language. During an interview and demonstration at Mr. Richards’s apartment, the group discussed the work that went into internalizing these techniques.Mr. McFarland recalled learning “Tetras,” a string quartet by Iannis Xenakis, which demanded scratch tones, without specifying them in great detail. “As a quartet, we decided we needed to codify how we did it,” he said. “And we spent hours going around in a circle each playing a scratch tone and trying to match it exactly. It makes a difference when you then play the piece: just like a quartet would practice for hours to match their vibrato in Brahms.”Today, Mr. Streisfeld coaches a teenage string quartet that specializes in contemporary music as part of the Kaufman Center’s Face the Music program. “They are diving into things that I didn’t encounter until well into my graduate studies and beyond,” Mr. Streisfeld said. “They are dealing with a lot of extended technique, so I teach them some of the things that we as a quartet have taken a lot of care with.”As the new sounds are absorbed into the mainstream by a new generation, they no longer feel really “extended.” Ever since composers like John Cage redefined the notion of what constitutes an instrument — through compositions played on, say, an amplified cactus — the borders between musical sounds and noise, traditional and unexpected technique, have become porous, increasingly dependent on context. The percussionist Steven Schick said that since Cage, “the way we conceive of instruments has grown. And what’s outside of an instrument has shrunk.”Ms. Chase says she likes to think of extended techniques “not as extensions of the instrument but as extensions of the imagination.” One striking aspect of the body of new work for solo flute she has lately been commissioning is the use of the player’s breathing, which, amplified through the instrument, is woven into the score.Jason Eckardt’s “The Silenced,” which had its premiere in Ms. Chase’s recital, begins with stuttering breathing. Sobs and gagged consonants are amplified through the flute. Eventually, these techniques give way to fragments of more traditional sounds, charting a progression from muzzled expression toward liberation.It’s in such juxtapositions of extended technique and conventional playing that unorthodox sounds can feel especially meaningful. They can deepen the field of emotional perspective, the way mimetic nature sounds in Vivaldi’s “Four Seasons” — rain, thunder or birdsong — push into focus the more overtly “man-made” melodies, creating the illusion of different planes of representation. Mr. Lachenmann’s quartets often use extended technique within a structural architecture built on traditional forms such as waltzes, fostering a dramatic tension between familiarity and alienation.And the strange vocal sounds in which Mr. Gavett and his ensemble, Ekmeles, specialize resonate at a visceral level because they are drawn from a universal stock of human utterances made involuntarily, or in extreme circumstances. Mr. Gavett cites the example of “void – un delitto italiano, un epitaffio,” a work by Claus-Steffen Mahnkopf that dramatizes the murder of Pier Paolo Pasolini. Based on texts by the Italian filmmaker, the score includes traditionally sung passages as well as spoken text and moments of naturalistic uses of the voice such as shouts and whispers.“They’re these extremely raw expressive moments in the piece where everything falls away, and we’re just gasping and screaming onstage,” Mr. Gavett said. “Every time that we’ve done it, audiences respond really deeply to the piece.”As the musical language expands, the line between the unexpected and familiar is constantly in question. But while the jarring power of a new sound diminishes with each hearing, so does the motivation to use sounds purely for shock value. Instead, it’s the eloquence of a sound within its context that determines its freshness.“I’m a total optimist,” Ms. Chase said. “If you have an authentic and compelling story to tell, it doesn’t matter what language you tell it in or whether the audience has a framework of reference for it. It will be heard, and it will be compelling.”Advertisement