Season 3, Episode 12:  ‘I Am Abassin Zadran’Товарищи, пристегните ремни.
(Comrades, fasten your seatbelts.)“Clark.” Peeling. Off. His. Wig. Martha watches as if he were a hideous alien pulling away the false skin that allows him to masquerade as a member of her species (and to mate with her). The scene is excruciating and fascinating. Clark looks as serious as we have ever seen him, and by the time he has loosed every bobby pin and pried the sandy hairpiece from his head, he has assumed a wild-eyed Randle McMurphy expression, or maybe it’s just the asymmetrically disarrayed natural (or so we believe) hair underneath.He removes the wig in what looks like a moment of desperation when Martha is about to leave him. His eyes say he wants Martha to stay, and that to keep her, he will reveal another layer of himself. It’s possible that he simply fears losing her as a potential agent, or that it’s just a matter of retaining control over her and what she knows. Where did she think she was going, anyway? Leaving Clark and returning to her parents’ house, even for a little while, would not fool Walter Taffet and company. It might not even fool Stan Beeman.Martha has no choice. She doesn’t know Clark’s whole story, and she probably won’t find out he is Philip Jennings, a married Russian spy with children. But she does know she was gullible to accept the terms of their “marriage,” no matter how satisfying the sex was and no matter how exotic her little bit of spy work made her feel.What does Clark mean when he says to Martha “We might have to go away, someplace new?” Is that a euphemism for getting her out of town to some remote motel where he can kill her? He wouldn’t be serious about leaving with her for good. It’s difficult to determine what he hopes to salvage and how he can manage the damage control.An Afghan coup.All at once, control is what seems to be sliding through the hands of the Directorate S illegals.But they have not lost their touch. Their masterly handling of the visiting mujahedeen leader Abassin Zadran is the ultimate exercise in control. After laying a trap based on a tidbit of information from the bug in Kimmy’s father’s briefcase, they smuggled out the Afghan fighter, wound him up and let him go. The power of suggestion — supported by the knowledge of how to inflame a killer with strong tribal loyalties coursing though his veins, an inbred suspicion of outsiders and a likelihood to act first and do the fact-checking later — allows Philip and Elizabeth to complete their destruction of the C.I.A.’s relationship with the Afghans bloodlessly. Sort of. The only blood on their hands was metaphorical. By remote control they gutted his enemies like goats and then delivered him, the nemesis of the Soviets, red-handed to the Americans.At the Rezidentura.There is a valedictory aura surrounding events in this episode as it shifts from moment to memorable moment. Oleg amusingly reads English dialogue from the copious transcripts of conversations the mail robot picked up. Every word is clatteringly committed to paper by the Red Army Typing Corps.The brilliant plan to use the lumbering machine as a roving eavesdropper seems to have backfired in the newly restrained atmosphere of the F.B.I. office. And Arkady is being uncharacteristically mercurial when he suddenly calls a halt to Operation Zephyr. Tatiana thinks it’s a bad move, an interference with her own secret plans, perhaps — and manipulates Oleg to help find ways to prolong the program and presumably help save Arkady’s image in the process.She also drops a few hints of Prague and brings in some Czech-Slovak pastry. Relevant detail, or a red herring? Did she get her chops steering a tank through the Prague Spring to crush the hopes for democracy?Get smart.Back at the bureau, the atmosphere is tense. In the course of a heated exchanged with Agent Aderholt, who is increasingly in his face, Stan presents a what-if scenario, and he is very close to being right.But Aderholt is a Denny-one-note.Aderholt: “Did you plant the bug?”Stan: “No. And you are not as smart as you look.” (Is that a bad thing?)Speaking of smart, Martha did handle her unexpected gentleman caller beautifully. He said he was there because he thought she was troubled, that she had stared into her coffee cup for a long time. (Nice try, Stan.)Martha takes the ball: “You know, I talk to it sometimes, and I beg it to wake me up,” she tells him over their endlessly steeping tea. Their nervous fiddling with the teabags seems to go on forever as we bite our nails, worrying over what would happen should “Clark’s” trajectory to Martha crosses Stan’s. Thank heaven for Hans, who was dispatched to patrol the area a few visits ago when Elizabeth thought Philip might need help.Martha does a professional job of getting rid of Stan, too. All she has to do is mention his failed marriage and wonder aloud why he is there in her maidenly apartment (she had carefully tucked away a photo of her and Clark) and Stan hightails it out of there. She certainly seems to have a future in espionage.Tea and comradery.Claudia (a.k.a. Granny, played by Margo Martindale, who has been plenty busy these days) makes an appearance again, this time with Gabriel in a place that resembles the diner that Stan and Zinaida visited in Episode 4. Contemptuous consumers that they are, Claudia and Gabriel banteringly discuss the burgers and their endless variety. “How does one choose?” he asks.
“The paradox of being American,” she says.
“Mmm. Isn’t this a Greek diner?” he says.They settle for tea, and amid some patting and clasping of each other’s hands — like very old friends or once upon a time something more? — they talk about the family of illegal agents that met a tragic end back in Season 2. Maybe Philip is right about trying to protect Paige, Gabriel ventures. He staves off Claudia’s disapproval, saying, “I’m thinking, Claudia. I can think out loud with you after 30 years.”“Think out loud all you like. It’s a free country, or hadn’t you heard?” she says as only she can. (Claudia is wearing what appears to be a wedding ring, at least for part of the scene, but that could mean nothing.)Stealth and wealth.So, in the last episode, Maurice’s greed propelled his wife, Lisa, right into Elizabeth’s … er … Michelle’s  hands. The couple said they caved so quickly because they were trying to save their house from foreclosure. But Lisa isn’t going to see any of that cash, is she? At least not the laundered K.G.B. payment from her first foray onto the Northrup factory floor with her clandestine camera. And now Maurice, fortified with everything a blackmailer needs, has Lisa in his control. Or he is about to reach the end of his days. All Elizabeth – or Lisa – would have to do would be to sprinkle a little something into that big juice jar in the cabinet.It leaves us with the question: Who is the nastier person? Elizabeth, preying on down-on-their-luck alcoholics, or Maurice, taking further advantage of his already abused (in unspecified ways, but surely abused) wife?Catchphrases.“I would gut every one of them like a goat.” Does this have a future as a catchphrase?We probably won’t see a lot more of Abassin, the bloodthirsty mujahedeen leader who gave the episode its name and uttered that line, but perhaps we can designate some other character to pick it up. Henry might be best.For example:Philip to Henry: “Hey, buddy, what are you studying so hard?”
Henry: “Geography test tomorrow.”
Philip: “Are you ready?
Henry:  “I’m gonna gut it like a goat.”White noise.Now, we must deal with Paige’s latest outbursts. Did you want to take a flyswatter to her for her insolence or body-block her overly menacing parents during their latest claustrophobic closed-door conference in the garage?She engaged in a fairly minor act of rebellion, except for her quite pointed embrace of Pastor Tim and a slightly less enthusiastic hug to his wife. Is she seeking asylum with them? Does she want to be adopted? These thoughts probably were not lost on her parents, who are losing control over her. They need to choose their battles, but their adolescent has a more dangerous secret than most.Following another explosion in which Paige rips photographs of faux relatives from a family album, she is probably feeling more isolated than ever. Philip senses her need for connection to family, and so the idea Elizabeth initially rejected begins to become reality. After much deliberation, Elizabeth reverses herself on the idea of going to Russia to see her mother. But she’ll be taking her daughter with her. She swoops into Paige’s room and presses the clock radio to create some white noise, setting off the dark  “Vienna,” by Ultravox, which plays as she makes her proposition to her daughter, repeating its chorus, “It means nothing to me.” Comments on the comments.To those of you who brought up Elizabeth’s recounting to Paige that she and her mother had shared an apartment with three other families, don’t you suspect that Elizabeth, even in that little speech in the car in Episode 11, was already spinning tales for Paige’s benefit? She elaborated her stories and lied outright to burnish them with a sheen of adversity and even heroism.Julie of Delaware came up with a way to neatly tie up the plot, when she posited that the family could accompany Pastor Tim on a mission trip to the Soviet Union, killing several birds with one stone, but religion is probably the last thing the Soviets want to import, so any “mission” had better be disguised as something else entirely. If they do make the trip, will Martha go along on a one-way ticket?Allen Rebchook of Wisconsin noted that “if you’re going to make your 16-year-old daughter an accessory to a capital crime, you probably have to get used to a bit of the silent treatment.” So true. And after this episode, a little silence might be welcome.Which moment was the most shocking for you in this episode, comrades? The most tense? The most realistic?
It’s time to sum up your impressions as we head to the finale next week. I hope those of you who are writing several hundred words of impassioned commentary each week and who are deeply invested in the show have something to turn to after April 22, or have a vacation coming, or are returning to your dissertations on crop yields for opium poppies.Товарищи, повторяйте за мной: Жизнь есть после Сезона 3.
(Comrades, repeat after me: There is life after Season 3.)