Season 2, Episode 7Alec Hardy has no pity for any of his suspects, and “Broadchurch” has no pity on us. “I like it when they panic,” Hardy tells Ellie Miller with a devilish grin — or at least as much of a grin as his taut face can muster. And most viewers will be panicking when they finish Episode 7, which ends with a double cliffhanger — including a verdict paused halfway through — before cutting to black.“That’s a cheap ploy!” you might cry from the bleachers.So what? They like it when you panic.There’s no doubt about it: after slurring and panting through the season, D.I. Hardy has made a bionic man resurgence. He walks with a new-found swagger, pursues leads with abandon and no longer dreams about the deathly waters, but rather of his intimate, serene moment with Claire.“I’m reborn,” he gloats at Lee, before ripping off a self-motivational monologue worthy of any great boxing movie. They’ve been wonderful antagonists: the younger, stronger and more stoic Lee delivered the first blows, but the post-surgery Hardy has turned into a wrathful, no-holds-barred fighting machine. When he lets slip that Claire had a secret pregnancy, he shatters Lee’s “Bonnie and Clyde” illusions and sends the Ashworth marriage into freefall.Not that they need much help. They’re a deceitful, self-destructive pair, perfect for each other but impossible in the long run. All it takes is that one small push from Hardy before they’re trying to drown each other in the ocean. They can’t quite finish each other off, but the inevitable tides of history crash, beating them over and over. Any hope for a spinoff, Mr. Chibnall? I’d absolutely watch “Star-Crossed Murderers in the South of France.”After letting Lee dog-paddle toward his own destruction, Hardy goes about picking off every other suspect. He starts with the hopeless headcase Gary Thorp, who’s less of a decoy than Lee presumed. Then it’s off to Ricky Gillespie, who dodges and lumbers around the truth like an elephant trying to hide in some trees. His answer to whether he likes bluebells tells you all you need to know about his intelligence and tact: “Yeah, they’re all right. They’re a flower.”When Hardy takes one more crack at Lee at the end of the episode, he’s in total command. Lee backs into full denial mode, just as Joe Miller tried to do in his mock interview before getting cut down by his own lawyers, so you know the truth is around the corner. Lee has generally been impossible to read, but his final “I have nothing left to say” reeks of fear and exhaustion.Speaking of Joe: he’s either about to be set free or convicted, as the two lawyers give their final statements back in the courtroom. Jocelyn is professorial in her attack: deliberate and eloquent, with sweeping  gestures and carefully-measured statistics. But she also carries with her more than a decade of passion, as she is about to confess her love to Maggie, in a touching (if slightly cloying) scene on the beach.“I always loved watching your speeches,” Sharon says to Jocelyn outside the courtroom during an improbably timed smoke break. (I can’t wait to see Pacquiao and Mayweather sharing a Gatorade  between rounds eight and nine.)Of course, Sharon doesn’t stop there.  Jocelyn and the  justice system “can both go to hell,” she snarls. How ironic and devastating that her redemptive mission was so poorly chosen. In her own closing speech, she throws all of Jocelyn’s formalities out the window. She’s blunt and manipulative, beginning with clear conjecture before dropping the hypothetical halfway through and gleefully concocting an account of Mark’s killing Danny. “Can you be sure that didn’t happen?” she asks, with a whiff of Lena Dunham-esque verbal trickery.Worst of all, it’s shockingly convincing.After this, it’s an agonizing and unnecessary waiting game, as the jury shuffles from one claustrophobic room to another. A drinking game involving close-ups of Beth Latimer’s pained expression would land you in the hospital. And if you thought you would get a result by the end of the episode, you’re a sucker. See you next week!Stray Notes and ObservationsScene Stealer Award: It goes to William Andrews as Ben, who stumbles over to Abby during a private moment in the courtroom to mumble, “I just wanted to say — I think you’re a truly horrible person.” Score a massive point for the good guys.Obligatory Ellie-to-Hardy insult: “You are such terrible company!”