

      By BRUCE FRETTS

APRIL 15, 2015

“You put on a costume to become a different person,” says Terry Dresbach, costume designer of  “Outlander,” the Starz drama about Claire (Caitriona Balfe), a British nurse who travels back in time from the 1940s and marries Jamie (Sam Heughan), an 18th-century Scottish warrior. “At Halloween we put on costumes to play at being something other than what we are, ” she says.  “Little children put on costumes and play at being different people. It's the most essential part of the work I do.” Ms. Dresbach, who is married to Ronald D. Moore, the show's executive producer, discussed some of her most memorable designs.
Related Article
“It was inspired by Ron’s line in the script that the sun had to come out when Jamie saw her. So it was incredibly important to me that the dress was reflective. We used a metallic linen, and we hand-embroidered it — it took months to make this dress. As for the acorns and leaves, the oak tree is a symbol of longevity through the world. Underneath the white you see another layer covered in shaved mica. We shaved mica for days to attach under the skirt so it would give a very organic shimmer in sunlight. There were no Bob Mackie sequins at the time, so we had to find as many ways to get light into that dress as we could.” “Jamie needed to be heroic. He needed to be the handsome prince. Ron said to me, ‘This has got to be the fairytale moment.’ I've read all the books and they’re still talking about their wedding in the eighth book. Ron and I have that with our own wedding. We remember that moment, and it comes up in our life all the time. You want to have an image that sears itself into their brains and into the brain of the audience. It’s the moment where these two people come together for the rest of their lives. As fantastic, ethereal and beautiful as she needs to be, he needs to be the perfect man — ‘The King of Men,’ as people call Jamie. What other color are you going to put him in but blue? Add the white at the neck, and he becomes Prince Charming.” “I deeply, passionately hated this costume in a way that I’ve never really hated a costume. You can write in a book that Claire goes through the stones in the 1940s wearing a cotton dress and comes out the other side and the 18th-century men who come upon her believe she‘s in her shift. Well, no 1940s dress looks anything like an 18th-century nightgown. So you're ripping your hair out trying to figure out, ‘How the hell do I do this?’ We only had two weeks to make the costume. So it’s a dress borne out of necessity, not design. For a long time, I cringed at it because I considered it not a very beautiful costume, but it was a nice little lesson to myself that not everything has to be beautiful. Sometimes it just has to serve the purpose. The audience has to believe what the Highlanders believe, that it’s a nightgown. And that’s my job.” “That gentleman there is in my favorite costume in the show. Hugh Munro (Simon Meacock) is a mute who’s gone off to fight in the Crusades and was captured by the Turks, and his tongue was cut out. He came back to Scotland, and they issued beggars’ badges for certain people. They were allowed to beg freely. Everybody focuses on the Claires and the Jamies, but the beauty of characters like this is no one cares what he wears. That‘s when you do the really amazing character work. His costume is literally made out of scraps we gathered off the floor of a mill in Scotland. And we wove them together by hand and created a coat of many colors. It is an extraordinary piece of art. On the front are all these beggars’ badges we gathered off eBay and Etsy. You can never see them close enough to know one of them is a 1950s swimming medal. But the antique relief work and imagery is there just enough to convey a beautiful depth.” “It’s interesting when you do a fitting with an actor, and they come in their modern clothes, and then you watch them put on their costume. Together in that fitting room, you work out who they are. You really start to hone the character. The first step when you know you’ve got it right is that they put it on and they start moving differently than they did when they came in. Tobias Menzies came in, and he had on skinny jeans and a narrow jacket — he looked like every other hipster. Then he put on this costume and he doubled in size and became massive. You saw him stand up straighter, his shoulders went back and his legs planted firmly in the ground. He just became a different person before your eyes.”  “Look at her. She's a formidable character. These are clothes that women gave birth, worked fields, carried pots of laundry, cooked, baked and skinned animal carcasses in. These are working clothes and they’re serious, and it’s important that you feel the authenticity when you look at her. She’s to be taken seriously. That lies at the heart of all the costumes, but particularly hers. You’ve got to believe she’s not just tripping around in some Alexander McQueen knockoff. She’s actually been thrown into this crazy world.”   “We call Dougal (Graham McTavish) our Darth Vader. He only wears black and gray. He’s the War Chieftain. So there has to be a power to him and almost a sense of menace. As with any commander, the men have to revere him and fear him, so we tried to get that commanding presence. And Graham probably has a commanding presence in a Speedo. He puts these things on, and it’s remarkable. He’s fun to dress because he’s really into it. Our daughter loves him because he’s in ‘The Hobbit.’ She’s a little distressed that he's tall.”   “That's Claire as the hero. Every hero has a cape. There’s nothing like a cape. That’s why kids put them on. They swirl and whoosh around. This story has two heroes: Claire and Jamie. It was important to me, as I’m a huge Claire fan, that we get that quality from her costumes as well as from his.” Advertisement