Short stories seem like the perfect snackable literary form for the digital age, when a growing number of readers are looking for content they can quickly scan through on their phones. But most of the time, publishers package stories in meal-sized portions, as a complete collection.Vintage/Anchor Books is now experimenting with selling short stories à la carte, through its Vintage Shorts digital imprint. Throughout May, to mark Short Story Month, Vintage will release a digital short story each day for 99 cents, the price of many iTunes singles. The works will include classic short stories by Anton Chekhov, Raymond Carver, Willa Cather, Edgar Allan Poe and Alice Munro; newer work by contemporary authors like Jhumpa Lahiri, Junot Diaz and Nam Le; and a sprinkling of original stories by Hari Kunzru, Alexander McCall Smith, Carrie Brown, Maeve Binchy and Patricio Pron.The goal is to get readers to sample new writers or rediscover classics through cheap, quick-to-digest digital books. The 31 stories range from 5,000 to 30,000 words, and most can be read during a 30-minute commute. They will be sold through major e-book retailers like Amazon, Barnes & Noble and Apple.“We knew from some research that we’d seen that millennial readers want cheaper, bite-sized pieces of content that are also high quality,” said Laura Crisp, Director of Digital Publishing & Business Development for Vintage Books/Anchor Books. “And we know that millennials are interested in reading e-books on their mobile phones, but they also read full-length books in print.”Vintage Shorts was created last year, giving Vintage/Anchor Books a foothold in the market for short digital content, alongside rivals like Amazon’s Kindle Singles and Barnes & Noble’s Nook Snaps. Its early offerings included original essays and nonfiction by Eli Saslow and Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie, as well as stories and excerpts from the publisher’s extensive backlist, with works by Lorrie Moore and James Baldwin.Mr. Kunzru, a journalist and novelist who is releasing an original short story next month with Vintage Shorts, said he was intrigued by the notion of selling short stories as standalone works. “It’s a chance to be part of an experiment to see if this way of circulating short stories is appealing to people,” he said. “I’d be very happy to see someone reading short fiction instead of playing Candy Crush.”Mobile phones are quickly overtaking e-readers as the go-to device for reading e-books. According to a 2014 survey of 3,000 consumers in the United States and Britain by Publishing Technology, 43 percent reported that they read e-books on their phones, and 36 percent said they preferred reading short content on their phones.A version of this article appears in print on 04/16/2015, on page C3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Coming to Your Phone: A Daily Short Story.