AdvertisementSupported byBy Joe CoscarelliLOS ANGELES — On a celebratory trip to Las Vegas last month, Justin Bieber demanded a round of applause from his entourage. His breezy new single, “What Do You Mean?,” had just made its debut atop the Billboard chart, giving him the first No. 1 song of his career.But the ovation wasn’t for himself — it was for a 36-year-old songwriter known as Poo Bear, Mr. Bieber’s primary musical collaborator for the last two years.“I don’t even like attention like that — it’s not my thing,” a soft-spoken Poo Bear (born Jason Boyd) recalled with insuppressible excitement the following week.Still, the gratitude didn’t hurt after almost two decades of quietly writing hits for R&B acts like 112, Usher, Chris Brown and Kelly Rowland. “I’m just used to working harder than everybody and other people taking the credit,” Poo Bear said at his preferred studio in North Hollywood, in the first extensive interview of his career. “Justin is the first person — literally — to bring my name up and say we did this album together.“I feel like he appreciates me,” Poo Bear continued. “And I never really felt appreciated before.”Mr. Bieber, 21, has reason to be grateful. Following some shaky years in which his tabloid antics reverberated louder than his music, Mr. Bieber’s adult career finally lifted off in 2015, courtesy of two singles: “What Do You Mean?” and “Where Are Ü Now,” a thoroughly modern collaboration with Diplo and Skrillex’s dance music project Jack Ü. On YouTube and Spotify, the tracks have nearly 900 million combined plays.Behind both songs — buried in the credits but often shouted out by Mr. Bieber in interviews — was Poo Bear, who worked with the singer on much of his comeback album, “Purpose” (RBMG/Def Jam), due out Nov. 13. In addition to being Mr. Bieber’s most significant co-writer, Poo Bear also worked as a vocal producer and will be credited on “Purpose” as an A&R executive for helping to guide the general musical direction.From all angles, this is an unlikely winning partnership: It began as a friendship between a grown man from the industry’s fringes and one of the most famous teenagers on earth. Soon after came the artistic connection.Although his career is fastidiously managed, Mr. Bieber forged the alliance alone, at times to the consternation of his team. And rather than plucking brand-name tunes for “Purpose,” a make-or-break project, from the so-called writing camps that help create albums by committee, Mr. Bieber insisted on writing his hits with the practiced, if unrecognized, Poo Bear.“Where Are Ü Now” and electronic dance music helped Justin Bieber sing for grown-ups. A story of how music is made today.In a Top 40 era long-dominated by the Scandinavian hit maker Max Martin and his army of writers (Dr. Luke, Shellback) known for their work with stars like Taylor Swift, the Weeknd and Katy Perry, this qualifies as a risk. While Diplo, Skrillex, Kanye West and Rick Rubin also worked on “Purpose,” according to Mr. Bieber, the core of the album’s songwriting comes from a man without a Wikipedia page (for now).“Justin tried with certain super-producers, but he was just doing it because he didn’t want to disrespect them,” Poo Bear said. “Ultimately, he’d say, ‘I hated that song, Poo Bear.’ Our relationship is different.”Scooter Braun, the manager who discovered Mr. Bieber and now also represents Poo Bear, said: “Justin knew what he wanted to say, and in Poo he found a partner. Justin went through a very tough period, and Poo actually went through it with him.”Poo Bear admitted his initial relationship with Mr. Bieber wasn’t necessarily productive. “I was making bad decisions with a minor — smoking weed and getting into trouble,” he said. “It was really unacceptable, but we went through those times together, and that made us closer than any other writer and artist could be.”Amid Mr. Bieber’s paparazzi-documented stumbles, he told Poo Bear that he wanted his next album to be “inspirational” — a chronicle of being built up only to be torn down. They wrote more than 100 songs together for “Purpose,” often workshopping melodies and tweaking lyrics from Poo Bear’s sketches.The pair first met in Las Vegas, in January 2013, through members of Mr. Bieber’s clique at the time, which included the teen rapper Lil Twist, with whom Poo Bear was recording.“We kind of just vibed on a personal level,” Mr. Bieber recalled in an interview earlier this year. “What was super cool with him is that he never forced any music on me.”Then Mr. Bieber learned that Poo Bear had written hits like “Peaches and Cream” by 112 and “Caught Up” by Usher. “I was like, really? This guy? He doesn’t look like he sings, you know?” Mr. Bieber said. “He played me a few songs and I was like, what are we doing? Why aren’t we in the studio cutting these records?”Poo Bear had his reasons. “Justin wanted ‘Grip Tight,’ ” a pulsing, dirty club track that Poo Bear had prepared for his own solo project, he recalled. He told Mr. Bieber: “You’re 18, and it’s a very sexual song. You can’t go from singing ‘Beauty and a Beat’ ” — Mr. Bieber’s relatively chaste 2012 disco-pop track — “to ‘Grip Tight.’ ”“Evidently nobody ever told him no,” Poo Bear added.Undeterred, Mr. Bieber soon offered to fly Poo Bear to the Miami stop of his yearlong “Believe” megatour. They bonded over their taste in ’90s R&B, along with their biographical similarities, which included being raised in religious homes by struggling single mothers.“We just got closer and closer,” Poo Bear said. “Then a light bulb switched in my head, and I was like, wait a minute, I’m a songwriter — I can always write more songs.” Poo Bear changed “Grip Tight” to “Hold Tight” (“That way it could be about a hug situation”), and the song became their first collaboration.From there, “Justin kind of kidnapped me,” Poo Bear said. Together they traveled around the world on tour — Boston, Toronto, Tampa, a break for beaches and Segwaying in Bali, Bangkok, Brazil — while working on what would become “Journals,” an underrated, under-promoted digital singles compilation, released at the end of 2013, that was crucial in introducing Mr. Bieber to new audiences and allowing him to flex some muscles of self-determination. “Before that, he was just told to sing,” Poo Bear said.The partnership also offered Poo Bear a chance to break through on an almost unimaginable scale — if he could stick along for the ride. Mr. Bieber was “very overprotective and possessive of me,” recalled Poo Bear, who was not being paid up front for those early studio sessions. “He said, ‘There’s no need for you to work with anybody else because I’m the biggest star in the world.’ And I’d be like, ‘You know what, you’re right.’ ”Like Mr. Bieber, Poo Bear entered the music industry at an early age. He was raised in Atlanta, where he moved at 9 with his mother and brother after his parents divorced and a tornado destroyed the family’s Connecticut home. Down South, he followed in the footsteps of the era’s local kids’ groups, signing his first record deal at 13 and another at 15.Through a cousin in the business, he met 112 and scored his first hit with that Puff Daddy-backed group while still in high school. But Poo Bear said he was routinely the victim of bad contracts, shady lawyers and credit-hogging artists, which includes the time he spent working with the white-hot (and then burned-out) producer Scott Storch, with whom he lived in a Miami mansion for three years during that beatmaker’s mid-’00s peak.Life with Mr. Bieber was comparatively tame and more reliable, despite the bumps, which were always well documented by the celebrity press. “I was there when he was supposedly drag racing in Miami,” Poo Bear said of a January 2014 incident involving a yellow Lamborghini that ended in a plea deal. “I was in an Escalade with his father next to him. We were going about 28 in a 35.”Poo Bear’s presence during these events wasn’t a comfort to members of Mr. Bieber’s inner sanctum, who tried to separate them. “He came in at a time of Justin’s life when I was very protective,” Mr. Braun said. “I didn’t get along with him at first.” However, he said, “Just like Justin learned and moved on from his mistakes, Poo went through that as well.”Poo Bear added, “Looking back, I would have been uncomfortable with me being around, too.” But he stayed, hoping to play a role in Mr. Bieber’s image rehab, musically and otherwise. “I remember him calling me one morning and saying, ‘I don’t want to do this anymore,’ ” Poo Bear said of the singer’s mild drug use. “So I stopped smoking weed, too. If he’s changed, I don’t want to be a bad influence.”With less time for recreation, he focused on songwriting. At the studio where Poo Bear cuts his demos, he scrolled through hundreds of song ideas on his iPhone, often just a few words long.His formula for pop songwriting calls for each track to have a “main idea” and express a “complete thought,” with “melodies simple enough for a child to sing along,” Poo Bear said, “but effective enough to spark interest in a mature human’s mind.”On Aug. 12, 2014, at 3:55 a.m., Poo Bear jotted down four words: “Where are you now.” And on June 22, 2015, at 1:31 a.m., a couple of lines: “When you nod your head yes, do you really mean no? When you say don’t move, do you really mean go?”Mr. Bieber said the pair work so well in the studio because Poo Bear “doesn’t have an ego. A lot of people that I’ve tried to work with in the industry, they got an ego, and I got a little bit of an ego as it is, so two egos together doesn’t really work.”The success of Mr. Bieber’s singles has also increased demand from others for Poo Bear’s work, a predictable outcome in an industry that eventually gets around to chasing those hitmakers with the highest batting averages.Poo Bear responded by doubling his studio fee. “I don’t want to oversaturate the market, and I want to keep this exclusivity,” he said. “I’ve seen so many writers and producers come and go for the last 19 years. I think it had a lot to do with me being tucked away. You can’t get tired of something you don’t know exists.“I’m like this ghost — you look around, and all you see is the artist,” he added. “But if you look at the credits, it’s still Poo Bear.”Jon Pareles contributed reporting.Advertisement