The Dictionary of American Regional English reached a milestone three years ago when it released its fifth installment, bringing its 50-year effort to document the vagaries of American speech to a climax with a volume running through “zydeco.”But now the project, started at the University of Wisconsin in 1963, may be forced to put a final period on things. DARE, as the dictionary is known, has announced that it will shutter most of its operations this summer unless it can find new sources of funding to cover its roughly $525,000 annual budget. The print dictionary had been supported by grants from the National Endowment for the Humanities, among other sources. More recently, the budget was covered in large part by stopgap grants from the university, which are set to run out. A crowd-funding effort announced last month has fallen short, raising only about $6,000 so far. “We have run out of places to go,” Joan Houston Hall, the chief editor, said.The dictionary, initiated by the lexicographer Frederic Cassidy in 1963, belongs to the great age of folk collecting. From 1965 to 1970, its fieldworkers fanned out to some 1,000 communities across the country in retrofitted Dodge vans nicknamed Word Wagons, gathering samples of speech on then-newfangled reel-to-reel tape recorders and inquiring about local ways of talking about everything from the weather and food to loose women and lawyers. The nearly 60,000-entry print edition, published by Harvard University Press, may be finished, but DARE still has more work to be done, Ms. Hall said. Its staff of five has written hundreds of new entries that she said she hoped would eventually be added to the digital edition, released in 2013.  Editors are also processing data from a pilot study of contemporary speech in Wisconsin, based on updated questionnaires given in the same communities as the original study, plus some new ones. (What do you call those cardboard sleeve thingies put around take-out coffee cups? In some places, Ms. Hall noted, a “zarf.”)Some results have been posted on DARE’s website, including a map tracking the never-ending ground war between “soda” and “pop.”“Wisconsin has always been a staunch pop state,” Ms. Hall said. “But soda is moving its way westward. The eastern part of the state now has lots of it.”A version of this article appears in print on 04/16/2015, on page C3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Regional English Project Is Running Out of Money.