A preview of “Live From New York!,” the documentary about “Saturday Night Live” opening the Tribeca Film Festival.This is one in a series of interviews focusing on New York-centric movies having their premieres at the Tribeca Film Festival.“Saturday Night Live”  has been a cultural signpost in the nation’s brightest and darkest moments, a launching pad  for many a comedian,  a political sounding board and  a regular part of  water cooler-discussions for the 40 years it has been on the air. Now it is the subject of a documentary, “Live From New York!,” that  opens the Tribeca Film Festival on Wednesday.Features, news, videos and more from the festival.Directed by Bao Nguyen, “Live From New York!” is made up of interviews with the show’s creator, Lorne Michaels, former hosts, cast members past and present, politicians, cultural critics and others who speak about the show’s impact over the years. In a phone interview, Mr. Nguyen, 31, discussed how he narrowed down what to cover from the show’s long run. Following are excerpts from that conversation.What were your memories of “Saturday Night Live” growing up?I remember when I was 9 years old sneaking out of my bedroom while my parents were sleeping and watching the show. I think everyone has that personal connection. I learned about Americana, in a way. Growing up in a Vietnamese immigrant family, it was kind of this window into American culture that I didn’t know.Is there a sketch that really stood out for you from that time?I remember the Gap girls sketch pretty well, the one with Chris Farley, Adam Sandler and David Spade working at the Gap. When I watch a rerun and see that sketch, it brings me back to childhood.What were some of the key elements you wanted to get across?We had a specific thesis of how has “S.N.L.” really impacted culture in 40 years? You look back at it in 1975 and it was a time capsule of what was happening then. It’s constantly reflecting what’s going on.We wanted to ask how does comedy play a role in forming our opinions and also helping us deal with tragedy. People don’t look at comedy in that way so much and  it was important  to find that balance of trying to be funny and pay tribute to the comedic value and legacy of the show, but also taking an anthropological look.With so many years and so much material to choose from, how did you decide who to talk to?We had a huge list starting out. My producers and my editors and I worked together to see who was telling the story we wanted to tell. It wasn’t trying to find the funniest person or trying to find the most popular cast member of an era. It was seeing what moments of “S.N.L.” reflected society and who were the key players in that story.Was there anyone you couldn’t get?There were a few people like that.  We worked around it because we had so many other stories we could tell. It’s not so much about one person, except for maybe Lorne Michaels. If Lorne said no to an interview, then I would be worried.One part of the documentary addresses diversity issues with the show’s cast over the years.I think the diversity subject is important when you’re talking about any sort of media. As an Asian-American filmmaker, I thought it was very important for me to talk about. “S.N.L.” has had its fair share of controversy in terms of diversity. So we weren’t censoring ourselves in terms of what topics we wanted to approach. When you’re looking at anything that’s lasted 40 years, you see the evolution of how media has changed and how diversity has changed. In a lot of ways, that segment was our opinion that maybe media hasn’t changed that much since the ’70s. There’s been some progress, but there’s still a lot of progress to be made. You can’t just blame “S.N.L.” Media in general is not as diverse as it should be.What was revelatory for you spending time on the set of the show for this film?For me, it was just interesting to see how well integrated each department was, working together. I saw people of all ages too. They had people in their 80s still working on the show after 40 years, and this is a high-pressure, high-energy environment. We talked to Eugene Lee, a production designer who’s been on since the beginning. Things like that surprised me because longevity in this industry is pretty rare.Have you lived in New York?Yes, I was in New York for about 12 years. Then 3 years ago, I moved to Vietnam.What was one of your quintessential New York experiences?New York is such a melting pot. As an Asian-American stepping into a city like New York, it could feel like home. I used to live in Nolita, so it was quite an experience and quite a cinematic history. I used to live near the old St. Patrick’s Cathedral where they shot the “Godfather” baptismal scene. And it was also the same street where some of “Mean Streets” was filmed. As a filmmaker, you use all these places as inspiration for your own film. You feel like the city is passing its baton for inspiration for the next project.