Times critics share what they’ve been listening to lately.Tchaikovsky Piano Concerto No 1; Prokofiev Piano Concerto No. 2
Kirill Gerstein, piano; James Gaffigan, conductor; and Deutsches Symphonie-Orchester Berlin
Myrios Classics MYRO16 Fans of Tchaikovsky’s beloved First Piano Concerto will notice something different at the start of this exciting new recording, featuring the formidable pianist Kirill Gerstein. When the soaring main theme breaks out in the orchestra, the accompanying piano chords are rolled, not played in solid blocks of steely sound; and the rising three-chord pattern spans just four octaves, not five. Mr. Gerstein and the conductor James Gaffigan use the 1879 version of the piece, the one Tchaikovsky settled on after making some alternations to the score after the work’s 1875 premiere. But the concerto is known today from an 1894 version, published after Tchaikovsky’s death, which includes tweaks and cuts the composer had never sanctioned, as Mr. Gerstein explains in his information liner notes. The changes, though not extensive, tend to tame and make more conventional some of Tchaikovsky bolder flights. It’s fascinating to hear, in this recording, a scurrying episode from the finale, one of the cuts made for that 1894 edition. But the main draw of this recording is Mr. Gerstein’s brilliant, insightful and exceptionally transparent playing. The album includes a dazzling account of Prokofiev’s Second Piano Concerto, a work he composed during a period of deep immersion into Tchaikovsky’s music.  Leonard Bernstein, ‘On the Town’
New Broadway Cast Recording
PS Classics ‘PS-1525 (two CDs)You don’t often hear the original 1944 version of the classic American musical “On the Town,” with a breakthrough score by the young Leonard Bernstein and a book and lyrics by Betty Comden and Adolph Green. The acclaimed, loving production created for the Barrington Stage Company in Massachusetts came to Broadway last year and is still playing for understandably delighted audiences. It’s a marvelous, vibrant production of a classic musical. And now it’s an essential two-CD recording. The score shifts constantly between the wonderful songs — the sassy “New York, New York,” the wistful “Lonely Town,” the beguiling, tender “Some Other Time” — and stenches of wondrous orchestral music for the dance sequences, in which Bernstein spins musical motifs and riffs into music of brilliant inventive and contemporary touches, with whiffs of bitonality and hints of Stravinsky and Copland. The cast is perfect. The conductor James Moore draws stylish, colorful playing from the sizeable and excellent orchestra.Irving Fine, Complete Orchestral Works
Boston Modern Orchestra Project, Gil Rose, conductor
BMOP Sound 1041Last year, the centennial of the birth of the American composer Irving Fine, brought some overdue attention to this significant and influential figure. Now there is an essential and rewarding new recording of Fine’s complete orchestra works, performed with expertise, zest and style by the Boston Modern Orchestra Project conducted by Gil Rose. Fine, who died in 1962, fashioned of lucid Neo-Classicism, elements of serialism and a feeling for American vernacular music into his own distinct voice. He founded the music department at Brandeis University and became part of what was became known as the Brandeis School of American Neo-Classicism, which included Fine’s colleagues Harold Shapero and Arthur Berger. It’s good to have these engaging recordings of Fine’s early Toccata Concertante and Notturno for Strings and Harp. And his “Blue Towers” and Diversions for Orchestra are demonstrations of how a composer can write smart, effective and charming works for a pop orchestra. (Both were given premieres by the Boston Pops.) Most important, though, is this arresting account of Fine’s Symphony, composed in 1962 for the Boston Symphony, a major contribution to the American symphonic repertoire that has been inexplicably neglected.Variations by Berio, Benjamin, Knussen, Lieberson and Brahms
Benjamin Hochman, piano
Avie AV2327 (one CD)The thoughtful, accomplished Israeli-born pianist Benjamin Hochman devised a fascinating program of works in variation form for this splendid new recording. If you think yourself resistant to atonal, modernist styles of music, listen to the inventive, fantastical and sensitive accounts that Mr. Hochman gives of Oliver Knussen’s Variations, Op. 24 and Berio’s “Cinque Variazioni” and you may have an epiphany. There are extraordinary performances of a meditative George Benjamin piece and Peter Lieberson’s elaborate 1996 Piano Variations, all building to the final offering: a commanding, exuberant account of Brahms’s great, and daunting, Variations and Fugue on a Theme by Handel.SPOTIFY PLAYLIST
Tracks from the recordings discussed this week. (Spotify users can also find it here.)