The Abba catalog has been mined for many purposes – a musical and a movie, for starters. And now, one of the Swedish pop group’s founders has decided to try a new venture: a “Mamma Mia!”-inspired immersive theatrical show.Björn Ulvaeus, one of the four members of Abba, plans to announce Wednesday that he will produce the new show, to be called “Mamma Mia! The Party,” inside a Stockholm beer hall that he is converting into a Mediterranean restaurant similar to the Skopelos tavern, used as a setting in the film and the play. He called the Stockholm venture an experiment and said that if it was successful, he would seek to expand it into other cities.“I’ve been sitting in theaters around the globe since we started, and have experienced that happy mood in the audience, where people stand up in the aisles and dance and sing, and I hear constantly about women who gather and have ‘Mamma Mia!’ Saturday nights,” Mr. Ulvaeus said in a telephone interview on Tuesday. “This is the next extension from that: transfer the mood to a restaurant – a Greek restaurant, of course – have a gigantic party, and tell a little story in real time.”Mr. Ulvaeus said the show would open in January in a Stockholm amusement park called Grona Lund, near a museum devoted to Abba. He said while the setting would be the same as that of “Mamma Mia!,” the story would change from night to night, based on interactions between performers and the audience. About a dozen performers would spin stories using Abba songs, some of which were used in “Mamma Mia!” and some of which were not.The new venture is being announced just days after producers of the musical said they would close their Broadway production on Labor Day weekend after 5,765 performances. But Mr. Ulvaeus said that the timing was coincidental — he said he has been working on the plan for some time, but needed to find a location — and noted that the musical continues to be staged all over the world. “Mamma Mia!” has grossed more than $2 billion globally since it opened in London in 1999.A version of this article appears in print on 04/16/2015, on page C3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: ‘Mamma Mia!’ Finds New Life.