By KATHRYN SHATTUCKAPRIL 15, 2015
3:30 P.M. (HBO2) THE CONSTANT GARDENER (2005) In this political thriller directed by Fernando Meirelles and adapted from the John le Carré novel, Ralph Fiennes portrays Justin Quayle, a British diplomat (and diligent caretaker of his plants), and Rachel Weisz is Tessa, his wife, whom he meets during a lecture on foreign policy when she angrily challenges Britain’s participation in the Iraq war. Throughout most of the movie Tessa is shown in flashbacks; she has been murdered in the Kenyan wilderness, where she traveled with a Belgian doctor of African ancestry (Hubert Koundé) to help fight poverty and disease. Danny Huston plays Justin’s colleague, and Bill Nighy is a villain in this tale about the evils lurking in multinational corporations and the Western governments that enable them. “It may be best to take the cloak-and-dagger elements of ‘The Constant Gardener,’ and the vision of justice with which it concludes, as metaphors, symbolic crystallizations of a reality too complex and diffuse to be dramatized by more empirical means,” A. O. Scott wrote in The New York Times. “Justin Quayle, then, is an allegorical figure, an emblem of timid virtue roused to heroic action by the discovery of his own complicity with evil.”3:55 P.M. (Starz Cinema) MIDNIGHT IN PARIS (2011) In Paris with his fiancée (Rachel McAdams) and her parents, Gil (Owen Wilson), a screenwriter and aspiring novelist, goes for walks each night and is magically transported to the 1920s in this film by Woody Allen. Though Gil wakes up each morning in the present, he spends his nights consorting with F. Scott Fitzgerald (Tom Hiddleston), Salvador Dalí (Adrien Brody) and a beguiling beauty (Marion Cotillard), delighting in the glamour described as “a moveable feast” by Ernest Hemingway (Corey Stoll). The film, for which Mr. Allen won an Oscar for best original screenplay, “is marvelously romantic, even though — or precisely because — it acknowledges the disappointment that shadows every genuine expression of romanticism,” A. O. Scott wrote in The Times.8 P.M. (13, 49) ANIMAL HOMES Even animals know it’s all about location, location, location. In Part 2 of this “Nature” special the ecologist Chris Morgan uses animated blueprints and tiny cameras to analyze the architecture of beaver, hawk and wood rat dwellings, and to figure out why these creatures settle where they do. In “The Great Math Mystery,” on “Nova” at 9, mathematicians, physicists and engineers draw on the work of Pythagoras, Galileo, Newton and Einstein — as well as music by the jazz bassist Esperanza Spalding — to ponder whether math is an invention or a discovery.9 P.M. (Esquire) BEST BARS IN AMERICA The comedians Sean Patton and Jay Larson continue their cross-country bar crawl, inspired by Esquire magazine’s annual rundown of favorite watering holes, in Louisville, Ky., where they meet up with James Watt and Martin Dickie, the Scottish-malt rebels of “Brew Dogs,” in two crossover episodes. On the itinerary: sipping a cocktail with a haunted history, nibbling on chargrilled squirrel and, at 10, creating a beer with hints of the Kentucky Derby’s signature drink, a mint julep.Advertisement10 P.M. (Cooking) DINNER AT TIFFANI’S Tiffani Thiessen whips up fried chicken, watermelon salad and root beer floats for her former “White Collar” co-star Tim DeKay and his family.MIDNIGHT (TMC) BIUTIFUL (2010) An underworld figure (Javier Bardem) dealing in the black-market labor of illegal immigrants in Barcelona tries to put his affairs in order for his two children and mentally unstable ex-wife after receiving a terminal diagnosis. Mr. Bardem “combines muscular, charismatic physicality with an almost delicate sensitivity, and this blend of the rough and the tender gives ‘Biutiful’ a measure of emotional credibility that it may not entirely deserve,” A. O. Scott wrote in The Times about this drama directed by Alejandro González Iñárritu (“Birdman”), which received Oscar nominations for best foreign language film and, for Mr. Bardem, best actor.AdvertisementWhat’s Streaming NowSHAKE THE DUST (2015) Nasir Jones, better known as the rapper Nas, is an executive producer of this documentary, directed by Adam Sjoberg, which examines the influence of break dancing and hip-hop culture in Cambodia, Yemen, Colombia and Uganda. Nas, Common and Talib Kweli provide the soundtrack. (vimeo.com)A version of this schedule appears in print on April 15, 2015, on Page C8 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Wednesday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.