By MIKE HALEAPRIL 14, 2015
There was never really any doubt that Raylan Givens, the deputy marshal whose body count was matched only by his grudging devotion to the law, would do the right thing in the end. But the makers of “Justified,” which closed out its six-season run on FX on Tuesday night, needed to keep us guessing as long as possible.So there was Raylan (Timothy Olyphant), halfway through the final episode, facing off for the last time against his criminal nemesis and evil twin, Boyd Crowder (Walton Goggins). Raylan’s leg was trembling, his hand was on his gun, you could feel his trigger finger itching. But then there was a cut and Boyd was being led away in handcuffs. “Why didn’t you just kill him?” asked Ava Crowder (Joelle Carter), the troublesome woman they both loved. “What’s it prove, letting him live?”“Maybe nothing,” Raylan said.But of course it meant everything. “Justified,” based on the fiction of Elmore Leonard, was always concerned with the codes people lived by in the picturesque but isolated and economically depressed landscape of eastern Kentucky. In the final season, as Raylan and Boyd headed toward their final reckoning, one character after another enunciated a code and then followed it, often to the death.The comically stoic driver and bodyguard Mike (Jonathan Kowalsky) and the Machiavellian gangster’s moll Katherine Hale (Mary Steenburgen) engaged in a shockingly brutal and intimate battle royale when his loyalty came up against her commitment to revenge. The crazy-eyed Boon (Jonathan Tucker) — a cross between Billy the Kid and Travis Bickle whose emulation of movie gunslingers was both code and psychopathy — was led by his principles to an inevitable, fatal showdown with Raylan.AdvertisementThe ruthless rounds of death and deception were embedded in an endgame narrative involving an outside crime boss’s attempt to buy up Harlan County land for marijuana cultivation and Boyd’s efforts to steal the boss’s $10 million stockpile of cash. Freed of the distractions of laying the groundwork for future events, the producers of “Justified” put together a focused, intricately plotted season that fully demonstrated the show’s hallmarks: the understated sophistication of its writing and direction, and its soulfulness, an authenticity and direct communication of character and place that you rarely feel in television drama.Grim circumstances dictated that there be less of the show’s distinctive laconic humor than usual, but it was still there in the byplay among Raylan and his surrogate family at the marshals’ service, and in a welcome reappearance by Patton Oswalt as the diminutive but fearless Constable Bob Sweeney. (When he took the way-out-of-his-league Ava into custody at a crucial point, he cautioned her, “Before you try to seduce me, just know it’s been tried before.”)AdvertisementTuesday’s episode suffered a common series-finale affliction: In order to leave room for a poignant coda, the showdowns between Raylan and Boyd and Raylan and Boon were a little rushed and anticlimactic. But the final 15 minutes were worth it — a quiet, bittersweet postscript, with no far-fetched twist or excess sentiment. Four years in the future, Raylan’s dreams hadn’t come true — he was a part-time father to his daughter, Willa, and her mother, Winona (Natalie Zea), was with another man.A tip from his old Kentucky colleague Rachel (Erica Tazel) sent him to California, where Ava was living as a fugitive, terrified that Boyd would track her (and their son) down. Just as he had let Boyd live, Raylan let Ava stay free, and then he went back to Kentucky and presented the imprisoned Boyd with faked evidence of her death. “Sometimes I think the only way to get out of our town alive is to have never been born there,” Boyd said, wiping away tears. “But then of course there’s you.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The lesson of six seasons of “Justified” is that Raylan can transcend Harlan County but never really leave it behind. Why did he bother to deliver the news about Ava personally, Boyd wondered, supplying his own answer: “We dug coal together.”“That’s right,” Raylan said, flatly, and a second later the screen went blank. It was a little like our last sight of Tony Soprano, another man whose life was on an endless loop.“Justified” wasn’t groundbreaking, but it was deeply satisfying in ways that were probably traceable to the influence of Mr. Leonard, who was an executive producer of the show before his death in 2013. The finale included a subtle but deeply touching tribute to him. Leaving the Lexington field office for the last time, Raylan reached into his desk and pulled out a battered paperback copy of “The Friends of Eddie Coyle” by George Higgins — not a Leonard book, but a book Mr. Leonard called the best crime novel ever. Raylan gave it a long look, then tossed it to Tim (Jacob Pitts), the marshal who always had his back. According to the code of “Justified,” it was better than actually saying goodbye.A version of this article appears in print on April 15, 2015, on Page C4 of the New York edition with the headline: A Lawman Tries to Do The Right Thing. The End.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.