AdvertisementSupported byBy Margalit FoxPaul Almond, a Canadian director whose television film “Seven Up!” examined the lives of a group of midcentury British children and became the basis of the documentary series that has followed them into middle age, died on Thursday in Beverly Hills, Calif. He was 83.The cause was complications of a recent heart attack, his son, Matthew, said.One of the most highly regarded documentaries of all time, the “Up” series, as it is collectively known, is most closely associated with Michael Apted, who directed all but the inaugural installment. But it was Mr. Almond who helped conceive that film, first shown on British television in 1964.Forty minutes long and shot in black and white, “Seven Up!” examined the enduring British class system through the lives of 14 7-year-olds from across the socioeconomic spectrum. He can be heard asking the children — 10 boys and four girls — questions about family, love and adult aspirations.Though the program was enthusiastically received by viewers and critics, it was intended as a one-off, and Mr. Almond later returned to Canada, where he had a successful career as a TV and film director and, in recent years, a novelist.Mr. Apted came up with the idea of revisiting the children at seven-year intervals. He directed the next installment, “7 Plus Seven” (1970), and those that followed — “21 Up” (1977), “28 Up” (1984) and so on — seeing his subjects through their professional lives, marriage and parenthood, ambitions fulfilled and ambitions thwarted. The most recent entry, “56 Up,” was released in 2012 in Britain.Viewed cumulatively, the “Up” series is a haunting study of how people get through life. It has spawned a spate of similar longitudinal documentaries in countries around the world.As a movie director, Mr. Almond was part of the cohort of Canadians who created their country’s first significant wave of art-house films. His work includes a noted trilogy, centering on mystical themes, for which he also wrote the screenplays: “Isabel” (1968), “Act of the Heart” (1970) and “Journey” (1972). All three films star Geneviève Bujold, to whom he was married from 1967 to 1973.The son of an Episcopal priest, David Paul MacPherson Almond was born in Montreal on April 26, 1931. After studying at McGill University there, he earned a degree in philosophy, politics and economics at Oxford and later directed television shows for the BBC, along with Granada and other British studios.“Seven Up!” was born in an English pub where Mr. Almond was drinking with Tim Hewat, a Granada producer. Musing aloud on Britain’s entrenched class system, Mr. Almond wondered to what extent it could be discerned in microcosm in the nation’s children.“Give me a child until he is 7,” Mr. Hewat responded, quoting the maxim ascribed to the Jesuits, “and I will give you the man.”From this exchange, “Seven Up!” was born. Produced for Granada, it was first broadcast on May 5, 1964.Mr. Apted, who was a young researcher on the film, helped find the children who became its subjects. Among those seen throughout the series are Tony, a scrappy Cockney lad who became a jockey and then a cabby; Suzy, a girl from a privileged background who became a wife and mother; Nicholas, a farm boy who is now a scientist at the University of Wisconsin; and Neil, a lively, articulate Liverpool boy who as a young man endured homelessness.Mr. Almond’s first marriage, to Angela Leigh, ended in divorce, as did his second, to Ms. Bujold. Besides his son, Matthew James Almond, from his marriage to Ms. Bujold, his survivors include his third wife, the former Joan Harwood Elkins, whom he married in 1976; three stepsons, Trey, Tim and Chris Elkins; a stepdaughter, Tracy Stoker; and eight grandchildren.His other directorial work includes a 1961 “Macbeth” for Canadian television, starring a young actor named Sean Connery, and, for American television, episodes of “Alfred Hitchcock Presents.” In retirement, he lived in Malibu, Calif.Mr. Almond, who also had a home in Shigawake, on the Gaspé Coast of Quebec, was the author of the Alford Saga, an eight-volume series of historical novels based on the lives of his pioneer ancestors in Canada. The series, which includes “The Deserter,” “The Survivor,” “The Chaplain” and “The Gunner,” spans some 200 years to the present day.He was invested as an Officer of the Order of Canada in 2003.In interviews, Mr. Almond was often asked what he thought of the “Up” series, now spanning half a century, and whether he had stayed in touch with its subjects. His replies were diplomatic but evinced a lingering discontent.“The only one I keep in touch with is Tony, the taxi driver, who has been loyal and faithful through the years,” he told The Globe and Mail newspaper in 2010. “I guess he’s the only one who recognized my contribution in creating and shooting and editing the first one in the way that made it special.”Mr. Almond added, “When a new episode comes out, Tony sends me the press clippings — in which I continue to see no mention of my name anywhere.”Advertisement