AdvertisementSupported byBy Jon ParelesThe progressive rock that arose in the late 1960s took pride in complexity, using large-scale structures, long-form narratives, jumpy melodies, dissonant harmonies, layers of polyphony, tricky meters, sudden transitions and the mixed vocabularies of rock, classical music and jazz — all tests of virtuosity and memorization. Magma, the band formed in France in 1969 by the drummer and songwriter Christian Vander, embraced all of those and added an extra convolution: Its lyrics are in an invented language, Kobaïan, of a culture that had to set out from a dying Earth into space. The story has been told across Magma’s albums.“Don’t even try to understand the lyrics,” Mr. Vander told the audience on Monday night at Le Poisson Rouge, where Magma finished the United States part of an international tour. “It comes from the heart and the beat.”True to prog-rock custom, Magma’s set featured suites, not songs. It played long excerpts from three of its albums: “Köhntarkösz” from 1974, “Mëkanïk Dëstruktïw Kömmandöh (M.D.K.)” from 1973 and “Slag Tanz” from 2015; its encore was “Zombies (Ghost Dance),” a song from its 1976 album “Udu Wudu.” The pieces were more consistent than their chronological spread might suggest, partly because Magma was never exactly trendy and partly because Mr. Vander’s initial template for the band was so broad. That template was certainly of its time. Magma’s music glances toward the jazz-rock of Weather Report and Return to Forever and toward the 20th-century classical repertory that informed Yes, Frank Zappa and Genesis.But Magma personalized its sources, constructing symphonic-scale pieces with nooks of improvisation. With three singers — Stella Vander (Mr. Vander’s ex-wife), Isabelle Feuillebois and Hervé Aknin — Magma encompasses dramatic declamations that hint at Carl Orff and glimpses of jazzy scat singing. Often, the women shared their jagged vocal lines with Benoît Alziary’s vibraphone and James MacGaw’s lead guitar as the rhythm section churned underneath. In many ways, meanwhile, Magma makes drummer’s music, built from the beat up and flaunting the off-center propulsion of odd meters (Mr. Vander is particularly fond of 7/4 and 5/4).There was room, when the rhythm section circled through its nimbly asymmetrical riffs, for Mr. Vander to play like a soloist, knocking the beat around, rumbling and crashing. At one point, Mr. Vander stopped drumming to take a vocal solo: scatting, warbling, screaming. Yet Magma was never quite a jam band; its suites were always headed somewhere. “M.D.K.” escalated from shimmering, almost pastoral delicacy to cataclysmic dissonance; “Slag Tanz” worked variations, discursive and percussive, on a terse, stop-start riff.There is, of course, a Kobaïan word for Magma’s style: Zeuhl. The band has earned it.Advertisement