AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben RatliffLarry Rosen, the music producer and digital-audio entrepreneur who was best known as a founder of the pop-jazz record label GRP, died on Oct. 9 at his home in Park Ridge, N.J. He was 75.The cause was brain cancer, said his publicist, Sheryl Feuerstein.Mr. Rosen and the keyboardist Dave Grusin started the GRP label (the initials stood for Grusin-Rosen Productions) in 1978, under the aegis of Arista Records. Almost from the start, much of the label’s music dovetailed with the radio format known as contemporary jazz — or, popularly, smooth jazz, although Mr. Rosen did not care for that term.A typical GRP release might have the funk and optimism of Brazilian pop, as well as jazz harmonies and a generally chilled-out disposition; it proposed a lush, sweet listening experience.“Recordings sounded like what the guys played in the club the night before,” Mr. Rosen said of jazz in the mid-1970s, in a 2012 interview for the website Jazz Monthly. By contrast, he explained, what he and Mr. Grusin sought was to “paint pictures with music.”Born in the Bronx on March 25, 1940, Mr. Rosen began his music career as a drummer. He attended the Manhattan School of Music and played with the Newport Youth Band, an incubator of young jazz talent founded by the trombonist Marshall Brown. He joined the singer Andy Williams’s touring ensemble in 1960 and remained with it until 1966; it was with that group that he met Mr. Grusin, who was playing piano.He later built a home studio and wrote commercial jingles in New York before beginning his record-producing career on the singer Jon Lucien ’s 1973 album “Rashida,” for which Mr. Grusin wrote arrangements. Soon after that, the pair began working as an independent production team on records by the guitarists Earl Klugh and Lee Ritenour, the violinist Noel Pointer and others.GRP — which operated as a joint-label venture with Arista until 1982, when it went independent — had early success with a range of jazz and pop performers, including the jazz trumpeter Tom Browne and the pop singer Angela Bofill.The company’s roster eventually came to include performers on a spectrum from pop to jazz-fusion to straight-ahead jazz, including the flutist Dave Valentin; the singers Patti Austin, Diane Schuur and Diana Krall; the bands Spyro Gyra, the Yellowjackets and the Brecker Brothers; and the pianists Chick Corea, Ramsey Lewis, Kenny Kirkland and Mr. Grusin himself, whose “Mountain Dance,” released in 1980, was one of the earliest digitally recorded nonclassical albums.Mr. Rosen lived in Park Ridge and in Fisher Island, Fla. He is survived by his wife, Hazel; his mother, Vivian Rosen; his son, J. J.; his daughter, Sandra Honigman; his sister, Susan Zelinka; and four grandchildren.GRP was an early proponent of digital recording and released its entire catalog on CD. One of its commercial bull’s-eyes was “In a Digital Mood,” a 1983 album of numbers from the Glenn Miller band’s repertoire recorded digitally, so listeners could hear new details in old music. It was certified gold in 1991.In 1987 the label signed a distribution agreement with MCA, and three years later MCA bought GRP for a reported $40 million. After the sale, GRP took charge of the parent company’s other jazz-label holdings, including Impulse and Decca. Mr. Rosen and Mr. Grusin stayed on until 1995.Soon after that, the two men started a new company, N2K Encoded Music, which in addition to operating as a record label (releasing albums by the trumpeter Arturo Sandoval and the vocalist Jane Monheit, among others) hosted online communities for various musical genres and the online store Music Boulevard. In 1999, N2K merged with CD Now, an early online music retailer.In 2006, Mr. Rosen produced “Legends of Jazz With Ramsey Lewis,” a 13-part PBS series of half-hour jazz shows. In recent years he became involved in the jazz performance business, starting Jazz Roots, a concert program for performing arts centers around the country, which began in Miami and spread to Dallas, Atlanta and elsewhere.Advertisement