AdvertisementSupported byBy Stephen HoldenA globular light show flickered behind the piano at 54 Below on Monday evening as Nellie McKay resurrected the cheerfully embattled spirit of the hippie counterculture in her new show, “Nice Try, ’60s.” The performance celebrated the release of her wonderful album, “My Weekly Reader,” devoted to vintage psychedelia and period protest songs. True to Ms. McKay’s idiosyncratic sensibility, her concert, like her album, bypassed the musical monuments of the period (there were no references to Woodstock) to exhume lesser-known songs like the Small Faces’ euphoric “Itchycoo Park,” the Kinks’ wistful “Sunny Afternoon” and Donovan’s phantasmagoric “Sunny Goodge Street.” The balance between psychedelia and political outrage recaptured the mood of the era with extraordinary fidelity. Singing playfully defiant songs, Ms. McKay’s magical little-girl voice conveyed a poignant sense of loss that underlined how the antiwar movement of the time often expressed itself in deceptively happy music. Buoyed by a sense of righteous solidarity, the protests voiced a naïve faith in the hippie dream of a brighter future. Thus, a song like Country Joe McDonald’s “I Feel-Like-I’m-Fixin’-to-Die Rag” was rooted in jaunty good-time music and slangy singalong lyrics that promised “a whole lotta fun, way down yonder in Vietnam.” That rag, which ends with “Whoopee, we’re all gonna die!,” was one of the high points of Ms. McKay’s show. Another was Richard Farina’s gung-ho anthem, “The Bold Marauder,” a folkie battle hymn of “the white destroyer” whose stinging lyrics promise “death will be our darling/and fear will be our name.” Ms. McKay played keyboards, including a conspicuous Hammond organ, and with her band, the Cosmic X-Rays (Alexi David on bass, Cary Park on guitar and Kenneth Salters on drums), recreated the scrappy clatter of ’60s rock before the introduction of gargantuan arena amplification. At her sweetest, Ms. McKay can break your heart. The evening’s most touching moment was her rendition of the Gerry and the Pacemakers hit, “Don’t Let the Sun Catch You Crying.” Behind the rage of this vehemently anticorporate singer-songwriter who has the courage to speak her mind you could feel the hurt of a vulnerable child you want to shelter from the storm. Nellie McKay performs through Saturday at 54 Below, 254 West 54th Street, Manhattan; 646-476-3551, 54below.com. Advertisement