By SIOBHAN BURKEAPRIL 14, 2015
Who is Olga Pericet? In “Flamenco Sin Título” (“Flamenco Untitled”), at Repertorio Español, the answer keeps changing. Joined by three other performers — the guitarist Antonia Jiménez and the singers José Ángel Carmona and Ismael Fernández — on the Repertorio’s small stage, Ms. Pericet, a compact powerhouse of a dancer, passes through many moods and modes of performance.Flamenco can be highly presentational or profoundly internal, and on Friday Ms. Pericet went to both extremes. At certain points she seemed to be acting the part of a flamenco dancer (poorly scripted), strutting proudly or shooting seductive glances at the crowd, as if to say, “Can you believe your eyes?” But in less calculated moments, she appeared to forget our existence altogether, lost in some ecstatic, tempestuous place. It was worth enduring a little forced theatricality to witness these.For the most part, “Flamenco Sin Título” is an unfussy show, a meeting of dance and music and dance-as-music without the kind of narrative pretense that sometimes burdens flamenco productions. Experts in the slow build, the performers repeatedly take us from somber, reflective depths to jovial heights during the evening’s 10 sections.The stage is undecorated except for a hanging lamp and a chair for Ms. Jiménez, whose lush playing is a highlight of the night. More elaborate visuals come in the form of Ms. Pericet’s costumes, which include two sumptuous red dresses: one with an expansive white-fringed shawl, the other with jeweled embroidery and a generously ruffled train. Her maneuvering of these hefty garments, as she tosses the shawl with matadorian zeal or hoists the ruffles to display her prodigious footwork, reveals both elegance and grit.AdvertisementIn a couple of too-cute interludes, to taped music, she more consciously takes on character roles: a doll-like Baroque dancer in a hoop skirt; a woman with a red rose searching for love.Ms. Pericet seems more herself, more enveloped in the moment and attuned to her collaborators, when less encumbered by costuming. In the opening segment, wearing form-fitting black pants and a white bolero jacket, she draws our focus to the bold contours of her movement, as her feet provoke a stormy conversation with the wailing vocalists. In a similar uniform for the finale, she escalates into a hair-tossing, rhythmically exacting fervor. Is this the same dancer we saw before? Ninety minutes is a lot for one dancer to carry, but Ms. Pericet’s personas manage just fine.Advertisement “Flamenco Sin Título” continues through April 26 at Repertorio Español, 138 East 27th Street, Manhattan; 212-225-9999, repertorio.org. A version of this review appears in print on April 15, 2015, on Page C2 of the New York edition with the headline: A Dancer With a Persona for Every Mood and Mode.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.