By NEIL GENZLINGERAPRIL 14, 2015
If you can’t wait for the reboot of “Heroes” that NBC is planning for later this year, CW has a series called “The Messengers” beginning on Friday that has some of the same elements. And the premiere certainly grabs your attention. The angel wings are a bit of a red flag, however.The opening episode does a nice job with a tried-and-true story structure: Disparate, geographically scattered characters who are touched by a supernatural experience gradually realize that they have changed somehow and are drawn together. In this case the transformation is wrought by a meteor that slams to Earth in New Mexico and sends out a silent blast wave that affects a scientist working nearby named Vera (Shantel VanSanten), as well as four other people who are far more distant. These five aren’t sure what exactly has happened to them, but by episode’s end they have begun to demonstrate that they now have extraordinary powers, and they seem destined to converge on Houston. It should be interesting when they meet up, because this is a very diverse group, at least in terms of lifestyle. In addition to Vera, we follow the stories of Erin (Sofia Black D’Elia), a mother with a young daughter; Peter (Joel Courtney), a high school student; Raul (J. D. Pardo), a federal drug agent working in Mexico; and Joshua (Jon Fletcher), a televangelist.This plot structure more or less requires that the chosen ones all have personal issues or secrets, and these characters certainly do. Joshua’s problem in particular turns out to be a doozy. But the group’s biggest challenge may be a mysterious being who landed along with the meteor. He is known simply as the Man (Diogo Morgado), but he is not a man at all, and he seems to be up to no good.Viewers realize that the special five are chosen before the characters themselves do, because under certain conditions — a reflection in a mirror, for instance — we see that they have gossamer wings. Whatever confrontation is coming — and the show is in no hurry to convey the details — is going to be apocalyptic. These five apparent angels have been imbued with exceptional powers, and it looks as if they’re going to need them to save the world.That same battle is already being fought over on Fox’s “Sleepy Hollow,” in which one episode this year also featured a winged angel. It looked pretty hokey then, and the winged moments here fare no better. Sorry, but putting wings on a human-looking character, even an angel, is never a good idea outside of a kiddie church pageant. That said, “The Messengers” certainly offers enough in its premiere to be worth a return visit next week, just to see where it’s going.A version of this review appears in print on April 15, 2015, on Page C4 of the New York edition with the headline: Mere Humans, Touched by a Meteor.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.