There must be something about solving paranormal mysteries that sparks literary inspiration.David Duchovny and Gillian Anderson, a.k.a agents Mulder and Scully from the Fox television show “The X-Files,” have each published novels recently, and both just signed deals for new books. Ms. Anderson’s first science fiction novel, “A Vision of Fire,” written with Jeff Rovin, was released last fall. Now she is writing a self-help book for women with the activist Jennifer Nadel, which Atria Books will publish next March.Mr. Duchovny’s surreal debut novel, “Holy Cow,” came out in February, and he just sold a second novel to Farrar, Straus & Giroux. The plot of “Holy Cow,” which features a talking cow, a cranky pig and a tech-savvy turkey seeking to escape the slaughterhouse, was as far-fetched as an episode of “The X-Files.”Mr. Duchovny’s next novel is decidedly more sober. Set in Brooklyn during the summer of 1978, the story centers on a struggling writer named Ted Fullilove, who learns that his estranged father, a retired advertising executive, is dying of cancer. The novel’s other hero is Bucky Dent, the light-hitting Yankees shortstop who famously — and surprisingly — hit a three-run home run in a one-game playoff against the Boston Red Sox in 1978, turning his name into an expletive for many New Englanders. The book is scheduled to come out in winter 2016.Mr. Duchovny majored in English at Princeton and wrote his thesis on the novels of Samuel Beckett, but says he feels more kinship with James Joyce. “He’s very austere, and I like fooling around with words,” he said in an interview with The New York Times magazine in January. “I guess I’m more Joycean, although that’ll sound really pretentious.” His lyricism isn’t limited to the page, apparently. He’s releasing a folk-rock album, “Hell or Highwater,” this spring.In addition to their parallel writing careers, Mr. Duchovny and Ms. Anderson are teaming up to fight supernatural crime again on a new season of “The X-Files,” which is returning to Fox after a 13-year hiatus.Though X-Files fans may suspect some kind of shadowy publishing-world conspiracy behind the timing of the Mulder/Scully books, it appears to be pure coincidence. In the interview in January, Mr. Duchovny acknowledged that he had not yet read his co-star’s science fiction novel.“We just had breakfast a few days ago,” he said, “and she didn’t even mention that she had one.”