AdvertisementSupported byBy Alastair MacaulayThe phrase “pure dance” is widely used when speaking of plotless choreography, yet dance is seldom so pure as Frederick Ashton’s “Monotones I and II.” This masterpiece is dance without climax, without bravura, without speed. No other work has gone so far in its idiom of unbroken poetic adagio and flowing lines, suggesting impersonal rituals of movement in unbounded space.Ashton’s perfect pair of dances joins the repertory of American Ballet Theater on Wednesday, Oct. 21, at the company’s gala at the David H. Koch Theater, when it will be sandwiched between the New York premiere of Mark Morris’s “After You” and the revival of Twyla Tharp’s “The Brahms-Haydn Variations” (2000). It’s the latest in a long series of Ashton ballets (three of them evening-length works) and divertissements that Ballet Theater has presented; in 1974, its artistic director, Kevin McKenzie, danced in the first Joffrey Ballet staging of “Monotones” himself.“Monotones” has two halves, I and II; each is a trio, set to a different threesome of musical items by Erik Satie. Since Ashton, then the director of the Royal Ballet of London, made the one you see first (two women and one man, in green costumes, to Satie’s “Trois Gnossiennes”) in 1966, a year after the other (two men and one woman, in white costumes, to “Trois Gymnopédies”), there’s been constant confusion about which should be called I and which II. Instead, people call them by either the title of their music or the color of their costumes.Intensely sensuous orchestral arrangements — by John Lanchbery, Claude Debussy and Roland-Manuel — are used to give Satie’s piano score the scale for big theaters. And Ashton precedes them with Satie’s “Prelude d’Eginhard” (in Lanchbery’s orchestration) as an overture.About Ashton’s composition for “Gymnopédies,” Arlene Croce wrote in 1974 “the continuity of his line is that of a master draftsman whose pen never leaves the paper.” This line fortuitously echoes a compliment made by Matisse to Ashton in 1939 after watching him create another ballet: “Your choreography unwinds like a chain.” (“Votre chorégraphie se déroule comme une chaîne.”)And perhaps to this day, no ballet has ever gone further than “Monotones” in establishing parity between men and women. Ashton (1904-88) had just entered his 60s when he made the “white” trio, while the world was well into the 1960s, when the fashion for long hair for men and androgynous clothing created a new label: unisex. In ballet, Rudolf Nureyev, devoting most of his time to the Royal Ballet, was giving new dance splendor to the male roles in the traditional ballets. (This movement was nicknamed Princes’ Lib.) Ashton — always responsive both to his own inner femininity and to aspects of male beauty — caught and rode this unisex wave in his choreography.In both halves of “Monotones” — even though his women dance on point, and the men lift them — he showed men and women sharing the same adagio steps, creating the same shapes and lines. Male-female partnering occurs, too, but even here a soloist amplifies a couple: In “Gymnopédies,” there are many moments when one man, sometimes dancing on the other side of the stage, shows the same elongated hand-to-toe line, executes the same rich turn and/or arrives in the same sculptural shape that the woman makes (on point) while partnered by the other man. The close harmony between the three in both trios is nonpareil.A further 1960s touch was that the three dancers of “Gymnopédies,” dressed in white, moved with the slowness that evoked recent film imagery of astronauts walking in outer space. Men had not yet walked on the moon, and yet “Gymnopédies” anticipated the look of Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin so well that within a few years Ashton – mistakenly – told an interviewer that his choreography was influenced by the time “when you Americans were all landing on the moon.”Plotless these two trios may be; yet they abound in incidents. In 1984, interviewing Ashton just before his 80th birthday, I asked him about a moment in the second one, when the three dancers are seated on the floor. He singled out a gesture all three make when, leaning forward, they arch their arms behind them like wings. “Well, you see,” he said, “Goldie the golden eagle had just escaped from London Zoo.”The escape of Goldie the golden eagle in February-March 1965 had been a much-publicized event when I was 9 years old; for days and days, we English schoolboys at boarding school hoped to spot Goldie in a tree near us until he was recaptured. And it was just like Ashton, with his ready sense of humor, to take a chance event and plant it in his choreography. Those “wings” in the “white” trio were his nod to Goldie. Almost 30 years after that interview, I found, in the New York Public Library Dance Division, a widely forgotten film of him rehearsing the three dancers; at the start of Satie’s second Gymnopédie, Ashton calls out “Goldie! Goldie! Goldie!”He was a charming, witty, naughty man — treating his dancers like friends and making work fun. It was in character for him to light on a current story like the one of Goldie and turn it into choreography. In the opening image of “Gymnopédies,” the woman lies on the floor with her legs in a 180-degree split, her torso bent forward to one leg. Then the two men, keeping her on that position, lift her till her legs make a vertical line, in which they rotate her. Ashton had come to rehearsals saying he had a dream of “a chicken on a spit.”But his multitrack mind also moved along lines he did not share with his dancers. Throughout, “Monotones” was addressing dance tradition and the variety of dance classicism, both ancient and modern. The eagle’s-wings image had occurred in choreography before; the title figure of George Balanchine’s “Apollo” (1928), the most influential ballet of the century, begins his second solo by spreading his arms behind him: “These are the wings of the eagle,” Balanchine told at least one dancer when coaching it. Goldie the Golden Eagle had rung an Apollonian bell in Ashton’s mind.He had seen “Apollo” first when it was young with the Diaghilev Ballet in the late 1920s; at the time of “Monotones,” he was negotiating for the Royal Ballet’s first production of it (which followed in 1966). When he made the “Gnossiennes” trio, he created other echoes of Apollo’s configurations with his three muses; and that “chicken on a spit” opening to “Gymnopédies” (the woman’s hyperextension was unprecedented in Ashton’s choreography) is almost certainly a nod to the new feats seen in Balanchine’s radical “Agon” (1957).Balanchine, Ashton’s exact contemporary, was the choreographer he admired most. It was good for world ballet that the two men worked on opposite sides of the Atlantic, exciting for New York that Ashton and his Royal Ballet had their greatest successes in the Royal’s long biennial (or more frequent) seasons at the Metropolitan Opera House. In “The Dream” (1964), Ashton had his 16 fairies quote a key step of Balanchine’s “Concerto Barocco” (hop on point, hop again, then step sideways off point). In “Gymnopédies,” he quoted “Barocco” more subtly: He had the two men slide the woman, her feet together, at a low angle along the floor until, arriving, she suddenly rose into a vertical position.The breadth of repertory that Ballet Theater and other companies demonstrate today is one first exemplified by Ashton’s Royal Ballet in the 1960s. Like many others, he felt that the Royal Ballet under his directorship had the broadest range of repertory in the world — pure dance and dance drama, new works and old. And his own works, “Monotones” not least, were often the binding thread: Their classical vocabulary connected to the language of “Giselle” and “Swan Lake”, to the 20th-century classicism of Michel Fokine, Bronislava Nijinska and Balanchine, and to the latest works of John Cranko and Kenneth MacMillan (both of whose ballets abound in Ashtonisms). The great Diaghilev ballerina Tamara Karsavina told him, “You are a link in the chain”; Nijinska told him, “Tu es mon fils” (“You are my son”).Now his ballets make links in other repertories. Keep looking at “Monotones,” and you also find references to the Shades scene of Marius Petipa’s “La Bayadère,” Fokine (Ashton makes a marvelous variation on “Les Sylphides” in one moment of “Trois Gnossiennes”), Nijinska and Merce Cunningham (in “Gnossiennes,” one woman lies on the man’s back in a classic image of Cunningham weight-taking: Though she is not lifted, she’s moved by him as she lies there). When Ashton made “Monotones,” his Royal Ballet was the only Western troupe dancing “La Bayadère”; American Ballet Theater became the second. And Cunningham’s “Duets (1980), in which weight-taking recurs, has been an item in Ballet Theater’s repertory since 1982.“Monotones” was once the ultimate statement of the adagio beauties of British ballet style; but American and other ballet companies have been dancing it since the 1970s. There are many reasons, as it joins Ballet Theater repertory, it should look right at home.Advertisement