New films by Todd Haynes, Gus Van Sant and Denis Villeneuve are among the entries in the official competition of the 68th annual Cannes Film Festival, organizers announced Thursday. Projects from Yorgos Lanthimos of Greece and  three leading Italian directors —  Matteo Garrone, Nanni Moretti and Paolo Sorrentino — also made the cut.The director of the festival, Thierry Frémaux, announced 16 films in competition but said that two or three  would be added in the coming weeks because technological innovations mean that directors can now send their work for consideration at the very last second.The festival will open with “La Tête Haute,” a film out of competition directed by Emmanuelle Bercot. It is the first time since 1987 that a film directed by a woman will open the festival.This year’s competition jury will be led by Joel and Ethan Coen, while Isabella Rossellini will chair the jury of the Un Certain Regard section, whose lineup of art-house films from around the world was also announced on Thursday.Woody Allen’s newest, “Irrational Man,” will be shown out of competition, as will “Mad Max: Fury Road,” the latest in that apocalyptic action series, a new adaptation of “The Little Prince;” and the latest Pixar feature, “Inside Out.”The competition lineup includes “Carol” by Mr. Haynes, starring Cate Blanchett as an older woman who falls in love with a younger one; “The Sea of Trees” by Mr. Van Sant, starring Matthew McConaughey as an American who travels to a forest in Japan frequented by whose who seek to kill themselves; and “Sicario” by Mr. Villeneuve, a drama set along the Mexican border and starring Emily Blunt, Benicio del Toro and Josh Brolin. Mr. Sorrentino, whose “The Great Beauty” was shown at Cannes in 2013 and went on to win the Oscar for foreign-language film, will this year present “Youth,” starring Michael Caine as a composer. Mr. Moretti, a longtime Cannes habitué, will present “Mia Madre,” and Mr. Garrone (“Gomorrah”) will present “Tale of Tales,” a big-budget fantasy starring Salma Hayek, Vincent Cassel and John C. Reilly.Also in competition are “The Lobster” by Yorgos Lanthimos, a Greek director known for his deadpan style; “Dheepan” by the French director Jacques Audiard; “Marguerite and Julien” by the French director Valérie Donzelli; “Louder Than Bombs” by the Norwegian director Joachim Trier; and “The Assassin” by the Taiwanese director Hsiao Hsien Hou.This year’s special screenings include the directorial debut of Natalie Portman, “A Tale of Love and Darkness,” based on the Israeli writer Amos Oz’s memoir of the same name.