An inspirational musical about the British slave trader who composed “Amazing Grace” will open on Broadway this summer.The musical, also called “Amazing Grace,” tells the story of John Newton, a sailor and slave ship captain who converted to Christianity and became an Anglican clergyman and an abolitionist. He lived in the 18th and early 19th centuries.Staged in Chicago last fall, the musical has been revised since then at Goodspeed Musicals in Connecticut, where it was initially developed. Reviews in Chicago were not great, but the show’s producers say audience reaction was enthusiastic, and they believe there is a market, and a need, for earnest shows with a redemptive theme; they are comparing the show to “Les Misérables.”“It’s a traditional big Broadway musical, but it’s different in that it’s also an opportunity for church group audiences to come to something and feel pretty confident they’ll walk out feeling uplifted,” said the lead producer, Carolyn Rossi Copeland. “The story is exciting and dramatic, with big romance and this amazing thing that happens where his life is changed.”The musical is the result of nearly two decades of work by Christopher Smith, a onetime police officer who was moved by a biography of Mr. Newton and set about transforming it into a musical. Mr. Smith wrote the music and lyrics, and co-wrote the book with Arthur Giron. The production is being directed by Gabriel Barre (“The Wild Party”), and stars Josh Young (“Jesus Christ Superstar”), Erin Mackey (“Chaplin”) and Tony winner Chuck Cooper (“The Life”).The Chicago production was criticized in part for telling the story largely from the point of view of Mr. Newton; Ms. Copeland said that since that production, the viewpoint of Thomas, a slave portrayed by Mr. Cooper, has become more prominent.“Amazing Grace” will begin its open-ended run with previews June 25 at the Nederlander Theater, and will have an official opening on July 16. Opening a Broadway show during the summer is unusual, but not unprecedented. Ms. Copeland, who said the show has cost $16 million to develop and mount, said the timing was determined by the availability of a theater.“It’s a different world now – you wait for these theaters to become available, and when they do, you have to jump,” she said.