By KATHRYN SHATTUCKAPRIL 16, 2015
10:30 P.M. (13) JASCHA HEIFETZ: GOD’S FIDDLER By most accounts, Heifetz (1901-87) — considered the first modern violin virtuoso — was a contradiction: generous and playful when socializing; serious and intense while performing and teaching. And he was a genius whose commitment to his art resulted in two failed marriages, estrangement from his children and very few friends. In this “American Masters” presentation, Peter Rosen uses home movies and interviews with those Heifetz influenced, including the violinists Itzhak Perlman, Ivry Gitlis and Ida Haendel, to traverse his life from his childhood in Lithuania and studies in St. Petersburg with Leopold Auer to his immigration to New York and later years in Los Angeles. Danny Burstein narrates, reading from Heifetz’s letters.7 A.M. (NBC) TODAY Matt Lauer interviews Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey at Blake’s Creamery in Manchester, N.H.1:25 P.M. (FXM) JOHN AND MARY (1969) Dustin Hoffman and Mia Farrow portray New Yorkers who meet in a singles bar, grow infatuated while debating the finer points of Jean-Luc Godard, and spend the night together. Then they wonder if perhaps they’d like to get to know each other, starting with their names. Olympia Dukakis plays John’s mother; Tyne Daly is Mary’s roommate. This Peter Yates drama, set to a score by Quincy Jones, “seems quite right on its outside,” Vincent Canby wrote in The New York Times. “It was shot in Manhattan (at Friday’s, on Riverside Drive, in Murray Hill) and it is paced by the latest cinematic clichés — sudden cuts to flashbacks and fantasies, usually designed as comic punctuation marks to present pretensions. If you look at it closely, however, you see the structure of an old Fred MacMurray-Claudette Colbert comedy, run backward.”1:40 P.M. (Starz Cinema) FROZEN RIVER (2008) Ray Eddy (Melissa Leo, in an Oscar-nominated performance), a wife and mother of two whose husband gambled away her family’s savings before deserting them, tries to come up with the money for a payment on a new double-wide trailer by Christmas — or lose everything. Her savior: Lila Littlewolf (Misty Upham), a single Mohawk mother who smuggles illegal immigrants into the United States through Canada. Ray becomes part of the business, hiding immigrants from China and Pakistan in the trunk of her car and driving them across a frozen river as she dodges the police and prays the ice doesn’t crack. “It is grim reality,” Stephen Holden wrote in The Times. “But because Ray refuses to give up, she lends the movie nobility. Ms. Leo’s magnificent portrayal of a woman of indomitable grit and not an iota of self-pity makes ‘Frozen River’ a compelling study of individual courage.”Advertisement7 P.M. (MSG) NEW YORK RANGERS VS. PITTSBURGH PENGUINS The Rangers begin their quest for the Stanley Cup at Madison Square Garden. Pregame coverage begins at 6; Ron Duguay, Dave Maloney, Joe Micheletti and Steve Valiquette offer postgame analysis.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.8 P.M. (ABC) GREY’S ANATOMY A plane crash with multiple casualties reignites nightmarish memories for Meredith (Ellen Pompeo) and Arizona (Jessica Capshaw). In “Scandal,” at 9, the team is intent on bringing down B613 when Olivia (Kerry Washington) receives a call that the mayor’s wife has been murdered. And in “American Crime,” at 10, Aubry (Caitlin Gerard) is asked to testify against Carter (Elvis Nolasco). Tony (Johnny Ortiz) is sent back to juvenile detention. And Barb (Felicity Huffman) questions Richelle (Gwendoline Yeo) about her decision to marry Mark (David Hoflin).Advertisement9 P.M. (ESPN) SOLE MAN “30 for 30” chronicles the 40-year reign of Sonny Vaccaro, the former sports marketing executive who anointed Michael Jordan a face of Nike with Air Jordans and in the process laid the foundation for two pillars of pop culture — basketball and sneakers — to become perhaps the most valuable assets in the $13 billion athletic-shoe industry.10 P.M. (NBC) DATELINE NBC Moments after a woman is murdered in her bed, her husband and son each call 911 from the crime scene — and accuse each other of being the killer.What’s Streaming NowHYENA (2015) In Gerard Johnson’s brutal portrait of a ruthless undercover London cop (Peter Ferdinando), involved with the violent drug traffickers he’s charged with bringing down, sells out his allies to stay alive after being threatened with exposure. (iTunes)A version of this schedule appears in print on April 16, 2015, on Page C7 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Thursday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.