AdvertisementSupported byBy Randy KennedyThe Morgan Library & Museum, which has been without a leader since late last summer, looked West to bring back a longtime New Yorker as its new director, choosing Colin B. Bailey, who has served since 2013 as director of the Fine Arts Museums of San Francisco but was for many years before that the chief curator at the Frick Collection.Mr. Bailey, a well-regarded Renoir scholar, succeeds William M. Griswold, who left last year to take over the Cleveland Museum of Art. Mr. Bailey comes to the Morgan almost a decade after an expansion, designed by Renzo Piano, enlarged not only the museum’s floor plan but also its ambitions, moving it more actively into contemporary art, collaborations with other institutions and high-end acquisitions.But Lawrence R. Ricciardi, the museum’s president, said that in looking for a new director, the board felt that the Morgan had room to improve in several areas and also to build its attendance, which has increased to about 190,000 annual visitors now from about 120,000 before the expansion. “We should be able to do a little better,” Mr. Ricciardi said. “The programming is there. It’s just a question of getting the word out and getting people in the door.” He said that Mr. Bailey believed part of the problem was that the museum was “behind on the use of social media both for communicating with our constituents and also for fund-raising.”Mr. Bailey, 59, who had never run a museum before taking the San Francisco job, said in a telephone interview that he told the board he also felt the Morgan should rely more on its permanent collection for exhibitions — some 500,000 pieces, including one of the world’s best collections of medieval and Renaissance manuscripts, old master drawings and early printed books. The museum also collects 20th-century drawings and prints and those by living artists like Susan Rothenberg and Chris Ofili. “To me the thrill is to think about all of the great artists of the Western tradition that you could show in depth just through the Morgan’s holdings of their drawings and prints,” he said.Mr. Bailey said that he had learned a lot about the digital world in two years of working within the ambit of Silicon Valley, “seeing the challenges of getting the attention and the interest of the millennials, as they’re called.”“I’ve seen just how persuasive social media can be,” he added.In moving from the Fine Arts Museums of San Francisco, Mr. Bailey will take over a much smaller staff and operation — the Morgan’s annual operating budget is $18 million, compared with a budget of more than $50 million in San Francisco. But the Morgan’s endowment, which had grown to $205 million in 2014 from $150 million almost a decade ago, is larger than that of San Francisco, at $120 million as of the end of the 2013 fiscal year. Mr. Bailey said that though “it was early to leave — and I wasn’t looking — it was just an extraordinary opportunity, to go to a place where I have such a deep affinity with the collections.”Mr. Bailey, who was born in London and educated at Oxford, held several positions in 13 years at the Frick Collection, including deputy director, but when the Frick director’s position came open in 2011, it went to Ian Wardropper, chairman of the department of European sculpture and decorative arts at the Metropolitan Museum of Art. Mr. Bailey has previously been deputy director and chief curator at the National Gallery of Canada, in Ottawa.Mr. Ricciardi said that the Morgan’s search committee chose Mr. Bailey chiefly because of his scholarly renown, but also because it was looking for someone “not afraid to make decisions and also someone who was connected with the New York cultural scene, the New York museum world and the New York philanthropic world.”“He’s somebody that I think will take us to the next level as an institution,” Mr. Ricciardi added. “We do well but we’ll do better under Colin’s leadership.”Advertisement