By GIA KOURLASAPRIL 15, 2015
Finding new choreographers is a perennial challenge for artistic directors, and Eduardo Vilaro, who leads Ballet Hispanico, is no different. In 2010, he formed the Instituto Coreográfico, a creative lab for Latino choreographers and filmmakers, and on Tuesday Ballet Hispanico opened its season at the Joyce Theater with three works, two of which were developed through that program: Miguel Mancillas’s “Conquer” and Rosie Herrera’s “Show.Girl.”If both ultimately fall short, each exudes a vivid atmosphere, something that the evening’s third dance, Gustavo Ramírez Sansano’s “El Beso” (“The Kiss”) from 2014 lacks. That work is infantile instead of frisky, coy instead of sensual. The world premiere of “Conquer” by Mr. Mancillas, a Mexican choreographer, is more internally driven as it delves into ideas about power and control to expose facets of the dancers’ vulnerability.The setting is somber and the lighting, by Bob Franklin, is purposely murky as the performers, like part of a nomadic tribe, drift onto the stage, staring at one another or tipping backward and forward as if their bodies, once full of air, were leaking. Backs arch deeply; a rotating shoulder twists the torso sideways. There are battles for dominion as well. In a dream or a nightmare, Kimberly Van Woesik crushes Christopher Hernandez until he goes limp, facedown.But Mr. Mancillas’s work — sexy in moments and lugubrious in others — is only half-baked, fueled too much by gloomy obscurity and not enough depth. Equally incomplete is Ms. Herrera’s “Show.Girl.,” a New York premiere in which she explores Latina identity through the aesthetic of Cuban cabaret; what’s most intriguing is how this normally brash Miami choreographer incorporates restraint.In “Show.Girl,” the opening number, six women perform a series of gestures that would be considered seductive if they weren’t so uniformly mechanical. Later, five men surround Lauren Alzamora with white feather fans, but her bleak expression contrasts with the image that she’s floating on clouds. (It’s how I’ve always imagined a showgirl feels on the inside.)There are predictable moments — one with whipping hair — yet in the final scene, Ms. Herrera creates a canvas in which the dancers, shimmering in crystal costumes, are illuminated, or perhaps exposed, one by one under spotlights. This slow, deliberate deconstruction of showgirl poses infuses the movements with fresh, eerie potency. As the ending to her dance, it’s terrible. But for Ms. Herrera, this is the dance: She’s found a beginning.Ballet Hispanico continues performances through April 26 at the Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue at 19th Street; 212-242-0800, joyce.org. A version of this review appears in print on April 16, 2015, on Page C2 of the New York edition with the headline: Creative Lab Fosters Some Experiments Onstage.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.