By ANTHONY TOMMASINIAPRIL 15, 2015
Someone at the Metropolitan Opera should persuade the director David McVicar to turn off the rotating platform that mars his new production of Mascagni’s “Cavalleria Rusticana.” Over all, Mr. McVicar’s bleak, spare take on this enduring 1890 one-act , the breakthrough work of the Italian verismo movement, offers some insights into Mascagni’s drama of love, betrayal and revenge in a small Sicilian village. And Mr. McVicar’s daring concept for its traditional companion piece, Leoncavallo’s “Pagliacci,” may prod those who think they know this 1892 tale about a hardscrabble troupe of roving commedia dell’arte players to think again: Mr. McVicar zaps the setting from late-1860s Calabria to a grimy truck stop in the late 1940s in what could be any bustling Italian town; the players become a troupe of zany vaudevillians.In “Cavalleria,” however, Mr. McVicar uses that rotating platform too often. It comes off as a director’s shortcut to lending mystery, even a touch of surrealism, to an ingeniously compact melodrama. Watching the townspeople mill around on that spinning dais just makes you dizzy.This new production of opera’s most popular double bill, which opened on Tuesday, would seem the next step in the general manager Peter Gelb’s effort to rid the Met of Franco Zeffirelli shows. The Zeffirelli “Cav/Pag,” a painstakingly realistic staging, had been around since 1970. It was time for a change.For this new “Cav/Pag,” the Met recruited a strong cast, featuring Marcelo Álvarez in the lead tenor roles of both works: Turiddu, the peasant returned from the army in “Cavalleria”; and Canio, the leader of the troupe in “Pagliacci,” who plays the clown in the traveling show. This double assignment is a formidable challenge, and Mr. Álvarez delivers the most impassioned and commanding singing I have heard from him at the Met. The soprano Eva-Maria Westbroek brings vocal charisma and wrenching vulnerability to Santuzza, the tragic heroine of “Cavalleria,” a young woman who, having been seduced by Turiddu, now loves him desperately.This double bill certainly has the right maestro on the podium: Fabio Luisi, the Met’s principal conductor. He draws clarity, color and vigor from the inspired Met orchestra in both works, but especially “Cavalleria.” He had this score, dismissed by some as a red sauce crowd pleaser, seeming uncommonly intelligent.AdvertisementMr. McVicar’s take on “Cavalleria” comes across like a half-and-half staging, combining contemporary and traditional elements. Rae Smith’s set is framed by the earthy stone walls of the Sicilian town’s church. That central platform is encircled, at first, by a row of simple chairs. Soon, the townspeople (the Met’s splendid chorus) wander in and take seats. The image suggests the internal dynamics of a Sicilian town, where everyone observes everyone else’s personal life. Moritz Junge’s costumes show people in everyday outfits, including a group of men in rumpled black suits, who preen about like the town’s enforcers of propriety.AdvertisementThe juxtaposition of starkness, abstraction and realism might have worked well had Mr. McVicar left it at that. But when that platform starts rotating, you sense a director trying too hard. And why is the lighting (by Paule Constable) so dark? The opera takes place on Easter morning. In this “Cavalleria,” the villagers could be attending midnight Mass.The Latinate colorings and fervor of Mr. Álvarez’s singing suit the impetuous young Turiddu. Returning from army service, he discovered that his fiancée, the winsome Lola, had abruptly married Alfio, the town’s cart driver. To make Lola jealous, he seduced the willing Santuzza. Somehow the plan worked. Lola has begun an affair with Turiddu, to the despair of the suffering Santuzza. This is where the story we see begins.The baritone George Gagnidze makes an aptly brash Alfio. His voice may lack richness. But his robust gruffness fits the character. The mezzo-soprano Ginger Costa-Jackson, as Lola, sings with sultry sweetness and goes about town like a would-be film star, willfully ignoring the danger of rousing her jealous husband. Of course, Alfio’s murder of Turiddu in a duel of revenge brings the story to the inevitable conclusion. Jane Bunnell, the veteran mezzo-soprano, wins your heart as Mamma Lucia, Turiddu’s hard-working mother, who runs the town’s inn. The Met’s chorus filled the processional hymn scene with affecting sincerity.Mr. McVicar has said in interviews that in his experience of “Pagliacci,” the commedia dell’arte play-within-a-play is never very funny. Hence his decision to turn that comedy into a vaudeville show, complete with a shaving-cream fight, pratfalls and garish costumes. What he’s up to comes through immediately in the prologue. This scene, as written, presents an interpretive challenge. The baritone singing Tonio, one of the clowns in the troupe, introduces himself as someone sent by the author to tell that audience that the actors are also flesh-and-blood people who feel the emotions of the story.Mr. McVicar turns the prologue into a vaudeville routine, based on the comedian Dickie Henderson of an earlier era, known for a bit in which he sang a song with a microphone while stagehands tried to yank him to the wings by pulling on the cord. Mr. Gagnidze appears before a bright blue curtain with gold stars evocative of vaudeville days, microphone in hand. Sure enough, three acrobatic actors keep trying to drag this stage hog into the wings.This take on the prologue prepares you for Mr. McVicar’s updating. The church walls from “Cavalleria” remain, lending visual symmetry to the double bill. But a grid of electric wires hovers above the dingy square. The players pull up in a clattering truck piled high with suitcases, props and costumes.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.If the antics sometimes go too far, the rawness of the story comes through with freshness and, by the end, genuine tragedy. Mr. Álvarez, first appearing in a light suit with a bow tie and bowler hat, makes an affable and frumpy Canio, loved by the crowd as the clown Pagliaccio in the play. Anyone singing this role today must compete with the memory of towering tenors who have performed and recorded it. If Mr. Álvarez’s voice seems a little modest in comparison, he sang with intensity and soaring lyricism, and gave an anguished account of the touchstone aria “Vesti la giubba.”The soprano Patricia Racette may have a slight hard-edged quality in her full-voiced top notes these days. Still, as Canio’s wife, Nedda, who has become involved with the villager Silvio, she sang with beguiling feistiness, sizable sound and great character. She looked charming and captured the suffocating young woman’s restlessness. You can understand why she was smitten by the tall, solid villager Silvio, sung here by the earnest, appealing baritone Lucas Meachem. The tenor Andrew Stenson conveyed the boyish innocence of Beppe.The rotating platform was used minimally, and more effectively, in “Pagliacci.” That spinning set is all too central to Mr. McVicar’s concept of “Cavalleria.” If only he would flick the off switch for the rest of the run.The double bill of “Cavalleria Rusticana” and “Pagliacci” runs through May 8 at the Metropolitan Opera House; 212-362-6000, metopera.org A version of this article appears in print on April 16, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: Of Rotating Platforms and Vaudevillians.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.