AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael CooperThe New York Philharmonic was, at crucial moments in recent years, “an orchestra adrift.” New York City Opera’s death, after years of missteps, was “a suicide, not a homicide.” And all who care about the Metropolitan Opera are entitled to ask how its “desperate financial condition arose, and whether the steps taken to date are nearly enough to address it successfully.” These blunt assessments, in a book being published next month by Reynold Levy, the former president of Lincoln Center, are sure to make waves in the genteel world of New York’s elite cultural institutions, where foes tend to exchange air kisses in public and keep their battles private. Mr. Levy’s willingness to name names may not quite reach you’ll-never-eat-lunch-in-this-town-again levels but could make for some awkward encounters at the chic Lincoln Ristorante, built at Lincoln Center as part of the $1.2 billion renovation that he oversaw.Mr. Levy’s book, “They Told Me Not to Take That Job: Tumult, Betrayal, Heroics, and the Transformation of Lincoln Center” (PublicAffairs), tells the story of how the well-received renovation project was accomplished in the face of big obstacles. But it is also a warning about the fragility of the nonprofit sector, and the need to hold trustees and executives accountable.“I regard this as a celebratory book, but also a cautionary tale,” Mr. Levy, the president of Lincoln Center from 2002 through early 2014, said in an interview.Mr. Levy said he hoped to offer lessons to other institutions in giving a peek behind the white travertine facades of Lincoln Center at some of the key players who shape what happens there, and in recounting what he describes in the book as “their noble feats of leadership and their painful acts of omission and commission.” Along the way, he gives not always flattering appraisals of some of the cultural leaders of 21st-century New York.He writes that while Lorin Maazel, the former music director of the Philharmonic who died last July, was among the world’s most able conductors, he was also “missing in action” when it came to forging a relationship with the city — and describes a sense that the trustees who appointed him had “settled rather than selected.” He calls the struggling City Opera’s decision in 2009 to make George Steel its general manager, though he had never run a comparably large institution, “nothing short of stupefying.” And he suggests that as the Metropolitan Opera grapples with fiscal woes, Peter Gelb, its general manager, should delegate more to others.“Evidence abounds that Peter Gelb’s management and artistic responsibilities are simply too much for any one executive to shoulder, no matter how creative and hard-working,” he writes.As president of Lincoln Center, Mr. Levy was responsible for common functions across the 16-acre campus, which is home to 12 independent organizations, each with its own mission, budget and board. He was able to push through the renovation project through prodigious fund-raising and canny politics. When large institutions balked, he rallied smaller ones to the cause. Expanding the board brought in donations and expertise — and diluted the power of the board members designated by each institution to protect its own interests. But the independent constituents did not answer to Mr. Levy, and he recounts some of their crises to warn that bad things can happen when executives and boards behave irresponsibly. Mr. Levy questions why the board leaders and top executives of the New York Philharmonic were not forced out after leading a bungled attempt in 2003 to return to their old home at Carnegie Hall — a detour that set back efforts to fix up its Avery Fisher Hall by years. (Of Paul B. Guenther, who was then the chairman of the Philharmonic’s board, he writes caustically, “He failed to lead, and he failed to leave.” Mr. Guenther declined to comment.)He praises the Philharmonic’s new leadership, including Matthew VanBesien, its president, and writes that Alan Gilbert, its music director, “understood what it takes to be a cultural leader.” But he writes that the news that Mr. Gilbert will step down in 2017 raises new questions about the orchestra’s future.Mr. Levy’s chapter on the well-chronicled demise of City Opera begins as an autopsy report, citing as the cause of death “succession of self-inflicted wounds; severe case of governance failure; poor succession planning, resulting in flawed decisions on C.E.O. selection; trustees too few and too disengaged; charitable contributions wanting; budgets out of balance; endowment shrinking; patient living beyond means; displacement and uprootedness.” He cites a contributing factor: “music critics as cheerleaders and enablers,” including those at The New York Times.He sharply questions the selection of Mr. Steel, who had previously led the Miller Theater at Columbia University and, briefly, the Dallas Opera, to take over the teetering company in 2009, saying that he lacked the necessary fund-raising experience. He contends that Mr. Steel’s decision for City Opera to leave Lincoln Center, after its theater there was renovated and renamed for David H. Koch, helped seal its fate.Mr. Levy writes that early on, he sent Mr. Steel a paper outlining steps to strengthen the company, which recommended replacing the chairwoman of its board, Susan L. Baker. He called them both to a meeting. “There, it quickly became clear that Steel had not shared the paper with Susan at all,” he writes. “It even seemed that Steel himself had never read it!” Mr. Steel, in an interview, recalled it differently. He said he had been told not to share the paper with Ms. Baker, that most of its recommendations were “boilerplate” and unhelpful, and that the meeting was counterproductive. “To be very frank, I think it was harmful,” he said.As for criticisms about his fund-raising experience, Mr. Steel noted that he raised a record amount for the company during his first season, but that it was not enough. In the end, he said, City Opera simply could not afford to stay in its costly Lincoln Center home — and Lincoln Center did not offer the help that might have made it possible. “The choice was for the company to close or to leave,” he said.Now, as the Metropolitan Opera faces fiscal woes after large spending increases earlier in Mr. Gelb’s tenure, Mr. Levy questions whether its recent labor concessions and management cuts will be sufficient to fix its finances after running a $22 million deficit last year. (The Met declined to comment; officials there have said that with the savings, they are on track to balance their budget this year, and they are planning a campaign to bolster the endowment.)Some institutions are singled out for praise, including New York City Ballet. The ballet, he writes, responded to alarmingly high deficits after the recent fiscal crisis by bringing in Kathy Brown as a new executive director and taking steps to make the organization healthier.Advertisement