By NATE CHINENAPRIL 15, 2015
Near the midpoint of Black Cube SP’s commanding show at ShapeShifter Lab in Brooklyn on Tuesday night, Rob Mazurek tucked his cornet between his knees and began punching buttons. He had turned his focus toward a tabletop console with the dimensions of a large briefcase, joining his bandmates in an analog electronic squall.On one side of him, Guilherme Granado fiddled intently with a sampler and a keyboard; on the other, Thomas Rohrer used a tiny mallet to elicit steely chimes from an amplified kitchen whisk. And Mauricio Takara hunched over a ukulele-like cavaquinho before returning to his drums — by which point Mr. Mazurek was pursuing a staccato tack on piano, and Mr. Rohrer was pushing a shrill gust of notes through a soprano saxophone.This was just one moment of heated transition in the performance, and true to the spirit of the band. Black Cube SP is an extension of São Paulo Underground, a visionary jazz-rock trio led by Mr. Mazurek, who hails from Chicago but lived for a stretch in Brazil, where the other musicians reside. The distinguishing feature among the groups is Mr. Rohrer, whose specialty is the rabeca, a large fiddle often heard in forró, the popular Brazilian folk music.Shrewd amalgamation of different styles has been a trademark of Mr. Mazurek’s since he formed the Chicago Underground Collective nearly 20 years ago. Black Cube SP, like most of his other projects, incorporates techniques of avant-garde jazz, psychedelic rock and experimental electronic music. Last fall the band released a darkly trippy album, “Return the Tides: Ascension Suite & Holy Ghost” (Cuneiform), which put emphasis on another influence: the late-1960s artistic movement Tropicália, an amalgamating force in itself.AdvertisementTwo pieces from the album — “Let the Rain Fall Upwards,” a study in abstract texture, and the title track, a rock-samba rollick — found their way into Tuesday’s set, each reshaped almost beyond recognition. The sonic signature of Black Cube SP is a brash, muddy churn, propelled at the bottom by Mr. Granado’s synthesizer hum and Mr. Takara’s deft, polyrhythmic drumming.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Periodically one or more members of the group took on a purely percussive role, using shakers, chimes or cowbells; the hypnotic power of ritual was never far from the center of the frame. A few of Mr. Mazurek’s pieces, like “Evetch,” threaded a ribbon of minor-key, folklike melody through an ecstatic racket of drums and low drones.AdvertisementBut there was also space in the music for individual heroics, and not just by Mr. Mazurek, who altered the dimensions of his brassy timbre with mutes and less manual effects. “Primitive Jupiter,” a tune imported from one of his other bands, featured a woolly rabeca solo, followed by a cornet solo of oblique but traceable melodic logic.For the finale, a lunging extrapolation of “Skull Caves of Alderon” morphed into echoing abstraction, as Mr. Mazurek chanted a line by the science-fiction novelist Samuel R. Delany. “A moon’s beauty,” went his singsong mantra, “is in variations of sameness.”Eventually every member of the band was chanting with him, against a residual loop of electronic noise. They kept it up as they filed out of the room.Rob Mazurek’s São Paulo Underground and Black Cube SP appear on Friday in Chicago; on Saturday in Urbana, Ill.; and on Sunday in Louisville, Ky.; robmazurek.com.A version of this review appears in print on April 16, 2015, on Page C2 of the New York edition with the headline: Stirring Styles and a Dash of Brazil.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.