By ROBIN POGREBINAPRIL 15, 2015
When Susan Henshaw Jones became director of the Museum of the City of New York in 2003, the way forward was as complicated as a Greenwich Village street map.The institution, on Fifth Avenue at 103rd Street, was running deficits; in the winters, visitors to its 1932 building were advised to keep their coats on; the programming was widely perceived as stodgy.“We were effectively broke,” said James G. Dinan, the museum’s chairman.Ms. Jones, he said, “saved the institution.”Now, as a 10-year renovation and restoration nears completion, and after getting the museum back on solid financial ground, Ms. Jones, 67, has decided to step down in December.Advertisement“This place is in good shape for the next gal or guy,” she said in an interview at the museum.Some of the goals set by Ms. Jones will remain unrealized in her tenure. She had initially hoped to build annual attendance to 500,000 from 82,000 when she started; it has reached only 250,000. Museum officials say progress was slowed by having to close portions of the building during construction.AdvertisementThe growth of the institution, though, is evident in its balance sheet; in the last 12 years annual operating costs have risen to $20 million from about $6 million, without running deficits. And there is now an endowment of $9 million; before there was none.Founded in 1923 to “consider all things New York,” the museum has evolved from featuring a complete room of Duncan Phyfe furniture and a man’s suit worn at George Washington’s inaugural ball to a collection with about 750,000 objects, including prints, photographs, decorative arts, costumes, paintings, sculpture and theatrical memorabilia.Though there was talk in the early 1990s of merging with the New-York Historical Society — which also covers state and American history, while the City Museum sticks to the five boroughs — the two institutions decided the proposal was too costly.Ms. Jones said the museum teaches about the past to inform the present with programming like its coming show on affordable housing.“New Yorkers have a way of thinking nothing else needs to be learned,” she said. “Yet we really have to think about issues of sustainability and infrastructure.”In October 2016, the museum plans to open a technologically sophisticated, long-term exhibition on the city’s history, “New York at Its Core,” which will occupy the museum’s entire first floor and cost $14 million, most of which has been raised.In 2005, the museum opened the Frederick A. O. Schwarz Children’s Center, which offers education programs that seek to improve student performance in social studies. Some 47,500 schoolchildren and teachers are expected to attend by the end of June.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Perhaps most significant, the museum has found a willing partner in the government of the city it chronicles, which donated $67 million to the $97 million renovation and ran the project out of the Department of Design and Construction. This level of commitment came after the museum lost out on a home at the Tweed Courthouse downtown and being turned away for a place at ground zero.AdvertisementBy 2011, the museum was doing well enough that it was approached as a savior of the struggling South Street Seaport Museum; Ms. Jones also took on management of both. But the City Museum had to withdraw from that role in 2013 after Hurricane Sandy’s damage to the Seaport Museum made its comeback too costly.“My heart and soul were in it,” Ms. Jones. “We were really doing well and then Sandy was the terminator.”Though the City Museum is at the northern end of the so-called Museum Mile, Ms. Jones said it is operating in something of its own cultural district with a revitalized El Museo del Barrio at 104th Street and the ambitious — though much-delayed — Africa Center under construction at 110th Street.Shows like “Robert Moses and the Modern City: Remaking the Metropolis” in 2006 and “Saving Place: 50 Years of New York City Landmarks, which opens on Monday, have brought the museum international attention and “made the institution relevant again to New Yorkers,” Mr. Dinan said.“We are no longer an institution where people come to see dollhouses or period rooms that were last renovated in the 1950s,” he added. “We’ve moved beyond the existentialist phase into becoming a world-class city history museum.”Ms. Jones said mounting these shows has been the most enjoyable part of the job. “It’s like taking a course,” she said, “learning about something new, delving into history.”Ms. Jones began her career in New York City in the early 1970s in the Lindsay administration; she was one of three founders of Creative Time, a nonprofit organization devoted to public art. She was president of the New York Landmarks Conservancy from 1988 to 1994 and president and director of the National Building Museum in Washington from 1994 to 2002.Ms. Jones said she is looking forward to relaxing in places like Key West, Fla., and Montana with her husband, Richard K. Eaton, a federal judge (they have two grown daughters). But her intense involvement in the museum, where she has been known to show up for work on weekends, will be a tough habit to break.“I love the Museum of the City of New York,” she said. “I believe firmly in the things we celebrate here as part of our mission — diversity and opportunity and perpetual transformation.”A version of this article appears in print on April 16, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: Director to Leave Museum of the City of New York.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.