AdvertisementSupported byBy Neil GenzlingerMore interesting than watching grass grow, less interesting than chain-saw sculpturing. That’s “Cedric’s Barber Battle,” reality television’s latest “Can we make a TV show out of that?” experiment, which begins Friday on CW.It’s a haircutting competition series with Cedric the Entertainer as ringmaster. This isn’t a-little-off-the-sides haircutting. It’s the equivalent of good tattoo art, with the competing barbers clipping portraits, geometric designs and other elaborate images into the heads of presumably willing people. Cedric is well qualified to host the show; he is one of the best things about the “Barbershop” movie franchise, which has a new installment in the works. But there’s a big difference between scripted barbershop chatter delivered by professional actors and improvised trash talk attempted by real barbers as they work.The show, which travels from city to city, features three barbers in each episode, whose work is assessed by a three-judge panel. The barbers, who go by flashy nicknames (J-Roc, Rizzo Scissorhands, Rob the Original) and work in front of a cheering crowd, are given a first-round challenge that results in the elimination of one of them.“You’ve been clipped,” Cedric tells the unfortunate loser. Then the remaining two contestants go head-to-head, as it were, in a second challenge, the winner taking home $15,000.Shows like this are all about the reveal, the moment when the finished work is shown, but that occupies only a small fraction of each episode, and in this series the wait to get to those moments is time wasted. Cedric occasionally tosses in some amusing banter, but mostly it’s left to the barbers to fill the gaps, and unlike Cedric, barbers are not entertainers.At least the resulting haircuts are impressive and amusing. In one challenge, contestants have to use a soccer ball as inspiration for their design. In another, one barber cuts an image of Batman into someone’s head, while another renders the Flash. But the show isn’t as absorbing as some of the tattoo reality shows out there, which are bolstered by the personal stories of the customers or even by the chain-saw carving shows, because chain-saws are more telegenic than scissors.Advertisement