AdvertisementSupported byBy James R. OestreichAt 51, the violinist Anne-Sophie Mutter has never lacked for laurels, nor has she ever rested on them. Having mastered the standard repertory early on, she has made repeated forays into contemporary music, deepening her interpretive skills in old music as well as new. She has developed into a complete musician, as passionately committed to chamber music as to the great concertos. No shrinking violet, she has cultivated a glamorous image, but without compromising her artistry with cheesy crossover ventures and the like.So it is altogether appropriate that Carnegie Hall has rewarded her with a Perspectives series this season. She has devoted some of it to straightforward concerto and chamber performances, and some to working with young performers, as in a concert in November with the Mutter Virtuosi ensemble and one still to come on April 28 with Michael Tilson Thomas and the New World Symphony.But the earnest and hard-working Ms. Mutter is entitled to bit of self-indulgence, too, and that came on Tuesday, most beautifully, during an evening in Carnegie’s Stern Auditorium featuring the Mutter-Bronfman-Harrell Trio.Ms. Mutter has performed often with the veteran cellist Lynn Harrell, and she had long wanted to collaborate with the pianist Yefim Bronfman in chamber music, according to her publicist, so here was an opportunity to try out something new. The program, too, was made for comfort, featuring two solid standards, Beethoven’s exquisite “Archduke” Trio in B flat (Op. 97) and Tchaikovsky’s somewhat rambling Trio in A minor (Op. 50), although an encore, the second movement of Shostakovich’s Trio No. 2 in E minor, gave a tantalizing taste of the greater adventures that may lie ahead if these players continue to work together.And they should. They didn’t seem to be an obvious combination beforehand. Ms. Mutter achieves strength less through sheer power than through the focus and eloquence of her tone, while Mr. Harrell and Mr. Bronfman are large and muscular players. But each was capable of scaling back as necessary. Mr. Bronfman, in particular, was a wonder, moving from huge masses of sound, where appropriate, to the most delicate effects, as in the tinkly music-box variation of the Tchaikovsky second movement.The performances were everywhere alive with chemistry and communication. You have to hope for further such indulgences.Advertisement