By MIKE HALEAPRIL 15, 2015
The amiable documentary “Knock Knock, It’s Tig Notaro,” which has its premiere Friday on Showtime, is a you-had-to-be-there kind of experience. A twist on the usual tour movie, it features Ms. Notaro traveling the country and doing her stand-up in people’s homes. Clearly it would have been great to be sitting with your friends in that living room or that backyard a few feet away from the comedian (and her film crew). Watching others have that experience isn’t quite the same thing.To be fair, there’s quite a bit more to the 76-minute documentary than what we see of Ms. Notaro and her driver and opening act, John Dore, doing their routines. (It’s a quirk of the film that Mr. Dore’s material, heavy on wordplay, comes off better than Ms. Notaro’s drier, more cerebral work.) We see the videos submitted by people asking Ms. Notaro to come to their homes, and we see the locals’ excited preparations for the shows. And there’s a fair bit of road-movie filler — Ms. Notaro and Mr. Dore getting on each other’s nerves in the car, or visiting a junk shop where their best find is soiled underwear.Ms. Notaro, who wrote for the first season of “Inside Amy Schumer” and has acted in “Transparent” and “The Sarah Silverman Show,” is probably best known for incorporating her 2012 breast cancer diagnosis into her comedy. Her health problems, which have included a serious intestinal disorder, are woven through the film. Midtour she begins to feel abdominal pain and ends up in the hospital.There are clearly larger ideas at play in “Knock Knock, It’s Tig Notaro,” having to do with healing and human contact and getting back to roots, that don’t quite come into focus. The meta-Americana of Ms. Notaro and Mr. Dore’s travels can be amusing or it can be awkward and slightly condescending.The film’s memorable bits come not from performance but from the serendipity of the road: Ms. Notaro snapping “Google me” to an unimpressed tollbooth worker, or browsing a roadside tombstone display, where she tells the proprietor: “I’ve had some health issues lately. Just want to be smart. Think ahead.”A television review on Thursday about the documentary “Knock Knock, It’s Tig Notaro,” which has its premiere tonight on Showtime, misstated the surname of the comedian who serves as Ms. Notaro’s driver and opening act. He is John Dore, not Dorne. The review also referred incorrectly to Ms. Notaro’s work on “Inside Amy Schumer.” She was a writer during its first season; she does not currently write for it.A version of this review appears in print on April 16, 2015, on Page C2 of the New York edition with the headline: Comedian Who Makes House Calls.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.