Just like everyone else, George Lucas checked out the new teaser for “Star Wars: Episode VII – The Force Awakens.”  That was one of several tidbits gleaned from a wide-ranging talk between the director and  the television host Stephen Colbert at the Tribeca Film Festival on Friday. Features, news, videos and more from the festival.The discussion, which lasted a little more than an hour at the packed Tribeca Performing Arts Center, touched on Mr. Colbert’s  aspirations, Mr. Lucas’s scriptwriting chops and the prospects of a “Howard the Duck” remake. With a beard, longish hair and an open collar, Mr. Colbert looked much more casual than his “Colbert Report” alter ego, while Mr. Lucas joked about his own anti-fashion  (plaid shirt, jeans and sneakers).  Mr. Lucas is no longer involved in the “Star Wars” franchise  — he sold Lucasfilm to Disney in 2012 — and spoke only a little about the forthcoming installment, saying, “I hope it’s successful, I hope they do a great job.” (When asked what he thought of the trailer, he said only that he wanted to watch it on a big screen.)The focus was on Mr. Lucas’s career, and Mr. Colbert took the director through his early days studying film at the University of Southern California (after a bad accident ended his original dream of becoming a race-car driver); his experimental film years; and his battle to get the studio to release his 1973 comedy “American Graffiti.” When it came to “Star Wars,” he recalled showing the first film to Steven Spielberg, Brian De Palma and other peers before it was released, and said that few other than Mr. Spielberg had faith in it. That’s why he was skeptical when a studio executive called early in its run to tell him it was a hit. Science-fiction fans will go to anything, Mr. Lucas said, getting a laugh during the talk.But he acknowledged criticism that his dialogue can be wooden — it’s not wooden, Mr. Colbert interjected, “it’s hand-carved” — but explained that he viewed dialogue as one aspect of the overall sound design of a film. As part of a discussion of blog culture, he mentioned “Howard the Duck.” Mr. Colbert called it “the first Marvel movie.” And Mr. Lucas, noting technological advances, added, “I have a feeling it will be remade.”The director had other ideas as well, suggesting Mr. Colbert should have taken over for the “Daily Show” host Jon Stewart, who recently announced his retirement. “You could jump on his body and say ‘I won! I won!'” is how Mr. Lucas put it, but Mr. Colbert was having none of it, citing Mr. Stewart’s strong record. “I don’t want to be the guy who takes over” right after Mr. Stewart. (He also expressed support for the newly announced host, Trevor Noah.)And in a reference to Mr. Stewart’s recent big-screen effort, Mr. Colbert  said he had “no wish to become a film director.” (Mr. Lucas told him movies aren’t a way to make money anyway — “it’s not like TV.”)Throughout the talk Mr. Colbert brought up memories of seeing “Star Wars” for the first time, recalling that as a 13-year-old radio listener, he won tickets to a movie he knew nothing about. He and his friends were given special blue tickets and buttons that read, “May the Force Be With You.” After the movie was over, he said, he felt the world had changed and he tried to get that special ticket back as a souvenir but it had already been torn up.“George, can I get one of those blue tickets?” he asked.