A scene from “The Wannabe,” directed by Nick Sandow.This is one in a series of interviews focusing on New York-centric movies having their premieres at the Tribeca Film Festival.Nick Sandow may be best known  as the warden’s assistant Joe Caputo on “Orange Is the New Black.” But he’s managing criminals in a different way as the writer and director of the film “The Wannabe,” which features Vincent Piazza as the Mafia-obsessed Thomas, who tries to fix the trial of John Gotti in 1992. The film, based on actual events, also stars Patricia Arquette and has its world premiere at Tribeca on Friday.
Tribeca Film FestivalFeatures, news, videos and more from the festival.Features, news, videos and more from the festival.In an interview at The Times, Mr. Sandow, 48, spoke about his film and a character obsessed with gangster movies. Here are excerpts from that conversation.Tell me about your interest in making a movie set during this early ’90s moment in New York.That was my time. I’m born and raised in the Bronx, and I’m from a similar neighborhood as Thomas. So that world was very vivid to me. I had one foot still in the Bronx and one foot in acting class. And I was on that bridge of, should I stay? And what will I be if I stay? So it just was ripe for me.Did you know about the couple you based your film on  during that time?I read a couple of articles about them and was just fascinated with this kid who was a cinephile and a gangsterphile. My inspiration to become an actor was all those movies too.How do you see that period now?Looking back, it was the end of old New York and what it was about to become with Giuliani. It was the death of organized crime, really. Gotti was the obvious nail in the coffin. So I had this thought of this guy trying to hold onto what was and what he saw in movies. And this idea of wanting to be something you’re not, I spent 25 years doing that.How did you find locations for your film that matched with the era?Our location scout found us some great locations and this world still exists. We shot a lot in Bay Ridge and some in Queens. A little bit in the Bronx. We shot 20 days, 30 locations, which was a huge, scary undertaking. But I knew we couldn’t afford to build this stuff, so we had to find the locations. Making small movies in New York City without a lot of money, you’re up against it.Could you tell me about one challenge shooting this film on a low budget?We shot a block party scene and we got this city cop who oversees shooting for the day. He told us he wouldn’t allow us to block off the street. Every time we called cut, we had to run cars through the block party scene. I had 60 extras and it was a huge day for us. So I stopped calling cut and kept shooting, and that’s the way we survived that day.Because you have a character who is a movie lover, did you want to pay homage to gangster films in your movie?No doubt. I was trying to mess with the genre a bit. Scorsese is the godfather of this world and he set the tone. But there are moments in the the film where we go for it. Thomas has a walk to a club with a cigarette and music blaring. We wanted to make him gangster cool in the way we know it cinematically.But mostly your film is a deglamorized portrait of someone who wants to be cool like that, but isn’t very good at it.Yeah, I grew up in this world and saw so many of these guys reaching for something and dabbling in things where they really weren’t conscious of what they were after. It was ugly, and there was nothing glamorous about it. Nobody in my neighborhood said the word Mafia. There was, like, Uncle Joe, who just got out of “college,” but he had really spent 12 years in prison. It seemed like normal.As a native New Yorker, what is one quintessential element about the city that you love?I did a movie in Vancouver and spent two months there. I saw a documentary and they did an interview with somebody on the subway. And I welled up, just seeing the subway. I think if it’s anything, it’s that. I have this thing when I get in that car with all these people around me, I feel very, very at peace with the world. And I know the world is greater than me.