A new trailer for the THX sound system.It starts with soft, low, swarming, otherworldly sounds, then steadily builds to high-pitched unified, synthesized bliss. If you’ve been in an American movie theater at some point in the past 30 years, chances are that one of them has been outfitted with the THX sound system, and that the trailer for the system and its dizzying glissando has commanded the room. The audio of the “Wings” trailer for THX, which first appeared in 1983 ahead of screenings of “Return of the Jedi,” was created by Dr. James Moorer,  who was a digital audio project director in Lucasfilm’s computer division when he composed the original sound. THX, which has since spun off from Lucasfilm and expanded its operations into home theater and automotive sound systems, wanted to update the trailer and approached Dr. Moorer to enhance his original composition.The idea for the sounds in the original trailer came from concepts he had been coming up with as a student at Stanford University working at the Center for Computer Research in Music and Acoustics. “It was one of the first centers around the country where experimentation was done in synthesizing music and processing sound on computers,” he said in a phone interview.Dr. Moorer considered the direction he would take the sound from beginning to end.“I knew I wanted to end with what we call in the industry a power chord,” he said, “and I knew that, with it being on a computer, I could use what’s called just intonation.” Just intonation is a digital tuning system that helps to create a more powerful and unified sound.The original trailer for the THX sound system from 1983.“I wanted the beginning of it to be mysterious, so it would tell a story,” Dr. Moorer said. “You would start with chaos that you couldn’t really hear into, but was constantly moving and evolving. And then slowly, like a flower opening, the form would take shape and crystallize into the big chord.”He set up 30 digital “voices” that would create the sound in the original trailer, which was as many as they could incorporate at the time. He used programming to adjust the pitch and amplitude of the voices as the sound progressed.“If you play it 10 times through, you’ll hear different things in that beginning portion,” he said, “simply because it’s designed so that you can’t possibly hear it all.” This structure, ending with the dramatic power chord, Dr. Moorer said was inspired by Bach’s “Fugue in B Minor” and also by the Beatles’ “A Day in the Life.”For the  update, Dr. Moorer increased the number of voices to 70 and made enhancements that would play well both in movie theaters and home theaters, both of which have become much more sophisticated since the original. He had to think about tuning the balance in each of the many speakers that are now in theaters, and consider how to program the tones into multidirectional systems like Dolby Atmos, where audio comes from overhead in a more three-dimensional way. There are a total of 32 different versions of the new trailer, of different lengths and different numbers of audio channels to best fit the theater where it will be played.