AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn Shattuck8:10 P.M. (Starz Cinema) FOOTNOTE (2012) The tension-filled relationship between rival Talmudic scholars — Eliezer (Shlomo Bar Aba, above), who toils in obscurity under the belief that his career was blocked by a nemesis, and Uriel (Lior Ashkenazi), an academic star with a busy schedule of public lectures — becomes more complicated when Eliezer is mistakenly awarded a coveted prize meant for Uriel, who happens to be his son. But how to correct the error? Under the direction of Joseph Cedar, the American-born Israeli director, “the fraught relations between father and son erupt into an intergenerational tsimmes worthy of Shakespeare, Freud or the more melodramatic portions of the Hebrew Bible,” A. O. Scott wrote in The New York Times about this Oscar nominee for best foreign-language film. “It plays as farce, but the chords of family tragedy resonate underneath the laughter.” Resolution, he added, “is unlikely, which may or may not be cause for optimism. Academic life and family life are both built on love — the love of learning, the love of other people — but they survive on contention, renewing and extending quarrels from one generation to the next.”8 P.M. (Starz) PLANES: FIRE & RESCUE (2014) This sequel to Disney’s “Planes” finds Dusty (the voice of Dane Cook) — who in the wake of fame has damaged his gearbox by flying too fast — joining the Piston Peak Air Attack Team, which runs emergency missions out of a national park. Its ranks include the amorous Dipper (Julie Bowen), above; Windlifter (Wes Studi), an American Indian helicopter; and Blade Ranger (Ed Harris), the former star of a ’70s television series and Dusty’s instructor. The pop-culture allusions raise both smiles and groans, Ben Kenigsberg wrote in The Times, but “in 3-D, the firefighting scenes are visually striking — with plumes of smoke and chemical dust — though the backgrounds, like other aspects of the film, lack dimension.” 9 P.M. (CW) THE MESSENGERS A mysterious object crashes into the New Mexico desert and sends out a shock wave that momentarily stops the heart of Vera (Shantel VanSanten), a scientist, and four other strangers — a young mother (Sofia Black-D’Elia), a troubled high school student (Joel Courtney), a federal agent (J D Pardo) and a televangelist (Jon Fletcher) — who come miraculously back to life. Then the Man (Diogo Morgado) arrives, offering Vera what she wants most in life in exchange for helping him with a morally complicated undertaking.9 P.M. (Animal Planet) TREEHOUSE MASTERS Pete Nelson and his crew build a castle in the sky for the winner of the Ultimate Treehouse Giveaway.10 P.M. (13) CHILDREN OF GIANT A new season of “Voces” begins with Hector Galán’s exploration into how the making of George Stevens’s “Giant” — which brought Elizabeth Taylor, Rock Hudson and James Dean to Marfa, Tex., in the summer of 1955 — transformed residents’ lives.10 P.M. (Pivot) ANGRY PLANET The storm chaser George Kourounis examines the effects of climate change on Australia and follows firefighters battling one of the biggest bushfires in recent history.1 A.M. (13) THEATER TALK Hilary Mantel (right), the author of “Wolf Hall” and “Bring Up the Bodies,” discusses the Broadway production of “Wolf Hall” with its director, Jeremy Herrin, and the actors Ben Miles and Nathaniel Parker, who play Thomas Cromwell and King Henry VIII. What’s Streaming NowTHE DRIVER David Morrissey (the Governor on “The Walking Dead”) portrays Vince, a British cabdriver craving something new in his life who, at the urging of an ex-con friend (Ian Hart), takes a lucrative job driving for a crime lord known as the Horse (Colm Meaney) in this three-part BBC noir. “I thought you said you were sick of being ordinary,” his friend says when at first Vince balks at accepting the offer. “I am,” he responds. “That doesn’t mean I want to be extraordinary in prison.” But soon enough he’s taking a walk on the illicit side. “This formula has been worked so often that a story like this needs to have really good acting, which this one does,” Neil Genzlinger wrote in The Times. “It also needs to have really credible decision-making by whoever is weaving the tangled web, which is where this mini-series comes up short.” (acorn.tv) KATHRYN SHATTUCKAdvertisement