By JOSHUA BARONEAPRIL 16, 2015
Around TownMuseums and SitesAmerican Museum of Natural History: ‘Incredible Oceans’ (Sunday) This program, presented in conjunction with the exhibition “Life at the Limits: Stories of Amazing Species,” takes a look at some of the ocean’s extraordinary creatures, with a talk hosted by one of the show’s curators, Mark Siddall. There will also a musical performance by Michael Hearst, singing from his album “Songs for Unusual Creatures,” and a live-animal presentation from Jarod Miller from Animal Planet’s “Pet Finder.” From 11 a.m. to 4 p.m., American Museum of Natural History, Central Park West and 79th Street, 212-769-5200, amnh.org.American Museum of Natural History: ‘Countdown to Zero’ (through July 12) Smallpox is the only human disease to have been eradicated, but what about Guinea worm, polio, malaria and others? This exhibition, presented in collaboration with the Carter Center, examines international efforts to control and wipe out illness. Daily from 10 a.m. to 5:45 p.m., Central Park West and 79th Street, 212-769-5200, amnh.org.BRIC and the Brooklyn Historical Society: ‘Mapping Brooklyn’ (through Sept. 6) This exhibition features artworks that incorporate themes of mapping and cartography in historical maps. The artists here are exploring the ways maps represent the practical and metaphorical aspects of life. The show is on view at BRIC House through May 3. Tuesdays through Saturdays from 10 a.m. to 8 p.m., Sundays to 6 p.m., 647 Fulton Street, at Rockwell Place, Fort Greene, Brooklyn, bricartsmedia.org. The show will also be at the Brooklyn Historical Society through Sept. 6. Wednesdays through Sundays from noon to 5 p.m., 128 Pierrepont Street, near Clinton Street, Brooklyn Heights, 718-222-4111, brooklynhistory.org.Brooklyn Historical Society: ‘Personal Correspondents: Photography and Letter Writing in Civil War Brooklyn’ (through spring 2016) The historical society’s new exhibition tells the personal stories of Brooklyn soldiers and their families during the Civil War. Some of the tales, revealed through photos and letters, are funny; others are tragic. The show’s opening on April 9 coincided with the 150th anniversary of Robert E. Lee’s surrender. Brooklyn Historical Society, 128 Pierrepont Street, near Clinton Street, Brooklyn Heights, 718-222-4111, brooklynhistory.org.AdvertisementGrolier Club: ‘Aldus Manutius: A Legacy More Lasting Than Bronze’ (through April 25) To celebrate the quincentennial of Aldus Manutius’s death, the Grolier Club has assembled over 130 rare books, called Aldines, from that scholar-printer’s Italian Renaissance press. The exhibition explores the ways in which, to this day, Manutius influences how we preserve and disseminate knowledge. As Jennifer Schuessler wrote in The New York Times, “Anyone who has ever sat in a cafe, or in the bath, with a paperback owes a debt to Aldus and the small, cleanly designed editions of the secular classics.” Hours: Monday through Saturday, 10 a.m. to 5 p.m.; 7 East 60th Street, Manhattan, 212-838-6690, grolierclub.org; free.AdvertisementMorgan Library & Museum: ‘Lincoln Speaks: Words That Transformed a Nation’ (through June 7) This exhibition, presented thematically and chronologically, homes in on Abraham Lincoln’s leadership and its relationship to language. In his exhibition review for The New York Times, Neil Genzlinger wrote: “For Lincoln admirers, simply being in the same room with so many artifacts he touched will be a delight. And if they give the exhibition the time it requires, they will certainly come away with a fuller appreciation of the man.” 225 Madison Avenue, at 36th Street, 212-685-0008, themorgan.org.Museum of the Moving Image: ‘Matthew Weiner’s “Mad Men” ’ (through June 14) As one of the most critically acclaimed TV shows in recent years nears its finale, “Mad Men” gets the exhibition treatment in this look at the series’s creative process. On display are large-scale sets, such as Don Draper’s office, as well as costumes, art and research material used by the show’s staff. Viewers should expect not only a look behind the scenes of the show, but also, as in “Mad Men” itself, a peek into the era it depicts. 35th Avenue at 37th Street, Astoria, Queens, 718-784-0077, movingimage.us.New-York Historical Society: ‘Audubon’s Aviary: The Final Flight (Part III of the Complete Flock)’ (through May 10) The third installment of “Audubon’s Aviary: The Complete Flock” comprises nearly 130 plates from the watercolors in John James Audubon’s “The Birds of America” collection, engraved by Robert Havell Jr. The exhibition, as William Grimes wrote in an article for The New York Times, “underlines the natural wealth of the American land, and Audubon’s remarkable talent for producing art as varied as his subject matter.” 170 Central Park West, at 77th Street, 212-873-3400, nyhistory.org.New-York Historical Society: ‘Chinese American: Exclusion/Inclusion’ (through Sunday) In his review for The New York Times, Edward Rothstein called this show a “vigorous and imaginative new exhibition” that includes a look at “how Chinese-American identity came to be, how immigration and discrimination were followed by recrimination and conflict, and how, finally, a people’s trials give way to celebration.” Friday from 10 a.m. to 8 p.m., Saturday to 6 p.m., Sunday from 11 a.m. to 5 p.m., 170 Central Park West, at 77th Street, 212-873-3400, nyhistory.org.New York Transit Museum Grand Central Terminal Gallery Annex: ‘New York’s Transportation Landmarks’ (through Nov. 1) It’s been 50 years since New York passed its Landmarks Law, which covers over 30,000 buildings and structures around the city. To celebrate the anniversary, the New York Transit Museum has created an exhibition that explores the history of development, use and even rescue of these landmarks. Hours: Tuesdays through Fridays, 10 a.m. to 4 p.m.; Saturdays and Sundays, 11 a.m. to 5 p.m. More information: 212-878-0106, web.mta.info/mta/museum.New York Transit Museum: ‘Spanning the Narrows: The Verrazano Bridge at 50’ (through next fall) Photographs, maps, drawings, models and other archival materials related to the construction of the bridge (including correspondence from Robert Moses, who oversaw the project) are part of this exhibition commemorating its 50th anniversary. Tuesdays through Fridays from 10 a.m. to 4 p.m.; Saturdays and Sundays from 11 a.m. to 5 p.m.; Boerum Place and Schermerhorn Street, Brooklyn Heights, 718-694-1600, mta.info/mta/museum.‘Signs of Life: In and Out of Time and Place’ (through April 24) The works of the Pratt Institute’s second-year M.F.A. candidates are on display in this show, organized by Sara Reisman, artistic director of the Shelley & Donald Rubin Foundation, which supports the arts. The pieces span a variety of media, with two themes running throughout: a desire for movement and attempts to capture time. The show will open on Friday with a reception from 7 to 9 p.m. Afterward, it is open from Thursdays through Sundays, from noon to 6 p.m. At the Boiler, 191 North 14th Street, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, pratt.edu; free.AdvertisementArturo Vega: ‘American Treasure’ (Friday through Sunday, Wednesday and Thursday) Howl! Happening, a new gallery and performance space in the East Village, presents an exhibition with paintings by Arturo Vega, a Mexican-born artist who worked in New York from 1971 until his death in 2013. Many of his paintings depict open palms holding a silver dollar — what exactly that means is open to interpretation. (Through April 25.) From 11 a.m. to 6 p.m. Howl! Happening, 6 East First Street, howlarts.org.EventsAipad Photography Show (through Sunday) The Association of International Photography Art Dealers presents the 35th iteration of its exhibition, with works from 89 art photography galleries around the world. The show also features photo-based art, video and new media. There will also be various public programs over the weekend; the schedule and additional information are at aipad.com/2015public. Park Avenue Armory, 643 Park Avenue, at 67th Street, 212-933-5812, aipad.com.‘Bascove/Bridges: Transporting the Metropolis’ (through July 12) This exhibition features more than 30 paintings and drawings of city bridges by the artist Anne Bascove, including the Brooklyn Bridge, the Outerbridge Crossing and the George Washington Bridge. Thursdays through Sundays from 1 to 5 p.m.; also by appointment; Noble Maritime Collection, Snug Harbor Cultural Center and Botanical Garden, 1000 Richmond Terrace, Livingston, Staten Island, 718-447-6490, noblemaritime.org.Immigrant Screening Series: ‘Entre Nos’ (Friday) New York Women in Film and Television, as part of its series “Immigrant Women: Sharing Our Voices Through Film,” screens “Entre Nos,” by Gloria La Morte and Paola Mendoza. The film, the directors’ take on hope for the American dream, is the story of a Colombian woman’s struggle to survive in New York with her two children after her husband abandons the family. At 6:30 p.m., Maspeth High School, 54-40 74th Street, Queens, 212-679-0870, nywift.org; free.Industry City Open Studios (Saturday) In an event similar to High Line Open Studios in Chelsea, Industry City in Brooklyn opens its doors for the public to get a behind-the-scenes look at the studios of artists, makers and manufacturers. There will be traditional artists, such as painters and sculptors, as well as makers of furniture and musical instruments. More information is at industrycity.com/industry-city-open-studios. From 11 a.m. to 6 p.m., 274 36th Street, Sunset Park, 718-965-6450, Ext. 200.Juilliard Organists (Wednesday) Juilliard presents this organ recital as part of the Cathedral of St. John the Divine’s Great Music in a Great Space series. The students, under the direction of the organ department’s chairman, Paul Jacobs, will perform works such as the “Andante espressivo” from Elgar’s Sonata in G, Op. 28, and a transcription of selections from Grieg’s “Holberg Suite,” Op. 40. At 7:30 p.m., Cathedral Church of St. John the Divine, 1047 Amsterdam Avenue, at 112th Street, Morningside Heights, 212-799-5000, events.juilliard.edu; free.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.‘Lafayette’ (Wednesday and Thursday) The French Institute Alliance Française is presenting this play to celebrate the reconstruction of the Hermione, a ship used by the Marquis de Lafayette in the American Revolution. The play, inspired by letters between Lafayette and his wife, tells the story of their shared adventures and how he became the youngest general in George Washington’s army. At 7:30 p.m., Florence Gould Hall, 55 East 59th Street, Manhattan, 800-982-2787, fiaf.org.Love Saves the East Village Benefit (Saturday) Local bands and restaurants join forces to raise money for people affected by the explosion that destroyed three buildings at Second Avenue and East Seventh Street on March 26. The day features a variety of bands and M.C.’s, with proceeds going toward the housing group Good Old Lower East Side and the Mayor’s Fund to Advance New York City. From 11 a.m. to 7 p.m., La Palapa, 77 St. Mark’s Place, near Second Avenue, East Village.Pen Paper Palate: ‘International Spies’ (Tuesday) The BBC host Frank Delaney leads a conversation with writers about international spies at this salon complete with a special menu from The Half King. Panelists include: Eric Lichtblau, a New York Times reporter; Scott Anderson a war correspondent who was contributed to The Times; Alex Berenson a novelist former Times reporter; and James Grady, a novelist and screenwriter. At 7 p.m., The Half King, 505 West 23rd Street, at 10th Avenue, Chelsea, 866-811-4111, irishartscenter.org.Advertisement‘Thereminage à Trois’ (Friday) The theremin, the instrument seemingly made for science fiction, comes to Joe’s Pub in this concert presented by the New York Theremin Society. Dorit Chrysler, Rob Schwimmer and Scott Robinson will perform a sci-fi classic — the score for “The Day the Earth Stood Still” — as well as new solo and collaborative works. At 8:30 p.m., at the Public Theater, 425 Lafayette Street, at Astor Place, East Village, 212-967-7555, joespub.com.Toast 50 Years of the Landmarks Law (Sunday) The New York Preservation Archive Project toasts to the 50th anniversary of the New York City Landmarks Law’s passage on the exact day when it happened. A birthday cake will be served, as will a screening of WNET’s documentary “Treasures of New York: The Landmarks Preservation Movement.” People who spoke in the film will be present to discuss the past 50 years of preservation in the city. At 3 p.m., the Loft at Professor Thom’s Bar & Grill, 219 Second Avenue, at 13th Street, East Village, 212-988-8379, nypap.org.Videology Presents Movie Trivia (Tuesdays) Videology, the Brooklyn bar and cinema, hosts a free film-themed trivia contest every week. The game varies; you will want to know theme songs, facts, quotations (especially ones from Nicolas Cage) and more. The winning team receives a free round of drinks, and there are chances to win drinks each round. At 8:30 p.m., 308 Bedford Avenue, at South First Street, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, 718-782-3468, videology.info.Spoken Word‘American Dreamers: Faces of a Civil Rights Movement’ (Tuesday) Julia Preston, a Pulitzer Prize-winning reporter for The New York Times, has been covering immigration since 2006. As part of the Joanna Jackson Goldman Lectures on American Civilization and Government, she discusses immigration and the United States’ changing identity. At 7 p.m., Stephen A. Schwarzman Building, New York Public Library, 917-275-6975, nypl.org/locations/schwarzman.The New Salon: Writers in Conversation (Friday) Michael Cunningham, who won the Pulitzer Prize for his novel “The Hours,” discusses and reads from his work. The author’s most recent book is “The Snow Queen,” published last year. He will speak with Darin Strauss, a member of New York University’s creating writing faculty and a winner of the National Book Critics Circle Award. At 5 p.m., Lillian Vernon Creative Writers House, 58 West 10th Street, near Sixth Avenue, Greenwich Village, cwp.fas.nyu.edu; free.“Weird Al” Yankovic and John Ficarra (Monday) John Ficarra, editor in chief of Mad magazine, celebrates the release of issue 533 with its guest editor, “Weird Al” Yankovic. The only planned part of the evening will be when the two sign copies of the magazine, so improvised antics seem inevitable. At 6 p.m., Barnes & Noble Union Square, 33 East 17th Street, 212-253-0810, barnesandnoble.com.Walking ToursAmerica’s Museum: Art and History of the Metropolitan (Sunday) The Metropolitan Museum of Art is more than two million square feet — about the same size as the Empire State Building. This tour won’t cover that whole space, but stops will include visits to important artworks, as well as stories about some of the museum’s famous benefactors, one of whom was eaten by cannibals. The tour meets at Fifth Avenue and 82nd Street at 11 a.m.; 888-606-9255, bigonion.com.Flatiron District Walking Tour (Sundays) This free tour meets at 11 a.m. on the southwest corner of Madison Square Park, at 23rd Street and Broadway, in front of the William Seward statue. Sponsored by the Flatiron/23rd Street Partnership; discoverflatiron.org.AdvertisementGangs of New York and the Bloody Five Points (Sunday) It’s difficult to see now, but the area of Lower Manhattan formerly known as the Five Points was once saturated with crime, disease and poverty. This tour takes a look at the highlights of the neighborhood brought to life in Martin Scorsese’s film “Gangs of New York,” with stops that include graves, churches and sites visited by people like Charles Dickens and Davy Crockett. The tour meets at Bowery and Bayard Street. At 1 p.m., 212-242-5762, joycegoldhistorytours.com.History of Wall Street Tour (weekdays) Stops on this tour, led by Wall Street Walks, include the New York Stock Exchange, Trinity Church, the Wall Street Bull, and ground zero and the Sept. 11 memorial. The tours last 90 minutes and begin at 11 a.m. and 1:30 p.m. (Also at 3 p.m. on Tuesdays and Fridays.) More details: wallstreetwalks.com.SoHo Gallery Tour (Saturday) This neighborhood gallery tour includes seven stops, among them a gallery showing paintings by Annie Lennox’s 22-year-old daughter. Other highlights include an Italian artist’s sculptures and a collection of controversial artworks that museums have banned or censored in recent years. The tour meets at 115 Spring Street, near Greene Street, at 1 p.m. 212-946-1548, nygallerytours.com.A Taste of Jewish New York (Sundays) Participants in this tour will get an insider’s look at Borough Park, Brooklyn, by learning about the customs of its Hasidic residents. There will also be the chance to try a range of food. This tour includes a stop at a lively shopping area, as well as at a matzo bakery — with free samples, of course. The tour meets at 9:45 p.m. at Fort Hamilton Parkway and 44th Street; 718-339-2302, timelinetouring.com.Union Square: Crossroads of New York (Saturdays) Sponsored by the Union Square Partnership, this free year-round tour focuses on the area’s political and social histories. The walk, led by guides from Big Onion Walking Tours, meets at 2 p.m. by the statue of Lincoln in Union Square Park, near the 16th Street transverse. 212-517-1826, unionsquarenyc.org.JOSHUA BARONEAn earlier version of this listing included an entry about the appearance of Kelley Paul on Monday night at the Strand Book Store to discuss her new book, “True and Constant Friends.” After the listing was published, Ms. Paul’s publisher canceled the event.Information on events for possible inclusion in Spare Times should be sent to weekend@nytimes.com by Monday at 5 p.m. for publication that week. Longer versions of Around Town and For Children listings are in a searchable guide at nytimes.com/events. A version of this schedule appears in print on April 17, 2015, on Page C20 of the New York edition with the headline: Spare Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.