By LAUREL GRAEBERAPRIL 16, 2015
‘Take the Stage With Broadway Stars’How do a lot of children get to Carnegie Hall on Saturday?One thing is certain: They won’t have to practice.“Take the Stage With Broadway Stars,” a Carnegie family concert, will live up to its title. Over the course of an hour, audience members will sing and dance to show tunes and, during a number near the concert’s end — “You Can’t Stop the Beat,” from “Hairspray” — at least 40 of them will be invited onstage to perform with Broadway actors. No audition. No rehearsal. Just a few brief lessons from the pros.“We really were out to create a dream-come-true, one-of-a-kind performing experience,” Leslie Stifelman, the event’s musical director and co-host, said in a telephone interview.Melissa Rae Mahon, Ms. Stifelman’s wife, will choreograph and direct the event, and the composer Thomas Cabaniss will be co-host. Jessie Mueller, who won a Tony Award as the lead in “Beautiful: The Carole King Musical,” will perform, joined by the Broadway All-Star Chorus, made up of veterans from shows like “Kinky Boots,” “The Book of Mormon” and “Chicago,” for which Ms. Stifelman is musical director and conductor. (Above, a previous family concert.)Advertisement“We have a progression from singing, to adding dance, and then adding acting, which is what we do in musical theater,” Ms. Stifelman said of the concert’s format. But to give a taste of what a big production number is like, the fun will start with two songs from “Grease” — “Born to Hand Jive” and “We Go Together” — and everyone, born to it or not, will learn to jive. Then Ms. Mueller will lead the audience in the quintessential teaching song “Do-Re-Mi,” from “The Sound of Music.”Advertisement“Maria von Trapp does march around, and we’ll do that also,” Ms. Stifelman said. “Don’t be surprised if you get to visit with our cast members in your seat.”Dance students will roam the aisles and select children to go onstage. But Ms. Stifelman emphasized that everyone would be able to sing and dance, even in the last row of the balcony. A 23-foot-wide video screen above the stage will display the lyrics and steps for the numbers, which will also include “Seasons of Love,” from “Rent,” and songs from “Beautiful” and “Les Misérables.”And because Ms. Stifelman adores Kander and Ebb, the children will exit singing “New York, New York,” ready to start spreading the news about being part of Carnegie Hall.(Saturday at 3 p.m., 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org.) LAUREL GRAEBERFor Children ‘Archaeology Zone: Discovering Treasures From Playgrounds to Palaces’ (Friday, Sunday through Tuesday, and Thursday) Children will step into the shoes of an explorer like Indiana Jones in this permanent exhibition at the Jewish Museum, but the adventures will be purely scholarly. Still, there is plenty of excitement in analyzing artifacts like a jar handle, a clay jug and a bangle and figuring out the purpose behind ancient pieces like a Greek helmet and a bull-shaped vessel. This interactive show, for ages 3 to 10, also includes a recreated room from the Ottoman period (about 1900), where young archaeologists can dress in costume. From 11 a.m. to 5:45 p.m.; until 8 p.m. on Thursdays; 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92nd Street, 212-423-3200, thejewishmuseum.org.Bindlestiff Family Cirkus Cabaret (Saturday and Sunday) Not everything that the Bindlestiff Family Cirkus does is family-friendly; this New York troupe blends vaudeville, circus and Wild West shows with its own aesthetic, which can be risqué. But its family matinees are certified wholesome, places to see all manner of circus arts, acrobatics and old-fashioned attractions like sword swallowing, fire eating and contortion. Saturday at 3 p.m.; Sunday at 1 and 4 p.m.; Connelly Theater, 220 East Fourth Street, East Village, 877-246-3537, bindlestiff.org.‘The Bully’ (Saturday and Sunday) Vital Theater Company has revived this ever-topical musical, by John Gregor and David L. Williams, which refreshingly avoids the trap of bullying its own audiences with heavy moralizing. Instead, the many pitfalls of the typical middle school relationship of victimizer and victim are revealed through wit, humor and a killer of a sly twist. (Through April 26.) At 3:30 p.m., McGinn-Cazale Theater, 2162 Broadway, at 76th Street, fourth floor; 212-579-0528, vitaltheatre.org.‘Catch Me!’ (Friday through Sunday) The young members of Flip FabriQue claim to be French Canadian, but after watching them perform in this show, closing this weekend, you may suspect that they hail from a different planet. That’s because they offer acts that don’t seem humanly possible, like walking up a building face. Their circus’s title, “Catch Me!,” seems to refer not only to the aerial and acrobatic antics onstage but also to an enthusiastic invitation to play. The company projects an irrepressible spirit of fun and, yes, it’s catching. Friday at 7 p.m.; Saturday and Sunday at noon and 5 p.m.; 209 West 42nd Street, Manhattan, 646-223-3010, newvictory.org.Advertisement‘Cinderella and the Prince Who Slays the Magic Dragon’ (Saturday) The Little Orchestra Society is understandably well known for its concerts, but this production is designed to captivate eyes as well as ears. Its “Cinderella,” set to excerpts from Prokofiev’s score, offers a dozen dancers, masked performers and enormous puppets designed by Manju Shandler, who worked with Julie Taymor on “The Lion King.” Part of the Happy Concerts for Young People series, for ages 6 to 12, this season-ending show includes a strong-willed Cinderella and a fairy godmother with the stature she deserves: She’s 15 feet tall. At 11 a.m. and 1 p.m., Avery Fisher Hall, Lincoln Center, 212-971-9500, littleorchestra.org.‘Dig! Plant! Grow!: Wake Up, Garden!’  (Saturday, Sunday, and Tuesday through Thursday) No garden could stay asleep after all that exhortation. In the Ruth Rea Howell Family Garden at the New York Botanical Garden, children will help get things up and growing by sowing seeds, planting seedlings and spreading compost; they can also observe germinating seeds through magnifiers and microscopes. (Through May 3.) New York Botanical Garden, Bronx River Parkway (Exit 7W) and Fordham Road, Bedford Park, the Bronx, 718-817-8700, nybg.org. (Search under calendar).‘The Gazillion Bubble Show: The Next Generation’  (Friday through Sunday, and Thursday) Children love bubbles, and this interactive show promises not just a gazillion but also some of the largest ever blown, along with light effects and lasers. The stars are the members of the Yang family: Fan and Ana Yang and their son Deni and others, who rotate as M.C.s for the production. Audience members may even find themselves in bubbles of their own. (The run is open-ended.) Friday at 7 p.m.; Saturday at 11 a.m. and 2 and 4:30 p.m.; Sunday at noon and 3 p.m.; Thursday at 11 a.m. and 2 p.m.; 340 West 50th Street, Clinton, 212-239-6200, gazillionbubbleshow.com.‘Gilgamesh’ (Sunday) He made a great friend, slew a monster, spurned a goddess and set out to find the secret to immortality: Gilgamesh, the ancient Mesopotamian king, was given quite a series of adventures in the epic that bears his name. David Novak will bring this centuries-old tale to life in a performance that’s part of a free storytelling series, recommended for children 8 and older, from the Steinhardt School of Culture, Education, and Human Development at New York University. At 3 p.m., Provincetown Playhouse, 133 Macdougal Street, near West Fourth Street, Greenwich Village, 212-998-5867, steinhardt.nyu.edu/music/edtheatre/programs/storytelling.‘Hello From Japan!’ (Friday through Sunday, and Tuesday through Thursday) Japanese culture comprises both unbridled whimsy and serene seriousness. Young visitors can get acquainted with these two sides at the Children’s Museum of Manhattan, which recreates different aspects of Tokyo in this new exhibition. One-half of the show, Kawaii Central, captures the fun of the city’s Harajuku district with the opportunity to sing karaoke, serve a Japanese meal and create cute, cartoonlike family mascots. The exhibition’s other half includes a Shinto shrine park, where young visitors can build a bridge, meet kami (spirits) and express their desires at a wishing tree. Programs, free with museum admission, accompany the show. (Through May 17.) Museum hours: 10 a.m. to 5 p.m.; to 7 p.m. on Saturdays; also open free from 5 to 8 p.m. on the first Friday of every month. Tisch Building, 212 West 83rd Street, 212-721-1223, cmom.org.‘Jack and the Beanstalk’ (Friday through Sunday, and Tuesday through Thursday) Many plants grow in Central Park, so why not a beanstalk? This one sprouts indoors at the Swedish Cottage Marionette Theater, which has revived Michael Alogna’s adaptation of the classic fairy tale about Jack, the Giant (here named Milford), Dolly the Cow and the famous Golden Goose. Bruce Cannon, the theater’s artistic director, has revised the script, and a human actor now stars in the show along with the company’s hand-built marionettes. (Through June 28.) Weekdays at 10:30 a.m. and noon, with an additional performance on Wednesdays at 2:30 p.m.; Saturday and Sunday at 1 p.m. (Some shows are sold out.) Reservations required. 79th Street and the West Drive, Central Park; 212-988-9093, cityparksfoundation.org/arts.‘The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe’  (Saturday) If the children of the Pevensie family could travel to the magical land of Narnia through something as simple as a wardrobe, why shouldn’t two hard-working actors be able to play them and all the characters found there? That’s what Abigail Taylor-Sansom and her husband, Rockford Sansom, are attempting in the Off Broadway Family Theater’s first production, le Clanché du Rand’s adaptation of C. S. Lewis’s classic novel. (The run is open-ended and continues on Saturdays, except April 25.) At 11 a.m., St. Luke’s Theater, 308 West 46th Street, Clinton; 212-239-6200, narniaoffbroadway.com.Materials Day (Saturday) Children often have a gift for discerning the potential usefulness in something that an adult might call junk. At this free event, the grown-ups will actually encourage them to have as much fun as possible with castoffs. An exercise in creative recycling, the celebration will offer all manner of materials — Bubble Wrap, fabric swatches, spools, corks, nuts and bolts, old maps — and projects to repurpose them, like making a cardboard city, a bottle cap mandala, a found-object costume and more. Musicians like Eric Farber and the bands Bash the Trash and the Easy Rollers will provide a soundtrack and inspiration. From 10 a.m. to 4 p.m., North Seventh Street, between Havemeyer Street and Meeker Avenue, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, newyorkcitywol.org/materials-day. (If it rains, the event will be held indoors at the Williamsburg Northside School, 299 North Seventh Street.)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Bob McGrath (Sunday) Generations of children have enjoyed the music of Bob McGrath, one of the first residents of what became a famous address: “Sesame Street.” An original cast member in 1969, he’s now out to win the hearts of more little ones in this benefit concert for P.S. K280, one of the city’s new prekindergarten programs. The Brooklyn singer-songwriter Pete Sinjin and children from Park Slope Performing Arts will join him. At 2 p.m., P.S. K280, 500 19th Street, Windsor Terrace, Brooklyn, bobmcgrath.peatix.com.Advertisement‘A Midsummer Night’s Dream’ (Friday through Sunday) What if Helena and Hermia, Shakespeare’s maidens, were a pair of contemporary adolescents besotted with social media? And what if the enchanted wood into which they run was Central Park? These are some of the twists devised by Mary Jo Bono, who has adapted this comedy into a child-friendly 75 minutes (with one intermission). Presented by the New Acting Company, it still features Puck, Oberon, Titania and the rest of the gang. (Through April 26.) Friday at 7 p.m.; Saturday and Sunday at 1 and 5 p.m.; the Celebration of Whimsy, 21-A Clinton Street, between Houston and Stanton Streets, Lower East Side, 917-972-9394, thenewactingcompany.com.Milstein Science Series: ‘Incredible Oceans’ (Sunday) The seas have some extraordinary creatures within their depths, like the mantis shrimp, with appendages that punch at the speed of a 22-caliber bullet, and the mimic octopus, which can disguise itself to look like a variety of fierce predators. This program at the American Museum of Natural History, held in conjunction with the show “Life at the Limits: Stories of Amazing Species,” will investigate the life cycles and adaptations of a number of odd ocean dwellers. In addition to presentations by marine biologists, the event will feature a live animal demonstration and a musical performance by Michael Hearst that draws on his album “Songs for Unusual Creatures.” From 11 a.m. to 4:30 p..m., Central Park West and 79th Street, 212-769-5200, amnh.org.MoMA Art Lab: Places and Spaces (Friday through Thursday) What’s an art lab? These interactive spaces for children at the Museum of Modern Art, free with museum admission, help introduce the institution’s collection through activities related to a theme: this time it’s Places and Spaces. Young visitors can design, draw and build as they explore spaces both real and imagined — landscapes, cityscapes, seascapes — as they appear in Modern art. (Through Aug. 31.) Daily, from 10:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.; to 6:30 p.m. on Fridays; Lewis B. and Dorothy Cullman Education and Research Building, 4 West 54th Street, Manhattan; 212-708-9805, moma.org/momaartlab.Prospect Park Audubon Center Nature Programs (Friday through Sunday, and Thursday) Spring is about to bloom all over, and so are related activities sponsored by the Prospect Park Audubon Center. Starting this weekend, the center is expanding its open hours; it is also increasing its Pop-Up Audubon programs, weekends from 11 a.m. to 4 p.m., to include two tents with themed nature investigations in different parts of the park. At the Eastwood tent, whose April theme is “Leaf Litter Critters,” children can learn about soil, fungus and decomposition; at the Peninsula tent, whose theme is “Animal Clues,” they can explore the lives of indigenous creatures. Both tents will feature nature walks, bird-watching and opportunities to help the environment. At the Audubon Center itself, the fun includes nature games, bird identification and, on Thursdays and Fridays, an animal encounter. Another new feature: discovery packs, kits for self-guided exploration that include activities like playing habitat bingo and designing a home for one of the park’s wild residents. Center hours: Thursdays and Fridays, noon to 4 p.m.; Saturdays and Sundays, 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. At the boathouse, near the Lincoln Road and Ocean Avenue park entrance, Brooklyn, 718-287-3400, prospectpark.org/audubon. All activities are free.‘Rapunzarella White: A Fairly Fractured Tale’ (Saturday and Sunday) Yes, it’s fractured, but it’s also blended: In this creative musical retelling, by June Rachelson-Ospa and Daniel Neiden, Rapunzel, Cinderella and Snow White are infant triplets abducted by an ill-tempered witch. These heroines aren’t like their traditional selves — Snow White, for instance, is allergic to apples — and neither are their princes, who may be more clumsy than charming. (Through June 14.) Saturday at 1 p.m., Sunday at noon, 13th Street Repertory Theater, 50 West 13th Street, Greenwich Village, 212-352-3101, rapunzarellawhite.bpt.me.Brady Rymer and the Little Band That Could (Sunday) Now it’s more like the Little Band That Did. Mr. Rymer’s American roots rock is a huge hit with children. And his former group, From Good Homes, once opened for Bob Dylan and toured with Dave Matthews, so he has a pedigree that will please parents, too. In this concert at the Jewish Museum, he and the band will play tunes from their Grammy-nominated 2014 album, “Just Say Hi!” At 11:30 a.m., 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92nd Street, 212-423-3337, thejewishmuseum.org.‘Samba With the Sea Lions’ (Saturday) Yes, you read it right. Beebe and Stella, the limber sea lions at the Prospect Park Zoo, will groove to a Latin beat at this event, featuring the music of Samba New York!, a Brazilian drum ensemble. And zoo visitors will be invited to join the samba line — on dry land, of course — at the celebration, part of the Central Brooklyn Jazz Festival. From noon to 2 p.m., 450 Flatbush Avenue, Brooklyn, 718-399-7339, prospectparkzoo.com.‘Short Stories’ (Tuesday through Thursday) You can turn almost anything into a puppet, but Ines Pasic and Hugo Suarez, the principals of Teatro Hugo & Ines, turn to the absolute basics: their bare knees, the soles of their feet, their hands and elbows. With the help of props and costume accents, these bodily parts become the characters in “Short Stories,” a presentation from the Dream Music Puppetry program at Here. In a 55-minute show recommended for ages 8 and older, Ms. Pasic and Mr. Suarez use mime and dance, as well as puppetry, to reveal the poignant and funny side of ordinary life. (Through April 25.) At 7 p.m., Here, 145 Avenue of the Americas, at Dominick Street, South Village, 212-352-3101, here.org.Advertisement‘Soarin’ Over Staten Island’ (Sunday) This weekend, wonders of both nature and art will dominate the skies over Freshkills Park, a former landfill that used to have a far less appealing atmosphere. This free event from the Parks Department, a combination hawk watch and kite festival, will invite children to learn about migratory birds from local experts while scouting for the creatures’ return. It will also be a time to fly kites. (Families can take their own or build free ones on site.) To welcome visitors from Manhattan, shuttle buses will run from the Staten Island Ferry Terminal in St. George to the park at 11 a.m. and 12:30 p.m.; they will return to the terminal at 2 and 3:30 p.m. Shuttles will also run continuously into the park from the event’s parking area at 350 Wild Avenue. From 11 a.m. to 4 p.m., 350 Wild Avenue, near the East Service Road, Travis-Chelsea, Staten Island, freshkillspark.org/upcoming-events.‘Spring Poems & Songs: A Musical Celebration of Poetry Month’ (Sunday) T.S. Eliot may have described April as the cruelest month, but it’s still kind to writers like him, whose work is celebrated at this time every year. Now Arts Brookfield is inviting children to salute National Poetry Month with this free event, which will include performances by Tina Chang, Brooklyn’s poet laureate; Mahogany L. Browne, a spoken-word artist; and students from the Third Street Music School. Before and after the verse and songs, Poets House will lead activities to inspire visitors to write their own poems. From 1:30 to 3:30 p.m., Winter Garden at Brookfield Place, 230 Vesey Street, near West Street, Lower Manhattan, artsbrookfield.com/springpoems.‘A Taste of Magic’ (Saturday) Would you like a side of sleight of hand with that burger? This show, developed by Magnets, a collective of local magicians, brings wizardry to the dinner table. Taking place at various restaurants, the presentation includes acts like mind reading and card tricks, which professionals perform close-up for guests; there’s also a cabaret-style show. And the admission price includes a full meal. At 8 p.m., Docks Oyster Bar & Seafood Grill, 633 Third Avenue, at 40th Street, Manhattan, atasteofmagicnyc.com.‘Tiny Giants’ (Friday through Thursday) The heroes of this film may be small, but they’re mighty in their will to survive. Inspired by the BBC television series “Hidden Kingdoms,” this new Imax movie at the American Museum of Natural History uses 3-D cameras to peer into the universes of two diminutive creatures: a forest chipmunk and a grasshopper mouse from the Arizona desert, noted for its ability to prey on scorpions. Narrated by Stephen Fry, the film allows viewers to see the world from their perspectives. (Through July 5.) Hourly from 10:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., with 2-D screenings at 11:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m.; all other screenings are 3-D. Central Park West and 79th Street, 212-769-5200, amnh.org.‘Tunes With Tina’ (Sunday) That’s Tina deVaron, a jazz musician and singer, whose musical brunch for young people at the Measure Lounge at Langham Place, Fifth Avenue, a hotel in Midtown Manhattan, has returned. Ms. deVaron, who often sings show tunes for children, also improvises and gears her performances to the audience. On selected Sundays throughout the season, she will be accompanied by Broadway performers. Singing along is encouraged. (Through May 31.) At noon, 400 Fifth Avenue, at 36th Street, 212-695-4005, measurenyc.com.‘The Very Hungry Caterpillar and Other Eric Carle Favorites’ (Sunday) Children tend to devour the books of the author and illustrator Eric Carle with the same kind of enthusiasm that one of his famous characters, the Very Hungry Caterpillar, brings to munching all kinds of food. Now the Brooklyn Center for the Performing Arts is presenting this production, from the Mermaid Theater of Nova Scotia, which uses projections, puppetry, black light and other special effects to bring to life the caterpillar and Mr. Carle’s characters Little Cloud and the Mixed-Up Chameleon. Right after the performance, families can also enjoy the National Grid Earth Day Celebration on the plaza outside. This free event, with storytelling, yoga for children and live music, will emphasize environmental stewardship with demonstrations on fire prevention and making crafts and musical instruments from recycled materials. At 2 p.m., Walt Whitman Theater, Brooklyn College, Flatbush and Nostrand Avenues, Flatbush, 718-951-4500, brooklyncenter.org.‘¡Viva Pinocho!’/’A Mexican Pinocchio!’ (Saturday) This Pinocchio is more than a wooden boy who longs to be human; he’s also a Mexican immigrant in search of his identity in a new land, the United States. Presented by Teatro Sea, which specializes in Latino theater for children, this show is the work of Manuel Antonio Morán, the company’s founder and director. Incorporating music, masks and several types of puppetry, it runs on Saturdays through May 23. At 3 p.m., Teatro Sea, Clemente Soto Vélez Cultural Center, 107 Suffolk Street, at Rivington Street, Lower East Side, 212-529-1545, teatrosea.org.‘A Voyage Through Jewish History’  (Sunday through Thursday) This journey involves not just miles, but years. In this permanent interactive exhibition at the Jewish Children’s Museum, young visitors can travel from Abraham and Sarah’s tent to the Western Wall in contemporary Jerusalem and beyond. Activities along the way include giving water to Rebecca’s camels, playing the strings on David’s harp (a high-tech version with beams of light that emit sounds when struck) and taking part in the exodus from Egypt. Museum hours: 10 a.m. to 4 p.m.; to 5:30 p.m. on Sundays; 792 Eastern Parkway, at Kingston Avenue, Crown Heights, Brooklyn; 718-907-8833, jcm.museum.LAUREL GRAEBERA version of this schedule appears in print on April 17, 2015, on Page C20 of the New York edition with the headline: Spare Times: For Children.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.