APRIL 16, 2015
Full reviews of recent jazz performances: nytimes.com/jazz. A searchable guide to these and other shows is at nytimes.com/events.Nat Baldwin  (Friday) This longtime bassist of the celebrated art-rockers Dirty Projectors broadens his scope on his sixth solo album, “In the Hollows,” on which he warbles intimate, folksy narratives over tempestuous chamber-pop strings or his own unadorned instrument. Twisting, jazzy passages add to the intrigue. With Ava Luna and Warehouse. At 8 p.m., Baby’s All Right, 146 Broadway, near Bedford Avenue, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, 877-987-6487, ticketfly.com. (Stacey Anderson)Mary Chapin Carpenter  (Wednesday) A thoughtful country-folk chorister whose warm introspection suggests campfires and coffeehouses, Ms. Carpenter is so beloved in Nashville that she was inducted into the city’s Songwriters Hall of Fame. “Songs From the Movie,” a fanciful record that reimagined some of her past works in rich orchestral arrangements, was released last year. At 8 p.m., the Town Hall, 123 West 43rd Street, Manhattan, 212-840-2824, 800-982-2787, the-townhall-nyc.org. (Anderson)★ Cntrl With Richie Hawtin  (Friday) Richie Hawtin, the longtime leader of Detroit’s techno scene, both through his own releases and under his abstract pseudonym, Plastikman, has spoken fervently about electro artists’ need to expand boundaries for new fans in the trendy electronic dance music genre. He aims to educate the young masses during this headlining set at the Girls + Boys dance party. At 10 p.m., Webster Hall, 125 East 11th Street, East Village, 800-745-3000, websterhall.com/events. (Anderson)AdvertisementCom Truise (Friday) Although this spirited D.J. doesn’t stop alien invasions or leap from skyscrapers to save the girl, like his Tinseltown inspiration, Com Truise (whose real name is Seth Haley) does crib the best of ’80s synthetic New Wave in his funky electro mixes. “In Decay,” his second studio album, was released on the influential label Ghostly International in 2012, as was “Wave 1,” his seven-song EP, which arrived last year. At 7 p.m., Verboten, 54 North 11th Street, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, verbotennewyork.com. (Anderson)AdvertisementMatthew Dear  (Friday) This experimental microhouse D.J. and producer channels Detroit techno in his reedy, subtly dystopian brushes of beats. His pop-friendly hand has earned him favoritism in rock circles, too; he has opened for Interpol, among other groups. With Mike Dehnert, Kyle Hall and Dino G. At 11 p.m., Verboten, 54 North 11th Street, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, verbotennewyork.com. (Anderson)★ Earl Sweatshirt (Saturday) This standout Odd Future member, who was rumored to have left that rap group a few times over, clearly cannot abandon his gift for dark double entendres. His debut solo album, “Doris,” was a complex highlight of the 2013 hip-hop slate; in the songs, he lamented his absentee father and joked with sharp wit atop noncommercial beats. His swaggering, profanely titled second album was released last month. With Vince Staples and Remy Banks. At 8 p.m., Best Buy Theater, 1515 Broadway, at 44th Street, 212-930-1950, bestbuytheater.com. (Anderson)Ex Hex  (Thursday) This rock trio fronted by Mary Timony — veteran of the Wild Flag and Helium — is rich with jangling guitars and Ms. Timony’s echoing, stoic vocals. The band’s debut single, “Hot and Cold,” was chipper, with inflections of grunge and punk, and had a kitschy, food-obsessed music video; its boisterous debut album, “Rips,” is out now. With Sheer Mag, Kuroma and Roya. At 8 p.m., Le Poisson Rouge, 158 Bleecker Street, near Thompson Street, Greenwich Village, 212-505-3474, lepoissonrouge.com. (Anderson)George Ezra  (Wednesday) It’s easy to overlook Mr. Ezra amid the unrelenting stream of guitar-wielding pop-soul troubadours being exported from Britain (recently, Ed Sheeran and Ben Howard). However, on his debut album, “Wanted on Voyage,” this recent “Saturday Night Live” musical guest proves a cut above the fray with straight-shooting, elegant folk-blues songwriting that nods to the Head and the Heart and Lead Belly, and a mercurial baritone that suggests sinister edges not yet explored fully. At 8 p.m., Webster Hall, 125 East 11th Street, East Village, 800-745-3000, websterhall.com/events. (Anderson)★ Gilberto Gil (Thursday) The singer and guitarist Mr. Gil, who is so vaunted in Brazil that he has served as the country’s minister of culture, now endures as an unofficial emissary of regional samba and rock. Still a spry and impassioned performer at the age of 72, this Grammy winner returns to New York for his first show in approximately five years. At 8 p.m., the Town Hall, 123 West 43rd Street, Manhattan, 212-840-2824, 800-982-2787, the-townhall-nyc.org. (Anderson)Heems  (Monday) The silly, rowdy meta-commentary on hip-hop culture by the defunct rap trio Das Racist has been missed, but one of its former members, Heems, had a promising solo outing with the 2012 mixtape “Wild Water Kingdom,” an intelligent work of coiled, occasionally sitar-tinged beats and stubbornly nontraditional rhyming schemes. His racially incisive and socially astute debut solo album, “Eat Pray Thug,” arrived last month. With Weekend Money, Topaz Jones and more. At 8 p.m., Baby’s All Right, 146 Broadway, near Bedford Avenue, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, 877-987-6487, ticketfly.com. (Anderson)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Juan Maclean  (Friday, Saturday and Thursday through April 25) The disco-house D.J. John MacLean and the former LCD Soundsystem member Nancy Whang have found their groove in a steady stream of mixes and outtakes in recent years. Last fall, they released their first album in several years, “In a Dream,” a punk-synth excursion of charming call and response. Friday and Saturday at 8 p.m., Cameo Gallery, back room of the Lovin’ Cup Café, 93 North Sixth Street, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, 718-302-1180, cameony.net. Thursday through April 25 at 9 p.m., Union Pool, 848 Union Avenue, at Meeker Avenue, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, 718-609-0484, union-pool.com. (Anderson)Lindstrom  (Thursday) This Norwegian disco D.J.-producer and founder of the excellently named Feedelity Recordings shoots for the cosmos in his spacious, atmospheric sets. His latest full-length effort, “Six Cups of Rebel,” is too labyrinthine to fall neatly into the current dubstep craze, and therein lies its charm. At 10 p.m., Good Room, 98 Meserole Avenue, near Manhattan Avenue, Greenpoint, Brooklyn, goodroombk.com. (Anderson)Advertisement★ Low Cut Connie (Thursday) On their raucous and slyly stirring third record, “Hi Honey,” these local rockers infuse their barroom boogie and Britpop formula with Southern R&B; “Little Queen of New Orleans,” which features Merrill Garbus of Tune-Yards, is an especially hearty slab of soul. The group’s live show is a strange phenomenon: The singer Adam Weiner whirls across the stage and accosts his piano in a direct channeling of Jerry Lee Lewis, challenging the front row to accept his velocity. This show serves as their record release party. With the Silks. At 11:59 p.m., Baby’s All Right, 146 Broadway, near Bedford Avenue, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, 877-987-6487, ticketfly.com. (Anderson)John Mellencamp (Monday, Tuesday, Thursday and April 24) One of last fall’s more ambitious but ultimately murky stage spectacles was “Ghost Brothers of Darkland County,” a Southern Gothic musical about familial drama and supernatural menace that was created by Mr. Mellencamp and Stephen King. Mr. Mellencamp’s country-, gospel- and zydeco-tinged tunes fared well, however, and would have made a fine song cycle without all the busy stage dressings. There is a chance that this Grammy-winning musician will pull from its book at these two area shows, which promote his most recent album, “Plain Spoken.” Monday and Tuesday at 8 p.m., Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org; Thursday and April 24 at 8 p.m., Apollo Theater, 253 West 125th Street, Harlem, 800-745-3000, apollotheater.com. (Anderson)The Month in Cabaret (through May 2) At Café Carlyle, the guitarist John Pizzarelli reunites with Daniel Jobim, Antônio Carlos Jobim’s son, who played with his father on many of his recordings, from Tuesday through May 2. Tuesdays through Fridays at 8:45 p.m.; Saturdays at 8:45 p.m. and 10:45 p.m. The cafe also continues to showcase nontraditional nightclub acts with an engagement, through Saturday, by Lena Hall, recently seen in the Broadway revival of “Hedwig and the Angry Inch.” Friday at 8:45 p.m.; Saturday at 8:45 p.m. and 10:45 p.m.; Café Carlyle, 35 East 76th Street, Manhattan, 212-744-1600, thecarlyle.com. The Midtown club 54 Below is hopping with divas from different generations. Nellie McKay’s new show, “My Weekly Reader,” looks back at the 1960s from a playful 21st-century perspective. Through Saturday, at 9:30 p.m. The venerable Marilyn Maye’s new show, “Her Way: A Centennial Tribute to Frank Sinatra,” from Friday through April 30, is another birthday celebration of Ol’ Blue Eyes. All shows at 7 p.m. except Saturday, at 2 p.m., and next Friday, at 8:30 p.m. 54 Below, 254 West 54th Street, Manhattan, 646-476-3551, 54below.com. (Stephen Holden)★ Squarepusher (Sunday) The hectic electronica beats that emerge from this British producer’s tangled web borrow from acid jazz, house and even musique concrète. At this point, in his homeland, he is a mindful and welcome counterpoint to all the thrashing dubstep jockeying for his dance floors. “Damogen Furies,” his first album in three years, is to be released on Monday; he celebrates with a show set in the decayed glamour of Webster Hall. At 8 p.m., Webster Hall, 125 East 11th Street, East Village, 800-745-3000, websterhall.com/events. (Anderson)Richard Thompson  (Wednesday) Mr. Thompson, a BBC Radio Lifetime Achievement Award winner, once serenaded Britain alongside his ex-wife, Linda Thompson; he continues to romance audiences with his lavish, folksy acoustic guitar compositions, which have been covered by Robert Plant, Bonnie Raitt and more. At 8 p.m., New Jersey Performing Arts Center, One Center Street, Newark, 888-466-5722, njpac.org. (Anderson)★ Rachel Trachtenburg (Thursday) In the early 2000s, Ms. Trachtenburg was the Eloise of the art-pop world. At the age of 6, she began touring the country as the precocious drummer of her parents’ Trachtenburg Family Slideshow Players, a vaudeville pop band. As a teenager, she formed her own psychedelic pop outfit, Supercute! On Thursday, this musician and model, now 21, performs new solo material; her recent single, “I Like to Be Alone,” is a catchy yet barbed burst of ukulele indie-pop. At 8 p.m., Cake Shop, 152 Ludlow Street, near Stanton Street, Lower East Side, cake-shop.com. (Anderson)Seth Troxler (Friday) This dance D.J.-producer nods heavily to the deep techno scene of Detroit in his nimble mixes, for which Rolling Stone anointed him as one of the “Top 25 D.J.s That Rule the Earth.” Mr. Troxler, who was born in Michigan and now lives in Berlin, is also a fixture at Burning Man and on the New York dance festival circuit. At 10 p.m., Output, 74 Wythe Avenue, at North 12th Street, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, outputclub.com. (Anderson)Waka Flocka Flame  (Monday) This hyperactive representative for Southern hip-hop is aiming for the electronic dance music crowd; he toured recently with the electro guru Steve Aoki, and has appeared with other D.J.s on their party jams. For some time, he has been teasing the follow-up to his witty, if somewhat blustering, last effort, “Triple F Life: Friends, Fans & Family,” and recently announced that it was to be released this summer. With Azizi Gibson, Ben G and Funk Flex. At 8 p.m., Webster Hall, 125 East 11th Street, East Village, 800-745-3000, websterhall.com/events. (Anderson)A version of this schedule appears in print on April 17, 2015, on Page C17 of the New York edition with the headline: The Listings: Pop.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.