By BRIAN SEIBERTAPRIL 16, 2015
It was an odd night at New York Live Arts on Wednesday. For one thing, exceptional dancers kept dying. Or that is was it looked like, as one by one they entered, moved around a bit and collapsed on the ground, lying there as more and more dancers succumbed to the same fate.This happened through most of the premiere of Beth Gill’s hourlong “Portrait Study,” but that was only the first half of the program, part of the Live Ideas Festival, which has been organized this year by Laurie Anderson. The second half was a conversation between Ms. Anderson and the choreographer Deborah Hay about their collaboration on “Figure A Sea,” a long ensemble dance for the Cullberg Ballet that is to debut in Stockholm in September.That segment, about a work that does not yet exist, was necessarily provisional. But even Ms. Gill’s work came with a disclaimer about how, given a shorter gestation period than she is used to, she was experimenting with “an improvised installation.” The cast — nine distinguished downtown dancers and four excellent Bard College students — had only a series of directives.These distinctive dancers brought some individual character to their improvisations: Jodi Melnick at once calm and restless, Omagbitse Omagbemi at once insouciant and anxious, Stuart Singer and Levi Gonzalez creepy and weird. And the succession of deaths was given some suspense by the music of Eliot Krimsky and Ryan Seaton, which often sounded like the score to a sci-fi horror film. Yet the serial structure ultimately palled.AdvertisementOnce all the bodies had assembled, there was a lovely moment as the music shifted into song, and the dancers, shifting as if in sleep, woke up as if from a dream and discovered one another in wonder. In the few remaining moments, loose and comradely configurations stirred memories of Ms. Gill’s compositional talents, mostly unused here.The conversation between Ms. Anderson and Ms. Hay began awkwardly, with the two talking at cross purposes or tangents to each other. But then, as Ms. Anderson told wryly amusing anecdotes and tried out sounds on her electric violin and nest of electronics, Ms. Hay rose and investigated the space with spare and careful motions.AdvertisementWhen they agreed upon potential aims for the project — a disappearing, a “place of not naming” — I imagined that the prospective work they were discussing was the one I had seen earlier that evening. “Portrait Study,” with its fine dancers floating in an atmosphere too thin, was an apt pièce d’occasion.A version of this review appears in print on April 17, 2015, on Page C4 of the New York edition with the headline: By the Seat of Their Pants.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.