AdvertisementSupported byFull reviews of recent classical performances: nytimes.com/classical. A searchable guide to these and other performances is at nytimes.com/events.Opera‘Aida’  (Friday and Monday) Not one to ignore an opportunity to multitask, Plácido Domingo conducts the Metropolitan Opera’s revival of Verdi’s great Egypt opera as he continues a run in that composer’s “Ernani.” The cast includes Oksana Dyka, Violeta Urmana, Marco Berti, Mark Delavan and Stefan Kocan. At 7:30 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Zachary Woolfe)‘Un Ballo in Maschera’  (Thursday) The cast is largely the same as it was at the 2012 premiere of David Alden’s production of Verdi’s uncategorizable work at the Metropolitan Opera: Sondra Radvanovsky, Dolora Zajick and Dmitri Hvorostovsky. But the tenor star is now Piotr Beczala, and James Levine conducts the opera at the Met for the first time in nearly 20 years. At 7:30 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Woolfe)★ ‘Don Carlo’ (Saturday and Wednesday) For this revival of Nicholas Hytner’s 2010 production of Verdi’s profoundly great “Don Carlo,” the Metropolitan Opera has assembled a strong cast and an exceptional conductor. The Korean tenor Yonghoon Lee brings melting sound and youthful impetuosity to the title role. The Italian soprano Barbara Frittoli is an affecting Elisabeth; the suave Russian baritone Dmitri Hvorostovsky excels as Rodrigo; and the great Italian bass Ferruccio Furlanetto owns the role of the isolated, ruthless Philip II. Best of all is the stylish, exciting conducting of Yannick Nézet-Séguin. Saturday at noon and Wednesday at 7 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. ­(Anthony Tommasini)‘Cavalleria Rusticana’ and ‘Pagliacci’  (Saturday and Tuesday) It was about time for the Metropolitan Opera to replace its 1970 Franco Zeffirelli production of Mascagni’s “Cavalleria Rusticana” and Leoncavallo’s “Pagliacci,” opera’s most enduring double bill. In his new staging, the director David McVicar brings an intriguing, sometimes uneasy mix of abstraction and realism to “Cavalleria,” marred by the overuse of an annoying rotating stage platform, a heavy-handed touch. For “Pagliacci,” the action is updated to a grimy truck stop near a church in an Italian town in 1948; the commedia dell’arte troupe becomes a band of zany vaudevillians. The cast is strong, especially the tireless tenor Marcelo Álvarez, who takes on both Turiddu in “Cavalleria” and Canio in “Pagliacci,” a formidable challenge. The soprano Eva-Maria Westbroek is a wrenching Santuzza in “Cavalleria,” and the soprano Patricia Racette a feisty Nedda in “Pagliacci.” Fabio Luisi conducts surging, textured and lucid accounts of both scores. Saturday at 8:30 p.m. and Tuesday at 7:30 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Tommasini)‘The News’  (Friday and Saturday) Also known as JacobTV, the Dutch composer Jacob Ter Veldhuis brings to New York this ever-evolving “reality opera,” which combines live music with news media footage. These performances feature the ensemble Fulcrum Point New Music Project and the vocalists Nora Fischer and Loire. At 7 p.m., Grace Rainey Rogers Auditorium, Metropolitan Museum of Art, 212-570-3949, metmuseum.org/tickets. (Woolfe)Classical Music★ American Symphony Orchestra  (Sunday) In addition to serving as this peerlessly adventurous orchestra’s music director, Leon Botstein is the president of Bard College. So it’s only appropriate that he has planned “Music U.,” a program of works by composers associated with the Ivy League. That means Randall Thompson, Horatio Parker, George Rochberg, Leon Kirchner and, from Roberto Sierra, the premiere of “Cantares,” performed with the Cornell University Glee Club and Chorus. At 2 p.m., Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, americansymphony.org. (Woolfe)★ Les Arts Florissants  (Thursday) William Christie leads his vibrant Baroque ensemble, Les Arts Florissants, and soloists from Le Jardin des Voix, his academy for aspiring singers, in a semi-staged performance called “In an Italian Garden.” The program features excerpts from Handel’s “Trionfo del tempo e del disinganno” and Vivaldi’s “Orlando Furioso,” as well as selections by Haydn, Mozart, Stradella, Cimarosa and Porpora. At 7:30 p.m., Alice Tully Hall, Lincoln Center, lincolncenter.org, 212-721-6500. (Vivien Schweitzer)★ Kristian Bezuidenhout  (Thursday) This deeply thoughtful and highly communicative early-keyboard specialist takes to the harpsichord for a program surveying the cosmopolitan interconnection of Baroque keyboard styles. Composers include Johann Jacob Froberger, Matthias Weckmann, Christian Ritter, Purcell and, of course, Bach. Weill Recital Hall, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Corinna da Fonseca-Wollheim)★ Boston Symphony Orchestra  (Friday) This storied orchestra has been energized by its new music director, Andris Nelsons, 36, who shows extraordinary promise. Just one work on the program for this, the last concert of its visit to Carnegie Hall: Mahler’s daunting, terrifying Sixth Symphony. At 8 p.m., Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (David Allen)★ Ian Bostridge and Wenwen Du (Friday) The vast drill hall of the Park Avenue Armory has become a site of choice in New York for unusual opera productions and ambitious multimedia concerts. But of late, the Armory has also been presenting recitals in its beautifully restored and ideally intimate Board of Officers Room. The next one features the superb tenor Ian Bostridge and the pianist Wenwen Du in a program titled “Songs of World War I,” with works by Mahler, Butterworth, Weill, Britten and more. At 8 p.m., 643 Park Avenue, at 67th Street, 212-933-5812, armoryonpark.org. (Tommasini)Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center  (Sunday) This program pairs Copland and Stravinsky. The Amphion String Quartet, the clarinetist David Shifrin, the violinist Kristin Lee and the pianist Anne-Marie McDermott perform works including Stravinsky’s Suite from “L’Histoire du Soldat” and Copland’s Sextet. At 5 p.m., Alice Tully Hall, Lincoln Center, 212-875-5788, chambermusicsociety.org. (Schweitzer)★ Composer Portrait: Anna Clyne  (Thursday) Miller Theater’s last composer portrait of the season sketches the work of the London-born Anna Clyne, who is just completing her tenure as composer in residence at the Chicago Symphony Orchestra. Brad Lubman leads Ensemble Signal in four works, including parts of “As Sudden Shut,” a setting of poems by Emily Dickinson. At 8 p.m., Miller Theater, Broadway at 116th Street, Morningside Heights, 212-854-7799, millertheatre.com. (Allen)★ ‘Crash’ (Friday and Saturday) The inventive American composer Robert Ashley died last year at 83, shortly after finishing “Crash,” his final opera, which had its premiere at the 2014 Whitney Biennial. Mr. Crash’s unconventional operas blend spoken dialogue; meditative, surrealist scores; surrealist dramatic elements; and experimental vocal idioms. “Crash,” which explores the attitudes and prejudices of an older man, features six voices and a score accompanied by photo projections. At 8 p.m., Roulette, 509 Atlantic Avenue, near Third Avenue, Boerum Hill, Brooklyn, 917-267-0363, roulette.org. (Schweitzer)★ JACK Quartet (Thursday) The inviting David Rubenstein Atrium has become not just a popular place near Lincoln Center to hang out and enjoy snacks, but also an increasingly busy space for concerts of all kinds. The adventurous and excellent JACK Quartet plays a free program of American works on Friday, including Ruth Crawford Seeger’s String Quartet “1931,” and recent pieces by John Zorn, Caroline Shaw, Missy Mazzoli and Jason Eckardt. At 7:30 p.m., Broadway between 62nd and 63rd Streets, Lincoln Center, 212-721-6500, atrium.lincolncenter.org. (Tommasini)Juilliard Orchestra  (Sunday) The charismatic conductor David Robertson leads this excellent orchestra in a 90th-birthday tribute to Pierre Boulez that retraces lines of debt and gratitude through 20th-century touchstones like Debussy’s “Prelude to the Afternoon of a Faun,” Stravinsky’s “Symphonies of Wind Instruments” and two works by Boulez: “Originel,” from “... explosante-fixe ...,” and “Rituel in Memoriam Bruno Maderna.” At 3 p.m., Avery Fisher Hall, Lincoln Center, 212-721-6500, lincolncenter.org. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)MATA Festival  (Friday and Saturday) This zany, adventurous and polyglot festival of new music by young composers from around the world wraps up with a program on Friday headlined by the endearingly named Bearthoven Trio (piano, percussion and bass) in works by Jonathan Nangle and Amanda Schoofs. There’s also a new work for bass by Du Yun and “Corporate Talent Factor’s Next Top Idol!,” a piece posing as a talent competition, by Adam de la Cour. On Saturday, the accomplished Talea Ensemble delves into works inspired by technology and machines, including a percussion concerto, played partly on a handmade sculpture, by Ann Cleare. Full details are online. Most events take place at the Kitchen, 512 West 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-255-5793, thekitchen.org. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)Modigliani Quartet  (Sunday) Three very different string quartets make up the program for this Peoples’ Symphony concert: the darkest of the set that Mozart dedicated to Haydn (K. 421); the first, and arguably sunniest, that Shostakovich wrote; and Ravel’s gorgeous sole example of the genre. At 2 p.m., the Town Hall, 123 West 43rd Street, Manhattan, 800-982-2787, the-townhall-nyc.org. (Allen)Orchestra of St. Luke’s  (Thursday) Every young conductor wants to impress in the core repertoire, and there’s nothing more “core” than Beethoven’s Fifth Symphony. For this orchestra’s last Carnegie Hall appearance with the principal conductor Pablo Heras-Casado this season, the Beethoven follows Stravinsky’s “Symphonies of Wind Instruments” and Shostakovich’s Cello Concerto No. 2, with Alisa Weilerstein. At 8 p.m., Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Allen)★ Dorothea Röschmann and Mitsuko Uchida (Wednesday) Two stars come together for this recital devoted to Romantic art songs, including Schumann’s tender “Liederkreis” and “Frauenliebe und -leben” and Berg’s “Seven Early Songs.” At 8 p.m., Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)★ Tallis Scholars  (Friday and Saturday) On Friday at the Church of St. Ignatius Loyola, Peter Phillips conducts the eminent Tallis Scholars and 30 young choral singers in Tallis’s monumental 40-part motet, “Spem in alium.” The program also includes works by Brumel, de Victoria, Gibbons, Sheppard and Cowper. On Saturday at Carnegie Hall, the Tallis Scholars perform Franco-Flemish and English Renaissance sacred music by William Byrd and Josquin des Prez. Both concerts are part of Carnegie Hall’s Before Bach focus. On Friday at 8 p.m., Church of Saint Ignatius Loyola, 980 Park Avenue, at 84th Street; on Saturday at 7:30 p.m., Weill Recital Hall, Carnegie Hall; 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Schweitzer)★ Tenet  (Saturday) This acclaimed early-music group presents “The Secret Lover,” its first staged production, with music by, for and about women from 17th-century Italy. Named for Barbara Strozzi’s cantata “L’Amante Segreto,” the program, directed by Marc Verzatt, honors Italy’s first female musicians, known as the concerto delle donne. Jolle Greenleaf, the lead soprano and artistic director of Tenet, is joined by Molly Quinn, soprano; Virginia Warnken, mezzo-soprano; and various instrumentalists. At 3:30 and 7 p.m., Fabbri Mansion, 7 East 95th Street, Manhattan, tenetnyc.com. (James R. Oestreich)Advertisement