AdvertisementSupported byBy Holland CotterIN terms of New York City gallery history, the Upper East Side, roughly from 57th Street northward, is the establishment, the old regime. Galleries that put the city on the international map in the 1950s started here. Several of our big museums call this turf home. So do several of the elite contemporary galleries that now serve as feeding tubes to those museums.True, there have been some shake-ups. A few young dealers have recently moved in; and a major museum, the Whitney, has moved out. But in true establishment spirit, many of the exhibitions on view at the moment are of artists in mid- or late career, and heading toward, if they haven’t already achieved, classic status.There are several such figures in “Moderno: Design for Living in Brazil, Mexico, and Venezuela, 1940-1978” at this gallery, a modest Park Avenue space that, under its director of visual arts, Gabriela Rangel, regularly presents museum-worthy fare. The show is a tight, readily graspable survey of household design dating from a time when the idea of modern had both political clout and commercial cachet. The influence of European and North American trends is evident. But just as clear is how Latin American designers molded those influences to their own ends, either through the use of indigenous materials — Brazilian hardwoods, Mexican agave fibers — or through the adoption of pre-Columbian or colonial-era forms and motifs. Limits on local manufacturing capacity and the vagaries of the market in troubled times meant that artists usually had to work as cheaply as possible, which put a premium on ingenuity. And in the work of certain designers who were also sculptors, like Lina Bo Bardi (1914-1992) and the ceramist Tecla Tofano (1927-1995), the merging of art and craft, and archaic and contemporary, is genius, which can only be hinted at in a show like this. But it’s there.Something like the same components meet in new work by the American sculptor Daisy Youngblood at the McKee Gallery. Ms. Youngblood, who is now in her late 60s and lives in Costa Rica, had her first New York solo in 1979 but has been little seen in the past decade. Her sculptures are primarily fired clay supplemented by stone and wood, and her subjects are similarly hybrid, a human-animal-spirit blend. In her version, the Egyptian god of the underworld, Anubis, has a jackal’s head delicately modeled in clay and a body made from a tree trunk with bark left on. The torso of a reclining figure called Chandrika is a slab of driftwood; its legs tapered clay cones; its face a mask resting on a smooth, uncut river rock. You wait for the work to turn sentimental, but it doesn’t. It’s too strange.Holland Cotter’s walk through the galleries of the Upper East Side.That’s pretty much also true of the ceramic-based sculpture of the New Yorker Simone Leigh at Tilton Gallery. A 2010-11 artist in residence at the Studio Museum in Harlem, she makes references to African art and African culture but keeps nudging the images in an abstract, design-intensive direction: Josephine Baker’s banana skirt becomes a gilded porcelain chandelier or maybe a circlet of chimes; the steel hoops of a 19th-century skirt doubles as a domed village hut; female coiffures made of cowrie shells and rose petals are at once as natural and as sculptural as those photographed by the Nigerian artist J. D. Okhai Ojeikere. In Ms. Leigh’s work, organicism is an aesthetic category.Shirley Jaffe, 91, started out in New York as an Abstract Expressionist, using lots of gestures and paint. Then in 1949 she moved to Paris and became something else: an expressive geometrician. Her newly crisp-edged forms and flat bright colors owed a debt to Matisse’s cutouts, as she readily acknowledged, but it’s the Expressionist, always there, who surfaces in the works on paper in her current show at Tibor de Nagy (one of the area’s few remaining old-regime spaces, since 1950). Alongside the show’s handful of rigorous oil paintings, the works on paper are art at ease. Ms. Jaffe swipes colors on and lets them bleed together, lets forms overlap, adds squiggles and splats and bits of collage. She makes painting look like fastidiously worked joy.Fastidiousness is the inescapable and intended impression made by the paintings of Tadaaki Kuwayama, who arrived in New York from Japan in 1958 and stayed. And the selection of early work here suggests that he anticipated Minimalism yet to come: four 1962 pieces pasted together from strips of cut paper on board aren’t quite paintings but aren’t sculptures either, and look machine-tooled until you are close enough to see some texture. Soon afterward came monochromatic paintings made with metallic spray paint. The surfaces are glass-smooth but the colors — complex pinks and yellow-greens — pulse and shift as you change position. The paintings are as solid as Donald Judd boxes but have a chromatic sensuality and ambiguity that most Minimalism avoided.Mel Bochner’s early work certainly avoided those features, judging by his drawings from 1966 to 1968. Many of these, done in pencil or black felt-tip pen on graph paper, takes the form of small numeral-filled diagrams, or what look like architectural renderings and studies for sculptures. The drawings are more interesting to think about than to look at, particularly put in the context of an art of great wit to come. Here we see a young Minimalist working toward Conceptualism, and loosening up as he goes: The show ends with the drawing of a grid crumpled up and an installation that consists of a faint cloud of blue paint rubbed on a gallery wall.Conceptualism, with a political overlay, was where Jaime Davidovich was headed too, in work from the late 1960s and early 1970s. Born in 1936 in Buenos Aires, he began exhibiting there and then in New York using adhesive tape as a primary medium, first affixing paintings to the walls with it, then coverings walls with the tape alone, mining the material’s symbolic potential: it could hold things in place, but it could also cover them over and seal them in, which was the effect a military government had on freedom in Argentina in the 1970s. From adhesive tape Mr. Davidovich moved onto videotape: he became one of the era’s pioneers in the medium and among the first to explore the aesthetic possibilities of television. The Faria exhibition gives a valuable sense of how he got there.Among the newcomers to the old art neighborhood, this gallery stands out in its novelty and ambition. With three franchises already in India, it arrives in New York with the goal of making South Asian modernism a contender in the market here. It puts a persuasive foot forward with its inaugural show, “Indian Modern: Narratives From 20th-Century Indian Art.” A bunch of the right names are included: Manjit Bawa, Jogen Chowdhury, M. F. Husain, Ram Kumar, Gieve Patel, and F. N. Souza, who lived for many years in this city. Paired with the substantial survey “After Midnight: Indian Modernism to Contemporary India 1947-97” at the Queens Museum, it offers a chance to get up to speed on a modernism that our big museums barely acknowledge existed.Photography fans will be glad to see the veteran American artist William Klein — a longtime Paris transplant who turns 87 on Sunday — return to his home city in an extravagant homage to Brooklyn at this East 57th Street gallery. On a commission from Sony, Mr. Klein visited the borough in the summer of 2013 and shot everything from the West Indian American Day Parade, to a Hasidic wedding, to bodies broiling on Coney Island sand. The color pictures don’t tell us anything about Brooklyn we don’t already know, but blown up large and papering the gallery walls they make a bigger-than-life show.Finally, far uptown, “Anchor,” a show at Hunter College’s East Harlem gallery, says a lot, and on an unflashy human scale, about an old New York many people don’t know. Organized by the gallery director Arden Sherman, it focuses on the photography of Hiram Maristany, who was born in this neighborhood to Puerto Rican parents and in 1969 became the official photographer for the Young Lords, a party of Puerto Rican activists modeled after the Black Panthers. More than two dozen of Mr. Maristany’s wonderful black-and-white pictures are on view, along with projects by six young artists — Nicole Cohen, Selena Kimball, Miguel Luciano, Steven Perez, Saul Williams and Caroline Woolard — who have been inspired by them, and by his example. Small though it is, the result is a complex show that extends out into the surrounding neighborhood. And it’s only one I saw in which an old establishment seems to be giving birth to something genuinely new.Sigmar Polke’s rarely exhibited “Silver Paintings,” at the MICHAEL WERNER GALLERY  (4 East 77th Street, near Fifth Avenue, through June 27); the postwar Italian avant-gardist Fabio Mauri at HAUSER & WIRTH (32 East 69th Street, near Madison Avenue, through May 2), and Yuichi Higashionna’s immersive light and mirror environments at MARIANNE BOESKY  (118 East 64th Street, near Park Avenue, through Saturday).SEAMSTRESS The relative cocktail desert that is the Upper East Side received some irrigation with the recent opening of this sprawling space. Groups should opt for the creative large-format drinks (bottle of spirits, mixers, ice, garnishes), which allow you to mix your own drinks. 339 East 75th Street, near First Avenue, Manhattan; 212-288-8033, seamstressny.com.Advertisement