
Inside Art By                     
 HILARIE M. SHEETS
 
APRIL 16, 2015
TWO MUSEUMS TO HOSTPOLLOCK ‘BLACK POURINGS’Jackson Pollock, the master of Abstract Expressionism, reached an endgame with his groundbreaking drip paintings in 1950, and then experimented with a new technique, akin to drawing, of pouring thinned black enamel onto unprimed cotton duck.“The power of Pollock’s allover drip paintings from 1947 to 1950 is so all-commanding that they’ve forced a blind spot in our ability to look at other aspects of the artist’s genius,” said Gavin Delahunty, senior curator of contemporary art at the Dallas Museum of Art. He began researching Pollock’s “black pourings,” made from 1951 to 1953, after conversations with artists including Wade Guyton, Jacqueline Humphries and Julie Mehretu, who discussed their influence. “You see the legacy of these radical works now,” said Mr. Delahunty, who has tracked down a large group of black paintings for “Jackson Pollock: Blind Spots,” opening on June 30 at Tate Liverpool and traveling to Dallas in November.Shown at the Betty Parsons Gallery in 1951 and at Sidney Janis in 1952, the “black pourings” had undeniable suggestions of figuration and fragmented faces. “Clement Greenberg felt it was a disavowal of his modernist argument,” said Mr. Delahunty, recalling the critic who championed abstraction and Pollock’s career. “They were misread as the last gasp of an artist drowning in alcoholism and depression.” Pollock died in a car crash in 1956. While the drip paintings were built up in energetic layers of color that could veil errors, Mr. Delahunty argued, there was nowhere to hide in the black paintings. “They are him at the height of his control — his balance of chance, gravity and skill,” he said.Mr. Delahunty has secured 31 black paintings between the two museums. (The largest previous museum grouping was 17 in William Lieberman’s 1967 Pollock retrospective at MoMA.) “Number 24, 1951,” classified as missing in the 1978 Pollock catalogue raisonné, was found in a private American collection and will be one of several works on view for the first time since the early 1950s. Mr. Delahunty will also show five of Pollock’s six existing sculptures, including a terra-cotta piece painted black that resembles a Medusa’s head and looks like a three-dimensional black painting.Advertisement“It will be the first time ever that we get to analyze this body of work with a healthy distance from Modernism and Greenberg,” Mr. Delahunty added.A RAUSCHENBERG SHIFTThe Robert Rauschenberg Foundation is leaving the Gagosian Gallery, which has handled that artist’s estate since a year after his death in 2008. The foundation will now be represented by a globally positioned team of galleries: Pace (with branches in New York, London, Hong Kong and Beijing), Thaddaeus Ropac (in Paris and Salzburg) and Luisa Strina (in São Paulo).Advertisement“The foundation is looking forward to working directly with a more distributed leadership that is very strong in their local geographies,” said Christy MacLear, its executive director. Pace, which represented Rauschenberg for the last two decades of his life, will show late work this fall in New York, followed by solo exhibitions at Ropac in Paris and the artist’s first gallery exhibition in South America at Strina. In addition to placing Rauschenberg’s works with museums and collectors worldwide, the foundation is focused on his 2016-17 retrospective organized by Tate Modern and the Museum of Modern Art and traveling to the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.RETURN OF THE LABYRINTHIf circumnavigating the 190 or so booths at Frieze New York on Randalls Island isn’t endurance test enough, visitors to that art fair, from May 14 to 17, may enter “Flux-Labyrinth” at their own risk. A reconstruction of a famous project staged in 1976 in Berlin by George Maciunas and other Fluxus artists interested in extreme and playful actions, the labyrinth is a 200-foot-long twisting corridor filled with obstacles that visitors must overcome to exit. The Frieze Projects curator Cecilia Alemani is reprising segments from the original, including Nam June Paik’s challenging locked door that can be opened only by striking the right key on a nearby piano. Ms. Alemani said this week that she also commissioned three new hurdles from Amalia Pica, John Bock and the collective Gelitin, “to see how relevant the spirit of Fluxus still is and how the Flux-Labyrinth could be reinterpreted by a younger generation that works with similar strategies.”Visitors to a hallway conceived by Ms. Pica, a London-based Argentine artist who deals with bureaucratic mazes as a foreigner, will be asked to complete a form with absurd questions, watch as it is shredded, and wade through a paper-filled pool. “I wanted to have something that feels like an obstacle in real life,” she said.Participants in Mr. Bock’s section will be asked to squeeze through a corridor filled with large, sweaty men dressed only in gold underwear. “My space is more brutal,” said Mr. Bock, who is based in Berlin. “You will be nervous and want to slip through very fast or very slow.”Gelitin will send visitors into a dead end with a door that opens and closes on two different door frames, based on Marcel Duchamp’s clever design for his Paris apartment. People will have to double back to renegotiate the door. “It’s an elegant psychological trick,” said Florian Reither, a member of Gelitin, which is based in Vienna. “For a second you lose your orientation. That’s what labyrinths are for — to get lost.”A SECRET NOGUCHI GARDENThose who prefer to get lost in a more Zenlike fashion can enter an Isamu Noguchi rock garden secreted amid the 30 galleries at Collective Design, a vintage and contemporary design fair running May 13 to 17 in an industrial building in the South Village, at 550 Washington Street. A vestibule festooned with luminescent Akari paper sconces designed by Noguchi will open onto a loading dock transformed by sculptures echoing natural stone forms in bronze, granite, steel, wood and paper from the Noguchi Museum in Long Island City, Queens. The centerpiece will be four basalt boulders that Noguchi pulled from the Uji River in Japan. “Noguchi got ideas from looking at the way the river carved rock,” said Dakin Hart, senior curator at the museum. “These objects create their own mystical universe.”An earlier version of a headline with this column misspelled the surname of the “black pourings” artist. He was Jackson Pollock, not Pollack.A version of this article appears in print on April 17, 2015, on Page C24 of the New York edition.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »