Season 1, Episode 11: “The Devil’s Mark”How rare is it to find a true kindred spirit as an adult?When you’re a child, friendship occurs without thought. New acquaintances are friends until they’re not, often immediately earning the title of best friend upon discovery of a shared middle name or an affinity for chocolate-chip ice cream. In childhood, friendship is magical, almost otherworldly, because it is the first time we build something meaningful and lasting out of nothing at all.Friendships forged in adulthood are rarely so straightforward, given years of learned self-preservation tactics. Adults are full of bluster, wary at the idea that a stranger might find them weak or, worse yet, unlikeable. Like children, adults often find the greatest comfort in their families, but beyond that, particularly in the age that “Outlander” is set in, there is much more value in allies and acquaintances, clans and co-conspirators than there is in pure friendship. It’s this rarity that makes Claire’s friendship with Geillis Duncan the most serendipitous, if not the most important, relationship in the entire series. There was always more going on with Geillis than viewers could guess, some secret brewing just out of sight. She had a meticulous understanding of her environment that allowed her to move through the world as though she had the second sight villagers long accused her of. Geillis was simultaneously devious and delightful and the way she looked at Claire with a barely suppressed glee made little sense until “The Devil’s Mark” snapped her into sharp focus with the single tug of a sleeve.Kept in the thieves’ hole to await trial for witchcraft, Claire and Geillis can finally speak plainly about who they are and what they’ve done. Even so, it takes time for the two to fully reveal themselves. Arthur Duncan died at his wife’s hands, this much Claire knows, and she says as much to Geillis, who admits that she’d been poisoning him for quite some time. As the episode progresses, so do the women’s confidences, with Geillis disabusing Claire of the notion that she pursued Dougal MacKenzie for his money. It turns out that in addition to poisoning Arthur, Geillis was also hiding away his money for the Jacobite cause, all the more reason her heart belongs to Dougal.Claire comes to realize Geillis, too, seems stuck out of time in a world where independent women are mistrusted, a mistrust made all too clear as person after person marches through to testify against the pair. Geillis’s housekeeper accuses her of selling potions to the women in town and Laoghaire tearfully claims that Claire bewitched Jamie and stole him from her, and the accusations only mount from there. As their remaining moments together grow scarce, Claire speaks of the starlings she used to watch as a child, how the birds flew together to protect each other from predators. It’s clear now that Claire and Geillis are a flock of two.The episode painstakingly leaves crumbs for the audience about who Geillis truly is. References sprinkled throughout make you prick up your ears. These seeming anachronisms cause the brain to stutter a step. Claire says, “I only regret that I have but one life to give for my country,” and Geillis murmurs, “Nicely put.” Geillis, angered at being rushed to her almost assured death, throws out the same vulgarity that Jamie asked Claire to explain to him only a few episodes prior. These hiccups pull you from the narrative, not enough to distract, but enough to raise a question that hasn’t even had time to fully form yet. “Outlander” doesn’t necessarily want you to have figured out that Geillis is a fellow time traveler, but once revealed, it wants you to realize that part of you has known all along. Claire refuses to give up Geillis in order to save herself at the trial, which isn’t a surprise. That’s who Claire is. Even if she found Geillis to be the most loathsome person on the planet, it’s not in her to sacrifice someone else to save herself. It’s also not surprising when Jamie bursts in at the last moment to save Claire mid-lashing and heroically threatens to take on every man in the room. What is surprising is when the pregnant Geillis, who, we learn piecemeal through her final moments, arrived in  Scotland from 1968 to aid the Jacobite uprising, incriminates herself to save Claire. Though Geillis may have an agenda, Claire has something worth fighting for and, more important it would seem, someone, in Jamie, fighting for her. Dougal does not come to rescue Geillis, so Geillis decides to rescue Claire.The friendship between the two women, though brief, is powerful because it exists as beloved childhood friendships once did. The magic of being understood without having to explain yourself, to be known by someone before they’ve even come to know you, is an occurrence so prized in adulthood that it’s been almost entirely co-opted by romance. Claire and Jamie have love and fidelity and have sworn to protect the other, but when all is said and done, it’s Geillis Duncan who gives herself over to the angry mob to keep Claire safe, an act of love that stands unrivaled. Geillis’s choice changes the trajectory of many lives, and allows for the escape of Jamie and Claire. In “The Reckoning,” while acting as the show’s narrator, Jamie speaks of every man making a choice between right and wrong and that the sum of those choices becomes your life. And while that’s not necessarily wrong, it misses the heart of what much of marriage is. Marriage, at its core, is making the same choice over and over, every day, every moment. The choice is not between right or wrong or love and hate or life and death. It’s about whether you want the person you’re with or not. Marriage is choosing the former, even if you suspect the latter. And once they’re free of the bloodthirsty mob, Claire and Jamie realize the breadth of what that choice entails.It is when they’re free of the frenzy  that Claire finally admits to Jamie the truth of who she is. He asks if she’s a witch, and she tells him the whole of her story. She explains why she knows what she knows and how she can walk amid dying men and remain untouched. She tells him how she understands that this truth is likely more unbelievable than any lie she might tell him and declares that she’s no witch, but a time traveler. But, because he’s Jamie, true and good and honest, he believes her. And the next day, when Jamie asks Claire if she’s ready to go home, it’s not Lallybroch that lays over the horizon, but Craigh na Dun, the stones through which Claire slipped out of her time and into his. He leaves her, telling her to return to her time, as there’s nothing for her in Scotland. After he’s gone, Claire examines her two hands, her two rings, her two love lines, her two lives, and she makes a choice. She chooses Jamie. She’ll make that choice again and again, just as Jamie will, an infinite number of times, because that’s what marriage is. Kindred spirits are still difficult to come by once the guilelessness of youth has faded and it’s rarer to find that person who knows you before you are known. The brilliance of “The Devil’s Mark” comes in its understanding that there’s a difference between difficult and impossible and that, though unlikely, Claire has managed to find two such souls in a single moment. Moreover, each declares their affection through the power of choice. Geillis Duncan proves it by choosing to give herself for Claire in a gesture of true understanding, while Jamie Fraser proves it by choosing Claire every moment of every day. Perhaps something is lost in the process and friendship isn’t quite as magical as it once was, but maybe it’s that element of choice makes the relationships all the more resonant.Other Gossip• When Jamie finds out that when he struck Claire she had been trying to get back to her husband, he seems truly heartsick, which doesn’t alleviate the weirdness of the beating but does stem the unfortunateness a bit. • Claire’s long explanation of who she is and what she knows and why she knows it was brilliant and compelling and could have gone on for hours and still been fascinating.• Ned Gowan’s appearance to try and free the women with incisive lawyering is much appreciated, even if largely fruitless.