AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn Shattuck9 P.M. (CUNY) THE CLAY BIRD (2003) City Cinematheque’s tribute to Milestone Films continues with Tareque Masud’s drama, set in Bangladesh in the 1960s, about Anu (Nurul Islam Bablu), a shy young boy from rural East Pakistan who is sent to an Islamic school by his father (Jayanto Chattopadhyay), who doesn’t want his son tainted by the outside world. Anu struggles to conform to the school’s monastic ways, and to be accepted by the cliquish boys. But soon he gravitates to the enthusiastic oddball Roko (Russell Farazi), the one student who refuses to go along with the program. “Mr. Masud’s expansive fluidity is rapturous, inspired equally by the floating equanimity of Satyajit Ray and the work of the Iranian director Abbas Kiarostami, who deftly uses ritual behavior to provide social commentary,” Elvis Mitchell wrote in The New York Times. “It’s also evident that Mr. Masud loves all his characters, even the small-minded ones — the sign of a real director. It’s no small achievement to make a picture that extols the necessity for clear, free thought while dramatizing the barriers that challenge such a capacity.”10:30 A.M. (13) RELIGION & ETHICS NEWSWEEKLY Lucky Severson reports on the intelligence of androids and the possibility that they will eventually be able to make moral decisions. Kim Lawton looks at the use of flash mobs to encourage Sunday-morning worship. In “Richard Heffner’s Open Mind,” at noon, Danielle S. Allen, a professor of political philosophy at the Institute for Advanced Study, discusses her book “Our Declaration: A Reading of the Declaration of Independence in Defense of Equality.”7 P.M. (ABC Family) DR. SEUSS’ HORTON HEARS A WHO! (2008) Jim Carrey lends his voice to that ever-faithful elephant, Horton, who hears a cry for help on a dust mote. Steve Carell is the beleaguered mayor of Who-ville; Seth Rogen is Morton, Horton’s fast-talking mouse friend; and Carol Burnett is the moralizing kangaroo who wants to send that bothersome speck on its way. Writing in The Times, A. O. Scott said that the film has aspects that “are fresh and enjoyable, and bits that will gratify even a dogmatic and orthodox Seussian” but that Dr. Seuss’s fable was supplemented “with pages from the battered, worn-out Hollywood family-film playbook.” In “Kung Fu Panda” (2008), at 9, Po, an awkward, rotund panda voiced by Jack Black, learns martial arts at the hands of Master Oogway (Randall Duk Kim), an ancient turtle who invented kung fu and now serves as spiritual adviser to an elite squad, including the mustachioed red panda Shifu (Dustin Hoffman) and his students, the Furious Five: Tigress (Angelina Jolie), Viper (Lucy Liu), Monkey (Jackie Chan), Crane (David Cross) and Mantis (Mr. Rogen). Writing in The Times, Manohla Dargis called this DreamWorks film “high concept with a heart.”9 P.M. (VH1) THE RIDE Macklemore & Ryan Lewis open this new series, in which performers recount significant moments on the road to success and offer a look at their lives on tour and in the studio.9 P.M. (BBC America, AMC, IFC, Sundance, WE) ORPHAN BLACK Season 3 begins as the Project Leda clones — Sarah, Helena, Cosima and Alison, each portrayed by Tatiana Maslany — realize they’re not alone when the military men of Project Castor, played by Ari Millen, make their existence known. In “Tatau,” a new series at 10 on BBC America, Kyle (Joe Layton) and Budgie (Theo Barklem-Biggs), two young Londoners eager to see the world, set their sights on the Cook Islands, with Kyle getting a Maori-style tattoo in honor of the journey. But when the men arrive in the South Pacific, the locals have a strange reaction to his ink — whose meaning is soon revealed when he glimpses a dead body underwater and realizes that he might have seen into the future.What’s Streaming NowGANGNAM BLUES (2015) In Yoo Ha’s noirish action film, Lee Min-ho and Kim Rae-won play best childhood friends turned sworn enemies after finding themselves on opposing sides in a war between powerful factions. At stake is control of the Gangnam district of Seoul during the 1970s, before it was to become one of the city’s most expensive neighborhoods. In Korean with English subtitles. (dramafever.com)Advertisement