
Snapshot By                     
 TAMARA BEST
 
OCT. 14, 2015
Ennis Esmer might not be the next Rafael Nadal, but he gives it a good shot. In the new Amazon series “Red Oaks,” set at a country club in the summer of 1985, Mr. Esmer plays Nash, a flirtatious tennis pro and questionable role model to his protégé, David (Craig Roberts), an assistant tennis coach struggling to figure out his postgrad life.“I worked with a friend who trained me to look like I knew what I was doing,” Mr. Esmer said of his tennis game. “There’s no way I was going to become pro-level good.” (He does claim to have a decent serve.)Mr. Esmer, 36, is a Canadian actor and comedian also seen on FXX’s “Man Seeking Woman.” For the role in “Red Oaks,” he read with the director David Gordon Green (“Pineapple Express”), in both his regular voice and an invented accent he calls “Indo Middle Eastern British.” (Mr. Esmer was born in Turkey and moved to Canada when he was a toddler.) “I spent 45 minutes just trying to make him laugh,” he said.With Steven Soderbergh as an executive producer, “Red Oaks” features actors from classic ’80s movies, like Jennifer Grey from “Dirty Dancing” and Paul Reiser of “Diner.” By phone from Toronto, Mr. Esmer discussed baseball and researching hangover remedies. These are excerpts from the conversation.AdvertisementQ. How would you describe Nash?A. After seeing the pilot, it’s easy to conceive that he’s just a philandering troublemaker with no positive attributes. But the more you go on in the season, the more you find out there’s more to him than just that. He definitely cares about his new protégé, as misguided as some of his advice may be. He’s such a preposterous person, but yet they found a way to ground him.In one scene, David is hung over before a crucial match, and Nash hands him a mixture of Gatorade and Absolut vodka. Does that actually work?I did a lot of clinical trials before the show to be thorough. It depends on what you drink the night before.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.What kind of tennis player are you?There’s a real disconnect between how much I like playing tennis and how good I am. You know what I’m really good at? If I think it’s in and the linesman says it’s out, I’m really good at going, “Ugh, what? Are you kidding me?”So you’re John McEnroe.Yeah.You’ve said that working with Richard Kind and Paul Reiser was like a comedy internship. How so?These are some of the finest comedic actors in the world, and it’s incredibly influential to watch them at work. You step outside of yourself at certain points and think, I just spent 30 minutes improvising with Paul Reiser. It gets a little surreal. David Gordon Green would throw lines out and say, “If you don’t like it, just build on it.”How does it feel being on a streaming show instead of a network?There’s one episode where I think if I was watching the show at a certain time every week, it wouldn’t work. It’s one of the craziest half-hours of television. So the fact that you can watch the next episode at your own pace is good.AdvertisementYou’re a huge Blue Jays fan. Are they going to the World Series?I’m just going to say I think they have an excellent shot. I’ve put a deposit on tickets, so I’m very hopeful that it ends up happening.A version of this article appears in print on October 18, 2015, on Page AR2 of the New York edition with the headline: Tennis and Laughs With Comedy Pros.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »