By JAMES R. OESTREICHAPRIL 17, 2015
If it is possible for a musician performing publicly at full tilt to be simultaneously lost in thought, the Catalan viola da gamba virtuoso Jordi Savall may have done it in the first half of his solo program at Weill Recital Hall on Monday. One of Mr. Savall’s two appearances in Carnegie Hall’s Before Bach festival, the recital, “The Spirit of the Viol,” focused on music of Marin Marais and the Sainte-Colombes, father and son.Those names may be familiar from a 1991 film by Alain Corneau, “Tous les Matins du Monde,” a fictional portrayal of the relationship between Marais, the great, celebrated gambist at the court of Louis XIV, and his teacher, Jean de Sainte-Colombe, whom we know little. Not the least of the film’s distinctions was the international exposure it gave Mr. Savall, who played brilliantly on the soundtrack.But his return to this music now must carry a tremendous weight of feeling. In “Tous les Matins du Monde,” Sainte-Colombe’s reaction to his wife’s death, reduces him to austerity and rage. Mr. Savall’s own wife, the soprano Montserrat Figueras, who also performed on the soundtrack, died in 2011.Mr. Savall’s reaction has been less extreme and more productive, though he seems to have forsworn much of the vocal repertory. “I don’t think I will find another person who can do this music in a way that can support it,” Mr. Savall, now 73, recently told The New York Times.Advertisement“I have nice singers,” he added, “but I don’t have any singer that sings with the same spirit as Montserrat.”So here – not only in the recital but also in Mr. Savall’s outing with his ensemble Le Concert des Nations on Thursday evening in Zankel Hall, also featuring French Baroque repertory — was music by Marais, Sainte-Colombe and Sainte-Colombe’s son (whose name we don’t know), some of it used in the film. The solo performances in the small, darkened hall on Monday were extraordinarily intimate and deeply moving, as Mr. Savall, the least ostentatious of performers, seemed plunged in the emotion of performance and of life.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The understated peak came in the elder Sainte-Colombe’s “Les Pleurs” (“Tears”), made all the more powerful by Mr. Savall’s restraint. That piece came up again in a larger context on Thursday, as part of Sainte-Colombe’s “Tombeau les Regrets” (“Tomb of Sorrows”) for two viols, in which the gambist Philippe Pierlot joined Mr. Savall in like spirit. The other highlight of that concert was Marais’s chiming “Sonnerie de Ste-Geneviève du Mont-de-Paris.”A surprise in Mr. Savall’s solo recital was the Bourrée from Bach’s Unaccompanied Cello Suite in E flat, the only actual Bach I’ve so far encountered in Before Bach. The rest of the recital lightened the mood charmingly with selections from Thomas Hume’s “Musicall Humors” of 1605, music from the 17th-century “Manchester Gamba Book” and Celtic dances from Scotland and Ireland.AdvertisementThe Concert des Nations program – with Mr. Savall and Mr. Pierlot joined by Manfredo Kraemer, violinist; Marc Hantaï, flutist; and Pierre Hantaï, harpsichordist — was basically an unsystematic survey of French Baroque music far beyond Marais and Sainte-Colombe. With such minimal forces, another number from the film, the “Marche pour la Cérémonie des Turcs” from Lully’s “Bourgeois Gentilhomme,” lacked the full-orchestra panache it had there.There was otherwise plenty of good music to go around, by François Couperin, Jean-Philippe Rameau, Jean-Baptiste and Antoine Forqueray, and Jean-Marie Leclair. But lacking any unifying point or theme, it all seemed ultimately a bit inconsequential.If a listener expected more, it was only because Mr. Savall and company have so often provided it in the past. But that is my problem, having heard too much, not theirs, having offered too little. You can’t expect over-the-top every time out.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.