AdvertisementSupported byBy Brian SeibertThe conversion of famous movies into stage musicals is business as usual on Broadway these days. But the adaptation of the 1951 film “An American in Paris” that opened at the Palace Theater on Sunday has attracted unusual attention from the world of ballet because of who is involved.It is directed and choreographed by Christopher Wheeldon, one of the world’s most celebrated ballet choreographers but one with no experience directing musicals. It stars Robert Fairchild, a star at New York City Ballet with no experience appearing in musicals, and Leanne Cope, a Royal Ballet dancer also new to this form. How would they do, and would they succeed in bringing ballet values to Broadway? They did well on both counts. The greatness of the Gershwin music can be assumed, but the abundance of high-quality dance, which has been mostly absent on Broadway in recent years, is worth celebrating.This is a decidedly dance-centric production. Mr. Wheeldon, working in the director-choreographer tradition of one of his early mentors, Jerome Robbins, makes the whole show dance.He does so right from the start. After a short, spoken introduction by the narrator (Brandon Uranowitz), there comes a long sequence of wordless storytelling. The time and place (Paris after World War II), the introduction of the American leading man (Mr. Fairchild) and the Frenchwoman he falls for (Ms. Cope), their first meeting: all of this is conveyed through dance. And as the show continues, Mr. Wheeldon adroitly keeps it flowing, with the ensemble dancers moving set pieces in crossfades and montages that impressionistically blur the boundaries between scenes and numbers.The reviews have largely been raves, and most negative criticism has focused on heavy-handedness in the book, by Craig Lucas. This is a script in which the characters clunkily debate whether art should expose life’s dark underbelly or cheer people up, in which they inform one another (and the audience) that art is important but love is more so.I wonder if this anxiety about art is expressed so baldly by the characters because the show’s creators are anxious about how much meaning they are conveying through motion rather than words. It’s a pity, because the musical’s proclamations of faith in love (a sentiment that is better sung or danced) and its recognition of the dark underbelly are expressed more subtly, and thus affectingly, in Mr. Wheeldon’s choreography than in Mr. Lucas’s dialogue. That first meeting of Mr. Fairchild and Ms. Cope happens immediately after a mob viciously attacks a Nazi collaborator. What Mr. Lucas tells us — that love can bloom in the ashes of war — Mr. Wheeldon lets us see. Or so it seems to someone accustomed to reading the language of ballet, which is the language Mr. Wheeldon speaks. Though he includes some nice, twizzly jazz moves, goofy period steps, a kick line and a dash of basic tap, the foundation of his vocabulary is classical, and he draws on ballet conventions. That opening sequence, with the man searching for the One in a crowd, is straight out of Romantic ballet.The other main source of the dance vocabulary is Hollywood dance musicals of the golden age. This “American in Paris” is a dance show because the boy can win the girl only through dance. Ms. Cope, like a Ginger Rogers character, resists Mr. Fairchild’s words and gives in to his moves. (Less than convincing when delivering brash American dialogue, Mr. Fairchild is fully persuasive and charming when in motion, the control of his off-balance phrase endings communicating the carefree confidence that his line readings don’t.)This “American in Paris” is a dance show because you learn that Mr. Fairchild and Ms. Cope are meant to be together by the way they dance together. Their danced duets — sexy, tender — are the heart of the production, the heart even of the climactic 13-minute show-within-a-show “American in Paris” ballet. Here, Ms. Cope’s character, fantasizing that she is dancing with Mr. Fairchild’s, repeats steps from an earlier number, when he was fantasizing about her, and completes a lift she couldn’t manage before. Such echoes and connections are among a choreographer’s most potent tools, and Mr. Wheeldon uses them with uncommon sophistication.Where Mr. Wheeldon’s choreography falls short is in the traditional function of the Broadway showstopper. The numbers that seem to be playing that role — “I Got Rhythm,” “Fidgety Feet” and especially “I’ll Build a Stairway to Paradise” — only gesture toward real excitement. Part of the trouble is Mr. Wheeldon’s desire to maintain flow and finesse transitions: he doesn’t want the show to stop, even for ecstatic applause. More fundamentally, though, there’s just something missing: an overflow of invention, a rhythmic irresistibility. It’s all fine craftsmanship but insufficiently inspired.With all of the cleverness and care lavished on this “American in Paris,” with the sneaky infiltration of balletic storytelling onto Broadway, it may seem churlish to ask for more. But this is a show whose characters and creators have high aspirations. Its classic message is not to settle. In art, as in love, it’s tempting to accept the very good as the just right. But that doesn’t mean they’re the same. Advertisement