AdvertisementSupported byBy Siobhan BurkeMONTCLAIR, N.J. — For the choreographer Heidi Latsky, there are no unbeautiful bodies and no bodies incapable of dancing. In what some might call disability, she finds possibility. In “Triptych,” which opened at the Alexander Kasser Theater at Montclair State University on Thursday as part of the Peak Performances series, she unleashes some of those possibilities in three complementary dances, one for film and two for the stage.The film, “Soliloquy,” is the first project commissioned by Dance for Film on Location, a new Montclair State initiative. Invited to choreograph for, and with, the camera, an uncharted medium for her, Ms. Latsky braids together images of dancing bodies, zooming out from parts to the whole, though the trajectory, drawn out over 14 minutes, is not so direct. From enigmatic close-ups — a hazy pair of swirling hands (or are they legs or shoulders?), a bloodshot eye, the curvature of a neck — 10 people come into view. Presenting the full-body shots last, Ms. Latsky finally acquaints us with the fullness of each dancer’s physicality. Robert Simpson walks with a cane; Alexandria Wailes doesn’t. Jen Bricker, a gymnast, has no legs; the tap dancer Evan Ruggiero has one and a half; Jillian Hollis, whom we see onstage later, has a muscular pair.Delivering these portraits in no particular order, Ms. Latsky frames them as different and equal, or equally different, and there’s great humanity in that. Yet the film overdramatizes and thus undercuts that message, a function partly of music (by Chris Brierley) that seems too aware of its own importance. I wondered what “Soliloquy” would look like in silence.Similar themes resurface in “Somewhere” (2015), the program’s final work. Though cerebral palsy affects one side of Jerron Herman’s body, and though Mr. Simpson has Parkinson’s disease, they are no less electric than Ms. Latsky’s other fine dancers, the inexhaustible Mr. Herman in particular.In “Solo Countersolo” (2013), the strongest third of “Triptych” — more streamlined than the choreographically busy “Somewhere” — Ms. Latsky addresses her status as an older dancer (she is 56) amid a younger cast. If age is hampering her own physical abilities, it’s hard to tell. Planted in the middle of the stage, as five dancers walk slowly around her, she revs up into a kind of scribbling fury with circling hips and knocking knees. When the evening grew too long-winded or unfocused, as it did toward the end, I kept coming back to this image of Ms. Latsky, charged, dancing as if she might never stop.Advertisement