AdvertisementSupported byBy Gia KourlasA dancer may be born with talent, but it takes more than that to get a body ready for the stage. At “Stars of Today Meet the Stars of Tomorrow,” a Youth America Grand Prix gala in which young dancers shared a program with professionals, Julie Kent, the host along with Jared Angle, spoke of gratitude for the teachers, parents and students who sacrifice much in the “pursuit of bringing more beauty to the world.”The first half of Thursday’s program at the David H. Koch Theater, included an entrancing Busby Berkeley-style fan dance by MorningStar Dance Academy of Atlanta and wrapped up with more than 250 of the competition’s entrants, baby bunheads and cavaliers, performing Carlos dos Santos Jr.’s “Grand Defilé.”The second half, featuring professionals, or the stars of today, delivered a weak collection of new dances — and video segments that looked as if they had been recorded on Skype — including “Windy Sand,” a sappy work choreographed by Alexei Kremnev and performed with ever-outstretched arms by Joffrey Studio Company.Despite the addition of live musicians, Emery LeCrone’s “Minuet from String Quartet No. 15,” set to Mozart for the New York City Ballet dancers Teresa Reichlen and Zachary Catazaro, added up to a lifeless display of dips and slides. In Anton Pimonov’s “Double Polka,” Calvin Royal III of American Ballet Theater and Kristina Shapran of the Mariinsky Ballet shared the stage in denim shorts and brick-red vests for a duet filled with playful crossings but nowhere to go.Perhaps the evening was plagued by too many pas de deux: The Bolshoi stars Evgenia Obraztsova and Semyon Chudin tended toward efficiency in their rendition of Pierre Lacotte’s “Pharaoh’s Daughter,” and Melissa Hamilton and Eric Underwood of the Royal Ballet rarely rose above a mechanical display of contorted classical technique in Wayne McGregor’s “Qualia.”Paloma Herrera, retiring from American Ballet Theater this spring, joined Juan Pablo Ledo of Teatro Colón in Mauricio Wainrot’s tango-inflected but sparkless “Verano Porteño.” Xander Parish of the Mariinsky Ballet worked his goofball charm in Eric Gauthier’s feckless comic solo “Ballet 101.” Choreographically, this half looked like the student show.Several of the professionals were Grand Prix alumni, including Isabella Boylston of Ballet Theater and Kimin Kim of the Mariinsky, who danced a pas de deux from Petipa’s “Le Corsaire.” Ms. Boylston’s élan played off against Mr. Kim’s quiet dignity, which made the light ease of elevation all the more transcendent. In June, Mr. Kim makes his Ballet Theater debut, and clearly he’ll be bringing more beauty into the world.Advertisement