AdvertisementSupported byBy Randy Kennedy, Eve M. Kahn and Patricia Leigh BrownFor years, the things sat in storage in John Ryan’s house in Connecticut and in his father’s house before that, a 60-year-old time capsule of a painful period in American history and a looming question mark for the Ryan family members, who did not know what to do with what they had.When they decided a few months ago to put the items up for auction — some 450 photographs and handmade artifacts collected in the 1940s from Japanese-American internment camps, representing the resolve and spirit of many forcibly dislocated people — they also had no idea what kind of outrage lay in store. On Wednesday, the auction house that planned the sale, Rago of Lambertville, N.J., canceled it after a widespread outcry from the families of those held in the camps and other Japanese-Americans. They described the auction — at which the deeply personal items including handmade jewelry and carved family nameplates would have been sold among conventional estate items like snuff bottles, Oriental rugs and mantel clocks — as a moral affront.As a national reaction exploded on social media and in public statements, the consignors of the artifacts sought to remain anonymous. But on Thursday, Mr. Ryan, who works in sales and marketing for a credit card company, came forward for the first time, saying that he wanted to explain why his family had decided to sell the pieces and to try to calm a situation that he said caused him to fear for his safety and that of his family. Against charges of insensitivity, he defended his family’s care of the items for more than 25 years.“We have tried to be good stewards of this material and protect it over the years,” Mr. Ryan said in a telephone interview. “We weren’t trying to extort money from anyone.” He said that the auction house had assured him and his family that the likely bidders at the auction — where the top estimate for the materials was $27,900 — would be museums and other institutions that would be the best homes for such artifacts. And he added that the family wanted to sell the things, rather than donate them, because a family member in financial difficulty needed help.“We really believed that it would be institutions that would step up and collect these materials,” he said. “We’ve always loved the collection.”But some questions remain about how it came to be in the Ryan family’s possession. The artifacts were collected by Allen Hendershott Eaton, a crafts expert who gathered them and commissioned photographs of camps beginning in 1945, with the intention of organizing an exhibition to publicize the injustice of the camps, as well as the perseverance of as many as 120,000 people held in them.In “Beauty Behind Barbed Wire: The Arts of the Japanese in Our War Relocation Camps,” a 1952 book by Mr. Eaton with a foreword by Eleanor Roosevelt, he wrote that he wanted to tell “the story of the arts of the Japanese in our War Relocation Camps, a story without parallel in our country and one of the most remarkable chapters in the long history of the human arts.” The collection, much of which was given to him by camp detainees, he wrote, showed how “artisans made tools and art supplies out of salvaged wallpaper, drainage pipes, lumber scraps, discarded saw blades, worn-down files, automobile springs and other waste metal.”In 1942, after the attack on Pearl Harbor, the United States government ordered the relocation, mostly of Japanese-Americans on the West Coast, to camps in several states, including North Dakota, Montana and Wyoming, until 1945. Sixty-two percent of those kept in the camps were American citizens, many of whom lost jobs and property during their incarceration. Their camp artifacts come up for sale not infrequently, though rarely in such quantity and with a clear provenance trail.Mr. Eaton handed down the materials he had collected to his daughter, Martha Eaton, who kept them for many years but, according to auction house officials, eventually sold some of them to Thomas Ryan, John Ryan’s father, a Yonkers contractor who repaired Ms. Eaton’s house after a fire. When she died in 1990, Thomas Ryan served as the executor of her estate and received her property, including the rest of the camp artifacts. But her decision to will her things to Mr. Ryan was disputed in court in Westchester County by friends and family members, who claimed in legal papers that he had taken “advantage and unduly influenced Martha Eaton, a delicate and fragile elderly woman, living alone,” who “was losing her physical and mental capacities.”In November 1990, a surrogate judge, Albert Emanuelli, dismissed the claims, ruling that opponents had failed to prove that Ms. Eaton was not capable of making a will and to “particularize” instances in which Thomas Ryan had exerted undue influence on her. In an interview Friday, John Ryan said that his father had not manipulated Ms. Eaton and had helped her make sure that collection of camp artifacts remained safe. He said his recollection was that distant members of Ms. Eaton’s family had contested the will and that his father had reached a private monetary settlement with them that ended the dispute.Mr. Ryan took the collection after his father’s death in 2008, and he said that he had it “safely tucked away” with no immediate plans to sell any of it.The family had previously sold non-camp-related items through the Rago auction house, and Mr. Ryan showed one of its owners, David Rago, some of the photographs from the camp collection. “He was instantly drawn to them,” Mr. Ryan said. “David convinced us that there was a need for this at museums and that they could benefit from it.”But only a few days before the scheduled auction, the family rejected an offer of $50,000 — nearly twice the estimate — from the Heart Mountain Wyoming Foundation, in Powell, Wyo., which was the site of an internment camp and where the foundation now runs a center dedicated to the history of the camps. “We didn’t feel qualified to make the decision about whether it should go there,” Mr. Ryan said, adding that the family had been assured by the auction house that several institutions would be present to bid at the sale.Janice Mirikitani, a former poet laureate of San Francisco who found a photograph of the artist Jimmy Mirikitani, her cousin, among the auction artifacts online, said in an interview that she was shocked that the picture was for sale. “These are pieces of art created in camps against our will,” she said. “They are pieces of our soul.”Yoshinori Himel and his wife, Barbara Takei, who live in Sacramento, began what became a national campaign on Facebook to stop the sale after seeing a photo of Mr. Himel’s mother. Mr. Himel called the sale of the photo “a violation of her memory.” Families like his would like to see the artifacts go to institutions where they can be shown to the public and not private collectors.As the opposition grew stronger, Mr. Ryan said: “I did realize that it appeared cold because no one knew who we were, that we’re caring people with families and children and that these things are important to us, that we’ve taken care of them for many years and that we understand the historical importance of them.” He added: “I feel terrible for the families that have had to go through these images and find images of loved ones and suffer as a result of that. It brings me pain, as the father of young children.”Shirley Ann Higuchi, the chairwoman of the board of the Heart Mountain Wyoming Foundation, which threatened to go to court to stop the sale, said an auction of materials from the camps was “inherently immoral.” Ms. Higuchi’s parents met in the Heart Mountain camp when they were held there as children.On Friday, Mr. Ryan said that he and his family were now proceeding with a plan to find a home for the photos and artifacts in a nonprofit museum or historical institution, and would conduct a formal request for proposals. He said the family would make a decision on any sale with advice from a group of counselors, which will include the actor George Takei, known for his role as Mr. Sulu on “Star Trek.” (He is not related to Barbara Takei.)“We are focused on keeping the collection together as one archive,” Mr. Ryan said. “But we want it to go to the place where its history will be best served.”Alain Delaquérière and Nate Schweber contributed research.Advertisement