AdvertisementSupported byBy Neil GenzlingerEarth Day, which this year falls on Wednesday, is an occasion for celebrators, castigators and celebratory castigators. And for television that does all three of those things.The celebrators use the occasion to note the beauty and variety of the natural world. That kind of programming, of course, is offered year-round on outlets like PBS and NatGeo Wild, and there’s a particularly fine example of it right now on the PBS series “Nature.”It’s a three-parter (the final part will be broadcast on Wednesday) called “Animal Homes” that examines the housing of an array of creatures — how they construct it, why they locate it where they do and the surprisingly purposeful architecture of what to the casual eye looks like a pile of twigs or hole in the ground. The combination of practicality and delicacy is humbling, an emotion well suited to Earth Day.Remorse is another such emotion, and there are programs in the next few days that will certainly make you feel lousy about how humans have treated planet Earth. One is “The Great Invisible,” a thoughtful examination of the Deepwater Horizon oil disaster being shown Monday on both Pivot and PBS’s “Independent Lens.”It’s hard to believe that Monday is the fifth anniversary of the explosion, which spewed oil into the Gulf of Mexico for months. The film, which had a theatrical release last year, takes a piercing look at the aftermath — the effect on fisheries, the reparations program, the continuing questions and concerns. And the director, Margaret Brown, also doesn’t forget the 11 workers who died in the disaster.Castigation on an entirely different subject — one not often thought of in connection with environmentalism, or thought of at all — comes Wednesday night on MSNBC in a spunky documentary called “Just Eat It: A Food Waste Story.” It takes us to task for the startling amount of food we throw away.“I was looking at various metrics for sustainable agriculture in the fruit and vegetable industry,” a food scientist named Dana Gunders says, “and I started coming across these numbers about how much was being wasted. Here we’re trying to get farmers to be just a little bit more efficient with their water, just a little bit more efficient with their fertilizer use, and yet, on the other hand, 40 percent of the food was not actually being eaten. And I just thought, How is nobody talking about this?”The program livens up its discussion of the problem by checking in on a couple who volunteers to try to survive on nothing but discarded food for six months. What does wasted food have to do with Earth Day?“People think that environmental problems are about smokestacks, about roads, about factories, about cities and concrete,” says Tristram Stuart, an English activist who writes about the subject and delivered a TED Talk on global food waste. “And for sure those are significant. But if you look at the earth from the sky, what you see is fields, and it is there that we have had the biggest impact. Wasting a third of the land and all of that energy that we currently use by wasting the food that we’ve produced is one of the most gratuitous aspects of human culture as it stands today.”But the way we have abused the natural world can have a silver lining: It can lead us to celebrate efforts to undo our own damage. Take, for instance, the heartwarming “Operation Orangutan,” Wednesday on NatGeo Wild. It visits a rehabilitation center in Borneo for orangutans that have lost their homes to rain forest destruction or been kept as pets, often under abusive conditions.It’s not just a matter of feeding them for a few days and sending them on their way. The staff and volunteers often have to teach them how to be the animals they’re supposed to be.“Surprisingly, a lot of orangutans when they arrive are actually quite frightened of tree climbing and don’t like the heights,” says Lisa Burtenshaw, who is in charge of “enrichment” for the orangutans. Animals from the pet trade might have never been in a tree. Babies whose mothers have been killed need to be taught to climb so they can be released into the wild, where their natural food supply is high off the ground.Speaking of teaching the young, HBO uses Earth Day to run the third of a six-part series called “Saving My Tomorrow,” made with the American Museum of Natural History. It’s a mixture of lessons for children — about biodiversity, the Pacific garbage patch, rain forests — and messages from children. In this program, kids do a lot of the talking, urging awareness and activism. Environmentalism as defined by this crowd has a refreshing simplicity.“Just don’t throw away as much,” one 7-year-old boy says.The film features contributions from stars like Alan Cumming and Pharrell Williams. One of the stars who has a cameo would certainly have endorsed that 7-year-old’s matter-of-factness: Pete Seeger, who is seen in a lovely film clip from before his death last year, singing an environmental tune to two young relatives.Advertisement