By MIKE HALEAPRIL 17, 2015
Just to prove that all eight-episode cable drama series are not created equal, even in the golden age of television, BBC America is offering the British import “Tatau” beginning on Saturday night. From the production studio behind the original “Being Human,” “Tatau” is a spring-break thriller translated to TV about a pair of gullible boys from London set loose among the shamans, hallucinogens and maidens of the South Pacific. You get a sense of what you’re in for early on when the grizzled surfer dude who runs the local bar walks into his first scene carrying a chain saw.Theo Barklem-Biggs (he played a clerk in the BBC-PBS legal drama “Silk”) and Joe Layton are Budgie and Kyle, best friends who travel to the Cook Islands to soak up a little exotic atmosphere and take a break from their dodgy lives back in London. Kyle has prepared by getting a Maori-style tattoo (hence the show’s title), but rather than the icebreaker he hoped it would be, it registers with the natives as a serious cultural faux pas.Before you can say, “Maybe you shouldn’t drink that,” the boyos have imbibed a potent local brew that induces some low-budget tripping — shaking camera, actors staring at their hands — and leads to Kyle’s having a vision while snorkeling of a beautiful young woman dead in the water. Maybe he’s seeing the future. Maybe the old Maori guy who hangs out by the docks will be able to explain it all. Maybe this would work better as a two-hour movie starring Leonardo DiCaprio.“Tatau,” created and written by Richard Zajdlic — who has written for a much better cheesy young-male-oriented series, “Strike Back” — is barely B-grade. But like a lot of shows these days, it offers the compensations of lovely scenery captured in quite satisfactory digital cinematography, in this case real locations in the Cook Islands and New Zealand. Now if we could just have a sip of what Kyle and Budgie are drinking from those coconut shells.A version of this review appears in print on April 18, 2015, on Page C4 of the New York edition with the headline: Going Native? Rule No. 1: Forget the Copycat Tattoo.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.