AdvertisementSupported byBy Siobhan BurkeLuring new dance audiences, through cheap tickets and crowd-pleasing variety, has been a goal of Fall for Dance since its inception in 2004. The 12th edition of the festival opened on Wednesday at City Center, and the program, one of the most memorable in recent Fall for Dance history, must have produced at least a few converts. “Did you fall for dance?” asks a discount voucher in the program, urging ticket buyers, a little desperately, to come back for more.If you can relax into that evangelical atmosphere, and the crowds, Fall for Dance is potentially a lot of fun, even for the already dance-obsessed. Program 1, ranging from engaging to exhilarating to startlingly unfamiliar, included Miami City Ballet in George Balanchine’s “Allegro Brillante,” Doug Elkins’s “Hapless Bizarre,” L. A. Dance Project in Justin Peck’s “Murder Ballades” and, from out of left field, the all-male Argentine percussive dance group Che Malambo.Ten dancers from Miami City Ballet seemed to have summoned extra pluck for their New York jaunt, or maybe they always look this happy to be dancing “Allegro Brillante.” In this 1956 crystallization of what Balanchine called “everything I know about the classical ballet,” the corps — four women, four men — is as propulsive as the central couple, danced by Patricia Delgado and Renan Cerdeiro on Wednesday. The stunning Ms. Delgado swept through space with a lilting, gracious freedom, and Mr. Cerdeiro with a youthful buoyancy born of ultralong legs. The only drawback was the taped music, Tchaikovsky rendered tinny, especially uninviting in the moments before the curtain rose.While “Allegro Brillante” is at home on a big stage, the touching and suavely slapstick “Hapless Bizarre,” for six fantastic dancers of Doug Elkins Choreography, Etc., at first seemed too subtle for a theater of City Center’s size. I wondered if the work’s whimsical details registered at the back of the sold-out house. But from the orchestra, at least, the company proved more than able to transmit Mr. Elkins’s sly humor with clarity and breadth.The jokes in “Hapless” pivot on Mark Gindick, a clown and physical comedian, whose nerdy, uncoordinated character tries to fit in among a more dancerly crew. Short and bespectacled, he starts off flirting with the towering Deborah Lohse and, after a bumpy cascade of mishaps and false endings (“Hapless” is a little long by Fall for Dance standards), winds up with the more compact Cori Marquis. By that point he’s acquired not only some pretzeling partner moves but also a shirt in the ’70s floral pattern sported by the rest of the crew. He’s one of them.The evening peaked with L. A. Dance Project, whose dancers blazed through Mr. Peck’s “Murder Ballades” as if they might never perform again. This 2013 work, possibly the best in the company’s repertory, reveals shades of Jerome Robbins — “West Side Story,” “New York Export: Opus Jazz” — in the sneakered scheming of its three women and three men, unleashed against Sterling Ruby’s fiery backdrop. But it’s also undeniably Mr. Peck’s, in that ballet looks like a perfectly natural form of communication, whether depicting friendly rivalries or budding romances.The closing number may have surprised even the most seasoned dancegoers: a thrilling display of malambo, a traditional dance of South American cowboys that doesn’t come around New York too often. Fourteen stomping, drumming, roaring men pounded rapid-fire rhythms into the ground with many surfaces of their feet — heels, toes, inside and especially outside edges — and with spinning boleadoras, floor-skimming stones attached to lassoes. It’s not the first time that a Fall for Dance program has ended with a rousing group spectacle. The formula is well tested.The Fall for Dance Festival continues through Oct. 11 at City Center, Manhattan; 212-581-1212, nycitycenter­.org.Advertisement