AdvertisementSupported byBy Jon ParelesHALLUCINOGENSilences and spaces define Kelela’s music as much as her voice does on her new six-song EP, “Hallucinogen” (Cherry Coffee/Warp). Obvious beats and repetitive bass lines all but disappear, replaced by deep throbs and flickering accents; the arrangements flare open around her high, fastidiously placed, often multitracked voice as if her melodies were parting the sea before her. She has added new production and songwriting collaborators to the ones that helped her make her 2013 mixtape, “Cut 4 Me,” among them Arca and Boots, who clear the upper octaves and make the lower ones ooze and pulse unpredictably in “The Message” as she achingly pulls free of a lover. The tempos stay slow as Kelela sings about lust as a kinky secret in “Gomenasai” and as a druglike temptation in “The High”; “Hallucinogen” itself is an experiment in vocal improvisation over a track by Arca that fractures its rhythm as it goes. One song, “Rewind,” perks up the tempo and flaunts a poppy chorus along with whispery asides; it’s like Janet Jackson streamlined and rebooted, seemingly transparent and covertly intricate.FADING FRONTIERThere’s no more hiding behind noise or slurred words for Bradford Cox, Deerhunter’s main songwriter and lead singer. And there’s a sun-dazed psychedelic shimmer to the songs that start Deerhunter’s seventh studio album, “Fading Frontier” (4AD); they arrive with major chords, soothing tempos and a consonant halo of reverb. But that gleam is an illusion; Mr. Cox is singing, gently but clearly, about suburban boredom, off-the-grid alienation, lurking enemies, encroaching senility and perhaps, in the gently swaying “Take Care,” about euthanasia. The benign musical mask starts to slip in “Take Care,” as pretty sounds pile up a little too deep, and it drops away entirely in later songs, as lyrics turn more cynical and keyboards and percussion grow wayward and vaguely threatening. The album’s finale thinks positive: “Even though you’re gone/I still carry on.” But the title reads differently: “Carrion.”INCITATIONOlga Bell’s 2014 album, “Krai,” was fearlessly obscure: a collection of songs in Russian that revealed grand compositional ambitions and a dynamic voice. (Ms. Bell was born in Moscow and raised in Alaska, and studied classical piano and electronic composition; she also sang and played keyboards with Dirty Projectors.) Her new EP, “Incitation” (One Little Indian), brings her to the arty, adventurous edge of pop. Synthesizers enfold her in fluctuating artificial environments; programmed drums switch between propulsion and bombardment. The lyrics are in English, cryptic but urgent, getting swept up in love or worrying about total collapse: “More or less what you wanted everything disintegrating./Think about the future, don’t it seem to turn a darker shade?” But she has forthright, supple melodies to hold everything together, and a voice — creamy, vibrant, sensual — that makes all her conundrums startlingly immediate.HASTA LA RAÍZUnabashed romance and lissome melodies fill “Hasta la Raíz” (RCA), the sixth studio album by Natalia LaFourcade, who’s a major pop star in Mexico. With a high voice that keeps her sounding perpetually innocent, she offers wide-eyed promises, laments breakups that she hopes won’t last forever and finally moves on in the swelling, hymnlike “Estoy Lista” (“I’m Ready”). There’s sophistication behind the charm. Ms. LaFourcade has been a hybridizer and style-hopper through more than a decade of recording. It has been six years between albums of Ms. LaFourcade’s own songs; in 2012 she released an album of songs by a revered Mexican balladeer, Agustín Lara, sharing duets with musicians from across the Americas. She brings the retro tone of that album to her own songs on “Hasta la Raíz”: using mostly acoustic instruments backed by some orchestral arrangements, hinting at bossa nova and calypso as well as Mexican pop, and leaving air around her vocals the way 1950s crooners did. But it’s not a strict period piece; Ms. LaFourcade also toys with sly anachronisms, tucking in a drum-machine beat every so often and toying with stereo effects. Her finale, “No Más Llorar” (“No More Crying”), is clearly a contemporary recording, a rock anthem hovering in endless virtual space.SERMON ON THE ROCKSThe literary-minded songwriter Josh Ritter — he has published a novel, “Bright’s Passage” — recharges his music on his eighth studio album, “Sermon on the Rocks” (Pytheas/Thirty Tigers). Harking back to Bob Dylan, Bruce Springsteen and maybe a little Mark Knopfler, Mr. Ritter has always been a slinger of serious ideas and high-flown imagery. His previous album, “The Beast in Its Tracks,” was a folky reflection on new love after a breakup. Now, two stratagems punch up his new songs: recording with a four-man studio band in New Orleans and thinking, here and there, about the Bible. The songs aren’t devout. The twangy, fast-talking “Getting Ready to Get Down” applauds a girl who hasn’t been reformed by Bible college, taunting, “What kind God would ever keep a girl/From getting what she needs?” And in the stoic “Henrietta, Indiana,” crime becomes a last resort in a fading mill town; “Blessed be the poor of Henrietta, Indiana/But happy are the ones who get out.” By the end of the album, in “Lighthouse Fire,” this singer is bold enough to promise his new love, “Gonna build you a cathedral/Out of nothing but the rafters ’tween the stars.”Advertisement