Season 4, Episode 2: “East Wing”This week’s episode has a few typically funny through-lines: The only piece of art by a Native American painter gets removed from the West Wing, outraging (you guessed it) the Native American community; the president’s aides inform her that they’ve done secret polling and her daughter’s popularity index is “shallow”; and Dan and Jonah try to sell their Families First bill to recalcitrant members of Congress.The core of the half-hour, however, was in the show’s core relationship — the unlikely (and platonic) love between President Selina Meyer and her body man, Gary.But first: Selina’s poor daughter, Catherine. She is getting made fun of in the press — a printout is brandished of a flier showing her face juxtaposed with that of a bulldog — and it falls to Kent, an aide, to have a chat with her about “the brand image of Catherine Meyer, TM.”“I asked you in because,” Kent begins, before cutting to the quick: “Catherine, America doesn’t like you.”“This is like high school all over again,” moans Catherine, with Kent quipping, “Sure, kind of, but much bigger.” Changing her narrative, he suggests, could fall back on the “customary shortcuts to public affirmation” — military service or childbirth.It is hard here not to think of a young Chelsea Clinton, coming-of-age as a preteen in the White House glare, with the braces, gangliness and sprinkling of acne familiar to anyone who still has their bat mitzvah pictures. And if you think polling on a personal matter seems a bit absurd, well think again; the Clintons famously polled about where they should vacation. (Martha’s Vineyard was deemed too elitist, so the first family opted for a more rugged trip to Jackson Hole, Wyo.)Catherine proves an awkward and begrudging study. But the episode ends with her performing a classic East Wing photo op and draping medals around the necks of an adorable troop of what look like Girl Scouts. She also exhibits a bit of her mom’s political charisma, whispering to an aide: “Can you pull me out the second it becomes acceptable to leave?”But now onto the main plot, which, in atypical “Veep” fashion, is not particularly funny. Gary — most often seen trailing Selina and making himself unobtrusive — becomes the unwitting and unwilling star when he tries to fulfill what he imagines are his boss’s wishes. First, it turns out that Gary is the one who decided, unilaterally, to remove the Native American painting, which had offended Selina’s sense of aesthetics.And, in his desire to make Selina’s first state dinner (with Israel) “really nice,” Gary also drops a ton of cash — think three truckloads full of fresh flowers, and that’s just the start  — and the press corps sniffs out a potential spending spree scandal.“Her bagman spends like a Babylonian king,” says the president’s new communications director, articulating the problem.When the lavish state dinner is over, Selina confronts Gary, who she finds huddled behind a stack of chairs. “Who do you think you are?” she demands. “Gary Antoinette?!”But the tone quickly turns cruel, with rage and hurt radiating out from both of them.“You are unimportant, O.K., and you have suckered onto me like some sort of a car window Garfield,” Selina shouts, previously unsaid truths pouring out as her anger grows. “You are not a big shot, Gary, you’re a middle-aged man who sanitizes my tweezers.”“You’re wrong,” Gary finally retorts, asking her if she even knows when Catherine’s birthday is. (She’s off by a day).“I’m your calendar, I’m your Google, I’m your Wilson the volleyball,” he enumerates. “I have broken my body for you, I have let myself be laughed at, I have let myself be humiliated, and I’m happy to do it.”When Selina says she’s happy to find somebody else to fetch her hand cream, Gary tells her to go do it, adding, “Can you find somebody else who did what I did?”And here the mood shifts, as an unspoken incident or moment they simply refer to as “Labor Day” passes between them, some unknown and heroic or pathetic or illegal or shameful action Gary took on Labor Day and that they have vowed never to speak of again.The New York Times Magazine recently posited that at the center of the acerbic satire that is “Veep” sits “the singularly awkward, brutal, tender, nonromantic romance between Selina and Gary.”“Gary and Selina cohabit a dysfunctional not-quite-romance: brutal, abusive, pathetic and unbalanced, but, at the same time, almost in spite of itself, soulful and affectionate,” writes Sam Anderson.And here we get to witness the real and messy but also deeply loyal relationship between the most powerful woman in the nation and the man who totes her purse. The fight calms, as the two struggle to somehow, someway, undo all that has just been said. Then Selina notices a sheet cake sitting in the corner of the room — an edible remnant of yet another Gary extravagance. (“Happy Harrison Day.”)“That looks good,” she says, quietly.Gary offers her a piece — “It’s light sponge,” he all but whispers — and then they pick up, like many regular couples after a fight, into their patterns and banter, but tentative and chastened, having just realized both how fragile and enduring their relationship truly is.Munching on cake, Selina leaves the room as Gary follows a step behind — shoulders perhaps just slightly more stooped than usual, but ready to slowly fall back into their routine.