Season 2, Episode 2: “Runaway Devaluation”This was an oddly lethargic “Silicon Valley,” though an occasionally funny one. The early scenes, full of technical exposition about the implications of the lawsuit that Gavin Belson filed against Pied Piper late last episode, linger longer than necessary, and several jokes are repurposed so often you wonder if there was an app for that. Yet ultimately the slow buildup feels worth the trouble, as the episode ends beautifully. Belson — the chief of Hooli, whose brand, like Google’s, suggests a menacing tenacity to do us a lot of good, whether we like it or not — offers what could be the world’s most perfect argument against the cult of the start-up. It leaves Richard, Pied Piper’s founder, speechless (or he would be, if he weren’t also drowned out by a mariachi band). But first, the overlong jokes. There’s an extended montage of venture capitalists exacting revenge on Erlich for his rudeness from last week’s episode, in which he “negged” them into thinking more highly of Pied Piper; it pays off in only a couple funny lines involving testicles, sadly unprintable here. The joke about Bro, a Yo-like app that sends your bro a message saying “bro,” also wears out its welcome. Jared’s line, “You know what they say, bros disclose,” is worth a chuckle. The half dozen other ways in which “Bro” is jammed into the episode aren’t.The Bro set-piece does deliver us the episode’s funniest scene, at a Kickstarter party to garner “bronations” for the app. Dinesh, who can no longer afford the $5,000 he’d pledged to fund his cousin’s app, tries to work the crowd against Bro. “You know what ‘bro’ means in Portuguese?” Dinesh asks as he mingles. “Rapist.”I found myself charmed by Dinesh, played by Kumail Nanjiani, who might be the only Pakistani-American in American pop culture. (Commenters, anyone major I’m overlooking?) The show usually focuses on Dinesh only as part of the odd-couple rivalry with Martin Starr’s Gilfoyle, but this time Starr is on the sidelines. Instead, in a hilarious conversation between Dinesh and his cousin, we get a peek at Dinesh’s anxieties about abandoning his app to join Pied Piper. There’s subtitled swearing in Urdu, which is pretty funny. After getting rebuffed by every venture capitalist in the Valley — including one who tries to trick Pied Piper into disclosing its technology, a common Silicon Valley practice the episode terms “brain raping” — the guys are all but sunk. Then Belson invites Richard to a one-on-one at a Mexican restaurant to make an acquisition offer. Richard immediately rejects it, on the grounds that “everything I’m building becomes the property of your giant, soulless corporation.”That’s when Belson launches into his perfect critique of the mythology of the start-up. “Now what exactly do you think you’re building?” he asks. Every company starts out with high ideals; it necessarily loses them as a function of success, he argues. “I suppose once Pied Piper is a billion-dollar company you’ll seek out your competitors and help them?”And what is the point, really, of building new cookie-cutter start-ups to replace old ones? “What is Hooli except the best possible future version of Pied Piper?” Belson asks. “You think you’re building something different? No. You’re building something that’s exactly the same as what I’ve already built, except with you, instead of me.” Last week I worried about the show’s tendency toward realism at the expense of comedy; that continues here, but at least the payoff is a searing critique of the very mind-set that fuels this place. Every year, hordes of young men arrive on the shores of San Francisco Bay aiming to disrupt the place and the world. Yet many end up founding, or working for, a version of the order they’re trying to overturn. Lots of Google’s employees came from Microsoft, which Google once considered its archenemy.  Now, as antitrust regulators bear down on Google, it is often compared to Microsoft. A huge number of Facebook’s workers decamped from Google, while many at Pinterest and Snapchat and Uber came from Facebook. In time, won’t they all become pretty much the same?   