Season 5, Episode 2: ‘House of Black and White’Here be spoilers and luckless dwarfs.“Game of Thrones” returned for its second week with “House of Black and White,” a title taken from the citadel of the Faceless Men but also one that seemed to reference the polarities that vex us all.From the opening shot of the Titan of Braavos, straddling land and sea as in (inaccurate) legends of the Colossus of Rhodes, this was an episode obsessed with duality, both intrinsic, as with young Arya, wrestling with her righteous anger, and external, as other characters wrestled with decisions that tested their mettle and challenged their conceptions of themselves.The histories of kingdoms, which can seem preordained in retrospect, are built from such moments, when choices about shifting loyalties or how to define values reverberate far beyond the moment of reckoning. The trick, of course, is that such decisions are never totally black and white at the time.Whatever ultimately comes to pass, Arya Stark at least got to feel the sun on her face.The fantasy epic on HBO.After growing up in the gloomy North and slogging through Westeros’s muckier precincts with the Hound, she arrived in summery Braavos like a little bloodthirsty Mary Richards, thrilling in her newfound freedom.[Interview: Maisie Williams on Arya’s Evolution]The thrill didn’t last, of course. No sooner had she arrived at her destination than she was turned away from it. “I have nowhere else to go,” she said to the man we’ll continue to call Jaqen H’ghar, despite his protestations (and disguise), because names make things easier.“You have everywhere else to go,” he said, and shut the door.She took solace in her Kill List, reciting the names over and over — Cersei, Walder Frey, the Mountain, Meryn Trant — as the skies opened and rained on her devotional of vengeance. Finally fed up, she impetuously tosses her magic coin into the bay. Check out the framing of the shot: Arya perfectly straddling the black and white doors behind her as she ponders her options, before crossing over the dark side to hunt pigeons and pull Needle on Braavosi street rats.After Jaqen had seen enough, he brought her back to the House to begin her Jedi training. First lesson: A girl must become no one. Which is to say, the order’s “facelessness,” an objectively awesome assassin’s gimmick, would seem to refer equally to a spiritual abandonment of the self.Arya Stark will have to let go of the things that make her Arya — the Kill List, the decimated family — which, come to think of it, maybe aren’t all that great anyway. And in she went through the black door, presumably to emerge at some point through the white as an ethically clear administerer of lethal justice.At Castle Black, meanwhile, Arya’s brother wrestles with his own identity issues and reaches the opposite conclusion, choosing his own word and enduring bastardhood over Stannis’s promise of legitimacy (“the first thing I ever remember wanting,” Jon said) and dominion over Winterfell. Stannis has to be wondering what it’s going to take to get someone, anyone, in this godforsaken castle to kneel, for R’hllor’s sake.The ultimate outcome of Jon’s dedication was unexpected by him and by the other knights, if not the rest of us. He was elected the 998th lord commander of Night’s Watch after Maester Aemon cast the tiebreaking vote in his favor. (More on him in a minute.)Kit Harington can be a little wooden at times but he made Jon’s delight — both at the win and at finally being something official to someone — feel authentic.For that he can thank Samwell Tarley, who went Karl Rove on Ser Alliser Thorne, attacking the frontrunner’s puddle-making associates in order to tarnish his good name. Sam had his own angle, of course, aiming to scuttle the ticket that would toss his beloved out into the cold. That’s “S,” Gilly, as in Stick around for awhile. (Shouts to Ser Denys Mallister, who went the way of most third-party candidates but took his throttling in stride.)The warmer climes in King’s Landing did nothing to thaw the chilly relations between Cersei and Jaime, who bickered over a cobragram from Dorne that seemed to promise peril for their daughter Myrcella. One assumes the Sand Snakes were behind it, possibly with the help of an increasingly Khan-like Ellaria Sand. We’ll find out soon enough, as Jaime heads as far south as south goes to deal with the situation.“I’m going to make things better,” he told Cersei.“You’ve never made anything better,” she countered. (Has this woman ever lost an argument?) Besides, she said, you can’t take an army with you. Do you really think you can handle this all alone?“I never said I was going alone,” he said, and I actually yelled “Bronn!” at the TV a split second before he showed up, skipping stones and faux-listening to fiancée prattle. So happy to have that guy back in my life.Over in Meereen, meanwhile … honestly, just typing that phrase makes me tired.So let’s not spend too much time on the execution or trial question, the mercy or justice question, or what we think Daenerys Targaryen is ultimately going to learn about leadership as the sectarian fallout from her Middle Essos occupation intensifies, sending the would-be liberator fleeing under cover of armor.My question is this: Why didn’t the former slave get a trial for killing the Harpy insurgent? I know he admitted to it but wasn’t following the due process of law the whole point this week? Or was that his trial when he stood before Dany, pleading not guilty by reason of “I did it for you, Mhysa?”It all seemed pretty incoherent, at any rate, which was perhaps intended to signal Dany’s ongoing fumbling as she gropes toward … hey look, its Drogon! Wait, where are you going? Come back! Save us Drogon!A few thoughts while we wait for our ‘save the date.’• Littlefinger wasn’t exactly forthcoming about that wedding proposal, was he? To channel another saga we’re obsessively tracking this week, I have a bad feeling about this.• Related: It was a good news-bad news week for Brienne, who finally found Sansa (thanks to Podrick) but lost her in the time it took a few hired guns to chase her into the woods. What did you make of Sansa’s refusal to go along with her? On the one hand, I think Sansa puts a certain amount of faith in Littlefinger, and is intrigued by what she thinks she can learn from him. But I also think her “You should leave” scanned as “No really, you should get out of here before my creepy uncle has you killed.”• “You have no idea what people will do,” Lady Selyse, the deranged Ms. Stannis admonishes her daughter, Shireen, after she finds her reading with Gilly. I don’t know, Selyse, you locked her up in Dragonstone for years and she just watched her dad’s girlfriend try to burn a man alive. Pretty sure she has a rough grasp of the depths, at least, of what people will do.• “How many dwarfs are there in the world?” wondered a stir-crazy Tyrion, who traded up for a slightly larger box this week. “Is Cersei going to kill them all?” THUMP goes an innocent little person’s head on Cersei’s table. This show is unmatched at making me laugh at ghastly things.• Add “the Smirking Whore of Highgarden” to “the Bastard of Winterfell” and others I’m probably forgetting on Westeros’s list of “no thanks, you can keep it” titles.• At one point, recalling the fall of Dany’s father the Mad King, Ser Barristan made reference to the rebellion “that killed every Targaryen, except two.” That would be Dany and her loathsome, since gold-plated brother Viserys, right? But we know there’s at least one more: Maester Aemon at Castle Black, who revealed his identity last season to Jon Snow. The invaluable “Game of Thrones” wiki tells me he is Dany’s great uncle.• What do we think about Qyburn, the new master of whispers, keeper of heads and, you’ll recall, undertaker of overly “bold” medical experiments at the Citadel? Should we assume he won Cersei’s favor by saving the Mountain from Oberyn Martell’s poison?• Your turn. What do you make of the dissension between Cersei and Uncle Kevan? Where is Tommen, anyway? What does Varys have to offer Dany that Ser Barristan doesn’t? Feel free to share your comments on this or anything else, but please, no book (or leaked episode) spoilers.