AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn Shattuck5:30 P.M. (FXM) RUBY SPARKS (2012) Zoe Kazan, above, wrote and stars in this variation on the Pygmalion myth as Ruby, a smart, saucy, redheaded young woman from Dayton, Ohio, who magically appears in Los Angeles, seemingly without much control over her emotions. Paul Dano, Ms. Kazan’s real-life partner, is Calvin, a literary whiz kid turned blocked writer who breathes life into this figment of his imagination, and then directs her every move. “ ‘Ruby Sparks,’ directed by Jonathan Dayton and Valerie Faris, the team behind ‘Little Miss Sunshine,’ has the same zany and sweet tone laced with just enough hardheaded wisdom to keep it grounded in psychological truth,” Stephen Holden wrote in The New York Times. “The screenplay, by Ms. Kazan, is so polished and witty that it immediately puts her in the same league as Diablo Cody. And Ms. Kazan’s lovely, tart performance is the equal of Ellen Page’s portrayal of the title character in ‘Juno.’ Both are impetuous screwball heroines who could have been created only by women.”10 A.M. (Fox) FOX NEWS SUNDAY Senator Lindsey Graham, Republican of South Carolina, discusses the 2016 presidential election and the Obama administration’s foreign policy in the Middle East. Senator Bernie Sanders, independent of Vermont, weighs in on the presidential candidates so far.10:30 A.M. (CBS) FACE THE NATION Senator Marco Rubio, the Florida Republican and presidential candidate, is a guest.12:45 P.M. (Sundance) BILLY ELLIOT (2000) An 11-year-old boy (Jamie Bell, left) in a coal mining town in northern England dreams of becoming a ballet dancer — to the horror of his father (Gary Lewis) — and is pushed to audition for the Royal Ballet School by his secret dance teacher, Mrs. Wilkinson (Julie Walters). “As in so many British movies, class antagonism permeates ‘Billy Elliot’ like coal soot in the air,” A. O. Scott wrote in The Times. “In this world, happy endings are not impossible, but they’re also not unequivocal. ‘If you go out to find life, you lose other things,’ Mrs. Wilkinson tells Billy, and, like the movie at its best, her words are no less true for being platitudinous.”8 P.M. (Fox News) LEGENDS & LIES: THE REAL WEST This documentary-style series chronicles the lives of some of the Wild West’s greatest characters, continuing here with the gunfighter and gambler Wild Bill Hickok.8 P.M. (CBS) THE 50TH ACADEMY OF COUNTRY MUSIC AWARDS Garth Brooks, Kenny Chesney, Miranda Lambert, Reba McEntire, George Strait, Taylor Swift and Brooks & Dunn will be honored for their career achievements with the 50th Anniversary Milestone Award at this ceremony, broadcast live from the AT&T Stadium in Arlington, Tex. Ms. Lambert leads the nominations with eight; Dierks Bentley has seven; Florida Georgia Line has five; and Luke Bryan, Mr. Chesney and Eric Church have four each. 10 P.M. (13, 49) WOLF HALL With Cardinal Wolsey dead, it’s up to Thomas Cromwell (Mark Rylance, left) to orchestrate a marriage between Henry VIII (Damian Lewis) and Anne Boleyn (Claire Foy) — thrusting him into the king’s good graces, but opening him up to further scrutiny by his enemies.10 P.M. (CNN) HIGH PROFITS A Colorado couple work to become the first moguls of marijuana in this new eight-part documentary series.10:30 P.M. (HBO) VEEP The staff prepares Selina (Julia Louis-Dreyfus) for a state visit with the Israeli prime minister during which Mike (Matt Walsh) takes advantage of his increasing visibility, Amy (Anna Chlumsky) learns that a new director of communications has been hired, and Gary (Tony Hale) goes overboard with dinner plans. Meanwhile, a certain painting in the White House comes into play.What’s Streaming NowSTOP MAKING SENSE (1984) Jonathan Demme shoots David Byrne and Talking Heads in performance in what many critics consider one of the best concert films ever made. “The film’s visual style is as coolly iconoclastic as Talking Heads itself,” Janet Maslin wrote in The Times. (fandor.com) KATHRYN SHATTUCKAdvertisement