By JON CARAMANICAAPRIL 17, 2015
JidennaCLASSIC MANIf you don’t believe in the power of the beat, try this. For much of the last three years, DJ Mustard has set the tempo for hip-hop and R&B. YG, Ty Dolla Sign, Tinashe, Kid Ink: they’ve all jump-started careers on the back of Mustard’s aerated bleeps and bloops. Then came the simulators: the white Australian female rapper Iggy Azalea surfed a faux-Mustard beat to the top of Billboard’s singles chart last year, proving the sound didn’t discriminate.And now there’s “Classic Man” (Wondaland/Epic), which reinterprets the Mustard sound through a space-funk lens in service of an unexpected message: the values of gentleman culture. Jidenna is a sprightly, tough singer, but more notably, he is a dandy: in the video for this song, he sports a 1920s-style high club collar, cuff links, a pocket watch and a cane. At one point, he sits for a straight-razor shave. All this while singing a come-on that promises “your needs getting met by the street, elegant, old-fashioned man.” It’s electrifying, buoyant and sleek, one of this year’s most striking R&B songs.“Classic Man” is the lead single from “Wondaland Presents: The Eephus,” a forthcoming compilation EP on Wondaland Records, Janelle Monáe’s label. (Jidenna also appears on “Yoga,” Ms. Monáe’s new single.) For many years, Ms. Monáe has been operating at the edges of mainstream hip-hop and R&B, a futurist with angular approaches. But songs like “Classic Man” and “Yoga” show she’s learning the trick of imparting unlikely messages in state-of-the-art packages.Chastity BeltTIME TO GO HOMEFog hovers over the second Chastity Belt album, “Time to Go Home” (Hardly Art), — the fog of the morning after, the fog of questionable decisions, the fog of not yet having it all figured out. But this group, from Seattle, renders that fog elegantly and succinctly; it is disciplined in its disaffection.Advertisement“Time to Go Home” takes the sometimes happy-go-lucky energy of its 2013 debut “No Regerts” and sees it to its logical end, beginning to reckon with consequences. “Drone” is about how relationships write their own boundaries without you even knowing. “I thought I had freedom,” Julia Shapiro dryly sings, but “he was just another man trying to teach me something.” In places, the carefree spirit of its debut remains, like on the wry “Cool Slut.”AdvertisementBut mostly this absorbing album is about fatigue. “I did not want to be there,” Ms. Shapiro sings on “IDC,” continuing, “So I got drunk out of boredom/Is it cool not to care?” She knows the answer: “I don’t care,” sung a dozen or so times, until it reads less like an anesthetic and more like a statement of pride.Sicko MobbSUPER SAIYAN VOL. 2Three years ago, drill music began to take hold of Chicago’s hip-hop scene. Dark and brutalist, it suggested hip-hop boiled down to raw parts — shuddering percussion, pugnacious boasts, dire mood. But then, like a sunbeam pushing through clouds, came bop music, an almost twistedly positive Chicago hip-hop sound that came with ecstatic dances and relentless cheer, serving as a counterbalance to drill’s nihilism.Sicko Mobb — the brothers Lil Trav and Lil Ceno — immediately stood out as early champions of the sound, and scored a record deal with Polo Grounds/RCA. The duo hasn’t released an album yet, but on its new mixtape, “Super Saiyan Vol. 2,” they’ve perfected a chirpy, narcotic fantasy sound, like applying a coat of neon paint to a drill skeleton. The subject matter is largely celebratory, and the vocals are heavily processed and virtually post-human. It’s all influenced by video games — the mixtape title is a reference to a Hulk-like transformation state in the “Dragon Ball” manga and video-game series, and on the cover, Sicko Mobb are animated as video-game characters. Overall, Sicko Mobb has created a place of escape, the sound of kids surrounded by darkness inventing a world of light and bliss.Mickey GuytonBETTER THAN YOU LEFT METhe only war Taylor Swift has not been able to win is country music’s war on women. Despite her success, and that of Carrie Underwood and Miranda Lambert, women are still by and large relegated to the genre’s margins, with room for an occasional outlier, like Kacey Musgraves or Maddie & Tae, who upended bro-country fantasy last year on “Girl in a Country Song.” But country music doesn’t like to be told what it’s doing wrong — it prefers amenable allies, which might explain a slate of recent singles by young female singers playing it safe, but expertly so.The best of these is Mickey Guyton’s “Better Than You Left Me” (Capitol Nashville), a gentle song about moving on from someone who didn’t give what was needed. Ms. Guyton — who is black, still a country anomaly — has an impressive voice that she’s using only half of. She showed it off to better effect on a strong, unnoticed EP last year, “Unbreakable,” and in YouTube clips of live performances of songs like “Why Baby Why.” Like Kelsea Ballerini’s “Love Me Like You Mean It” and Jana Kramer’s “I Got the Boy,” “Better Than You Left Me” doesn’t pretend to test the limits of country’s gender agenda, but maybe that’s why it’s gaining traction. And in the meanwhile, if you’re looking for modern feminism in mainstream country, try the new Reba McEntire album.A version of this article appears in print on April 19, 2015, on Page AR24 of the New York edition with the headline: Enter the Dandy, Moody Indie Rockers and Chicago Bop.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.