AdvertisementSupported byBy Alastair MacaulayThe dance forms of India — though I began to watch them over 30 years ago in London — became a regular and deepening source of fascination to me only once I began work as chief dance critic of The New York Times in 2007. It’s been a boon, after decades of dancegoing, to investigate them: They’ve extended my idea of dance itself, what it can be and signify.New York sees excellent examples of Indian dance each year. On April 25-26, three examples of its classical styles will be on view. Two, at the Skirball Center for the Performing Arts at New York University, are World Music Institute “Dancing the Gods” performances, each exemplifying a different classical idiom. Bharata Natyam — a genre rich in pure form and expressive acting, deriving from the southeastern state of Tamil Nadu — has a centuries-old matrilineal tradition. On April 25, Rama and Dakshina Vaidyanathan, mother and daughter, perform “Dwita — Duality of Life.”If “Duality of Life” were the title of a ballet or modern dance work, my heart would probably sink. Yet in Indian dance, philosophical themes are unpretentiously, modestly and affectingly addressed — as if to illustrate, by focusing on the sublime, how much larger existence is than any mere dancer. (This music, this space, this myth, this god, this art: Though I bring them together, I am just a part.)On April 26, Parul Shah and Prashant Shah (no relation) perform in the Kathak style. Associated with northern India, Kathak is the form in which dance and music can combine to most playfully exhilarating effect; it can have terrific speed and rhythmic complexity. This program is called “Kadamb and Beyond: A Tribute to Kumudini Lakhia,” acknowledging the work of the Kathak pioneer Ms. Lakhia and the Kadamb School she founded in 1967.On April 26, when William Dalrymple, author of “Nine Lives: In Search of the Sacred in Modern India” and other works about India, lectures on the history and culture of Hyderabad at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, his talk is to be followed by an original dance performed by Preeti Vasudevan and her dance company Thresh. Ms. Vasudevan was trained in Bharata Natyam; today she’s one of a number of artists who combine classical Indian dance with contemporary Western forms.Each of these can only hint at the dance variety of India. Twice in recent years, I’ve made four-week visits there. The biggest lesson of my first trip (February-March 2012) was that dance is more central to Indian culture than to any other I’ve encountered. Just one small example: On arrival at the airport in Bhubaneswar, the capital of Odisha, the poster welcoming arrivals was a vast image of Odissi, the state’s beautiful classical dance form. More crucially, all around the nation, the Hindu gods are seen as dancing; and Shiva’s dance is cosmological.The chief discovery of my second visit (December 2014-January 2015) was that dance in India covers a far wider spectrum than in any other culture in the world. To explain this, I single out just eight days, Dec. 18 to Dec. 25. Christmas Day I spent in Mumbai — of course! — watching a big Bollywood musical, “PK,” an appealingly nutty crazy-quilt in which a chap from outer space ends up breaking into song and dance as he falls in love with the Indian heroine. In “PK,” dance keeps bubbling up at the oddest moments — I especially liked the policemen who burst into dance as they chased after the hero.I had been in the southwest state of Kerala from Dec. 18 to Dec. 22, watching the local forms of Mohiniattam, Kathakali and Theyyem. Mohiniattam (all-female) and Kathakali (all-male) are recognized among India’s classical forms; and though Kathakali and Theyyem are among its strangest, they now feature prominently in tourist imagery, for reasons of their exotically picturesque makeup.It was not till this trip that Kathakali — Homeric in its epic meter, character-packed drama and variety of intense dramatic color — became a revelatory experience to me; and I would travel back for more. On the evening of Dec. 19, as I rushed in a cab from one side of Thrissur (a long and exuberant open-air Kathakali performance) to the other (to catch Kalamandalam students dancing Mohiniattam) and back again, Thrissur’s dance world felt as busy as New York’s.I’d return, too, to further investigate Theyyem, which, though not the richest dance experience of my life, was far the strangest. This, like Kathakali, is an art that involves male performers in extraordinary makeup and elaborate costume. (Tourists may watch the performers in their lengthy preparations.) It’s peculiar to the villages of north Kerala (and two adjacent regions of Karnataka); and I spent the morning of Dec. 22 in three of those villages watching Theyyem both in preparation and as event.The facial makeup is predominantly scarlet, but with complex internal patterning and drastic eyeliner. (In one case, metal tusks sprouted from the dancer’s mouth.) This, like the costuming, indicates which of the local gods is being shown.The attire is amazing. One performer laced himself into four different skirts one on top of another; another was assisted into a rigid farthingale. The multiskirt dancer then had a rigid hoop fitted around his upper body, with fronds hanging from it; this tightly limited the movement of his arms and shoulders (his face and forearms protruded over its edge). The farthingale dancer had a triangular patterned pyramid, more than twice his height, attached to the top of his costume, like a spire.And it’s thus — in heavy, bright and intensely restricting outfits — that the Theyyem performers dance. Footwork, not complex, is rhythmic; the dancer travels and rotates in space; in the face, only the eyes move, radiating vehemence. The steps and mobility of those I saw (hundreds of dances are said to exist) have nothing of the formal fascination of the Indian classical genres; but a stunted force, even violence, stays in the memory.Theyyem is an example of both trance dance and of divine embodiment. The dancer doesn’t impersonate but becomes the god. In Mr. Dalrymple’s “Nine Lives,” the Theyyem artist Hari Das explains what divine possession is like:“When the drums are playing and your makeup is finished, they hand you a mirror and you look at your face, transformed into that of a god. Then it comes. It’s as if there is a sudden explosion of light. A vista of complete brilliance opens up — it blinds the senses.”Though I had heard of trance dance and divine possession, I had expected them to be different — more physically ample, for one thing. Mr. Das also relates how the genre’s performers come from the lowest castes of Keralan society. During the three months of the Theyyem season, they are revered and well paid, but then return to menial employment the rest of the year.Theyyem is just one astonishing example of India’s dance sociology. A more archetypal image of India, but now receding into history, is the female temple dancer. For ballet people, the bayadère — temple dancer — is their central idea of Indian dance: in particular Nikiya, the heroine of Marius Petipa’s 1877 Romantic-classical ballet “La Bayadère,” and the corps de ballet of Shades. (It returns to the repertory of American Ballet Theater at the Metropolitan Opera House, June 1 to June 6.)The historic truth of bayadères, however, arises from the centuries-old Indian tradition of devadasis: women dedicated to the temple from childhood, some as dancers and/or musicians, some as prostitutes, some as all of the above. They were outlawed in 1984, after decades of reform.This March, many were fascinated to read The New York Times’s obituary of Sashimani Devi, 92, the last temple dancer at the Jagannath Temple in Puri, Odisha (the devadasis of that state bore the name maharis); Ms. Devi was initiated into temple service at 7 or 8. At a 1994 conference, in her early 70s, she danced a dance that she had been taught at the temple and that had its roots 5,000 years before.Those of us brought up in the West may be amazed by the profound and pervasive connection between religion and dance here. To comb the cathedrals of Europe for dance imagery would not be fruitful. In India, however, the opposite is true. At the temple in Konark — along the Odisha coast from the one at Jagannath — the thrilling proliferation of sculpted images adorning the multipillared Hall of Dance are, like those in many other Indian temples, important sources for today’s dancers.Though there are no longer temple dancers, dancing certainly occurs in temples. On Feb. 20, 2012, in Tamil Nadu, I watched a dance festival at the temple at Chidambaram on the day of the year when the great god Shiva was honored as Nataraja, lord of the cosmic dance.Chidambaram is the temple most associated with Nataraja, whose dance implies change, destruction, renewal. Statues depict him balanced on one leg, within an arc or circle of flame. Among the implications of his pose are movement within stillness and stillness within movement.Sacred and profane, motion and stasis, renewal and destruction: Indian culture delights in dualisms, and dance is at their heart.Advertisement