
Blindspot By                     
 NEIL GENZLINGER
 
OCT. 19, 2015
Interagency animosity, that old favorite of TV shows dealing in law enforcement, has bubbled up occasionally in NBC’s “Blindspot,” but in Monday night’s episode it was the main attraction, building to a ludicrous guns-drawn stare-down. Of course no one fired, but if you’re as weary of this trope as I am, you may have wished someone, or everyone, had.The plot of the week involved a terror group’s plans to unleash a dirty bomb. First Kurt Weller (Sullivan Stapleton) and his team were called to a hostage situation, which led them to a C.I.A. black site, and ultimately everyone ended up at a cemetery in Queens chasing some guy with an urn full of radioactive cesium. There was a George A. Romero moment when bad guys with guns popped up, zombielike, among the tombstones, but the bigger threat turned out to be from within.The C.I.A. deputy director, Tom Carter (Michael Gaston), drew a bead on Jane (Jaimie Alexander), only to have the deputy director of the F.B.I., Bethany Mayfair (Marianne Jean-Baptiste), draw a bead on him. Soon all of their respective underlings pulled guns and aimed them at one another, and the preposterous prospect of a shootout between F.B.I. agents and C.I.A. agents seemed imminent.I know turf wars between law enforcement agencies are a real-life thing, but that near-gunfight made me laugh, which was probably not the intent. You?AdvertisementThere was other stuff going on in the episode, of course, including an effort to punch up Weller’s back story. An attempt by his sister to reacquaint him with his estranged father didn’t go so well.There was also, as the episode ended, a sinister moment as Carter met secretively with Zapata (Audrey Esparza), from Weller’s team, and handed her an envelope of cash. Zapata, you’ll recall, had previously been revealed to have a gambling debt. The more this series seems as if it’s just about interagency game playing, the less I like it.AdvertisementI also spent this episode noticing what one of last week’s commenters pointed out: how relentlessly grim everyone in this show is. The facial expressions, on actresses and actors alike, put me in mind of Jack Bauer in “24”: all scowly, all the time. But “24” had something that this series, so far, doesn’t: Chloe. That character, wonderfully played by Mary Lynn Rajskub, provided a sort of quirky comic relief despite the dire things Jack and company were tasked with preventing. In “Blindspot,” only the geeky Patterson (Ashley Johnson) is occasionally allowed to be amusingly eccentric. There’s room for more lighter moments in this show.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »