This is one in a series of interviews focusing on New York-centric movies having their premieres at the Tribeca Film Festival.Features, news, videos and more from the festival.Much has been written about the work, and humor, of cartoonists for The New Yorker. But the process of how those cartoons come to be published, and the collection of intriguing personalities behind the drawings, had yet to receive a big-screen documentary feature treatment. In “Very Semi-Serious,” the filmmaker  Leah Wolchok follows the New Yorker cartoon editor Bob Mankoff through the selection process and interviews  several of the publication’s longtime contributors: George Booth, Mort Gerberg, Roz Chast. They are joined by  emerging artists like Liana Finck, Farley Katz and Ed Steed.The film also peeks into the weekly open office hours of the cartoon department, where artists can submit their work directly to Mr. Mankoff, receiving instant criticism or praise in the process. “Very Semi-Serious” had its world premiere Sunday at the Tribeca Film Festival, and has three more screenings this week. During an interview in New York, Ms. Wolchok, 37, spoke about  how she sought to portray the cartoons and cartoonists on screen. Below are excerpts from that conversation.You had so many cartoonists to choose from. How did you go about figuring out who to talk to?Part of it was looking at the cartoons I liked and finding those people. But another part of it was that I was really looking for the multigenerational story. I was looking for people who had been around for a really long time who were at the end of their careers and looking back on their legacy at The New Yorker. And I was looking for people at their peak, like Roz Chast, who will always be on top. And then I was looking for people who were at the very beginning of their career. When I first met Matt Diffee in 2008, he was called the rising star by a few different publications.The degree of racial diversity in the world of cartoonists for The New Yorker, and subsequently for your film, is low. Did you seek out diversity making the movie?It was something that intrigued me from the beginning to meet a group of people this large that was so homogenous. Especially coming out of a San Francisco liberal consciousness and looking at an institution so well respected, how could it be that they’re still so homogenous. All I know is that the community that you see on screen is the community that exists at The New Yorker.How did you go about choosing the cartoons to show and how to show them onscreen?There were cartoons that were interesting because they were thematically relevant to the scene. And then, it’s a tricky thing because it’s an art form that’s meant to be appreciated in flipping through a magazine. To have something work on-screen is a totally different experience. The way someone gets a cartoon is you look at the image, you look down at the caption and you look back at the image and you get it. The New Yorker has done studies that your pupil dilates in the moment that you get the cartoon. Thinking about that, we knew that we had to present the cartoon in such a way that we’re forcing you to look where we want you to look so that you get it when we say that you should. So we zoom out in certain places or we pan right or left, or do the caption first. There are ways we’ve guided you in the best way to help you get it in the context of the movie.Have you always been a fan of The New Yorker?I didn’t grow up with The New Yorker. I discovered it in college because of the fiction. I was interested in writing. And then I got into the cartoons.How did you want to use New York in the film?We shot a lot of street scenes because we were looking for everyday moments that happen on the streets of New York that could be turned into New Yorker cartoons. You could put a New Yorker cartoonist on any street corner and have them observe what’s happening and they would see things that none of the rest of us would see.Any quintessential New York moments to share?We were filming a New Yorker softball game against GQ in Central Park. Right before the game started and we were waiting at the benches, a woman stuck her dog in the water fountain and started washing the dog’s bottom in the water fountain. She was basically using the water fountain like a doggie bidet. This happened as we were filming our cartoonist on the bench waiting for the softball game to begin. To me, that kind of, I don’t care what anyone else thinks or what other person is gonna be using this water fountain, I’m gonna take care of my needs right now attitude, that kind of thing could only happen in New York.