A writer for Conan O’Brien who briefly punctured the illusion that late-night television is a chummy fraternity and offered some elliptical criticism of rival hosts has been met with a rare rebuke from his usually genial employer.In a series of tweets that has since been deleted, Andrés du Bouchet, a writer for the TBS late-night program “Conan,” decried what he called “Prom King Comedy” and criticized a perceived overreliance on gimmicky, celebrity-oriented comedy segments on other shows.Using language that was occasionally suitable for prime time, Mr. du Bouchet wrote that “comedy in 2015 needs a severe” shakeup.“No celebrities, no parodies, no pranks, no mash-ups or hashtag wars,” he continued.Mr. du Bouchet added: “Prom King Comedy. That’s what I call all this,” using an expletive for emphasis.“You’ve let the popular kids appropriate the very art form that helped you deal,” he wrote. “None of the funniest stuff ever involved celebrity cameos.”Though Mr. du Bouchet did not mention any names, he appeared to be criticizing programs like Jimmy Fallon’s “Tonight” show on NBC, where viral videos, social media games and segments that present celebrity guests in surprising settings have become signature elements.Late-night shows like “Jimmy Kimmel Live” on ABC and James Corden’s “Late Late Show” on CBS also regularly feature similar segments.On Sunday afternoon, Mr. O’Brien offered a similarly indirect response to Mr. du Bouchet. Without mentioning him by name, Mr. O’Brien wrote on his Twitter account:I wish one of my writers would focus on making my show funnier instead of tweeting stupid things about the state of late night comedy.— Conan O’Brien (@ConanOBrien) 19 Apr 15Representatives for Mr. O’Brien and for “Conan” did not immediately comment on Monday morning.But Mr. du Bouchet seemed to be aware that his remarks had struck a nerve. In a tweet posted on Sunday, he wrote that he wished “this many people” cared about his opinions “when I was THE leading oncological researcher in the world.”A version of this article appears in print on 04/21/2015, on page C3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Writer for Conan O’Brien Criticizes Other Shows.