Season 7, Episode 10: “The Forecast”With Diana the Greek waitress-oracle thankfully out of the picture, Roger asks Don to write a “Gettysburg Address-type speech” on the future of the firm. It initially seems like an invitation for Don to reprise the rhetorical greatness of seasons past and point the way forward after a convulsive decade of battle in matters business, marital and literal. When it turns out that Roger first asked unambitious, dull Ted to write that same speech, it’s clear that the address doesn’t matter at all. It’s just another company memo, only longer. This spotty episode, jam-packed with more references to the show’s past, will not end with a classic Don Draper stem-winder. It will end with yet another shot of Don, silent and alone.The period drama on AMC.Nonetheless, Don can’t help but obsess over the assignment, endlessly and fruitlessly, because thinking about the future has always either inspired him or terrified him. When he moans “four score and seven years ago” and “it’s got to get better” into his Dictaphone and asks for copies of his older, inspirational calls-to-arms, it’s pointedly pathetic. The very obvious irony of Don’s character has always been that he can understand what other people want — but can’t figure out what he wants. He just doesn’t seem to believe in the concept of happiness anymore, if he ever really did.“Advertising is based on one thing: happiness,” Don said in the series pilot, to Lucky Strike’s Lee Garner, who gets a shout-out from Mathis in this episode. “And you know what happiness is? Happiness is the smell of a new car. It’s freedom from fear. It’s a billboard on the side of the road that screams reassurance that whatever you are doing is O.K. You are O.K.”By Season 5, Don had reduced happiness to sharklike consumption, arguing that happiness is just “a moment before you need more happiness.” No matter how successful Don has grown, he has never been free from fear. His fear has just changed shape. Guys like him and Ted and Roger — and even Joan and Peggy — are no longer afraid of losing their jobs, making it, or even getting rich. They’re afraid of not taking the next leap (whatever that is). They’re afraid of not being happy. They’re afraid that material comfort — or even excess— is not enough. This is, in some ways, a definition of privilege: to seemingly have it all and be threatened by the idea that you do not have enough.“I’ve always said this is a show about becoming white,” “Mad Men” creator Matthew Weiner said in a Paris Review interview last year. “That’s the definition of success in America — becoming a WASP. A WASP male…” Weiner also said, of writing the show’s pilot: “I just wanted an excuse to exorcise my demons, to write a story about somebody who’s thirty-five years old, who has everything, and who is miserable.”Over the course of the series, Don has shaken off his past identity and evolved into the square-jawed, superficial definition of WASP success, albeit one in the midst of a persistent midlife crisis. The show is no longer about his — or anyone else’s — hardscrabble climb to the top floors. It’s now a story about the strange, privileged tribe of white people who live up there, which asks why its fickle members find it so very hard to be happy.The simplest answer offered in this episode is that nothing is ever enough — as Don hammers home in his brief office scene with Peggy (which only made me hunger for more scenes with the two). “I want to have my performance reviewed,” she tells Don, who doesn’t so much comply as subject her to an existential grilling. Sure, Peggy wants to become the first female creative director at the agency, create a catchphrase, become famous and “create something of value.” Don’s reply to every admirable and sincere goal is essentially, “What else?” Though Don surely respects Peggy’s goals in the abstract, he could care less if she breaks through a glass ceiling, and in this scene, he’s more interested in the idea that she has goals at all. He’s not thinking about her; he’s hoping she’ll inspire him, yet again. No doubt, Don sees himself as a sage seeking a deeper truth, but in that office, talking to Peggy as her boss, he comes off like the child who tries to exhaust and annoy his parents by asking the same question over and over: What else? And yet, we see why: “What else? What else? What else?” might well be Don’s mantra. Don is, again, struggling to figure out what to want next in this episode and, again, like so many of his privileged peers, he is looking for ways to blame his current dissatisfaction on others. When Don’s Realtor tells him that his empty penthouse “reeks of failure,” he defensively blusters that “a lot of wonderful things happened here.” When Mathis screws up by trying to apologize to a client with one of Don’s stale (and overly alpha male) lines, he blames it on Don, who fires him after saying, “Take responsibility for your failure.” When Joan’s romance nearly combusts, she blames it on her babysitter. Glen — slimmed down, denim-shirted and delivering awfully stilted dialogue — blames his enlistment (two years after My Lai!) on his stepfather, saying it was the only way to cover up his flunk-out. Sally cares little that her privileged upbringing allows her to go on a summer road trip; she blames her unhappiness on her parents who “just ooze everywhere.”The series has always been a sort of elaborate period-piece midlife crisis drama, and the repercussions of divorce are everywhere in this episode: Tinkerbell cookies sold with Dear John notes, Glen and his stepfather, Sally and her family, and, most poignantly, Joan and her new beau. Joan apparently stocked up on evening wear just in time, because it comes in handy after she meets Richard (Bruce Greenwood), a handsome anti-environmentalist real-estate developer in California, while enjoying the kind of trip she’s booked for Don dozens of times.“Just an executive on a trip out of town,” Richard coos approvingly, as Don’s women have often cooed at him. “I’ll send you flowers,” says Joan, who’s more used to placing the order. It’s a hopeful moment, but it unravels when he tells her that his “plan is no plans” (try typing that in your memo, Don). Much like Don on a business trip, she falls into bed fast and lies about her life — only, unlike Don, it catches up with her because she’s looking for something real, and because Richard says, “I love kids, but I raised mine already… I’m done with that part of my life.”Joan blows up at her babysitter, perhaps because she represents the childless youth she once had, but when Richard shows up at her office with flowers, it’s a little shock. He’s going to buy property in New York (though not on 12th Street in 1970, so maybe he’s not the most forward-looking developer) and try to have a relationship. He doesn’t promise her anything but that he will try. For Joan, that seems like enough for now. For a show that’s been tightfisted about giving its most beloved characters any enduring comfort, this provisional shot at a happy ending may be as good as it gets for Joan.For my money, though, this episode belonged to Sally, who got all the best lines. One of the pleasures of watching this often grim show has been to see the young actress Kiernan Shipka grow up from a pint-size bartender, nearly suffocating in plastic bags, to the spiky, principled teenager raging at Don in front of that bus. Ms. Shipka has become a terrific, naturalistic actress with a sharp sense of comic timing that’s on full display when she debates the dubious security of travelers’ checks with Betty. When she tells Betty that she doesn’t need a sex talk, she’s absolutely perfect: “This conversation’s late… And so am I.” Ms. Shipka nearly makes the odd scenes with Glen work, and masters the art of the devastating side-eye while watching her parents bask in sexual attention. She’s so sharp, in fact, that when she screams at Don that she’s going to “hopefully be a different person from you two,” you don’t believe him when he tells her that she’s wrong.A quick note: These recaps are not intended to be exhaustive; that would be exhausting for all of us. I’ll just try to pick a theme each week and continue the conversation. So please share your thoughts in the comments. Do you agree that Sally had the show’s best lines? Did you even know Mathis’s name before he was fired?  Are you tiring of Don’s whinging? We’ve now seen the return of Glen and Rachel — who else do you think we’ll see again? Bob Benson? Sal?And by the way, here’s a look at the New York atelier where the pilot episode of “Mad Men” was shot.
Logan Hill is a journalist who has contributed to The New York Times, New York, Rolling Stone, “This American Life,” Cosmopolitan, Glamour, Wired and others. You can follow him on Twitter at @loganhill33.