This post contains spoilers about Sunday’s episode, “The House of Black and White.”After taking the first week of “Game of Thrones” off, Arya Stark landed in Braavos to commence her training with Jaqen H’ghar and the Faceless Men.[Episode 2 Recap: Cobragrams and Faceless Men]Arya, played by Maisie Williams, has been in the care, voluntarily and otherwise, of one person or another since the series began. She traveled from her home, Winterfell, with her father to King’s Landing, only to see him beheaded, after which she spent time captive to various groups, including the Mountain’s men — who lent her to an unsuspecting Tywin Lannister as a “cupholder” — and the Brotherhood Without Banners. For the past season-plus, she was paired with Rory McCann’s Sandor “The Hound” Clegane in one of the program’s more appealing duos, until she left him for dead in last year’s finale.Season 5 brings new surroundings — Ms. Williams moved from shooting in Belfast to shooting in Croatia — as well as Arya’s first significant wardrobe upgrade since the show’s first season.“The new season was wonderful because my story line was so different,” Ms. Williams said. “But it was still like, ‘Aw, I don’t get to be with Rory.’ ”Ms. Williams recently discussed Arya’s plans in Braavos and teased an answer to why she really left the Hound. These are edited excerpts from the conversation.On Sunday Arya arrived at the House of Black and White. What does that mean to her?I don’t think she knows at the start. She knows that she possibly has one person here who she’s met before but she isn’t 100 percent sure he’s even there. She’s just looking for someone new and someone who will take her under their wing and show her happiness, and that you don’t need to avenge your family to feel satisfied. She can become someone new for a little while.She does start out quite angry though.It won’t change overnight. She’s come a long way to be rejected from the only place she thought would help her. There is a certain amount of frustration when she gets there and he turns her away.She doesn’t have many options, of course, but why do you think this was where she went?Because nothing else was really working. She tried to get home and then got captured. She tried to find her family and they got slaughtered. She tried to go and be sold to her auntie and she passed away. She’s been told this is what you should do, and that is what you should do, and now she’s just like, I’ll do something for me. This place has always intrigued me. I was given this coin for a reason. I’ll go and see what it’s all about. She found Jaqen very interesting, but I don’t think she every really believes that this place Braavos would ever be beneficial to her, until she gets there and meets these wonderful people and realizes she can’t be that mean-spirited little girl, and can’t be bratty and actually has to shut up and listen a little bit in order to go further and be a better person. And a better killer.Arya and the Hound had a fun chemistry together. Did you and Rory McCann talk about how to make that relationship work? Or did it happen organically?I think with Rory, our relationship was quite similar anyway. I was a bit annoying and he was a bit like “Shh.” He’s trying to remember his lines and I’m like [annoying voice] “Did you get any pudding? Did you like it?” And then “Shh.” But we had loads of fun. Even the hardest emotional scenes — once we left the set, that got left behind. I remember once after a really, really tough scene that we had together, we went back to the hotel to get changed. And I came out and there was a piano in the hallway, and he was playing the piano and singing. Three seconds ago we were nearly crying and now we’re just having fun.Were you sad to leave that behind?I was. We spent the end of Season 3 together and the whole of Season 4 together, and “Game of Thrones” is such a massive part of my life. So I spent a long time with a really good friend. I think Arya leaving the Hound for dead at the end of Season 4 was something that lots of people disagreed with. And in this new season you might find out a little bit why she did it. Maybe? It’s nice, because everyone had that opinion on the Internet and you never really get to express yours. But I’ve been given that opportunity onscreen.Do you think Arya was inspired to set out on her own by seeing Brienne, this female warrior, take out the Hound?Definitely. And going into this new training process, her recent experiences have been with the Hound, who talks about the quickest way to kill a man, and with Brienne, who is biting people. It’s very vicious, so that’s the mentality she has going into this. She’s like, “I want to be like those guys. I want to go to the next level. I’m ready.” And [the Faceless Men] are like, “You’re so not.” She thought she was learning the way to be the most effective killer and she realizes there’s so much more to it than that. Finally Arya’s being put in her place. Usually she’s the one who’s like “Me me me,” and finally someone says no and means it, and it really hits her hard. Like “Oh, I don’t know everything…”