AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn Shattuck10:15 A.M. (Starz Cinema) MASTER AND COMMANDER: THE FAR SIDE OF THE WORLD (2003) In the first of three Russell Crowe movies, Mr. Crowe stars as Capt. Jack Aubrey, commander of a British frigate whose crew must battle a faster, larger French vessel off the South American coast during the Napoleonic wars. Paul Bettany is the ship’s surgeon — so deft he operates on his own abdomen — and the sensitive foil to Aubrey’s ferocity. Writing in The New York Times, A. O. Scott said that Peter Weir’s vigorous adaptation of the Patrick O’Brien series, with land-based scenes filmed on the Galápagos Islands, “hums with humor, passion and life.” He added, “It makes you wish Napoleon were still around, so we — that is, I mean, the British Empire — could beat him all over again.” In “Winter’s Tale” (2014), at 12:45 p.m. on HBO Signature, Mr. Crowe plays a gangster in early- 20th-century New York intent on putting asunder the love between a consumptive rich girl (Jessica Brown Findlay) and a thief (Colin Farrell). “A thin line separates the magical from the preposterous, and by insisting so strenuously on its own magic, ‘Winter’s Tale’ pitches helplessly into earnest ridiculousness,” Mr. Scott wrote about this adaptation by Akiva Goldsman of Mark Helprin’s best seller. And in “A Good Year” (2006), at 2:45 on HBO Signature, Mr. Crowe portrays Max Skinner, an aggressive London bond trader who inherits a small vineyard from his Uncle Henry (Albert Finney). Soon enough, Max, soothed by the memories of summers spent amid the grapevines, has morphed into a bon vivant and fallen for a beautiful bistro owner (Marion Cotillard). Then a young Californian (Abbie Cornish) shows up and announces that she is his uncle’s previously unknown daughter — which would make her Henry’s true heir. In his review of this Ridley Scott adaptation of the Peter Mayle novel, Stephen Holden advised viewers “to make a reservation at an upscale French restaurant immediately after seeing the film or risk going home feeling deprived.”9 P.M. (Fox) THE FOLLOWING Ryan (Kevin Bacon) finds his hunt for the new killer leading him back to Joe Carroll (James Purefoy).9 P.M. (CW) JANE THE VIRGIN Jane (Gina Rodriguez) tries to figure out how to move beyond her problems with Rafael (Justin Baldoni). Xo (Andrea Navedo) reveals a secret that she has been keeping from Rogelio (Jaime Camil). And Alba (Ivonne Coll) finally remembers who pushed her down the stairs.11 P.M. (Nat Geo) STARTALK Neil deGrasse Tyson interviews the actor George Takei about how once-futuristic scenarios in “Star Trek” relate to contemporary moral and social issues. Charles Liu, an astrophysicist at the American Museum of Natural History; the comedian Leighann Lord; and the science educator Bill Nye weigh in.11 P.M. (HBO Signature) GRAVITY (2013) A medical engineer (Sandra Bullock) and an astronaut (George Clooney) become stranded high above Earth when satellite debris destroys their space shuttle in this intense spectacle. “You have to see it to believe it,” A. O. Scott wrote in The Times. “Nothing in the movie — not hand tools or chess pieces, human bodies or cruise-ship-size space stations — rests within a stable vertical or horizontal plane. Neither does the movie itself, which in a little more than 90 minutes rewrites the rules of cinema as we have known them.” The film won seven Oscars, including best director (Alfonso Cuarón) and best cinematography.What’s Streaming NowBEYOND THE REACH (2015) A corporate shark named Madec (Michael Douglas) hires a young guide, Ben (Jeremy Irvine), to help him kill a bighorn on a Mojave Desert hunting trip. But Madec mistakes an old prospector for a sheep and pulls the trigger too soon, turning Ben, who refuses to cover up the accident, into Madec’s next prey. “Why Madec doesn’t just do away with Ben when he has the chance is unclear, but when Mr. Douglas is playing this type of snarling, greed-driven ogre, rational decision-making is always in short supply,” Neil Genzlinger wrote in The Times about this thriller, directed by Jean-Baptiste Léonetti. (iTunes)Advertisement