By ANTHONY TOMMASINIAPRIL 19, 2015
One would think that by now the Boston Symphony Orchestra, which has been around since 1881, would have nothing to prove. Still, Andris Nelsons, the ensemble’s dynamic new music director, and the players, who are clearly excited over his arrival, seemed eager to show off last week at Carnegie Hall.The orchestra performed three challenging programs on three successive nights, ending on Friday with a feisty, commanding account of Mahler’s 80-minute Sixth Symphony. These were the first chances for New Yorkers to hear the Boston Symphony since the Latvian-born Mr. Nelsons took its helm in September. The hall was packed each night.The pressure on Mr. Nelsons, 36, must have been enormous. Before his coming, the orchestra had been without a music director since James Levine resigned in 2011, finally bowing to health problems that during that period had caused him to withdraw from numerous performances. The players were understandably demoralized. A couple of weeks after the resignation, Mr. Nelsons substituted for Mr. Levine in a Boston Symphony performance of Mahler’s Ninth at Carnegie Hall, which may have been a sign of what was coming.If anything is clear from these Carnegie concerts, Mr. Nelsons has brought a jolt of youthful energy, along with charisma and accomplishment, to an eminent ensemble that was crying out for leadership. The orchestra certainly sounded lush and rich, though in the Mahler, and also Shostakovich’s 10th Symphony on Thursday night, Mr. Nelsons sometimes went for huge climaxes that turned blaring and raw.AdvertisementLast year at Carnegie, Mr. Nelsons conducted a glittering, sensual concert performance of Strauss’s “Salome” with the Vienna Philharmonic. These Boston Symphony concerts were not quite on that level. The highlight was Shostakovich’s 10th on Thursday. Even some of Mr. Nelsons’s biggest champions acknowledge that he arrived on the job with no discernible mission for the institution. He has said in interviews, including a recent one in The New York Times, that his top priority for now will be maintaining the orchestra’s honored heritage. But where does he want to take it?AdvertisementOne fresh venture involves Shostakovich. Deutsche Grammophon has begun a project to record Mr. Nelsons and the orchestra in live performances of Shostakovich’s Symphonies 5 to 10, and some shorter works, a series titled “Shostakovich Under Stalin’s Shadow.”Based on the performance of the 54-minute 10th, Mr. Nelsons connects intuitively to Shostakovich’s music. The piece was completed in 1953, just months after Stalin’s death, and the oppressiveness of the Stalinist era hovers over the score, even with its bouts of gnashing intensity and curious episodes of Neo-Classical vitality.Mr. Nelsons brought dark colors and edginess to the brooding, fitful first movement. The shorter, pummeling second movement had slashing fervor and blazing colors. There was a Mahlerian cast to the Allegretto. Echoes of Bartok came through the searching slow introduction to the finale; then Mr. Nelsons set a crisp tempo in the deceptively vibrant, tart Allegro main section. Now and then, rough patches occurred in the playing and some screeching outbursts seemed forced. Alan Gilbert, in the incisive performance he conducted with the New York Philharmonic recently, did better at revealing the strategic design of a score that can seem rambling. Still, Boston’s crackling account under Mr. Nelsons abounded in character.It was a great idea to begin with the Passacaglia from Act II of Shostakovich’s “Lady Macbeth of Mtsensk,” the opera that led the composer to be denounced by Soviet cultural authorities for the modernism and depravity of the work. This piece starts with a defiantly ugly orchestral blast, played for all its raucousness here.It did not make obvious programmatic sense to follow this piece with Beethoven’s Violin Concerto. Still, the superb German violinist Christian Tetzlaff proved an ideal soloist. All the delicacy, lyricism and magisterial elegance of the music came through in Mr. Tetzlaff’s playing. Yet, being an artist immersed in contemporary music, he also revealed the experimental strangeness in this piece, especially with his impetuous dispatching of passagework. Mr. Nelsons and the orchestra were with him all the way.Wednesday’s program opened with the New York premiere of Gunther Schuller’s “Dreamscape,” composed in 2012. Mr. Schuller has written that this 11-minute piece was practically “presented” to him in a dream, including details of its three-part structure: a fanciful scherzo, followed by an atmospheric nocturne, then a primordial section titled “Birth-Evolution-Culmination.”His musical voice here deftly combines skittish pointillist figures, atonal harmonic richness and hints of big-band jazz. The playfulness includes impish quotations, including bits of Tchaikovsky’s “Nutcracker.” Mr. Schuller, 89, who was present, looked gratified by the dynamic performance and the audience’s enthusiastic response.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.One can only hope that Mr. Nelsons will make music by living composers a priority. So far, he has been moving very cautiously. Contemporary music is not a box to be checked off on a music director’s list of things to do; it is core to the mission of an orchestra, not to mention the future of the art form.After Mr. Schuller’s piece, a much-reduced number of players joined the veteran pianist Richard Goode for Mozart’s final piano concerto (No. 27 in B flat, K. 595). Mr. Goode played for the most part with style and grace, especially in his lilting account of the dancing final movement. But the orchestra’s playing was curiously generic and staid.After intermission Mr. Nelsons led a cinematic and sumpt uous account of “Ein Heldenleben” by Richard Strauss, another composer for whom Mr. Nelsons seems to have strong affinity.The Mahler Sixth on Friday had moment-to-moment excitement. Episodes and passages were dispatched compellingly, and I never drifted. But at times, especially during the expansive first movement, the music came off as lurching and driven. This symphony has been called the “Tragic,” and the best performances capture the inherent weightiness, the bitter resignation, in the music, something I missed in this account, often pumped up and sometimes just loud. Mr. Nelsons settled down during the sublime slow movement, drawing glowing sound from the Boston’s impressive string section and shaping the wistful melody tenderly. And the frenzied finale, usually the hardest to make sense of, emerged with welcome structural clarity.AdvertisementThe audience gave Mr. Nelsons and the players an enormous ovation. Whatever the future, for now the Boston Symphony has placed its trust in a young dynamo.A version of this review appears in print on April 20, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: An Infusion of Energy.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.