AdvertisementSupported byBy David Allen, Zachary Woolfe and James R. Oestreich‘SONGS OF WORLD WAR I’Ian BostridgePark Avenue Armory The centenary of World War I has garnered little attention in America, but elsewhere there is daily news of the past’s horrors. Friday, for instance, was the 100th anniversary of the Battle of Hill 60. And in the Board of Officers Room at the Park Avenue Armory, war’s echoes resounded again, in a devastating concert by Ian Bostridge and his superb pianist, Wenwen Du.Served with unflinching clarity, it was more an indictment than a recital. Mr. Bostridge’s tenor became a weapon of pure, cold metal. Beauty was not the intention; rather, emotional savagery. Vowels lacerated like bayonets; consonants spat, as if they were spent shells. Wild hectoring gave way to cemetery stillness only in the last encore, Ivor Gurney’s uneasy, unearthly “Sleep.”Composers fought and perished, after all. The German Rudi Stephan died in Ukraine in 1915: his brief set, “Ich will dir singen ein Hohelied,” was sung and played with hushed, erotic magic. George Butterworth fell during the Battle of the Somme in 1916: Mr. Bostridge moved his “A Shropshire Lad,” from youthful joy, through anger at a vapid, glorious death, and finally to a survivor’s bitter guilt in the last song, “Is My Team Ploughing?”Music itself was a casualty, Mr. Bostridge suggested in a brief introduction. Few art songs deal with the war, and “Songs of World War I” therefore became songs of conflict. Three of Mahler’s “Wunderhorn” lieder were premonitions, blanched with fear; Weill’s “Four Walt Whitman Songs” had ferocious power; selections from Britten’s “Who Are These Children?” sneered with pacifist righteousness.  DAVID ALLEN‘THE SECRET LOVER’TenetHouse of the RedeemerConstructed in Italian Renaissance style in the early 20th century, the intimate library at the Fabbri Mansion on the Upper East Side, now the House of the Redeemer, was an apt setting for “The Secret Lover,” a charming performance on Saturday by the creative, ambitious early-music group Tenet.The program explored the “concerto delle donne,” a female singing group in late-16th-century Italy that marked a crucial shift in the gender makeup of professional musicians. With a changing lineup and performances that combined singing and likely some light choreography, they were the Supremes of Renaissance Ferrara, gradually taking over the ducal court’s regular chamber performances of secular madrigals for an exclusive audience.The music had casually florid, poised performers on Saturday in the sopranos Jolle Greenleaf and Molly Quinn and the mezzo Virginia Warnken, whose voices, delicate individually, rose to more than the sum of their parts in richness and eloquence when combined. Trading off the verses in ‘L’Amante Segreto’ by Barbara Strozzi, a groundbreaking female composer from the tail end of the ‘concerto delle donne’ period, they gave a sense of both this repertory’s restraint and its freedom.Strozzi was well represented on the program, which also included Francesca Caccini, Luigi Rossi, Sigismondo d’India, Domenico Mazzocchi and Luzzasco Luzzaschi. Caroline Shaw, the winner of the 2013 Pulitzer Prize for music, contributed the shining encore, a setting of a 17th-century poem that had Baroque purity and some modern harmonies. The ensemble — Jeffrey Grossman, harpsichord; Joshua Lee, Hank Heijink, Daniel Swenberg, Charles Weaver, strings — played with relaxed command whether accompanying the singers or in some spirited instrumental selections. ZACHARY WOOLFE‘SPEM IN ALIUM PROJECT’Tallis ScholarsChurch of St. Ignatius LoyolaThe 10 voices of the stellar British choir the Tallis Scholars went relatively unheard in its magnificent concert at the Church of St. Ignatius Loyola on Friday evening. But that was by design.This was the culmination of an ingeniously conceived weeklong Carnegie Hall workshop for pre-professional singers, the Spem in Alium Project, itself part of Carnegie’s groundbreaking early-music festival Before Bach. Peter Phillips, the founder and director of the Tallis Scholars, provided the guiding hand and spirit.Thomas Tallis’s “Spem in Alium,” a motet written for 40 independent voices, proved the ideal vehicle, exceeding the Scholars’ capacity three times over. So Carnegie, through its Weill Music Institute, assembled 37 singers from the United States, Canada, Britain and elsewhere to rehearse and perform as the Carnegie Hall Chamber Chorus.Exquisitely trained by Mr. Phillips and the Scholars, the chorus joined them in performing a Mass consisting of alternating movements from Tomás Luis de Victoria’s “Missa Salve Regina” and Antoine Brumel’s “Missa Et Ecce Terrae Motus” (“Earthquake” Mass). After intermission, the chamber chorus offered choice works by Orlando Gibbons, Thomas Weelkes, Robert Cowper, John Sheppard and Tallis.Then came the vaunted “Spem in Alium” (“Hope in Any Other”), a work hard to make transparent even with singers as well trained as these, the 10 Scholars and 30 members of the chorus. Mr. Phillips gave it a good shot, and the sheer waves of sound had tremendous effect in this excellent acoustical setting.But perhaps more impressive in the end was the chamber chorus’s rendition of an altogether more modest creation by Tallis, the four-part motet “If Ye Love Me.” Simply beautiful. JAMES R. OESTREICHAdvertisement