AdvertisementSupported byBy Joe CoscarelliCLEVELAND — Although the show went on for five hours, a few things managed to go unmentioned at the 30th annual Rock and Roll Hall of Fame induction ceremony on Saturday night here. Among the relevant topics not discussed: the solo catalog of Ringo Starr, who became the fourth and final Beatle to gain entry to the Hall twice over, this time as an individual; disco, rap and dance music, some of the rock-adjacent genres not represented in this year’s class; and the conspicuous decades-long absence of Bill Withers, one of the show’s honorees, from the music industry.Mr. Withers, in a rare public appearance since ceasing to record or perform live in the 1980s — after gifting the world timeless hits like “Lean on Me” and “Ain’t No Sunshine” — alluded to his indefinite hiatus in a crowd-pleasing speech. “I watch a lot of ‘Judge Judy,’ ” he said. “I’m not out and about.” (Mr. Withers also managed to sneak in some insider digs, referring to record labels’ A&R executives as “antagonistic and redundant.”)But at an event dedicated to conserving and protecting a musical tradition, Mr. Withers, 76, held back any real gripes about the business of rock ’n’ roll, and even sang backup for John Legend during a cover of “Lean on Me.” Stevie Wonder, in his induction speech for Mr. Withers, also skipped over the abrupt end to the soul singer’s career. Instead, the ceremony was about holding up — and keeping a tight grip on — consensus icons of the art form, like the late Lou Reed, inducted for a second time after his entry with the Velvet Underground, and the blues-rock guitarist Stevie Ray Vaughan, who died in a helicopter crash in 1990 at age 35.Also welcomed into the Hall of Fame: the pop-punk godfathers Green Day (in their first year of eligibility, which occurs 25 years after an act’s debut record); the “5” Royales, an influential ’50s rhythm and blues group; Chicago’s multiracial Paul Butterfield Blues Band, from the ’60s; and Joan Jett & the Blackhearts, representing women in rock for the evening.In large part a history lesson, the show took more risks when it looked forward. “There’s an effort to keep things relevant,” said Joel Peresman, the president of the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame Foundation, in an interview on Thursday, ahead of the show.Inducting Ms. Jett from far outside the canon was Miley Cyrus, the pop provocateur, who opened her speech by describing “the first time I wanted to have sex with Joan Jett.” Ms. Jett is “what Superwoman really should be,” Ms. Cyrus said.But even with a millennial ambassador on stage, the generational push and pull could be felt. Ricky Byrd, the guitarist for the Blackhearts, said his 13-year-old daughter was “truly not impressed by any of this,” unless it meant she could meet the rapper Iggy Azalea. “In my world, there is only one Iggy you want to meet,” Mr. Byrd said — meaning Iggy Pop — to whooping applause.Still, Mr. Peresman had pointed to the incorporation of current artists as a sign of progress for the institution. Tucked into the back bottom corner of the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame museum down the street from the ceremony was the “Right Here, Right Now” exhibit, featuring costumes and props from artists like Taylor Swift, Rihanna and Lady Gaga. “You have an audience coming in here that you want to keep engaged,” Mr. Peresman said. “You definitely always want to have younger people come, because you want them to learn.”Ms. Cyrus’s Instagram feed could make a nice interactive addition to the collection: Before joining Ms. Jett onstage for a fiery rendition of “Crimson and Clover,” she posted photos of herself in leather overalls, breasts exposed (save for pasties adorned with two letter “J”s), and making an obscene hand gesture to a “no smoking” sign backstage.“It’s important to see another strong woman who does things her way — and she does,” Ms. Jett said of her spiritual protégé, before calling rock a subculture of “integrity, rebellion, frustration, alienation” — one that makes “eternal teenagers of all who follow it.”Actual teenagers were present and screaming from the rafters for Green Day, who were introduced by Fall Out Boy, another punk-influenced, pop-leaning act. Pete Wentz, Fall Out Boy’s bassist, said in an interview, “If we want rock ’n’ roll to keep being this big, meaningful spirit and idea, then you have to be progressive and open to the idea that our culture is moving forward.”While the packaging may be different, he added, “The things Kanye West is doing right now are super rock ’n’ roll.” (Mr. West will not be eligible for the Hall until 2028, although hip-hop acts like N.W.A. and LL Cool J have so far stalled on the ballot.)Appearances this year by modern rock ambassadors like Beck, Dave Grohl, John Mayer, Gary Clark Jr. and Tom Morello were more traditional. Patti Smith and Laurie Anderson gave moving tributes to Mr. Reed — “Everything that Lou taught me, I remember,” Ms. Smith said — while Karen O of the Yeah Yeah Yeahs, pregnant in a studded leather jacket, delivered a sharp version of Mr. Reed’s “Vicious.”By the time Paul McCartney told a drummer-centric version of the Beatles’ origin story, it was past midnight and the crowd was growing visibly restless. (An edited version of the show will air May 30 on HBO.) Ringo Starr shared his solo moment anyway, welcoming most of the night’s performers back for “With a Little Help From My Friends.”Amid the rockers was Ms. Cyrus, and even Mr. Withers again squeezed in front of a microphone. He appeared to be singing, although it was impossible to pick out any one voice. By the time the group moved into the final number, “I Wanna Be Your Man,” Mr. Withers had slipped back offstage, leaving to the others the burden of legacies.Advertisement