AdvertisementSupported byBy Scott ReyburnLONDON — The digital world is increasingly meshing with the art world. More and more art is being marketed and sold online. At the same time, relics from the early days of computing are drawing eye-catching prices, and more and more commercial galleries are showing works by innovative, Internet-savvy artists.Last Monday, a manuscript written by Alan Turing, the British mathematician who was instrumental in cracking the German Enigma code during World War II, sold for $1 million at Bonhams in New York. The price, which included auction house fees, highlighted the growing demand for relics associated with the pioneers of the technology that today dominates our lives.Turing’s fame had recently been enhanced by “The Imitation Game,” the 2014 movie that garnered an Oscar nomination for the actor Benedict Cumberbatch, who played the indefatigable code-breaker. But even before the movie, Turing was recognized among the technologically inclined as the father of modern computing. His 1936 paper, “On Computable Numbers,” is regarded as a landmark in the history of theoretical computer science.The “bombe” computing device Turing constructed at Bletchley Park, Britain’s wartime code-breaking center, was the forerunner of Colossus, the world’s first true computer, with which colleagues de-encrypted the Germans’ even more intractable Lorenz cypher. But his life ended tragically. Turing died in 1954 at age 41 after eating a cyanide-infused apple, having been subjected to years of persecution for his homosexuality and then hormone injections to “cure” it.Bonhams’s 56-page manuscript, the first by Turing that has appeared on the open market, comprised notes on mathematical logic and was thought to date from about 1944. Once owned by the British mathematician Robin Gandy, the notebook was bought by an unidentified bidder. The auction house had not published an estimate, but said by telephone that it had expected it to sell for more than $1 million.Bonhams is gaining a reputation as the leader in this auction sector. Its Fine Books and Manuscripts sale in New York on April 13 included a German wartime Enigma machine. It sold for $269,000.At Bonhams’s History of Science auction in October, the Henry Ford Museum paid $905,000 for one of the 50 Apple-1 computers that Steve Wozniak built at Steve Jobs’s California home in 1976. It is still in operational condition, and the price was the highest paid at auction for a vintage computer. The Apple-1 originally cost $666.66, about $2,600 in today’s money.“Science is a universal language. It belongs to everyone,” said Cassandra Hatton, the director at Bonhams in New York of the history of science and technology. “Artists go out of fashion, but you can’t take away the historical value of something like a Galileo telescope.”Or an Apple-1, given that just about everywhere you are in the world, someone will be using a device bearing that distinctive logo. The Apple logo was designed in 1977 by Rob Janoff, who said in a 2009 interview with the design website creativebits.org that he had not been thinking of Turing’s sad demise at the time. He said that it was a coincidence that he used an apple and that he added the bite to distinguish it in scale from a cherry.Ms. Hatton said that fewer than 20 of the original batch of 50 Apple-1s are still in working order. Number 22 is currently being offered by the American collector Bob Luther on eBay. The bid price last week was in the low five figures and rising, with more than a week of the auction remaining.Although the auction prices of those early machines can vary wildly, depending on condition and provenance — another sold for $671,400 at auction in Germany in May — the Apple-1 is to the vintage computer world what the Ferrari 250 GTO is to the classic car market. Both are extraordinarily rare (just 39 GTOs were made from 1962 to 1964) and their prices dominate their respective markets — a GTO was sold for $38.1 million at a Bonhams auction in California in August.But there are plenty of other glamorous and desirable cars created over the decades, now commanding hefty six- and seven-figure sums. The difference is, in part, that luxury sports cars have always been rolled out in relatively small numbers while computers are mass-produced. And a 1980s IBM 5150 PC discovered in a garage doesn’t have the same visual or commercial appeal as a Porsche 911 3.2 Carrera “barn find.”“It’s always going to be the early item, made before they were famous, that drives the value,” Ms. Hatton said. “They only made 50 Apple-1s when they started. That’s why it made its money.”Unfortunately, as yet, there don’t seem to be enough of these rarities to sustain a wider market. While early computers are being bought and sold, those transactions are generally conducted privately by enthusiasts with arcane levels of specialist knowledge.“A large chunk of it is done collector-to-collector,” said Earl Baugh, secretary of the Atlanta Historical Computing Society, which is co-organizing the Vintage Computer Festival Southeast 3.0 at Roswell, Ga., from May 2 to 3.“Collectors are in Internet groups and they’re talking to each other,” Mr. Baugh said. “If a trade happens on eBay, that’s often because someone has just found an old computer in a garage.”Mr. Baugh said he had recently discovered a 1980s Sun-1 workstation in a garage and managed to sell it to a collector for $10,000.Meanwhile, the technologies that Turing and Jobs developed are in their turn continually creating new kinds of art. On Wednesday, XPO Gallery in Paris opened an exhibition of new works by the Brooklyn artist Clement Valla, who has used 3-D printing techniques to “wrap” recreations of French medieval sculptures from the Metropolitan Museum of Art and the Cloisters in New York in their own digital images. The 17 works are priced from $2,000 to $10,000.Further south, down in Turin, the Fondazione Sandretto Re Rebaudengo has commissioned a new work from the digital artist Ian Cheng, also from New York. The first episode of his three-part film series, “Once out of Nature,” will use the latest artificial intelligence systems to explore the evolution of the human mind. The show, organized by Hans Ulrich Obrist, opens on Thursday.“We think technology is very important, and we want to work with artists who use it in a sophisticated way,” said Patrizia Sandretto Re Rebaudengo, whose private foundation, specializing in video and digital works by younger artists, is celebrating its 20th anniversary this year.But Ms. Sandretto Re Rebaudengo is aware that video and digital art, like vintage computers, are not always easy on the eye, and so have a more limited appeal to collectors.“You never see videos these days at auctions,” she said. “Paintings are more decorative, you can have them at home and you can sell them easily.”The question is: Digital technology is changing art, but can it change collecting?Advertisement