AdvertisementSupported byBy Sam RobertsBill Arhos, a frustrated guitarist whose long-running television show, “Austin City Limits,” introduced much of America to the sound of redneck rock and progressive country and prompted Austin, Tex., to proclaim itself the “Live Music Capital of the World,” died on April 11 in suburban Austin. He was 80. His death, of heart disease, was announced by KLRU, the public television station in Austin, his hometown, which originated the show.Armed with a pilot featuring Willie Nelson that he produced for $7,000, Mr. Arhos (pronounced AR-hoes) convinced public broadcasting stations in 1975 that the rest of the nation was ready for the emerging home-brewed regional mix of rock and counterculture lyrics by country singer-songwriters, a marked contrast to mainstream Nashville music.By 2010, “Austin City Limits” had become the longest-running live musical concert show on television, surpassing the Boston Pops’s 34-year record on WGBH. “Bill got it launched as a series, Bill kept it going as a series for 25 or more years,” said Terry Lickona, the show’s current producer and Mr. Arhos’s former colleague. “That was an important part of Bill’s legacy.”The genesis was collaborative. Inspired by Jan Reid’s 1974 book, “The Improbable Rise of Redneck Rock,” Paul Bosner, a producer for the Austin station (originally called KLRN), and a colleague, Bruce Scafe, suggested that they start a music series. Mr. Arhos submitted a proposal to PBS, which awarded a grant and featured his pilot in one of its first national on-air fund-raising drives. Introduced with Gary P. Nunn’s “London Homesick Blues,” “Austin City Limits” went on to feature performances by country stars like Chet Atkins, Garth Brooks, Johnny Cash, the Dixie Chicks, Emmylou Harris and Reba McEntire, as well as rock and blues acts including Ray Charles, Leonard Cohen, Sheryl Crow, Fats Domino, Foo Fighters, B. B. King, Roy Orbison, Pearl Jam, Robert Plant, Neil Young, Townes Van Zandt and Stevie Ray Vaughan. In 2002 the show spawned the Austin City Limits Music Festival. “What was the most visible cultural product of Austin? Music,” Mr. Arhos was quoted as saying in the 2010 book “Weird City,” by Joshua Long. “It was obvious. It would be like ignoring a rhinoceros in your bathtub.” In 1995, Mr. Arhos told Texas Alcalde, the University of Texas alumni magazine: “There were probably more blues and jazz musicians here than country musicians, but the only moneymaking gigs were in country. So they played jazz and blues inside the country music, and that developed a new art form.” Billy Philip Arhos was born in the East Texas town of Teague on Nov. 3, 1934, the son of Greek immigrants. His father, Philip Arhos, was a restaurateur. His mother, the former Helen Bournias, was a courthouse administrator. He earned a bachelor’s degree from Rice University and a master’s in education from Texas A&M. He is survived by two daughters, Leslie Lucas and Laura Jenkins; a son, Damon Arhos; six grandchildren; four great-grandchildren; and a sister, Virginia Hardy. Mr. Arhos joined public television shortly after it began broadcasting from the communications building at the University of Texas in Austin, and through “Austin City Limits,” his former colleague Mr. Lickona said, “he was able vicariously to live a lot of his musical fantasies.” He was president and general manager of the station from 1986 until his retirement in 1999. He also served on the boards of PBS and the Country Music Association. As executive producer of “Austin City Limits” from 1975 until his retirement, he was credited with setting the program’s cutting-edge tone. “Here was a show that you could watch an entire live performance of a band — not just one song after Johnny Carson walks off the couch — in front of an intimate audience,” Dave Grohl of Foo Fighters told Rolling Stone magazine.“Those experiences translate,” he said. “When I was young, I was like: ‘Wow, that’s music! That’s how it’s done! Now it’s in my living room, and it makes me want to do that, too.’ You watch these brilliant musicians ripping on that stage week after week, and it could only inspire young musicians. Maybe that’s what it was for.”Advertisement