By KATHRYN SHATTUCKAPRIL 21, 2015
8:30 P.M. (TCM) MARRIAGE ITALIAN STYLE (1964) Sophia Loren, the subject of this Turner Classic Movies tribute, stars as an ex-prostitute who tricks her longtime lover (Marcello Mastroianni) into marrying her instead of a younger woman by claiming to be dying. But soon enough it becomes evident that she isn’t. Whenever the director Vittorio De Sica joins forces with Ms. Loren, “something wonderful happens,” Bosley Crowther wrote in The New York Times about this flamboyant Oscar nominee for best foreign-language film. “The something wonderful that’s happened is the conception and projection of a film so frank and free and understanding of a certain kind of vital woman — and man, too — that it sends you forth from the theater feeling you’ve known her — and him — all your life.” A short film directed by Ms. Loren’s son Edoardo Ponti, “Human Voice” (2014), based on the Jean Cocteau play about a woman’s final telephone conversation with her lover, leads in at 8 p.m.8 P.M. (13, 49) THE NATIONAL MALL — AMERICA’S FRONT YARD National Geographic traces the evolution of the National Mall in Washington, from its conception in 1791 by Pierre Charles L’Enfant to the creation of the Washington Monument and the Lincoln Memorial to the Mall’s use as a place for protest, reflection and celebration.8:20 P.M. (Starz Cinema) AFTERNOON DELIGHT (2013) A discontented wife and mother (Kathryn Hahn) visits a strip club with her husband (Josh Radnor) — the better to bring the erotic thrill back to their bedroom — and gets a lap dance from a frisky 20-year-old (Juno Temple), then invites her home to work as a nanny in this Jill Soloway comedy. “Because this talky, uncinematic movie portrays bourgeois Los Angeles as peopled by bored, yammering wives whose husbands are happier playing cards or sports than spending time with them, it is easy to view them as smarter, wittier, less narcissistic equivalents of ‘The Real Housewives of Beverly Hills’ minus cosmetic surgery,” Stephen Holden wrote in The Times. “Even so, by the end of ‘Afternoon Delight,’ you find yourself mulling over a nagging question: Is that all there is? Could be.”8:30 P.M. (TV5Monde) MONSIEUR KLEIN (1976) Alain Delon stars as Robert Klein, a dandyish Roman Catholic art dealer in Paris in 1942 who uses the Nazi occupation to profit from failing Jewish businesses. Then he discovers that he has been mistaken for a missing Jew — and a member of the Resistance — who is using his identity in schemes that are even more diabolical. Vincent Canby, writing in The Times, said that Mr. Delon was “neither interesting nor mysterious enough to hold a film like this together.” But, he said, Joseph Losey’s movie was “a seductive picture to watch.”Advertisement9 P.M. (CW) iZOMBIE Liv (Rose McIver) devours the brain of a murdered computer hacker and inherits his intense agoraphobia along with his gaming skills.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.9 P.M. (TLC) 19 KIDS AND COUNTING The newlyweds Jessa Duggar and Ben Seewald embark on their European honeymoon — without their chaperones.Advertisement10 P.M. (CBS) CSI: CYBER Agent Ryan (Patricia Arquette) and her team investigate a high school victim of cyberbullying who has vowed revenge against her classmates.10 P.M. (13); 11 P.M. (49) AMERICAN TERRORIST In November 2008, members of Lashkar-e-Taiba, a militant group often said to be associated with Pakistan’s intelligence agency, carried out an assault on Mumbai that left more than 160 people dead. Among the operatives was David Coleman Headley, an American who had cased the city for two years. In this follow-up to their 2011 documentary, “A Perfect Terrorist,” the PBS series “Frontline” and ProPublica present new information on surveillance programs that failed to detect and stop the plot; footage recorded by Mr. Headley on a reconnaissance mission inside the Taj Hotel before an attack; insights into an assault on a Danish newspaper that he also planned; and accounts of how he was finally captured.What’s Streaming NowDEADBEAT Tyler Labine returns as the hapless stoner Pac, who can still see ghosts in Season 2 of this Hulu original. But romance is brewing with the recently deceased Sue (Lucy DeVito), and if he helps her reach the afterlife he might lose her for good. (hulu.com)A version of this schedule appears in print on April 21, 2015, on Page C7 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Tuesday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.