AdvertisementSupported byBy Mike HaleComedy Central recently released a teaser for the third season of “Inside Amy Schumer”: a music video parody sending up male obsession with a certain aspect of female anatomy, to the refrain, “Milk, milk, lemonade, round the corner fudge is made.” A few days later “Inside Amy Schumer” won a Peabody Award, television’s seal of middlebrow cultural respectability, alongside dramas like “The Americans” and “The Honorable Woman.” It was all the proof needed that no one has read the current cultural, intellectual and comedic moment better than Ms. Schumer.But if you want some more evidence, check out the guest stars in Season 3 of “Inside Amy Schumer,” beginning on Tuesday night. A segment in the season premiere puts Ms. Schumer onscreen with Tina Fey, Julia Louis-Dreyfus and Patricia Arquette. An episode-long movie parody in the May 5 episode includes the serious actors John Hawkes, Paul Giamatti, Jeff Goldblum, Dennis Quaid and Vincent Kartheiser. That’s a lot of weight for a sketch-comedy series on basic cable, which is to say, that’s a lot of people trying to hitch a ride on Ms. Schumer’s success.The mesmerizingly transgressive “Milk, Milk, Lemonade” video opens the season, and it encapsulates Ms. Schumer’s primary themes: what women are expected to look like, act like and think; the sliding definition of dirty in current comedy; the strategic employment of said dirtiness by a sweet-faced girl from the Upper East Side of Manhattan. Beyond all that, it reflects the perfect, classic balance of smart and filthy that makes Ms. Schumer so hilarious.Unfortunately, it’s funnier than most of what follows in the first three episodes of the season, where there are signs that all the positive attention the show is receiving may be having a negative, perhaps inevitable, effect. Seriousness has crept in — too many of the sketches have a didactic, lecturing quality at the expense of the wild, smutty humor that made the show necessary viewing. In the season premiere, especially, it’s as if Ms. Schumer put down the sex toys and picked up a megaphone.A “Friday Night Lights” takeoff starring her and Josh Charles has a premise that’s better in theory than in execution: the town turns against the new high school football coach when his rules for the team include “no raping.” The scenes of the young players earnestly arguing in favor of rape are initially funny, and Mr. Charles does a great Kyle Chandler impression, but the one-note sketch runs on too long. It’s better than the one starring Ms. Fey, Ms. Louis-Dreyfus and Ms. Arquette, another high-concept, low-laughs piece about the expiration date on actresses’ desirability.Later sketches with Ms. Schumer as the woman who’s more game for a strip club outing than the guys, or as an undercover cop who’s literally invisible because of her ordinary looks, are funny enough but still don’t have the old spark.A different animal altogether is the season’s third episode, the full-length “12 Angry Men Inside Amy Schumer,” a highly polished black-and-white “12 Angry Men” parody in which an all-male jury debates whether an off-screen Ms. Schumer is hot enough to be on television. (Well, on basic cable.) It certainly gets points for being different and ambitious, and the performances are mostly first-rate, especially Mr. Giamatti’s fully committed portrayal of a reprehensible holdout. But again, it’s more admirable than funny.The best thing in the new season — after “Milk, Milk, Lemonade” — is another music video parody, a relatively low-pressure segment with no big-name guest stars. Ms. Schumer, getting ready for work in the morning, is confronted in her apartment by a boy band that tells her she doesn’t need all that makeup. But when she happily scrubs it off, they’re not so sure. “I didn’t know that your lashes were so stubby and pale,” they croon. “Just a little mascara and you’ll look female.” Point made, effortlessly.Advertisement