By KATHRYN SHATTUCKAPRIL 20, 2015
“How’s it end?” Holly Taylor asked when she discovered that her interviewer had seen the Season 3 finale of FX’s “The Americans,” which she had not.In hushed tones, Wednesday night’s cliffhanger was revealed. And then, “Yes!” A squeal. Some exuberant jumping up and down.Ms. Taylor’s Paige, the daughter of Elizabeth and Philip Jennings — those K.G.B. operatives masquerading as your average American couple in the suburbs of 1980s Washington — has become a major catalyst this season, sleuthing her way into the uncomfortable truth about her parents. So forgive her, please, if she’s been a little broody.“I feel like her emotions are pretty understandable for a 15-year-old who just found out that her whole life is a lie,” Ms. Taylor said.AdvertisementIn the first season, Paige was something of a prop, the result of the K.G.B.’s requirement that Elizabeth (Keri Russell) and Philip (Matthew Rhys) have children to secure their believability as a couple. But by Season 2, her relentless snooping into her parents’ dark spaces suggested that Paige would not go quietly into the night Then the Jennings’s handlers ordered them to reveal their true selves to Paige and bring her into the fold. In the middle of Season 3, the couple finally told her the truth: They were Soviet spies.Advertisement“I thought it was awesome that they put it kind of randomly there in the middle,” Ms. Taylor said of what could easily have been a season-ending cliffhanger. “That way, you get to see how it affects everyone after.”A petite 17-year-old who describes herself on Twitter as “composed of 97% pop tart,” Ms. Taylor was 2 when she moved with her Irish mother and Scottish father from Nova Scotia, where she was born, to North Jersey.At 3, she started dancing and not long after, wide-eyed from seeing “42nd Street,” announced to her mother that she dreamed of being on Broadway.After hearing about an open call for the musical “Billy Elliot,” she tried out and made it to the end of auditions but wasn’t called back. The second time, she was, and at 11, Ms. Taylor was dancing eight shows a week as the ballet girl Sharon Percy.The gig lasted 22 months, during which she watched her fellow cast members go on auditions and decided that she wanted to as well. In the eighth grade, as “Billy Elliot” was ending, she headed to California, where she read for several series, including “The Americans.” By the time she was called back for the show, she’d nearly forgotten about it.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Returning to New York, Ms. Taylor had what she called a “chemistry read” with Ms. Russell. “It was like: ‘The whole gang’s here. Watching you. No stress,’ ” she said with a giggle. Combustion achieved.The emotional complexities found in “The Americans” can be daunting for a veteran actor, let alone a teenager in her first starring role. To assist Ms. Taylor with her story line, Joe Weisberg and Joel Fields, the show runners, created a document that tracked Paige’s psychological state scene by scene as her parents’ lives were unveiled. They also allowed time for rehearsals and shot a variety of reactions that could be interchanged, depending on forthcoming developments and what ultimately felt right for her character.“Holly is able — very often, on a first reading without any direction, as if it’s effortless — to get those emotions across,” said Mr. Weisberg, the show’s creator.AdvertisementMr. Fields added: “She doesn’t feel the need to act. What she does is find the truth in her character and simply let that play.”Part of that truth is the show’s attention to ’80s fashion detail. And Paige’s pre-Lycra, cardboard-stiff vintage jeans hurt. “This season, I had to ask them for a different pair,” she said. “Usually I try and deal with it because they’re a little snug. But I went to sit down, and I thought my rib cage would crack open.”Filming two to four days a week, Ms. Taylor is accompanied by her mother to the set in Brooklyn. Like a typical high school junior, she’s contemplating college, mulling what to wear to the school formal and, in contrast to Paige’s immersion in Christianity, researching Buddhism.“I guess it’s kind of like a Hannah Montana thing,” she said. “I have the best of both worlds.”So is Paige going to end up working for the K.G.B.?“I honestly have no idea how that’s going to go, but I think it would be awesome if I was a spy,” she gushed.“Hopefully not putting people in suitcases,” she added, referring to the gruesome scene in which her television parents broke the bones of a naked corpse to make it fit. “But, I mean, if that’s what she signs up for, I guess it comes with the contract.”A version of this article appears in print on April 21, 2015, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline: Playing a 15-Year-Old Whose ‘Whole Life Is a Lie’.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.