AdvertisementSupported byBy Zachary WoolfeIf you have heard Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo speak and immediately thought “operatic hero,” then Jacob Ter Veldhuis’s “The News” is the music drama for you.An alchemical rendering of spoken texts as the source of sung music, “The News” had its New York premiere on Friday evening at the Metropolitan Museum of Art. In one sequence, as we see Mr. Cuomo’s image on a screen railing against opponents of gun control regulations, the pitches and rhythms of his speech are simultaneously translated into lines for two female singers and a nine-member ensemble. It may be as close as the governor will ever get to singing “Vissi d’arte.”Over an awkwardly paced 80 minutes, this clever trick is repeated again and again with a host of notables, including Benjamin Netanyahu and Sarah Palin, Piers Morgan and Glenn Beck. Using stuttering, overlapping fragments of speech and graphics-packed video as the issues skip from guns to Iraq to obesity, “The News” gives a fair approximation of how overwhelming, not to say patently absurd, our contemporary media environment can feel.Loosely staged, with the singers (Nora Fischer and Lori Cotler, whose stage name is Loire) spending much of their time sitting behind a news anchor desk, “The News” has appeared in different versions over the past few years. But its politics have remained the same, a slightly left-of-center vision in which the likes of Mr. Cuomo and Michael Moore are championed and the usual suspects are villainized. (Ms. Palin, at this point, is a particularly tired target.)Mr. Ter Veldhuis, who often composes and performs as JacobTV, has a talent for deriving sweet, poppy melodies from his unlikely material. Leaning on brasses, electric guitar, keyboard and percussion, his ensemble (here the agile Fulcrum Point New Music Project) sometimes sounds slouchily jazzy, sometimes energetic and rocking. The vocal lines, electronically processed on occasion to give them an Auto-Tune-like sheen, veer from the peppy vitality of speech rhythms to sinuous lyricism.All experiments in this style take place in the shadow of Scott Johnson, who starting in the early 1980s built melodies and harmonies from the cadences of recorded speech and borrowed propulsive rhythms from rock. Steve Reich used taped fragments of people speaking in some of his earliest works from the mid-1960s, and returned to such samples in later works like “Different Trains.”In a less exalted vein, since 2009 we have had Songify the News (originally Auto-Tune the News), in which electronic processing is ingeniously applied to news broadcasts. Mr. Ter Veldhuis’s recent pieces are a kind of cross between Songify the News and the composer Ted Hearne, who has made vigorous settings of texts from current events in works like “Katrina Ballads,” about the 2005 hurricane, and “The Source,” about WikiLeaks.But Mr. Hearne, especially in “The Source,” shows a soulful sincerity and command of ambiguity that elude Mr. Ter Veldhuis, whose works blare with neon colors, obvious politics and nonstop activity. That relentless pace may accurately mirror our modern condition, but the art Mr. Ter Veldhuis derives from it, however candied, swiftly wears out its welcome.Advertisement