Season 3, Episode 13: “March 8, 1983”Товарищи, как часто вы лжете?
(Comrades, how often do you lie?)The third season is over and Elizabeth and Philip’s worst fears have been realized. And all our questions have been tidily answered.That last statement was a lie.But “everyone lies,” or so Elizabeth tells us. “It’s a part of life.”And besides, look what happens when you tell the truth.Paige could not preserve the secret to which she demanded to know the answer for more just than a few weeks. Her last act here is to call Pastor Tim and tell him her parents are Russian, not American. We don’t know his reaction because it’s a one-way telephone conversation. And we won’t know until next season.That’s not all we don’t know. How much has Elizabeth told Paige about Moscow’s career plan for her? Since the last episode, Paige seems to have been fed a little more information, but we are not told how detailed or truthful it was.But in the night, after Paige has met her grandmother, the woman who has communicated with Elizabeth only by tape since she let her go off to serve the K.G.B., her words are full of the fear that comes with a little knowledge:“I don’t get how she could let you leave like that — basically say goodbye forever,” Paige says. “Would you let me do that?”“You would never have to do anything like that, O.K.?” Elizabeth answers.Elizabeth’s reunion with her mother was moving and consisted mostly of tears and simple exchanges. There is so much to say and so little time. When the three women join hands, you can feel their energy and their sorrow.Similarly, it was interesting to observe Elizabeth’s physical closeness with Paige on the trip, her arm wrapped around her daughter as they walked through West Berlin, and Paige’s seeming physical dependency in response, when just days earlier she was saying, “Don’t touch me.”The closeness disappears when they are back on American asphalt. As Elizabeth and Paige come out of the airport, a rattled Paige blurts out: “I don’t know if I can do this, Mom. I don’t think I can do it,” and our hearts stop.Paige continues: “Go home? And lie to Henry about everything? All my friends, everyone in my life? To lie for the rest of my life? That’s not who I am.”Has Elizabeth already broached the topic with her? Is she just talking about the trip?Sexual exploration“When you try to separate sex from intimacy and honesty, it always goes wrong,” the EST group leader tells the “graduate sex seminar” participants.No one has more experience at that than Philip. Are we all assuming that he got to go skip to the graduate level because of his traumatic advanced-placement sexual training in Russia? Philip’s eyes are shadowed. He appears wounded, damaged even.And is it a coincidence that Philip and Sandra Beeman are both there? Which of Philip’s many discontents possessed him to go back to EST after attending a few sessions as a buddy to Stan?Philip seems to be a broken man in this episode, ready to go rogue or worse. It was clear he was angry for much of the season, but it’s his vacant look in this finale that is most chilling.Was it the near-miss with Stan at Martha’s apartment that is haunting him? Or does it go back to the discovery of the bugged pen and the knowledge that the suspicion would fall on Martha?Or was it Gabriel telling him, “You can’t see 10 feet in front of you” and cutting him down to size with two words: “Grow up”?Sandra catches sight of Philip at the EST meeting, and, in a sort of impromptu speed-sharing session, tells him baldly, “I’m not sure anyone in my life has ever known me.” This pops out as she warms up to proposing that they become confidential EST buddies who tell each other everything. This is the ultimate open-ended plot development. If he accepts, anything might happen. And he looks like a guy who needs a friend.Enter the evil empireWhen Elizabeth sees her mother in West Berlin, her eyes are transformed into fathomless, dark wells spilling over with tears. And what does Paige do? She prays for her grandmother.A few days later, Reagan did something similar as he delivered his “evil empire” speech to the National Association of Evangelicals on March 8, 1983, the date that serves as the title of this episode. His condemnation of the Soviets was wrapped in godliness: “Let us pray for the salvation of all of those who live in that totalitarian darkness — pray they will discover the joy of knowing God,” he said, equating communism with godlessness.When Elizabeth turned her attention to President Reagan, those eyes burned with anger and at times seemed to embody that evil. I expected them to smolder with green fire.Elizabeth interrupts Philip to draw his attention to Reagan on TV. She has no tolerance for Philip’s indecisiveness. In filling in Elizabeth on the engineered “suicide” of the F.B.I. technician, Philip says he thinks it would be acceptable for Martha to find out indirectly.“I don’t think you’re seeing things clearly,” Elizabeth tells Philip, urging him to inform Martha before she hears of the death through office gossip.Philip tries to explain to Elizabeth how hard it was to stage the suicide of the innocent F.B.I. computer tech, whose apartment was filled with robots and other toys that reminded Philip of their son, Henry, but he stumbles and stammers. He seems to be reaching to explain that he needs more justification for what he is doing, but he cannot choke out the words.“What do you mean?” Elizabeth asks, sounding patient but seeming worn.At the BureauPhilip’s end run around Gabriel to arrange Elizabeth’s trip to see her mother is paralleled in the story that Stan unspools to Agent Gaad in the confines of the “vault.” Richard Thomas plays his role with even more pomposity than usual and with a hint of knowingness, as if he had been shadowing Stan, just waiting for him to announce Operation Insubordination. (That’s quite likely. He and Agent Aderholt have made no secret of their conversations that excluded Stan.)Let’s rewind to Stan and Oleg in the car at a rendezvous point, wondering about Nina.Stan: “Can you imagine what she’d think if someone told her the two of us were sitting here doing what we’re doing to try to get her out?”
Oleg: “I think she knows I’m trying to help her.”
Stan: “I think she’d like to put a bullet in my head.”The rest of the world: “What is wrong with you two chuckleheads? How did you ever get into intelligence, anyway?”What are Stan and Oleg expecting in the event that there is a prisoner exchange involving Nina? A return to their cozy triangle?At the same time, Nina is confiding in Anton Baklanov in Russia. “I can’t keep doing this – buying back my life.” She doesn’t sound like she wants to go back to being the K.G.B. whipping girl in Washington.When Stan sits down with Agent Gaad, he seems sure that the logical outcome of his collaboration with Oleg will be to secure the return of Nina. And that he can turn Oleg, or perhaps that part is just window dressing.Agent Gaad is incredulous. “Why would I be stupid enough to trust you again, Stan?” (He wastes no time, however, in arresting Zinaida. No more candy bars for her.)But was Gaad putting on the extreme reaction? Stan’s plan may have been presumptuous and not very farsighted, but certainly his conclusion that the logical next step would be a prisoner exchange for Nina was just a romantic delusion.Then the tables turn, and Stan’s dismissal is reversed by the deputy attorney general who shows up not to discipline Stan but to reassure him that what he has done shows aptitude and that he ought to continue, despite his superiors’ disapproval. Again, Stan’s first request, once he is back on the right side, is to get Nina released, an idea that is nixed once again. When will he ever learn?Suitcase material, revisitedYousaf, too, makes an appearance in this farewell episode.“So Annelise finally pays off for you; the weapons stay out of your enemies’ hands,” Yousaf tells Philip (in his Scott wig and glasses). “Is it worth it?”Based on his words, Yousaf has no knowledge of the bloodshed perpetrated by the goat-gutter, but only that the talks between the Senate Armed Services Committee and the mujahedeen were canceled, denying the Afghan fighters a chance at the weapons they had hoped to use against the Soviets.Comments on the commentsIt’s a good thing you commenters weren’t betting piles of rubles on Martha’s fate, because as far as we know she is still kicking, which means there is a chance we will see her next season. Has Martha joined the cause? Is that even possible? If she did, it would be hard to keep her from knowing about Elizabeth. And the speculation goes on.Commenters, it has been a pleasure sharing these hair-raising moments with you for the last three months. Thank you for the insights and knowledge and background you bring to the table.Thanks, too, to Maria for the Russian translations each week. It’s fun to share this show with a native of the country who is also a regular viewer.The season finale leaves us more paranoid than ever. We have to wonder: Was that really Elizabeth’s mother who was brought to the room for the moving reunion scene? Is it possible that she and Gabriel double-crossed Philip in the service of recruiting Paige? Is Elizabeth gas-lighting Philip?Have we been trained so well to be suspicious that we can’t accept anything in the show at face value? Out-spying the spies and trying to second-guess the show’s creators is part of the pleasure. So please share your ideas about what we have seen and what is to come.Товарищи, до сезона 4, будьте наготове к любым возможностям.(Comrades, until Season 4, remain alert to all possibilities.)