In the penultimate episode of this season of “Broadchurch,” Claire Ripley asks Ellie Miller why she’s so insistent on finding the Sandbrook killer. “It brings peace to the families involved,” Ellie answers.“You think so?” Claire responds with a smirk. “Your friends, the parents. The boy your husband killed. Are they at peace now?”Ellie is left momentarily speechless, and there’s a harrowing silence as Claire’s putdown sinks in. Through these two seasons, everyone has been searching for the light at the end of the tunnel — the final statement, delivered by a police officer or a jury, that brings finality and eventual happiness. Claire knows that’s not how the world works. Endings are never really endings: The morning after Joe was arrested, the Latimer parents still woke up grieving and with an empty bed upstairs. Peace after a tragedy can never really be found.But the finale of the second season of “Broadchurch” offers a powerful rebuttal to Claire’s pessimism. The legal system may be flawed, but there’s a force of justice that’s stronger: a united community. Individuals are weak, violence is easy and pervasive, but when the town stands together, it overcomes all.It doesn’t look that way at the beginning of the episode, though, when Joe Miller is found innocent by a jury of his peers. “What does it take to destroy lives forever? Twelve people. Twelve ordinary, stupid, easily swayed,” Hardy snarls as he leaves the courtroom, punctuating his sentence with an obscenity. The trial has been nearly masochistic to the show itself, dangling all of Ellie and Hardy’s hard work from the first season over the cliffs. And when Joe Miller rises from his glass box and is set free, the town shatters. Nearly everyone was involved in the trial in some way, from the lawyers to the witnesses to the jury to the police force, and they have collectively failed.And of course, the verdict is also a massive failure for the legal system. Even the victorious Sharon Bishop knows it as she packs up her things. “It’s street fighting in wigs, that’s all,” she tells the fuming Jocelyn. The oblivious Abby acts as if she just won the World Cup, but Sharon’s cynicism only grows.The acidic taste of disillusionment sits in the air as Ellie and Hardy race off, with Claire in tow, to crack the Sandbrook case once and for all. The verdict is a body blow for both detectives. Hardy, however, flips powerlessness into motivation. “That fury is fuel. Do something with it,” he tells Ellie.So they bring the kitchen sink to their confrontation with Claire and Lee, who deny, smirk, and deny some more. But through a painstaking examination of evidence, as well as some emotional manipulation, the detectives coax out the truth. Lee was having sex with Lisa, beneath a supposedly asleep Pippa, when Ricky came storming in. A few vengeful blows were all it took for Lisa to die, eyes wide open in shock. The ensuing cover-up devolved into brinkmanship, and Pippa was killed by the Ashworths for knowing too much (and too little).The scenes from that fateful Sandbrook night are shown in extended flashbacks. Dizzyingly complex and sublimely executed, they finally bring gravitas to a plot line that always seemed destined to play second fiddle. The most heartbreaking aspect, perhaps, is Claire’s emergence as a mother figure. She’s been many things to many characters: gal pal, victim, seducer, co-conspirator. And as she holds a crying Pippa in bed, you can see how badly she wanted to tell Lee about her pregnancy, and how she might have been a better, more comforting mother than Pippa’s wine-guzzling one. But fear and self-protection take over, and Pippa is laid down to rest in the bluebells.Like Danny Latimer’s murder, the Sandbrook deaths were the result of a single act of fury followed by a series of ambivalent, panicked cover-ups. And once again, it took Hardy’s obsession and Ellie’s diligence; they picked away at the scab until it bled. After Ricky, Claire and Lee are taken away, Hardy weeps alone at the police station, overcome by the release of a failure that has so defined his life.There is yet another hero of this episode, one whom I did not expect but should have seen coming. That would be Vicar Paul Coates, who has largely been a wreck this season. He’s been a secret sympathizer with Joe; a neutered, detached boyfriend to Becca Fisher; a demon conjurer for Beth. And early on in this episode, as Joe wanders back to the church seeking protection, it looks as if Paul’s piousness might be wavering.But the show ultimately reveals its religious core. In season 1, Paul acted as a moral center, leading the town’s recovery process with an unwavering hand (and, crucially, helping the police obtain the Miller computer). And at the close of season two, he guides the effort to bring justice to Joe, bringing him face to face with Beth Latimer in the hut where Danny was killed.Paul’s earlier attempt to involve Beth in a sex-offender education program, which seemed to be a terrible decision, now makes more sense. He wanted to steel her to face her monsters head-on. And there’s significantly more catharsis for Beth in these few minutes than she ever achieved in any formal system.As Joe is sent off, he passes every member of the town, who then coalesce into a group, with the vicar bringing up the rear. It’s a beautiful shot, and carefully symbolic. “Broadchurch” places little faith in anyone: not the justice system nor the police department, and definitely not people themselves. But while one or two individuals may stray, the herd will inevitably come together toward righteousness and redemption.After two gripping, inventive endings, the show pivots toward season 3, which has already been confirmed. Sharon and Jocelyn are set up as a legal pair, which seems to bode well. They were fascinating adversaries, but can they be strong teammates? Then again, the strength of this show has been, and always will be, the Olivia Colman-David Tennant relationship. As Alec Hardy stares off into the distance, wondering where to take his indecipherable accent next, you can only hope that Ellie Miller will be one exasperated phone call away.