The national union representing stage actors has decided to require some small theaters in Los Angeles to pay the minimum wage, despite considerable opposition from supporters of that city’s thriving theater scene.The union, Actors’ Equity, said that, in response to concerns from performers in Los Angeles, it would provide a variety of exceptions. But a coalition of supporters of the small 99-seat theaters there said it was disappointed nonetheless. The coalition had sought to preserve the current system, under which union actors are allowed to work in small theaters for only a tiny stipend.The situation in Los Angeles is unusual because of the dominance of the television and film industries there. Over the last several decades, the small theater scene has flourished, driven in large part by actors who say they want the experience and exposure of performing on stage, and are willing to do so for little pay. The actors fear that some small theaters forced to pay the minimum wage — which is $9 per hour in California — will fold. Equity’s executive director, Mary McColl, said in an interview that the union’s national council acted out of a concern that “in 99-seat theater, there is nowhere for actors to work where they would be compensated for their time.” But, she said, the union also sought to create new rules that would be “responsive to the concerns the L.A. community told us they had.”There are about 200 small theaters in Los Angeles, and it was not immediately clear how many of them would be required to start paying the minimum wage when the Equity rules go into effect in May 2016. The rules include exceptions for short runs of low-budget productions in theaters with 50 seats or fewer, and for existing companies that maintain a roster of union members who often appear in their productions. Ms. McColl estimated that about half of the small theaters in the city are membership companies.“There are options for actors to hone their craft and flex their muscles,” Ms. McColl said, “and options that allow actors to get paid.”Advocates for the 99-seat theater scene, which is sometimes also called intimate theater, said they were disappointed, but still reviewing the details before deciding how to proceed. Some had been considering legal action in the run-up to the decision, but on Wednesday they said they wanted first to digest the details.“We’re very disappointed that Equity acted the way they did,” said Gary Grossman, the producing artistic director of Skylight Theater Company, and an actor who joined a lawsuit against Equity three decades ago that helped create the current scene. “But we need to figure out who is affected, and see what they changed and what they haven’t.”