The Sundance Film Festival, a proving ground for filmmakers, helps the careers of male and female directors at a nearly equal rate, a new study found. But after that, their professional fortunes split along gender lines, with male narrative filmmakers getting stronger distribution deals early on and having an easier time ascending through the Hollywood ranks, according to data and interviews compiled over three years of research.The study is the third and final part in a report conducted by researchers at the Annenberg School for Communication and Journalism at the University of Southern California, and commissioned by the Sundance Institute and Women in Film Los Angeles, an advocacy group. Among other things, it found that gender did not affect whether Sundance feature films received distribution after the festival, with 88.7 percent of female-directed films and 83.9 percent of male-directed films getting deals.But films helmed by women were more likely to be released by independent companies “with fewer financial resources and lower industry clout,” the study said. It found that 43.1 percent of films directed by men were snapped up by studio divisions and similar companies “with deeper pockets and greater reach”; the same was true for 29.8 percent of films by women.That sets a course for more male-directed films to dominate the box office, as they are shown in more theaters, the study found. “Above 250 screens, male directors outnumber female directors by a factor of 6 to 1,” according to the report, written by Stacy L. Smith, the director of the media, diversity and social change initiative at the Annenberg School. That gender imbalance helps create the perception that directing is a male business. In follow-up interviews, 70 percent of female filmmakers said that their authority or expertise had been questioned by colleagues.“These new findings help pinpoint where and why female filmmakers fall out of the industry’s pipeline,” Keri Putnam, the executive director of the Sundance Institute, said in a statement. “Diversity in media is critically important to the health of our culture because it is through media that we understand ourselves and each other. We can’t make systemic shifts without allies in all corners of the industry.”Female directors, Ms. Smith added, “face a steep fiscal cliff as they attempt to move from independent to more commercial filmmaking,” a hard leap to make individually.“As market forces increase, the opportunities for female directors decrease,” she wrote in the study, even though aggregate scores on Metacritic showed virtually no difference in reception for female- and male-led indie movies. The critical response for the few female-directed movies that were released by studio divisions was actually slightly better than for those directed by men. The filmmakers are “punching at roughly the same weight in terms of critical reception,” the report noted, but female filmmakers are still slotted into less-remunerative deals.“After three years of research,” she said, “the question can progress from ‘why are female directors missing behind the camera in top films?’ to ‘what can be done to create change?’”A version of this article appears in print on 04/23/2015, on page C3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Post-Sundance Syndrome: Female Directors Suffer.