Over the course of his career, the Canadian filmmaker Bruce LaBruce has made often subversive, sometimes playful and always queer work for the big screen. And he has mined mainstream Hollywood films for inspiration along the way. He’s become known for drawing out the gay subtext in movies from Robert Altman and  Billy Wilder, and bringing it to the forefront in his features “Super 8 1/2 (1994),” “No Skin Off My Ass” (1991) and “Hustler White” (1996). That could mean using the same dialogue, creating scenes that mimicked the originals or  taking footage directly from them.“Talent borrows, genius steals,” Mr. LaBruce joked.All of his features, including his latest (and most mainstream) work “Gerontophilia,” will be screened in a retrospective at the Museum of Modern Art running Thursday through May 2. “Gerontophilia” will be in theaters May 1. In a phone interview from Toronto, Mr. LaBruce discussed five films that he found most inspiring. Here are excerpts from the conversation:1. That Cold Day in the Park (1969), directed by Robert AltmanI saw “That Cold Day in the Park” on TV as a teenager. It just blew my mind. It was so twisted, the scenario. Sandy Dennis is a spinster who finds this young man, perhaps a hustler, in the park, and she takes him home and ends up keeping him locked up in her bedroom. I took that narrative as the basis for “No Skin Off My Ass.” I transformed it to a gay hairdresser who finds a skinhead in a park and does the same thing to him.“That Cold Day in the Park” was based on a novel by a gay novelist named Richard Miles. I made my first trip to L.A. with the movie at Outfest, and Richard Miles came to the screening. He brought me a hardcover copy of the book and he signed it. And he said he liked my version better than Altman’s. He wrote in the book, “You got it right!”2. Play It as It Lays (1972), directed by Frank PerryFor my film “Super 8 1/2,” I was influenced by “Play It as It Lays.” I was an enormous Tuesday Weld fan. I had seen it on late-night TV. I bought my own 16-millimeter print of it, but the footage I used from it for the movie I just shot off of the TV. In one scene, my character in the movie is lying in bed with the sound turned down and mouthing the lines of Tuesday Weld.3. Who’s Afraid of Virginia Woolf (1966), directed by Mike Nichols and based on the Edward Albee playA. O. Scott takes a look at a very unusual relationship at the heart of Mike Nichols's 1966 film, adapted from Edward Albee's Broadway play.I think I have a reference to “Who’s Afraid of Virginia Woolf” in almost every film I’ve made. For example, in “The Raspberry Reich,” the female terrorist says, “Let’s play a game.” And they all start saying “kiss the captive,” which is like “hump the hostess” in “Virginia Woolf.” But it’s more than just the lines, it’s actually the scenarios.When my film “Otto: or Up With Dead People,” which has at least one “Virginia Woolf” reference in it, opened in New York, somebody took Edward Albee to see it. His friend messaged me and said Edward quite enjoyed the film. I got him to blurb the DVD that Strand put out. Everyone thought I made it up, that it was a fake quote. But it’s actually real.A Manhattan call girl being stalked by a psychopath becomes involved with a small-town detective investigating the disappearance of a friend.4. Klute (1971), directed by Alan J. PakulaI make a lot of references to this one. “Klute,” to me, has the best end line ever in a movie. Jane Fonda says in voiceover, “I have no idea what’s going to happen. I just can’t stay in the city, you know? Maybe I’ll come back. You’ll probably see me next week.” I stole that for the end of “No Skin Off My Ass,” almost word for word. I love those kinds of endings where characters, usually female, are going into some kind of exile and they’re speculating on what the future may hold. There’s something about that that really gets me.An aging screen star, unable to face her stagnant career, hires an opportunistic young screenwriter to aid her in making a comeback.5. Sunset Boulevard (1950), directed by Billy WilderBoth “Super 8 1/2″ and “Hustler White” heavily reference “Sunset Boulevard.” In the film, William Holden is really like a hustler, basically. He ends up being kind of a gigolo. And it’s a very gay film in terms of the campness of the Norma Desmond character. Even though it’s a straight story, it’s heavily coded as gay. In “Super 8 1/2,” I quote the famous line “It was all very queer, but queerer things were yet to come.” That line doesn’t need so much queering itself.The whole beginning of “Hustler White” is a direct reference. Instead of William Holden face down in a swimming pool, it’s Tony Ward face down in a jacuzzi.