By KATHRYN SHATTUCKAPRIL 22, 2015
7:30 P.M. (HBO) SAVING MY TOMORROW “You are the future generation,” says Grace, 10, a member of Plant-to-Planet in Seattle, which plants trees to help counter carbon dioxide emissions, the most prominent factor in climate change. “You are the ones who are going to have to deal with this mess that everybody else behind us has gotten us into.” Grace is one in a chorus of children speaking up for the planet in this kaleidoscopic family Earth Day special, the third of six episodes created with the American Museum of Natural History that melds science, animation, readings by Alan Cumming, Laura Dern, Tina Fey and Neil deGrasse Tyson, and music by Pharrell Williams, They Might Be Giants and Pete Seeger (in a previously unreleased performance) to address the perils of pollution, oil and gas drilling and climate change. “The adults clearly aren’t doing enough to stop this,” says Zoe, 12, “so we have to take it into our own hands.”5:15 P.M. (HBO2) LOST IN TRANSLATION (2003) An American movie star (Bill Murray), cashing in on his celebrity to make a lucrative ad in Japan, meets a young woman (Scarlett Johansson) who has been temporarily deserted by her husband (Giovanni Ribisi) in this comic melodrama written and directed by Sofia Coppola, who won an Oscar for best original screenplay. As they escape the confines of the Tokyo Hyatt, something like love ensues. Mr. Murray “supplies the kind of performance that seems so fully realized and effortless that it can easily be mistaken for not acting at all,” Elvis Mitchell wrote in The New York Times.8 P.M. (NBC) THE MYSTERIES OF LAURA Laura (Debra Messing) copes with a personal crisis while searching for the killer of a teacher’s aide and winds up embroiled in N.C.A.A. madness.8 P.M. (13, 49) ANIMAL HOMES Humans aren’t the only creatures who like communal dwelling. Puffins in the Hebrides find safety in numbers in colonies of more than a million inhabitants. Social spiders in Ecuador work together to capture prey 20 times as large as themselves. And leaf-cutter ants in Costa Rica join forces to build acre-wide cities. In the conclusion of this “Nature” special, the ecologist Chris Morgan uses animated blueprints and tiny cameras to analyze the architecture of these dwellings. In “Invisible Universe Revealed,” at 9, “Nova” commemorates the 25th anniversary of the Hubble Space Telescope by looking at its development, including the one-millimeter engineering blunder that almost rendered the project a failure; the five astronauts sent on a repair mission; and the stunning images that have brought the beauty of the universe back to Earth.Advertisement10 P.M. (MSNBC) JUST EAT IT: A FOOD WASTE STORY The filmmakers Grant Baldwin and Jenny Rustemeyer examine the effects of food waste on the economy, climate and human health as they forgo traditional grocery shopping for six months and instead subsist wholly on food that would otherwise have been discarded. Afterward the chef Tom Colicchio moderates a discussion with experts including Emily Broad Leib, director of the Harvard Food Law and Policy Clinic.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.10 P.M. (FX) THE AMERICANS Paige (Holly Taylor) gets her first real glimpse into her parents’ lives when she travels to West Germany with Elizabeth (Keri Russell) to meet her dying mother in this Season 3 finale. Philip (Matthew Rhys) meanwhile finds solace in a strange place. And Stan (Noah Emmerich) continues to have a bumpy ride both at work and at home.Advertisement10 P.M. (CBS) CSI: CYBER The sisters Patricia and Rosanna Arquette act together for the first time since 2008 in this episode, in which Agent Ryan helps a woman deal with the death of her own sister.10 P.M. (BBC America) BROADCHURCH The saga comes to an end as decisions are made, truths are revealed and lives are changed in this Season 2 finale.What’s Streaming Now INEQUALITY AND CLIMATE CHANGE: JOSEPH STIGLITZ AND NICHOLAS STERN IN CONVERSATION Mr. Stiglitz, the Nobel-winning economist, and Mr. Stern, a professor at the London School of Economics, debate the effect of economics on the environment in this discussion, streamed live at 7 p.m. from the CUNY Graduate Center. (cuny.tv)A version of this schedule appears in print on April 22, 2015, on Page C7 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Wednesday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.