Scholars studying dying languages, nuclear weapons, the effects of “dark money” on politics and the history of immigration reform are among the first recipients of the Andrew Carnegie Fellowship, a new award intended to support research in the beleaguered humanities and social sciences. The Carnegie Corporation of New York, which announces its first class of 32 fellows on Wednesday, will provide grants of up to $200,000 to each recipient. The award, to be given annually, supports a year or two of full-time research and writing leading to the publication of a book or study.The size of the new award, one of the richest of its kind, invites comparison to the MacArthur Fellowship, which provides a five-year, $625,000 no-strings-attached award to some two dozen writers, artists, scholars, scientists and others each year; they are known colloquially as “genius grants.” Asked for a catchphrase for the new fellowship, Vartan Gregorian, the president of the Carnegie Corporation, suggested “brainy,” and emphasized the real-world nature of the winners’ projects.“The idea was to invest in scholars working on the major issues of our time,” he said. This year’s 32 winners were chosen from a pool of more than 300 candidates, who were nominated by leaders in higher education, philanthropy and publishing and then asked to submit research proposals on the theme of “Current and Future Challenges to U.S. Democracy and International Order.” The winners include a mix of junior and senior scholars and independent researchers from a variety of disciplines, whose proposals touched on such subjects as race, policing, privacy, big data, aging, voting behavior and nuclear power.Laurence Ralph, an anthropologist at Harvard University, will research the impact of witnessing gun violence and death on black and Latino youth, with a focus on Chicago. Sarah Mathew, an anthropologist at Arizona State University, will pursue fieldwork in northern Kenya looking at why men risk their lives in warfare to benefit the group. Gregory T. Cushman, an environmental historian at the University of Kansas, won support for a project called “The Anthropocene: A People’s History of the Earth Under Human Domination.” Caleb Everett, a linguist at the University of Miami, will research the impact of dying languages, through examples in Australia, New Guinea and the Amazon, where Mr. Everett himself was raised by linguist parents. Susan Hockfield, a former president of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and head of the selection panel, said that the humanities and social sciences were essential to understanding today’s world.Science and technology “are critical for building a foundation for understanding how our world works,” she said. “But science and technology alone cannot solve the world’s most pressing problems.”