By CORINNA da FONSECA-WOLLHEIMAPRIL 21, 2015
Even if everyone loves a bad boy, the appeal of Philip II in Verdi’s “Don Carlo” is hard to explain. He has none of Don Giovanni’s erotic allure or Méphistophélès’s sardonic wit. In Verdi’s adaptation of Schiller’s searing play, this Hapsburg king is a tyrant, a bigot and a hypocrite.And yet it is his climactic monologue — an uproar of grief, loneliness and heartbreak late in the opera — that is the work’s emotional core. Two productions this weekend of “Don Carlo” give insight into how singers tease out the humanity in this seemingly hateful figure.The Metropolitan Opera’s revival of the opera, with two final performances tonight and Saturday, stars the eminent Italian bass Ferruccio Furlanetto, who over the course of 35 years singing the role has fleshed out and polished his Philip into a tragic figure of Shakespearean dimensions. On Friday, Opera Philadelphia presents its own “Don Carlo” in a new production built around the rising American bass-baritone Eric Owens. Making his role debut as the king, Mr. Owens brings to it the same honesty and vulnerability that made even his malignant Alberich in the Met’s recent production of Wagner’s “Ring” cycle improbably sympathetic.At 65, Mr. Furlanetto has lived with the character of Philip for over half his life and his portrayal is an accretion of details based on historical sources and dramatic choices born from experience. He even travels from production to production with his own Philip wig, a remnant of a career-changing 1986 Salzburg Festival staging conducted by Herbert von Karajan.“He compelled the court to dress black,” Mr. Furlanetto said of the king over coffee. “We know that he didn’t want to be touched or to touch. We know how bigoted he was and how this was also a political move.”AdvertisementThat aversion to physical contact is a quality that Mr. Furlanetto has emphasized in this current Met run of Nicholas Hytner’s 2010 production. Dismissing the Marquis of Posa, a man who both challenges and fascinates the king, he offered his hand to kiss, then withdrew it with a casual, dismissive wave just as Posa knelt to grasp it — a gesture that managed to inflict humiliation even as it suggested a wary friendliness.AdvertisementIt was all the more poignant, then, to see the king cradle his wife, Elizabeth, to his chest, awkwardly and desperately, moments after his ferocious accusations of infidelity have made her faint. Mr. Furlanetto said that in too many productions the queen is left to lie there unaided.“I thought, ‘Isn’t it stupid to leave this woman for whom he cares — ba-da-boom! — on the floor?’ ” he said. “So starting with a production in Trieste many years ago, I asked the soprano to faint in my arms. And from that moment, while she’s not conscious, what I’m singing is a wonderful love declaration that he probably wouldn’t be able to say with her fully present.”The most moving expression of Philip’s conflicted feelings is that late monologue: the aria “Ella giammai m’amò” (“She never loved me”), which has become a favorite showpiece of the bass repertory. A lone cello sighs and undulating strings retrace the obsessively circular thoughts of a king who believes himself to be deceived and knows himself to be unloved. The soaring vocal line ennobles this prickly character and pulls in the audience’s sympathies.Mr. Furlanetto utters the beginning of the aria quietly, “sotto voce,” like a half-formed thought. He said this was in accordance with Verdi’s stage directions, which describe the monarch inhabiting a state of “dormiveglia”: “that state,” he said, “that is not quite sleep or perhaps in which you could talk in your sleep.”In an interview before a rehearsal at the Academy of Music in Philadelphia, Mr. Owens said that while he has sung “Ella giammai m’amò” many times in concert, performing it in a fully staged opera is entirely different. “The focus is a lot more on the words,” he said. “I’m not necessarily making every line a beautiful tone. I’m trying to be that character in that moment rather than sing prettily.”Mr. Owens likens Philip to “a child that hasn’t been loved.” He pictures him “growing up being schooled by priests and nannies who were probably strict disciplinarians,” adding, “He likely didn’t see his parents often and you think, ‘Yeah, he’s got childhood baggage that he takes with him into adulthood and marriage.’ ” For Mr. Owens, the central lament of “Ella giammai m’amò” encompasses more than just the queen’s rejection. “The ‘ella’ — ‘she’ — is probably more a ‘loro’ — ‘they,’ ” he speculated. “It’s the infamous ‘they’ throughout his life that never loved him.”During a rehearsal underneath Andrew Lieberman’s stylized copy of the cupola of El Escorial, Philip’s cathedral-cum-castle near Madrid, Mr. Owens offered poignant glimpses of the king’s fleeting attempts to connect to others and the mechanisms with which he censors himself. Confronting the baritone Troy Cook’s Posa, he reached out and grabbed Mr. Cook’s arms, then pulled back sharply, as if remembering himself. Throughout Mr. Owens vividly conveys Philip’s physical isolation, the way in which the king, as Mr. Owens, puts it, is “spending the evening alone in a crowded room.”“People end up feeling for this guy,” Mr. Owens said. “He’s not somebody they’re going to boo at the curtain call.”A version of this article appears in print on April 22, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: Conjuring a King Beyond His Many Flaws.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.