By JON CARAMANICAAPRIL 21, 2015
In December 2013, the Prancing Elites — a black, gay, male dance troupe based in Mobile, Ala. — marched in the Christmas parade in the city of Semmes, Ala. The Prancing Elites specialize in J-setting, a fluid style with roots in cheerleading and traditionally performed by women. The group had applied through the formal channels, was accepted and showed up in Santa-themed costumes ready to dance.Not everyone in Semmes was pleased, underscoring something any observer of New York City’s St. Patrick’s Day Parade has known for years: parades, ostensibly exuberant celebrations of shared community, can so easily be reduced into fatiguing and callous battlegrounds over values.This serves as fodder, both literal and conceptual, for “The Prancing Elites Project,” a reality show about the troupe, which begins Wednesday on Oxygen. There is dancing, and it is wonderful. And there is camaraderie among the five group members — Adrian Clemons, Kentrell Collins, Kareem Davis, Jerel Maddox, Tim Smith — and that is wonderful, too.And then there are the obstacles that are steadily thrown in the path of all that. In the premiere, the group, which has been in existence since the mid-2000s, tries to march in a similar parade in Saraland, Ala., though this time the members are denied a permit. They’re met at the parade route by county constables who escort them as they walk parallel to the parade, working in a few maneuvers while spectators hurl insults their way. Words like “community” and “family” are used as weapons against them. Their grace and elegance under attack is both brave and beautiful.AdvertisementAfter they’ve made their stand, a handful of people walk up to them to offer support, including a teary-eyed young white girl, who tells them, “They shouldn’t have done that to you.”In Alabama, the Prancing Elites are often ostracized, but out in the rest of the world, they’re minor celebrities. They’ve performed all over the United States. Shaquille O’Neal tweeted out a link to one of their routines, and they appeared on “America’s Got Talent,” albeit briefly.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.And now they have their own show, an affectionate program that paints them partly as civil rights agitators and partly as lovable bumpkins. (You could draw a somewhat crooked line between this show and others that fetishize Southern simplicity, like “Duck Dynasty” or “Party Down South.”) Despite the show’s occasional attempts to play up the group members’ wide-eyed innocence, they have a deeply refined sense of how they’re perceived, which only emboldens them to push harder.In the second episode, the Elites, frustrated that male J-setting troupes — there are others — are not allowed in existing competitions, decide to stage their own, called Prance 2 The Beat. (Incidentally, the Facebook page for the event stated, “This competition will be a family-oriented event.”) At the end, both male and female teams are awarded prizes, a gender-blind result that might not have been possible had the Prancing Elites not been willing to long subject themselves to the hostility that the outside world appears to provide them in heavy doses.AdvertisementA show like this, in a way, fulfills the original promise of reality television. With so many networks looking to fill so much air, cameras begin poking into places they might not previously have. No good person, or scene, would go unaired.Or unspoiled, depending on your perspective. When the group goes to the Saraland parade hoping to dance, cameras are in tow, but does it matter which came first, the desire to perform in the parade or the desire to be filmed getting denied permission to perform in the parade? In the premiere, the group gets the (very staged) opportunity to meet and speak with NeNe Leakes, the “Real Housewives of Atlanta” major-domo; the members’ thrill is vivid, regardless of whether they knew she was coming through the door.Reality television has its conventions, but those conventions happen to well serve subjects like the Prancing Elites, people for whom life inside that box — with all its fabrications, exaggerations, and concessions, traded for glamour and fame — might be so much easier than life outside it. Reality television is the trap, and it is also the escape route.A version of this review appears in print on April 22, 2015, on Page C6 of the New York edition with the headline: At Hostile Parades, the March Goes On.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.