AdvertisementSupported byBy Alison SmaleBERLIN — In this city of three major opera houses, a feted star of recent seasons has been off stage: Barrie Kosky, a self-described “gay Jewish kangaroo” from Australia who has staged everything from Rameau and Mozart to forgotten 1930s operettas and “West Side Story.”Since becoming artistic director of the Komische Oper in 2012, Mr. Kosky, a 48-year-old native of Melbourne, has won a truly mixed audience for his often camp stagings. His house is 85 percent sold out, and both city fathers and picky critics appear delighted: At the end of Mr. Kosky’s first season, the Komische Oper was pronounced opera house of the year by 50 international critics, and in 2014 he was named best opera director.“He takes Mozart as seriously as musicals, and Monteverdi as seriously as operetta,” said Wolfgang Prosinger, a columnist at Der Tagesspiegel. “And he has brought something of the glamour of Broadway to Berlin. That has helped change his audience: More and more young people are coming to the Komische Oper.”Although young foreigners increasingly see this city as a must-visit capital of cool, Berlin remains a great repository of classical culture. The operas, Mr. Kosky noted in an interview, sell more than 800,000 tickets a year, mostly to the city’s roughly 3.5 million residents.“This city has such a wonderful complexity,” he said. “It’s got an amazing energy, yet is so laid back.”Walking around is a journey through history, Mr. Kosky said, adding: “In Berlin, you see bits of the Nazis, you see bits before the Wall and after the Wall, and then you see ugly ’80s buildings, and it’s all thrown together. I love it.”Mix and complexity are built into the intendant’s position at the Komische Oper, founded in 1947 by the Vienna-born director Walter Felsenstein, who led the house until his death in 1975. A major cultural figure of East Germany, he was lauded for innovative opera productions but also for staging dramatic works at the Burgtheater in Vienna. Harry Kupfer then continued the rich tradition of ensemble music theater prized by Mr. Felsenstein.Variety clearly appeals to Mr. Kosky, who looks back fondly on a childhood and youth in the “absolute, true melting pot” and open landscape of Australia. His recent productions include “West Side Story,” which Mr. Kosky remade into a story of star-crossed German and Turkish lovers in Berlin; “The Magic Flute” and “The Marriage of Figaro”; “Castor and Pollux” by Rameau; and Arnold Schönberg’s “Moses and Aron,” which was masterfully conducted by Vladimir Jurowski in its premiere on Sunday.In the complex work, started by Schönberg in Berlin before he fled the Nazis, Mr. Kosky showed once more his theatrical expertise — about 200 members of the superb choir and 170 dummies were crowded on stage at one point. Other ideas — a tantalizing link to Beckett’s “Waiting for Godot,” for example — were less clearly developed. A Kosky production, staged amid the restored splendor of the Metropol Theater, often appeals to a certain taste — perhaps too much so for some critics. Frank Fechter, writing on klassik.com last fall, said Mr. Kosky had indeed perfected a style. “Kosky has defined jazz operetta as show, as gay and Jewish,” Mr. Fechter wrote. “Displaying flesh is as important for him as Charleston, shimmy and quickstep.” It makes for “racy, perfectly timed successes,” and “Berlin’s gay community is delighted,” he added. But, Mr. Fechter questioned, can one really apply such touches, as Mr. Kosky did, to a different kind of operetta, Offenbach’s “Die schöne Helena”?Mr. Kosky, a fount of energy mixed with calm consideration, noted that he was unlikely to please everyone all of the time. But, he said, “I believe very much the only way you can run cultural institutions successfully is to be 100 percent subjective, and saying, ‘This is what I like and I hope you like it.”’Mr. Kosky started piano at 5, played cello as a teenager and above all grew up with opera. That came courtesy of a grande dame of a Hungarian-born grandmother who in her youth went weekly to the opera in Budapest, and regularly to Vienna. She brought him to his first opera, Puccini’s “Madama Butterfly,” when he was 7.“I was completely infected,” he recalled. “It was one of those moments in life that change everything.”At 18, Mr. Kosky said, he had heard probably 200 operas. After discovering theater directing and the operas of Wagner as a teenager, he plunged into theatrical life during his university days in Melbourne. By 28, he had directed at the Sydney Opera House and run the Adelaide festival. Then Europe beckoned.“Theater is not like film, or a writer, or painter, where you can actually still live in Australia and work in an international environment,” Mr. Kosky said. Besides, he added, “the German system of opera is the best in the world and you gravitate toward it.”Part of the appeal, he explained, is the financial support and ability to attract a broad audience: “The great thing about subsidized theater is that it doesn’t just give you the money to put on big productions.”“It gives you the money to reduce ticket prices,” Mr. Kosky said, something “many people don’t realize in England or America.”He first saw Berlin as a teenager, accompanying his father on a business trip. The Hungarian grandmother, who spoke seven languages, above all German, and could never fathom how the cultivated Germans became Nazis who killed almost all her relatives, gave the 18-year-old Mr. Kosky her school volumes of Goethe and Schiller. Study of the language, and then of German theater, followed in 1988 and 1989, he said. Mr. Kosky says he now speaks German rather better than “my Australian Denglish, which people find very charming.” “For the Berlin audience, the gay Jewish kangaroo — it’s a marketing position that works quite well,” he added with a smile.His predecessor, Andreas Homoki, invited him in 2001 for his first production at the Komische Oper, Gyorgy Ligeti’s only opera, “Le Grand Macabre,” shown in 2003.Coincidentally, in 2001, Mr. Kosky had just moved to Vienna to co-run the Schauspielhaus, once the preserve of the director George Tabori. In 2005, Mr. Kosky fell out with his co-director, and with Vienna, which he said was now still full of “unexorcised ghosts” of the Nazi era. The transition led to moves all over Europe directing opera, including five productions at the Komische Oper, where he took over as artistic director and Mr. Homoki moved on to Zurich in 2012.Mr. Kosky’s contract was recently extended until 2022. In the near future he will also stage productions at venues that include Covent Garden, Bayreuth, the Bavarian State Opera in Munich, Los Angeles, Chicago and Toronto. In Berlin, meanwhile, he plans to revive more of the Jewish operettas that have proved smash hits of his tenure to date.“A Woman Knows What She Wants!” is the latest, with Mr. Kosky’s muse Dagmar Manzel and co-star Max Hopp slipping in and out of the costumes and characters of at least 30 parts in a tour de force.“Absolutely certain to become a cult piece,” Die Welt said.The music for the latest show was written by Oscar Straus, who like Paul Abraham, the composer of another Kosky hit, “The Ball in Savoy,” was Jewish and forced to flee Berlin after the Nazis came to power.Mounting works by Jews like Mr. Abraham “is a 10-year project for me,” said Mr. Kosky, who wants to also include Yiddish operetta — material he recently played for two singers in a late-night performance to mark the 70th anniversary of the liberation of Auschwitz.Mr. Kosky said his style “may not work on everything — there is no guarantee in theater — but the issue is to say, ‘I stand behind it, I believe in this, and think it is really important.”’“I would hope that the house, the people who work in this house and the audience,” he said, “would understand that this is where I want to be, this is where I want to create and this is my artistic home. Full stop.”Advertisement