By KATHRYN SHATTUCKAPRIL 23, 2015
1:30 A.M. (Flix) THE MAGDALENE SISTERS (2002) Four Roman Catholic Irish teenagers (Anne-Marie Duff; Dorothy Duffy; Nora-Jane Noone; and Eileen Walsh) are sentenced in the late 1960s to toil in convent laundries run by the Sisters of the Magdalene as punishment for sexual misconduct in this semifictional story. (The existence of these religious labor camps, which 30,000 women are thought to have endured, came to light in the ’70s with the discovery of the unmarked graves of some who lived there; the last laundry was closed in 1996.) Geraldine McEwan plays Sister Bridget, the twisted head nun — with a soft spot for “The Bells of St. Mary’s” and John F. Kennedy — who turns into a demon if her rules are flouted. “ ‘The Magdalene Sisters’ would be too painful to watch if it didn’t have a silver lining,” Stephen Holden wrote in The New York Times about this drama, which was written and directed by Peter Mullan and won the top prize at the Venice Film Festival. “Suffice it to say that it is possible to fly over this religious cuckoo’s nest and remain free. All it takes is courage and the timely kindness of strangers.”5:15 P.M. (Showtime 2) PHILOMENA (2013) With the help of a former political journalist (Steve Coogan), an Irish Roman Catholic woman (Judi Dench, in an Oscar-nominated performance) seeks the son who was taken from her 50 years earlier, when she became pregnant as a teenager and was forced to live in a convent, in this drama directed by Stephen Frears. Their sleuthing takes them to Washington after they discover that the boy was adopted by an American couple and worked for the Reagan administration as an adult. “Ms. Dench’s Philomena Lee glows with the radiance of someone serene in her faith despite inhumane treatment by the church,” Stephen Holden wrote in The Times. Her dignified performance and the screenplay — adapted by Mr. Coogan and Jeff Pope from Martin Sixsmith’s 2009 nonfiction book, “The Lost Child of Philomena Lee” — “stabilize a volatile blend of ingredients,” Mr. Holden added.8 P.M. (ABC) GREY’S ANATOMY Derek (Patrick Dempsey) witnesses a horrific car crash and races to save lives. In “Scandal,” at 9, Cyrus (Jeff Perry) comes to the defense of Mellie (Bellamy Young) after she incites the ire of the nation. And in “American Crime,” at 10, the city government tries to stop Aliyah (Regina King) and her supporters from marching on behalf of Carter (Elvis Nolasco), while Barb (Felicity Huffman), who has become the target of violent threats, rallies supporters of her own. Alonzo (Benito Martinez), meanwhile, encourages Tony (Johnny Ortiz) to testify against Carter to earn some leniency after learning that his son could be tried as an adult. And Russ (Timothy Hutton) turns to Mark (David Hoflin) for help.8 P.M. (Fox) BONES Booth (David Boreanaz) is tempted to gamble again when he and Brennan (Emily Deschanel) enter the world of underground poker after the remains of a high roller are found in an industrial shredder.Advertisement8:30 P.M. (CBS) THE ODD COUPLE Oscar (Matthew Perry) and Felix (Thomas Lennon) compete in a decathlon to determine the better athlete. In “Mom,” at 9, Christy (Anna Faris) and Bonnie (Allison Janney) discover that their bickering has made them unwelcome guests.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.10 P.M. (USA) DIG Lynn (Anne Heche), whose job has been jeopardized by the troublesome behavior of Peter (Jason Isaacs), suspects that a mole may have infiltrated the consulate. Debbie (Lauren Ambrose) sets out for the compound with vengeance in mind.What’s Streaming NowWITNESSES When corpses from desecrated graves start appearing in model homes in northern France, two very different cops — Sandra Winckler (Marie Dompnier), a young lead detective, and Paul Maisonneuve (Thierry Lhermitte), a retired crime squad legend — find themselves thrown into an uncomfortable collaboration in this French mystery thriller. The six-part series, in French with English subtitles, is available on iTunes, with the first episode free through Monday. (iTunes)AdvertisementPLANETARY (2015) The director Guy Reid draws on aerial footage of Earth from NASA; his own travels across several continents; and interviews with the astronauts Ronald J. Garan Jr. and Dr. Mae C. Jemison, the environmental activist Bill McKibben, and other scientists, explorers, journalists and religious leaders to examine the ways people can reconnect to the planet and one another. (vimeo.com)A version of this schedule appears in print on April 23, 2015, on Page C7 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Thursday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.