AdvertisementSupported byDance ReviewBy Alastair MacaulayA heady amalgam of youthful beauty, charm and skill flooded the Ailey Citigroup Theater on Tuesday during a 90-minute program shared by the Royal Ballet School and American Ballet Theater Studio Company: a showcase of the pre-professional skills of young dancers at a very high level.The performances were part of an exchange. A similar program by the two groups took place in New York two years ago, while last year the Ballet Theater youngsters danced with the Royal Ballet School in London. Though performance itself must always be a climax, probably the best aspects of this collaboration have been offstage when teachers and coaches are shared.I felt a frisson just to see the great ballerina Irina Kolpakova in the auditorium. This former luminary of the Kirov Ballet is now part of the American Ballet Theater institution, and I envy all young dancers who are brushed by her artistry. The evening’s introductory speeches by Kate Lydon (director of the ABT Studio Company) and Christopher Powney (artistic director of the Royal Ballet School) set the evening’s happy mood; Mr. Powney said his dancers had not stopped smiling since they touched down in New York.Each institution performed three items. It became fascinating to see what the Royal and Ballet Theater troupes had in common and what features seemed national specialties. On Tuesday (casts were to change for all but one piece in Wednesday’s performance), the abundance of sheer good looks across the program was extraordinary — and these were always supported by dance technique, style and sheer performing skill. On two occasions in the Royal performance of Liam Scarlett’s “Classical Symphony” (made for this school in July 2014), I spotted moments of strain in partnering. What was impressive was how well, especially in a theater as small as this, these were disguised.The Ballet Theater dancers — perhaps because of sheer experience, having already danced some items they have performed in New York before — had more individuality. In an extended series of excerpts from “Le Corsaire,” Rachel Richardson (dancing Medora) and Jin Zhang (Gulnare) showed why they have already become apprentices with American Ballet Theater (the Studio Company’s parent troupe). Ms. Richardson, despite her modest stage manners, is an enchantress with wonderful delicacy, while Ms. Zhang brings a marvelous fullness to her choreography.No less striking was the skinny, beaming Rinaldo Venuti as the “Corsaire” slave Ali. He certainly has panache; better, he also has timing, with the ability to find musically-hairbreadth pauses within phrases that many dancers would deliver in an undifferentiated rush.The six eager dancers who performed half of Merce Cunningham’s “Duets” (1980, and in Ballet Theater’s repertory since 1982) weren’t ideal Cunningham stylists in weight or dynamics. And yet they were wonderful, full of rhythmic continuity, suspense and brio, apparently loving the choreography’s wit. Breanne Granlund and Aran Bell (“like Hansel and Gretel,” remarked my companion of their playful innocence) gave their dance the fresh naïveté of a Bournonville duet, and Hanna Bass and Samuel Rodriguez — both closest to the choreography’s manner — drew the audience into the moment-by-moment tension.The Royal dancers showed more particular features of style. My American companion drew attention to the greater lift they showed in their upper body. There was much to see in Mr. Scarlett’s “Classical Symphony” (set to Prokofiev’s eponymous work), not all of it good. Over all, this ballet (ladies in white tutus, men in dark tunics and tights, academically classical steps for a formally hierarchical gathering) looks like a cheap imitation of George Balanchine’s “Symphony in C.” Moments of it are ghastly: At one point four ballerinas, lying on their backs, extend their stretched legs vertically in the air and twiddle them in entrechats.But the choreography’s finest sections, chiefly in the first movement, are the best indication I have seen of Mr. Scarlett’s compositional sophistication and of his feeling for the nice points of Royal style. Here were the charming harmony of head and leg as women advanced on point in emboîtés, the face turning briskly left, right, left to match the foremost foot. Here was épaulement (shouldering) as a primary effect, as men stood, their arms raised like halos, and alternated the angles of their shoulders (left, right, left, again). And here were arms extended in low lines to continue the slope of the shoulders — a favorite touch of the Royal’s founder-choreographer Frederick Ashton and often employed by his most celebrated successor, Kenneth MacMillan.The “Classical Symphony” lead pair Leticia Dias Domingues and Harry Churches and the “Chanson” couple Giulia Frosi and Lukas Bjorneboe Braendsrod all exemplified these features of traditional British ballet style. Like their Ballet Theater counterparts, they also showed redoubtable standards of delivery.Advertisement