By ALESSANDRA STANLEYAPRIL 22, 2015
The jig is not up, not yet. But the third season of FX’s “The Americans” ended on Wednesday night with the disclosure that the series’ superspies, Philip (Matthew Rhys) and Elizabeth (Keri Russell), have been dreading — and dodging — since the very first episode.Their teenage daughter, Paige (Holly Taylor), tormented by the discovery that her ordinary suburban parents are in reality Russian-born K.G.B. agents, reaches out to the leader of her Christian youth group and blurts out the truth. “They aren’t who they say they are,” Paige says, weeping. “They are not Americans.”And because this mischievous FX drama has always made room for ironies, small and sweeping, Paige’s surreptitious phone call to a minister takes place while her Russian parents are watching President Ronald Reagan deliver his famous “Evil Empire” speech to the National Association of Evangelicals in 1983.“The Americans” is a smart and exciting Cold War series that was never just about espionage. It’s also one of the best — if most underappreciated shows — on television.AdvertisementThis is a show about double agents in more ways than one: Characters have mixed motives, there is a duality to every relationship, and one action mirrors another.AdvertisementThe deceit and delusions of the spy trade are echoed in the travails of everyday life; the brinkmanship and bartering between superpowers are not so different from the tensions and transactions of marriage.And the Cold War bug is contagious: In June, Sundance TV will air “Deutschland 83,” a German television series about an East German spy working undercover in West Germany in the 1980s.Season 3 of “The Americans” was in some ways even better than the previous two. There were horrifying developments: Philip and Elizabeth broke a dead woman into pieces to fit her into a suitcase; a South African agent was set on fire, or “necklaced,” in an abandoned lot; and Philip performed back-alley dentistry on his wife. The violence was extreme, and so was the sex. Philip is a seasoned and talented womanizer, but even he found the wooing of a C.I.A. official’s teenage daughter disturbing. The main characters, always complex, evolved. All those transgressions took a toll, most of all on Philip.Paige was at the center of this season. While she was searching for her spiritual calling, K.G.B. handlers were pushing her parents to recruit her for an entirely different cause. It’s like a classic Russian joke: Elizabeth wished that her daughter would become like her, and Paige does — only her idealistic ardor turns her into a Christian instead of a Communist.Elizabeth, always more zealous than Philip, hoped that revealing the truth to Paige about who her parents were would set the young girl free to follow in their footsteps. But on this show, expert liars are also good at fooling themselves.In the season finale, Elizabeth reproaches her husband for underestimating how Martha (Alison Wright), the F.B.I. secretary he recruited and married under a false identity, would feel when she found out an innocent man was killed to protect her from being unmasked, saying, “I don’t think you are seeing things clearly.” He isn’t. But at that moment, neither is she. She is blind to the fact that her daughter is wrestling with her conscience and on the brink of outing her parents.Meanwhile, Philip’s dedication was so sorely tested this season that in the finale, he seemed on the verge of outing himself.And even that was presented with a twist. Philip, who uses his sexual proficiency to steal secrets, finds himself tempted to tell all at a graduate sex seminar run by E.S.T., the self-help organization. As other participants confide their sexual yearnings, Philip has a sudden, overwhelming lust to possibly reveal more of himself than is wise.AdvertisementThe show has always drawn parallels between Moscow and Washington, and those were echoed in the odd friendship between Philip and Stan, (Noah Emmerich) the F.B.I. agent who lives next door.Stan tries to go around his boss, Agent Gaad (Richard Thomas), to rescue Nina (Annet Mahendru), the Russian girl he recruited, had an affair with, and who was caught and sent to a Soviet prison. Agent Gaad, when informed, refuses to play along and tries to kick Stan out of the agency. Instead, Agent Gaad is overruled, and his superior allows Stan to continue his off-the-book spying mission — though without freeing Nina.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Philip has an almost identical experience. He wants Elizabeth to go back to Russia to visit her dying mother, but Gabriel (Frank Langella), their K.G.B. handler, won’t allow the trip. Philip persists, and the Center, as the K.G.B. command is known, overrules Gabriel and arranges to smuggle the ailing woman into West Germany, where Elizabeth is waiting with Paige.Stan thought a rogue operation with a Russian diplomat would win Nina’s freedom; Philip and Elizabeth hoped the rogue trip would help Paige to accept her roots.As Agent Gaad sardonically tells Stan in that moment when he thinks, incorrectly, that he has the last word, “This is a day of big disappointments for all of us.”For everyone except the viewers, that is.A version of this review appears in print on April 23, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: Some Secrets Are Too Big to Harbor.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.