AdvertisementSupported byBy Alastair MacaulayDance forms evolve. Because of the phenomenal popularity that ballroom-based competitions have achieved on television, there are many thousands of people out there — including members of my family and close friends — who feel they have a good grasp of the rudiments of the rumba and the Viennese waltz, without themselves having danced much or any of them. But because I watch little television and because I briefly studied ballroom, my first reaction to what I occasionally see being done on screen (and, even more rarely, onstage) to the fox trot, the rumba and other styles tends to be one of reactionary horror.It’s a tribute to the three-part PBS series “America’s Ballroom Challenge,” which has its premiere on Friday, that the show broke down some of my prejudices. Many of these dance pairs, especially the finalists in Episode 3, deserved attention and rewatching: I was always impressed by how much more I saw on a second viewing.A first viewing of these numbers often involves shocks and adjustments. How should we react to a waltz in which the man’s opening move is to lift the woman and hold her horizontally along his chest as he turns? Had you thought of “Send in the Clowns” as a Viennese waltz? Me neither.What concept of ballroom permits what used to be called a po-po lift, where the man holds the woman above his head with his hand planted squarely between her legs? How keen are you on any ballroom number that features either dancer or both spending periods horizontally on the floor? We all know that ballroom dances are sublimated courtship rituals, but who needs to see a rumba that ends with both dancers lying on the floor (the man bare-chested) in a multisecond kiss?The hosts, Mary Murphy and Tony Meredith, are former ballroom stars (and judges) whose screen manner is dangerously unspontaneous and endlessly enthusiastic; Ms. Murphy sometimes seems to be forcing bonhomie through gritted teeth. But Mr. Meredith, with the acumen of an experienced pro, often gives pointers that help us spot things that are unusual within this genre. (I can’t help wishing, though, that he didn’t always guess accurately which couple will prove the winner in each round; it makes any cynic suspect he’s in the know.)Ms. Murphy does make a few remarks that nonspecialists will be grateful for. She often says that these dancers are “pushing the envelope” and we can’t miss how right she is, not least in matters of dress and makeup. One couple performs barefoot, another man bare-chested; the female performer in one mambo pair wears plenty of clothing above the neck and beneath the knee, with remarkably little in between. And far beyond what is found in the ballet world, the women’s makeup — especially around the eyes — is frequently garish and often needlessly harsh.As these dancers extend their genres, they’re changing history. (They compete in four areas: American Smooth, American Rhythm, International Standard, International Latin.) Some of this is impressive: Ballroom can be irksomely sexist, and it was good to see two couples where the women plainly took the lead at times. Too seldom, alas. Ms. Murphy and Mr. Meredith exclaim when Misha Vlasov whips Vanda Polakova around in a fast, flamboyant cartwheel lift: O.K. Yet they make no comment a few seconds later when Mr. Vlasov folds Ms. Polakova in two and plays her buttocks like a drum before propelling her between his legs.And though our hosts point out the more point-winning features of the dances performed by Peter and Alexandra Perzhu, I wish they had drawn viewers’ attention to a fabulously expressive gesture in it. While traveling together at speed across the floor, Ms. Perzhu inclined her face to rest on the palm of his extended hand — a moment of startling tenderness dramatically sustained.“There’s the top-line we love so much,” Ms. Murphy rightly remarks about Artem Plakhotnyi and Inna Berlizyeva. Several other couples so exaggerate the arched deportment considered stylish in the waltz, quickstep and other genres that it often looks as if each is doing all possible to stretch away from a partner he or she actually detests — but with Mr. Plakhotnyi and Ms. Berlizyeva, this stretched “top-line” carriage becomes the debonair essence of exhilaration.I lost my heart to this couple early on; and it stayed lost. Gradually I learned to admire different stylists — the level, eventually, was phenomenal — but the dancing of these two more than once ravished me as that of nobody else quite did.The final round consisted of one short entry (staying within their chosen area) and one long one (with license to roam stylistically) by each of the four top couples. You can understand why Mr. Plakhotnyi and Ms. Berlizyeva lost ground in the brisk first dance, where their brightness was forced.But oh! Nothing was more daringly simple or more sheerly beautiful than their second number. They began just by walking, side by side, she in a marvelous white gown, he in a simple black suit and tie with white shirt; even though the camera, facing them head on, did not show the full rhythmic subtlety of this walk, its austere elegance was unmistakable. And they ended, again, standing side by side. What happened in between was often angelic, the quintessence of romantic grace.Advertisement