By NATE CHINENAPRIL 22, 2015
There’s a coolheaded but decisive tension between moment-to-moment details and the arc of a larger design in the recent music by the alto saxophonist Tim Berne. That conceptual push and pull has been a hallmark of his working band, Snakeoil, since its auspicious debut album several years ago. Still, it probably hasn’t had a more potent distillation than “Embraceable Me,” the composition that closed the band’s first set at the Jazz Standard on Tuesday night.Drawn like the rest of the set from Snakeoil’s impressive third album, “You’ve Been Watching Me,” out this week on ECM, “Embraceable Me” began with a chiming but brambly exchange between members of the rhythm section: Matt Mitchell on piano, Ches Smith on vibraphone and Ryan Ferreira on guitar. Hypnotic as a windup music box, this prelude soon led to a more declarative melody, played in harmonic tandem by Mr. Berne and the clarinetist Oscar Noriega, against Mr. Smith’s assertive drumming.What next? An open-form section featuring Mr. Berne’s split-tone multiphonics against an abstract stir of piano and drums; the onset of a new theme, scored for alto saxophone and bass clarinet in an unhurried 7/4 meter; a deep buildup of intensity, experienced less as a common crescendo than as a shift in atmospheric pressure. The whole excursion, stretching some 15 minutes, attested to the unbending refinement of an idea.On some level, Mr. Berne has been working toward this outcome for the last 35 years, when he was just beginning to release albums as a bandleader. At 60, he’s an acknowledged influence among composer-improvisers, who are drawn to the expressive commitment and lurching, contrapuntal force of his music. The other members of Snakeoil fit this acolyte profile, though their own capabilities, individually and as a unit, helped determine the latest phase in Mr. Berne’s style.Tuesday’s stand, which began a 15-city tour, underscored just how much that shift has to do with chamberesque restraint. “Lost in Redding” interspersed a complex churn of parts with pensive cadenzas. “Small World in a Small Town” included a passage of spontaneous duologue by Mr. Berne and Mr. Mitchell, whose split-second chordal accompaniment was often staggering in its intuition. Later in the piece, Mr. Smith hunched over his vibraphone with mallets and a violin bow, making cycles of damping and decay.And if Snakeoil comes across as less combative than some of Mr. Berne’s previous bands, that’s not to suggest it treads lightly. Mr. Ferreira, its newest member, brought serrated electronic texture to the music, notably on “False Impressions.” And for a good stretch of that composition, the entire band attacked a lunging cadence in the melody, immersed in the intricacies at hand, but also being carried irresistibly forward.Tim Berne’s Snakeoil appears on Friday in Philadelphia, on Saturday in Baltimore, and on Sunday in Washington; screwgunrecords.com. A version of this article appears in print on April 23, 2015, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline: Restrained, but Not Treading Lightly.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.