By MATT WOLFAPRIL 22, 2015
LONDON — As if there were any doubt that the Almeida Theater is the most consistently provocative playhouse in town, along comes Simon Stephens’s “Carmen Disruption” to, well, disrupt whatever notions you may have about the well-made play.Elusive and fractured in its story-telling and often quite ravishing to behold, Mr. Stephens’s new play uses Bizet’s opera as the starting point for his own portrait of anomie as it besets a handful of people in an unnamed European city. That four of these characters share the same name as the principals from the opera — the fifth, known only as The Singer (Sharon Small), turns out to be a diva who has traveled the globe playing the eponymous gypsy-woman of legend — allows the playwright to bring love, sex and death into his own very distinct alignment: Mr. Stephens co-opts his classical source only to deconstruct it as his play marches to its own distinctly mournful and haunting beat.Lizzie Clachan’s immediately arresting set consists of a life-size bull — in itself a visual echo of Bizet’s landscape — fringed by the rubble of a once-grand auditorium that has fallen into ruin. Amid the wreckage drift various personages whose separate narratives start to overlap near the grief-laden conclusion of the 90-minute piece (no intermission).While the magnetic Ms. Small speaks of feeling real only when inhabiting her role, we are introduced to the foursome of Mr. Stephens’s own invention, starting with a young male prostitute sporting a leather jacket and Pierre Cardin scarf who just so happens to go by the name of Carmen. A preening attention-getter whose defining relationship would seem to be with his cellphone, this Carmen walks a dangerous tightrope between desire and destruction, and Jack Farthing invests the part with the nervy energy of a casual narcissist who knows that looks can kill — as, in this scenario, they threaten to do.AdvertisementThe others include Don José (Noma Dumezweni), here reimagined as a female taxi driver forever roaming the stage in search of respite; Escamillo, conceived afresh in John Light’s terrific performance as a highflying banker who is seen quite literally to be climbing the walls; and Micaela, whom Katie West presents as an expletive-prone student on the rebound from a relationship that began — where else? — online.AdvertisementThat the characters never speak directly to one another permits the able director, Michael Longhurst, to layer the successive monologues like so many pieces of music, snatches of Bizet’s actual score folded in here and there courtesy of an actual opera singer (Viktoria Vizin) as well as the two cellists who are seated to one side of the stage.“Carmen Disruption” was commissioned and first produced by the Deutsches Schauspielhaus in Hamburg in March 2014, and the evening thrums to an interest in nonliteral modes of drama that is especially prevalent on the Continent. The result may catch unawares those who only know this playwright from his London and Broadway hit “The Curious Incident of the Dog in the Night-Time,” which looks likely to figure prominently in the nominations for this year’s Tony Awards as they are announced on April 28.But that play, of course, is adapted from the novel by Mark Haddon and finds room for a frisky dog just in time for its finish, whereas “Carmen Disruption” comes directly from Mr. Stephens’s own imagination and with not a live animal in sight. (In addition, he keeps busy as an adapter of classic texts, including the startling 2012 London revival of “A Doll’s House,” which was subsequently seen in New York.)Those wanting an audience-cosseting experience may chafe at the baleful rhythms of what emerges by its close as a requiem of sorts for a world in which human connection has seen to have all but disappeared, notwithstanding the number of ways that are now available to us to interact — and “Carmen Disruption” at one point or another references them all, a visible dot-matrix screen a reminder of just how it is that many of us do so much of our reading these days.Will the alienation the play describes pass itself on to its public? It shouldn’t with luck, not least coming after a spate of productions (“King Charles III,” “Mr. Burns,” a production of “The Merchant of Venice” set in Las Vegas) at this same address, all of which have upended a spectator’s expectations in different ways. And in its ability to locate the high drama that exists within all our lives, “Carmen Disruption,” for all its gathering sadness, gets the last laugh. After all, who among us wouldn’t want to be a leading character from an opera, even only for one night?Across town at the Royal Court, a theater that has long been known for stirring the pot, are two productions that opened within days of one another, one essential and the other, I’m sorry to say, a waste of time. The outright dud is a stage version of Roald Dahl’s “The Twits” that bills itself as “mischievously adapted” by Enda Walsh, the Tony-winning writer of the musical “Once,” when it is in fact a thoroughgoing and humorless muddle that seems likely to bore children and exasperate their parents. The director is his fellow Tony winner John Tiffany, steering what for him is a rare misfire.I suppose there is some delight to be had in the physical makeover of the central couple — the Twits, as played by Jason Watkins and Monica Dolan, a visual study in distressed hair and protruding teeth. But the story itself quickly gets lost in the unrewarding antics of a cage full of monkeys in human form and a murky parable about English rural life that comes improbably to rest with a citation from “Morning Has Broken,” a song that — by the time it arrives — represents a welcome escape if not quite a new dawn.Whether the National Health Service will enjoy its own bright future is the highly pertinent topic of the Court’s concurrent entry, “Who Cares” (the title bears no relation to the George Balanchine ballet of the same name that comes with a question mark attached), which has opened just in time for the forthcoming British elections, where health care as ever is a hot-button topic.AdvertisementOn this occasion, three directors have been pressed into service to make viable playing spaces out of those areas of the Court that are normally off limits to the public.A promenade performance in which the audience is separated into three groups of 15 each and sent on their way before coming together in one seated room for the last half hour, Michael Wynne’s script compresses into 90 minutes (again, no intermission) the verbatim remarks of those on the frontline of the health service, be they administrators, doctors, or, most importantly from a playgoer’s point of view, patients.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The choice moments come thick and fast and include Elizabeth Berrington as a distressed daughter of an ailing patient who returns to her mother’s hospital bedside to find that her chair has disappeared, alongside multiple accounts of the fortitude and courage displayed daily by what, we are told, is the world’s fifth largest employer.You exit the play pondering the system while admiring those who do so much to keep it functioning. Who cares? The implicit answer is that we all do — or should.Carmen Disruption.  Directed by Michael Longhurst. Almeida Theater. Through  May 23.Roald Dahl’s The Twits.  Directed by John Tiffany. Royal Court Jerwood Theater Downstairs. Through May 31. Who Cares.  Directed by Debbie Hannan, Lucy Morrison and Hamish Pirie. Royal Court Jerwood Theater Upstairs. Through May 16. A version of this review appears in print on April 23, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.