By ROBERTA SMITHOCT. 1, 2015
New York has just added another outstanding museum exhibition to its autumn roster, this one at the Neue Galerie. “Berlin Metropolis: 1918-1933” is an ambitious effort in a limited setting that successfully combines historical sweep, clockwork organization and an egalitarian approach to mediums.Its nearly 350 pieces — expertly shoehorned into six themed spaces — cover the cultural ferment of the fragile Weimar Republic, as it came to be known, which was sandwiched between the end of World War I and the onset of the Third Reich and was Germany’s first attempt at full democracy.The show is hardly definitive, yet it can feel that way because it creates such a poignant, specific view of the devastation of Hitler’s rise and rule: the array of potential cultural achievements destroyed by death, disruption and the shattering of a great city.Is it too much to say that during the Weimar years Berlin was poised to become the capital of the 20th century, repurposing Walter Benjamin’s exalting phrase about the significance of Paris in the 19th century? Perhaps. The title probably belongs to New York. But this show can make Berlin – considered the most American of European capitals at the time – seem like a contender.AdvertisementAfter the war, the city resumed much of its robust prewar growth. (Its population quadrupled between 1871 and 1919.) All the arts thrived in this fulcrum: painting, film, architecture, photography, collage, fashion illustration and various kinds of design (graphic, clothing, costume, set). It was a time when German Expressionism became more socially critical; the even more disgruntled tendencies of Dada took hold and a hyper-realism called Neue Sachlichkeit (New Objectivity) resurrected Northern Europe’s tradition of exacting realism. (This broad strain is examined and linked with photography in “New Objectivity: Modern German Art in the Weimar Republic, 1919-1933” opening Sunday at the Los Angeles County Museum of Art.) The world’s most creative film industry emerged, as did indisputably modern architecture and design, partly thanks to the nearby Bauhaus, founded in 1919.The show represents a spectrum of human innovation and aspiration: Some of it ferociously engaged with the Weimar’s tribulations and Hitler’s rise, some of it Utopian, some of it aimed at middle-class creature comforts. And there is often an undercurrent of mounting dread. Some artists knew what was coming and confronted it directly; others expressed less consciously a German fatalism older than Albrecht Dürer. Another kind of consistency comes from inventive uses of line and also photography.“Berlin Metropolis” reunites the curator and designer responsible for the Neue Galerie’s harrowing “Degenerate Art” exhibition of 2014. The curator is Olaf Peters, a German art historian who focuses here on a handful of emblematic figures – especially Hannah Höch, George Grosz and John Heartfield – sometimes bringing out surprising facets of their work while including a large cast of less familiar figures.The vast majority of the loans come from German museums and archives, especially in Berlin, so a lot of the material is fresh. Among the surprises: four oil paintings from 1924 by Höch, an early adopter with Raoul Hausmann of Dadaist collage, that are thought never to have traveled to this side of the Atlantic. Höch’s collages often created monstrous faces and masks from snippets of magazine images. Now we learn she translated these beings onto canvas – most grotesquely in a quartet of lurid creatures titled “Journalists.” These paintings have a lot to offer contemporary artists.AdvertisementThe exhibition design, by Richard Pandiscio,  has nice touches. In the opening gallery, “The Birth of the Republic,” blowups of typographically elegant Dada poster-poems confront fiery political posters designed by German Expressionists during the turmoil that preceded the signing of the new republic’s constitution in Weimar in 1919. Later in the show, a reproduction of the handsome five-sided electrical traffic light that presided over Berlin’s Potsdamer Platz – probably the first in Europe – sums up a lot about German design logic and ingenuity. Mr. Pandiscio found it in an old photograph. It flashes cautionary yellow.The evenhanded mix of mediums is especially inspiring. Properly scaled, it turns out they really can all get along. For example, it is one thing to know that Fritz Lang’s great silent film “Metropolis” of 1927 bares traces of the influence of German Expressionism. But it is another thing to actually see it playing on a slim screen no larger than a drawing in a gallery alongside works that reflect the same absorption and use teeming crowds to the create overall sense of urban energy. “Metropolis” converses with Max Beckmann’s great, perturbed “Trip to Berlin” lithographs of 1922 and Karl Hubbuch’s refined prints, which seem to mimic collage’s use of photographs.For collage, there’s Höch’s quietly subversive “Heads of State,” from 1918-20, which recasts two European politicians as bare-chested tribesmen in a jungle formed by an ironed-on embroidery pattern; and Hausmann’s elaborate excoriation, “A Bourgeois Precision Brain Incites a World Movement (later known as Dada Triumphs),” from 1920. You get a striking sense of Grosz’s versatility, as he moves from demonic cafe scenes of bourgeoise obliviousness to a geometric set design for a police station (1923) to “Gymnast,” a painting from around the same time that subscribes to the robotlike idealization of Oskar Schlemmer.Nearly everything here has both echoes and opposition. The importance of film is underscored in “The New Utopia” section by Hans Poelzig’s 1924 designs (and one fabulous drawing in wax crayon) for the Capitol Cinema movie palace, which hesitates between Art Deco and the more severe International Style. Erich Mendelsohn’s model of the German Expressionist Einstein Tower in Potsdam (1917-21) contrasts with his 1924 drawings for a more streamlined Berlin apartment complex. And Mies van der Rohe’s drawings of monolithic apartment towers rise majestically above everything else, commensurate with his stature as a modernist god. Three perfect white benches add to the gallery’s hushed, chapel-like effect. But they are intended for viewing Walther Ruttmann’s 1927 film, “Berlin: Symphony of a Metropolis,” a relentless, mesmerizing portrait of the city projected on one wall that brings reality crashing into the space. (Ruttmann made photomontages using stills from the film that are included here, shown in the United States for the first time.)Similarly, the gallery titled “The Neue Frau” (New Woman) includes dresses, shoes, movie stills and a vitrine of sparkling jewelry. But the distorted faces and bodies of Höch’s paintings and collages are also here, disrupting the mood. So are photographs of the spirited actress Valeska Gert, taken between 1917 and 1934, and Christian Schad’s sexually charged “Two Girls,” from 1928.In the show’s final gallery, “Into the Abyss,” the horror of Hitler’s totalitarianism comes to the fore in a series of extreme contrasts of violence and calm. Oozing Dalíesque decay, the large marauding centurion of Rudolf Schlichter’s 1937 allegory, “Blind Power,” fights horror with horror. So do Heartfield’s grimly prescient photomontages from 1933-34, sometimes turning the swastika into an instrument of medieval martyrdom. Actual Nazi posters are also here, while large tempera paintings by Oskar Nerlinger from 1928-30 perpetuate the rarefied fantasy architecture of the 18th century yet hint at the conflicts of modern life. And other works focus elsewhere, like Carl Grossberg’s hyper-real painting of a Miesian dining room from 1935.Amid all this, another small screen interjects Lang’s masterly film “M,” from 1931, in a gorgeous recent restoration. It indicates his seamless transition to sound with a murder melodrama that seems keyed to the growing hysteria of real-life Berlin. Its poster features a large hand painted with a big red M, a scarlet letter that also foreshadows the tattooed numbers of the concentration camps.This show is itself masterly, a fast-moving smorgasbord that coheres through its call-and-response syncopation among the artworks themselves. Above it, buoyed by its evidence, hovers the unanswerable question of what might have been.“Berlin Metropolis: 1918-1933” runs through Jan. 4 at the Neue Galerie; 212-628-6200, neuegalerie­.org.A version of this review appears in print on October 2, 2015, on Page C23 of the New York edition with the headline: Hope and Dread Infused in an Era.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.