AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn Shattuck10 P.M. (Starz Cinema) WILD TALES (2015) If it bleeds, it leads: A model boards a plane and enters a kind of “Twilight Zone” reunion involving her former boyfriend, a musician who was delivered a soul-crushing critique. A waitress in a greasy spoon with a rat problem realizes that her customer is responsible for the demise of her family. A crazy case of road rage resembles a standoff between the Road Runner and Wile E. Coyote. A wealthy family pins a crime on its gardener. And love and jealousy blow up a wedding. Each of the six tales in Damián Szifron’s Argentine anthology — titled “Relatos Salvajes” in Spanish, and an Oscar nominee for best foreign-language film — begins on a savage note. How they end is kind of up to the viewer. “It’s a mad, mad social Darwinian world, churning with men and women who, whether pushed a lot or just a little, are all eager to do the worst to one another,” Manohla Dargis wrote in The New York Times. (Image: Erica Rivas)5 P.M. (21); 6 P.M. (13) METROFOCUS This New York-centric newsmagazine goes daily, as Representative Peter T. King, a Republican, discusses security at home and around the country; Amy Robach of ABC’s “Good Morning America” talks about the on-air mammogram two years ago that led to her diagnosis of breast cancer; and Little Anthony remembers the first time he heard himself on the radio singing “Tears on My Pillow.”6 P.M. (TCM) JEZEBEL (1938) A Southern belle throws away her shot at love by daring to wear red to the ball of the year. The film was supposedly Bette Davis’s compensation for losing out on the role of Scarlett O’Hara in “Gone With the Wind.” She won her second Oscar instead.9 P.M. (History) ATLANTIS FOUND The geologist Martin Pepper — yes, you may call him Dr. Pepper — tries to prove that the city of Atlantis actually existed on the Greek island of Santorini and was destroyed by the biggest volcanic eruption known to humans. How? you ask. By using sonar scans of the seabed, microscopic analysis of ancient landscapes and matching sites on Santorini to 12 clues embedded in Plato’s description of this lost city.10 P.M. (NBC) BLINDSPOT Jane’s trustworthiness is thrown into question as the F.B.I. and the C.I.A. race after the same criminal.10 P.M. (ABC) CASTLE Beckett and Castle try to figure out why someone would kill for a priceless work of art.10 P.M. (Flix) SOUTH PARK: BIGGER, LONGER AND UNCUT (1999) Cartman, Kyle, Stan and Kenny sneak into an R-rated movie and put their new, even more foul vocabulary to use. The result is war with Canada. The strangely surreal subplot: Satan as Saddam Hussein’s pining love slave.11:35 P.M. (NBC) THE TONIGHT SHOW STARRING JIMMY FALLON Lip-sync redux: Justin Timberlake and Ellen DeGeneres are the guests in this repeat. Macklemore & Ryan Lewis perform.What’s Streaming NowTHE ROYALS Elizabeth Hurley — who set off alarms this month at the Victoria and Albert Museum in London by posing for a snapshot on the Great Bed of Ware, reportedly able to accommodate at least four couples — portrays the foul-mouthed Queen Helena alongside Vincent Regan as the bewildered King Simon, the rulers of a decadent if fictional British dynasty in this nighttime soap. Leading their unruly brood is Prince Liam, the heir apparent after his older brother dies, who angers his mother by sleeping with the daughter of the queen’s head of security. Princess Eleanor, meanwhile, likes to drink, take drugs, seduce servants and bodyguards, and party in Paris nightclubs without any underwear. Relive the inaugural season of E!’s first scripted series before Season 2 drops on E! on Nov. 15. (amazon.com)Advertisement