The tenor saxophonist Kamasi Washington, whose first album “The Epic” comes out on May 5th from Brainfeeder, is part of a collective of Los Angeles jazz musicians in their early 30s who are accomplishing a couple of difficult things extremely well. One is that the group of musicians, calling themselves the West Coast Get Down, have set themselves up as the next significant chapter in Los Angeles jazz through regular residencies at clubs in Leimert Park and Hollywood, and through the coherence of their band sound, re-formatted as they like according to whoever is leading it.  (Mr. Washington’s album, “The Epic — a three-disc, 175-minute megalith with a ten-piece band, choir, and string-section — was recorded during a month of recording in which six others from the group made their own albums.) The story of jazz in southern California is fragmentary and often hidden from the historical record — great musicians develop there, nurtured by local bandleaders or teachers, and often face a decision to head east or stay obscure. The West Coast Get Down has already made its impact locally over the last five years, and may soon make it internationally.The collective’s other achievement is that its members have naturally allied their jazz with a progressive hip-hop aesthetic: a quest shared among many jazz musicians over the last 25 years and seldom achieved.  Brainfeeder is the label established by the electronic musician and producer Flying Lotus, and Mr. Washington, in particular, can be heard on Kendrick Lamar’s new album, “To Pimp A Butterfly,” which might be described as jazz-like in spirit if not always in sound.  (There was nothing forced or unlikely about his participation in the record: Terrace Martin, one of Mr. Lamar’s producers, has known and played jazz with Mr. Washington since high-school days.)In this edition of Popcast, Jon Caramanica and I talk about Mr. Washington’s sprawling album, full of funk and gospel and swing and collective surges, both in terms of how it relates to the rest of jazz, and also in light of the Los Angeles hip-hop connection.Listen above, download the MP3 or subscribe in iTunes. RELATEDBen Ratliff on Kamasi WashingtonSPOTIFY PLAYLISTTracks by artists discussed this week. Spotify users can also find it here.
