By CORINNA da FONSECA-WOLLHEIMAPRIL 24, 2015
In 1847, the German Romantic poet Joseph von Eichendorff told Clara Schumann that the lieder settings by her husband, Robert Schumann, had “given life to his poems for the first time.” Clara replied that, on the contrary, Eichendorff’s poems “gave life to the music.”On Wednesday the soprano Dorothea Röschmann and the pianist Mitsuko Uchida gave a recital at Carnegie Hall that opened with Schumann’s “Liederkreis,” with texts by Eichendorff. Both artists are superstars and a capacity audience turned out, drawn by the promise of a collaboration as symbiotic as that between composer and poet.But this was no dream team. In fact, while Ms. Uchida’s playing exhibited her hallmark refinement and subtlety, Ms. Röschmann’s voluminous silken sound nearly smothered the life out of these songs. The fault for that lies also with Carnegie. In the drafty 2,800-seat Stern Auditorium, Schumann’s delicate, aphoristic lieder seem condemned to take on the stiff, embalmed quality of a museum exhibit.Amid the succulent sweetness and generous vibrato of Ms. Röschmann’s voice, words and syllables bled into each other so much that it was possible only to sit back and surrender to the sounds. These held many marvels. Ms. Uchida made beautiful work of her part in “Die Stille” (“Silence”), ending in a tiptoeing motion that, on the very last notes, melted into pensive legato. In Schumann’s “Frauenliebe und -Leben,” a song cycle about a woman’s life, both musicians brought lovely flexibility of tempo to “Ich kann’s nicht fassen, nicht glauben” (“I can’t grasp it, nor believe it”), describing the thrill of a reciprocated love.AdvertisementBy contrast, in “Auf einer Burg” (“In a Castle”) from “Liederkreis,” Ms. Röschmann drew breath at such inopportune moments that the song’s illusion of centuries-long sleep was undermined. “Mondnacht,” Schumann’s famous song about a moonlit kiss between earth and sky, also lacked the requisite stillness and sense of wonder.Berg’s “Seven Early Songs” fared much better. Ms. Röschmann’s voice was well served by the denser textures of the chromatic piano part. The jagged melodic profile of songs like “Die Nachtigall” (“The Nightingale”) also seemed to shake loose a greater variety of colors. She brought chilling sharpness to the words “wildes Blut” (“wild blood”), and the bloom of her top notes fit well with these songs’ fin-de-siècle decadence and contained anxiety.AdvertisementMs. Uchida’s playing was more assertive in the Berg. She and Ms. Röschmann were equals in “Schilflied” (“Reed Song”) in which the piano part skirts and leans away from the vocal line before gathering force to support it. The last bars of “Sommertage” (“Summer Days”) were an exquisite example of Ms. Uchida’s ability to suggest spatial depth with a resonant downward arpeggio answered by a tiny, radiant, starlike chord.A version of this article appears in print on April 24, 2015, on Page C7 of the New York edition with the headline: Moonlit Kisses Mingle With Nightingale’s Song.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.