Performance Biennial
Various venues.
April 27-June 7.After the French artist Sophie Calle’s boyfriend ended their relationship by sending an email that closed with the words “take care of yourself,” Ms. Calle filmed 100 women’s reactions as they read the parting note. The resulting artwork, “Take Care of Yourself,” is showing in this interdisciplinary performance festival, which also includes artwork and appearances by Marina Abramovic, Laurie Anderson and the performance artist Osías Yanov. The artist Tania Bruguera, whose passport was revoked by the Cuban government after planning a performance art demonstration for a public square in Havana last December, remains on the festival calendar and will attend if she can secure the right to leave Cuba.International Arts GuideA selection of arts events taking place across the world in the coming week.
A selection of arts events taking place across the world in the coming week.Celebrating Two Contemporary Geniuses: Jakuchu and Buson
Suntory Museum of Art.
Through May 10.The painters Ito Jakuchu and Yosa Buson, both born in 1716, pioneered some of 18th-century Japan’s most celebrated artistic techniques, creating understated, clean-lined landscapes, portraits and images of animals. This exhibition weaves together their artworks with details from their lives. It explores topics like the influence of international trade on their works, and how much the two might have influenced each other directly.Project Biennial of Contemporary Art
D-0 ARK (Atomic War Command).
Through Oct. 24The underground bunker where this biennial takes place was built as a headquarters for the Yugoslav People’s Army in the event of nuclear war and was kept a tight secret until Yugoslavia disintegrated in the early 1990s. The first two editions of this biennial focused on artwork about the Cold War, but this year, curators have aimed to branch out. Artists’ works on view include those of the Russian mural painter Nikolay Oleynikov; the Danish artist Tue Greenfort, who has used CCTV cameras to document wildlife; and the artist couple Damian and Delaine Le Bas.La Traviata
Zurich Opera House.
Through May 23.The director David Hermann, who recently staged a version of “The Oresteia” on the roof of the Deutsche Oper Berlin parking garage, directed this new take on Verdi’s opera. The production (shown above) takes a modern spin on the material, updating the action to a present-day no-man’s land. Sonya Yoncheva and Ailyn Pérez will trade off performances in the role of Violetta Valéry, the opera’s damned courtesan.Saint Lucia Jazz & Arts Festival
Various venues.
April 30-May 10.The hip-hop stars Robin Thicke, Flo Rida and Chronixx will each play concerts at this music and art festival, set at venues across this Caribbean island. An art fair featuring work by local artists will take place alongside the jazz and pop headliners. The final concerts, featuring the festival’s biggest names, like Mr. Thicke, will be held amid colonial ruins in one of the island’s national parks, overlooking the ocean.Dolce Vita? From the Liberty to Italian Design (1900-1940); Adolfo Wildt (1868-1931). Le Dernier Symboliste
Musée d’Orsay; Musée de l’Orangerie.
Through Sept. 13; July 13.Two related shows at the Orsay and its small sister museum compose a mini “Italian season” in Paris. “Dolce Vita” examines the legacy of early 20th-century Italian design. Through art and objects, the show explores how aesthetics like Futurism related to the politics of the day. “Adolfo Wildt,” at the Orangerie, focuses on the Italian sculptor, who created a distinctly modern style with clear echoes of Italy’s high Renaissance art.Le French May Festival
Various venues.
May 1-June 30.This extensive celebration of French culture, organized with guidance from the French Embassy, includes performances, exhibitions and a special section dedicated to France’s cuisine. Offerings include a show dedicated to the architect Le Corbusier and a major exhibition about the works created by the historic Sèvres ceramics factory. A number of events will blend local resources with Gallic ones, like a concert by the Hong Kong Wind Kamerata led by the horn player André Cazalet.Theatertreffen
Haus der Berliner Festspiele.
May 1-17.A panel of judges scoured the German-speaking world to find the 10 productions that will visit this theater festival, an annual gathering of Mitteleuropa’s best work for the stage. This year’s lineup includes a production of “Waiting for Godot” by the Bulgarian director Ivan Panteleev; “Common Ground,” a new semidocumentary piece from the Maxim Gorki Theater about a group of actors who return to their ancestral homes in the former Yugoslavia; and a contemporary spin on Ibsen’s “John Gabriel Borkman” from the Deutsches Schauspielhaus Hamburg. Most productions will have English subtitles.Yinka Shonibare MBE: Pièces de Résistance
DHC/ART.
April 28-Sept. 20.Photographs and installations by this Nigerian-British artist offer a wry take on British history. For one humorous photo series, Mr. Shonibare (born 1962) placed black actors at the center of traditional British aristocratic scenes; for another, he dressed two female mannequins in lavish Victorian dresses and placed them with guns in their hands, as if in a duel.