LONDON  — The director of Tate Modern, Chris Dercon, will step down  in 2017 to lead the Volksbühne, one of Berlin’s five major theaters.The move is the second major departure from Tate in less than a month. Penelope Curtis, the director of Tate Britain, announced plans to step down from her role this summer to run the small Calouste Gulbenkian Museum in Portugal. Unlike Ms. Curtis, who was seen by some as a divisive figure, Mr. Dercon has been widely regarded as a strong leader for the prominent museum, which has attracted record numbers of visitors in recent years, and is currently erecting a new building.Nicholas Serota, the director of Tate, was not available for immediate comment. In a statement he said: “Chris Dercon is helping to open Tate Modern to a wider world and more diverse audiences through his support for a more international program, photography, live performance and film. We look forward to working with him on the opening of the new Tate Modern and until he takes up his appointment in Berlin in 2017.”Mr. Dercon, who is in Berlin for the announcement, said in a telephone interview that the departures were “completely independent from one another,” and that he had had extended discussions with Mr. Serota before his departure. He added, “now that the news broke I can fully concentrate on Tate.”Mr. Dercon will replace the stage director Frank Castorf, who will have held his position for a quarter century when he leaves. Mr. Castorf has a reputation for staging epic, postmodern productions that dispense largely with narrative. Mr. Dercon, a native of Belgium who used to run the Haus der Kunst in Munich, will take on his new role in 2017.
He said that he hoped to make the theater more interdisciplinary, and to fold in plans with large city projects, like a civic center being planned for the city center. ”Social infrastructure and cultural infrastructure have to go hand in hand,” he said. He pointed to the programming at the Park Avenue Armory and plans for the coming Culture Shed in New York as evidence that there is a growing appetite for interdisciplinary work. A version of this article appears in print on 04/25/2015, on page C3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Director of Tate Modern to Step Down in 2017.