AdvertisementSupported byMusic ReviewBy Anthony TommasiniIn programs that combine recitations of poetry with live performances of music, the music, no matter how powerful, often winds up seeming like a backdrop to the words. But music and poetry mingle with equal force in “The Night Dances,” an hourlong collaboration between the renowned English actress Charlotte Rampling, who gives transfixing recitations of poems by Sylvia Plath, and the adventurous French-American cellist Sonia Wieder-Atherton, playing selected movements from the Suites No. 2 and 3 for solo cello by Benjamin Britten.These impressive artists have performed the work internationally to acclaim. The program had its American premiere on Wednesday evening in an ideally intimate space, the beautifully restored wood-paneled Board of Officers Room at the Park Avenue Armory. That this inviting room seats just 108 has a downside: There are very few tickets remaining for the rest of the run. It was Ms. Wieder-Atherton’s idea to pair Plath and Britten. She had long been gripped by what she calls the “solitary and radical voice” of the Boston-born Plath, whose intense, passionate poetry was an outlet for her tempestuous life. In 1963, just 30, Plath sealed off her children’s bedroom in London with wet towels and turned on the gas stove, killing herself.Ms. Wieder-Atherton explains that Plath’s extremes, the “crackle of her tongue,” go with Britten. In the cellist’s mind, these suites match Plath’s “obsessive pacing to and fro, her deep song, her infinite colors, and even her flashes of humor and her sense of form.”“The Night Dances,” directed by Ms. Wieder-Atherton, is played atop a simple elevated platform with lights illuminating the performers. The piece begins with Ms. Rampling, barefoot in a plain, black dress, reciting “Lady Lazarus,” which draws on World War II imagery as a metaphoric expression of more general oppression. It is the lament of a woman longing for death, even attempting to die, and yet continually brought back to life: “Soon, soon the flesh/The grave cave ate will be/At home on me.”With minimal movements and eerie concentration, Ms. Rampling spoke 11 of Plath’s lengthy, elusive poems, all performed from memory. Sometimes she stood and confronted her listeners. (Or was she confiding in them?) Other times she spoke while reclining on an ottoman, or propping herself up with her arms. In more narrative poems, like “Edge,” her delivery was restrained yet purposeful; in emotional poems, like excerpts from “Three Women,” she was swept up in the moment, as if struggling with how to express herself. Ms. Wieder-Atherton matched these qualities in her commanding performances of eight movements from Britten’s cello suites, written for the composer’s friend, Mstislav Rostropovich. The music shifts from impulsive bursts to enigmatic passages. Some movements hew loosely to traditional forms like the fugue and the scherzo. The Third Suite incorporates dark Russian folk melodies and dances. Ms. Wieder-Atherton’s full-bodied cello sound filled the space excitingly. During some stretches of “The Night Dances,” music and poetry overlapped. For me, the greatness of Britten’s music came through with special force when Ms. Wieder-Atherton played alone and Ms. Rampling just listened, with an acuity as gripping as her recitations.“The Night Dances” runs through Sunday in the Board of Officers Room at the Park Avenue Armory; 212-616-3930, armoryonpark.org Advertisement