AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn Shattuck9 P.M. (ABC) BRUCE JENNER — THE INTERVIEW “My whole life has been getting me ready for this,” Mr. Jenner says in a recent teaser for this hotly anticipated tell-all with Diane Sawyer. But what “this moment” is, exactly, still remains something of a mystery. The physical transformation of Mr. Jenner, 65, the 1976 Olympic gold-medal decathlete, has been a source of intense scrutiny for months, leading to speculation that he is transitioning from male to female. In this two-hour “20/20” special, Ms. Sawyer interviewed Mr. Jenner in Malibu, Calif.; New York City; and Tarrytown, N.Y., where he lived as a child, and spoke with several of his relatives as well. “Those are the only ones I’m concerned with,” Mr. Jenner says in the trailer. “I can’t let myself hurt them.”1 P.M. (TCM) BEING THERE (1979) Peter Sellers stars as Chauncey Gardiner, an illiterate gardener mistaken for a genius and transformed into a national hero in this comedy, directed by Hal Ashby and adapted by Jerzy Kosinski from his novel. Writing in The New York Times, Janet Maslin called the film “a stately, beautifully acted satire with a premise that’s funny but fragile,” adding, “Mr. Sellers never strikes a false note.”4 P.M. (HBO2) THE TALENTED MR. RIPLEY (1999) Starting with the loan of a jacket with a Princeton insignia, Tom Ripley, a men’s room attendant played by Matt Damon begins his ascent of the social ladder — then murders his way up the rest of the rungs — in Anthony Minghella’s adaptation of this Patricia Highsmith thriller. Jude Law is Dickie Greenleaf, the scion of a rich American family, whose father has hired Tom to bring him back to the United States from Italy; Gwyneth Paltrow is Marge, who must share Dickie’s affections with his new friend. And Philip Seymour Hoffman is Freddie, who isn’t buying Tom’s act. Writing in The Times, Janet Maslin said the film “offers diabolically smart surprises wherever you care to look.”8:30 P.M. (ABC Family) ENCHANTED (2007) Amy Adams sings and dances her way through this revisionist fairy tale as Giselle, a princess who falls from her animated world to Times Square and finds shelter with a Manhattan lawyer and single father (Patrick Dempsey) while waiting for her prince (James Marsden) to come. Susan Sarandon is the evil Queen Narissa, who will stop at nothing to knock off her future daughter-in-law; Timothy Spall is the queen’s bumbling henchman; and Kevin Lima, who directed, and Jeff Bennett lend their voices to Pip, a computer-generated chipmunk. Writing in The Times, Manohla Dargis called the film “unexpectedly delightful.”9 P.M. (13) AMERICA’S BALLROOM CHALLENGE Twenty-five couples (including Shannon Jensen and her husband, Shane) make like Fred Astaire and Ginger Rogers in four major styles of dance — American smooth, American rhythm, international standard and international Latin — in Columbus, Ohio, at the world’s largest ballroom dancing competition. This series, which returns to PBS after a six-year hiatus, begins with the waltz, tango, cha-cha and mambo. Mary Murphy, formerly a judge on Fox’s “So You Think You Can Dance,” and the choreographer and dancer Tony Meredith provide commentary.10 P.M. (Animal Planet) FLIPPING SHIPS Edwin McCain, the singer behind hits including “I’ll Be” and “I Could Not Ask For More,” trades his guitar for sandpaper and varnish to restore ramshackle vessels with the help of his crew at Boats Have Souls. He begins by teaming with a longtime friend, the singer Darius Rucker, to turn a 1959 Sea King into a rock ’n’ roll speedboat, complete with retro fins and a classic console, to be auctioned off to benefit a South Carolina children’s hospital.1 A.M. (13) THEATER TALK The actors Chita Rivera and Roger Rees, the director John Doyle and the composer John Kander discuss “The Visit,” the musical Mr. Kander wrote with Fred Ebb and Terrence McNally, now at the Lyceum Theater.What’s Streaming NowFIRST DAYS STORY PROJECT The stories of Vietnamese-American refugees and Vietnam veterans have been collected and preserved in this collaboration between StoryCorps and PBS’s “American Experience,” to be cataloged online and archived at the Library of Congress. The project is the cornerstone of the outreach initiative for “Last Days in Vietnam,” an Oscar-nominated documentary directed by Rory Kennedy to be shown on PBS on Tuesday. (pbs.org)Advertisement