By CORINNA da FONSECA-WOLLHEIMOCT. 18, 2015
How many sopranos does it take to turn in a revival of “Tosca”?Four, it seems. Also four conductors, two leading tenors and four baritones to share the role of the baddie.Luc Bondy’s frosty-louche production of this Puccini melodrama returned to the Metropolitan Opera on Friday in a satisfying performance led by the incisive Ukrainian soprano Oksana Dyka and conducted, often brilliantly, by Marco Armiliato. Twelve more are scheduled, but none feature the opening night’s lineup. For potential ticket buyers, choosing a night to see “Tosca” this fall can resemble a game of fantasy football, with nine different configurations.Mr. Armiliato won’t be conducting any of them: He stepped in to replace Plácido Domingo, who underwent gallbladder surgery and is expected to return to the pit in November. The powerful tenor Roberto Aronica will anchor the cast as Cavaradossi, although Marcello Giordani will take over the role for several performances in November. Always impressive for the sheer volume of his top notes, Mr. Aronica grew in warmth and expressive ardor on Friday, culminating in a deeply affecting rendition of “E lucevan le stelle.”Ms. Dyka was irresistible in the first act, in which a playful Tosca flirts with her beau. As politics, torture and the threat of sexual violence darkened her character’s world, Ms. Dyka’s voice took on a keener glint. Her exclamations of horror and outrage at the end were delivered with searing intensity. But while Cavaradossi’s character seemed to grow in self-knowledge and moral stature in Mr. Aronica’s portrayal, Ms. Dyka’s Tosca was most radiant and most fully herself in the innocent world of Act I. It will be interesting to see how the sopranos Angela Gheorghiu, Maria Guleghina and Liudmyla Monastyrska chart Tosca’s trajectory.As Scarpia, the baritone Roberto Frontali often sounded pale and rigid. His portrayal of that sadistic police chief was efficiently repulsive, but lacked the flashes of humanity that can give the character depth. Perhaps the Scarpias of James Morris, Marco Vratogna and Zeljko Lucic will reveal more about the psychology of a character who openly compares himself to Iago. In that regard, Mr. Lucic, who just completed a riveting run as that villain in Verdi’s “Otello,” might have an edge.“Tosca” runs in repertory through Dec. 1 at the Metropolitan Opera, with frequent cast changes; 212-362-6000, metopera­.org.A version of this review appears in print on October 19, 2015, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline: A Full Battery of Sopranos and Baritones.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.