AdvertisementSupported byBy Bruce WeberLois Lilienstein, whose sunny personality and tuneful, bell-clear voice were central to the live and televised performances of Sharon, Lois & Bram, the Canadian singing group popular among young children and their families, died on Wednesday at her home in Toronto. She was 78.The cause was cancer, her son, David, told The Associated Press.A trained pianist and singer, Ms. Lilienstein was an American Midwesterner who in 1966 moved with her husband, Ernest, to Toronto, where she began performing for and teaching music to preschoolers and other children. In the 1970s, she met Sharon Hampson and Bramwell Morrison when all three were performing at the Mariposa Folk Festival in Orillia, Ontario, north of Toronto. They released an album of eclectic folk songs for children, “One Elephant, Deux Éléphants,” in 1978, and began touring with a show that often encouraged singalongs and other forms of audience participation.Their profile was raised in 1984 with the premiere of their television show, “Sharon, Lois & Bram’s Elephant Show” (initially merely “The Elephant Show”), featuring the trio; another children’s entertainer, Eric Nagler; an actor in a cheery elephant costume, Paula Gallivan; and both child and adult guests. The show was on the Canadian Broadcasting Company until January 1989, and in reruns on the Nickelodeon cable channel in the late 1980s and the 1990s.Each of the 30-minute episodes, which were sweet-tempered with an educational element à la “Sesame Street,” had a theme, delivered mostly in songs. (“Farm Show,” for example, featured songs about barnyard animals and growing vegetables.) Notable for employing a variety of musical styles — from rock to nursery rhyme, country to calypso — the show’s episodes signaled their closing with a regular finale, which became a musical signature: a jaunty ditty called “Skinnamarink,” with a repeated nonsensical lyric that made perfect sense:Skinnamarinky dinky dink,Skinnamarinky doo,I love you.Lois Ada Goldberg was born in Chicago on July 10, 1936. Her father was an insurance salesman who played piano at weddings and bar mitzvahs; her mother went with her to tap school, and they performed together at family gatherings. She studied music literature and piano at the University of Michigan, where she met Ernest Lilienstein, who was studying sociology. They married in 1959; lived for a time in Chicago, where Ernest completed his doctorate; and moved to Toronto when he was offered a job at York University.Mr. Lilienstein died in 1998, and shortly thereafter Ms. Lilienstein decided to stop touring with the group, though she occasionally made guest appearances with Ms. Hampson and Mr. Morrison. Beyond her son, a list of immediate survivors was unavailable.Sharon, Lois & Bram performed together through most of the 1990s — they appeared on Broadway between Christmas and New Year’s in 1993 — and a second television show, “Skinnamarink TV,” was presented in the late 1990s on the CBC in Canada and the Learning Channel in the United States. Their many albums include “Smorgasbord,” “Singing ’n Swinging,” “In the Schoolyard,” “Mainly Mother Goose,” “Candles, Snow and Mistletoe” and “All the Fun You Can Sing.”Advertisement