By LAUREL GRAEBERAPRIL 23, 2015
St. George DayIt’s a shame that the Isle of Berk residents in the “How to Train Your Dragon” movies weren’t Staten Islanders instead. Then they’d have already embraced the beauty of dragons.That beauty is one of the themes of St. George Day, an annual Staten Island festival that sounds like a celebration of legend’s greatest dragon annihilator. Except it isn’t. In Spain’s Catalonia region, April 23, St. George’s Day, includes a tradition of giving books, and in 1995, Unesco declared it World Book and Copyright Day. Years later, that led Katie McCarthy and Steve Jones Daughs, owners of the Everything Goes BookCafé — not far from the St. George neighborhood of Staten Island — to conceive an event that would honor literature, the arts and peace rather than dragon slaying. They held contests to create a story, a song and an artwork that would revise the myth, “with St. George and the Dragon working it out rather than killing,” Ms. McCarthy said.The event grew into St. George Day in Tompkinsville Park, which began in 2009 and also honors another April holiday. “When the festival started taking on its own life and momentum, we wrote this play about the dragon needing water and the villagers needing water, and we realized that it fit perfectly into an Earth Day theme,” Ms. McCarthy said.On Saturday, this year’s free festival will revolve around a huge parade at 2 p.m. featuring the Susan E. Wagner High School Marching Band, flower fairies and at least five majestic dragon puppets, the largest about 35 feet long and 12 feet tall. (At left, an example.) “If you’re dressed up as a dragon or a flower, you can definitely join the parade,” Ms. McCarthy said.AdvertisementThat spectacle has become so vast that this time, she and Mr. Daughs don’t plan to do their puppet theater production, “St. George & the Friendly Dragon.” But the festival has no lack of other entertainment. A children’s stage will offer an open mike, singalongs, storytelling, a dragon dance from Xiaolin Martial Arts and performers including the Staten Island Philharmonic Youth Orchestra. Craft activities will include found-object art, ceramics, a communal quilt and learning how to draw dragon cartoons.AdvertisementThe fair’s Earth Day Zone will present a composting exhibit, sunflower-seed planting and a recycling relay race in which children compete to recycle castoffs. Dragons should be welcome here, too — after all, they don’t burn fossil fuels to fly.(Saturday, 11 a.m. to 5 p.m., rain or shine, Tompkinsville Park, Victory Boulevard and Bay Street, stgeorgedaysi.org.) LAUREL GRAEBER Arbor Weekend at Wave Hill (Saturday and Sunday) How many public gardens actually invite children to climb a tree? Wave Hill in the Bronx will do just that on Saturday, from 11 a.m. to 3 p.m., when it will host a Junior Arborist Station: Visitors over 7 can put on helmets and tree-climbing harnesses to scale an old sugar maple with the help of experts from Almstead Tree, Shrub & Lawn Care. Arbor Weekend will also offer an activity for budding artists on both Saturday and Sunday from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m.: “Buds, Buds, Buds,” a drop-in family project, will involve sketching a blossoming magnolia and then using natural materials to create a sculptural tree. At West 249th Street and Independence Avenue, Riverdale, 718-549-3200, wavehill.org.‘Archaeology Zone: Discovering Treasures From Playgrounds to Palaces’ (Friday, Sunday through Tuesday, and Thursday) Children will step into the shoes of an explorer like Indiana Jones in this permanent exhibition at the Jewish Museum, but the adventures will be purely scholarly. Still, there is plenty of excitement in analyzing artifacts like a jar handle, a clay jug and a bangle and figuring out the purpose behind ancient pieces like a Greek helmet and a bull-shaped vessel. This interactive show, for ages 3 to 10, also includes a recreated room from the Ottoman period (about 1900), where young archaeologists can dress in costume. From 11 a.m. to 5:45 p.m.; until 8 p.m. on Thursdays; 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92nd Street, 212-423-3200, thejewishmuseum.org.‘A Band of Angels’ (Saturday, Sunday, Tuesday and Wednesday) New York City Children’s Theater used to be called Making Books Sing, and 10 years ago, it first produced this musical, based on a book whose subject was also singing: “A Band of Angels,” by Deborah Hopkinson. The book relates the history of the Fisk Jubilee Singers, established in 1871 at Fisk University in Nashville, one of the first educational institutions for freed slaves. Written by Myla Churchill and recommended for ages 8 and older, this adaptation follows Ella, a contemporary teenager, as she goes back in time and meets the Fisk singers. (Through May 10.) Saturday and Sunday at 2 and 4 p.m.; Tuesday and Wednesday at 11 a.m.; Theater 3, 311 West 43rd Street, third floor, Clinton, 646-250-1178, nycchildrenstheater.org.‘The Bully’ (Saturday and Sunday) Vital Theater Company’s revival of this ever-topical musical, by John Gregor and David L. Williams, is closing this weekend. The show refreshingly avoids the trap of bullying its own audiences with heavy moralizing. Instead, the many pitfalls of the typical middle school relationship of victimizer and victim are revealed through wit, humor and a killer of a sly twist. At 3:30 p.m., McGinn-Cazale Theater, 2162 Broadway, at 76th Street, fourth floor; 212-579-0528, vitaltheatre.org.‘Dig! Plant! Grow!: Wake Up, Garden!’  (Saturday, Sunday, and Tuesday through Thursday) No garden could stay asleep after all that exhortation. In the Ruth Rea Howell Family Garden at the New York Botanical Garden, children will help get things up and growing by sowing seeds, planting seedlings and spreading compost; they can also observe germinating seeds through magnifiers and microscopes. (Through May 3.) New York Botanical Garden, Bronx River Parkway (Exit 7W) and Fordham Road, Bedford Park, the Bronx, 718-817-8700, nybg.org. (Search under calendar).Advertisement‘The Gazillion Bubble Show: The Next Generation’  (Friday through Sunday, and Thursday) Children love bubbles, and this interactive show promises not just a gazillion but also some of the largest ever blown, along with light effects and lasers. The stars are the members of the Yang family: Fan and Ana Yang and their son Deni and others, who rotate as M.C.s for the production. Audience members may even find themselves in bubbles of their own. (The run is open-ended.) Friday at 7 p.m.; Saturday at 11 a.m. and 2 and 4:30 p.m.; Sunday at noon and 3 p.m.; Thursday at 11 a.m. and 2 p.m.; 340 West 50th Street, Clinton, 212-239-6200, gazillionbubbleshow.com.Green Festival Expo (Friday through Sunday) Children can learn what sustainability means — and have fun — at this huge marketplace devoted to an environmentally friendly lifestyle. Programs for young visitors (admission is free for those 16 and under) include, on Saturday, games to test their recycling knowledge and crafts that involve making weird creatures from reusable materials. And if they happen to have recently consumed any empty calories, on Sunday they’ll get help in burning them from activities like Chinese dance and capoeira. Friday, noon to 5 p.m.; Saturday, 10 a.m. to 6 p.m.; Sunday, 10 a.m. to 5 p.m.; Jacob K. Javits Convention Center, 655 West 34th Street, Manhattan, greenfestivals.org.Healthy Kids Day (Saturday) Ideally, every day is Healthy Kids Day, but this free event sponsored by the Y.M.C.A. will give families the tools they need to make it so. Y’s across the five boroughs will hold games, dance classes, scavenger hunts and other activities that emphasize fitness and nutrition. Children will also have opportunities to make — and enjoy — healthy snacks, from smoothies to sushi. From 10 a.m. to 3 p.m. Information on individual schedules and events: ymcanyc.org.‘Hello From Japan!’ (Friday through Sunday, and Tuesday through Thursday) Japanese culture comprises both unbridled whimsy and serene seriousness. Young visitors can get acquainted with these two sides at the Children’s Museum of Manhattan, which recreates different aspects of Tokyo in this new exhibition. One-half of the show, Kawaii Central, captures the fun of the city’s Harajuku district with the opportunity to sing karaoke, serve a Japanese meal and create cute, cartoonlike family mascots. The exhibition’s other half includes a Shinto shrine park, where young visitors can build a bridge, meet kami (spirits) and express their desires at a wishing tree. Programs, free with museum admission, accompany the show. (Through May 17.) Museum hours: 10 a.m. to 5 p.m.; to 7 p.m. on Saturdays; also open free from 5 to 8 p.m. on the first Friday of every month. Tisch Building, 212 West 83rd Street, 212-721-1223, cmom.org.‘Jim Henson’s Dinosaur Train Live! — Buddy’s Big Adventure’ (Sunday) This is an adoption story with a prehistoric twist: Buddy is a Tyrannosaurus rex living happily with a family of pteranodons. Based on the PBS preschool series “Dinosaur Train,” this live show deals with Buddy’s questions about what will happen when he attains his full size. Combining paleontology with pure whimsy — these dinosaurs do ride a train — the production uses enormous puppets and special effects to tell Buddy’s tale. At noon and 3 p.m., Brooklyn Center for the Performing Arts, Brooklyn College, Flatbush and Nostrand Avenues, Flatbush, Brooklyn, 718-951-4500, brooklyncenter.org.‘Inspector Pulse Learns to Reed’ (Sunday) No, that verb is not a typo. In this program, Inspector Pulse, the alter ego of Bruce Adolphe, director of family concerts for the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center, will become acquainted with the wonders of woodwind instruments — and so will his young audience. The fun starts when the comical detective is expecting something to read and receives a delivery of reeds instead. The concert, the season’s last in the Meet the Music! series for ages 6 and older, will feature Chamber Music Society players performing Debussy, Stravinsky, Britten and more. At 2 p.m.; preconcert activities start at 1; Alice Tully Hall, Lincoln Center, 212-875-5788, chambermusicsociety.org.‘Jack and the Beanstalk’ (Friday through Sunday, and Tuesday through Thursday) Many plants grow in Central Park, so why not a beanstalk? This one sprouts indoors at the Swedish Cottage Marionette Theater, which has revived Michael Alogna’s adaptation of the classic fairy tale about Jack, the Giant (here named Milford), Dolly the Cow and the famous Golden Goose. Bruce Cannon, the theater’s artistic director, has revised the script, and a human actor now stars in the show along with the company’s hand-built marionettes. (Through June 28.) Weekdays at 10:30 a.m. and noon, with an additional performance on Wednesdays at 2:30 p.m.; Saturday and Sunday at 1 p.m., with additional 11 a.m. shows this weekend. (Some performances are sold out.) Reservations required. 79th Street and the West Drive, Central Park; 212-988-9093, cityparksfoundation.org/arts.‘The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe’  (Saturday) If the children of the Pevensie family could travel to the magical land of Narnia through something as simple as a wardrobe, why shouldn’t two hard-working actors be able to play them and all the characters found there? That’s what Abigail Taylor-Sansom and her husband, Rockford Sansom, are attempting in the Off Broadway Family Theater’s first production, le Clanché du Rand’s adaptation of C. S. Lewis’s classic novel. (The run is open-ended and continues on Saturdays, except April 25.) At 11 a.m., St. Luke’s Theater, 308 West 46th Street, Clinton; 212-239-6200, narniaoffbroadway.com.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.‘Manxmouse: The Mouse Who Knew No Fear’ (Saturday and Sunday) Manxmouse actually has plenty to be afraid of: namely, the Manx cat. He also looks peculiar, with blue fur, rabbitlike ears and, of course, no tail. Presented by Theatergroep Kwatta, a Dutch children’s theater troupe, this adaptation of Paul Gallico’s 1968 novel, recommended for ages 6 through 10, follows Manxmouse’s many adventures en route to meet his feline nemesis. (Through May 2.) At 11 a.m. and 2 p.m., Fishman Space, Fisher Building, Brooklyn Academy of Music, 321 Ashland Place, near Lafayette Avenue, Fort Greene, 718-636-4100, bam.org/kids.Advertisement‘A Midsummer Night’s Dream’ (Friday through Sunday) What if Helena and Hermia, Shakespeare’s maidens, were a pair of contemporary adolescents besotted with social media? And what if the enchanted wood into which they run was Central Park? These are some of the twists devised by Mary Jo Bono, who has adapted this comedy into a child-friendly 75 minutes (with one intermission). Presented by the New Acting Company, it still features Puck, Oberon, Titania and the rest of the gang. Friday at 7 p.m.; Saturday and Sunday at 1 and 5 p.m.; the Celebration of Whimsy, 21-A Clinton Street, between Houston and Stanton Streets, Lower East Side, 212-868-4444, thenewactingcompany.com.MoMA Art Lab: Places and Spaces (Friday through Thursday) What’s an art lab? These interactive spaces for children at the Museum of Modern Art, free with museum admission, help introduce the institution’s collection through activities related to a theme: this time it’s Places and Spaces. Young visitors can design, draw and build as they explore spaces both real and imagined — landscapes, cityscapes, seascapes — as they appear in Modern art. (Through Aug. 31.) Daily, from 10:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.; to 6:30 p.m. on Fridays; Lewis B. and Dorothy Cullman Education and Research Building, 4 West 54th Street, Manhattan; 212-708-9805, moma.org/momaartlab.New York Children’s Theater Festival (Friday through Sunday) Pity all those poor socks that go into the laundry, never to return. One of those left bereft by these mysterious disappearances is the star of “The Sock Who Lost His Mate,” and he’s determined to rescue all that missing footwear. This musical by MK Wolfe and Thomas Adams opens this year’s New York Children’s Theater Festival, a four-weekend celebration whose productions — a new one each week — are chosen from submissions sent to a large group of theater professionals. (Through May 17.) Friday at 5 p.m.; Saturday at 11 a.m. and 2 p.m.; Sunday at 2 p.m.; the Players Theater, 115 Macdougal Street, at Minetta Lane, Greenwich Village, 866-811-4111, nyctfest.org.‘Opening Day at Pier 16’ (Saturday) The South Street Seaport Museum is about to sail into spring. This free celebration heralds the new season’s programs with boat tours and a walking tour, as well as a variety of children’s activities: a seaport scavenger hunt, an investigation of sailors’ navigational tools, a clay boat-building workshop and an exploration of oceanic life with microscopes and hand lenses. Young visitors can also contribute to “Seaport Storywall,” a giant mural in the Visitors Center. From 11 a.m. to 5 p.m., Fulton and Front Streets, Lower Manhattan, 212-748-8600, southstreetseaportmuseum.org.‘The Pinkertonian Mystery’ (Sunday) Young detectives should get their notebooks and magnifying glasses ready. The DiMenna Children’s History Museum at the New-York Historical Society is asking them and their families to help solve a Victorian-era crime. Live In Theater, known for its interactive murder mysteries, will present the case, a premiere production that unfolds throughout the museum galleries. Young visitors will portray members of the Pinkerton National Detective Agency, out to capture a crook called El Diablo in 1875. From 3 to 5 p.m., 170 Central Park West, at 77th Street, 212-873-3400, nyhistory.org.Prospect Park Audubon Center Nature Programs (Friday through Sunday, and Thursday) Spring is blooming all over, and so are related activities sponsored by the Prospect Park Audubon Center, which has expanded its open hours; it has also increased its Pop-Up Audubon programs, weekends from 11 a.m. to 4 p.m., to include two tents with themed nature investigations in different parts of the park. At the Eastwood tent, whose April theme is “Leaf Litter Critters,” children can learn about soil, fungus and decomposition; at the Peninsula tent, whose theme is “Animal Clues,” they can explore the lives of indigenous creatures. Both tents feature nature walks, bird-watching and opportunities to help the environment. At the Audubon Center itself, the fun includes nature games, bird identification and, on Thursdays and Fridays, an animal encounter. Another new feature: discovery packs, kits for self-guided exploration with activities like playing habitat bingo and designing a home for one of the park’s wild residents. Center hours: Thursdays and Fridays, noon to 4 p.m.; Saturdays and Sundays, 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. At the boathouse, near the Lincoln Road and Ocean Avenue park entrance, Brooklyn, 718-287-3400, prospectpark.org/audubon. All activities are free.Puppetry Arts Park Slope Family Festival (Saturday) The season of street fairs is just beginning, and this free event is especially for the youngest members of the neighborhood. It will include carnival games, juggling shows, live music, “Star Wars” characters and, of course, the talents of Puppetry Arts, which presents free puppetry workshops and performances in communities and public schools. From 11 a.m. to 3 p.m., rain or shine, J.J. Byrne Park, Fourth Street at Fifth Avenue, Brooklyn, 718-768-3703, puppetryarts.org.‘Rapunzarella White: A Fairly Fractured Tale’ (Saturday and Sunday) Yes, it’s fractured, but it’s also blended: In this creative musical retelling, by June Rachelson-Ospa and Daniel Neiden, Rapunzel, Cinderella and Snow White are infant triplets abducted by an ill-tempered witch. These heroines aren’t like their traditional selves — Snow White, for instance, is allergic to apples — and neither are their princes, who may be more clumsy than charming. (Through June 14.) Saturday at 1 p.m., Sunday at noon, 13th Street Repertory Theater, 50 West 13th Street, Greenwich Village, 212-352-3101, rapunzarellawhite.bpt.me.Advertisement‘Short Stories’ (Friday and Saturday) You can turn almost anything into a puppet, but Ines Pasic and Hugo Suarez, the principals of Teatro Hugo & Ines, turn to the absolute basics: their bare knees, the soles of their feet, their hands and elbows. With the help of props and costume accents, these bodily parts become the characters in “Short Stories,” a presentation from the Dream Music Puppetry program at Here, closing this weekend. In a 55-minute show recommended for ages 8 and older, Ms. Pasic and Mr. Suarez use mime and dance, as well as puppetry, to reveal the poignant and funny side of ordinary life. Friday at 7 p.m.; Saturday at 2 and 7 p.m.; Here, 145 Avenue of the Americas, at Dominick Street, South Village, 212-352-3101, here.org.Strike! (Saturday) You could say that boxing and chamber music both involve percussion. But they have other things in common, too: discipline, precision, movement, timing. This unusual series for teenagers at the celebrated Gleason’s Gym in Brooklyn explores the relationship between the two. Developed by the cellist and boxing fan Dan Barrett, the programs alternate 10- to 15-minute sets of classical music played by the collective the International Street Cannibals with boxing rounds by teenage competitors. This event, a fundraiser for the gym’s Give a Kid a Dream program, will feature repertory ranging from Bach and Mozart to contemporary pieces composed in honor of the sport. At 8 p.m., 77 Front Street, near Washington Street, Dumbo, 718-979-2872, gleasonsgym.net.‘A Taste of Magic’ (Saturday) Would you like a side of sleight of hand with that burger? This show, developed by Magnets, a collective of local magicians, brings wizardry to the dinner table. Taking place at various restaurants, the presentation includes acts like mind reading and card tricks, which professionals perform close-up for guests; there’s also a cabaret-style show. And the admission price includes a full meal. At 8 p.m., Docks Oyster Bar & Seafood Grill, 633 Third Avenue, at 40th Street, Manhattan, atasteofmagicnyc.com.‘Tiny Giants’ (Friday through Thursday) The heroes of this film may be small, but they’re mighty in their will to survive. Inspired by the BBC television series “Hidden Kingdoms,” this new Imax movie at the American Museum of Natural History uses 3-D cameras to peer into the universes of two diminutive creatures: a forest chipmunk and a grasshopper mouse from the Arizona desert, noted for its ability to prey on scorpions. Narrated by Stephen Fry, the film allows viewers to see the world from their perspectives. (Through July 5.) Hourly from 10:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., with 2-D screenings at 11:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m.; all other screenings are 3-D. Central Park West and 79th Street, 212-769-5200, amnh.org.‘The Trials of Alice in Wonderland’ (Saturday and Sunday) Imagine that Lewis Carroll had traded Britain for Brooklyn. In this new musical adaptation from Tada! Youth Theater, by William Brooke, Eric Rockwell and Joanne Bogart, Alice, a contemporary girl, doesn’t feel that she belongs with the crowd of kids on the Coney Island boardwalk. Her adventures begin when she runs off to a fun house there, and her peers, who follow her, become the rest of the Wonderland cast. Alice also finds herself on trial. The charge? Growing and changing. (Through May 17.) Saturday at 7 p.m.; Sunday at 2 and 4 p.m.; Tada! Youth Theater, 15 West 28th Street, Manhattan, 212-252-1619, Ext. 5, tadatheater.com.Tribeca Family Festival Street Fair and Tribeca/ESPN Sports Day (Saturday) The screenings may be indoors, but the Tribeca Film Festival offers outdoor pleasures, too. Its free annual fair, on Greenwich Street between Chambers and Hubert Streets, offers crafts, storytelling, entertainment and the Tribeca Studios Backlot, an opportunity to learn what it’s like to make a movie. Children can visit a hair and make-up trailer and a camera car, operate film equipment, work on animation and create a movie poster. At the Games for Change Public Arcade, on Jay Street between Greenwich and Hudson Streets, they can play both video and outdoor games that have a positive educational or social impact. A separate event, the Tribeca/ESPN Sports Day, on North Moore Street, between Greenwich and West Streets, also free, promises sports clinics, games, demonstrations and athlete appearances. Fittingly, the day ends with a free movie: the classic “Back to the Future” (1985), screening at 6 p.m. at the TriBeCa Performing Arts Center, first come first served. Day events from 10 a.m. to 6 p.m. Information: tribecafilm.com/family; tribecafilm.com/ESPN.‘Tunes With Tina’ (Sunday) That’s Tina deVaron, a jazz musician and singer, whose musical brunch for young people at the Measure Lounge at Langham Place, Fifth Avenue, a hotel in Midtown Manhattan, has returned. Ms. deVaron, who often sings show tunes for children, also improvises and gears her performances to the audience. On selected Sundays throughout the season, she will be accompanied by Broadway performers. Singing along is encouraged. (Through May 31.) At noon, 400 Fifth Avenue, at 36th Street, 212-695-4005, measurenyc.com.‘¡Viva Pinocho!’/’A Mexican Pinocchio!’ (Saturday) This Pinocchio is more than a wooden boy who longs to be human; he’s also a Mexican immigrant in search of his identity in a new land, the United States. Presented by Teatro Sea, which specializes in Latino theater for children, this show is the work of Manuel Antonio Morán, the company’s founder and director. Incorporating music, masks and several types of puppetry, it runs on Saturdays through May 23. At 3 p.m., Teatro Sea, Clemente Soto Vélez Cultural Center, 107 Suffolk Street, at Rivington Street, Lower East Side, 212-529-1545, teatrosea.org.‘A Voyage Through Jewish History’  (Sunday through Thursday) This journey involves not just miles, but years. In this permanent interactive exhibition at the Jewish Children’s Museum, young visitors can travel from Abraham and Sarah’s tent to the Western Wall in contemporary Jerusalem and beyond. Activities along the way include giving water to Rebecca’s camels, playing the strings on David’s harp (a high-tech version with beams of light that emit sounds when struck) and taking part in the exodus from Egypt. Museum hours: 10 a.m. to 4 p.m.; to 5:30 p.m. on Sundays; 792 Eastern Parkway, at Kingston Avenue, Crown Heights, Brooklyn; 718-907-8833, jcm.museum.AdvertisementLAUREL GRAEBERA version of this schedule appears in print on April 24, 2015, on Page C20 of the New York edition with the headline: Spare Times: For Children.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.