By JOSHUA BARONEAPRIL 23, 2015
Around Town Museums and SitesAmerican Museum of Natural History: ‘Countdown to Zero’ (through July 12) Smallpox is the only human disease to have been eradicated, but what about Guinea worm, polio, malaria and others? This exhibition, presented in collaboration with the Carter Center, examines international efforts to control and wipe out infection. Daily from 10 a.m. to 5:45 p.m., Central Park West and 79th Street, 212-769-5200, amnh.org.BRIC and the Brooklyn Historical Society: ‘Mapping Brooklyn’ (through Sept. 6) This exhibition features artworks that incorporate themes of mapping and cartography from historical maps. The artists here are exploring the ways maps represent the practical and metaphorical aspects of life. The show is on view at BRIC House through May 3. Tuesdays through Saturdays, from 10 a.m. to 8 p.m., Sundays to 6 p.m., 647 Fulton Street, at Rockwell Place, Fort Greene, Brooklyn, bricartsmedia.org. The show will also be at the Brooklyn Historical Society through Sept. 6. Wednesdays through Sundays from noon to 5 p.m., 128 Pierrepont Street, near Clinton Street, Brooklyn Heights, 718-222-4111, brooklynhistory.org.Brooklyn Historical Society: ‘Personal Correspondents: Photography and Letter Writing in Civil War Brooklyn’ (through spring 2016) The historical society’s new exhibition tells the personal stories of Brooklyn soldiers and their families during the Civil War. Some of the tales, revealed through photos and letters, are funny; others are tragic. The show’s opening on April 9 coincided with the 150th anniversary of Robert E. Lee’s surrender. Brooklyn Historical Society, 128 Pierrepont Street, near Clinton Street, Brooklyn Heights, 718-222-4111, brooklynhistory.org.Grolier Club: ‘Aldus Manutius: A Legacy More Lasting Than Bronze’ (through Saturday) To celebrate the quincentennial of Aldus Manutius’s death, the Grolier Club has assembled over 130 rare books, called Aldines, from that scholar-printer’s Italian Renaissance press. The exhibition explores the ways, to this day, Manutius influences how we preserve and disseminate knowledge. As Jennifer Schuessler wrote in The New York Times, “Anyone who has ever sat in a cafe, or in the bath, with a paperback owes a debt to Aldus and the small, cleanly designed editions of the secular classics.” 7 East 60th Street, Manhattan, 212-838-6690, grolierclub.org; free.Advertisement‘Hubble and Our Altered Universe’  (Thursday) A team of scientists discusses the legacy of the Hubble Space Telescope as part of its 25th anniversary. The panel includes Sara Seager, from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology; Priyamvada Natarajan, from Yale; Adam G. Riess, from Johns Hopkins University; and Matt Mountain, president of the Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy. The talk will be moderated by Ira Flatow, host of Public Radio International’s “Science Friday.” At 7 p.m., Intrepid Sea, Air & Space Museum, Pier 86, 46th Street and 12th Avenue, Clinton, 877-957-7447, intrepidmuseum.org.AdvertisementMorgan Library & Museum: ‘Lincoln Speaks: Words That Transformed a Nation’ (through June 7) This exhibition, presented thematically and chronologically, homes in on Abraham Lincoln’s leadership and its relationship to language. In his exhibition review for The New York Times, Neil Genzlinger wrote: “For Lincoln admirers, simply being in the same room with so many artifacts he touched will be a delight. And if they give the exhibition the time it requires, they will certainly come away with a fuller appreciation of the man.” 225 Madison Avenue, at 36th Street, 212-685-0008, themorgan.org.Museum of the Moving Image: ‘Matthew Weiner’s “Mad Men” ’ (through June 14) As one of the most critically acclaimed TV shows in recent years nears its finale, “Mad Men” gets the exhibition treatment in this look at the series’s creative process. On display are large-scale sets, such as Don Draper’s office, as well as costumes, art and research material used by the show’s staff. Viewers should expect not only a look behind the scenes of the show, but also, as in “Mad Men” itself, a peek into the era it depicts. 35th Avenue at 37th Street, Astoria, Queens, 718-784-0077, movingimage.us.New-York Historical Society: ‘Audubon’s Aviary: The Final Flight (Part III of the Complete Flock)’ (through May 10) The third installment of “Audubon’s Aviary: The Complete Flock” comprises nearly 130 plates from the watercolors in John James Audubon’s “The Birds of America” collection, engraved by Robert Havell Jr. The exhibition, as William Grimes wrote in an article for The New York Times, “underlines the natural wealth of the American land, and Audubon’s remarkable talent for producing art as varied as his subject matter.” 170 Central Park West, at 77th Street, 212-873-3400, nyhistory.org.New York Transit Museum Grand Central Terminal Gallery Annex: ‘New York’s Transportation Landmarks’ (through Nov. 1) It’s been 50 years since New York passed its Landmarks Law, which covers over 30,000 buildings and structures around the city. To celebrate the anniversary, the New York Transit Museum has created an exhibition that explores the history of development, use and even rescue of these landmarks. More information: 212-878-0106, web.mta.info/mta/museum.New York Transit Museum: ‘Spanning the Narrows: The Verrazano Bridge at 50’ (through next fall) Photographs, maps, drawings, models and other archival materials related to the construction of the bridge (including correspondence from Robert Moses, who oversaw the project) are part of this exhibition commemorating its 50th anniversary. Boerum Place and Schermerhorn Street, Brooklyn Heights, 718-694-1600, mta.info/mta/museum.‘Signs of Life: In and Out of Time and Place’ (Friday) The works of the Pratt Institute’s second-year M.F.A. candidates are on display in this show, organized by Sara Reisman, artistic director of the Shelley & Donald Rubin Foundation, which supports the arts. The pieces span a variety of media, with two themes running throughout: a desire for movement and attempts to capture time. The Boiler, 191 North 14th Street, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, pratt.edu; free.Luci Tapahonso (Saturday) Luci Tapahonso is the Navajo nation’s first poet laureate and a professor of American literary studies at the University of New Mexico. She will discuss her life and career, as well as read selections from her body of work. At 2 p.m., National Museum of the American Indian, 1 Bowling Green, Lower Manhattan, 212-514-3700, nmai.si.edu; free.AdvertisementArturo Vega: ‘American Treasure’ (through Saturday) Howl! Happening, a new gallery and performance space in the East Village, presents an exhibition with paintings by Arturo Vega, a Mexican-born artist who worked in New York from 1971 until his death in 2013. Many of his paintings depict open palms holding a silver dollar — their meaning is open to interpretation. From 11 a.m. to 6 p.m. Howl! Happening, 6 East First Street, howlarts.org.Gardens‘Night Lights at Wave Hill’  (Friday, Sunday and Thursday) Wave Hill, the public garden in the Bronx, is celebrating its 50th anniversary with a month of after-hours events. “The Lightening: a Project for Wave Hill’s Aquatic Garden,” an installation by the artist Chris Doyle, will be on display, and the Mark Twain Room will host piano performances that cover a range of classical and jazz standards. More information is at wavehill.org/events/categories/nightlights. (Through May 24.) At 6:30 p.m., West 249th Street and Independence Avenue, Riverdale, the Bronx, 718-549-3200.Sakura Matsuri (Saturday and Sunday) The Brooklyn Botanic Garden devotes the weekend to celebrating Japanese culture as its cherry trees bloom. There are countless things to do — hands-on activities, entertainment, food and more — at multiple sites in the garden. From 10 a.m. to 6 p.m.; the full schedule is at bbg.org/visit/event/sakura_matsuri_2015. 990 Washington Avenue, at Eastern Parkway, Prospect Heights, Brooklyn, 718-623-7200.EventsNeighborhood Movie Nights at St. Paul’s  (Friday) St. Paul’s Chapel opens its doors for its monthly movie night. This time, the selection is “Adventures in Babysitting,” the 1987 action comedy about a night that begins with boredom but quickly spirals out of control. At 7 p.m., St. Paul’s Chapel, Broadway at Fulton Street, Lower Manhattan, 212-602-0800, trinitywallstreet.org/movies; free.‘Bascove/Bridges: Transporting the Metropolis’ (through July 12) This exhibition features more than 30 paintings and drawings of city bridges by the artist Anne Bascove, including the Brooklyn Bridge, the Outerbridge Crossing and the George Washington Bridge. Thursdays through Sundays from 1 to 5 p.m.; also by appointment; Noble Maritime Collection, Snug Harbor Cultural Center and Botanical Garden, 1000 Richmond Terrace, Livingston, Staten Island, 718-447-6490, noblemaritime.org.New York Nineteenth Century Society Extravaganza (Sunday) The New York Nineteenth Century Society presents a day of talks and outdoor activities and concerts to celebrate what the city was like during the 1800s. Visitors can, for example, learn how to fight like Sherlock Holmes or draw outdoors like the French. The full roster of events is at nyncs.org/sunday-extravaganza. From 11 a.m. to 4 p.m., Old Stone House, 336 Third Street, between Fourth and Fifth Avenues, Park Slope, Brooklyn, nyncs.org.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Nuts and Bolts of Stop Motion: The Artistry and Ingenuity of LAIKA (Friday) The Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences takes a look at Laika, the animation studio behind movies like “Coraline” (2009) and “The Boxtrolls” (2014) — both of which were nominated for the Oscar for best animated feature film. The event’s guests include Laika veterans, who will use storyboard and behind-the-scenes footage to demystify the studio’s process. At 7 p.m., the Academy Theater, 111 East 59th Street, Manhattan, 310-247-3000, oscars.org.Yinka Shonibare & Chop and Quench  (Wednesday) Lincoln Center presents the first evening in a free series that pairs films made by artists with live musical performances. The centerpiece this time is the artist Yinka Shonibare’s short film “Un Ballo in Maschera.” (Verdi’s opera of the same title is currently running through May 9 at the Metropolitan Opera.) Christa Clarke, senior curator of arts of global Africa at the Newark Museum, will lead a discussion about art and music before the screening, and afterward there will be a performance from the band Chop and Quench. At 7:30 p.m., David Rubinstein Atrium, Broadway, between 62nd and 63rd Streets, Lincoln Center, atrium.lincolncenter.org.Strike! (Saturday) The International Street Cannibals and Gleason’s Gym present another round of Strike!, a performance series that combines boxing and chamber music to draw out the subtle kinship of these discipline-heavy pursuits. The musical program contains both contemporary music and classics, such as Bach’s Fugue in F sharp minor and Mozart’s Flute Quartet No. 4 in A. At 8 p.m., Gleason’s Gym, 77 Front Street, near Washington Street, Dumbo, Brooklyn, 718-797-2872, gleasonsgym.net.Advertisement(Un)Silent Film Night (Monday) The College of Performing Arts at the New School presents a free evening of ensembles providing live music for silent films, hosted by the actor Matthew Broderick. The Mannes Theater Orchestra will play a new score for the 1924 Buster Keaton film “Sherlock Jr.” The School of Jazz’s Improvisation Ensemble will also provide the music for Charlie Chaplin’s 1917 classic, “The Immigrant.” At 7 p.m., New School University Center, 65 Fifth Avenue, at 14th Street, Greenwich Village, 212-229-5600, newschool.edu/events.Videology Presents Movie Trivia (Tuesdays) Videology, the Brooklyn bar and cinema, hosts a free film-themed trivia contest every week. The game varies; you will want to know theme songs, facts, quotations (especially ones from Nicolas Cage) and more. The winning team receives a free round of drinks, and there are chances to win drinks each round. At 8:30 p.m., 308 Bedford Avenue, at South First Street, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, 718-782-3468, videology.info.Worldwide Pinhole Photography Day (Sunday) The Alice Austen House is celebrating Worldwide Pinhole Photography Day by opening its doors to visitors who want to take their own pinhole photos and develop them on site. The museum provides all the equipment, and the first exposure is free. From noon to 4 p.m., 2 Hylan Boulevard, at Edgewater Street, Rosebank, Staten Island, 718-816-4506, aliceausten.org.Spoken WordBig Gay Ice Cream: Bryan Petroff and Douglas Quint (Monday) Mr. Quint and Mr. Petroff, founders of Big Gay Ice Cream, celebrate the release of their debut cookbook, “Big Gay Ice Cream: Saucy Stories & Frozen Treats.” They will speak with Stacy London of TLC’s “Love Lust or Run”; additional guests include the drag personalities Bambi Galore and Bertha Mason. The event’s $35 price tag includes a copy of the book and a Big Gay Ice Cream tasting. At 7 p.m., Strand Book Store, 828 Broadway, at 12th Street, 212-473-1452, strandbooks.com.Lydia Davis and Lynne Tillman (Monday) Ms. Davis reads from her most recent short story collection, “Can’t and Won’t,” which continues her tradition of writing spare, punchy tales. Ms. Tillman, a Guggenheim fellow and author of more than a dozen books, will read from her essay collection “What Would Lynne Tillman Do?” At 7 p.m., McNally Jackson, 52 Prince Street, between Lafayette and Mulberry Streets, SoHo, 212-274-1160, mcnallyjackson.com; free.Larry Kramer (Tuesday) Mr. Kramer, the provocative writer and activist, discusses the recently released first volume of his magnum opus, “The American People,” as well as a coming HBO documentary, “Larry Kramer in Love and Anger.” A founder of the Gay Men’s Health Crisis in the early 1980s, he is widely known for his play about the AIDS crisis, “The Normal Heart,” which was adapted into an Emmy Award-winning film on HBO last year. At 6:30 p.m., the Roosevelt House Public Policy Institute, Hunter College, 47-49 East 65th Street, Manhattan, aspeninstitute.org; free.Walking ToursBetween the Clocks (Saturday) The American Institute of Architects leads this tour, which runs from Grand Central Terminal’s facade to the southern end of Park Avenue South. That stretch of New York contains an encyclopedic array of the city’s architectural history, from the 19th century to the present. The tour meets in front of the cafe in Pershing Square, across 42nd Street from Grand Central. At 10:30 a.m., 212-683-0023, aiany.org.Flatiron District Walking Tour (Sundays) This free tour meets at 11 a.m. on the southwest corner of Madison Square Park, at 23rd Street and Broadway, in front of the William Seward statue. Sponsored by the Flatiron/23rd Street Partnership; discoverflatiron.org.AdvertisementHistory of Wall Street Tour (weekdays) Stops on this tour, led by Wall Street Walks, include the New York Stock Exchange, Trinity Church, the Wall Street Bull, and ground zero and the Sept. 11 memorial. The tours last 90 minutes and begin at 11 a.m. and 1:30 p.m. (Also at 3 p.m. on Tuesdays and Fridays.) More details: wallstreetwalks.com.Lower East Side Gallery Tour (Saturday) This gallery tour, which makes seven stops, includes talks from two of the artists being shown. The Stockholm-based artist Anton Alvarez will discuss and demonstrate his sculpture. Marta Jovanovic, from Serbia, will speak about her performance art, which she has been doing for eight hours a day over the past four weeks. At 1 p.m., 196 Bowery, at Spring Street, 212-946-1548, nygallerytours.com.A Taste of Jewish New York (Sundays) Participants in this tour will get an insider’s look at Borough Park, Brooklyn, by learning about the customs of its Hasidic residents. There will also be the chance to try a range of food. This tour includes a stop at a lively shopping area, as well as at a matzo bakery — with free samples, of course. The tour meets at 9:45 a.m. at Fort Hamilton Parkway and 44th Street; 718-339-2302, timelinetouring.com.Union Square: Crossroads of New York (Saturdays) Sponsored by the Union Square Partnership, this free year-round tour focuses on the area’s political and social histories. The walk, led by guides from Big Onion Walking Tours, meets at 2 p.m. by the statue of Lincoln in Union Square Park, near the 16th Street transverse. 212-517-1826, unionsquarenyc.org. JOSHUA BARONE Information on events for possible inclusion in Spare Times should be sent to weekend@nytimes.com by Monday at 5 p.m. for publication that week. Longer versions of Around Town and For Children listings are in a searchable guide at nytimes.com/events. A version of this schedule appears in print on April 24, 2015, on Page C20 of the New York edition with the headline: Spare Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.