APRIL 23, 2015
Museums and galleries are in Manhattan unless otherwise noted. Full reviews of recent art shows: nytimes.com/art. A searchable guide to these and many other art shows is at nytimes.com/events. Museums★ American Folk Art Museum: ‘When the Curtain Never Comes Down’  (through July 5) A sprawling, cacophony of objects, audiotapes, photographs and films is here orchestrated into a curatorial marvel. Strange and wonderful in numerous ways, the show sheds new light on the performance aspects of much outsider art while reminding us how eccentricity is not only basic to creativity but to personal liberty and democracy itself. 2 Lincoln Square, Columbus Avenue at 66th Street, 212-595-9533, folkartmuseum.org. (Roberta Smith)★ Asia Society and Museum: ‘Buddhist Art of Myanmar’ (through May 10) In 1962, Myanmar, once known as Burma, closed its doors to the world and threw away the key for almost 40 years. Under surveillance-obsessed military rule, little from outside could get in, and little from inside could get out, including art. Recently, the country has re-established international contact, and even made efforts to advertise its cultural riches. They couldn’t have made a more persuasive case than with this splendidly designed exhibition of some 70 sculptures and paintings, from small portable eighth- and ninth-century Buddha statuettes, each basically a mobile communication device, a spiritual smartphone kept close for use on the road or at home; a single towering 19th-century lacquered wood shrine, glinting with gilt and cut glass and rising, tier upon tier, to the ceiling. Welcome to Bliss City. 725 Park Avenue, at 70th Street, 212-517-2742, asiasociety.org. (Holland Cotter)★ Brooklyn Museum: ‘Jean-Michel Basquiat: The Unknown Notebooks’ (through Aug. 23) In this sparkling if sometimes arcane exhibition, the contents of eight notebooks, supplemented by several paintings and large drawings, trace the evolution of Basquiat’s loquacious pictorial style. Time spent with the catalog enhances the experience. 200 Eastern Parkway, at Prospect Park, Brooklyn, 718-638-5000, brooklynmuseum.org. (Smith)Advertisement★ Brooklyn Museum: ‘Kehinde Wiley: A New Republic’ (through May 24) You can love or hate this artist’s bright, brash, history-laden, kitsch-tinged portraits of confident, even imperious young black men and women usurping heroic roles from the generally lily-white history of Western painting. No matter, the two-decade survey of his extravagant, mind-teasing canvases rewards. His career seems to be one of ceaseless ambition, socially conscious generosity and an uncanny skill that he is still harnessing. 200 Eastern Parkway, at Prospect Park, 718-638-5000, brooklynmuseum.org. (Smith)Advertisement★ Cooper Hewitt Smithsonian Design Museum (continuing) The stately doors of the 1902 Andrew Carnegie mansion, home to the Cooper Hewitt, are open again after an overhaul and expansion of the premises. Historic house and modern museum have always made an awkward fit, a standoff between preservation and innovation, and the problem remains, but the renovation has brought a wide-open new gallery space, a cafe and a raft of be-your-own-designer digital enhancements. Best of all, more of the museum’s vast permanent collection is now on view, including an Op Art weaving, miniature spiral staircases, ballistic face masks and a dainty enameled 18th-century version of a Swiss knife. Like design itself, this institution is built on tumult and friction, and you feel it. 2 East 91st Street, at Fifth Avenue, 212-849-8400, cooperhewitt.org. (Cotter)Frick Collection: ‘Coypel’s Don Quixote Tapestries: Illustrating a Spanish Novel in 18th-Century France’ (through May 17) Miguel de Cervantes’s “Don Quixote” has inspired and challenged illustrators from Goya to Dali. This exhibition is devoted to a set of extraordinarily sumptuous, mural-scale tapestries depicting episodes from the novel that were woven at the Gobelins Manufactory in Paris based on images by the artist Charles Coypel (1694 - 1752). It includes three of the Gobelin tapestries; five of the original 28 paintings, or cartoons, that the artist produced for weavers to copy; and 18 engravings by which Coypel’s terrifically popular images were disseminated throughout Europe. 1 East 70th Street, Manhattan, 212-288-0700, frick.org. (Johnson)★ Guggenheim Museum: ‘On Kawara - Silence’  (through May 3) The first retrospective of this Conceptual Art giant turns the museum’s spiral into a vortex suffused with the consciousness of time, life’s supreme ruler, in all its quotidian daily unfoldings, historical events and almost incomprehensible grandeur. The presentation of date paintings, “I Got Up” postcards and “I Am Still Alive” telegrams echoes Mr. Kawara’s exquisite sense of discipline and craft. This is an extraordinary tribute. 1071 Fifth Avenue, at 89th Street, 212-423-3500, guggenheim.org. (Smith)Institute for the Study of the Ancient World: ‘From Ancient to Modern: Archaeology and Aesthetics’ (through June 7) Small but bursting with ideas, this show tells a fascinating tale about the 20th-century excavation and interpretation of some ancient Sumerian artifacts. It focuses on about 50 objects that were unearthed in the 1920s and ’30s in Mesopotamia, including sumptuous jewelry and wide-eyed, bearded men carved from stone. Along with these are profuse archaeological documentation; paintings and sculptures by 20th-century artists like Willem de Kooning and Henry Moore who were inspired by Sumerian art; and politically fraught works by two contemporary artists, Jananne al-Ani and Michael Rakowitz. Institute for the Study of the Ancient World, 15 East 84th Street, Manhattan, 212-992-7800, isaw.nyu.edu. (Ken Johnson)Japan Society: ‘Life of Cats: Selections From the Hiraki Ukiyo-e Collection’ (through June 7) Cats were brought to Japan from China in the mid-sixth century. Adopted as pets and valued for their rat-killing skills, they naturally infiltrated Japanese art, literature and folklore. This excellent show should be catnip for cat lovers; all the better if they’re into art, too. Its 86 drawings, paintings, woodblock prints and decorative objects dating from the 17th to the early 20th century represent cats behaving in typical, ridiculous and supernatural ways. 333 East 47th Street, Manhattan, 212-832-1155, japansociety.org. (Johnson)★ Metropolitan Museum of Art: ‘Fatal Attraction: Piotr Uklanski Photographs’ (through Aug. 16) A small but succinct survey of the multimedia bad-boy artist’s polymorphous relationship to photography shows him constantly changing scale, film and printing methods while exploring the medium’s ability to startle, seduce and become generic. He appropriates, imitates and pays homage as he goes, regularly invoking his Polish roots. Don’t miss the large photo-banners in the museum’s Great Hall or the massive fiber-sculpture monument to the eye and to insatiable looking. 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org. (Smith)★ Metropolitan Museum of Art: ‘Fatal Attraction: Piotr Uklanski Selects From The Met Collection’ (through June 14) Complementing the survey of his photographs, the artist has orchestrated 80 works from the museum’s holdings — along with a few of his own — into a mesmerizing display meditating on sex and death. Consisting mostly of photographs, it is bolstered by paintings by Dali and Cranach sculptures from several cultures and several surprises. Scratch any artist of note, even a postmodern one, and you often find a connoisseur. 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org. (Smith)Advertisement★ Metropolitan Museum of Art: ‘The Plains Indians: Artists of Earth and Sky’ (through May 10) Some of the earliest surviving art by native North Americans left America long ago. Soldiers, traders and priests, with magpie eyes for brilliant things, bundled it up and shipped it across the sea to Europe. Painted robes, embroidered slippers and feathered headdresses tinkling with chimes found their way into cupboards in 18th-century London and Paris, and lay there half-forgotten. Now, with the arrival at the Met of this traveling show, some of those wondrous things — truly world masterpieces — have come home in an exhibition context that carries the Native American story from 100 B.C. into the 21st century. 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org. (Cotter)★ Metropolitan Museum of Art: ‘Reimagining Modernism: 1900-1950’ (continuing) One of the greatest encyclopedic museums in the world fulfills its mission a little more with an ambitious reinstallation of works of early European modernism with their American counterparts for the first time in nearly 30 years. Objects of design and paintings by a few self-taught artists further the integration. It is quite a sight, with interesting rotations and fine-tunings to come. 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org. (Smith)★ Metropolitan Museum of Art: ‘Warriors and Mothers: Epic Mbembe Art’ (through Sept. 7) If a dozen masterpiece Renaissance sculptures, done in an unknown and wildly unorthodox style, suddenly turned up in the Italian countryside, the find would make the news. You’ll encounter the equivalent of such a discovery in this show of spectacular weatherworn, wood-carved figures, some dating to before the 17th century, that were made by the Mbembe in southeastern Nigeria and taken to Paris by an African dealer in the early 1970s. They caused a sensation among collectors and scholars at the time, and you can see why. But the effort to find more of them proved fruitless. The examples at the Met, which include the original dozen, represent all the fully intact stand-alone Mbembe figures known to exist. 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org. (Cotter)MoMA PS1: ‘Samara Golden: The Flat Side of the Knife’ (through Sept. 7) Standing at a railing where you look into the museum’s two-story-tall Duplex Gallery, you behold a confoundingly complicated interior architecture with furniture, stairways, musical instruments, wheelchairs and many other domestic items rendered in silvery, foil-clad foam board. The gallery’s floor is covered by a grid of large mirrors so that everything is doubled. What you think is up may really be down and what you take to be real might be a virtual reflection of the real. 22-25 Jackson Avenue, at 46th Avenue, Long Island City, Queens, 718-784-2084, ps1.org. (Johnson)★ El Museo del Barrio: ‘Under the Mexican Sky: Gabriel Figueroa, Art and Film’ (through June 27) Painting with light is one way to define the cinematographer’s task, and it describes the art of Gabriel Figueroa (1907-1997), who worked with some of the leading international film directors of his time and was a national hero in his native Mexico, the supreme painter-in-light of Mexicanidad. How do you put this particular kind of art across in a museum — art that is as much about time as it is about material, as much about flux as it is about fixity? This show, which mixes Figueroa film clips with paintings and prints by some of Mexico’s greatest artists and in the process utterly transforms El Museo’s interior spaces, gives an enthralling answer. 1230 Fifth Avenue, at 104th Street, East Harlem, 212-831-7272, elmuseo.org. (Cotter)Museum of Arts and Design: ‘Richard Estes: Painting New York City’  (through Sept. 20) The core of this show is a selection of vivid, Photorealist paintings of urban subjects like glass and chrome storefronts, movie theater marquees, cars and trucks, subways, the Brooklyn Bridge, views from the Staten Island Ferry and idyllic images of Central Park made between 1965 and 2015. The exhibition also includes didactic sections about the craft and technique that go into Mr. Estes painting and prints, but that aspect doesn’t fully deliver what it promises. 2 Columbus Circle, Manhattan, 212-299-7777, madmuseum.org. (Johnson)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.★ Museum of Biblical Art: ‘Sculpture in the Age of Donatello: Renaissance Masterpieces From Florence Cathedral’ (through June 14) This terrific 23-piece show features three major works by the early Renaissance sculptor Donatello (1386-1466), including the life-size statue of a bald prophet known as “lo Zuccone” or “Pumpkin Head,” which is widely considered the sculptor’s greatest work. Along with a half-dozen other works by or attributed to Donatello are sculptures by Nanni di Banco (circa 1386-1421), Donatello’s main competitor, including his monumental representation in marble of St. Luke. With the addition of a series of octagonal marble reliefs by Luca della Robbia and wooden models of the Florence Cathedral’s enormous dome attributed to its designer, Filippo Brunelleschi, the exhibition amounts to a tightly cropped snapshot of the birth of the Renaissance. 1865 Broadway, at 61st Street, 212-408-1500, mobia.org. (Johnson)★ Museum of Modern Art: ‘One-Way Ticket: Jacob Lawrence’s Migration Series and Other Visions of the Great Movement North’ (through Sept. 7) In the early 20th century, tens of thousands of African Americans left the rural South for the industrial North in search of jobs, homes and respect. Officially, this MoMA show is meant to mark the centennial of that immense population shift, though it also marks another anniversary: the first time in two decades that all 60 paintings in Jacob Lawrence’s great “Migration Series,” now divided between New York and Washington, D.C., have been shown together at the museum. Here they are surrounded by period photographs, books and fabulous music in a display as stimulating to the mind and the ear as it is to the eye. 212-708-9400, moma.org. (Cotter)Museum of Modern Art: ‘Scenes for a New Heritage: Contemporary Art from the Collection’ (through March 2016) MoMA’s latest installation of works from its permanent collection fills the second floor contemporary galleries with videos, installations, sculptures, drawings, prints and photographs produced by more than 30 artists during the past three decades. It’s an uneven, haphazard selection, but leaving artistic quality aside, its unusually optimistic-sounding title inadvertently raises a large and intriguing question: At a time when contemporary art seems to be spinning its wheels, what could a new heritage be? 212-708-9400, moma.org. (Johnson)AdvertisementMuseum of Modern Art: ‘Björk’ (through June 7) More than most, an exhibition devoted to the Iceland phenomenon — the most avant-garde popular singer of her time — needs to justify its place in a major museum. But MoMA was clearly unable to commit in terms of space, curatorial imagination or a serious catalog. The result is something of a shambles, but at least the music videos — projected on a large screen with surround sound — confirm the visual side of Björk’s complex sensibility and achievement. 212-708-9400, moma.org. (Smith)Museum of the City of New York: ‘Everything Is Design: The Work of Paul Rand’  (through July 19) You may not know the name Paul Rand (1914-96), the immensely influential advertising art director, illustrator and graphic designer, but it’s a safe bet you’re familiar with some of his works. After shaking up American advertising and book cover design in the 1940s and ’50s, he created logos for UPS, IBM, Westinghouse and other American corporations. His admirers called him “the Picasso of graphic design.” This show tracks his six-decade career with 150 examples of vintage magazines, book covers, three-dimensional containers, children’s books and books by Mr. Rand about principles of design. Fifth Avenue at 103rd Street, 212-534-1672, mcny.org. (Johnson)Neue Galerie: ‘Gustav Klimt and Adele Bloch-Bauer: The Woman in Gold’ (through Sept. 7) With the release of the movie “Woman in Gold,” which is about the restitution of some Nazi-looted paintings by Gustav Klimt to their rightful heir, the most celebrated of those works, the predominantly golden “Adele Bloch-Bauer I” (1907), is back in the media spotlight after its 2006 purchase by Ronald S. Lauder for the then record-setting price of $135 million. This small show features the portrait along with eight other Klimts and an assortment of jewelry and decorative objects typifying the luxurious lifestyle of Adele and Ferdinand Bloch-Bauer, the art collectors who commissioned it. 1048 Fifth Avenue, at 86th Street, 212-628-6200, neuegalerie.org. (Johnson)★ New Museum: ‘Surround Audience: 2015 Triennial’ (through May 24) If you’re fed up with big joke-shop sculpture, diva spectacle and brain-dead abstraction, this museum’s 2015 Triennial will come as a break in the clouds — not a full flood of new light, but a pull in a different direction. It’s a glimpse of terrain composed almost entirely of border crossings in media, art disciplines, ethnicities, genders and species. The in-between as an aesthetic is no surprise given the curators: Lauren Cornell of the New Museum, who has been paying astute attention to digital art and the Internet for years, and the artist Trecartin, whose laptop-generated, YouTube-distributed, hourslong pop-epic videos add up to some of the most thoroughly genre-collapsing art of the past decade. If nothing by the 51 artists from 25 countries is as genius as his work, there is still a lot to ponder in a show that represents a welcome shift to microgravity flux within a gross-objects industry. 235 Bowery, at Prince Street, Lower East Side, 212-219-1222, newmuseum.org. (Cotter)★ New-York Historical Society: ‘Freedom Journey 1965: Photographs of the Selma to Montgomery March by Stephen Somerstein’ (through Oct. 25) Almost 50 years ago, the picture editor of a campus newspaper at City College of New York assigned himself a breaking story: covering what promised to be a massive march in Alabama, led by the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., to demand free-and-clear voting rights for African-Americans. On short notice the editor, Stephen Somerstein, grabbed his cameras, climbed on a bus and headed south. The 55 pictures of black leaders and everyday people in this show, installed in a hallway and small gallery, are some that he shot that day. The image of Dr. King’s head seen in monumental silhouette that has become a virtual logo of the film “Selma” is based on a Somerstein original. 170 Central Park West, at 77th Street, 212-873-3400, nyhistory.org. (Cotter)Galleries: ChelseaAlison Rossiter: ‘Paper Wait’ (through May 2) The first part of Alison Rossiter’s process involves acquiring unexposed, expired photographic paper, generally from eBay. Then she pours liquid developer on the paper and exposes it to light. The results are abstract compositions that blur the boundaries between photography and painting. For instance, the series “Latent Eastman Kodak Velox, expired May 1919, processed 2014” employs paper that expired just after World War I. The demise of chemical photography becomes a metaphor for the fate of defeated and exhausted empires, but she also suggests that expired materials have poignant memories and stories to reveal. Yossi Milo Gallery, 245 10th Avenue, near 24th Street, 212-414-0370, www.yossimilo.com. (Martha Schwendener)Galleries: Other‘The Gee’s Bend Tradition’ (through May 6) A show of 14 quilts by seven artists, all made since 1990, and an accompanying exhibition of photographs, demonstrates what makes the Gee’s Bend tradition so compelling. Unlike most quilts in the European-American tradition, which favored uniformity, harmony and precision, Gee’s Bend quilts, made by generations of African-American women, include wild, improvisatory elements: broken patterns, high color contrasts, asymmetry and syncopation. They came into being alongside gospel, blues and jazz. The photographs document how the quilts are historically linked to slavery, Depression-era politics and the Civil Rights Movement, and the rich landscape in which they germinated and thrived. Lehman College Art Gallery, Lehman College, 250 Bedford Park Boulevard West, the Bronx, 718-960-8731, lehman.edu/gallery. (Schwendener)Out Of Town★ National Museum of African Art: ‘Conversations: African and African American Artists in Dialogue’  (through early 2016) For its 50th anniversary, this museum has brilliantly thread together work from two sources: its own holdings in African material and the Camille O. and William H. Cosby Jr. collection of African-American art. The Cosby collection, weighted toward canonical figures like Romare Bearden and Charles White, will bring in the crowds, but it is the curators and museum itself, which is in a period of renaissance, that have made the show rise well above predictability. Smithsonian Institution, 950 Independence Avenue SW, Washington, 202-633-4600, africa.si.edu. (Cotter)AdvertisementLast Chance★ Asia Society and Museum: Takahiro Iwasaki: ‘In Focus’ (closes on Sunday) Takahiro Iwasaki, born in 1975 in Hiroshima, Japan, has a lacemaker’s hand, a jeweler’s eye and a shopper’s instinct for cool materials, as he demonstrates in this solo show. Inspired by a 17th-century Japanese six-panel folding screen called “Flowers and Grasses of the Four Seasons” in Asia Society’s collection, he has made his own sculptural version entirely of threads pulled from kimonos. And he has added 21st-century reference to environmental change: open-weave construction cranes like those being used to revive the tsunami-ravaged, radiation-plagued city of Fukushima dwarf a single tiny pine tree that survived the disaster. 725 Park Avenue, at 70th Street, Manhattan, 212-517-2742, asiasociety.org. (Cotter)Steve DiBenedetto: ‘Mile High Psychiatry’ (closes on Saturday) Steve DiBenedetto has been showing in New York since the 1980s, but like many painters working on the slow-burn development plan, he’s flourishing midcareer. Expertly constructed but aggressively psychedelic and curiously weird, this is a phenomenal group of canvases. There are references to films like “Easy Rider” and the writers Thomas Pynchon, Terence McKenna and Isaac Asimov. Eduardo Paolozzi’s scruffy robot sculptures and the works of alpha painters like Philip Guston, Carroll Dunham and Brice Marden also serve as touchstones. But Mr. DiBenedetto has achieved a kind of organic understanding of both structure and surface which gives this body of work an aura of both history and authority. Derek Eller Gallery, 615 West 27th Street, Chelsea, 212-206-6411, derekeller.com. (Schwendener)Subodh Gupta: ‘Seven Billion Light Years’ (closes on Saturday) Like all highly successful global art, the work here is sleek, smart and familiar yet exotic; a local (in this case Indian) variation on well-worn international strategies of 1970s art, whether in sculpture, installation, film or painting. Liberal use is made of found objects that connote hard work and impoverished lives. What’s missing is anything beyond the generic, anything truly personal, as opposed to cavalier. Hauser & Wirth, 511 West 18th Street, Chelsea, 212-794-4970, hauserwirth.com. (Smith)Victor Moscoso: ‘Psychedelic Drawings, 1967 - 1982’ (closes on Saturday) In the 1960s, Victor Moscoso produced some of the most memorable acid rock posters of the psychedelic revolution in San Francisco. He also contributed trippy strips to Zap Comix, the underground publication founded by R. Crumb. This exhibition offers a tantalizing glimpse back at an unusually euphoric time in the history of graphic design. Along with vintage concert posters, it presents original drawings, collages and surrealistic comic strips dating from 1967 to 1982. Andrew Edlin Gallery, 134 10th Avenue, near 18th Street, Chelsea, 212-206-9723, edlingallery.com. (Johnson)Gaetano Pesce: ‘One of a Kind Iconic Works, 1967-2015’ (closes on Saturday) This mini-retrospective of the Italian designer Gaetano Pesce’s career is a Noah’s Ark of imaginary creatures — animal, human and animistic. Octopus vases, centipede tables, hugging couples and lamps with ears, all colorful and most produced in bouncy resins, populate a show of iconoclastic objects that first challenged the sleek world of industrial design in the 1960s. Pesce has continued to produce signature objects that, like Trojan horses, slip serious social commentary — feminism, abuse, diversity — into the living room under the guise of bashful charm. Humor can be serious. Allouche Gallery, 115 Spring Street, SoHo, 212-966-6675, allouchegallery.com. (Joseph Giovannini)★ Peter Saul: ‘From Pop to Punk’ (closes on Saturday) This selection of paintings and drawings owned by Allan Frumkin (1927-2002), Mr. Saul’s longtime dealer (30 years), brings a new clarity to Mr. Saul’s early development — when he moved from oil to acrylic and from a garrulous, if lushly painted, variation on Pop Art to paintings that fuse the figurative, the abstract and the scathingly political with a force that has few equals. Venus Over Manhattan, 980 Madison Avenue, at 76th Street, 212-980-0700, venusovermanhattan.com. (Smith)A version of this schedule appears in print on April 24, 2015, on Page C19 of the New York edition with the headline: The Listings: Art.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.