AdvertisementSupported by  Full reviews of recent dance performances: nytimes.com/dance. A searchable guide to these and other performances is at nytimes.com/events.Ballet Hispanico  (Through Sunday) This ardent company has returned to the Joyce Theater with works by Spanish and Latin American choreographers, spanning four programs. The lineup includes a world premiere by the Mexican choreographer Miguel Mancillas and the New York premiere of Rosie Herrera’s “Show.Girl.,” a look at Latina identity through the lens of Cuban cabaret. The troupe revives some of its pithiest choreography with Gustavo Ramírez Sansano’s flirtatious “El Beso,” from last year, and Annabelle Lopez Ochoa’s popular “Sombrerísimo,” for six men in bowler hats. Friday at 8 p.m.; Saturday at 2 and 8 p.m.; Sunday at 2 p.m.; Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-242-0800, joyce.org. (Siobhan Burke)Michelle Boulé (Through Saturday) BioGeometry is the study of the energy of shapes and colors. It was invented in the 1970s by Ibrahim Karim, an architect, who describes it as “equally scientific and spiritual in essence.” It is also the theoretical foundation of Michelle Boulé’s new work, “White,” a trio for herself, Lauren Bakst and Lindsay Clark in which they try to become vessels for the energetic frequencies that otherwise cannot be seen or quantified. At 8 p.m., Danspace Project, St. Mark’s Church, 131 East 10th Street, East Village, 866-811-4111, danspaceproject.org. (Brian Schaefer)Rebecca Davis  (Wednesday through May 9) The title of Ms. Davis’s new work, “Bloowst windku,” welds parts of recognizable words (bloom, twist, windmill, haiku) into something unrecognizable. The same may be true of the movement, light and sound in this carefully constructed trio. In another twist on the ordinary, hundreds of security envelopes, amassed over three years, are put to inventive architectural use. At 8:30 p.m., Here, 145 Avenue of the Americas, at Dominick Street, South Village, 212-352-3101, here.org. (Burke)Milka Djordjevich and Chris Peck  (Thursday through May 2) Ms. Djordjevich, a choreographer, and Mr. Peck, a composer, unveil a new phase of their longstanding collaboration. “Mass” features three women — Jessica Cook, Kyli Kleven and Ms. Djordjevich — interpreting a complex score of dance and song in deliberately effortful ways. Building on ideas from “Kinetic Makeover,” her 2013 solo, Ms. Djordevich attends closely to the relationship between the female body and the black box theater. At 8 p.m., the Kitchen, 512 West 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-255-5793, thekitchen.org. (Burke)★ Food for Thought  (Thursday through May 2) In this eclectic series, which benefits the St. Mark’s Church food distribution programs, Danspace Project invites three artist-curators to envision distinctive evenings of dance. On Thursday, Jeanine Durning presents “This is not the end,” featuring choreographers with whom she has shared a two-year Movement Research residency. Next Friday, in “Charged Space,” David Thomson brings together three performers with a certain kind of electricity. On May 2, Iréne Hultman offers “A.N.D. YES!,” named for its participants (Alex Escalante, Niall Jones and Dai Jian), whom she describes as “delicious, funny and sincere.” A discount on admission is given to those contributing two cans of food. At 8 p.m., Danspace Project, St. Mark’s Church, 131 East 10th Street, East Village, 866-811-4111, danspaceproject.org. (Burke)Fridays at Noon: Wendy Perron and Stephen Petronio  (Friday) These dancer-writers, both former members of the Trisha Brown Dance Company, have something else in common: Both are addicted to dance. Ms. Perron, a self-described “dance addict,” and Mr. Petronio, author of “Confessions of a Motion Addict,” capture their voracious love for movement in a shared reading and performance at the 92nd Street Y. Ms. Perron will read from her recent collection, “Through the Eyes of a Dancer,” and perform excerpts from her own work. Mr. Petronio offers a solo, “Big Daddy,” and passages from his autobiographical “Confessions.” At noon, 92nd Street Y, 1395 Lexington Avenue, 212-415-5500, 92y.org. (Burke)Emily Johnson  (Through Sunday) Most choreographers interested in social connection try to spur their audiences into action. Emily Johnson makes it part of the program. “Shore,” the last work in a trilogy that questions the components of belonging while also seeking it, has four main ingredients: Volunteerism, Story, Performance (through Saturday) and Feast (Sunday). The radical cumulative statement is that dance can respond to, and be part of, the real world. The feast locations are online at newyorklivearts.org. Performances begin at 7:30 p.m. at Public School 11, the William T. Harris School, 320 West 21st Street, Chelsea, and end at New York Live Arts, 219 West 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-924-0077. (Schaefer)Raja Feather Kelly  (Through Saturday) What would “A Chorus Line” look like if Andy Warhol had choreographed his own version? In “Andy Warhol’s 15 (Color Me, Warhol),” the adventurous Raja Feather Kelly and his company, the Feath3r Theory, try to answer that question, using unabashedly jazzy choreography and other sneakier tactics. Marilyn Monroe wigs and multicolored face paint may be involved. Friday and Saturday at 7 p.m., Dixon Place, 161A Chrystie Street, between Rivington and Delancey Streets, Lower East Side, 212-219-0736, dixonplace.org. (Burke)Pontus Lidberg Dance  (Monday) Four dancers and one bunraku puppet make up the cast of Mr. Lidberg’s “Snow,” created in 2013 for the centennial of “The Rite of Spring.” In a new iteration, Mr. Lidberg replaces Stravinsky’s score with new music by the contemporary classical composer Ryan Francis. As part of the Works & Process series at the Guggenheim Museum, he discusses this transition and shares excerpts from the revamped work, which will have its premiere at the Joyce Theater in June. At 7:30 p.m., 1071 Fifth Avenue, at 89th Street, 212-423-3587, worksandprocess.org. (Burke)Lyon Opera Ballet  (Wednesday through May 3) This company from Lyon, France, has a long tradition of fostering innovation in ballet. The troupe returns to New York with the work of three influential choreographers, chief among them William Forsythe, whose 1985 “Steptext,” for one woman and three men, plays with the gender dynamics of a traditional pas de deux. The program also includes Benjamin Millepied’s “Sarabande,” for four male dancers, and a New York premiere by the Israeli choreographer Emanuel Gat, less often seen on this side of the Atlantic. Wednesday at 7:30 p.m.; Thursday at 8 p.m.; May 2 at 2 and 8 p.m.; May 3 at 2 and 7:30 p.m.; Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-242-0800, joyce.org. (Burke)★ Mark Morris Dance Group (Through Sunday) In time for May flowers, the Mark Morris Dance Group presents the New York premiere of “Spring, Spring, Spring,” a meditation on “The Rite of Spring,” with a nontraditional take on the Stravinsky score by the jazz trio the Bad Plus. Also new is “Whelm,” a world premiere set to Debussy, and “Pacific,” created for the San Francisco Ballet in 1995, which the Mark Morris dancers will perform in New York for the first time. Other works from the company’s repertory complete two distinct programs, performed to live music. Friday and Saturday at 7:30 p.m.; Sunday at 3 p.m.; Howard Gilman Opera House, Brooklyn Academy of Music, 30 Lafayette Avenue, at Ashland Place, Fort Greene, 718-636-4100, bam.org. (Schaefer)★ David Neumann/Advanced Beginner Group  (Through Saturday) Mr. Neumann has weathered a number of storms in recent years, personal and meteorological. In “I Understand Everything Better,” he reflects on the deaths of his parents, which bookended Superstorm Sandy. Techniques from Japanese Noh theater, along with his characteristic wit, provide grounding and leavening forces. At 8 p.m., Abrons Arts Center, 466 Grand Street, at Pitt Street, Lower East Side, 212-352-3101, abronsartscenter.org. (Burke)★ New York City Ballet  (Tuesday through June 7) Thirty-one ballets are in store for City Ballet’s spring season, dating from 1862 (August Bournonville’s “La Sylphide,” newly staged by Peter Martins) to 2015 (Justin Peck’s “Rodeo: Four Dance Episodes”). The first 12, presented in various combinations this week, spotlight the bracingly minimalist black and white aesthetic of the company’s founder, George Balanchine. The bedrock of a vast repertory, these include classics like “Concerto Barocco” and “The Four Temperaments” (Tuesday); “Agon” and “Apollo” (Wednesday); and “Stravinsky Violin Concerto,” part of Thursday’s “See the Music” program. Tuesdays through Thursdays at 7:30 p.m. (May 7 gala at 7 p.m.); Fridays at 8 p.m.; Saturdays at 2 and 8 p.m.; Sundays at 3 p.m.; David H. Koch Theater, Lincoln Center, 212-496-0600, nycballet.com. (Burke)Olga Pericet  (Through Sunday) A rising star in Spain, the flamenco dancer Olga Pericet has brought her new show, “Flamenco sin título” (“Flamenco Untitled”), to Manhattan, delivering the simple, profound and intricate pleasures of solo dancing to live music. Friday and Saturday at 8 p.m.; Sunday at 2:30 p.m.; Repertorio Español at Gramercy Arts Theater, 138 East 27th Street, Manhattan, 212-225-9999, repertorio.org. (Burke)★ ‘Rhythm in Motion’ (through April 26) If you haven’t heard, tap is back — or at least being newly appreciated by those who previously dismissed it. The American Tap Dance Foundation has long championed innovation in the form, and its annual showcase puts that freshness on display. Michelle Dorrance, Derick K. Grant, Chloe Arnold — part of a modern “Tap Pack” — are contributing to two programs over five days, along with fellow tap entrepreneurs, musicians and singers. Program A: Friday at 8 p.m. Program B: Saturday at 3 and 8 p.m.; Sunday at 3 p.m.; 14th Street Y LABA Theater, 344 East 14th Street, East Village, 646-230-9564, atdf.org. (Schaefer)Adam H. Weinert  (Friday and Saturday) For the past four years, Mr. Weinert’s research has revolved around the choreography of Ted Shawn, a pioneer of American modern dance whose works have largely disappeared from the stage. In “Monument,” Mr. Weinert’s first evening-length production, he and his collaborators have reconstructed works by Shawn and Doris Humphrey, another modern-dance trailblazer, interweaving these with new but related material. With finely honed dancing and a score by Chris Garneau, “Monument” shuttles eerily between the present and a rarely seen past. At 8 p.m., 92nd Street Y, 1395 Lexington Avenue, 212-415-5500, 92y.org. (Burke)Words on Dance: Christopher Wheeldon and Rita Moreno  (Monday) Mr. Wheeldon, the British ballet choreographer and newly minted Broadway director, joins Ms. Moreno, the esteemed actress and singer, to discuss his leap from ballet to Broadway, where his “An American in Paris” recently opened to enthusiastic reviews. In addition to spirited conversation (can it be otherwise, with Ms. Moreno as interlocutor?), the evening will include rare footage from film and television. At 7 p.m., Symphony Space, 2537 Broadway, at 95th Street, 212-864-5400, symphonyspace.org. (Burke)Work Up (Through May 2) Gibney Dance Center continues its inaugural spring series for emerging choreographers. For the third installment, Ni’Ja Whitson Adebanjo/the NWA Project, Elena Rose Light and Alyssa Gersony present new works exploring issues related to gender, religious faith and sensual perception (Friday and Saturday). The final edition features Lauren Ree Slone, Eli Tamondong/Projectile Imagery and Jacob Slominski (Thursday through May 2). At 7:30 p.m., Gibney Dance Performing Arts Center, 280 Broadway, near Chambers Street, Lower Manhattan, 646-837-6809, gibneydance.org. (Burke)Ann Liv Young  (Wednesdays through May 20) The irreverent Ms. Young presents “Elektra Cabaret” at Joe’s Pub, casting a character often portrayed as wicked in a compassionate light. In this reimagined version of her full-length “Elektra,” she is joined by Marissa Mickelberg (chorus), Bailey Nolan (Klytemnestra), Charley Parden (Orestes) and Vanessa Soudan (Chrysothemis). Wednesdays (except next Wednesday) and this Monday at 9:30 p.m., Joe’s Pub, at the Public Theater, 425 Lafayette Street, at Astor Place, East Village, 212-967-7555, joespub.com. (Burke)Advertisement