AdvertisementSupported byPop For full reviews of recent concerts: nytimes.com/music. A searchable guide to these and other shows is at nytimes.com/events.★ AlunaGeorge  (Tuesday) This young electro-R&B pair from London have a hypnotizing way with their heartbreak: The producer George Reid shatters and reassembles driving beats under the singer Aluna Francis’s arch, sky-high falsetto. Their debut, “Body Music,” was one of 2013’s best; “White Noise,” their hit single with the equally suave dance duo Disclosure, remains a dance floor staple. They recently released a new, thoroughly disco-influenced track, “Supernatural.” At 9 p.m., Rough Trade NYC, 64 North Ninth Street, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, roughtradenyc.com. (Stacey Anderson)BAM Presents: ‘The Karen Gala’  (Tuesday) Mavis Staples, the powerhouse former anchor of the Staple Singers, remains an indefatigable performer and road warrior. Her most recent album, “One True Vine,” has an earthy dose of lo-fi Americana, courtesy of its producer, Jeff Tweedy, the Wilco frontman. Here she headlines a retirement gala for Karen Brooks Hopkins, president of the Brooklyn Academy of Music; Steve Reich, Rufus and Martha Wainwright and others also perform. At 8 p.m., BAM Howard Gilman Opera House, 30 Lafayette Avenue, at Ashland Place, Fort Greene, 718-636-4100, bam.org. (Anderson)James Bay  (Wednesday) The Tortured British Invasion continues apace with this 24-year-old singer-songwriter, whose breakthrough EP, “Let It Go,” has the same lilting vulnerability as works by Hozier and Sam Smith. Mr. Bay’s easy rasp swathes ’70s folk and blue-eyed soul, and his lyrics can often take a maudlin path; “Why don’t you be you/And I’ll be me,” he wails on the EP’s title track, though his belting conveys great conviction in the concept. His debut album, “Chaos and the Calm,” was released last month. At 7 p.m., Irving Plaza, 17 Irving Place, at 15th Street, Manhattan, 212-777-6800, irvingplaza.com. (Anderson)‘Neo-Souled to Cure Sickle Cell Disease’ Benefit Concert With Bilal’  (Saturday) Bilal, a glossy New York neo-soul crooner, has a firm fan in Janelle Monáe, who once raved that his voice was “like a van Gogh painting.” He takes a surrealist slant on his most recent record, “A Love Surreal,” which he said was inspired by Salvador Dalí, and its savvy psychedelic pathways do not disappoint. He also recently sang on Kendrick Lamar’s “To Pimp a Butterfly,” and performs with Avery*Sunshine, Lyfe Jennings and Angie Stone at this benefit. At 7 p.m., Newark Symphony Hall, 1030 Broad Street, Newark, newarksymphonyhall.org. (Anderson)‘Cambodian Rocks’ Concert, With Chhom Nimol  (Tuesday) Cambodian pop remains a particularly elated strain of dance culture, at once both retro and timeless, with its surf-cum-lounge guitar lines and frenetically paced choreography. WFMU celebrates this bright genre with an evening of performances capped by Ms. Nimol, the singer of the band Dengue Fever, which was the first American Khmer rock group to tour Cambodia after the fall of Pol Pot’s regime. With Baksey Cham Krong, the Drakkar band and more. At 8 p.m., Monty Hall, 43 Montgomery Street, Jersey City, brownpapertickets.com. (Anderson)★ Four Tet  (Thursday) The veteran electronic musician Kieran Hebden cut his teeth as a member of the British post-rock band Fridge, and the moody undertones of its genre linger on in his complex synthetic works as Four Tet. Though his solo efforts are often described as influenced by his occasional collaborators, Radiohead, the reverse is arguably more accurate. At 9 p.m., Output, 74 Wythe Avenue, at North 12th Street, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, outputclub.com. (Anderson)★ Hurray for the Riff Raff  (Friday and Saturday) An informal leader of the roots music scene in New Orleans, the singer and multi-instrumentalist Alynda Lee Segarra creates intimate, earnest pop yarns with traditional Americana anchoring. Her project Hurray for the Riff Raff released its cool, confident fifth album, “Small Town Heroes,” in February 2014. With Clear Plastic Masks. Friday at 9 p.m., Bowery Ballroom, 6 Delancey Street, near the Bowery, Lower East Side, 800-745-3000, boweryballroom.com. Saturday at 8:30 p.m., Music Hall of Williamsburg, 66 North Sixth Street, Brooklyn, 800-745-3000, musichallofwilliamsburg.com. (Anderson)iLoveMakonnen  (Tuesday and Wednesday) This singer-rapper’s cheerfully narcissistic stage name is a bit of a red herring; iLoveMakonnen (whose real name is Makonnen Sheran) is an earnest cultural omnivore whose instantly catchy synthetic hip-hop hooks and purring rhymes entwine strong elements of pop and electronica. Much like his career-making collaborator, Drake (they worked together on “Tuesday”), iLoveMakonnen makes music with a sense of wistfulness — one of his few conventional elements. With Key! and Sonny Digital. Tuesday at 9 p.m., Bowery Ballroom, 6 Delancey Street, near the Bowery, Lower East Side, 800-745-3000, boweryballroom.com. Wednesday at 9 p.m., Music Hall of Williamsburg, 66 North Sixth Street, Brooklyn, 800-745-3000, musichallofwilliamsburg.com. (Anderson)Jessie J  (Wednesday) This British pop singer-songwriter earned some latent crossover fame stateside last year with “Bang Bang,” her saucy radio hit with Ariana Grande and Nicki Minaj. Her warbling alto cadence shares strong similarities with that of Katy Perry; her suggestive stage spectacles evoke Ms. Perry’s, too. At 9 p.m., Webster Hall, 125 East 11th Street, East Village, 800-745-3000, websterhall.com/events. (Anderson)The Juan Maclean  (Friday and Saturday) The disco-house D.J. John MacLean and the former LCD Soundsystem member Nancy Whang have found their groove in a steady stream of mixes and outtakes in recent years. Last fall, they released their first album in several years, “In a Dream,” a punk-synth excursion of charming call-and-response. At 9 p.m., Union Pool, 848 Union Avenue, at Meeker Avenue, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, 718-609-0484, union-pool.com. (Anderson)Madeon  (Friday) A 20-year-old nu-disco producer from France, Madeon (whose real name is Hugo Pierre Leclercq) has shot to top stages in the electronic dance music world off the strength of his pop collaborations with Lady Gaga and Coldplay. His debut album, “Adventure,” released in March, includes cameos from Passion Pit, Dan Smith of Bastille, Mark Foster of Foster the People and more. At 6:30 p.m., Webster Hall, 125 East 11th Street, East Village, 800-745-3000, websterhall.com/events. (Anderson)John Mellencamp (Friday) One of last fall’s more ambitious but ultimately murky stage spectacles was “Ghost Brothers of Darkland County,” a Southern Gothic musical about familial drama and supernatural menace that was created by Mr. Mellencamp and Stephen King. Mr. Mellencamp’s country-, gospel- and zydeco-tinged tunes fared well, however, and would have made a fine song cycle without all the busy stage dressings. There is a chance that this Grammy-winning musician will pull from its book at this area show, which promotes his most recent album, “Plain Spoken.” At 8 p.m., Apollo Theater, 253 West 125th Street, Harlem, 800-745-3000, apollotheater.com. (Anderson)The Month in Cabaret (through May 2) At Café Carlyle, the guitarist John Pizzarelli reunites with Daniel Jobim, Antônio Carlos Jobim’s son, who played with his father on many of his recordings, through May 2. Tuesdays through Fridays at 8:45 p.m.; Saturdays at 8:45 p.m. and 10:45 p.m.; 35 East 76th Street, Manhattan, 212-744-1600, thecarlyle.com. The Midtown club 54 Below has been hopping with divas from different generations. The venerable Marilyn Maye’s new show, “Her Way: A Centennial Tribute to Frank Sinatra,” through Thursday, is another birthday celebration of Ol’ Blue Eyes. All shows at 7 p.m. except Friday’s, at 8:30 p.m.; 254 West 54th Street, Manhattan, 646-476-3551, 54below.com. (Stephen Holden)MS MR  (Wednesday) An electropop duo with pulsing, catchy beats and subtly morose underpinnings, MS MR released its debut album, “Secondhand Rapture,” in 2013. A single from it, “Hurricane,” earned haute couture clout when it was featured in a Gucci ad campaign. The group’s second album is set for release in July. At 9 p.m., Rough Trade NYC, 64 North Ninth Street, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, roughtradenyc.com. (Anderson)★ Mark Ronson (D.J. Set)  (Thursday) The prototype of the modern celebrity D.J., Mr. Ronson earned his stripes by spinning at exclusive New York parties in the late 1990s; his retro-soul inclinations soon served Amy Winehouse and Lily Allen well when he produced breakthrough albums for both of them. With this year’s release of his fourth album, “Uptown Special,” and its irrepressible single “Uptown Funk,” with Bruno Mars, he became a chart-topping artist in his native England. He returns to Brooklyn for a rare D.J. set, a field in which he still excels whenever he reappears. At 10 p.m., Verboten, 54 North 11th Street, Williamsburg, verbotennewyork.com. (Anderson)Will Sheff (D.J. Set)  (Thursday) The erudite indie-rockers Okkervil River, from Austin, Tex., are known for vast conceptual albums on topics like a heroin-addicted folk singer (“Black Sheep Boy”) or the plight of a failing glam-rock band (“The Stand Ins”). The group’s latest album, “The Silver Gymnasium,” plumbs a deep nostalgia for adolescent innocence and captures a new, dark energy. The frontman, Will Sheff, D.J.s a set tonight. At 10 p.m., Baby’s All Right, 146 Broadway, near Bedford Avenue, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, babysallright.ticketfly.com. (Anderson)They Might Be Giants  (Sunday) These Brooklyn-born eccentrics of the highest order represented Keep Williamsburg Weird decades ago with the 1990s singles “Istanbul (Not Constantinople)” and “Snail Shell.” They released their 16th studio album, “Nanobots,” in 2013 — after which, fittingly, they gave a lively and heartfelt closing performance at the Celebrate Brooklyn! festival. For their residency at the Music Hall of Williamsburg, they will play the last Sunday of each month through May. This month’s show also serves as a record release party for their new album, “Glean.” At 8 p.m., Music Hall of Williamsburg, 66 North Sixth Street, Brooklyn, 800-745-3000, musichallofwilliamsburg.com. (Anderson)Advertisement