AdvertisementSupported by Full reviews of recent classical performances: nytimes.com/classical. A searchable guide to these and other performances is at nytimes.com/events.Opera‘Un Ballo in Maschera’  (Tuesday) Though David Alden is one of the most interesting directors in opera, his intriguing updated 2012 production of Verdi’s “Un Ballo in Maschera” proved disappointing overall. With contemporary sets and costumes evoking film noir, the production captures the emotional darkness of the story of the self-destructive King Gustavo, who is pursuing Amelia, the wife of his trusted adviser. Mr. Alden embraces the opera’s curious elements of Gallic humor. But the stage is dominated by a mural of Icarus, symbolizing the king who sees no limits to his entitlement, and this overplayed metaphor becomes tiresome. James Levine conducts the current revival; the enticing cast includes Piotr Beczala as Gustavo, Sondra Radvanovsky as Amelia, and Dmitri Hvorostovsky as Anckarstrom. At 7:30 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Zachary Woolfe)★ ‘Don Carlo’ (Saturday) For this revival of Nicholas Hytner’s 2010 production of Verdi’s profoundly great “Don Carlo,” the Metropolitan Opera has assembled a strong cast and an exceptional conductor. The Korean tenor Yonghoon Lee brings melting sound and youthful impetuosity to the title role. The Italian soprano Barbara Frittoli is an affecting Elisabeth; the suave Russian baritone Dmitri Hvorostovsky excels as Rodrigo; and the great Italian bass Ferruccio Furlanetto owns the role of the isolated, ruthless Philip II. Best of all is the stylish, exciting conducting of Yannick Nézet-Séguin. Saturday at 7 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Anthony Tommasini)‘The Merry Widow’ (Friday, Monday and Thursday) Given the acclaimed creative team and stellar cast, headed by Renée Fleming, that the Metropolitan Opera lined up for its new production of this Lehar operetta this season, things looked promising. Yet though colorful and full of lively dancing, this production by the director and choreographer Susan Stroman, a five-time Tony Award winner in her Met debut, felt tentative and timid when it opened on New Year’s Eve. A new cast will sing as it returns for four more performances. The mezzo-soprano Susan Graham is the widow Hanna Glawari, left a fortune by her banker husband; Rod Gilfry sings the debonair Count Danilo, Hanna’s former flame who falls for her again; Andriana Chuchman is the ingénue Valencienne. The spoken dialogue (written by Jeremy Sams for this production) is amplified, but not the singing. Fabio Luisi conducts. Friday, Monday and Thursday at 7:30 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Tommasini)‘Le Nozze di Figaro’  (Friday, Sunday and Tuesday) Stephen Wadsworth, noted for his stagings of 17th- and 18th-century classics, completes a cycle of the three operas Mozart wrote with the librettist Lorenzo Da Ponte. Gary Thor Wedow conducts the performance at the Juilliard School, and the cast includes Thesele Kemane, Ying Fang, Virginie Verrez, Takaoki Onishi and Alexandra Razskazoff. Friday and Tuesday at 7:30 p.m.; Sunday at 2 p.m.; Peter Jay Sharp Theater, 155 West 65th Street, Lincoln Center, 212-769-7406, events.juilliard.edu. (Woolfe)‘Die Zauberflöte’  (Wednesday) Mozart goes “Mad Men” with this production at the Manhattan School of Music, set in the early 1960s. Jay Lesenger directs; George Manahan conducts. (There are further performances next Friday and on May 3.) At 7:30 p.m., John C. Borden Auditorium, 122nd Street and Broadway, Morningside Heights, 917-493-4428, msmnyc.edu. (Woolfe)‘Cavalleria Rusticana’ and ‘Pagliacci’  (Saturday and Wednesday) It was about time for the Metropolitan Opera to replace its 1970 Franco Zeffirelli production of Mascagni’s “Cavalleria Rusticana” and Leoncavallo’s “Pagliacci,” opera’s most enduring double bill. In his new staging, the director David McVicar brings an intriguing, sometimes uneasy mix of abstraction and realism to “Cavalleria,” marred by the overuse of an annoying rotating stage platform, a heavy-handed touch. For “Pagliacci,” the action is updated to a grimy truck stop near a church in an Italian town in 1948; the commedia dell’arte troupe becomes a band of zany vaudevillians. The cast is strong, especially the tireless tenor Marcelo Álvarez, who takes on both Turiddu in “Cavalleria” and Canio in “Pagliacci,” a formidable challenge. The soprano Eva-Maria Westbroek is a wrenching Santuzza in “Cavalleria,” and the soprano Patricia Racette a feisty Nedda in “Pagliacci.” Fabio Luisi conducts surging, textured and lucid accounts of both scores. Saturday at 12:30 p.m. and Wednesday at 7:30 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Tommasini)Classical Music★ Australian Chamber Orchestra  (Sunday) This bracingly original chamber ensemble puts together a typically eclectic program, with well-loved favorites like Mozart’s radiant Clarinet Concerto (with Sharon Kam as soloist) and Haydn’s Symphony No. 83 (“The Hen”), alongside an arrangement of Prokofiev’s playful “Visions fugitives” and a new work, “Water,” by Jonny Greenwood, the guitarist from Radiohead. At 3 p.m., Zankel Hall, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Corinna da Fonseca-Wollheim)Bargemusic  (Friday through Sunday) Beethoven’s “Pastoral” Symphony gets a makeover in an unusual piano four-hands arrangement performed by Timo Andres and David Kaplan on Friday. The program also includes Mr. Andres’s own jazzy “How Can I Live in Your World of Ideas” and “Retro Music,” as well as selections from Brahms’s “Liebeslieder Waltzes.” Saturday and Sunday offer more standard fare, with the Shanghai String Quartet performing works by Ravel and Beethoven; the pianist Cecile Licad joins for Schumann’s Piano Quintet. Friday and Saturday at 8 p.m.; Sunday at 4 p.m.; Bargemusic, Fulton Ferry Landing, next to the Brooklyn Bridge, Brooklyn, 800-838-3006, bargemusic.org. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center (Friday and Thursday) On Friday, the great violinist Cho-Liang Lin joins a regular Chamber Music Society cast for an evening of Brahms. He plays the Violin Sonata in A major; also on the bill are the Piano Trio in C minor and the String Sextet in G. On Thursday, the pianist Gilbert Kalish comes to the Rose Studio with a striking program of Crumb, Janacek, Ives and two world premieres. Friday at 7:30 p.m., Alice Tully Hall; Thursday at 7:30 p.m., Rose Studio, 165 West 65th Street; 212-875-5788, chambermusicsociety.org. (David Allen)★ I Fagiolini (Saturday) Uncompromising musicianship and a wicked sense of humor are the hallmarks of this stellar vocal ensemble from Britain. Playing on their whimsical name, which means “little beans” in Italian, they offer “Insalata I Fagiolini,” a “salad” of short works from the Renaissance and early Baroque periods, mixing highbrow virtuosity and vernacular wit in at least four different languages. At 7:30 p.m., Weill Recital Hall, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)★ Richard Goode (Friday) It’s always a treat to hear the pianist Richard Goode, whose playing is invariably a revelation. Here, he offers a program featuring Mozart’s Adagio in B minor (K. 540); Beethoven’s Piano Sonata No. 24 in F sharp (Op. 78); Brahms’s “Klavierstücke”; Debussy’s “Children’s Corner”; and Schumann’s “Humoreske.” At 8 p.m., Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Vivien Schweitzer)Juilliard Orchestra  (Tuesday) The endlessly committed conductor Jeffrey Milarsky leads the Juilliard Orchestra in world premieres of works by four student composers: Joshua Cerdenia, Michael Seltenreich, Aaron Severini and Chason Goldfinger. At 8 p.m., Alice Tully Hall, Lincoln Center, 212-799-5000, events.juilliard.edu. (Allen)Jupiter Symphony Chamber Players  (Monday) “Despite Tyranny” is the title and theme of this program, and it features works by five composers whose work was banned or otherwise affected by totalitarian regimes: Meyerbeer, Prokofiev, Shostakovich, Adolf Busch and Erwin Schulhoff. At 2 and 7:30 p.m., Good Shepherd Presbyterian Church, 152 West 66th Street, Manhattan, 212-799-1259, jupitersymphony.com. (Allen)★ Monteverdi Choir  (Thursday) Monteverdi’s “Vespro della Beata Vergine” was the first work that John Eliot Gardiner and his great choir ever performed, back in 1964. Now at the summit of choral artistry, the Monteverdi Choir and another Gardiner group, the English Baroque Soloists, bring the Vespers to Carnegie Hall for the penultimate day of the Before Bach festival. (Also next Friday.) At 8 p.m., Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Allen)New World Symphony  (Tuesday) Dreamlike music, some of it dark and haunting, is the focus of this lovely program, conducted by Michael Tilson Thomas and featuring the superstar violinist Anne-Sophie Mutter in Berg’s deeply personal Violin Concerto and “En rêve,” a work written for her by the Swiss composer Norbert Moret. Incidental music from Schubert’s “Rosamunde” and Debussy’s painterly “La Mer” round out the evening. At 8 p.m., Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)New York Festival of Song: ‘Letters From Spain: A World of Song in Spanish Poetry’ (Tuesday) Spanish verse is the inspiration for this program, which features music by Shostakovich, Schumann, William Bolcom, Taneyev, Wolf, Peter Lieberson, Xavier Montsalvage and Granados, performed by singers including the soprano Corinne Winters, and accompanied by Steven Blier and Michael Barrett. At 8 p.m., Merkin Concert Hall, 129 West 67th Street, Manhattan, 212-501-3330, nyfos.org, kaufmanmusiccenter.org. (Schweitzer)New York Virtuoso Singers: ‘Distinguished Queens College Composers — Past and Present’ (Saturday) Harold Rosenbaum conducts the New York Virtuoso Singers, a champion of contemporary American music, in a program featuring works by composers associated with Queens College. The ensemble will be joined by the Queens College Vocal Ensemble for a lineup including the American premiere of Luigi Dallapiccola’s “Tempus Destruendi Tempus Aedificandi” and pieces by composers including Elliott Carter, Thea Musgrave, George Perle, George Tsontakis and Hugo Weisgall. At 8:30 p.m., Merkin Concert Hall, 129 West 67th Street, Manhattan, 212-501-3330, kaufmanmusiccenter.org. (Schweitzer)Quatuor Cambini-Paris  (Sunday) The Frick Collection’s intimate music room is an ideal space for chamber music. This ensemble, named after the 19th-century composer and violinist Giuseppe Maria Cambini, offers an unusual program, featuring Mozart’s Quartet in C (“The Dissonances”), as well as a quartet of the same title by Hyacinthe Jadin, an 18th-century French composer. The lineup also includes the Quartet in F Minor, No. 1, by Félicien David, a 19th-century French composer. At 5 p.m., 1 East 70th Street, Manhattan, 212-288-0700, frick.org. (Schweitzer)Advertisement