APRIL 23, 2015
For news about comedy, including critical commentary: nytimes.com/arts. A searchable guide to these and other shows is at nytimes.com/events.‘The Macaulay Culkin Show’  (Sunday) Brett Davis and Sally Burtnick again welcome an amazing collection of comedians to their monthly show, which is not affiliated with the titular actor. Performers include Conner O’Malley, Phoebe Robinson, Seaton Smith, Jason Sáenz, Good Cop Great Cop, Max Wittert, Unisex and Brian Fiddyment & Edy Modica. At 7 p.m. Shea Stadium BK, 20 Meadow Street, between Waterbury and Bogart Streets, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, liveatsheastadium.com. (Elise Czajkowski)‘Extended Play’ (Friday) Kenny DeForest hosts long stand-up sets from two of the city’s finest, Ben Kronberg and Brooke Van Poppelen, and featuring Greg Stone. At 8 p.m., Knitting Factory Brooklyn, 361 Metropolitan Avenue, at Havemeyer Street, Williamsburg, 347-529-6696, bk.knittingfactory.com. (Czajkowski)‘Gravid Water’  (Monday) This popular high-concept show consists of several two-person scenes: One participant is an actor who has memorized his or her lines in a classic scene; the other is an improviser who has no idea what scene they’re doing and must play along. At 8 p.m., the Upright Citizens Brigade Theater, 307 West 26th Street, Chelsea, 212-366-9176, newyork.ucbtheatre.com. (Czajkowski)Advertisement★ David O’Doherty  (Tuesday) An internationally renowned Irish comedian, Mr. O’Doherty is a riveting storyteller whose shows blend personal narratives with songs performed on his tiny child’s keyboard. He swings through New York with his current show, “David O’Doherty Has Checked Everything.” At 7:30 p.m., Le Poisson Rouge, 158 Bleecker Street, near Thompson Street, Greenwich Village, 212-505-3474, lepoissonrouge.com. (Czajkowski)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.‘Right Now! With Carolyn Castiglia’ (Wednesday) Ms. Castiglia hosts this brand-new live talk show, which blends late-night comedy with daytime chat. Guests include Sara Benincasa, Desiree Burch, Jordan Carlos, Abbi Crutchfield, Ophira Eisenberg, Mara Wilson and Jean Grae. At 8 p.m., the Slipper Room, 167 Orchard Street, at Stanton Street, Lower East Side, 212-253-7246, slipperroom.com. (Czajkowski)Advertisement‘Soft Spot’ (Tuesday) Claudia Cogan and Brendan McLaughlin begin their new stand-up show with a stellar lineup of Sabrina Jalees, Matt Koff, David Smithyman and Charla Lauriston. At 8 p.m., Tiny Montgomery at Threes Brewing, 333 Douglass Street, at Fourth Avenue, Gowanus, Brooklyn, 718-522-2110, threesbrewing.com. (Czajkowski)★ ‘Stand-Up Comedy Night at the Artist’s Institute’ (Thursday) As part of the visual artist Carolee Schneemann’s season at the Artist’s Institute, in which she focuses on the body, Miriam Katz hosts this all-female stand-up show devoted to “frank portrayals of interpersonal relationships, identity and the body.” Performers include Maeve Higgins, Phoebe Robinson, Michelle Wolf, Jo Firestone and a special guest. At 8 p.m., the Artist’s Institute, 163 Eldridge Street, at Delancey Street, Lower East Side, 646-512-9608, theartistsinstitute.org. (Czajkowski)★ ‘Trike’ (Saturday) Nick Kanellis and Peter McNerney perform their weekly two-man show, reliably one of the best improv performances in the city. At 10:30 p.m., Magnet Theater, 254 West 29th Street, Chelsea, 212-244-8824, magnettheater.com. (Czajkowski)A comedy entry in the Listings pages on Friday about Stand-Up Comedy Night at the Artist’s Institute, scheduled for Thursday on the Lower East Side, included outdated information. After publication, the event’s lineup was changed; Michelle Wolf will be among the comics performing, not Sabrina Jalees.A version of this schedule appears in print on April 24, 2015, on Page C17 of the New York edition with the headline: The Listings: Comedy.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.