By SIOBHAN BURKEAPRIL 23, 2015
The American Tap Dance Foundation’s “Rhythm in Motion” showcase, started three years ago by the foundation’s director, Tony Waag, is one of a kind. It shouldn’t be. Why aren’t there more opportunities of this caliber for tap choreographers to create and show new work? Given the talent in sight at the Theater at the 14th Street Y on Wednesday, one showcase seemed hardly enough.Wednesday’s program (the first of two) included leading choreographers like Michelle Dorrance, Derick K. Grant and Jason Samuels Smith, alongside relative newcomers — Samara Seligsohn and Leonardo Sandoval — and the veteran tapper Brenda Bufalino, who brought the night to a puzzling close.As an art of making noise, tap can just as effectively explore silence. In “MidBloom,” Ms. Seligsohn and her three dancers, in Goth-inspired costumes, investigated both, punctuating their soundtrack (Poliça’s “Dark Star”) with unexpected pockets of stillness. (Ms. Seligsohn cites T. S. Eliot — “There will be time” — as her guide.)Though philosophical in its intention, “MidBloom” remained a neatly wrapped routine, a dance lasting the length of a pop song. Mr. Sandoval, arriving next as if blown in from the wings, had a more spontaneous aura of thinking on his feet as he riffed off the bassist Greg Richardson’s Afro-Brazilian sounds, played live. This smooth solo and the rousing group piece that followed were excerpts from his new show, “Music From the Sole,” created with Mr. Richardson. When will New York get to see the whole thing?AdvertisementThe joy — and the great live music — continued in Mr. Grant’s “#teamtap,” for four radiant young women. Sydney Burtis, Grace Cannady, Kyra Durfee and Emma Wylie paid glamorous tribute to a bygone era of tap clubs, while demonstrating that the next generation has serious chops. Ms. Dorrance’s “Boards and Chains,” excerpted from her full-length “ETM: The Initial Approach,” suggested likewise, as her excellent dancers mined a dizzying sonic repertoire from wooden and metal surfaces.Mr. Samuels Smith shared a work in progress choreographed with (and fleetingly featuring) his mother, Sue Samuels, pitting jazz against tap dancers to D’Angelo’s “Sugah Daddy.” It is far from finished.AdvertisementEditing could also have benefited Ms. Bufalino’s “Diary of a Racing Pigeon (Chapter 3),” in which she played the title bird, complete with a long monologue about preparing for a race. (Maybe you need to have seen Chapters 1 and 2?) Her crisp, satisfying “All Blues/Tacit” — performed earlier by the frisky Felipe Galganni and Lynn Schwab, with a vocal solo for Mr. Waag — would have been a more fitting end to an invigorating show.A dance review on Friday about the American Tap Dance Foundation’s “Rhythm in Motion,” at the Theater at the 14th Street Y in Manhattan, misspelled the surname of a performer. He is Felipe Galganni, not Galgani.“Rhythm in Motion” continues through Sunday at the Theater at the 14th Street Y, 344 East 14th Street, East Village; 646-230-9564, atdf.org A version of this review appears in print on April 24, 2015, on Page C2 of the New York edition with the headline: A Stage Alive With the Sound of Dancing.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.