AdvertisementSupported byBy Alessandra Stanley“Happyish,” a new Showtime comedy that begins on Sunday, is funnyish. Mostly, though, it’s annoyingesque.This is a series that pits neurotic, self-involved adults against cocky, self-involved millennials who are taking over their elders’ workplaces and cultural primacy. The generational collision could be amusing if the grown-ups — Steve Coogan as Thom Payne, a burned-out advertising executive, and Kathryn Hahn as his wife Lee, an artist — were meant to be as ridiculous as the young upstarts they feel threatened by. Instead, Thom and Lee are conduits into a rather smug portrait of 40-something angst. It may well be that Shalom Auslander, the author of the novel “Hope: A Tragedy” and “Foreskin’s Lament,” a memoir of growing up as an Orthodox Jew, created the show in his own image. Because beneath a veneer of mockery, Thom’s existential pain is taken surprisingly seriously. This is a show where people cite Henry Miller, debate the existence of God and the notion of happiness and use words like “Weltanschauung.” (Each episode begins with a coy joke about guest stars. One, for example, says “starring Nabokov, Hippocrates and God.”)Thom and Lee are cynical, but they are nevertheless presented as sensitive souls who seek meaning and a moral compass in a messed-up new world order ruled by Twitter and Tumblr. In short: Thom reads Camus while waiting for his train while younger commuters next to him read Steve Jobs biographies on their iPads. The humor is oddly familiar. Thom’s riffs about God and despair echo early Woody Allen movies — adolescent introspection leavened with highbrow literary references. A creative director at an advertising agency, Thom is a hypochondriac obsessed with his own mortality and, on most days, his virility. Lee is a painter who in midlife is still in revolt against her overly critical Jewish mother. The Paynes live in bohemian ease in Woodstock, N.Y., and lavish their only child with love, worry and tasteful toys. Both Thom and Lee use obscenities in almost every sentence — profanity presumably lends street cred to people who drive S.U.V.s.  There is an inherent problem to trying to make these kind-of-glib, self-absorbed characters sympathetic — their witty asides and self-deprecating jokes aren’t persuasive. Mostly, the happyish few seem tiresomely pretentious. Comedy about the privileged is hard to pull off: it usually requires a stripping down of ego like the kind that happens in a Marine boot camp. Well-to-do protagonists, like raw recruits, have to be broken before they can be built up. “Togetherness” a recent HBO comedy that also bore down on midlife travails, but with a group of showbiz friends in Los Angeles, did exactly that: the main characters were first cut down to size by the most painful humiliations. Thom, whose name seems to deliberately echo that of Thomas Paine, the author of “Common Sense,” is full of righteous indignation and sardonic put-downs about the buzzwords and pieties of the social media generation. He doesn’t like the obsession with “branding” and goes on a tear about how absurd it is that ads for Pepto-Bismol urge consumers to “follow us on Twitter.” Ellen Barkin as Dani, a hardened headhunter, and Bradley Whitford as Jonathan, Thom’s office mentor, are entertainingly coldblooded and opportunistic. There are some amusing moments at the expense of the new generation, especially a pair of young Swedes brought in to wreak change at the firm and who turn every office meeting into a TED talk. “Happyish” begins as “Mad Men” prepares to shut down, and paints itself as a de-romanticization of the advertising business. But Thom’s umbrage doesn’t add up: an ad executive who worries that he is selling out by using Facebook is like a stripper who draws the line at twerking.The other problem is that the show’s satirical targets are not very fresh — it’s hard to find a comedy on television these days that doesn’t make fun of Silicon Valley-speak, social media and the outdatedness of AOL email accounts. “Veep” and “Silicon Valley” on HBO or even “Younger” on TV Land do it with much more wit and imagination.“Happyish” tries to lighten the mood with fantasy sequences: Thom, in particular, has imaginary confrontations with the Geico gecko and other characters from advertising brands (in the first episode, he has sex with an elderly Keebler elf), and those moments strain to seem provocative.“Happyish” is clever, but it’s so enamored of its own cleverness that it forgets to be funny. Advertisement