By SAM ROBERTSAPRIL 23, 2015
THIS month’s 50th-birthday celebrations of New York’s landmarks law often attribute the historic preservation movement solely to the backlash over the bulldozing of Pennsylvania Station in the early 1960s. But, as an edifying new exhibition at the Museum of the City of New York demonstrates, fears that the city was flagrantly burying its patrimony go back much further, to at least the 1890s, when City Hall itself was threatened with demolition.Defending that nearly century-old palatial gem in Lower Manhattan, Andrew H. Green, the urban visionary who became the father of Greater New York, declared at the time, “Its presence tends to keep alive associations that are near to very many of our citizens, a visible landmark, an object lesson to the people, that should not be destroyed.” (Its defenders worried with reason. In 1812, the original Federal Hall, where George Washington was inaugurated, was razed after hardly a whimper.)New York is neither Brasilia, forged full grown from the jungle, nor Bruges, frozen in amber.Landfilling aside, New York has not expanded its boundaries much since 1898, when Green finally consolidated the separate jurisdictions in the metropolitan area into what became the five boroughs. The challenge: how to accommodate a growing population in a finite geography.The illuminating exhibition, “Saving Place: 50 Years of New York City Landmarks,” complemented by a handsome book of the same name (from the Monacelli Press) and designed by Studio Joseph, suggests that the experiment in preservation largely succeeded in reconciling a four-century historical legacy with the imperative to recycle real estate perpetually as New York lurchingly matured into a global city.Advertisement“New York’s future is based on a mix of old and new,” said Donald Albrecht, the museum’s curator of architecture and design.AdvertisementIt seems particularly appropriate that “Saving Place” opened Tuesday, the week after Susan Henshaw Jones, the museum’s director, announced that she would retire at the end of the year. Not only has she restored the museum to fiscal health while seeking to broaden its cultural reach, but since the 1970s, when the Lindsay administration fought to save the vacant Custom House on Bowling Green, she has also been among those New Yorkers at the forefront of historic preservation.Which is one of the points that Mr. Albrecht presents in the timeline that flanks the 2,600-square-foot main-floor gallery. Going back to Andrew Green, if preservation has succeeded it has been because of the legal muscle that eventually empowered the grass-roots campaigns led by civic figures like Jacqueline Onassis, Brendan Gill, Ada Louise Huxtable, Barbaralee Diamonstein Spielvogel, Fred Papert and Kent Barwick.Floating above the gallery are sweeping aerial photographs by Iwan Baan, framed by quotations, including the admonition by Ms. Huxtable, a groundbreaking New York Times architecture critic, that society will be “judged not by the monuments we build but by the ones we have destroyed.”One long table in the middle of the room demonstrates the ways new buildings, like the Rose Center for Earth and Space at the American Museum of Natural History or the expansion of the Jewish Museum on Fifth Avenue, can either contrast with or conform to landmarks architecturally. Another explores the ways historic structures are restored or retrofitted and how landmarks like the Jefferson Market Courthouse in Greenwich Village have been adapted to new uses (in its case, a library).As Prof. Andrew S. Dolkart, co-curator of “Saving Place” and director of Columbia University’s historic preservation program, puts it, “The exhibition shows that landmarking and preservation are not about antiquarianism or freezing the past.”In photographs, blueprints, videos (ghostly visions of the late, great Pennsylvania Station, whose demolition hastened the landmarks law; Isaac Stern speaking about the vitality of Carnegie Hall; excerpts from “Our Vanishing Legacy,” a pioneering 1961 television documentary; Mrs. Onassis testifying on behalf of Grand Central Terminal), the exhibition recalls what was spared and what was not. (As part of the anniversary, a separate exhibition in the Transit Museum’s Gallery Annex at Grand Central celebrates transportation landmarks.)“A key element of the exhibition is the investigation of the battles and losses that led to the law,” Professor Dolkart said. “This is crucial 50 years later, since I think New Yorkers as a whole love the idea of landmarks and landmarking but also take it for granted and do not realize how difficult it was to get where we are and how easy it would be to lose it.”AdvertisementImagine that Carnegie Hall had been replaced by that ruby-red tower depicted in a rendering on the gallery wall. Original Marcel Breuer prototypes to supplant Grand Central actually make the Pan Am (now MetLife) Building look good.Even with a landmarks law, the Singer Building, the Ziegfeld Theater and the old Metropolitan Opera House were lost because, at the time, they weren’t considered worth preserving. (The official criteria: A site must be at least 30 years old and provide “a special character or special historical or aesthetic interest or value.”)In the book “Saving Place,” the architect Robert A. M. Stern cites the bureaucratic mixup that led the City Council in 2003 to overturn the landmark designation of the Cathedral Church of St. John the Divine. “We need keystone cops, not Keystone Cops,” he wrote.Later, the commission’s jurisdiction was thankfully extended to interiors (the New York Public Library, Radio City Music Hall) and to scenic landscapes (Central Park).Still later, fights were lost and won to save Broadway theaters. Proposed looming towers (over the New-York Historical Society and St. Bartholomew’s Episcopal Church) were rejected because, contextually, they dwarfed adjoining landmarks that had already been designated.“There is a difference between accommodating change and approving desecration,” Mr. Stern said.On two wall-mounted iPads, visitors can explore the more than 1,300 individual landmarks already designated by the commission (in all, 114 historic districts include 33,000 landmark properties, as well as 117 interior landmarks and 10 scenic landmarks).At 50, a middle-aged commission has no shortage of challenges: religious institutions seeking more flexibility to modernize or capitalize on their real estate holdings; a dusty and dormant backlog of cases. The thrust of the exhibition, though, like the city itself, is about what lies ahead, a promising but uncertain destiny, depending on how conscientiously the Landmarks Preservation Commission balances its responsibilities to the past and to the future. “ ‘Saving Place,’ ,” said Ms. Jones, the museum director, “establishes landmarks as a key to urban dynamism, not as some fuddy-duddy concept. These are living, vital buildings.”“Saving Place: 50 Years of New York City Landmarks” continues through Sept. 13 at the Museum of the City of New York, 1220 Fifth Avenue, at 103rd Street; 212-534-1672; info@mcny.org. A version of this review appears in print on April 24, 2015, on Page C31 of the New York edition with the headline: Half a Century of Victories and Demolitions.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.