AdvertisementSupported byBy Alastair MacaulayNo choreographer alive has a higher reputation for musicality than Mark Morris; and that reputation — despite several blunders along the way — has been well earned over more than 30 years of marvelously eclectic creativity. From the Baroque to American modernism, from Monteverdi to Stravinsky, from Stephen Foster to jazz, his dances have brought music to meet dance in ways that have expanded our appreciation of the alchemy that these two arts can achieve together. And he is singularly, courageously, committed to live music in a field where, for economic reasons, recordings are increasingly employed.His current five-performance season at the Brooklyn Academy of Music has two programs; the first, which opened on Wednesday evening, is impressively and characteristically diverse. “Whelm,” a world premiere to Debussy, and New York’s second view of “Words” (new last autumn and set to 18 of Mendelssohn’s 48 “Songs Without Words”) are sandwiched by two items to music by Lou Harrison, a composer whose music I have come to regard, thanks to successive Morris works, as an American Janacek, marvelously engaging in his connection of modernist imagination and folk vitality. This musical range apart, what’s exceptional in this program is its demonstration of the varied visions and musicalities to which these scores prompt this choreographer.In “Words,” he ties every movement to a note. The piece’s charm lies in its odd choices of simple-seeming movements and in its range of rhythmic accentuations within apparently innocent meters. But its structure is too straggly to suit a piece of such stylistic limitation, and the charm borders on faux-naïf cuteness. (This is more apparent in this all-Morris program; its world premiere opened a Fall for Dance quadruple bill of different dance genres.) By contrast, “Whelm” is often free from individual notes; and here Mr. Morris seems to be meeting the music primarily in terms of imaginative drama. “Whelm” is one of his bizarre dreamscapes; it borders on nightmare and carries suggestions of death. It’s set to three spellbinding piano pieces by Debussy: “Des Pas sur la Neige” (“Some Steps on the Snow”), “Étude Pour les Notes Répétées” (“Study for Repeated Notes,” 1915), and “La Cathédrale Engloutie” (“The Sunken Cathedral”); the first and third of these are from the 1909-10 Preludes.The stage is dark; so is the dancers’ attire. Lighting (by Nick Kolin) is subtle and dim; on one side, a shadowy object, like a short wall, is silhouetted. We might be in one of Robert Rauschenberg’s black paintings, and, in one sphinx-like pose, the choreography fleetingly evokes Merce Cunningham’s “Winterbranch” (1964), which Rauschenberg designed with black costumes and makeup, and with comparably obscure lighting. But Mr. Morris’s work is more pointedly surreal. Its four dancers seem to come from at least three different realms; costumes are by Elizabeth Kurtzman. Dallas McMurray, who emerges as this work’s unknowable central figure, is hooded; Chelsea Acree, like an early-20th-century widow, wears a black veil and a stiffly skirted outfit. Aaron Loux and Maile Okemura wear body-tight tunics and leggings of black and somber maroon. These characters move along different paths. In “Des Pas sur la Neige,” the two men, their backs to us, progress laboriously away from us, one walking, the other clinging to his heels like a black shadow. Very slowly, Ms. Acree crosses at the back; for a long time she seems in an entirely separate zone. As “Whelm” progresses, Mr. McMurray is visited or haunted by the other three; and the initially pedestrian movement opens up to include sequences of spectral virtuosity. (Mr. Loux’s diagonals of jumps and turns make a particular impression, and Mr. McMurray’s traveling spins come as a real surprise.) Is that Mr. McMurray’s death we see at the end, from behind?This is a mysterious, ambiguous, compelling composition (though the final “Cathédrale Engloutie” music surely suggests grand architecture and religious ritual in a way that Mr. Morris here bypasses). Mr. Morris only occasionally ventures into fantasy dramas this bleak; many dancegoers will be startled by what seems a new departure. The program opens with “Pacific” (1995), an atmospherically energetic pure-dance work set to the third and fourth movements of Mr. Harrison’s Trio for Violin, Cello, and Piano. (Mr. Morris made this for San Francisco Ballet, with women dancing on point, and it has been danced by other ballet companies. Only this year has it entered his own group’s repertory, with dancers of both sexes in slippers.) Both men and women wear flowing full-length skirts (costumes are by Martin Pakledinaz); the men are bare-chested. You can see Mr. Morris’s delight in the clean lines of ballet and in making subtle permutations of its academic vocabulary. My head is still full of one particular, repeated leap in which the body changes angle: as it starts, one leg is extended sideways, but then torso and hip pivot so that the same raised straight-pointing leg is now behind the dancer as he or she lands. It’s not so complex a jump; but here each time Mr. Morris’s dancers make its accentuation mint-fresh. Torsos in this dance move with the same power as limbs; energy is open.The closing “Grand-Duo” (1993, set to Mr. Harrison’s work of that name for piano and violin) is one of Mr. Morris’s four greatest and most multilayered works. The movement seems at different times neurological, neoprimitivist, military. It’s both savage and orderly, comic and bleak, poignant and exciting. Here, as throughout, the 17 permanent members of the Mark Morris Dance Group and one apprentice are exemplary, marvels of commitment and honesty.They are matched in this program by the three instrumentalists of the MMDG Ensemble: the music director, Colin Fowler (piano for all four works, always a crucial Morris component); Georgy Valchev (violin for three); and Wolfram Koessel (cello for one). In a more enlightened artistic climate, Mr. Morris would have an orchestra permanently attached to his dance company, and would have New York seasons that lasted weeks rather than days. As it is — while many of the world’s ballet companies perform with large orchestras churning out tawdry musical repertories to which the choreography’s connection is superficial or coarse — this handful of musicians work with these 17 dancers to create a sight-sound fusion as rewarding as may be found anywhere in dance today.The Mark Morris Dance Group performs through Sunday at the Howard Gilman Opera House, Brooklyn Academy of Music, 30 Lafayette Avenue, at Ashland Place, Fort Greene; 718-636-4100, bam.org. Advertisement