AdvertisementSupported byWeekend MiserBy Joshua BaroneTake a moment to wrap your head around this Russian doll of a concept: a famous Broadway musical, within a hypothetical film adaptation of it, within a show about imagining the movie that could have been. Still there?Now it might be easier to understand the intentionally complicated title “the feath3r theory Presents: Andy Warhol’s 15 (Color Me, Warhol).” A hybrid of theater and dance from the choreographer Raja Feather Kelly, it runs through Saturday at Dixon Place on the Lower East Side of Manhattan. Mr. Kelly, who is openly obsessed with Warhol, says he thinks the artist could have made the perfect film version of “A Chorus Line,” that monologue-laden stage musical about dancers’ sharing their stories during an audition. Each principal character gets, as Warhol might say, his or her 15 minutes. A film adaptation of “A Chorus Line” already exists, but Mr. Kelly wanted to explore the idea of Warhol’s making his own were he living in 2015. Rather than simply presenting “A Chorus Line” for the Twitter generation, “Color Me, Warhol” focuses on the process of remaking the musical: Mr. Kelly’s research, his meditations on Warhol and an actual audition that unfolds onstage. (The outcome changes from performance to performance.) Above all, this is a show about modern pop culture: “The Hunger Games,” Lana Del Rey, Kanye West, Miley Cyrus (expect twerking), Daft Punk and “RuPaul’s Drag Race” are among the cultural references too numerous to count. (Friday and Saturday at 7 p.m.; 161A Chrystie Street, near Delancey Street; 212-219-0736; dixonplace.org; $16 in advance, $20 at the door $12 seniors and students.)JAZZ SAMPLER IN QUEENSOn Saturday, the Queens Jazz OverGround will present the musical equivalent of a hop-on, hop-off bus tour with 10 hours of workshops and performances for its third annual Spring Jazz Fest at Flushing Town Hall. The day is divided into halves that cater to different audiences. Visitors can come and go as they please. The first six hours are about education and showcasing student musicians, with a Louis Armstrong workshop for children, master classes and performances by jazz combos from local high schools. If professional musicians are more your speed, a series of seven 50-minute sets by Queens-based ensembles begins at 5:30 p.m. Concertgoers will have to choose between concurrent performances in Flushing Town Hall’s gallery and theater, with the exception of Rufus Reid’s set at 9 p.m. Mr. Reid, a bass player, is headlining the festival, and he’ll be joined by a trumpet player, a guitarist and a drummer to close out the musical marathon. (Noon to 10 p.m.; 137-35 Northern Boulevard, at Linden Place, Queens; 718-463-7700; queensjazz.org.)Advertisement