AdvertisementSupported byInside ArtBy Jori Finkel, Randy Kennedy and Hilarie M. SheetsWilshire Boulevard Temple, famous for its ornate 1929 synagogue, is trying to create another Los Angeles landmark, negotiating with the Pritzker Prize-winning Dutch architect Rem Koolhaas to design a building next door for special events. It would be open for use by the public as well as by congregants.“Architecture is a form of prayer,” said Rabbi Steven Z. Leder of the Reform congregation, which is in Koreatown. He said the intention was to create “an inspiring gathering place for the many different communities in our neighborhood, which may well be the most ethnically diverse neighborhood west of Brooklyn.”With his usual theoretical flair, Mr. Koolhaas has proposed a dynamic, trapezoidal five-story building that leans toward Wilshire Boulevard. Along with office spaces, it would have a large, vaulted ground-level banquet hall for receptions like bar mitzvahs and an open rooftop space level with the temple’s Byzantine-style dome. Other features also complement the quasi-Moorish temple, like the constellations of windows set at different angles in the events space to create an intricate, Moroccan-inspired pattern.Mr. Koolhaas and his firm OMA were recommended for the project by a committee made up of congregation members, including such prominent philanthropists as Erika Glazer, Bruce Karatz, Eli Broad and Tony Pritzker, whose aunt and uncle founded the Pritzker Prize. The group considered more than a dozen architectural firms and commissioned four of them to submit detailed proposals.Once known as the “Temple of the Stars,” the synagogue was a Hollywood production from the start. Albert, Harry and Jack Warner — better known as the Warner Brothers — commissioned an epic mural by Hugo Ballin depicting Jewish history from the time of Genesis to 1929. Louis B. Mayer, the head of MGM, donated stained-glass windows. The sanctuary was modeled after movie theaters, eliminating a central aisle through the pews to preserve the best seats in the house.But the building did not hold up well over the decades, with plaster chunks falling from the ceiling and the mural cracking. By 2013, Rabbi Leder had raised about $120 million to complete restoration of the structure and to begin expansion of the campus. The congregation has not yet pledged money specifically for the Koolhaas project. JORI FINKELThe performances and installations of the artist Joan Jonas — like the looping quality of memory itself — rarely exist as discrete events. Instead they echo and repeat and seem to collapse into the future: A trip provides the inspiration for a 1976 performance, parts of which are carried into a 1994 installation, which is then reimagined a decade later, losing and gaining things along the way. “Basically, my work is a way of storytelling,” she has said.Ms. Jonas, a pioneering performance and video artist, will represent the United States at the Venice Biennale next month with an installation of newly conceived video and sculptural work that will fill the Palladian-style American pavilion. But she said she had always intended a performance to follow during the run of the biennale, which continues through November. And now performances at the Teatro Piccolo Arsenale have been set for July 20, 21 and 22, of works that will include new music by her longtime collaborator, the composer and pianist Jason Moran. In a telephone interview from Venice, Ms. Jonas said she was only now beginning to think about the performance, as she works furiously to complete the pavilion installation, organized by the M.I.T. List Visual Arts Center and titled “They Come to Us Without a Word.”“I’ve been rolling a few things around in my head, but I won’t really even be able to start until I’m back in New York in May,” she said of the performance, which will be called “They Come to Us Without a Word, II.” She added: “I’ve never performed in Venice, so I’m looking forward to that. And I like the theater. It’s a nice, big, rough stage, which is a good place to work.”Ms. Jonas usually holds her cards close to her vest about new performances, and has spoken recently about a desire, at 78, to make her work more spontaneous and “precarious.” Asked if she could say anything about what she was thinking or planning, she would only allow: “I’m sure I’ll shoot some footage here in Venice. Whether I’ll use it or not is another question.” RANDY KENNEDY Printed Matter Inc., a nonprofit organization devoted to the distribution and appreciation of books by artists, is set to move in September from its cramped storefront on 10th Avenue in Chelsea, where it was battered by Hurricane Sandy in 2012, to a former freight terminal and warehouse nearby on 11th Avenue and West 26th Street that will double its space. Founded in 1976 by the conceptual artist Sol LeWitt and the art critic Lucy Lippard, the organization lost more than 9,000 books and sustained significant water damage to its archives during the storm.Designed pro bono by Handel Architects, which designed the National September 11 Memorial, the new double-story ground-floor space will have a dedicated exhibition gallery — a first for the organization — as well as an expanded bookstore with room for 15,000 titles on the shelves, a public reading room on the upper-level mezzanine, flexible space for performances and public programming, and, of course, flood-proof storage.“Even though people run around saying the book is dead, we’ve seen the interest in artist publications — both among artists and the general public — has really risen,” said Philip Aarons, the board president of Printed Matter. In 2006 the group introduced an annual art book fair in New York that drew 6,000 visitors; last year 35,000 people attended. Its success spawned a companion fair in Los Angeles in 2013 that has more than doubled in attendance, with 35,000 visitors this year. Printed Matter offers its entire inventory of about 15,000 titles by more than 6,000 artists at mostly modest prices, in line with the founders’ belief that artists’ books were part of a more accessible and egalitarian vision of art.“Even though those Ed Ruscha books that were $5 in the 1970s are now $10,000 today, that democratic principle is still important to us,” Mr. Aarons said, adding, “We have new $5 books.” HILARIE M. SHEETSAdvertisement