AdvertisementSupported byBy Eve M. KahnA new museum on the outskirts of Charleston, S.C., will focus on the lives of slaves owned by middle-class farmers.The McLeod Plantation, which opens to the public on Saturday, is set on 37 acres a few miles from a downtown wharf where newly arrived Africans were sold. At times the marshy McLeod property was so unprofitable to farm that it was deemed a waste of investment and nicknamed “pickpocket place.” It went through a half-dozen owners before the Civil War, including several slave traders.Black soldiers from Massachusetts lived there during the war, and freedmen moved there afterward. Until the 1990s, a dense cluster consisting of a colonnaded main house, agricultural outbuildings and slave cabins was kept intact in private hands. In the last two decades, various institutions debated what to do with it; sports fields and a fire station and police station were proposed for the site.Now, the Charleston County Park and Recreation Commission has turned this relatively modest property into a museum that stands in contrast to more lavish plantations nearby, including Drayton Hall, which belonged to politicians. (At the site of Charleston’s slave-trading wharf, a museum of African-American history is planned.)The McLeod site “was much more representative of what would have been the norm,” said Shawn Halifax, the cultural history interpretation coordinator for the park commission.A few antiques will be on view, including a 19th-century cotton gin that was patented by Fones McCarthy, a New Yorker who became a slave owner in Alabama. The largely unfurnished buildings, Mr. Halifax said, are meant to encourage visitors “to have their own almost spiritual connection to the site, without it being cluttered by things.”Archaeological artifacts including German stoneware shards, British coat buttons and Spanish coins have turned up on the property over the years. People have also dug there without permission. “This site has had its share of looters, we suspect,” Mr. Halifax said.Archival research has yielded a few full names of McLeod slaves. In 1862, a field hand named William Dawson ran away and joined the United States Navy. He served on a gunboat and a frigate and then returned after the war to farm the land where he had been a captive. Most of the other slaves at the plantation are known only by first names like Patience, Cephas or Syphax.“We have years’ worth of research to do here before we get a complete picture,” Mr. Halifax said.Artifacts traceable to Charleston slaves occasionally come on the market because the slave system there had an unusual practice common nowhere else in the South. Local silversmiths and watchmakers made copper badges for the areas’s slaves, identifying the workers’ main skills but not their names, so that the local tax authorities could track which ones were being rented to work temporarily for different owners. On May 18, Heritage Auctions in Dallas will offer a private collection of about 30 badges.Starting bids are expected to range from $600 to $4,000 each for metal disks, squares and octagons made from 1800 to 1860 for fishermen, fruit sellers, mechanics and porters. Collectors prefer badges with legible dates and lettering along with signs of what the auction catalog describes as “pleasing brown, green, and red patina.”ABSTRACTION AT GARDEN FAIRAt this year’s Antique Garden Furniture Fair, which opens Friday at the New York Botanical Garden, abstract sculptures are making inroads among the traditional arrays of nymph and animal statues and scrollwork benches. A handful of the three dozen dealers exhibiting at the annual show, which has been held for two decades, are bringing modern works.A cratered bronze slab weighing a few thousand pounds (priced at $275,000) will be installed at the stand of David Bell Antiques from Washington. It was designed around 1970 by Valerian Rybar, a Bosnian-born interior designer who catered to members of the Rothschild and du Pont families. Mr. Rybar had it hung over his bed in his Manhattan apartment between two statues of 16th-century Spanish bishops. Tom Preston, an owner of David Bell Antiques, said the slab has “beautiful depth and texture and color and raw edges.”Village Braider Antiques in Plymouth, Mass., will offer two sculptures from the 1960s by Claire Harootunian with six-foot-high stacks of rusted iron grids and disks ($3,000 each). Brennan & Mouilleseaux Antiques in Northfield, Conn., will bring an eroded stone sculpture (about $1,500) that “looks something like an oil slick,” Tim Brennan, an owner of the company, wrote in an email message. It is dated 1970 and incised with artists’ initials that have not yet been identified.PRENDERGASTS OFFEREDThe artists Maurice and Charles Prendergast lived together in Boston and New York for much of their lives. The two brothers worked symbiotically: In addition to painting, Charles created carved and gilded frames for Maurice’s canvases. After Maurice’s death in 1924, Charles married a young French hotel worker named Eugénie Van Kemmel. She died in 1994 after decades of promoting the Prendergasts’ works and donating or bequeathing hundreds of them to Williams College.Friends and colleagues also acquired some of her paintings and frames. On Saturday, Stair auction house in Hudson, N.Y., will offer four paintings by the Prendergasts that had belonged to an executor of her estate, the art historian Joseph T. Butler, who died in 2013. The works, including scenes of beachgoers and picnickers, have estimates ranging from $10,000 to $100,000 each. Stair will also offer two gilded frames attributed to Charles, estimated at $2,000 to $5,000 apiece.Williams College has been digitizing its Prendergast holdings, which range from major canvases to hotel receipts, Christmas cards and gilding tools. Kevin M. Murphy, the college museum’s curator of American art, said he wanted to keep track of where the Stair lots end up. “We do like to make sure we have up-to-date provenance,” he said of the artists’ legacy.Advertisement