AdvertisementSupported byFriday FileBy Mary Jo Murphy107 YEARS AGOGo on, hazard a guess about the subject of a front-page headline in The New York Times that included the words “smuggling plot,” “art works” and “Mrs. Gardner.”It was about the biggest art heist in American history, right?The brazen one at the Isabella Stewart Gardner Museum in Boston 25 years ago, when two men posing as police officers made off with 13 works — a Vermeer! three Rembrandts! — and vanished? (A Connecticut man was arrested last week in connection with the heist. The F.B.I. believes he might know where the loot is. So far, nothing.)But no, the headline is from 1908, five years after Mrs. Gardner turned her collection into a museum, and it concerned her continuing tax woes.The article began: “The successful efforts of Mrs. “Jack” Gardner of Boston to bring $80,000 worth of art treasures into the United States without payment of $30,000 duty and the subsequent discovery of the affair by the United States Treasury officials created a sensation in Chicago to-day.”It seems Mrs. Gardner had shipped the treasures from Paris to a friend in London who brought them to the United States, labeling them “household goods.” An official quoted in the article said that he couldn’t understand why the friend “should lend herself to Mrs. Gardner in such an affair as this. She surely must have known Mrs. Gardner’s reputation as a defier of the Custom House authorities, and that Mrs. Gardner is almost constantly under the eye of some special agent, lest she smuggle her valuable collections into the United States.”Mrs. Gardner was at the forefront of a group of wealthy American collectors, including Henry Clay Frick and J. Pierpont Morgan, who had been snapping up European art for years. In 1911, they were the subject of an article in The Times reporting on various fruitless measures that irate Europeans were taking to retain their treasures “since the art-lust struck the New World.”Quoting from The Times of London, the article said: “The new American millionaires are much the most dangerous raiders, because they are richer than anybody has ever been before, and because there are enough of them to set up that conflict of rival vanities which, in a case of this kind, is the surest way to make a market.”Mrs. Gardner’s vanity from the beginning had apparently extended to an aversion to paying taxes. In 1902, she was quoted in a Times article as saying, “This question of duties on works of art is nothing more than a question of robbery.” Calling for a repeal, she said, “If J. P. Morgan or any other public-spirited citizen gives a single object of art to the Metropolitan Museum in New York or any other public institution he or they should be examined by a commission in lunacy.”The next year, Mrs. Gardner opened her own museum. “She is to throw the museum open to the public Monday, in response to a gentle hint from the Collector of Customs,” The Times reported in 1903 in recounting “the last private entertainment before the public gets a chance to look at the place.”To this day an appreciative public looks, but in the case of the stolen works, only at empty frames. MARY JO MURPHYAdvertisement