By JON PARELESOCT. 18, 2015
Everything goes precisely askew in songs by Weaves, a band from Toronto that gained and boggled fans at its five CMJ shows, most of them at Pianos. The band’s singer, Jasmyn Burke, and guitarist, Morgan Waters, write songs that take left turn after left turn.Slamming drumbeats and distortion-edged guitar riffs might promise basic punk, except that the melodies Ms. Burke sings are jaggedly chromatic. A rocker starts out at a midtempo swagger, but instead of building up, it thins out to a teasing dialogue of voice and guitar, then explodes. A song with a twangy, almost country guitar line stays stubbornly slow, lurches into a chorus with a scream, deliberately comes unsprung and returns to the twang, maybe even slower.Then there are the lyrics, which relish various states of derangement and paradox. “I can’t be left alone,” Ms. Burke sang. “I can’t be left alone anymore” — with the guitar joining her for the little melodic curlicue of “anymore.” Or, as the guitar and bass pick through quick, interlocking staccato triplets, a question fit for a logician: “Do you think I might be lying in the next sentence?”The construction is cerebral, but the songs come across as uproarious. There’s high-speed slapstick in the way the music suddenly shifts tempo and how Mr. Waters’s guitar lines wriggle and jab. And there’s tart amusement in Ms. Burke’s voice, which has some Erykah Badu jazziness and some of the orneriness of Karen O of the Yeah Yeah Yeahs.Onstage, Ms. Burke was cleareyed and wily: calm between manic outbursts, theatrically pouting or flirting and making every non sequitur fully plausible. On Friday night, finishing the set with a dissonant sprint of a song called “Motorcycle,” she stepped down from the stage and calmly backed into the audience, not looking back as listeners scrambled aside. Then she raised her long microphone cord and had fans gleefully cross underneath it, back and forth, as Mr. Waters pushed his guitar into feedback. It was the kind of charged, club-size indie-rock moment that had one fan shouting between songs, “You won CMJ!”A version of this article appears in print on October 19, 2015, on Page C2 of the New York edition with the headline: Sonic Slapstick  in Shifting Tempos.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.