Season 1, Episode 12: “Lallybroch”The most remarkable thing “Outlander” does every week is take experiences that its audience is used to seeing through a modern lens and reimagining them through a historical one. In “Lallybroch,” this tactic is used to examine the rite of passage of returning home after a long time away, when Jamie and Claire finally arrive at Jamie’s childhood home. For Jamie, the experience is fraught. For Claire, her challenge is to survive the challenges of meeting the in-laws.We’ve all seen these stories hundreds of times in series set in the modern era, but viewing the experiences through the filter of “Outlander” brings new insight to tired tropes.Upon his return to Lallybroch, Jamie transforms into a version of himself that is largely unfamiliar to his wife. He speaks of what is proper and what he is entitled to as laird, seemingly indifferent to the lengths his sister, Jenny, and her husband, Ian, have gone to keep the estate running in his four-year absence. When Claire tries to correct his boorish behavior, she is instructed, essentially, to be seen and not heard, and told that her complaints could be addressed privately.What’s most interesting about this facet of Jamie is how seamlessly it integrates into the character we’ve come to know. Being stubborn and willful can be charming, but it doesn’t take much for these qualities to curdle into uncompromising egotism. What doesn’t make sense is why this behavior seems to manifest after his arrival home. Jamie’s had nothing but glowing things to say about Lallybroch and his beloved sister, so why act so callously now?In time, it’s revealed that Jamie’s attitude is the result of something familiar to many people in the same situation. When young, it’s easy to imagine what your life will look like when you’re grown. As a child, you have ideas about how you’ll act, what life will entail and what it will feel like to be an adult. Once grown, however, you come to realize that often those youthful expectations aren’t reasonable or even attainable. In the meantime, it takes time to adjust the parameters by which you measure your own success and, in some cases, what form maturity takes for you.What haunts Jamie, then, is the memory of his father. He recounts to Claire the last time he saw his father, shortly before his second whipping, and how his father keeled over dead when it seemed as if Jamie had been killed. So in addition to playing out his misguided version of the way his father would expect him to perform as laird, Jamie is also struggling with intense guilt over the manner of his father’s death, thinking that if he had stayed out of trouble, his father might still be alive.In the meantime, Claire struggles to find purchase on which to build a meaningful relationship with Jenny, who is rightfully suspicious of this English wife who seems so ill-suited for her new life as lady of Lallybroch. Claire tries her best to make nice but is at a loss for navigating the situation, particularly in light of continuing tensions between Jamie and Jenny. Eventually, Claire finds solace with Ian, whose advice about remaining stalwart in the face of Fraser mulishness spurs her to give Jamie a stern talking to about his behavior and ultimately brings him back around to being himself.Claire and Jamie struggle throughout the episode to come to terms with the delicate ecosystem that is marriage. It appears it’s no easier to be newlyweds in the 18th century than it is now and that there’s a steep learning curve for even the most compatible of couples. Ideally, Jamie will soon realize the futility of trying to force Claire into behaving like a “proper” 18th-century woman, and Claire will understand that she may have to alter her behavior a bit to not constantly draw attention to the fact that she’s an outlander. But, then, no one’s first year of marriage is perfect, and all young partnerships involve compromise.Perhaps the single most relatable trope used in “Lallybroch” is how haunted Jenny and Jamie are by their past. What happened on the day they last met, when they were both set upon by Captain Randall, laid open wounds on the psyches of them both, wounds that time and misinformation transformed into scars as deep and unwieldy as those on Jamie’s back.Jamie accuses Jenny of bearing not one, but two, bastard children, and she begrudges him the years he spent away, with no indication of his whereabouts or well being. They lash out at each other because they cannot forgive themselves for the sins they feel they’ve perpetrated against each other. If they cannot find a way to navigate their memories, they will surely be consumed by them.It takes time and some pointed prodding by their spouses, but the two finally reconnect while standing over their father’s grave, admitting how guilty they each felt, not just for the pain of the other but for the death of their father. At heart, Jenny and Jamie are still the children they were when they were young, play-acting through their lives and attempting adulthood through approximation, just like any of us watching their exploits now.Throughout “Lallybroch,” “Outlander” manages to take routine stories and repurpose them into something new, merely by putting its own spin on them. It shines new light on tired tales of matrimony and family drama and misguided expectations, making something intriguing out of repurposed elements. Though lagging at times and often trapped in the needless drama of simple misunderstandings, the episode serves the necessary function of building relationships required to move forward and round out the characters at its center in the most interesting way it knows how.Other GossipThere’s a lot of new information introduced about Captain Randall this episode, largely surrounding his sexual appetites. Jenny reveals that in the process of trying to rape her, Randall was unable to get aroused, a matter that she met with laughter. This enraged him and exacerbated the problem, until eventually sexual assault was avoided, even if it was merely replaced by physical assault. Jamie also reveals that Randall offered to forgo his second lashing if he would instead “give himself over” to the captain, lending credence to the theory that Randall had always had a sexual interest in him. As clear as it is that Randall is a sadist, it would seem that the show is also solidifying the idea that he’s also a repressed homosexual, as supported by his repeated instructions to Jenny that she turn away from him as he tried to rouse himself.While watching Jenny deal with her assailant is strangely mesmerizing, it’s worth noting that this is another threat of sexual assault-actual assault of a woman that ends up focused primarily on how Jamie feels about it. For a show so focused on being female-friendly, it continues to be most concerned with how Jamie deals with the trauma both Claire and Jenny encounter, as opposed to how the women themselves feel about it.Jamie is a terrible laird, giving back the much-needed rents to the tenants and generally running things not as they should be run but as he theorized his father would run them. He also seems unable to accept that Jenny and Ian and Lallybroch as a whole were functioning quite well without his intervention and declines to take into consideration their wisdom and experience. Let’s hope he’ll keep his hubris in check moving forward.