AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn Shattuck8 P.M. (Showtime) BOYHOOD (2014) Starting in 2002, Richard Linklater began to film four characters — a boy (Ellar Coltrane), then 6; his sister (Lorelei Linklater, Mr. Linklater’s daughter); and their parents (the Oscar-winning Patricia Arquette and Ethan Hawke, in a nominated role) — over 12 consecutive years, composing the script as the movie progressed. “What emerged from those dozen years is a series of meticulously textured and structured scenes set to the rhythm of life,” Manohla Dargis wrote in The New York Times. Siblings argue. A mother struggles with men, paying the bills and earning several college degrees. An estranged father roars into his children’s lives in a 1968 GTO. “The story in ‘Boyhood’ is blissfully simple: A child grows up,” Ms. Dargis added about this film, which also earned Oscar nominations for best picture, directing, original screenplay and editing. “This, along with the modesty of its physical production — its humble rooms, quiet moments, ordinary lives — can obscure Mr. Linklater’s ambitions and the greatness of his achievement.” But in his masterpiece, she said, “he both captures moments in time and relinquishes them as he moves from year to year. He isn’t fighting time but embracing it in all its glorious and agonizingly fleeting beauty.”NOON (13) THE OPEN MIND Alexander Heffner interviews Neal K. Katyal, a former acting solicitor general in the Obama administration, about the Supreme Court.8 P.M. (Discovery) VALLEY UPRISING (2014) The network’s Elevation Weekend begins with a documentary that chronicles the evolution of rock climbing in Yosemite National Park, including the recent escapades of Alex Honnold and Dean Potter, who climb barehanded and without ropes in a technique called free soloing. Last year the men, along with three other professional climbers, lost their sponsorships by Clif Bar for undertaking risks the company said it would no longer support. At 10, “Everest Avalanche Tragedy” revisits the April 2014 avalanche on the Khumbu Icefall on Mount Everest, which killed 13 Sherpa guides and left three missing — the highest known death toll in a single day in the mountain’s history.9 P.M. (CUNY) I’M GOING HOME (2001) A celebrated 75-year-old French actor (Michel Piccoli) leaves the stage after portraying a dying monarch in Eugène Ionesco’s “Exit the King”; learns that his wife, daughter and son-in-law have been killed in a car crash; and quietly carries on. Then, while he is filming “Ulysses” with an American director (John Malkovich), the realization of what has happened sinks in. “Old age doesn’t automatically confer wisdom and artistic profundity,” Stephen Holden wrote in The Times. “But when it does, as in the case of the Portuguese-born, Paris-based director Manoel de Oliveira, who is still making movies at 92, what can emerge is a remarkable mixture of appreciation and sadness, colored with an implacable, cleareyed awareness of looming extinction.” (Mr. de Oliveira was 106 when he died April 2.) He added, “Avoiding even a hint of morbidity or of sentimentality, ‘I’m Going Home’ gives you the steady pulse of life in a beautiful city viewed through the eyes of a character who, in spite of tragic loss and increasing decrepitude, knows in his bones that he is one of the luckiest men alive.”9 P.M. (Starz) OUTLANDER Jamie (Sam Heughan) returns to Lallybroch, his family home, with Claire (Caitriona Balfe) and tries to persuade her to act like a lady.9 P.M. (BBC America) ORPHAN BLACK The Leda clones are hunted as Project Castor tries to obtain tissue samples from them. But Sarah (Tatiana Maslany) thinks she may have detected a defect that could imperil the lives of Rudy (Ari Millen) and his brothers Seth, Mark and Miller.10 P.M. (HBO) WORLD CHAMPIONSHIP BOXING  The heavyweight champion Wladimir Klitschko (63 wins, 3 losses, 54 knockouts) will defend his title against Bryant Jennings (19 wins, no losses, 10 knockouts) at Madison Square Garden.What’s Streaming NowNICK BROOMFIELD SPOTLIGHT The SundanceNow Doc Club celebrates Mr. Broomfield’s journey through life’s underbelly with nine of his documentaries — among them, “Kurt and Courtney” (1998); “Biggie & Tupac” (2002); and “Aileen Wuornos: The Selling of a Serial Killer” (1993) and its follow-up, “Aileen: Life and Death of a Serial Killer” (2003), which he directed with Joan Churchill. (docclub.com)Advertisement