By BRIAN SEIBERTAPRIL 24, 2015
Just before presenting the debut of her new trio, “White,” at Danspace Project on Thursday, the choreographer Michelle Boulé, dressed elegantly in that color, with her hair frizzed out like a fashion model’s, explained in a French accent that the work addresses things she doesn’t understand, like quantum physics and BioGeometry. The soundtrack, she said, would involve frequencies outside the range of human hearing but nevertheless “in ze room.”Ms. Boulé, a celebrated performer in works by Miguel Gutierrez and others, does not normally speak with a French accent. But even if you didn’t know that, you might have detected the sound of satire, or at least of Ms. Boulé pre-emptively acknowledging the way a dance about “invisible information” might sound pretentious or daft in a traditionally French way.“White” turned out not to be parody, but it was rather insubstantial. Ms. Boulé and her lithe colleagues, Lauren Bakst and Lindsay Clark, looking great in Reid Bartelme’s sophisticated outfits, engaged in some mildly interesting trio activity, playing with synchronization, orientation, foreground and background. Ms. Bakst did a woozy solo, like a ribbon dance without a ribbon. Ms. Clark, having wandered off, squiggled her feet like an absent-minded James Brown. Ms. Boulé, a low-intensity Dionysian, hurled herself around with her head released.Emotion was a spectral presence in “White,” discernible as something withheld or indulged only with protective insincerity. Ms. Bakst, futzing with a portable amplifier, brought a microphone to her lips, as if about to speak, but she didn’t. The soundscore, by Chris Seeds, contained plenty within the range of human hearing: dramatic swellings of white noise as in a poltergeist visit or the inside of a carwash and hints of disco that finally materialized fully as “Emotion,” the 1977 Samantha Sang single in which the lead vocalist is swamped by the backup vocals of Barry Gibb.The dancers synced their lips to the words about absence. Ms. Bakst brought her mike to the mouth of Ms. Clark, who tearily said “thank you, the whole second half I cried.” It was as if she had been moved by some performance, an affecting show of the kind only indirectly present in “White.”“White” continues through Saturday at Danspace Project, 131 East 10th Street, East Village; 866-811-4111, danspaceproject.org.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.