AdvertisementSupported byMusic in ReviewBy Vivien Schweitzer, David Allen and Zachary WoolfeVoices of AscensionChurch of the AscensionThe 25th anniversary concert of the Voices of Ascension chorus and orchestra on Wednesday at the Church of the Ascension in the West Village seemed like a versatility test – a busy lineup of 500 years of choral music from the Renaissance composer Josquin des Prez to new pieces.The choir, conducted by Dennis Keene, has long kept its focus wide, and it demonstrated its flexibility here in an eclectic range of repertory, beginning with the emotive “Shui Diao Ge To” (2004), a setting of a Song dynasty poem of the same name by the Chinese composer Chiayu Hsu. Her piece was juxtaposed with Josquin’s “Ave Maria,” a four-part motet beautifully rendered here by eight members of the chorus.Mr. Keene also chose works the choir has performed in its 25-year history, such as William Byrd’s tender “Justorum Animae” and a vibrant Palestrina motet. The singing was buoyant and often inspired throughout, although there were a few rough edges and muddy textures in Bach’s motet “Singet dem Herrn.”The program included Dobrinka Tabakova’s richly scored “Syng, Hevin Imperiall” (2011), with its rippling organ motifs played by Renée Anne Louprette, who also rendered with flair the organ part in the choir’s full-blooded rendition of Vaughan Williams’s lovely “Lord, Thou Hast Been our Refuge.” Selections by Brahms, Poulenc and Bruckner rounded out the concert, concluding with Ives’ “Psalm 90.” The highlight after intermission was Schoenberg’s “Friede auf Erden,” the contrasting moods of which were conveyed with dramatic conviction. VIVIEN SCHWEITZERPablo Heras-CasadoCarnegie HallConductors build reputations in all kinds of music, but they still cement them in the core, Beethoven-to-Bartok repertoire. Pablo Heras-Casado, now 37 and a musician of considerable promise, made his name in both the ancient and the contemporary. The totems in between have come slowly thus far.So Thursday’s performance of Beethoven’s Fifth Symphony at Carnegie Hall could have been a grand statement. But Mr. Heras-Casado flubbed his lines.His Beethoven is of the early-music variety: Phrasing was curt, timpani were thwacked and vibrato proved elusive. All that’s fair enough, but even by today’s metronome-chasing standards the first movement was a blur, smacked along at such velocity that the strings of the Orchestra of St. Luke’s couldn’t enunciate, let alone build momentum.And that was my problem with this Fifth. It was tersely thrilling, certainly, but it never seemed to go anywhere. Important inner lines vanished in a cloud of speed. Balances didn’t help, favoring the first violins and submerging the woodwinds. Amid all the energy, I missed a sense of process, of development, of Beethoven’s miracle of transformation.Stravinsky’s “Symphonies of Wind Instruments” suited Mr. Heras-Casado’s ear and style much better, and he found an ideal tension between sharp, acerbic bite and a more sultry longing. He drew superb orchestral playing, too, in Shostakovich’s Second Cello Concerto, an inward, reflective work written for Mstislav Rostropovich. The astute cellist Alisa Weilerstein was technically assured, as ever, but sounded merely reticent in a piece that demands ambiguity. DAVID ALLENComposer PortraitsMiller TheaterThe rising composer Anna Clyne is notable for the depth and range of her collaborations with artists in other media, including choreographers and animators. So a Composer Portraits concert focused on her at the Miller Theater at Columbia University on Thursday that featured her music alone (played by Ensemble Signal) perhaps inevitably felt a bit lacking.“Fits + Starts” (2003), a duet of sorts for amplified cello and a pretaped, elaborately processed amalgam of harpsichord and strings, began in a dramatic, lush mode that led to a more quiet, still section. But that journey was slack: One longed for the dancing that accompanied the piece at its premiere.Similarly, the luminous but long-winded chanting of Emily Dickinson’s poetry in Ms. Clyne’s chamber opera “As Sudden Shut,” a work in progress for three female voices and instrumental ensemble, might take on more focus when visual artists, a choreographer and a librettist are added to the mix, as planned. Ms. Clyne’s electroacoustic combinations sometimes give Dickinson a heavy-handed haunted-house feel, just as the prerecorded music box and carousel sounds in “1987” (2008) give off a plodding sense of nostalgia.Best was “Rapture” (2005), in which the sounds of a live clarinetist are processed in real time with the distortion and reverb commonly associated with electric guitars, then joined to a prerecorded track that starts off gently hissing and builds to fierce chaos. (Adrián Sandí was the fearlessly clear soloist.) In an onstage interview with Ms. Clyne, it was revealed that this was a breakup piece, and it bristles. ZACHARY WOOLFEAdvertisement