AdvertisementSupported byBy James R. OestreichZabaglione, that irresistibly sweet and creamy Italian confection, usually crowns a dessert course. But Le Jardin des Voix served it right up front in a feast of mostly Italian music at Alice Tully Hall on Thursday evening, starting with a comic madrigal by Adriano Banchieri from his 1604 collection “Il Zabaione Musicale.” And from there, things grew only more delicious and delightful.Le Jardin des Voix (“The Garden of Voices”), a vocal academy based in Caen, France, was founded in 2002 by William Christie to complement his venerable instrumental group, Les Arts Florissants. Mr. Christie conducted both groups on Thursday, along with the six singers of the current, seventh edition of Le Jardin in a semistaged pastiche, “In an Italian Garden.”The drama, such as it was, could not be taken too seriously. Even more than your typical pastiche – say, “The Enchanted Island” at the Metropolitan Opera in recent years, which Mr. Christie also took a hand in developing – this was a more or less whimsical cut-and-paste. It was tailored less for the edification of the audience than for the benefit of the young singers.“Generally, soloists must adapt to a predefined program,” Le Jardin says on its website, “but with Les Arts Florissants’ young singers’ academy, the reverse occurs; the program is adapted to the individual voices, each piece being carefully chosen to show them off to best advantage.”All this presumes an intimate familiarity with a broad repertory, which Mr. Christie certainly has. And he was abetted here by Paul Agnew, the co-director of the academy and a stage director, and Sophie Daneman, the other stage director, both singers of considerable experience.What resulted was a potted history of vocal music in Italian from Banchieri to – if an encore is fair game – Rossini (the amusingly mincing sextet, “Questo è un nodo avviluppato,” from “La Cenerentola”). The familiar – Handel, Haydn, Mozart — mingled with the likes of Orazio Vecchi, Giaches de Wert and Domenico Natale Sarro, and Alessandro Stradella loomed large.In addition, a little theme was developed around the betrayed and enraged Orlando of Ludovico Ariosto’s epic poem “Orlando Furioso,” who became an operatic stalwart. He was represented here not only by music from operas devoted to him by Vivaldi, Handel and Haydn but also by a de Wert madrigal.The performances were generally as entertaining as they were skilled. Renato Dolcini, an Italian baritone, played the mad scene of Vivaldi’s Orlando to the hilt and would surely have chewed the scenery had there been any.Lucía Martín Cartón, a Spanish soprano, sang Handel’s aria “Lascia la spina” meltingly, and Lea Desandre, a French mezzo-soprano, brought life and beauty to everything she touched.Carlo Vistoli, an Italian countertenor, sang with lovely tone, tinged at the bottom by his low natural voice, and remarkable breath control. Nicholas Scott, a British tenor, impressed as much with his comic timing as with his vocal qualities. John Taylor Ward, an American bass, filled out the superbly balanced ensemble with distinction.Mr. Christie and Les Arts Florissants lived up to the lofty expectations they always carry with them. Alix Verzier’s cello solos were especially laudable.Advertisement