AdvertisementSupported byBy Stephen HoldenNot the least of the blessings bestowed by “Twenty Feet From Stardom,” the 2013 documentary about backup singers, many of whom have more vocal clout than the stars they accompany, was the attention brought to Lisa Fischer, a phenomenal powerhouse. She enjoyed a moment of glory when she won a Grammy in 1992 for best R&B vocal performance but then curtailed her solo career, saying she preferred the role of backup singer to soloist.On Thursday evening at Birdland, I could see why. Ms. Fischer, with her band Grand Baton, is a mischievous free spirit unencumbered by the responsibilities, including the glamorous image-making, that go with pop stardom. In resplendent vocal shape at 56, she brought down the house in the single best show I’ve seen in the many years I’ve visited Birdland. The Railroad Earth song “Bird in the House,” an increasingly desperate cry for spiritual release, epitomized her sensibility.With a nearly vibrato-less gospel-oriented voice that stretches high into the stratosphere and a strong, steady middle register, Ms. Fischer effused a pure joy and sometimes a pure anguish in the kind of singing that is rarely heard nowadays outside of church. The material was predominantly secular and included three Rolling Stones songs.Ms. Fischer does not go in for elaborate melismatic display. The special effects were limited to sophisticated sound engineering that echoed her voice to evoke a never-ending internal dialogue.The show was essentially a collaboration between Ms. Fischer and J.C. Maillard, her musical director. Foremost in the musical arsenal of Mr. Maillard, who sang backup and played keyboard, is the SazBass, an eight-stringed electroacoustic instrument inspired by the Turkish baglama that added an intense Middle Eastern flavor. Rounding out the group were Thierry Arpino on drums and Aidan Carroll on bass.A high point of the set was Ms. Fischer’s early-90s hit “How Can I Ease the Pain?,” a sustained cry of agony. It culminated in an extended arrangement of The Stones’ “Wild Horses” that went to the center of earth.Ms. Fischer and Grand Baton perform through Saturday at Birdland, 315 West 44th Street, Clinton; 212-581-3080, birdlandjazz.com.Advertisement