By ALASTAIR MACAULAYAPRIL 24, 2015
If you try to analyze the way the choreographer Mark Morris fits dance to music, you quickly become aware of something akin to a scientific operation of intense intricacy: The connection of movement phrases and motifs to each score is extraordinarily complex in both structure and detail — and, often, brilliantly satisfying. But when you stand back and simply watch the sheer imagination with which Mr. Morris decides what kind of drama he’s marrying to music that, in most cases, was written long ago with very different ideas in mind, then he starts to look eccentric, a peculiar and daring oddball, an engaging but naughty maverick.Almost every Morris dance creation shows these two unalike sides of his mind working together. Often, his basic choices of style and timing immediately persuade us to become his passengers — to take whatever journey he wants to conduct — and we soon overlook, or surrender to, his nutty side. But it’s always there — and usually it’s vivid. At the Brooklyn Academy of Music, he’s currently presenting seven works, and the three pieces in Program B demonstrate what an extraordinarily daft visionary he is.The first two, “Crosswalk” and “Jenn and Spencer,” have been seen in New York before; they had their premieres two years ago, across the street from the Brooklyn Academy, at the Mark Morris Dance Center. The final item, “Spring, Spring, Spring,” had its premiere two months later, in 2013, in Berkeley, Calif. (I saw it there and reviewed it),  and is now being performed in New York for the first time.This dance, Mr. Morris’s response to the 2013 centennial of Stravinsky’s “The Rite of Spring” (though he said at the time that it was an accident that he turned to the score then), is already unusual in using a new arrangement of the score by the jazz trio the Bad Plus. This, disconcertingly, begins in the dark, the stage empty, with a taped account of the music’s first few minutes. (The trio’s pianist, Ethan Iverson, used to be Mr. Morris’s musical director. At Berkeley, the darkness was more total than in the more conventional space of the Howard Gilman Opera House at the Brooklyn Academy.)AdvertisementWhat follows when the lights go up and the band plays live is more eccentric in terms of stage action. The Bad Plus play in the pit; I very much like the group’s arrangement of the Stravinsky, though, in Brooklyn, its striking sonorities do not make the intimate impression they did in Berkeley, and though the percussion effects now seem to punctuate the music but not to give it impetus. It’s Mr. Morris’s choreography that remains strange. This isn’t just the most measured and contained “Rite of Spring” most of us have ever seen, it’s also the most carefully quaint.AdvertisementThe dancers are costumed by Elizabeth Kurtzman like 1960s flower children; the men, bare-chested and in brightly colored jeans, wear vine leaves in their hair, while the women, their locks garlanded with flowers, wear smocks of pale pastel hues. The neat choreographic patterns and formally precise steps that Mr. Morris gives them have no more force than daisy chains.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“How well Laurel Lynch executes that slow fouetté turn,” I thought, “and how excellently Aaron Loux (the company’s most exemplary stylist) delivers several sauts de basque développés!” In no other “Rite” staging could such thoughts occur; for a century, niceties of academic style are just what every other “Rite” set out to obliterate. As often with Mr. Morris’s choreography, I’m aware of clever historical references. We often see the 2-D bas-relief profiles made famous by Vaslav Nijnsky’s “L’Après-Midi d’un Faune.” But so what?As we see hand-in-hand lines of dancers neatly trotting across the stage, the mood is polite, pretty. When the dancers stand in concentric rings or other geometric formations, they have neither the galvanizing energy nor the restrained intensity that comparable devices have in other Morris dances. At several points, the piece suggests the dejection of a hangover or a post-narcotic crash. Sometimes “Spring, Spring, Spring” looks like an essay in effete modishness worthy of “Absolutely Fabulous,” and sometimes it seems like a camp concoction by E. F. Benson’s Mapp and Lucia.I keep changing my mind about “Crosswalk,” the program’s opener. Set to Carl Maria von Weber’s Grand Duo Concertant for Clarinet and Piano (Op. 48), it begins with a repeated and hilarious joke, as Ms. Lynch is knocked flat to the floor by other dancers as they briskly cross the stage. The whole piece is full of bizarre and funny juxtapositions, clashes, highs and lows; but often Mr. Morris seems, very musically, to be pointing out that he thinks this is a silly piece of music.By contrast, “Jenn and Spencer” remains one of his most riveting, adult and powerful compositions. A man and a woman (danced on Thursday by Jenn Weddel and Sam Black, both marvelous), who may be at home alone in their bedroom, are conducting a changing struggle for power. Amazingly, this is set to Henry Cowell’s Suite for Violin and Piano, both modernist and Baroque in structure and melody. The combination of raw, messy intimacy and formal pattern, brilliantly matched to the music, is like nothing else by this or any other choreographer.Mark Morris Dance Group continues through Sunday at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, 30 Lafayette Avenue, at Ashland Place, Fort Greene; 718-636-4100, bam.org. A version of this review appears in print on April 25, 2015, on Page C2 of the New York edition with the headline: A Man and a Woman, Pratfalls and Camp.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.