By SERGE F. KOVALESKI and TOM MASHBERGAPRIL 24, 2015
He may have a snappy nickname — the Cook — but Robert V. Gentile is no Hollywood director’s vision of a master art thief.He is 79, reliant on a wheelchair, and has diabetes, heart disease and high blood pressure. He never made it past the seventh grade. Though he is listed by the authorities as a full-fledged member of the Mafia with a criminal history stretching back to the 1950s, he lives with his ailing wife in a rundown ranch-style house in the suburbs of Hartford and drives a 1989 Buick.But to federal investigators, Mr. Gentile may be the last living person who can lead them to the masterpieces taken in the largest art heist in American history — an enduring whodunit pulled off 25 years ago at the Isabella Stewart Gardner Museum in Boston.In a conversation last year with a confidential informant wearing a recording device, the authorities say, Mr. Gentile boasted that he had access to two of the paintings snatched from the museum, one of them a Rembrandt, and could arrange a sale for $500,000 or more.AdvertisementMr. Gentile’s lawyer said that the authorities also believe that he traveled to Philadelphia in 2003 with another man and two of the Gardner’s paintings, including “Storm on the Sea of Galilee” by Rembrandt — one of 13 items taken from the museum — with hopes of selling them to underworld associates there.Advertisement“There is a 99 percent certainty that Mr. Gentile was lying when he said he didn’t know anything about the Gardner Museum robbery before it happened, he had never seen any of the Gardner paintings and didn’t know where any of them were,” John H. Durham, an assistant United States attorney, said during a court session on Monday.Mr. Gentile has not been charged in the museum theft. He was in court because he was arrested last week on charges of selling a loaded revolver to an F.B.I. informant. It was the second sting operation aimed at him in three years, both connected to investigators’ belief that Mr. Gentile knows the whereabouts of the items lifted from the Gardner in March 1990 by a pair of thieves disguised as police officers.Other men identified by the authorities as the leading suspects or persons of interest in the case are all dead.Mr. Gentile’s lawyer, A. Ryan McGuigan, says, though, that in relation to the Gardner theft all his client has ever been guilty of is braggadocio and a thirst for attention.“My client was talking about a fictitious deal with an F.B.I. plant,” Mr. McGuigan said. “It’s all made-up talk.”Mr. McGuigan’s reasoning is founded in the fact that the statute of limitations for the museum break-in has expired, so his client cannot be charged in the case. Why, the lawyer asks, would Mr. Gentile not lead investigators to the missing trove and collect a share of the $5 million reward being offered by the museum?“Would he really pass on a chance to get $5 million if he knew something?” Mr. McGuigan said.For law enforcement, though, the recent recording and the account of a trip to Philadelphia bolster a tip that F.B.I. agents received about Mr. Gentile in 2009. The widow of a Boston mobster told them that her husband had met with Mr. Gentile in the parking lot of a lobster house in Portland, Me., sometime between 2002 and 2004 and put several of the stolen pieces in the trunk of Mr. Gentile’s car.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In 2010, investigators tried to entice Mr. Gentile to reveal any knowledge he had about the works of art by talking up the $5 million reward, but he rebuffed the offer.AdvertisementAgents then embarked on a sting operation the following year that resulted in Mr. Gentile’s arrest in the sale of hundreds of narcotic painkillers that he had been prescribed for his chronic back problems.Mr. McGuigan said if Mr. Gentile had known anything about the missing art, he would have taken the deal to avoid prison time for selling painkillers because it would have allowed him to be with his daughter, who was dying from cancer at the time.“Why would he sit in prison rotting while his daughter dies of cancer if he could make a deal on the paintings?” he asked.He added, “My client never has and never will have any information about anything to do with the Gardner case.”But investigators said Mr. Gentile may never reveal what he knows about the missing artworks because he has an Old World approach to working with law enforcement — he loathes federal authorities and does not trust the F.B.I. to leave him alone or help him get the reward if he cooperates.Mr. Gentile is described by federal authorities as a member of the Philadelphia Mafia who once worked as a bodyguard for one of its lieutenants. Dating back more than six decades, his criminal record includes aggravated assault, receiving stolen goods, illegal gambling and counterfeiting, according to court records. He was also convicted of larceny for mishandling his father’s estate, of which he was executor.Mr. Gentile has worked as a bricklayer and a cement mason and ran an Italian restaurant with his brother. He became known as the Cook because he would prepare meals for mob associates with whom he spent time at a Hartford garage that was a gangster hangout.In February 2012, federal agents searched Mr. Gentile’s home and found several illegal firearms and silencers. The agents dug up part of Mr. Gentile’s land and searched a shed in his backyard and say they found a list of each item taken from the Gardner with prices indicating their black market value.Mr. Gentile’s wife, Patricia, said in a brief interview on Friday that the authorities just will not leave her husband alone.Advertisement“He doesn’t know anything about it, but they will never believe him,” she said. “If he knew where they were, he’d be a millionaire.”Alain Delaquérière contributed research.A version of this article appears in print on April 25, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: Ailing Man May Be the Last Link to a Trove of Stolen Art.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.