By ANTHONY TOMMASINIAPRIL 24, 2015
In more than four decades at the Metropolitan Opera, James Levine has made Verdi a particular specialty. Yet, until Thursday night’s performance of “Un Ballo in Maschera,” Mr. Levine had not conducted this touchstone Verdi work since 1997. The occasion was the revival of David Alden’s film-noirish production, introduced in 2012.Over all, Mr. Levine lived up to expectations, though it took time for his conducting to settle in. The sly, suggestive orchestral music that establishes the mood of “Ballo,” a tale of conspiratorial intrigue at the court of King Gustavo III of Sweden, sounded curiously tentative. Even the initial singing of the Met’s typically superb chorus, portraying the king’s obsequious, not-to-be-trusted courtiers, was a little imprecise and unfocused.The chorus soon rallied. And Mr. Levine found his way, drawing pulsing, weighty and boldly characterized playing from the Met orchestra, despite moments here and there when the energy level slipped. He certainly had a strong cast, headed by the , rich-voiced tenor Piotr Beczala as Gustavo and the affecting soprano Sondra Radvanovsky as Amelia, the wife of the king’s loyal adviser and friend. Ms. Radvanovsky excelled in this role when the production was new. She is even better now.Amelia and the willful young king have fallen in love, though their relationship is innocent. The slightly grainy quality in Ms. Radvanovsky’s penetrating sound actually enhanced the emotionalism of her singing. She sent Verdi’s phrases soaring and conveyed the anguish of a wife who honors a devoted husband yet cannot resist her impassioned king.AdvertisementI was surprised by how much more I liked Mr. Alden’s production seeing it again after two seasons. In “Ballo,” Verdi juxtaposed chilling dramatic episodes, focused on the plot among conspirators to assassinate the king, with oddly lighter scenes depicting the superficial strivers at court. This time, the metaphorical symbols Mr. Alden deploys (like the mural of Icarus that hovers over every scene) did not seem so heavy-handed. I was able to appreciate the daring of the black-and-white, 1930s film-drama imagery and eerie geometric sets. The comic bits seemed almost surreal, like the scene when the preening courtiers break into a vaudeville dance, complete with kicks and caps.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Beczala’s ardent voice was up to the challenge of Gustavo, a demanding role. Temperamentally, he was a vocally virile but lightweight king, though in a way this suits the unsure yet entitled monarch’s veneer.The baritone Dmitri Hvorostovsky, as Count Anckarstrom, Amelia’s husband, brought his trademark bronzed sound and elegant legato to his performance. He was at his best, and most vehement, when it mattered most, in the compelling aria of revenge “Eri tu.”AdvertisementAt 63, the mezzo-soprano Dolora Zajick may not be quite the vocal powerhouse she once was. Still, she makes a formidable Ulrica, the fortune teller, wonderfully costumed here as a dowdy lady with a black purse, thick overcoat and orthopedic shoes. The soprano Heidi Stober tossed off the chirpy music of Oscar, the king’s impish page (a trouser role), singing with brilliant technique and sassy charm.“Un Ballo in Maschera” runs through May 9 at the Metropolitan Opera House; 212-362-6000, metopera.org. A version of this review appears in print on April 25, 2015, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline: A Noir Turn in the Shadows of a Court Conspiracy.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.