AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben RatliffAbout halfway through Gilberto Gil’s astonishing concert at Town Hall on Thursday night, he played “Desafinado” (“Off Key”) by Antônio Carlos Jobim and Newton Mendonça, made famous in 1959 by João Gilberto. It is an intimate and self-righteous little song — essentially, a man telling a woman that his music and his emotions are true and real and perhaps on the right side of history, even if she doesn’t think so. “Desafinado” became a kind of monument for 20th-century Brazilian culture: a justification and defense of modern attitudes, exemplified by bossa nova’s inward disposition and use of jazz harmony. Mr. Gil’s version gave it close attention and also ripped a hole in it. Mr. Gil, now 72, was surrounded by a small band whose members averaged about half his age, and their playing seemed to pick up an old and slightly mischievous conversation: After Mr. Gil ran through the song’s cycle of lyrics and started them again, Bem Gil — the percussionist, the guitarist and Mr. Gil’s son — kneeled on the floor and turned a knob on a digital pedal. A noise commenced, first in key and then rising out of it, sounding roughly like a boiling kettle, up and then down in a slow, single arc. At the end, the band took the song out on an extended groove and a single chord; the digital sound turned into soft, crackling hiss; and Mr. Gil sang wordless vowel sounds. That noise! What was it for? Was it an intervention or a defacement? Was it an aural shiatsu to help you hear a very famous song in a new way? The bridge of “Desafinado” has a startling lyric, which translates as: “I took your photograph with my Rolleiflex/which revealed your huge ingratitude.” Was the rising and falling tone a kind of timed exposure, Mr. Gil taking a picture of the song — or of the listener — or of himself? Who knows? But the new version becomes as seductive and truculent as the original. No doubt: Bossa nova is old and since the late ’50s has been universally commercialized and watered down and misplayed and possibly misunderstood; it hangs around monolithically, at least in Brazilian culture. But approached this way, it doesn’t sound exhausted.João Gilberto’s late-’50s bossa nova quieted the volume and projection of the popular samba tradition. It also translated the great swing in the samba beat into small-group dynamics, with lightly brushed drums or no drums at all: the guitarist’s thumb becomes the beat. Mr. Gil, the singer and guitarist and songwriter, came along during the decade after bossa nova and has often modified it for his own music in one way or another. But his newest record, “Gilbertos Samba” (Sony), goes to the prime material itself. It and its touring version mostly contain songs recorded by João Gilberto, with just a little bit of original material: he wrote lyrics to an instrumental recorded by Mr. Gilberto in 1960, “Um Abraço no Bonfá,” and wrote his own instrumental in response to it (“Um Abraço no João”). Just about everything he played during the two-hour concert on Thursday came from “Gilbertos Samba,” released in Brazil about a year ago, or the live album quickly resulting from it, “Gilbertos Samba ao Vivo.” (This is a convention at his level of Brazilian popular music: the album, the tour, the live album as a souvenir of the tour.) If you’d heard either or both, you wouldn’t have experienced any categorical surprises on Thursday. But what makes Mr. Gil so good at his best — and Thursday night he stayed right near his best, without overindulging in vocal improvising or one-man-jamming, as he can sometimes do — is his light-voiced, articulate, rhythmic energy: the vigor he put in songs like “O Pato,” “Doralice” and “ É Luxo Só,” his total delight in the syncopated rhythmic details, and the fresh simplicity that seeps down into the band — the drummer Domenico Lancellotti, the accordionist and percussionist Mestrinho and Bem Gil — who occasionally used MPCs (digital rhythm samplers played with the fingertips) or a dinner plate to tap out beats. Without imposing any kind of agenda on the concert other than his own admiration for bossa nova, Mr. Gil nearly seemed to be restoring its potential.Advertisement