Season 4, Episode 3: “Data”Like last week’s episode of “Veep,” which featured an intense and poignant look at the platonic love affair between President Selina Meyer and her body man, Gary, Sunday’s show also ends on a serious note. We begin on Good Friday, which turns out to be a very bad Friday for Selina and her team. Her aides have just discovered that the 8-year-old “H.I.V. girl” the president mentioned in a recent speech has been outed by a thread on Reddit, and helped along by a massive White House data breach.“This is catching fire like a gas station in a Michael Bay film,” warns Mike, her press secretary. “What’s our line here?”Selina decides on a tried-and-true “This Town” formula — someone needs to be fired. And her team initially thinks they can get away with axing a low level aide, one of the seemingly interchangeable young women who roam the West Wing, dressed in the unofficial uniform of slightly frumpy skirt suits. (Think Ann Taylor’s most basic beige line). “We call them the expendabelles,” quips Dan, Selina’s Machiavellian and fast-talking aide.“O.K., Dan, go sacrifice a virgin,” the president says. But, like many a Washington crisis, the problem snowballs, a truth made abundantly clear when Selina’s campaign starts hemorrhaging their microdonors because they don’t want the president’s re-election effort to have their personal data anymore. “It’s vital that these small time nobodys realize we respect them,” hisses Amy, Selina’s campaign manager, in the president’s ear as she leaves an event. Key family groups then start withdrawing their support from the administration’s Families First bill. But the real trouble comes when the team finds out that the data breach — a timely fictional issue in a real 21st-century world grappling with privacy concerns  — goes far deeper than they think. A direct mailer featuring Selina with babies and children was intentionally targeted at “recently bereaved parents,” using leaked child mortality data. “Well that’s a federal crime,” the president tells her staff. “You could go to jail.”And, as a quick aside, welcome to the world of Big Data. Targeting parents who have recently lost a child may be a step too far into the unseemly muck, not to mention illegal. But in 2012, I remember hearing a credible rumor that a rival campaign had asked a top data firm to provide a list of dog owners — who it planned to target with an ad pointing out that Mitt Romney had famously strapped his family dog, Seamus, to the roof of the car (in a crate) for a long road trip.A decision is made: Team Meyer needs a big time name on the chopping block, chum to (hopefully) make the press stop digging into the data breach before they discover the more nefarious truth.  The unlucky soul? Dan Egan. “It’s a perfect fit,” Kent tells Dan, coolly, pointing out that he worked on the Families First bill and is handsome — “Therefore, guilty looking.” (There had been an initial thought to fire Ben, one of the president’s most senior aides, but they eventually settled on Dan, deciding to keep Ben on board so that he might be sacrificed, if necessary, at a later date). The rest of the episode is edited like one of the final scenes from “The Godfather.” Selina, with plausible deniability, sits on the South Lawn reading a picture book to a group of kids at an Easter egg roll as her staff scrambles behind the scenes to save themselves, Dan pleads for his political life, and Mike stands behind the podium, getting ready to, in the words of Ben, “cut the throat of a bigger goat.”So how does Dan bleed? Just as you’d expect him to — with pure, red ambition. We first see Dan begging for his job. Then, we see him resigned, arguing in favor of a title promotion before he’s forced out. And, finally, the episode ends with Dan alone in his car, not wallowing but frantically working his cell.“So it looks like I am a free agent again,” he says, putting a rather euphemistic spin on his current situation.  “Yeah, so, give me a call. It’s the same number as in the last two messages.” I doubt we’ve seen the last of Dan Egan. 