By ALASTAIR MACAULAYOCT. 18, 2015
This should happen to every dance critic. A voice announces: “The most famous dancers on the planet!” On they come — the audience goes wild — and the critic realizes he or she, probably alone among all those present in a large theater, has neither seen them before nor heard of them. It’s good for the system.It happened to me on Friday. The occasion was the opening evening of the “Breakin’ Convention — Harlem 2015,” a weekend-long festival of hip-hop dance theater at the Apollo. The dancers were Les Twins; and many in the audience screamed throughout their act in a way my generation chiefly associates with the live performances of the Beatles. Well, maybe I had heard of them (one of their YouTube clips has accumulated over 11 million viewers), but if so — I see too little hip-hop — it had certainly slipped my mind. I say this not without embarrassment.These identical twins from France — Laurent and Larry Bourgeois offstage — wasted no time on Friday in showing why they were famous. With blasting energy, they displayed electrifying footwork, daredevil plunges, staggering contrasts of dynamics, terrific synchronicity, marvelous control within slowness, as well as speed. One of them held a long balance on one extremely bent leg with throwaway audacity; even at the end of a hip-hop evening abounding in remarkable feats, this took my breath away, but for him it was just another midphrase wonder. Now that I’ve seen Les Twins, I’m impatient to see them again.Very touching was the humility with which, after their dance, Les Twins spoke of the honor they felt in performing at the historic  Apollo. They weren’t the only identical twins to do so. A little earlier, Keith and Kevin Smith, two of the founders of break-dance in the 1970s, spoke not only of the importance of the Apollo but also of seeing James Brown perform there: to them the most influential of all musical figures.AdvertisementDespite the roots of hip-hop in New York City, particularly in the Bronx, “Breakin’ Convention” comes to Harlem from Sadler’s Wells in London, where during more than 13 years it has become an important annual fixture. (Sadler’s Wells has established itself as a year-round home for dance of many types.) Here, as there, its chief M.C. is Jonzi D, Britain’s foremost advocate of hip-hop; and Friday’s performance brought important examples of hip-hop not only from Britain, but also from Europe.New York was not neglected; three dance presentations came from this city. I was disappointed only by the troupe of whom I had hoped the most: Rennie Harris Puremovement & NL² (which derives from both Brooklyn and Philadelphia), though Jonzi introduced them by their old name of Next Level Squad. While (as always with this troupe) extraordinary physicality was shown — hyperextension of shoulders and arms that made the audience gasp and moan — this was hip-hop as ghoulish freakishness without rhythm. The Klassic and Havoc duo made a more powerfully dancey impression, as did Street Justice Crew.AdvertisementThe point of “Breakin’ Convention” is to demonstrate hip-hop as theater. While I wanted more exuberance, I liked the surreal thriller told by the BirdGang Dance Company of London. The Ruggeds, from the Netherlands, kept topping its own formidable levels of brilliant energy and cool showbiz skills.In the evening’s second half, just as I was thinking what a male-dominated genre hip-hop is, along came Antoinette Gomis from France, dancing to Nina Simone songs. Not only did this dancer exemplify the issues of black female beauty that were addressed in the songs, she also showed the most lyrically flowing aspects of break-dancing, and took them through several changes.Jonzi D and his American fellow compère Grandmaster Caz kept insisting that hip-hop is the most fertile source of invention today. It’s to be hoped that “Breakin’ Convention” — first and last seen here two years ago — becomes as established in New York as it is in London, and that it showcases more of the many varieties of hip-hop that occur around this country.A version of this review appears in print on October 19, 2015, on Page C6 of the New York edition with the headline: British Hip-Hop Festival, and French Duo, Give Apollo a Blast of Energy.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.