Season 2, Episode 3: “Bad Money”There’s a new guy in “Silicon Valley,” and he’s awful, which is great. Russ Hanneman, a billionaire who swoops in to fund Pied Piper just as the company is about to sell to Hooli, is the new best thing on the show. He’s described as “a vulgar human being,” “utterly distasteful,” “boorish, pompous” and “the worst man in America.” He drives an orange McLaren and eats $800 steaks, the sort of ostentatious behavior that doesn’t fly in the tech set. Worse, Hanneman is completely useless as a tech visionary, winning his wealth in the first Internet boom with the dumbest invention anyone can think of. Like Mark Cuban, an obvious inspiration, Hanneman put radio on the Internet. And he’ll never let you forget it.Played with zeal by Chris Diamantopoulos, Hanneman adds something that “Silicon Valley” had been missing in the first two episodes of the season: A lot of funny lines. Among the few not obscenely unprintable are either obnoxious or racist, like when he greets the Pakistani engineer Dinesh with, “Hey what’s up Al Qaeda?” Then adds: “No, I’m totally kidding, I’m defusing the tension with humor …. But seriously, no beheadings though.” Hanneman invests $5 million in Pied Piper with no strings attached, promising to let Richard and his crew work on their ideas without interference. He doesn’t even care about Hooli’s lawsuit against Pied Piper. “I got three nannies suing me right now—one of them for no reason,” he says. Richard, Pied Piper’s founder, immediately accepts, and the rest of the guys, who’d threatened to walk if Hooli had bought them, are initially elated by the infusion of cash. But it turns out that Hanneman is as hands-off with Pied Piper as he is alleged to be with women. When he stops by the Pied Piper house to “be a fly on the wall,” he keeps interrupting the shy, tentative Richard’s company meeting. “Do you really talk like that?” he asks. “Like how you’re talking, is that real? Wow.” Hanneman talks on the phone incessantly, and brings over an assistant who plays video games loudly. And he begins to dictate company strategy, including buying up more than a dozen billboards, and subtracting the cost from the amount he’s pledged to Pied Piper. The billboards, by the way, are as authentically inscrutable as most of the ones you see on Highway 101, Silicon Valley’s main thoroughfare. They show a pretty woman playing a guitar with the slogan “I am Pied Piper”; they’re meaningless, but they create “awareness,” which Hanneman insists matters more than having an actual product. Or, for that matter, making money. As usual, “Silicon Valley” is gleeful about ripping off real-life story lines of the Valley. So you have Hanneman espousing one of the tech businesses’ happy secrets, which is that for young companies, making any money can actually be detrimental to its prospects. “If you show revenue, people will ask how much, and it will never be enough,” he advises Richard, who’d foolishly believed that the point of starting a company is to make money. “It’s not about how much you earn but what you’re worth,” Hanneman says. “And who’s worth the most? Companies that lose money.” Hanneman’s analysis is largely correct. Google bought the home-device company Nest last year for $3.2 billion, a relatively small sum for a company that actually sold products that people were willing to pay for. Meanwhile companies that had, at the time, spent little time trying to make any money at all — like Snapchat and Pinterest — were valued at many billions more. But because the show prides itself on technical accuracy, I’ll point out an error: In a list of examples of companies that make no money, Hanneman points to Amazon, but it is not true that the e-commerce company eschews revenues. Amazon went after revenues at the start, and its sales have skyrocketed every year for more than a decade. Instead, because Amazon keeps sinking money into expanding its operations, it is the company’s profits that have faltered, an important, if nerdy, distinction. In another plotline that mirrors real life, Gavin Belson, Hooli’s chief, compares the treatment of tech billionaires to that of the Jews in Nazi Germany. His speech is almost a word-for-word copy of a letter that Tom Perkins, one of the founders of the vaunted venture capital firm Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers, wrote to The Wall Street Journal last year. Perkins wanted to “call attention to the parallels of fascist Nazi Germany to its war on its ‘one percent,’ namely its Jews, to the progressive war on the American one percent, namely the ‘rich.’” Perkins later awkwardly apologized for his comments.Belson, here, adds that you “could argue that billionaires are actually treated worse, and we didn’t even do anything wrong.” Later, in an effort to make amends, he tells a group of Jewish leaders that he’s building a Hooli replica of the Yad Vashem Holocaust memorial “right next to the bike shop.” It’s a beautifully shallow gesture; in other words, it’s perfect. 