Here be spoilers and more High Septon than you wanted to see.Season 5, Episode 3, “High Sparrow”Let’s set aside, for a moment, the fact that Sansa Stark is more unlucky in love than anyone else has ever been unlucky in anything. And we’ll also leave Tyrion dangling from Jorah’s shoulder for a few minutes more.[Interview: Sophie Turner on Sansa’s New Beau]Because while Sunday’s busy episode saw many fortunes take surprising or terrible or surprisingly terrible turns — later, Janos — it was a quieter exchange back in King’s Landing that offered a key to understanding the contemplative tone that has defined the current season of “Game of Thrones” thus far.The fantasy epic on HBO.It came between Cersei, the Season 5 M.V.P. so far, and the so-called High Sparrow, the leader of the emerging religious sect that earlier sent the High Septon on his fleshy walk of shame.Mr. Sparrow (played by the great British actor Jonathan Pryce) wonders whether the gods sent Cersei to tempt him or to arrest him. Nah, we’re good, Cersei says, surprising him. We tossed that old creep in the dungeon because men like that make people question their faith.“The faith and the crown are the two pillars that hold up this world,” Cersei said. “One collapses, so does the other.”The faith and the crown. Or rather (if you look at them through the prism of what each represents) hope and power. One senses that Cersei sees each as a means of keeping the rabble in line. Without the structure and authority that the crown provides, people would be too concerned with the basics of survival to worry about their souls. Without hope, a kingdom’s subjects would have nothing to lose and would become harder to control.“We must do everything necessary to protect one another,” she tells the High Sparrow.But viewed another way, the two pillars represent the two halves of the human coin: The side dedicated to something bigger than oneself versus the part that wonders what’s in it for me.Before this season, “Game of Thrones” had been concerned primarily with the crown half, as members of the Great Houses and their cohorts butchered one another to enhance their designs or claims on the Iron Throne. Lust for power remains at the heart of the story, of course, as Stannis plans his campaign in the North and Daenerys Targaryen aims to reclaim the throne for her family, if she can ever get out of her own way in Essos. Margaery, meanwhile, finally makes herself into a queen — and young Tommen into a man — in an uncharacteristically bloodless wedding and an apparently vigorous postgame celebration.The first three episodes of Season 5, however, have been lousy with the trappings of religious faith, whether it’s the Sparrows flocking in King’s Landing, the Lord of Light’s vampy priestesses proselytizing from Castle Black to Volantis, or the Faceless Men embracing a death-cult melding of murder for hire and mortuary service.Devotion is also trending among the major characters. In Essos, Tyrion and Varys are pledging allegiance to the dragon queen, ostensibly for the good of the kingdom. At the Wall, Jon Snow is doubling down on his Night’s Watch commitment. In Braavos, Arya Stark is learning, “Karate Kid”-style, that household chores and abandonment of the self form the path to enlightenment and formidableness.The point seems to be to start evening the scales between greed and service. (“Valar Dohaeris,” we keep hearing. All men must serve.) The show feels as if it’s shifting away from the craven self-interest represented by the late Tywin Lannister toward characters who idealize the sort of dedication to a larger cause that, presumably, the known world will have to recognize in order to survive the White Walker winter to come.This shift is being represented most explicitly by Arya, who opened Sunday’s episode with broom in hand, sweeping floors in the House of Black and White, surrounded by the iconography of various deities. There’s the Stranger, the Drowned God. (Here’s a brief primer on the religions of the Thronesiverse, if you’re curious.) Arya is moved by none of it.“I didn’t come here to sweep floors,” she complains to Jaqen H’ghar. “Teach me how to be a Faceless Man.”“All men must serve, Faceless Men most of all,” he says.“I want to serve,” she says.“A girl wants to serve herself,” he replies. (Evolve, Arya. Here’s some stick-beating and corpse cleaning to help you on your way.) Jaqen goes on to claim that, whatever the pantheistic wall art: “There is only one God. A girl knows his name and all men know his gift.”I have to admit that I was a bit fuzzy on both of those things. I assume the name is the Many-Faced God, like he said. So maybe the gift is … death? People seemed to be dropping left and right in that place, and happily.A world away, Arya’s sister Sansa learns that actually, there is no God. How else to explain the latest pairing for the Lana Turner of Westeros?Bet you didn’t think it got worse than Joffrey, did you Sansa? He did taunt you with your dad’s severed head after ordering his death, after all.That’s a weekend in Dorne compared to Sansa’s new man, but she doesn’t know that yet. Littlefinger doesn’t seem to realize it either, for what it’s worth. But we sure do. And if you managed to forget Ramsay’s torturing of Reek and his hunting of humans, here’s a whole family of people with their skin removed as a reminder! Ah, Ramsay, don’t ever change.Ramsay was on his best behavior, although that doesn’t figure to last. The good news for those of us in the anti-flaying camp is that the North seems plenty hostile to its new overlords. Roose Bolton may think Starkwashing his House will smooth things over, but it seems equally likely that Stannis will find eager help for his march on Winterfell. (“The North remembers,” a servant tells Sansa in this episode.) So perhaps Sansa, who chose to go along with Littlefinger’s plan, remember, will have her revenge after all.Speaking of rehabilitating one’s reputation, is that Jorah Mormont I see feeling sorry for himself in that Volantis brothel? Well buck up, my brokenhearted friend, your imp has come in. As with Varys, we figured Tyrion’s recklessness would catch up to him, but I was surprised by the way it all went down.You’ll recall that Jorah, Dany’s former adviser and lovesick worshiper, was exiled from Meereen when she learned he had originally joined her in order to spy on her. But do you remember whom he was spying for? Varys. So while Jorah presumably sees Tyrion as a gift to get back in Dany’s good graces (although he didn’t strictly specify which queen he was taking him to, I guess), I suspect Varys has one or two things up his bountiful sleeve that could complicate Jorah’s reception at the pyramid.As for Tyrion? Eh, he was heading to Meereen anyway. Crate, wheelhouse, jilted knight’s shoulder — just keep the wine flowing, and the mode of transport probably doesn’t matter.A few thoughts while we open the morning wine• Cersei and Margaery’s ongoing catfight of manners deserves its own Downtonesque spin-off. “Should I call you Queen Mother or Dowager Queen?” Margaery says brightly. (Translation: You’re old and irrelevant.) “There’s no need for such formalities,” Cersei replies. (Translation: Don’t talk to me at all, you doll-faced idiot.) “Wouldn’t you be happier in Casterly Rock?” Tommen asks Cersei. (Translation: Advantage Margaery, for now.)• For the record, I’m sure Cersei has some sort of personal agenda in regard to the Sparrows. I’m just not sure what it is yet.• What do we think Tyrion was reacting to when he changed course on that prostitute? I assumed that her arm cuff, which seemed to spark some alarm, reminded him of Shae, who wore a similar piece at times. Anyone have other theories?• Brienne’s continuing pity party was actually pretty heartbreaking this week, as she remembered the nasty little twits who once made her feel like “the ugliest girl alive, a great lumbering beast.” It also presaged another potential clash for the ages: Brienne versus Stannis at Winterfell, where both are headed for different reasons.• Speaking of lumbering beasts, I’m enjoying the gothic edge added by Dr. Qyburnstein and his friend under the sheet, who I assume is some version of the Mountain. We touched on this last week, but you’ll recall from last season’s finale that Cersei hopes to save the giant poisoned warrior and his fearsome strength for her own purposes.• Goodbye, Janos Slynt. It couldn’t have happened to a more weasely guy. Last week he was the right-hand man for the presumed new lord commander of the Night’s Watch. In quick order he was outed as a coward, marginalized by the election, ordered to Greyguard and then beheaded in another puddle of his own making (tears this time). He’s had it coming for a while – remember that he led the Baratheon bastard massacre in King’s Landing for Joffrey back in Season 2. But still, quite a fall for that guy.• Will you mourn Janos? Where do we think the Sansa-Ramsay nuptials will rank on the list of the worst weddings in Westeros? And what seems to be an appropriate present? Candlesticks always make a nice gift, but what do you get the man who flays everything? Please fire away in the comments.