Harper Lee’s hometown of Monroeville will continue to be able to host a stage adaptation of her novel “To Kill a Mockingbird” next year but the production will be run by a new not-for-profit organization being created, not the local museum.The Monroe County Heritage Museum produced the play this year, and the preceding 25 years, under an agreement with Dramatic Publishing Company, which licenses the play. But the company announced the new arrangement on its Facebook page Saturday. Officials of the museum, which reported $200,000 in ticket sales from sold-out shows in April and May of this year, said the museum will struggle financially without its biggest fund-raiser. “We’re basically in the dark, and we can’t plan anything,” said Tom Lomenick, president of the museum board.“I’m concerned about the future of the museum,” said Stephanie Rogers, its executive director.Relations between the museum and Ms. Lee have suffered since 2013, when a trademark dispute over souvenirs that the museum was selling ended up in court. The case was settled last year. Dramatic Publishing did not release an explanation for the change, which was first reported by The Associated Press. A Monroe County probate judge, Greg Norris, who tried to negotiate an extension of the museum’s licensing rights to the production, said that if the museum had not filed in opposition to Ms. Lee’s lawsuit, he is confident it would have kept the play.“Actions cause reactions, and you have to deal with the consequences of decisions you make,” he said. Efforts to contact Ms. Lee’s lawyer, Tonja Carter, for comment were unsuccessful. Her husband was recently appointed to the museum’s board and Mr. Lomenick said he expected him to continue serving in that role. “It might work out for everybody, but it might be the worst thing and take out the museum,” Mr. Lomenick said.A version of this article appears in print on 04/27/2015, on page C3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: New Organization to Host ‘Mockingbird’ Play.