AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn Shattuck9:30 P.M. (Showtime) HAPPYISH Steve Coogan stars as Thom Payne, a 44-year-old burned-out advertising executive living in Woodstock, N.Y., with his painter wife, Lee (Kathryn Hahn, above, with Mr. Coogan). He finds his world spiraling into disarray when his agency hires some young Swedes to bring the company into the new millennium. Bradley Whitford plays Jonathan, Thom’s office mentor, who advises him to rebrand himself. Ellen Barkin is Dani, the headhunter who thinks that Thom has hit his “joy ceiling.” Writing in The New York Times, Alessandra Stanley called this new series, created by the novelist Shalom Auslander (“Hope: A Tragedy,” “Foreskin’s Lament”), “funnyish.” But mostly, she said, “it’s annoyingesque.”10 A.M. (Fox) FOX NEWS SUNDAY Peter Schweizer discusses his coming book, “Clinton Cash: The Untold Story of How and Why Foreign Governments and Businesses Helped Make Bill and Hillary Rich.” Lanny J. Davis, former special counsel to President Bill Clinton, shares his thoughts on the controversy surrounding the couple.10:30 A.M. (CBS) FACE THE NATION The guests include Representative Elijah E. Cummings, Democrat of Maryland and a member of the House Select Committee on Benghazi; William J. Bratton, the New York City police commissioner; Evan Wolfson, president of Freedom to Marry; and Tony Perkins, president of the Family Research Council.2:30 P.M. (TBS) BAD TEACHER (2011) A gorgeous teacher (Cameron Diaz, left) seemingly without a conscience wreaks havoc on a school when she sets her sights on a new colleague (Justin Timberlake), a bore in a bow tie who has lots of family money. But she has a squeaky-clean rival (Lucy Punch) for his affection. “It’s a beautiful thing,” Manohla Dargis wrote in The Times of Ms. Diaz’s slide into debauchery in this comedy from Jake Kasdan. “A performer with a gift for light comedy and a comically ductile face that can work in fascinating counterpart to her rocking hot body (as her character would say), Ms. Diaz has found her down-and-dirty element in the kind of broad comedy that threatens to get ugly and more or less succeeds on that threat.” 8 P.M. (CBS) MADAM SECRETARY While preparing for the Iranian president (Houshang Touzie) to sign a nuclear treaty in the United States, Elizabeth (Téa Leoni, left) uncovers a plot to assassinate him on American soil. In “The Good Wife,” at 9, Alicia (Julianna Margulies) is forced to resign as state’s attorney after a voter fraud scandal. 8 P.M. (13) CALL THE MIDWIFE A couple who practice Christian Science refuse medicine for their newborn, prompting Sister Julienne (Jenny Agutter) to question the nature of absolute faith and others to accuse the parents of harming their child. In “Mr. Selfridge,” at 9, Gordon (Greg Austin) makes his debut as the store deputy amid scandal. And in “Wolf Hall,” at 10, Anne Boleyn (Claire Foy) gives birth — not to a long-awaited male heir to Henry VIII (Damian Lewis), but to a girl. Cromwell (Mark Rylance) demands that both the nobility and the church swear under oath that Anne is a lawful queen. But whether Thomas More (Anton Lesser) will agree is another question.10:30 P.M. (HBO) VEEP When the personal details of an anonymous girl mentioned by Selina (Julia Louis-Dreyfus) are leaked, her team rushes to find someone to blame for the privacy breach. Catherine (Sarah Sutherland), meanwhile, decides to support an anti-bullying campaign. Jonah (Timothy C. Simons) and Richard (Sam Richardson) try to buy fireworks for a campaign rally. And Mike (Matt Walsh) flubs a news conference while Selina hosts the annual Easter egg roll.What’s Streaming NowCHEF’S TABLE Six of the world’s best chefs — Dan Barber, Massimo Bottura, Francis Mallmann, Niki Nakayama, Magnus Nilsson and Ben Shewry — open up their minds and kitchens, focusing as much on philosophy and formative experiences as ingredients and technique. (netflix.com) KATHRYN SHATTUCKAdvertisement