
Playlist By                     
 JON PARELES
 
APRIL 24, 2015
Kathryn CalderKATHRYN CALDERPretty portents of sorrow fill “Kathryn Calder,” the self-titled album by the singer who is best known as the modest team player supplying harmony vocals in the New Pornographers. Her own albums — this is the third and most transparent — reveal grander structures and a singular perspective, as she sings with tuneful equanimity about deep, unresolved, enigmatic struggles. “Like claws, the breaking waves will crawl/Never the same but they still call me by name,” she sings in “When You See My Blood,” as the music turns both foreboding and undaunted. Her songs have a folky center that suits her pristine voice and her layered harmonies, while around them she builds tracks that can become folk-rock chorales, celestial hymns or pulsing, Stereolab-like grids. Her voice stays poised and airy; vistas and abysses open around it.Tal NationalZOY ZOYDon’t get too attached to any of the grooves on “Zoy Zoy,” the second internationally released album by Tal National, a band from Niger. The rhythms change fast, and there’s a galaxy of them in quick succession. Tal National is more like a sports team than a band; it’s a pool of more than a dozen musicians who work in various seven-member combinations to play the band’s all-night shows and constant tour dates. Tal National also very deliberately includes musicians from Niger’s various cultures, making each song a fusion and a coalition. So it’s downright miraculous how the songs mesh: guitar licks, hopscotching bass lines, cymbal offbeats and talking drums all land with microscopic precision and can reconfigure in an instant. “Zoy Zoy” is more clearly recorded and no less hyperactive than Tal National’s 2013 “Kaani,” and its songs engage body, conscience and spirit. “Zoy Zoy” is a woman’s song after giving birth, “Sey Wata Gaya” defends secular music against Islamist censure, and “Saraounia” is based on a traditional trance dance — and they all keep jumping.Nadine ShahFAST FOODNadine Shah’s low, tremulous voice is made for brooding — especially with the austere, incantatory backups she prefers, often revolving around her sparsely chorded electric guitar and an unswerving drumbeat. Her second album, “Fast Food” (Apollo/R&S), is full of accusatory songs about love, often addressed to “you.” They spare no one: not the lovers who turn out pretentious, distant or unfaithful; not the women who seek a man as panacea; and not herself, jealous and needy. Yet as bleak as things get, she refuses to retreat. The album’s most dulcet song, “Nothing Else to Do,” has as its entire lyric, “And there was nothing else to do but fall in love.” She repeats the line, assembling her voice into a choir over gently picked guitar, like a lullaby; then an eerie brass ensemble replaces her voices, and then a raucous guitar moves in. Soothing, otherworldly, contentious — that’s love, and she’s prepared.East India YouthCULTURE OF VOLUMEWilliam Doyle, who records as East India Youth, announces a priority — artificial electronic sounds, not songs — by beginning his second album, “Culture of Volume,” with staticky, overlapping twitches traveling from ear to ear, building up to a loud wash of a distorted chord, to start an instrumental aptly called “The Juddering.” But he also has a streak of the 1980s electro-pop songwriter in him, with an earnest tenor voice, a willingness to sustain ballad melodies and a fondness for disco thump that harks back to the Pet Shop Boys. The more those tendencies collide, the better he is, as in “Hearts That Never,” which is doubly obsessed: with the romance in the lyrics and with a relentlessly blipping synthesizer momentum.BuxtonHALF A NATIVEUncertainty, displacement, weariness and loss run through the songs of Buxton, a band from Houston. “I’m half a native and half alone/I’ll never make it on my own,” Sergio Trevino sings in the title song of Buxton’s third album, “Half a Native” (New West). The shaky modesty of his voice, and the tentativeness of his lyrics in songs like “Pool Hall” — “I would spend my days cursing at myself/If I hadn’t walked over to you” — shouldn’t be confused with lack of conviction. Buxton’s music straddles Americana and psychedelia, along the lines of My Morning Jacket or Wilco but with ideas of its own. Even in ballads as straightforward and acoustic as “A Little Bit More,” there are odd pockets of reverberation, and in the band’s more plugged-in arrangements, feedback and distortion well up alongside terse disclosures of emotion. Working with the band’s first outside producer — Thom Monahan, who has also collaborated with Devendra Banhart and Vetiver — Buxton defamiliarizes its rootsy foundations. “Icebreaker” and “Miss Catalina 1992” might just be the first honky-tonk krautrock.Suuns, Jerusalem in My HeartSUUNS AND JERUSALEM IN MY HEARTA four-man indie-rock band, Suuns, and Jerusalem in My Heart, the Arabic electronica project of the producer and singer Radwan Ghazi Moumneh, are both based in Montreal, and in 2012 they spent a week collaborating on “Suuns and Jerusalem in My Heart” (Secretly Canadian). Their common ground is revved-up Minimalism — drones, repetition, mutating patterns — and modal melodies that hint at both Arabic music and math-rock; the occasional vocals are in Arabic or English. Whether they are paced by programmed beats, guitars or both, and whether they lean toward rock, techno or vintage electronic Minimalism, the tracks are headed somewhere urgent.A version of this article appears in print on April 26, 2015, on Page AR20 of the New York edition with the headline: Engaging Body and Spirit, With Some Honky-Tonk Krautrock.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »