By ROSLYN SULCASAPRIL 24, 2015
FRANKFURT —  In a chic ’60s suit, spiky heeled boots and pillbox hat, Dana Caspersen strode to the center of the stage of the Bockenheimer Depot here, followed by a camerawoman. “Ladies and gentlemen,” Ms. Caspersen declared. “I’d like you to notice my extraordinary resemblance to ...” (assuming a French accent) “ ... Catherine Deneuve!” The audience cheered, and the dancers onstage buzzed excitedly around her. By the end of the performance, the perky self-assuredness of that opening was shredded, Ms. Caspersen’s naked vulnerability on display as she sat quietly in a chair, speaking the final words of the piece.It was her last appearance in William Forsythe’s “Kammer/Kammer,” first staged in 2000. It was performed here last weekend for what was probably the last time, as the current incarnation of the Forsythe Company closes up shop. Jacopo Godani, former Forsythe dancer, will take over as director in September, with a new group of dancers, while Mr. Forsythe will become the Paris Opera Ballet’s associate choreographer and teach at the University of Southern California. And Ms. Caspersen, 51, who has been a signature performer in Mr. Forsythe’s work for almost three decades, is moving into her new phase offstage, working in conflict resolution.“I’m ready for a different role,” she said, speaking in the airy apartment she shares here with Mr. Forsythe, her husband since 2000. (They plan to base themselves in the United States after this summer.) Tiny, with short blond hair and a thoughtful gaze, Ms. Caspersen speaks in precise, beautifully formed phrases that she occasionally interrupts to redefine.“As a performer, you create situations from the inside,” she said. “Now I’m interested in looking more broadly at bigger structures: How do our actions shape our world, and how does the world shape our actions? How, on a broad scale, can we make an awareness of conflict, and a curiosity about it, part of the way we think and teach young people?”AdvertisementThese ideas are presented in “Changing the Conversation,” a guide to conflict resolution written by Ms. Caspersen and published by Penguin USA in January. The book, which has a striking visual design by the book packager Joost Elffers, lays out 17 principles that Ms. Caspersen described as “a practical and action-based way of unpacking conflict so that we can see it as a series of manageable decisions about what we do.”Ms. Caspersen added: “This is where dancing practice is useful. Dancers will come in every day and do pliés, and every day you have to reconnect to the idea of a plié rather than thinking you’ve mastered it. It’s the same in conflict; it’s not about having a set pattern of response, but about practicing the most basic actions of perception, expression and focus.”The leap from performer to mediator is less extreme than you might think, Ms. Caspersen said. “What shaped me in the first years here was that Bill was asking us to consciously seek ways of seeing differently,” she said. “Dealing with conflict is not so different: It is also about recognizing what actions we are taking, which actions are possible and about having the capacity to choose the action we actually want to take.”AdvertisementThe Minneapolis-born Ms. Caspersen has been part of Mr. Forsythe’s core group of dancers since 1988, first with the Frankfurt Ballet, then the Forsythe Company. She has been central to many of his seminal works, providing inspiration for pure dance works like “Quintett” and “Of Any If And,” and often shaping and incarnating dramatic figures (the Woman in Historical Costume in “Artifact,” Persephone in “Eidos Telos,” the crazy neighbor in “I Don’t Believe in Outer Space”) in his more theatrical pieces that mix dance, speech and heightened sound.Ms. Caspersen said she discovered conflict mediation when a friend took her to a workshop. “Life was throwing all kinds of conflicts at me, and I thought there had to be a better way of dealing with it than I was managing,” she said.She began to read all she could on the topic and discovered she could earn a master’s degree. But, like most professional dancers, Ms. Caspersen had been working full time since high school and did not have an undergraduate degree. She was also performing full time and, like all of Mr. Forsythe’s dancers, closely involved in the intense collaboration used to create work in Frankfurt and touring all over the world.Ms. Caspersen, who wore a neck-to-hip brace for severe scoliosis from 14 to 18, is not one to shirk hard work. Through performing, writing and three hip operations, she got a master of fine arts degree through Hollins University in Virginia, which is geared to dancers’ schedules and offers credits for professional experience. She then completed a master’s in conflict studies and mediation at the Woodbury Institute of Champlain College in Vermont.“She has great common sense,” said Mr. Forsythe, who arrived later at the apartment. “I had been saying to her for years, you should become a Supreme Court judge, so this is perfect. It’s like her decisions onstage; I can’t imagine her not making the right choices.”Soon after Ms. Caspersen began the master’s in mediation, Mr. Elffers, whom she knew through mutual friends, told her she should write a book. “I said, ‘I’m not even trained yet, and I know nothing,’ ” she recounted. “Five or six years later, I had finished the course, I was injured and couldn’t go outside, and thought, O.K., I’m going to write the damned book.”Mr. Elffers, who produced Robert Greene’s best-selling “The 48 Laws of Power,” said in a telephone interview that he had been immediately certain that Ms. Caspersen could write an effective book. “She was working for decades in a creative situation that is also always a conflict situation.” He told Ms. Caspersen he wasn’t interested in a textbook. “You can’t grab a 400-page book when you are in conflict,” he said. “You need quicker tools.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The day after the interview, Ms. Caspersen sent an email. “The mind, like the body, is plastic,” she wrote. “Every action we take strengthens our ability to repeat that action.”It’s a message she is intent on conveying in a TEDx talk in London in May, and in a new project, “Violence: Recode,” a series of public dialogues that she is taking to different countries, working with communities through language and simple physical action to explore violence and the power of the individual to effect change.“One of the things people find most difficult is translating attack into information,” she said. “I’m thinking about a series of cards called ‘what to try when ranting gets boring.’ ”A version of this article appears in print on April 26, 2015, on Page AR11 of the New York edition with the headline: From Toe-Tapping to Handshaking.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.