
Scream Queens By                     
 NEIL GENZLINGER
 
OCT. 20, 2015
Tuesday night’s episode of the Fox series “Scream Queens” wasn’t as witty as some, but it was bloodier. It began with the results of the vote for sorority president, which ended in a tie between Zayday and Chanel. We soon learned that Chanel had created the tie by voting for Zayday herself, because, as she told her acolytes, “You never, ever want to be the boss in a time of crisis.” She hoped that having a co-president would put the target on Zayday’s back. She called it her, “Chanel dies last plan.”Zayday suggested a slumber party where a game of truth or dare might shed light on the killer’s identity. The guys got wind of the slumberfest and came over to the sorority house for the obligatory panty raid, which proved fatal for poor Caulfield when the Red Devil showed up, because he couldn’t climb the ladder to safety like his fellow panty raiders. See, because he had lost his arms in an earlier episode. Hard to climb without ‘em. You have to admire the way the writers planted a joke weeks ago for harvesting Tuesday night. (Also in the category of jokes with long gestation periods: We finally learned why Chanel 3 has been wearing earmuffs for the whole series.)Also dying Tuesday was Roger, twin of the already deceased Dodger. The Red Devil showed some carpentry skills there: He did the deed with a nail gun.And, most surprisingly, we saw the apparent death of Sam. (What leads to death in a horror movie? A kiss, of course; she had been given one by Chanel 3.) I say “apparent death” because she was never shown quite as definitively deceased as other victims have been, and I have vague hopes she’s not dead after all, since I was fond of her. And the series will be thinner without her. This show, like its creators’ previous series, “Glee,” is all about outsiders/misfits/rejects versus insiders. Sam was an outsider. Maybe a “Bring Back Sam” Twitter campaign or some such is in order?So, Chanel 3 was given a lot to do in this episode, Dean Munsch and the other adults were almost nonexistent, and there was one good laugh on the night, when Chanel called Grace “Haggie Gyllenhaal.” Now, apparently, the World Series is going to get in the way, though FX is planning a Halloween night marathon of the first six episodes. That might actually be kind of fun. This series moves pretty fast and is so jammed full of pop-culture references, movie homages, winking asides and so on that it might be worth a second viewing. Or was once enough for you?Read all of our “Scream Queens” recaps.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »