Season 7, Episode 11: “Time & Life”Fans who felt the first three episodes of the finale stretch of “Mad Men” were diffuse and off-kilter shouldn’t simply blame the portentous Greek waitress Diane, even if she did seem to lurk behind every closed door this week, ready to pounce. The period drama on AMC.Those episodes splintered the show’s stalwart characters off into so many discrete subplots that they rarely shared screen time with one another. This episode, directed by Lane Pryce himself — Jared Harris (read an interview with Mr. Harris here) — remedied that. Thankfully, it brought the show’s stars back into the same shots: Peggy, Pete, Don, Roger and Joan all pair off in satisfying scenes that flaunt the show’s depth and the cast’s hard-won chemistry. In “Time & Life,” the gang is back together and the plot is a reprise of old themes: The sanctity of the firm is threatened and the heroes circle the wagons. The news that McCann Erickson is dissolving their company and moving key employees into their home office is a punch in the gut. Only, the excitement is gone because the battle was lost — or was it actually won? — long ago.What, exactly, are the partners fighting for? Not much. The grand vision for this new Sterling Cooper and Partners California subsidiary, hatched in a now-familiar vision on Don’s couch, is, basically, to continue selling chemicals for napalm-manufacturer Dow, artery-clogging fast food for Burger Chef, sugary drinks for Sunkist, and laxatives for Secor — only, in a different office. In such a scenario, they would avoid direct oversight by the McCann goons, but that’s just part of the picture. Primarily, it seems, Don wants to be able to look in the mirror and lie to his reflection that he’s working for himself, even though McCann would still be signing his checks. It reminds me a little of today’s work-from-home craze: You’re free… to work all the time. Only, it’s over. They’re employees now.For this, the McCann executive congratulates the group: They’ve died and “gone to advertising heaven.” The Sterling Cooper partners are no longer the bold entrepreneurs who were once shot in centered silhouette against the city’s skyline, staring into the unknown future. These are despondent employees, sulking at a conference table, where they will surely have hundreds of dull meetings in the years to come. The failed California office gambit underscores how each compromise has led to more compromises, and how the pursuit of money hasn’t necessarily led to anything but more money. And why should it? The partners want that corporate cash, plus the illusion of independence. But McCann doesn’t owe Don a shell office that will make him feel like a maverick. McCann doesn’t owe Roger his name on the stationery. As Don once told Peggy when she was angling for credit, “That’s what the money is for.” The partners got paid, handsomely. They knew what they were doing. How dare they ask for more? “That’s what the money is for” has got to be the “Mad Men” line I think of most often (especially on bad work days as a freelancer). And it’s the line I thought about at the end of the episode, as Don tried to rally the troops and everyone ignored his half-hearted speech about how this is “the beginning of something” and “not the end.” That beautifully shot scene, with the roar of the office drowning out the now-irrelevant executives — the five of them lined up, off-center, with Roger in a royal-blue double-breasted jacket, looking like an extra in basically any Wes Anderson movie — was a reminder that their employees’ fear and devotion didn’t derive from their genius. It came from the fact that they were signing their employees’ checks. That authority? That was what the money was for. They sold it. This isn’t a beginning. This is the end.The episode continued to explore privilege among the white elites — and drove that point home with a golden golf tee, when Pete squared off with his WASPy rival, who was keeping a feud hundreds of years old alive by excluding his daughter from a Greenwich, Conn., private school. Challenged by an overprivileged idiot with a “draw a man” test, Pete’s daughter drew only a head, a mustache and a necktie. She failed the test but aced the metaphor: McCann’s executive condescendingly told the Sterling Cooper crew that they had “passed the test.” Apparently, there’s more to a man than his necktie.When Trudy, dressed to impress, boasted about other rich men flirting with her so much that she could hardly go out, it seemed she was, once again, all that Pete ever wanted — which is to say, something that other men desired and he might possess to spite them. Trudy also seemed impressed by his defense of her honor and bullheaded determination, though “you never take no for an answer” has a nasty double meaning, in Pete’s case, for those who remember when Pete pushed himself on his neighbor’s au pair.Meanwhile, the other mother of one of his children, Peggy, was wrestling with her own demons in the office, babysitting a child model. In an odd scene with Pete (following a shot in which he sees her clasped by a young girl), they talk only about work, as is their habit. But later, after Peggy vents her anger on a showbiz mom, Stan presses her to be honest with him. Clearly thinking of Pete, she wonders why a woman can’t “make a mistake just like a man does and move on.” She reveals the baby she gave away: “I’m here. And he’s with a family. Somewhere. I don’t know. But it’s not because I don’t care. I don’t know because you’re not supposed to know. Or you can’t go on with your life.”It was the high point of the episode and the first time in several seasons that Peggy has mentioned the child. And, though just about any other character here would surely say exactly the wrong thing, Stan is so decent that the show surely gave hope to fans who keep fantasizing that the two will get together. Peggy, of course, just goes back to work.But love is in the air. Roger’s illicit affair with Megan’s mother, Marie, has turned into something real. You know he’s happy because of the condescending way in which he tells Don, “You are O.K.” Ted has reunited with an old flame who’s “gorgeous and a little deep.” (Not too much! Phew.) And Joan’s real estate developer continues to impress, hopping on a red-eye at the slightest sign of distress.Don is the only one left alone at the bar now, to drink and then go out into the night, in search of Diane, whom he barely knows. As the show drives home the point that success has little to do with happiness, it may be better for Don — and all of us — if he never finds her.A quick note: These recaps are not intended to be exhaustive; that would be exhausting for all of us. I’ll just try to pick a theme each week and continue the conversation. So please share your thoughts in the comments. Do you think we’ve seen the last of Dawn and Shirley, who got fewer lines than Meredith? Will Pete and Trudy get back together? Will Joan and her man find real love? Will Stan and Peggy find a happy ending? Will anyone? Logan Hill is a journalist who has contributed to The New York Times, New York, Rolling Stone, “This American Life,” Cosmopolitan, Glamour, Wired and others. You can follow him on Twitter at @loganhill33.