By KATHRYN SHATTUCKAPRIL 27, 2015
10 P.M. (Starz Cinema) WILD AT HEART (1990) Lula Pace Fortune (Laura Dern, above), a 20-year-old peach who describes herself as hotter than Georgia asphalt, and Sailor Ripley (Nicolas Cage), her gentle ex-con beau, take off from Cape Fear, N.C., for Big Tuna, Tex., on what they see as a trip down their own Yellow Brick Road in search of the Wizard of Oz. But the private detective Johnnie Farragut (Harry Dean Stanton) is fast on their trail with Lula’s beauty queen mother, Marietta (Diane Ladd, in an Oscar-nominated performance), who wants Sailor dead. Willem Dafoe, wearing brown, wired-together teeth, plays the no-good gangster Bobby Peru; Isabella Rossellini is his unnaturally blond Mexican mistress; and Crispin Glover is Lula’s cousin, who puts cockroaches in his underwear for pleasure. The director David Lynch “believes that more is more but, after a while, the film’s odd inventions begin to exhaust,” Vincent Canby wrote in The New York Times about this adaptation of Barry Gifford’s road novel, which won the Palme d’Or at the Cannes Film Festival. But “though Miss Dern and Mr. Cage are constantly upstaged by the rest of the movie, they triumph.”7:30 P.M. (Nickelodeon) SO LITTLE TIME Mary-Kate and Ashley Olsen play Riley and Chloe, 14-year-old fraternal twins running head-on into typical teenage troubles — if, perchance, the typical teenager happens to live on Malibu Beach, have a knockout wardrobe and attract constant male attention. Still, the sisters’ lives are not problem-free: Their father (Eric Lutes), bogged down in a midlife crisis, has moved to a trailer overlooking the family home; their mother (Clare Carey), an assertive overachiever, is preoccupied with running a fashion-design company. That leaves their protective nanny (Taylor Negron) to oversee the potential mayhem while struggling to hold on to his sanity. This show is the first presentation from Nickelodeon’s recently acquired library of four series, seven television movies and two music video specials starring the Olsens (Ashley, above left, with Mary-Kate).8 P.M. (CBS) 2 BROKE GIRLS Max (Kat Dennings) and Caroline (Beth Behrs) decide that Nash (Austin Falk) should model — and that they should be his managers. Sophie (Jennifer Coolidge) and Oleg (Jonathan Kite) try to abstain from having sex for 30 days before their wedding. In “Mike & Molly,” at 8:30, Mike (Billy Gardell) meets his Aunt Rosemary (Margo Martindale), who is very unlike his mother (Rondi Reed).8 P.M. (TCM) DESIGN BY GEORGE JENKINS Turner Classic Movies pays tribute to the production designer George C. Jenkins (1908-2007), who won an Oscar for “All the President’s Men,” with five of his most visually arresting films. The lineup begins with “Up the Down Staircase” (1967), starring Sandy Dennis as an idealistic first-year teacher battling delinquent students and an apathetic administration in a gritty New York City school, based on the book by Bel Kaufman, who died in July at 103. It continues with “The Miracle Worker” (1962), at 10:15; “Night Moves” (1975), at 12:15 a.m.; “Funny Lady” (1975), at 2:15; and “The Subject Was Roses” (1968), at 4:45.Advertisement8 P.M. (Fox) GOTHAM The Penguin (Robin Lord Taylor) oversees a massacre and incites an all-out war. Bruce (David Mazouz) discovers the truth about Wayne Enterprises. In “The Following,” at 9, Ryan (Kevin Bacon) is forced to enter the prison alone when a hostage situation develops on the day that Joe Carroll (James Purefoy) is to be executed.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.9 P.M. (CW) JANE THE VIRGIN Jane (Gina Rodriguez) and Rafael (Justin Baldoni) are told that their baby is breech. Rogelio (Jaime Camil) gets a job offer that could restore his former luster. And Alba (Ivonne Coll) reveals what happened the night of her accident.9 P.M. (CBS) STALKER The series resumes after a hiatus as Beth (Maggie Q) fights for her life while her own stalker (Eion Bailey) holds her captive in the wilderness outside Ojai, Calif. The unit, meanwhile, waits to learn whether Ben (Victor Rasuk) will survive a shooting.AdvertisementWhat’s Streaming Now CONNECTED In this first long-form series from AOL Originals, six people use camcorders to document their lives for six months. Four new episodes begin as the relationship between Jonathan Bricklin, an aspiring writer and the owner of Spin, a Ping-Pong social club in New York, and his girlfriend, Susan Sarandon, reaches its breaking point. (aol.com/connected) KATHRYN SHATTUCKA version of this schedule appears in print on April 27, 2015, on Page C7 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Monday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.