By NEIL GENZLINGERAPRIL 26, 2015
The PBS programmers get a little carried away this week with the 40th anniversary of the fall of Saigon, but the occasion at least gives Rory Kennedy’s excellent “Last Days in Vietnam” an opportunity to reach a broader audience. And if the other PBS offerings aren’t as compelling, you can wander over to the Smithsonian Channel for an absorbing special called “The Spy in the Hanoi Hilton.”“Last Days in Vietnam,” which had a theatrical run last fall (allowing it an Oscar nomination for best documentary), is being shown on Tuesday night as an episode of the series “American Experience,” with additional footage not seen in the earlier version. It is a harrowing account of the events of this week in 1975, when the North Vietnamese Army completed its takeover of South Vietnam, prompting a disorganized evacuation in Saigon and elsewhere.Anyone over a certain age remembers that week in broad terms, of course, but the strength of the film is the detail it provides through the recollections of people — both American and Vietnamese — who were there. We hear about a symbolic tree in the parking lot of the American Embassy that had to be cut down to allow helicopters to land, and about Marines who were given the unusual assignment to burn $1 million in cash. Most stunning is the story of a South Vietnamese pilot who offloaded his passengers (including his own family) onto a ship too small to land on by hovering close enough for them to jump, then ditched his helicopter while jumping out himself.The frantic hours were full of bad decisions and commendable ones, with some Americans determined to help South Vietnamese friends and co-workers escape while also saving themselves. The chaos is palpable.Advertisement“Did the right mix of people get out?” asks Stuart A. Herrington, who was there as an Army captain. Then he adds, “At the embassy, a lot of the people who got out happened to be good wall jumpers.”AdvertisementThe PBS slate is augmented with other programs that have little to do with the anniversary except that they’re about Vietnam. The best is “Kent State: The Day the ’60s Died,” about the killing of four students at Kent State University in Ohio during an antiwar demonstration in May 1970.The program recounts President Richard M. Nixon’s decision to expand the war into Cambodia and the resulting protests, which at Kent State had turned violent. The National Guard was called in, and on May 4 guardsmen opened fire.Participants help tell the familiar story, but the program’s real point is the aftermath. It suggests that the events at Kent State were in effect a victory for the silent majority. As Patrick J. Buchanan puts it, “1972 was the nation’s verdict on the antiwar movement.” He’s talking about Nixon’s landslide re-election victory.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Less successful than “Kent State” are “Dick Cavett’s Vietnam” and “The Draft,” both of which PBS is showing on Monday night.“The Draft” gives a history of that practice in the United States, going back to the American Revolution, with a focus on the draft during Vietnam and complaints about its equity. Those complaints, it notes, were hardly new, stretching back at least to the Civil War, during which the wealthy could pay for someone else to go to battle in their place.“There are law offices that opened up for the express purpose of finding substitutes for people,” the historian Hari Jones notes of that time. The program builds to a question: Is the all-volunteer military better, because it consists only of people who have chosen to be in uniform, or worse, because it means most Americans are not directly invested in whether the country goes to war? It’s an interesting point that is left underexplored.Mr. Cavett is the guide to clips from his old talk show, which during Vietnam was not shy about discussing the war. The program, though, spends a lot of its time on a boilerplate history of the war and not enough on the clips. The ones that are shown only make you wish there were more.A young John Kerry speaks out about his experiences fighting in Vietnam. Wayne Morse, the Democratic senator from Oregon, denounces the Gulf of Tonkin resolution with a phrase that could have been relevant to any number of other subjects right up until today: “Watch out for the development of government by secrecy and executive supremacy.” And celebrities sound like fonts of wisdom.“It’s up to people like you and me and the rest of us to say what we think and not be ashamed of what we think and not defer to experts,” Warren Beatty says, responding to complaints that movie stars shouldn’t try to be voices in political debates. “There are no experts, I think, when you’re talking about questions of compassion and humanity.”AdvertisementThe best of the Monday offerings is not on PBS, but on the Smithsonian Channel, where “The Spy in the Hanoi Hilton” tells a fascinating story of how American prisoners of war communicated with the C.I.A. during Vietnam. One of the leaders of this clandestine operation was James B. Stockdale, who decades later became the butt of a lot of jokes when he was the vice-presidential candidate on Ross Perot’s 1992 ticket. Stockdale, who died in 2005, was a prisoner of war for seven and a half years beginning in 1965, and you’ll have a new respect for him after watching this program.A version of this review appears in print on April 27, 2015, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline: The Fall of Saigon and a Flood of Memories.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.