By MIKE HALEAPRIL 26, 2015
After its success with Andrew Jarecki’s “The Jinx: The Life and Deaths of Robert Durst,” HBO on Monday night offers another documentary about a man accused of murders that have gone unsolved for decades. Nick Broomfield’s “Tales of the Grim Sleeper” couldn’t be more different from “The Jinx,” however.Lonnie Franklin Jr., who was arrested in Los Angeles five years ago on 10 counts of murder and suspected of being the mass serial killer known as the Grim Sleeper, and who is now awaiting trial, is barely present in Mr. Broomfield’s film. While law enforcement officials guided Mr. Jarecki through the Durst case, representatives of the Los Angeles Police Department refused to talk to Mr. Broomfield.Whether by choice or because it was his only option, Mr. Broomfield hit the streets of South-Central Los Angeles and made a documentary that’s not really about Mr. Franklin’s guilt or innocence (his guilt seems to be largely assumed) and that spends virtually no time considering evidence or detailing the police investigation. As Mr. Broomfield says near the beginning of the film, “I wondered how this was possible” — how so many women, perhaps more than a hundred, could be killed or go missing in a section of a major American city, and how their cases could go unsolved across two decades.His answers are unsurprising — poverty, drugs, a police force unconcerned with the lives of black women it dismisses as prostitutes and addicts — and his film has a messy, contingent quality. (To belabor an unfair comparison, it doesn’t have the fine finish of “The Jinx.”) Mr. Broomfield’s first-person, voyeuristic style won’t be for everyone — he narrates the film and frequently appears in it, stalking the streets of South-Central with his oversize microphone like a British tourist seeking out scenes of American degradation. His insertion of himself into the neighborhood becomes part of the drama, and he favors neo-noir images of nighttime drives and street pursuits of potentially hostile interview subjects that heighten a sense of danger.For all its irritations, though, “Tales of the Grim Sleeper” develops in frightening and moving ways. Like a war correspondent, Mr. Broomfield finds fixers, local residents who provide entree into the Grim Sleeper’s world. Pam Brooks, a former prostitute, helps him track down women who describe their violent encounters with Mr. Franklin, and she is the film’s good-humored center of gravity. Two of Mr. Franklin’s friends, first heard yelling insults at Mr. Broomfield, become the filmmaker’s major sources, and as they grow more comfortable their stories about Mr. Franklin suddenly turn more alarming.The dominant motif of “Tales of the Grim Sleeper” is Mr. Broomfield cruising the streets seeking people who will talk, and there’s an unspoken, mordant parallel to the descriptions of Mr. Franklin stalking women in his camper van. But when Mr. Broomfield finds people, they talk to him in a way that they wouldn’t to the police. A lot of what he records might be dismissed as hearsay or considered unreliable in a courtroom. But if you live in Los Angeles County and you’d like to make sure you never have to serve on a Grim Sleeper jury, having watched the film might be considered sufficiently prejudicial.A version of this review appears in print on April 27, 2015, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline: In Voyeuristic Pursuit of Murder’s Secrets.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.