
Laughter was abundant on Tuesday at the tribute to Anne Meara, the actress, comedian and playwright, who died in May at 85. During the remembrance at the Eugene O’Neill Theater, much was made of what her son, the actor and filmmaker Ben Stiller, called her tough Irish broad exterior, and her delight in the use of profanity by her and others. Recalling Ms. Meara’s ribald, crotch-grabbing behavior while directing her in a television movie, Bob Saget called her “one of the best men I’ve ever met.”She was also the object of the playwright Donald Margulies’s youthful affection. “My love of shiksas can be traced back to Anne Meara,” he said. “I was 9. She was 34.”The speakers and film and television clips suggested that there was more to Ms. Meara than wisecracking and profanity. She was an actress of diverse comic and dramatic gifts who could swap comic lines with Carroll O’Connor in “Archie Bunker’s Place” or deliver Molly Bloom’s epic soliloquy. She could offer a few words of encouragement to her daughter, Amy Stiller, to elevate her acting performance. Liam Neeson said that Ms. Meara overcame her fear of forgetting her lines with hard work when they were in “Anna Christie” on Broadway.  “She was one brave actress,” he said, punctuating his praise with one of Ms. Meara’s favorite curse words.Michael Patrick King, who directed the “Sex and the City” films, said Ms. Meara delivered a long monologue at the end of a day of shooting for a scene in which her character has Alzheimer’s and enters a rest home. “I told her she was amazing,” Mr. King said. And, imitating her voice, he added: “She said, ‘Yeah, it’ll never make the movie.’ And it didn’t. She knew that at 6 a.m., and she still brought it for me.” Mr. King was also proud to be “the only man on the planet who got her to do a nude scene — including Jerry,” referring to her husband, Jerry Stiller, for an episode of the “Sex and the City” series.Mr. Stiller, 88, moved cautiously on and off the stage, flanked by his children. He recalled how, when the comedy team Stiller and Meara was hot, his wife insisted that they have children. “Either have kids or this mishegas is over,” he recalled her saying. “We had Amy and Ben. Bingo.”Speaking through sniffles, Amy Stiller compared her mother to Holden Caulfield in “The Catcher in the Rye. After reading the passage where Caulfield says, “What I have to do, I have to catch everybody if they start to go over the cliff,” Ms. Stiller said. “That’s what Anne was for a lot of people.”