AdvertisementSupported byBy William GrimesThe mental marathon billed as “A Night of Philosophy” began in an analytic frenzy at 7 p.m. on Friday as three speakers held forth simultaneously in separate lecture rooms: Monique Canto-Sperber, of the National Center for Scientific Research in Paris, dissected the notion of free speech in a liberal society. Chiara Bottici, of the New School for Social Research, discussed Machiavelli’s ideas about fortune. And Pascal Engel, of the University of Geneva, issued a ringing call for deep thought in a talk titled “Must Intellectual Life Be Boring?”Boring no. Strenuous yes. For the next 12 hours, 59 other philosophers held forth in 20-minute bursts at the Cultural Services of the French Embassy on the Upper East Side and its next-door neighbor, the Ukrainian Institute of America. Their subjects ranged from Pascal’s wager to the perils of moral relativism to alien intelligence, and were delivered amid a swirl of artistic performances, D.J. sets, a five-hour reading of the Marquis de Sade’s “Philosophy in the Boudoir” and eerie sounds emanating from a wooden space capsule with an astronaut D.J. inside.Logic suggests a limited audience for an event of this sort. But, as the philosopher J. C. Beall pointed out in his talk, logic is weak. The line outside the embassy extended several blocks along Fifth Avenue. On 79th Street, leading to the entrance of the Ukrainian Institute, the hopeful crowded the sidewalk from Fifth Avenue to Madison Avenue and beyond.The dominant school of thought was stoicism, as a chill wind whipped the crowd and the wait approached three hours. Undeterred, an audience of about 5,000 went through the doors over the course of the evening, with lines persisting until 5 a.m. Inside, the atmosphere was chaotic, by design. “It’s a sort of tribute to the New York art scene of the 1950s and 1960s — John Cage, happenings, the whole freedom of this,” said Mériam Korichi, the philosopher, stage designer and Warhol biographer who organized the event, as well as predecessors in Paris, London and Berlin over the last five years. “From the beginning, I had in mind a multistage event, where you could not possibly attend everything.”Randomness seemed to play well. Paul Bloomfield, a philosopher at the University of Connecticut at Storrs, mingled with the crowd on the second floor of the embassy, awaiting his opportunity, hours hence, to explain why morality is a precondition of happiness. “Just bringing philosophy to the public is a great thing, and the all-night feature is a gas,” he said. “Who knows what might happen at 2:30 in the morning?”By 9 p.m. John Cage had given way to pounding disco classics from the 1970s in the embassy’s bookstore, Albertine. Over at the Ukrainian Institute, the coffee machine broke down. On the plus side, free charcuterie from D’Artagnan appeared. Speaking in the Ukrainian Institute’s concert hall, Susan Schneider, of the University of Connecticut, speculated about the nature of alien consciousness and cast doubt on whether extraterrestrial beings might be as interested in communicating with us as we are with them. “You don’t spend time reading a book to your goldfish,” she said.Outside, the lines grew longer. Inside, attendees crowded the impromptu lecture rooms, clustered to engage in postlecture disputation or sprawled on the floor to gather strength.“I came here thinking I might find an oasis,” said Katarzyna Endler, a sophomore studying anthropology at Fordham University. “When you take a philosophy course, it’s all PowerPoint presentations, but this is more like a community, where people are here because they care.”As dawn broke, the embassy’s staff members were visibly wilting. The lines had disappeared. But about 400 die-hards remained inside, most of them alarmingly bright-eyed and ready for more philosophy.Mayank Mishra, an analyst from India with Berkshire Hathaway in Stamford, Conn., had lined up early in the evening, waited nearly three hours and stayed for the duration. “I wanted to get more key words that I can Google and read about,” he said. “Also, I want to soak up as much New York as I can while I am here.”Chloe Glynn, a galley cook for the Caravan Stage Company, an anticapitalist troupe performing on a ship, the Amara Zee, currently docked off Brooklyn, had struck up a friendship with Mr. Mishra despite his profession.She had arrived at midnight and remained upbeat. “It’s a once in a lifetime opportunity, to stay up until 6 a.m. with free coffee and some of the best minds in New York,” she said.Off in a corner, Danka Bakmaz, an architecture student at Parsons, studied her iPhone and waited for the final lecture of the event, suitably titled, “Will This Be Worthwhile?”“I came with friends from school, but they left me,” Ms. Bakmaz said. Asked if 12 hours was perhaps a little too much philosophy, she looked scandalized. “No, it is just right. I can’t wait for the last speaker. I am very excited about her. This is so refreshing.”At 6:30 a.m., the last speaker in question, Isidora Stojanovic, of the National Center for Scientific Research in Paris, addressed a standing-room-only audience of about a hundred, parsing the philosophical problems in assessing future probabilities, such as the pleasure potential of a rock concert in which an unknown group is playing, or the likelihood that one’s fifth attempt to quit smoking will succeed.“I don’t give talks to a wide audience that often, so I thought this would be a challenge,” Ms. Stojanovic said. “I usually work on things that are more technical and specialized.”And the hour? She smiled wanly. “Normally I sleep at this time of day” she said.Advertisement