AdvertisementSupported byBy Scott ReyburnLONDON — “There are certain things you can do with Plasticine you can’t do with paint,” said Henry Hudson, a British artist who is the subject of Sotheby’s first one-man show at its S|2 gallery here. “That,” he said, pointing to a pile of trash in his scene of a crack den, “has been head-butted, and that’s been done with the heel of my foot.”Mr. Hudson, 32, has re-imagined William Hogarth’s 1733 series of paintings, “A Rake’s Progress,” using the humble oil-based modeling material that brought us the stop-motion animation characters Wallace and Gromit. The message, as well as the medium, has also been given a 21st-century tweak.In place of Hogarth’s profligate heir Tom Rakewell is now the fictional contemporary Chinese artist “Young Sen,” whose tumultuously excessive life and brutal death are depicted in 10 large-scale “plates” that take us to China, to a London medical school, to the New York gallery scene, to a rehab clinic in Switzerland, then back, finally, to a firing squad in China.Three years in the making, the cycle abounds with the sort of tongue-in-cheek cultural references that Hogarth, in his own age, packed into his paintings.“I like the theatricality of Hogarth, the satire, the parallels with our own time,” said Mr. Hudson, who has a studio in Bethnal Green, East London. “It was similar then; it’s just that we’ve got different gadgets.”Hogarth’s mordant vision of a dog-eat-dog 18th century resonates with today’s British artists. The Turner Prize-winner Grayson Perry satirized contemporary consumerist culture with a cycle of six tapestries, “The Vanity of Small Differences,” also partly inspired by “A Rake’s Progress” and shown at the Victoria Miro gallery in Islington in 2012.But arguably it is the increasingly Hogarthian nature of London itself that could prove the even bigger influence on its city’s artists.The gap between the wealthy and the creative class is vast and daunting. Laissez-faire London is reported to have the largest population of multimillionaires of any city in the world, which has bloated its real estate values.Last year, 298 separate studio buildings or sites, for more than 11,500 artists, were recorded here, according to a study published by the Greater London Authority in September. Within the next five years, 28 percent of these studios will face the risk of losing their lease and rental arrangements as the buildings are redeveloped. The trend is likely to grow as the demand for real estate in London raises the potential value of artists’ spaces, putting “pressure on the sector,” the report said.The Biscuit Factory in the Clement’s Road area was, until the end of last year, providing studios for 390 artists, including such well-known names as Phyllida Barlow, who had been working on a Tate Britain commission. Once an industrial building, the Biscuit Factory is in one of London’s newest, most vibrant creative districts, Bermondsey, where White Cube opened a 58,000-square-foot gallery in 2011. The building was on a short-term lease to V22, one of several organizations that find studio space for artists. The building has now been “tastefully converted” by the developer Workspace “to suit media-style businesses seeking a central London location.”Organizations like V22, Acme Studios, Space Studios, ASC and the Bow Arts Trust are all active in providing affordable studio spaces. But the artists themselves, particularly if they have recently left government-funded art schools, which now charge annual tuition fees of 9,000 pounds, or $13,000, face further intimidating costs if they want to make an impact in the London art world.Duval Timothy, 25, who graduated from Central Saint Martins in 2011, rents an 80-square-foot studio from V22 in Bermondsey for £120 a month and pays £500 for accommodation in New Cross, South London.“It’s hard to be creative when you have to pay for a studio and rent,” said Mr. Timothy, who makes works that explore the interaction of color with individual personalities. He supplements sales of art from his website by being a member of Groundnut, a pop-up restaurant partnership that has just sold a cookbook of sub-Saharan recipes to Penguin Books.Artists are being worn down by the rising costs of living, said Rozsa Farkas, a gallery owner in southeast London. Ms. Farkas, 27, rents out nine studios to artists to defray the costs of running her gallery, Arcadia Missa, “a self-organized space in austerity Britain” in Peckham, which has recently become a hub for younger, serious-minded artists and dealers. She has had to move six times in four years and now pays £750 a month to share a house in Brockley, South London. “It means a narrower type of student is going to study art,” she said. “British art will get more boring. New York seems to me a lot more stable.”But Ms. Farkas and many other artists and London galleries continue to push boundaries. On May 1, Arcadia Missa will be showing several new sculptures by the New York artist Carlos Reyes inspired by political posters made by the Italian film director Pier Paolo Pasolini. These will be priced at $5,000 to $8,000.On Thursday, Pippy Houldsworth, a West End gallerist, exhibited a small silver version of the Paul McCarthy sex toy sculpture that was vandalized in the Place Vendôme in Paris last October. From an edition of 10, these are priced at £65,000 each.Also on Thursday, just to prove that all British contemporary art doesn’t have to come from London, the Fitzrovia dealership Carroll/Fletcher showed new works in various media by the Bristol duo John Wood and Paul Harrison, priced at £2,000 to £50,000. One of their deadpan, frequently hilarious videos of themselves as kinetic sculptures has been acquired by the Tate.There is, of course, nothing new about artists’ struggling to find fame in big cities. It was the same in Hogarth’s day, and it was the same back in 1969 when the young London artist Ben Johnson, just like the ill-fated “Young Sen,” had a sold-out show in New York. In those days, Mr. Johnson, who is now 69, painted like a German Expressionist. He now makes monumental Photo Realist paintings of architectural subjects, such as the Alhambra Palace, in Granada, Spain, three examples of which have recently sold to wealthy private collectors from Switzerland and the Middle East for about £150,000 each.“I see myself as a craftsman who happens to be a painter — that puts a lot of people off,” Mr. Johnson said in the spacious studio he bought in Hammersmith, West London, in 1990. “But I’m lucky. I can paint what I like.”As for Mr. Hudson, his internationalization of Hogarth has proved to be a shrewd commercial move. Before the opening of “The Rise and Fall of Young Sen — The Contemporary Artist’s Progress” on Thursday, Sotheby’s said it had sold all 10 of the large Plasticine works, each priced at about £65,000, to “well-known collectors from a high-end level.” The show, which runs through May 29, also includes about 30 smaller Plasticine panels, priced at about £8,000 each, and 10 drawings at £10,000 each.Mr. Hudson is also successful and lucky enough to own his studio in the neo-Hogarthian city that is 21st-century London.Advertisement