An occasional series on vintage comics.The modern comic book came of age in the shadow of World War II, so it’s no shock that war comics were a staple of the spin racks for decades: Sgt. Rock and Sgt. Fury, Boy Commandos and Captain America (Cap’s shown slugging Hitler on the cover of the very first issue), and the 1950s EC zeniths of Frontline Combat and Two-Fisted Tales.But as comic books increasingly became the domain of superheroes, and memories of World War II dimmed, war comics essentially vanished. The variable grays of the Vietnam War and later conflicts didn’t lend themselves as easily to fictional gung-ho action. But two new reprint projects — “A Sailor’s Story” by Sam Glanzman (Dover) and “Joe Kubert: Enemy Ace” (IDW) — are a reminder that some of the best work done in the field was created by the artists and writers of war comics.Refined from the ore of his sketchbooks and diaries, “A Sailor’s Story” is Mr. Glanzman’s quiet memoir about a simple sailor’s life aboard the Navy destroyer U.S.S. Stevens. Back in print after more than 25 years, the book also includes its sequel, “Winds, Dreams and Dragons,” and a never-before-seen Stevens story.Originally published by Marvel in 1987 and 1989, Mr. Glanzman’s overlooked gem is the antithesis of the hyperventilated heroics of Marvel’s Nick Fury and his Howling Commandos. As Larry Hama, the original editor on “A Sailor’s Story,” says of Mr. Glanzman in his introduction: “He was writing a history that wasn’t in the logbooks and naval journals. He was bearing witness from the mess deck, not from the bridge.” In “A Sailor’s Story” we follow Mr. Glanzman and the Stevens from the Brooklyn Navy Yard to the Pacific, where the destroyer shot down seven enemy planes, and its crew received six purple hearts, three commendations, nine battle stars and engaged in 16 operations against the enemy. Even so, this memoir isn’t about the glories of combat. Through Mr. Glanzman’s strong cartooning, the battle images are dramatic, but never overblown, just matter-of-fact. And his sharp eye for detail, whether it’s the government-issue mattress of an unsleepable bunk or an anti-aircraft gun, is always convincing. But what makes “A Sailor’s Story” most compelling is its modest grace. It’s not really a memoir of war, but of life aboard a floating town. Mr. Glanzman’s stories are like those you’d hear from a favorite uncle, true tales about average men who were most concerned about beer, women and gambling, not life, death and the enemy.◆After the documentary hush of “A Sailor’s Story,” “Joe Kubert: Enemy Ace” feels like Imax.In the artist Joe Kubert and the writer Robert Kanigher’s forays into World War I mythology and archaic biplane chivalry, beautifully drawn Fokkers, Nieuports, Martinsydes and Spads enact a deadly ballet of air warfare. There is much talk of “the murderous skies,” and thick, dark clouds constant billow.As the comic’s hero, Hans von Hammer, the Hammer of Hell, states in one of these epics — all taken from 1960s issues of DC’s Star Spangled War Stories — “My Spandaus screamed their song of death . . . and ribbons of flame plumed from the stricken British plane.” By the way, von Hammer’s only friend is a lone wolf who lives in the Black Forest.This IDW Artist’s Edition, its oversize pages scanned from the original art, is a perfect showcase for Mr. Kubert’s loose, muscular line, reminiscent of work by the illustrators N.C. Wyeth and Burne Hogarth. Mr. Kubert, who died in 2012, put that line to good use in a career of more than 70 years in comics (starting at age 11), on characters as diverse as Tarzan, Batman, Sgt. Rock and Viking Prince.But, as with most action comics, the bulk of Mr. Kubert’s supple art was in support of bold melodrama, and Mr. Glanzman’s book is just the right palate cleanser after a feast of pulpy adventure from Mr. Kubert.