By LAUREL GRAEBEROCT. 1, 2015
Submerge NYC Marine Science FestivalThe next time you’re near the Hudson River, walk to the water’s edge and look down. What do you see?Inevitably, not much.“The Hudson River is a very murky system,” said Nicolette Witcher, vice president for environment and education at the Hudson River Park Trust. Typically, “you can’t see deeper than 60 centimeters,” or about two feet.On Saturday, Hudson River Park and the New York Hall of Science plan to illuminate those shadowy depths. At the second Submerge NYC Marine Science Festival, teams will demonstrate remotely operated underwater vehicles, scuba divers will fetch specimens, and research stations will offer interactive experiments in biology, ecology, robotics and engineering. It’s all a free celebration of the park’s estuary, a rich ecosystem where freshwater and saltwater meet.“Hudson River Park is like the juvenile hangout for organisms like the striped bass,” Ms. Witcher said, explaining that bass hatchlings spend two to four years in the estuary before traveling into the ocean.AdvertisementThe festival will have its own juvenile hangouts. At the New York Hall of Science tent, children will build model boats propelled by rubber bands, explore flotation by designing small rafts and observe how changes in the sea’s acidity affect its life-forms. (Above, viewing specimens.) Activities at the River Ranger Kid Zone will include making crafts — painting recycled bottles in which young visitors will enclose environmental messages — and even handling river residents.Advertisement“They’ll see small mud crabs, which are often no bigger than an inch wide,” said Tina Walsh, an environmental educator. “We have grass shrimp, which are really beautifully translucent. And what kids really get a kick out of are sea squirts.” These small invertebrates “have this siphon, and when you squeeze them gently, they squirt out a little bit of water.”Smallest of all are plankton, to which Submerge will devote an entire tent. There little scientists will make nets to catch samples and then view the creatures under microscopes and build plankton models.Older children and teenagers can hear about research careers on a science stage, where marine experts will be interviewed and where the organization Mad Science will perform a mix of educational theater and experiments called “What Do We Know About H2O?”Submerge will also offer live music, kayaking, catch-and-release fishing and tours of the Lettie G. Howard, an 1893 fishing schooner. And a food tent, since not just minds will be hungry.(From 11 a.m. to 4 p.m., Pier 26, North Moore Street and the Hudson River, TriBeCa; submerge.nyc.)For Children‘Archaeology Zone: Discovering Treasures From Playgrounds to Palaces’ (Continuing) Children will step into the shoes of an explorer like Indiana Jones in this permanent exhibition at the Jewish Museum, but the adventures will be purely scholarly. Still, there is plenty of excitement in analyzing Middle Eastern artifacts like a jar handle, a clay jug and a bangle and figuring out the purpose behind ancient pieces like a Greek helmet and a bull-shaped vessel. This interactive show, for ages 3 to 10, also includes a recreated room from the Ottoman period (around 1900) where young archaeologists can dress in costume and portray early-20th-century immigrants to Palestine. 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92nd Street, 212-423-3200, thejewishmuseum.org.‘Brooklyn Sewers: What’s Up Down There?’ (Through May 29) When it comes to subterranean infrastructure projects, New York City’s subway system seems to get all the attention. But a group of teenage curators at the Brooklyn Historical Society would like to introduce you to another underground marvel: Brooklyn’s sewer system, one of the city’s oldest and most extensive infrastructure projects. This exhibition explores engineering conundrums and courtroom battles and tells the story of the sewer system through photographs, drawings and maps. 128 Pierrepont Street, near Clinton Street, Brooklyn Heights, 718-222-4111, brooklynhistory.org.Advertisement‘Connected Worlds’ (continuing) Human choices and actions have an impact on the world’s ecosystems, but people usually can’t see the effects as they happen. That isn’t true in this new permanent exhibition in the renovated Great Hall of the New York Hall of Science. Consisting of huge screens (one is 38 feet tall), the show depicts six interconnected environments with a shared water supply. With the help of technology that responds to gestures, “Connected Worlds” allows children to use simple motions to plant, harvest, cut trees, create clouds and make other changes in the projected landscapes — and see how the native flora and fauna fare. 47-01 111th Street, Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, Queens, 718-699-0005, nysci.org.Enchanted Wave Hill Weekend (Saturday and Sunday) Remember the woodland fairies in “A Midsummer Night’s Dream”? This weekend they will be conjured up at Wave Hill, the public garden in the Bronx. The drop-in Family Art Project will be devoted to making ribbon wands and tiny elfin houses from leaves and twigs and other natural materials. Children can also hear Rama Mandel tell stories about the resident sprites and enjoy the spell cast by the music of the New Thread Quartet. From 10 a.m. to 1 p.m., West 249th Street and Independence Avenue, Riverdale, the Bronx, 718-549-3200, wavehill.org.First Saturdays for Families: ‘More Heads’ (Saturday) You could say that the artist Wynne Greenwood has a thing about heads: those that talk and those that sing. Her show “Kelly,” at the New Museum, consists of remastered videos of her appearances in the all-woman band Tracy & the Plastics, in which she portrays all three musicians. The exhibition also includes videos in which sculptured heads by the artist appear to converse. In this free program for ages 4 through 12, children will emulate Ms. Greenwood’s work, creating heads from balloons, paper bags, foil, tape and other materials, and then inventing dialogues and performances in which they engage. From 10 a.m. to noon, New Museum, 235 Bowery, at Prince Street, Lower East Side, 212-219-1222, newmuseum.org; space is limited, first come first served.‘Flight School, the Musical’ (Saturday and Sunday) If you want to fly, and you’re a bird, you should be all set, right? Well, not if you happen to be a penguin. That’s the challenge confronting the little hero of this new musical from Vital Theater Company, adapted from “Flight School,” a picture book by Lita Judge. With a script by Cara Lustik, lyrics by Joshua H. Cohen and a score by David Mallamud, the show, recommended for ages 2 through 7, chronicles Penguin’s determination to remove the technical obstacles between him and the sky. (Through Oct. 31.) At 1 p.m., Marjorie S. Deane Little Theater, 10 West 64th Street, Manhattan, 212-579-0528, vitaltheatre.org.‘Cooking With Frida’ (Through Nov. 1) The New York Botanical Garden is honoring the Mexican artist Frida Kahlo (1907-1954) in its exhibition “Frida Kahlo: Art, Garden, Life,” and it offers programs to introduce its youngest visitors to this famous Latina. In this one, at the Ruth Rea Howell Family Garden, children can explore the raw ingredients of Mexican cuisine and enjoy cooking demonstrations inspired by Kahlo’s entertaining. The workshops are on Wednesdays, Saturdays and Sundays at 2 and 4 p.m.; Bronx River Parkway (Exit 7W) and Fordham Road, the Bronx, 718-817-8700, nybg.org/frida.‘Frolic!’ at the Children’s Museum of Manhattan (Through Dec. 31) You’re never too young to rock — and this space proves it. A new pop-up installation at the museum, “Frolic!” uses rock music and a themed décor to stimulate sensory play and learning in visitors ages 5 and under. In addition to a stage, a pretend ticket booth and ’70s-style props — including a Volkswagen mini-van to climb into — the 1,500-square-foot area has programs of workshops and live performances to help little ones get into the groove. The Tisch Building, 212 West 83rd Street, 212-721-1223, cmom.org.‘The Gazillion Bubble Show: The Next Generation’  (Friday through Sunday) Children love bubbles, and this interactive show promises not just a gazillion but also some of the largest ever blown, along with light effects and lasers. The stars are the members of the Yang family: Fan and Ana Yang and their son Deni and others, who rotate as M.C.s for the production. Audience members may even find themselves in bubbles of their own. (The run is open-ended.) Friday at 7 p.m.; Saturday at 11 a.m. and 2 and 4:30 p.m.; Sunday at noon and 3 p.m.; 340 West 50th Street, Clinton, 212-239-6200, gazillionbubbleshow.com.‘Go Fish!’ (Saturday) Fishing can be a lot of fun, unless you happen to be a fish. These free events from the Battery Park City Parks Conservancy turn the experience into a win-win situation. Master anglers will help Children will cast lines with barbless hooks into New York Bay, and all fish will be placed in tanks and identified and observed before heading back to their homes. The day will also include a bird-watching walk; a performance by the band Shine & the Moonbeams; and an art project to make musical instruments, based on a tour of Tony Cragg’s outdoor sculpture installation “Resonating Bodies.” From 10 a.m. to 2 p.m., Robert F. Wagner Jr. Park, Battery Park City (access at Battery Place), Lower Manhattan, 212-267-9700, bpcparks.org.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.‘Hansel and Gretel’s Halloween Adventure’ (Friday through Sunday, and Tuesday through Thursday) This pair already know how to deal with a witch, and they have encounters with many more fantastical creatures in this puppet musical at the Swedish Cottage Marionette Theater. Geared to ages 3 through 9 (and appropriately tame), the show is a sequel to the theater’s original “Hansel and Gretel,” introducing characters like mermaids, cute monsters, charming vampires and valiant pirates. (Through Oct. 31.) Weekdays, except Mondays, at 10:30 a.m. and noon, with an extra performance on Wednesdays (and on Halloween) at 2:30 p.m.; weekends at 1 p.m. At 79th Street and the West Drive, Central Park, 212-988-9093, cityparksfoundation.org/arts. Reservations required.Advertisement‘The Hunger Games: The Exhibition’ (Through Jan. 3) What enterprising 12- or 13-year-old wouldn’t like to foment a little rebellion? Such a visitor can do so vicariously at this attraction at Discovery Times Square, stepping into the role of Katniss Everdeen, the teenage heroine of “The Hunger Games” and the ultimate leader of the resistance against her nation’s totalitarian government. Based on the Lionsgate film adaptations of Suzanne Collins’s novels, the show includes costumes and artifacts from the movies, as well as re-creations of Katniss’s journey and interactive, role-playing elements like a gamesmaker’s table and a chance to learn and practice stunt choreography. 226 West 44th Street, Manhattan, 866-987-9692, discoverytsx.com, thehungergamesexhibition.com.‘If You Lived Here, You’d Be Home’ (Through Jan. 17) Maps present facts, but they can also engage the imagination. This new exhibition at the Children’s Museum of the Arts explores the intersection of cartography and art, showing work that expands upon, redefines or simply refers to maps. Among the eight artists represented are Matthew Cusik, who makes collages from map fragments; Joyce Kosloff, who layers images and textured paint onto maps; Loren Munk, who adds plaques of color and information to street maps; and Nikki Rosato, who subtracts from maps, cutting away all but roads and rivers. In the museum’s Cynthia C. Wainwright Gallery, 103 Charlton Street, between Hudson and Greenwich Streets, South Village, 212-274-0986, cmany.org.‘Jean-Michel Cousteau’s Secret Ocean’ (Friday through Thursday) Ever encounter a goby or a blenny? How about a Christmas tree worm? These small marine species, often unnoticed and uncelebrated, are among the stars of this new Imax movie at the American Museum of Natural History. Filmed by Jean-Michel Cousteau, son of the ocean explorer Jacques Cousteau, and Holly Lohuis, a marine biologist, the film captures 30 species that are among the tiniest to inhabit the seas. (Through Jan. 10.) Hourly from 10:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., with 2-D screenings at 11:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m.; all other screenings are 3-D. Central Park West and 79th Street, 212-769-5200, amnh.org.‘LARD: Life’s a Real Dream’ (Saturday) This show about LARD, the concept, has nothing to do with lard, the substance. An acronym for “Life’s a Real Dream,” “LARD” is the title of a rollicking musical production starring Lard Dog, who also happens not to be a dog. The alter ego of the multimedia artist Steven Erdman, Lard is a gregarious out-of-this-world character who has flown in from the planet Belopio on a giant pretzel. He and his Band of Shy perform this hourlong entertainment, which includes cartoon graphics and a pretzel toss. (Through Jan. 2.) Saturdays at 11 a.m., 13th Street Repertory Theater, 50 West 13th Street, Greenwich Village, houseoflard.com.‘The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe’  (Saturday) If the children of the Pevensie family could travel to the magical land of Narnia through something as simple as a wardrobe, why shouldn’t two hard-working actors be able to play them and all the characters found there? That’s what Chris Boerner and Erin Layton, who recently stepped into the roles, are attempting in the Off Broadway Family Theater’s first production, le Clanché du Rand’s adaptation of C. S. Lewis’s classic novel. (The run is open-ended and continues on Saturdays.) At 11 a.m., St. Luke’s Theater, 308 West 46th Street, Clinton, 212-239-6200, narniaoffbroadway.com.‘Mammoth Follies’ (Sunday) The members of the Hudson Vagabond Puppets are known for their giant creations, and here they have an appropriately giant subject: dinosaurs. These creatures will sing and dance their way through prehistory in this revue, the fall’s first family program in the On Stage at Kingsborough series. Hosted by Willie Mammoth, the show stars, among others, a pterodactyl and an 11-foot-tall T. rex. At 2 p.m., Leon M. Goldstein Performing Arts Center, Kingsborough Community College, 2001 Oriental Boulevard, at Oxford Street, Manhattan Beach, Brooklyn, 718-368-5596, onstageatkingsborough.org.The Medieval Festival (Sunday) It’s once again time for a lighthearted look at the Dark Ages, as the Washington Heights and Inwood Development Corporation and the Department of Parks and Recreation stage the annual Medieval Festival in Fort Tryon Park. This free fair turns the park into a village from the Middle Ages, with jesters, jousters, troubadours, minstrels, wizards and all manner of knights and damsels. Highlights include sword fighting and jousting demonstrations (the trained combatants really do knock one another off their mounts); falconry displays; puppetry and storytelling; Sciencetellers (a science show injecting a bit of the 21st century); a children’s costume parade; and a chance for young visitors to be dubbed junior knights. From 11:30 a.m. to 6 p.m., 190th Street and Fort Washington Avenue, Washington Heights, 212-795-1600, whidc.org. (The rain date is Oct. 11.)‘Moo at the Zoo’ (Saturday and Sunday) It’s great to see exotic creatures at the zoo, but let’s face it: Most New York City children are about as likely to own a cow or a sheep as they are a tiger or a rhino. At this themed weekend, the Queens Zoo will let them meet and learn about domestic animals they won’t find in their high-rises, including horses, chickens and Flemish giant rabbits. In addition to encountering the residents of the zoo’s farm, Young visitors can also churn butter, make cow masks and puppets, play farm-related games and watch cheese-making demonstrations. From 11 a.m. to 4 p.m., 53-51 111th Street, Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, Queens, 718-271-1500, queenszoo.com.AdvertisementMusic in Motion (Saturday) That motion is the gentle rocking of a boat for this series of family neighborhood concerts presented by Bargemusic, the floating barge at the foot of the Brooklyn Bridge. As always, the material — announced just before the performance — is chamber music, but these programs differ in important ways from the regular Bargemusic fare: With unreserved seating, they last only an hour, include a post-show question-and-answer session with the musicians and are free. (Through Nov. 28.) At 4 p.m. (doors open at 3:45), Fulton Ferry Landing, next to the Brooklyn Bridge, Brooklyn, 800-838-3006, bargemusic.org.Music for Little Rockers (Sunday) Small children aren’t shy about rocking out — especially if you provide the right tunes. In this series from the Rock and Roll Playhouse, geared to music fans 7 and under, young participants will move, play and sing while listening to works from the classic-rock canon. Held most fall Sundays at Brooklyn Bowl, the series will devote each hourlong workshop to a theme. This weekend it’s “Grateful Rockers,” with songs from, yes, the Grateful Dead. At 11 a.m., 61 Wythe Avenue, between 11th and 12th Streets, Williamsburg, 718-963-3369, therockandrollplayhouse.com.‘NYC & Me: A Little Bite of the Big Apple’ (Through Jan. 18) There’s one place where little citizens can safely run loose on the streets of New York: the Children’s Museum of Manhattan. This new interactive 3,000-square-foot gallery is a city microcosm for small visitors, allowing them to pretend to be taxi drivers, bus drivers, construction workers, street performers and, most impressively, the mayor. Activities include directing traffic, erecting a skyscraper, “ice skating” in their socks and investigating urban tales on the steps of the New York Public Library. The Tisch Building, 212 West 83rd Street, 212-721-1223, cmom.org.‘Robin Hood’ (Friday through Sunday) Merry Men will make for merry children in this production, which opens the season at the New Victory Theater. Written by Greg Banks and performed by Seattle Children’s Theater, this staging incorporates a lot of swordplay and fast costume changes, as four actors portray all the roles in the Robin Hood legend. Running about an hour and 40 minutes (with one intermission) and geared to theatergoers 7 and older, the show focuses on the many ways Robin and his fellows — and Maid Marian — consistently outsmart the evil prince and the Sheriff of Nottingham, all in the name of helping the poor. (Through Oct. 11.) Friday at 7 p.m.; Saturday at 2 and 7 p.m.; Sunday at 3 p.m.; 209 West 42nd Street, Manhattan, 646-223-3010, newvictory.org.Story Pirates (Saturday) These brigands traffic in children’s ideas. But they do not plunder; elementary school authors happily give them their fiction, which the literary buccaneers turn into musical-comedy sketches with inspired plotlines. These shows, which will include some old favorites as well as new material, inaugurate the season of the Just Kidding series at Symphony Space. At 11 a.m. and 2 p.m., Leonard Nimoy Thalia Theater, 2537 Broadway, at 95th Street, 212-864-5400, symphonyspace.org.Sunday Story Time in Mr. Morgan’s Library (Sunday) That Mr. Morgan is none other than Pierpont (1837-1913), whose library is now a cozy museum. Children ages 3 through 6 are invited there on Sundays to hear about Alice’s amazing trip to Wonderland and what she found there. The program relates to the museum’s show “Alice: 150 Years of Wonderland,” which includes the book’s original manuscript, along with illustrations and other vintage objects that young visitors can see in a brief visit after the story. (Through Oct. 11.) From 3 to 4 p.m., 225 Madison Avenue, at 36th Street, 212-685-0008, themorgan.org.‘A Taste of Magic’ (Saturday) Would you like a side of sleight of hand with that burger? This show, developed by Magnets, a collective of local magicians, brings wizardry to the dinner table. Taking place at various restaurants, the presentation includes acts like mind reading and card tricks, which professionals perform close-up for guests; there’s also a cabaret-style show. And the admission price includes a full meal. (Through Nov. 24.) At 8 p.m., Docks Oyster Bar & Seafood Grill, 633 Third Avenue, at 40th Street, Manhattan, atasteofmagicnyc.com.‘Theatresports’ (Sunday) It may involve actors, but it’s still a competitive event: The members of Freestyle Repertory Theater, an improv troupe, are once again thinking fast on their feet. They break into two teams and perform skits based on suggestions from the audience. Children will not only vote to determine the contest’s winner, but also participate onstage. At noon, Gallery Players Theater, 199 14th Street, Park Slope, Brooklyn, 718-595-0547, Ext. 6, galleryplayers.com.‘A Voyage Through Jewish History’  (Continuing) This journey involves not just miles, but years. In this permanent interactive exhibition at the Jewish Children’s Museum, young visitors can travel from Abraham and Sarah’s tent to the Western Wall in contemporary Jerusalem and beyond. Activities along the way include giving water to Rebecca’s camels, playing the strings on David’s harp (a high-tech version with beams of light that emit sounds when struck) and taking part in the exodus from Egypt. (The museum is closed Saturday through Tuesday because of Jewish holidays.) 792 Eastern Parkway, at Kingston Avenue, Crown Heights, Brooklyn, 718-907-8833, jcm.museum.AdvertisementLAUREL GRAEBERThe Spare Times for Children listings in some editions on Friday included an entry about the Raptor Fest, scheduled for today at the Unisphere in Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, Queens. After publication, the event was canceled because of expected bad weather. It will not be rescheduled, according to the New York City Department of Parks and Recreation.A version of this schedule appears in print on October 2, 2015, on Page C16 of the New York edition with the headline: Spare Times: For Children.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.