By KATHRYN SHATTUCKAPRIL 28, 2015
8 P.M. (ABC) DANCING WITH THE STARS: 10TH ANNIVERSARY SPECIAL More than 45 sequin-adorned and spray-tanned dancers — among them members of the current Season 20 roster as well as a returning 15 celebrities and seven professionals — will waltz, mambo, tango and cha cha their way across the ballroom floor. Highlights include a “bromance” paso doble featuring National Football League players past (Donald Driver, Hines Ward, Kurt Warner, Emmitt Smith, Michael Irvin and Jerry Rice) and present (Jacoby Jones); a showdown between the Season 18 winners, Meryl Davis and Maksim Chmerkovskiy, and the reigning champions, Alfonso Ribeiro and Witney Carson; and a performance of “Lady Marmalade” by Patti LaBelle, Lil’ Kim and Amber Riley.4:45 P.M. (Starz) AMERICAN HUSTLE (2013) Irving Rosenfeld (Christian Bale), a con man with a rococo comb-over, and Sydney Prosser (Amy Adams), his seductive mistress, are forced by an F.B.I. agent (Bradley Cooper) to help ensnare politicians in this screwball comedy, directed by David O. Russell and inspired by the Abscam sting operation begun in 1978, which netted corrupt elected officials but also resulted in entrapment charges. Jennifer Lawrence plays Irving’s adenoidal stay-at-home wife; Jeremy Renner is the mayor of Camden, N.J., whose ambitions trump his decency. The film “giddily embraces the excesses of its era, from spandex to ’staches, though it’s a farce that speaks as well to this tarnished age,” Manohla Dargis wrote in The New York Times.9 P.M. (13, 49) LAST DAYS IN VIETNAM (2014) In commemoration of the 40th anniversary of the fall of Saigon, “American Experience” presents Rory Kennedy’s Oscar-nominated documentary recounting the chaotic evacuation prompted by the North Vietnamese Army’s takeover of South Vietnam as American diplomats and military operatives tried to save their allies and friends. A symbolic tree was cut down in the parking lot of the American Embassy to allow helicopters to land. Marines were ordered to burn $1 million in cash. A South Vietnamese helicopter pilot unloaded his passengers — including his family — onto a ship too small to land on by hovering close enough for them jump, then ditched his aircraft and jumped himself. “Anyone over a certain age remembers that week in broad terms, of course, but the strength of the film is the detail it provides through the recollections of people — both American and Vietnamese — who were there,” Neil Genzlinger wrote in The Times. “Kent State: The Day the ’60s Died,” about the killing of four Kent State University students by members of the National Guard during an antiwar demonstration in May 1970, leads in at 8.10 P.M. (ABC) CAPTIVE: A JOURNEY OF SURVIVAL AND HOPE In this “20/20” special, Robin Roberts interviews Amanda Berry and Gina DeJesus, two of the women kidnapped by Ariel Castro and imprisoned and tortured in his Cleveland home for nearly a decade, about their new book, “Hope: A Memoir of Survival in Cleveland,” written with Mary Jordan and Kevin Sullivan of The Washington Post.Advertisement10 P.M. (Discovery) SONS OF WINTER For decades the Barks family — Randy; his wife, Tara; and their sons Dale, Shane and Kole — have called northern Saskatchewan home, surviving the that harsh Canadian wilderness by trapping animals to trade for fuel and ammunition. But now Dale and Shane are embarking on a rite of passage by spending a winter hundreds of miles from the homestead.10 P.M. (Science) AIRASIA 8501: ANATOMY OF A CRASH On Dec. 28, AirAsia Flight 8501 plunged into the Java Sea during a storm about 40 minutes into its journey from Indonesia to Singapore. This special examines that disaster and how increasingly severe weather has affected the aviation industry.AdvertisementWhat’s Streaming NowJOURNEY TO THE DRAFT Deion Sanders narrates this new series, which follows three college football players —Leonard Williams, a University of Southern California defensive lineman; Kevin White, a West Virginia University wide receiver; and Marcus Peters, a University of Washington cornerback removed from the team in November —trying to make it through the National Football League draft. Nine episodes are available for streaming on Tuesday; the finale will drop on May 6. (aol.com)A version of this schedule appears in print on April 28, 2015, on Page C7 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Tuesday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.