AdvertisementSupported byBy Julie LaskyMILAN — James Biber can see Russia from his roof. Mr. Biber, the architect of the USA Pavilion at Expo Milano 2015, the world’s fair that is racing to meet its opening date on Friday, also has a good view of Kuwait next door and Iran across the street.But with its 33-yard roof canopy jutting out like a knife, Russia’s national pavilion commands particular attention. This is no small coup when you’re among dozens of buildings lined up in aesthetic disjunction, like words pulled from a hat by a Dadaist poet.Beside the nearly milelong road that is the spine of the fairgrounds, the British pavilion hunkers behind a massive aluminum-and-steel sculpture inspired by a beehive. Next to it sits Hungary’s pavilion, a ribbed structure alluding to Noah’s ark, but also reminiscent of Pinocchio’s whale. To the north, the Palazzo Italia can be seen with its wrapping of spidery threads of white concrete, a patented material that is said to remove impurities from the air. With more than 80 buildings being constructed for the fair, it was getting a workout.“It’s really a kind of identity parade,” Mr. Biber, 62, said about the jumble. He was drinking caffè macchiato in mid-April at a cafe in the Brera neighborhood here, with Louie, his miniature Labradoodle, at his feet. “It’s every nation attempting to express itself in a building. It is the very best and very worst of design you’re going to see in its concentrated form.”Along with 54 national pavilions devoted to the fair’s theme, “Feeding the Planet,” there are multinational complexes related to rice, coffee and cocoa; a biodiversity park; an artificial lake; and corporate showcases, including Daniel Libeskind’s serpentine pavilion for the Chinese real estate developer Vanke, which is covered in intriguing, if unappetizing, reddish scales made of metal-infused porcelain.Two weeks ago, workers were painting the exterior of the Future Food District, effectively a grocery store operated by Coop Italia, the country’s largest supermarket chain. As designed by Carlo Ratti, an Italian architect who directs the Senseable City Lab at Massachusetts Institute of Technology, the building will try to turn edibles into communication tools. Simply gesturing at, say, an apple in a refrigerated produce case will summon the story of the fruit’s origin, journey and nutritional value. Exterior walls will be turned into 56-foot-high canvases on which robots will reproduce images of visitors.Mr. Biber, who studied biology before veering off into architecture, said that technology was a driver of the USA pavilion as well. Among other innovations, it will have a roof deck with programmable winking glass panels and what may be the world’s largest outdoor vertical farm.The pavilion’s message is “American Food 2.0: United to Feed the People” — a goal of finding solutions for nourishing the world’s population, expected to grow to nine billion by 2050. It is a bid to persuade skeptics that the United States has progressed as a culinary nation “beyond McDonald’s and Starbucks,” he said. (Mr. Biber also hopes it will meet a better reception than the American pavilion at the Shanghai Expo in 2010, designed by a Canadian, which was assailed as a “national humiliation.”)A New Yorker who designed the Harley-Davidson Museum in Milwaukee and the set of “The Daily Show” for Jon Stewart, Mr. Biber may be best known at home for the giant thread spool with needle that has become a landmark of the garment district. He is part of a team whose proposal for the building won a competition sponsored in 2013 by the State Department. The $60 million project is being privately funded through Friends of the U.S. Pavilion Milano 2015, a nonprofit founded by leaders of the James Beard Foundation, International Culinary Center and American Chamber of Commerce in Italy.The 35,000-square-foot steel-frame structure is open at both ends, revealing an interior ramp of reclaimed Coney Island boardwalk planks rising and descending over the 300-foot length. Outside is the large symbol of an American flag with a plate, fork and knife in place of stars. The symbol is by Michael Bierut, of the graphic design firm Pentagram, where Mr. Biber previously worked. (Mr. Bierut also designed the new logo for Hillary Rodham Clinton’s presidential campaign, which some critics have likened to a highway sign for a hospital.)Mr. Biber said that the boardwalk conveys the “American interface between entertainment, leisure and food.” The path will allow visitors with ambitious itineraries to take in the building in a snappy 20 minutes, including a multimedia tour of innovation and policy, told from the perspective of farmers, chefs and researchers, and a Thanksgiving address in the Mohawk language.Downstairs, attendees with free, timed tickets will have access to “The Great American Foodscape” exhibition, which Tom Hennes, 58, founder of Thinc Design, described as “a playful and surprising look at American food today” — spaghetti and meatballs, for example, is revealed as an Italian-American invention. On the floor of the 10,000-square-foot roof terrace, built as a cultural events space, there will be 312 glass panels wired to shift between transparency and opacity, creating a play of light and shadow below. The 3-feet-by-10-feet tiles, acting as pixels, can also be converted into text, as large as “messages to God,” Mr. Biber noted. Alluding to the controversial presence of an American fast-food chain at the fairgrounds, he jokingly suggested that one communiqué should be “Welcome, McDonald’s.”A 7,200-square-foot vertical farm makes up the east wall of the building. The job required transferring 42 varieties of vegetables, grains and herbs to about 1,500 hydroponic planters on swinging louvers. Their grid pattern refers to the 1785 Land Ordinance, which produced the geometry of American farmland, with the mechanized louvers creating an effect, Mr. Biber said, “like amber waves of grain,” or gills.“The building is kind of breathing,” he added. It was a bittersweet reminder that the pavilion, like almost all structures at the Expo, it is to be demolished when the fair ends on Oct. 31.“Rather than scrap everything,” Mr. Biber said, “we’re trying to reuse it.” And so the boardwalk planks and smartglass roof tiles will go back to their sources. But he is still looking for someone to adopt the vertical farm, he added. “And that’s kind of my next job.”Advertisement