By ALASTAIR MACAULAYAPRIL 27, 2015
No dance form is an island. Last week brought me three genres of Western dance (ballroom, ballet, modern) and the weekend brought three examples of Indian dance. It reminded me that just as you can never fully know any one genre, each casts light on others. Watching Indian dance, this Westerner can only miss nuances obvious to many Indians, while making other connections.In the first Indian program — Rama Vaidyanathan and Dakshina Vaidyanathan, mother and daughter, dancing in the Bharata Natyam genre of southeastern India on Saturday night at the Skirball Center for the Performing Arts — we were plunged straightaway into a dance realm with its own character and laws. The two women are physically alike and dance similarly, so their duets had terrific uniformity of style. (They were accompanied by four musicians; S. Vasudevan and K. Venkateshwaran alternated as vocalist.)One of the duets was about duality itself; mother and daughter were sometimes back to back, like two sides of a coin. A second, the evening’s most intimate piece, was about a mother’s feelings on finding that her daughter is now an adult; and a third was about body and spirit.In solos, Rama (the mother) has the greater wealth of resources and subtle expressive tones. Her range, intelligence and mastery have made a deeper impression on me each time I’ve seen her. She’s capable of great dance intensity. In passages of nritta (pure form), she relished the multidirectional geometries of movement. In one, traveling diagonally, her feet, bitingly, carried her in one direction while an arm and her eyes lustrously opened up a separate arc. In a sequence of abhinaya (expressive mime), demonstrating a woman’s longing for Lord Shiva, she showed how gestures can include waiting, listening and responsiveness as well as declaration.AdvertisementDakshina (her daughter, whom I saw perform for the first time on Saturday) is even more marvelously satisfying in the curved and straight shapes of Bharata Natyam. Her chief solo showed Shiva and his consort Parvati conjoined as Ardhanariswara — male and female, destruction and creation. As she stands on wide-parted legs and sways her torso violently from side to side, we can’t miss an image of destructive power.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Sunday evening’s performance, also at the Skirball Center at New York University (both programs were presented by the World Music Institute), was of the dissimilar genre of Kathak, which specializes in rapidly rhythmic footwork (suddenly ending bang! on the beat) and long series of single turns on the spot. Parul Shah and Prashant Shah (no relation) joined forces in an opening duet, to recorded music; then each danced to live accompaniment by different five-musician teams, Parul with the four other women of her company.In Parul Shah’s group dance, “All That Is In Between,” you could sense a lively experimental mind, here moving away from — there joining forces with — the music. The start and end, featuring percussive hand gestures striking the chest with no musical accompaniment, stays in memory. In between, a complex female dance polyphony develops. This is a good company, stylish and vivid; you can feel how its innovations (no ankle bells) are part of an engagement with the changing nature of Indian society.Prashant Shah’s solo, “Parampara — Ek Pravaah,” was an enthralling display of Kathak virtuosity; his interplay with his musicians — truly playful — involved rhythmic patterns of astonishing intricacy. What amazed me was the grace of Mr. Shah’s arms and upper body. (Only his facial expressions, especially the use of eyes and smiles, are sometimes forced.) Despite his top-speed footwork and its stop-on-a-dime conclusions, his arms moved in waves, rivulets, soft flourishes, always demonstrating calm and ease within brilliance. His rhythms (and those of his tabla percussionist, Ramesh Bapodara) were a superbly exciting demonstration of Kathak complexity: one cluster of strong and weak beats is topped by the next at two or three times the speed, and then by a third with sudden-death pauses within the rush.Only one of the weekend’s three performances disappointed. This was “Veiled Moon,” presented on Sunday afternoon by Thresh Dance Company at the Metropolitan Museum after William Dalrymple’s engaging lecture about aspects of Hyderabad’s history. The dance seemed to evoke the life and works of the exceptional 18th-century Muslim courtesan Mah Laqa Bai Chanda; and costuming suggested that period and a general atmosphere of feminine languor, if not creativity. But everything was vague, slow — with none of the flow of meanings or forms that makes so much of Indian dance so rewarding.A version of this review appears in print on April 28, 2015, on Page C2 of the New York edition with the headline: Movement Illuminating Movement.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.