AdvertisementSupported byBy Gia KourlasHow past dances live in the present is always on the mind of the choreographer and dancer Adam H. Weinert. His current project began after he reconstructed early solo works by the modern dance pioneer Ted Shawn. If, in dance, the body is a living archive — doesn’t a dancer store and preserve movement over time? — Mr. Weinert’s approach shows how a reconstruction can inspire a new work. With the premiere of “Monument,” performed on Friday at the 92nd Street Y, he does just that.The program prepped the audience, fittingly, with three dances from the 1930s: Shawn’s “Pierrot in the Dead City” (1935); “Four Solos Based on American Folk Music” (1930); and Doris Humphrey’s “Two Ecstatic Themes” (1931). In “Pierrot,” a swift and somber look at longing that conjures the soulful clown, Mr. Weinert, dressed simply in a white shirt and beige pants, uses his spiraling body to convey conflicting emotions.At the start, Mr. Weinert rests his hands on one hip, a stoic sight, before his arms rise and fall, propelling him across the stage with light jumps and pauses that hint at hope and hesitation. It’s really not so much what he’s doing but how he’s doing it: Mr. Weinert, like a specter, sails along with floating delicacy.The same can be said of Logan Frances Kruger, who, in “Two Ecstatic Themes,” enhances the circular and jagged shapes of Humphrey’s movement with a body that never pauses to comment on her actions: She’s liquid. In “Monument,” Mr. Weinert and Ms. Kruger are joined by Brett Perry, Davon Rainey and Manelich Minniefee. Lights circle the center of the stage; within the spotlight, dancers, like magnets, are drawn toward one another before dashing apart.Reminiscent of a vintage record, the score — by Chris Garneau after Jess Meeker, who was Shawn’s accompanist — crackles through the space like whispers from the past. The dance’s structure — a mix of circles and lines — recalls the sweep and stillness of “Pierrot.” Dancers, gazing out at an imaginary horizon, pose on top of other performers, who hunch over like rocks to create static images, seemingly inspired by archival photographs at Jacob’s Pillow, the dance retreat Shawn formed.But while “Monument” may echo the past, it doesn’t languish in it. In the final moment, the dancers place their hands at their hips, just as Mr. Weinert did in “Pierrot.” Taking sideways steps, they disappear into the wings, a reminder that while a dance can be reconstructed, these bodies, or living archives, are fleeting, mysterious and wholly alive.Advertisement