AdvertisementSupported byBy Nate ChinenThe high degree of difficulty on “Orphic Machine,” an enveloping new album by the clarinetist Ben Goldberg, has little to do with the formal intricacy or catalytic chemistry in his music.The challenge comes from Mr. Goldberg’s inspiration for the album: “Summa Lyrica: A Primer of the Commonplaces in Speculative Poetics,” a book-length essay by Allen Grossman.An influential work of poetic theory ever since its publication more than 20 years ago, it’s hardly a natural candidate for a musical adaptation. But Mr. Goldberg, who had Mr. Grossman as an undergraduate professor in the late-’70s, brings a light touch and a soulful ear. There’s little that rings emotionally heavy here, even though Mr. Grossman’s death last year at 82 imparts a whiff of elegy to this music.Mr. Goldberg marshals some of the sharpest improvisers on the scene into a dynamic orchestra. Carla Kihlstedt, his fellow member of the style-blending chamber group Tin Hat, takes center stage through most of “Orphic Machine,” singing verses excerpted from the original text. That it works so bewitchingly is a testament to Ms. Kihlstedt’s coolheaded, unflashy singing, and to Mr. Goldberg’s graceful way with a melody. On “Immortality,” they even bring a sly sensuality to the first line of Mr. Grossman’s argument: “The function of poetry is to obtain for everybody one kind of success at the limits of the autonomy of the will.” (Yes, somehow it works.)Besides Ms. Kihlstedt, who also plays violin, “Orphic Machine” features the trumpeter Ron Miles and the tenor saxophonist Rob Sudduth, blending or jostling by turns with Mr. Goldberg’s woodsy clarinet. The rhythm section consists of Nels Cline on electric guitar, Kenny Wollesen on vibraphone, Myra Melford on piano, Greg Cohen on bass and Ches Smith on drums.On a piece like “Care,” the ensemble floats from one clear melodic premise to the next, never sounding overdetermined or strained. The title track begins in rustling pianistic reverie, turns into a kind of soul dirge, shifts into oblique art song with classical counterpoint, and finally succumbs to a crushing accumulation of distorted guitar: all of it unpredictable, most of it thrilling.More than anything, Mr. Goldberg seems to have taken at face value, with imaginative care, his former teacher’s note in the essay’s preface: “Above all,” he writes, “this is a text for use, intended like a poem to give rise to thoughts about something else.”BEN GOLDBERG“Orphic Machine”(BAG)Advertisement