By BEN RATLIFFAPRIL 27, 2015
If you’re interested in new pop that does not follow the current media discourse, that is gentle to the point of frailty, that prophesies but never quite disturbs, Bill Fay might be your man. “New” needs a qualification: “Who Is The Sender” is indeed a collection of new songs, but right out of the wrapper, they feel aged almost to the point of expiration.Mr. Fay is a figure of minor interest from the English folk-rock scene of the early 1970s. His first studio album of new material came out in 1970, his second in 1971, and his third, “Life Is People,” more than 40 years later, after a belated rediscovery by Jim O’Rourke, Jeff Tweedy of Wilco, and others who covered his songs. “Who Is the Sender” more or less qualifies as his fourth album, outside of some demos and home recordings.In his songs, he is a small figure in the universe, a watcher of nature, human and ecological. He sits at his piano, singing slow, whispery, post-nuclear homilies and observations of man’s folly, and almost dares you to ignore him.The tremulous voices of aging Londoners achieve an almost cinematic piquancy when they are hoping for the best. This is essentially what Mr. Fay does, adding a bit of Christian mysticism, to the tune of folk-rock, hymns, and canons. He sounds utterly post-anger. (At times this record, produced by Joshua Henry, with occasional strings, brass, organ and electric guitar, recalls the atmosphere of Randy Newman’s “Sail Away,” but without the barbed lyrics.) His is not the sound of a man who needs to be heard, but he is saying things that ought to be said. In other words, he makes you feel empathy — not quite the same as stimulation or excitement.AdvertisementNow as before, Mr. Fay’s observations are basically anti-à la mode. He is at the purest point of his mission, really, when intoning something simple over and over again: “It’s all so deep,” eight times in a row in “How Little.” Or “This can’t be all there is,” four times in “World of Life.”But he also makes you consider where prophecy stops and truism begins. “There’s an age up ahead,” he sings on “A Page Incomplete,” that is “out of reach of this one’s grip.”AdvertisementYou can’t say he’s wrong. You can’t say this needn’t be pointed out. And such is the case for most of this record. It means well and conjures fellow feeling and makes you think the long thoughts. But it is a trudge, and strangely ponderous in its smallness.BILL FAY“Who Is the Sender?” (Dead Oceans)A version of this review appears in print on April 28, 2015, on Page C4 of the New York edition with the headline: Review: Bill Fay’s ‘Who Is the Sender?’ Harks Back to Another Time.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.