By ZACHARY WOOLFEAPRIL 27, 2015
R. B. Schlather’s production of Handel’s “Orlando” opened on Sunday for a two-evening run, but the performance really started almost three weeks ago.A vital part of Mr. Schlather’s project at the Whitebox Art Center on the Lower East Side, in this “Orlando” and Handel’s “Alcina” last September, is demystifying opera and its creation. Broadcasting practically all his rehearsals over the Internet, Mr. Schlather also opened them to the public, and the public came. Yoko Ono was among those who wandered in off Broome Street over the past few weeks to watch a bit of “Orlando,” Handel’s glorious 1733 tragicomedy of competing loves.As the Hebrew goes, “dayenu”: The open rehearsals would have been enough. But the final product was so winning — as touching and delightful as the very touching and delightful “Alcina,” if not more so — that it redoubled the gift Mr. Schlather has given the New York cultural scene.Whitebox is a shoe box. “Alcina” was set up with the main playing area opposite the entrance, at the narrow end. “Orlando” shifts our perspective 90 degrees, extending a thin raised platform along the entire length of the space.AdvertisementThe only piece of furniture is a wooden bench divided into five seats, like those on New York City subway platforms. The costumes are clothes of the 1970s, a time in the subway system when no one would have batted an eye to see, as here, a fur-wearing socialite; a disturbed gentleman in pajamas and trench coat; a muscular stud in head-to-toe skintight leather; and an interracial couple, all in various states of undress, coitus and rage.AdvertisementWhile the emotions in “Orlando” are extreme, they also change on a dime, from joy to despair and back again. Few directors are as responsive as Mr. Schlather to Handel’s disorienting swerves of feeling.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In charting these stormy waters, he has been aided by an agile conductor, Geoffrey McDonald, whose pacing is sure in both reflective and restless passages, and a sensitive, daring cast fully committed to the hapless characters. Two sopranos — the light-toned yet fascinatingly unsettled Kiera Duffy (Angelica) and the darker-hued, dazzling Anya Matanovic (Dorinda) — compete for the affections of Prince Medoro, sung with exquisite control by the countertenor Brennan Hall.His voice frayed but showing some of its old velvet, the veteran countertenor Drew Minter was movingly melancholy (rather than manic) as the mad Orlando. Overseeing all is the magician Zoroastro, sung by Hadleigh Adams with a dense yet flexible bass and a glowering presence, whether in the aforementioned leather, a pair of white briefs or a Santa Claus costume.As in “Alcina,” Mr. Schlather’s design team unstintingly supported his vision. Paul Tate dePoo’s stylized subway was elegant and effective. The lighting designer JAX Messenger drew a host of moods out of a strictly limited range of elements. Terese Wadden’s acute ’70s costumes never descended into parody.Mr. Schlather is already mulling “Ariodante,” to complete the trilogy of operas Handel based on Ludovico Ariosto’s epic “Orlando Furioso.” I, for one, can’t wait.A version of this review appears in print on April 28, 2015, on Page C5 of the New York edition with the headline: Down in the Subway, Riding With Handel.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.