By BRIAN SEIBERTAPRIL 27, 2015
Like any sampler of new work, the American Tap Dance Foundation’s “Rhythm in Motion” showcase needs only to introduce a promising voice or an intriguing experiment to count as worthwhile. Many of the entries in this year’s second program, which had its debut at the Theater at the 14th Street Y on Saturday, passed the I’d-like-to-see-more-of-that test. One of those segments even fulfilled the wish and kept returning.This was Caleb Teicher’s “Variations,”  which came in three parts distributed across the showcase program. To tracks from a Glenn Gould recording of Bach’s “Goldberg Variations,” Mr. Teicher, already an acclaimed dancer, revealed a choreographic talent.In geek-chic glasses, he began alone, kicking, swiveling and firing off sporadic bursts of whispered taps, as if practicing mentally, as Gould often did. What followed was sometimes perplexing but generally captivating in its close imitation of Bach. The way Mr. Teicher, Elizabeth Burke and Gabe Winns passed a fugal phrase down the line was fun, as was their frantic flapping to match Gould’s speed and how they danced hard against the music’s quiet.Exact imitation of a recorded performance felt more redundant in Michela Marino Lerman’s “Stardust,” a too faintly flirtatious duet with Dan Mitra to a Lionel Hampton vibraphone solo. The solo that Ms. Lerman improvised before that, in conversation with a live jazz trio and the appealing vocalist Martina DaSilva, was the program’s traditional highlight, packed with musical flavor made in the moment.Improvisation, terrifying to many dancers, is the brier patch where Ms. Lerman thrives. That’s also true for Kazu Kumagai, whose “Excuse Me Mr.” had a shape typical for him — ruminative to thunderous — with typically compelling effects. This occasion did have a particular subject: the social protest in the lyrics of that Ben Harper song.The state of the world was also on the mind of Nicholas Young, whose “WhiteNoise” was the program’s boldest venture. The score was composed of talk-show voices, sound bites about hot-button topics that the six performers manipulated with buttons attached to their metal folding chairs. Listening to the chatter, they looked morose. Responding to it with body percussion and tap, fitfully rising and sitting back down, they answered the noise with a mix of rhythmic sense and cacophony. Though the piece was sketchy, it registered as true.A version of this review appears in print on April 28, 2015, on Page C5 of the New York edition with the headline: Tapping to Bach and Talk-Show Chatter.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.