By GIA KOURLASAPRIL 27, 2015
Moments after Ann Liv Young’s “Elektra Cabaret” began at Joe’s Pub at the Public Theater on Wednesday, she interrupted the show, smack in the middle of belting out Beyoncé’s power ballad “1+1.” “This monitor,” she said darkly, “is way, way, way too loud.”The show started over.Such disruptions in a program by Ms. Young, the provocative choreographer and performance artist, are commonplace, but in this hourlong work, a companion to her forthcoming “Elektra,” the do-over was a rare occurrence. A highly structured piece intended to appear on the ragged side, “Elektra” is based on the text by Sophocles and relies on Ms. Young’s usual tools: ravaged emotions; pop music in which lyrics become the poetic through-line; and dancing, both flamboyant and aggressive.This transformation of a Greek myth into a contemporary tale also features Lovey Guerrero, Ms. Young’s daughter, who sings and dances, looking like a miniature doppelgänger of her mother. Lovey, 7, did, for the record, leave the stage for most of the bawdier moments, including some nudity, simulated masturbation ... you get the picture.After a fiery rendition of Kanye West’s “Black Skinhead,” the characters were introduced via voice-over: Klytemnestra (Bailey Nolan), Elektra’s mother, whose “lack of self-awareness is staggering”; Elektra (Ms. Young), consumed by fantasies of revenge after her mother murders her father, King Agamemnon; Elektra’s sister Chrysothemis (Vanessa Soudan), who has crippling panic attacks and whose duet with a pogo stick is a highlight; and Orestes (Charley Parden), recently returned from exile.Lovey Guerrero, with streaks of white on her face, plays the ghost of Iphigenia — Elektra’s sacrificed sister — and Marissa Mickelberg is the chorus. It’s a charismatic crew in head-to-toe denim. The lyrics of Phil Collins’s “In the Air Tonight” — “it’s all been a pack of lies” — resonate as the tableau comes to life. Ms. Young angrily swirls a rainbow ribbon wand as Lovey hops from side to side. As the songs progress, including Gloria Estefan’s “Conga,” which leads to a glorious hip-shaking ensemble dance that moves throughout the space, and Eminem’s “The Monster,” the tension increases: Klytemnestra must meet her fate.“Elektra Cabaret” is entertaining, yet Ms. Young, in this raw deconstruction, manages to sneak in some grimness. Betrayal is everywhere, and the more Ms. Young reveals Elektra’s inner monster, the more she shows an independent, outspoken woman. In other words, she’s found herself in Greek mythology.“Elektra Cabaret” continues on May 6, 13 and 20 at Joe’s Pub at the Public Theater, 425 Lafayette Street, at Astor Place, East Village; 212-967-7555, joespub.com. A version of this review appears in print on April 28, 2015, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline: Greek Myth With Lewd Heroes and Inner Monsters.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.