AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn Shattuck3:50 P.M. (MoreMax) TRANCE (2013) Danny Boyle’s thriller begins in an auction house, where a robbery leaves Simon (James McAvoy), an employee charged with safeguarding a Goya, with amnesia and unable to reveal where the painting is. Vincent Cassel plays Franck, the leader of the men behind the heist — and, it turns out, Simon’s business partner. And Rosario Dawson is the hypnotherapist who holds the key to Simon’s memory. “Mr. Boyle, as always, works hard to cast a spell in ‘Trance,’ and his energy and commitment to the audience’s entertainment are evident in every scene,” Manohla Dargis wrote in The New York Times about this film from the director of “Trainspotting” and “Slumdog Millionaire.” “But there are times when it feels as if he’s throwing everything at the screen — the throbbing music, bleeding fingers, narrative U-turns and the startling sight of a naked Ms. Dawson striding toward the camera as strategically shorn as a Renaissance nude — less because he wants to distract you from the big reveal than to obscure the material’s thinness.” She added, “That doesn’t lessen the movie’s appeal while you’re watching it, though it drastically shortens the afterglow.”8 P.M. (13, 49) MYSTERY MONKEYS OF SHANGRI-LA With their beguiling faces — tiny noses, almond-shaped eyes and pillowy pink lips — Yunnan snub-nosed monkeys first captured the public’s attention in the 1980s, when they were filmed by the Chinese wildlife photographer Xi Zhinong. Three decades later this “Nature” episode follows Mr. Xi and his crew as he spends two years documenting a monkey family living in one of the world’s highest forests, in the Himalayas, while taking in the exotic natural beauty in an area named for the mythical paradise of Shangri-La.9 P.M. (Cooking) TIA MOWRY AT HOME When she’s not acting in Nickelodeon’s “Instant Mom,” Ms. Mowry likes to cook, drawing on the international cuisine she sampled as a military brat. She begins by whipping up mac and cheese, lamb chops and a broccoli sauté for a date night with her husband, Cory Hardrict. In “Dinner at Tiffani’s,” at 10, Tiffani Thiessen and her husband, Brady Smith, grill lemon-and-herb-stuffed trout, corn and s’mores with their friends Jonathan Silverman and Jennifer Finnigan, and wash the meal down with bourbon strawberry lemonade.9 P.M. (Esquire) BEST BARS IN AMERICA The comedians Sean Patton and Jay Larson drink their way through some secluded speakeasies, accompanied by the actress Aisha Tyler.9 P.M. (NBC) CHICAGO P.D. In this crossover episode with “Law & Order: Special Victims Unit,” at 10, Benson (Mariska Hargitay) and Voight (Jason Beghe) lead their teams in an investigation of a rape and murder case in Chicago with similarities to one in New York a decade earlier. Then they are forced to release their prime suspect.10 P.M. (BBC America) RIPPER STREET Season 3 picks up in 1894, four years after Inspector Edmund Reid (Matthew Macfadyen) called for Sgt. Bennet Drake (Jerome Flynn) to end a life — causing Reid, Drake and Capt. Homer Jackson (Adam Rothenberg) to end their partnership. But all is forgotten when two trains collide.10 P.M. (Science) THROUGH THE WORMHOLE WITH MORGAN FREEMAN Are we all bigots? Mr. Freeman examines brain-imaging studies indicating that negative cultural stereotypes are rife in subconscious decision-making. He then investigates the science suggesting that those stereotypes can be overcome.What’s Streaming NowA RIVER RUNS THROUGH IT (1992) Craig Sheffer portrays the writer Norman Maclean as a quiet young man and Brad Pitt is Paul, his wilder, more magnetic brother, in this adaptation of Mr. Maclean’s 1976 autobiographical story about the sons of a Presbyterian minister coming of age in Montana between Prohibition and the Depression — and finding expression for their emotions through fly-fishing. “Between the novella’s well-known first sentence (‘In our family, there was no clear line between religion and fly-fishing’) and its elegiac last line (‘I am haunted by waters’), ‘A River Runs Through It’ circled gracefully among the landmarks of Mr. Maclean’s early years without violating the distant perfection of those memories,” Janet Maslin wrote in The Times. “It’s easy to recognize Robert Redford’s reverent film version of this beautifully spare novella as a labor of love.” (crackle.com)Advertisement