By ALESSANDRA STANLEYAPRIL 28, 2015
Oh to not be in England.That’s the yearning stirred by “The Casual Vacancy,” an adaptation of J. K. Rowling’s novel by the same name, her first outside the Harry Potter books.In this three-part mini-series, on HBO on Wednesday and Thursday nights, even a lovely old village with a medieval abbey, cobbled streets and flocks of sheep is sordid. There are mysterious deaths and young adults under the spell of their hormones in idyllic, imaginary Pagford, but “The Casual Vacancy” is not a charming, the-vicar-did-it murder mystery or a “Downton Abbey” romance.It’s actually closer to a Harry Potter novel, only with just the Muggles and none of the magic, a little like an old-fashioned animated cartoon after the shiny top sheets of cellophane are pulled away. There are no flying broomsticks or quidditch matches, just teenagers trying to navigate their parents’ stinting, blinkered world.“The Casual Vacancy,” which is set in modern day, has appealingly odd characters (the excellent cast includes Michael Gambon, who played Dumbledore in most of the Harry Potter films) and the adaptation, written by Sarah Phelps with Ms. Rowling’s collaboration, is clever.AdvertisementBut it is not in the least bit cheery or uplifting. Rather, it provides an intriguing and bleak look at class warfare, British country style. Behind a thicket of pastoral harmony, there is a messy power struggle between the prim Pagford bourgeoisie and its have-nots in outlying low-income areas.AdvertisementThe title refers to a vacancy on the parish council caused by the sudden death of Barry Fairbrother (Rory Kinnear), a man in his 40s with a wife and four children who is very popular in the less snobbish parts of Pagford.Barry was an active and ardent do-gooder who helped run the community center, which is one of the more unusual ones in Britain. In the 19th century, a benefactor named Sweetlove donated a grand mansion in town to the people of Pagford, and Sweetlove House became a full-service community center, with programs for underprivileged youths and drug addicts, most of whom live outside Pagford in housing projects known as the Fields.Everyone is shocked by Barry’s death and many are devastated, but the loss comes at a particularly convenient time for Howard Mollison (Mr. Gambon), a successful grocer and chairman of the board overseeing Sweetlove House. Howard and his wife, Shirley (Julia McKenzie), are determined to return the property to the Sweetlove heirs, who would turn it into an upscale wellness spa.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Sweetloves want the income and Howard and Shirley are eager to curry favor with their upper-class neighbors. But mostly, Howard and his ilk also want to shut down the community center to keep its undesirable clientele from spoiling the village’s quaint gentility. In their plan, social services would be moved to cheaper sites outside town. Barry told allies on the parish board that this kind of social gerrymandering is “apartheid.”His death, early on, sets in motion an election for his seat, and as in a Trollope novel, his loss has intersecting consequences for a disparate collection of characters. For all its charm, Pagford has a full share of strivers, cheats, boozy wives, frightened children, weak husbands and abusive ones.Several teenagers are in crisis, notably Krystal Weedon (Abigail Lawrie), a defiant resident of the Fields whose mother is a heroin addict and too strung out to look after Krystal’s baby brother. Krystal becomes involved with Stuart (Brian Vernel), a reedy, smart aleck known as Fats, who sees her as a sure thing. His best friend, Andrew (Joe Hurst), with bad skin and a sweet disposition, is more romantic, with an acute crush on a new girl in school who barely knows he exists.The young characters are more likable than their elders, but this is not a comic or tender look at adolescence. Fats is selfish and often cruel; Krystal is self-destructive. Barry was one of the few grown-ups who treated the teenagers with respect as well as kindness. Other adults in Pagford — parents, teachers, civic leaders and social workers — are mostly pitiable, despicable or ridiculous.Howard and Shirley are all three. When a council vote fails to approve their plan for Sweetlove House, the elderly couple drive to the heirs’ estate to report on the latest meeting, decked out in their Sunday best as if for an audience with the queen. Their rich, entitled hosts, condescending and impatient, can barely contain their boredom. Hurrying Howard out the back door, Aubrey Sweetlove (Julian Wadham) instructs Howard to bring him better news next time. His wife, Julia (Emilia Fox), adds: “In fact, no need to come out. You must be so busy — so just an email to the housekeeper will suffice.”Snobbery is only one of the smaller sins in Pagford; some are literally deadly.“The Casual Vacancy” is more interesting than it is enjoyable, an unsparing look at the reality of English country life, not the reverie.A version of this review appears in print on April 29, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: Snobbery and Death in a Village in England.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.