By ANTHONY TOMMASINIAPRIL 28, 2015
Carnegie Hall probably could have presented the popular Australian Chamber Orchestra in Stern Auditorium, its main hall. But it was a treat to hear that ensemble play a wonderful concert on Sunday afternoon in the 600-seat Zankel Hall, Carnegie’s appealing basement performance space. In that setting, the symphonic grandeur and inventiveness of Haydn’s Symphony No. 83 in G minor, known as “The Hen,” came through with up-close immediacy, although the fleet, bold performance these impressive Australian musicians gave would have sounded great almost anywhere.The program opened with an intriguing novelty: selections from Prokofiev’s “Visions Fugitives” (Op. 22), a suite of tart, quirky piano pieces arranged for strings here by Richard Tognetti, the artistic director and lead violinist of the orchestra, and Rudolf Barshai. Prokofiev called these epigrammatic miniatures, many of them portraits of friends, doggies, referring to biting qualities in the music. Some of the bite of the more brutal pieces is softened in these arrangements for strings. There is a trade-off, though, in the way the strings tease out the lushness and depths of even the slam-bang ones. The ruminative, dreamy pieces made the transition the best.Martin Frost, the brilliant Swedish clarinetist, had been scheduled to play Mozart’s Concerto in A (K. 622) on this tour with the orchestra. But he withdrew several weeks ago because of an injury. On Sunday, the ensemble had an exemplary replacement in the Israeli-born clarinetist Sharon Kam, who gave a probing, continually imaginative and technically prodigious account of this remarkable late Mozart work. Mozart composed the concerto for the virtuoso clarinetist Anton Stadler, renowned for the elegant lyricism of his playing. I can’t imagine a more lyrically refined performance than Ms. Kam’s. In the slow movement she revealed her inner mezzo-soprano, bending phrases with the beguiling beauty of a fine opera singer. Yet she and the Australian players brought plenty of ebullience to the piece, especially in the dancing, sly finale.Jonny Greenwood, the multi-instrumentalist and composer best known as a member of the band Radiohead, wrote “Water,” a subdued 17-minute piece, while in residence with the orchestra, which gave the New York premiere of the work at this concert. The title comes from a short Philip Larkin poem, and the music seemed especially evocative of the final image, describing a glass of clear water: “Where any angled light/Would congregate endlessly.”The scoring includes piano, synthesizer and tanpura, the long-necked string instrument common in Indian music that plays buttressing drones. Apropos its title, Mr. Greenwood’s piece unfolds in a shimmering haze of misty, lapping ostinato figures that congregate endlessly. But individual motifs come through the overlaid mass of haunting sounds. Eventually the music turns restless, almost frenzied, before calming down and returning to its original spiritual state; yet it is seemingly transfigured, more deliberate, less fluid.The ensemble’s beautiful performance of “Water” set the mood for Haydn’s ingenious symphony, music at once stern and rambunctious, surprisingly well.A version of this article appears in print on April 29, 2015, on Page C6 of the New York edition with the headline: Tart, Dreamy, Ebullient and Always Inventive .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.