By MICHAEL COOPERAPRIL 28, 2015
The countertenor Anthony Roth Costanzo will sing a new monodrama based on Michelangelo’s love poems by the composer Suzanne Farrin in the Metropolitan Museum of Art’s Renaissance-era Vélez Blanco Patio. Singers will offer Schubert lieder to museumgoers in certain galleries on certain days.And Tan Dun’s “Water Passion,” written as a response to Bach, will be performed at the Temple of Dendur in the museum’s Sackler Wing.The Met has radically re-envisioned its concert program in recent years, offering more daring fare in more unusual settings, and next year’s season, to be announced on Wednesday, will continue in that vein.But now the museum is preparing to take advantage of the possibilities offered by the new Met Breuer, the contemporary art outpost opening next year in the former home of the Whitney Museum of American Art on Madison Avenue.AdvertisementSo when the Met takes on Karlheinz Stockhausen’s mammoth, unfinished cycle “Klang” next spring, the performance will be held at all three of its buildings: at its main home on Fifth Avenue, at the Cloisters museum and gardens in Fort Tryon Park in Washington Heights and at the Breuer building.There will be more traditional fare as well, including at the museum’s Grace Rainey Rogers Auditorium. The Chiara String Quartet will be the museum’s next quartet in residence, a position held for decades by the Guarneri String Quartet. It plans to play the Brahms quartets by heart, among other works. Jordi Savall will lead Juilliard415 in music from the time of the Spanish Armada. And the Venice Baroque Orchestra will perform Vivaldi.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The lineup will be the fourth “Met Museum Presents” season planned by Limor Tomer, the Met’s general manager of concerts and lectures. “There really is no ‘normal,’ because we have no buckets to fill and no boxes to check,” she said. “We reinvent what performance means at the Met each year.”As previously announced, the Met Breuer will open on March 10 with an 18-day marathon of performances played or arranged by the innovative jazz pianist Vijay Iyer,  the Met’s artist in residence next season.And the composer John Luther Adams, who won the Pulitzer Prize last year, has been commissioned to write a downloadable crowd-sourced piece lasting nine minutes and nine seconds, the time it takes to walk briskly from the Met’s Fifth Avenue home to the Breuer building on Madison at 75th Street.Mr. Iyer will perform at the Met and the new Breuer building during his residency. Highlights include his multimedia work “Holding It Down: The Veterans’ Dreams Project,” as well as a performance on the Met’s 1830 Thomas Appleton pipe organ and a number of new works, including one he is creating to accompany an exhibition at the Breuer of work by the Indian modernist Nasreen Mohamedi.Mr. Iyer said in an interview that he hoped that his 18-day installation would be “less about disciplinary boundaries, and more about creating a larger sense of community.”A version of this article appears in print on April 29, 2015, on Page C4 of the New York edition with the headline: Met Museum to Expand Its Musical Offerings With New Breuer Space .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.