AdvertisementSupported byBy Zachary WoolfeAt its premiere on New Year’s Eve, the Metropolitan Opera’s new production of “The Merry Widow,” a dreary vehicle for Renée Fleming staged by the Broadway veteran Susan Stroman, made its title seem like a question. Merry? Really?Back four months later with a new conductor and an almost entirely fresh cast, the show offers a few more glimpses of charm. But on the road from depressing to irrepressible, it’s still stranded not far from the former.There is, happily, a marked improvement in the title role. Ms. Fleming, on Broadway as an opera diva in “Living on Love,” until the play closes Sunday, seemed in “The Merry Widow” to be grinning with teeth nervously clenched. Her singing voice was sometimes syrupy sweet and sometimes unpleasantly angular; she seemed ill at ease in the production’s heavy quantities of spoken dialogue.The mezzo-soprano Susan Graham, who has taken over as the widow, Hanna Glawari, is far more natural. With a 2014 Paris production of “The King and I” under her belt, she understands how to stylishly shift from speaking to singing and back again. A straightforward, straight-talking presence, her Hanna — whose husband has died, leaving her the millions that are fought over in this Franz Lehar blockbuster 1905 operetta — has no pretensions and no illusions.But Ms. Graham’s reserved, silky voice also gives the character a romantic side, as in her dreamy version of the celebrated “Vilja Song.” While her tone sometimes faded into the orchestral textures, it was more often clear and eloquent. With Fabio Luisi on the podium, the orchestra sounded more suave and less harried than it had under Andrew Davis a few months ago.As the work’s ingénue, Valencienne, the soprano Andriana Chuchman was most lucid at the top of her range. The tenor Stephen Costello, his physical presence bland as usual, at least sounded ardent as her love interest, Camille. Two baritones, Rod Gilfrey as Danilo and Alan Opie as Baron Zeta, sang gruffly but acted with class.The entire cast seemed game enough. But it is hard to imagine any talents being bright enough to overcome Jeremy Sams’s leaden English-language script.The jokes in the vast expanses of dialogue rarely land, and the doggerel of the sung verses falls flat, too. Counting his work on Johann Strauss II’s “Die Fledermaus” and the Baroque pastiche “The Enchanted Island,” Mr. Sams now has three strikes against him at the Met. Surely it’s time for Peter Gelb, the company’s general manager, to stop inviting him back.Advertisement