Think of the Instagram hashtag ArquiMoMA as an epilogue to the Museum of Modern Art’s “Latin America in Construction: Architecture 1955-1980.”Visitors leaving that exhibition, which Michael Kimmelman has weighed in on with a review, may notice a wall with a photo stream of the buildings they just saw, but as they are now. The stream is made up of images by amateur photographers who have been feeding #ArquiMoMA. There have been over 18,500 posts so far, including the Banco de Londres y  América del Sur headquarters in Buenos Aires, below. La casa central del extinto Banco de Londres y América del Sur fue creada en 1959 por el arquitecto argentino Clorindo Testa.  Es uno de los ejemplos más fáciles de identificar de la arquitectura Brutalista de nuestro país.  El edificio fue completado en 1966. En la década del 1990 pasó a manos del Lloyds Bank y actualmente es sede del Banco Hipotecario. /The headquarters of the Banco de Londres y América del Sur or Bank of London and South America in Buenos Aires was created in 1959 by Argentine architect Clorindo Testa. Is the country's most easily identifiable example of Brutalist architecture. The building, completed in 1966, was occupied by the local Lloyds Bank branch during the 1980s and early 1990s, and in 1997, was acquired by the newly privatized Banco Hipotecario. #igersBsAs #BuenosAires #vscocam #ArquiMoMa #ARQgentinaA photo posted by Nestor Barbitta (@nestorbarbitta) on Mar 14, 2015 at 8:36am PDTOrganizing Instagram users in 13 Latin American countries is no small task. Barry Bergdoll, the curator of the exhibition, partnered with Instagram to organize an “InstaMeet” connecting people in 11 cities on March 14, ahead of the show’s opening at the end of March. Photographers don’t appear to have taken the assignment lightly: #ArquiMoMA is “an exhibition in and of itself,” Mr. Bergdoll said. Many of the posts are carefully composed, with professional-level editing. Some have extended captions with multiple paragraphs describing a building’s history.And, Mr. Bergdoll said, the hashtag has had a welcome side effect. “We’re sending people to discover these buildings,” he said. “It’s kind of creating an architectural tourism locally that I hadn’t thought of.”The Instagram campaign has also broadened the exhibition’s scope. The hashtag covers 13 countries — one more than the museum show itself. Mr. Bergdoll said Guatemala was excluded because MoMA didn’t have access to drawings of the Centro Cultural Miguel Ángel Asturias, known as Teatro Nacional. Because of the hashtag, however, the theater, below, has sneaked its way onto MoMA’s walls.The exhibition runs through July 19.   . As simple as you can get. ⚪️