AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn Shattuck8 P.M. (Fox) BONES The series celebrates its 206th episode — making it 20th Century Fox Television’s longest-running hourlong drama — by mentioning each of the 206 bones in the human body as Brennan (Emily Deschanel) and Booth (David Boreanaz) investigate the death of a celebrity chef who was reviewing their favorite restaurant. In the season finale of “Backstrom,” at 9, a death on an American Indian reservation leads to the local meth czar (Gregory Cruz). Backstrom (Rainn Wilson) believes his father (Robert Forster), a county sheriff, knew about the drug dealings.2 P.M. (Sundance) LOVE ACTUALLY (2003) Hugh Grant portrays a British prime minister and randy bachelor who fancies a member of his household staff (Martine McCutcheon) at 10 Downing Street — and nearly causes an international crisis when he protects her virtue from the president of the United States (Billy Bob Thornton) — in this holiday comedy written and directed by Richard Curtis. Emma Thompson is the prime minister’s sister, a housewife whose husband (Alan Rickman) is besotted with his secretary (Heike Makatsch); Liam Neeson, a widower and single stepfather; and Colin Firth, a writer cuckolded by his own brother. And a “genuine comic spark comes from Bill Nighy, playing a washed-up, dissolute rock star,” A. O. Scott wrote in The New York Times. In “Bridget Jones’s Diary” (2001), at 3:10 on Starz, Renée Zellweger plays the bumbling London career girl — sort of — torn between lovers (Mr. Grant and Mr. Firth) in this classic chick flick torn from the pages of Helen Fielding’s novel. The movie “begins with a blitz of fast-cut, witty observations and short satirical takes on Bridget, her friends, the London dating scene and the inner workings of her publishing house,” Stephen Holden wrote in The Times. “The velocity leaves you almost breathless.” But “don’t expect ‘Bridget Jones’s Diary’ to deliver any searing revelations about the human condition,” he added. “What it is is a delicious piece of candy whose amusing package is scrawled with bons mots distantly inspired by Jane Austen.”8 P.M. (ABC) GREY’S ANATOMY Meredith (Ellen Pompeo) and the rest of the doctors at Grey Sloan Memorial struggle to cope with the death of Derek (Patrick Dempsey) in this two-hour episode.10 P.M. (USA) DIG As an ancient religious sect puts the pieces of a deadly plot into place, Peter (Jason Isaacs) tries to curtail a catastrophe by partnering with unlikely allies. Lynn (Anne Heche), meanwhile, investigates Ambassador Ridell (Regina Taylor).10:30 P.M. (13) LOST CHILD — SAYON’S JOURNEY (2013) At the age of 6, Sayon Soeun was abducted by the Khmer Rouge and used as a soldier in the civil war that toppled the Cambodian government and resulted in the deaths of an estimated 1.7 million from 1975 to 1979. In 1983, Sayon Soeun was taken in by an American family in Lowell, Mass. This documentary chronicles his return to Cambodia three decades later, when he meets people claiming to be his relatives and comes to terms with the brutality of his childhood.10:45 P.M. (HBO2) RUSH (2013) The director Ron Howard, working from a screenplay by Peter Morgan, climbs into the cockpits of Formula One racecars as he recounts the rivalry between James Hunt (Chris Hemsworth), a British playboy who rose from his middle-class beginnings to racing royalty, and Niki Lauda (Daniel Brühl), a wealthy Austrian nicknamed the Rat for his pronounced overbite, who drove the sport into mainstream consciousness in 1976. “Mr. Howard doesn’t just want you to crawl inside a Formula One racecar, he also wants you to crawl inside its driver’s head,” Manohla Dargis wrote in The Times. “ ‘Rush,’ which is serious without being self-serious, fun without being trivial, feels like the movie that he has been waiting to make his whole life.”What’s Streaming NowMURDOCH MYSTERIES: THE MOVIES Before “The Artful Detective,” the Canadian mystery series, came to Ovation, the characters from Maureen Jennings’s novels appeared in three 2004 feature-length adaptations. In “Except the Dying,” the first of these prequels, Detective William Murdoch (Peter Outerbridge) tries to restore order to gritty 1890s Toronto with the help of Dr. Julia Ogden (Keeley Hawes) and Inspector Brackenreid (Colm Meaney). (acorn.tv)Advertisement