By VIVIEN SCHWEITZERAPRIL 29, 2015
Cheeriness, when conveyed via Shostakovich, invariably takes on a darker hue. As the pianist Steven Blier said while introducing selections from the composer’s “Six Spanish Songs” at Merkin Concert Hall on Tuesday evening, they might look like “sweet little songs” on paper, but Shostakovich turned them into “songs of the steppes.”The rich-voiced baritone Alexey Lavrov offered a riveting interpretation of four excerpts from the set, based on Spanish folksongs, as part of a New York Festival of Song program, “Letters From Spain: A World of Song in Spanish Poetry.” He infused them with dramatic fervor and characterful nuance, his voice becoming sultry at the conclusion of “Little Stars” and vividly energetic in the melismatic “Farewell, Granada!”Shostakovich’s countryman Tchaikovsky set his “Don Juan’s Serenade” to a Spain-inspired poem by Tolstoy. This heated number was rendered with forceful intensity by Mr. Lavrov, whose vocal finesse was not matched by Michael Barrett’s pianism.Schumann and Wolf, who infused his Germanic ethos with evocations of strummed guitars and castanets, were among the German Romantic composers entranced by Spanish poetry. The soprano Corinne Winters wielded her luxuriant, plum-hued voice to lovely effect in Wolf’s “Geh’ geliebter, geh’ jetzt” (“Go Beloved, Now”).AdvertisementAnd for any lieder aficionados offended by hearing Wolf performed in Spanish, too bad, Mr. Blier said, joking, before the tenor Theo Lebow’s sensitive rendition of “Qué producirá mi Dios” (“What Will This Earth Bring Forth, my Lord?”).Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The tenor Plácido Domingo commissioned William Bolcom to write “Canciones de Lorca,” sung with commitment and flair by Mr. Lebow. Originally scoring the pieces for orchestra and later arranging them for piano, Mr. Bolcom took inspiration from various Spanish and South American idioms: tango inflections for the heartbroken protagonist of “Alba,” hints of flamenco in the “Soneto de la dulce queja” (“Sonnet of the Sweet Complaint”) and salsa references in “El poeta llega a la Habana” (“The Poet Arrives in Havana.”)The program also included alluring songs by the 20th-century Argentine composer Carlos Guastavino, elegantly sung by Ms. Winters. A highlight of the evening was the a cappella “Ay, trista vida corporal” (“Ah, sad human life”), a religious Renaissance piece whose haunting cadences were exquisitely rendered by Mr. Lebow.AdvertisementThe three singers joined forces to conclude the evening with “Anda, jaleo,” a traditional Spanish song arranged by Federico García Lorca, who had studied music in his youth.A music review on Thursday about “Letters From Spain: A World of Song in Spanish Poetry,” a New York Festival of Song program at Merkin Concert Hall, referred imprecisely to Corinne Winters, one of the performers. She is a soprano, not a mezzo-soprano.A version of this review appears in print on April 30, 2015, on Page C5 of the New York edition with the headline: Inspired by Spain, Written by Everyone.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.