AdvertisementSupported byBy Alastair MacaulayIn 1972, the great music critic Andrew Porter, who died on April 3, opened a New Yorker essay with these words: “Why, they ask me, do you so much enjoy living in New York?” There was the light, he wrote, which “makes each day a visual adventure,” and moreover the New York City Ballet. “Imagine a world in which Mozart’s music was played regularly in only one town, by an ensemble directed by its composer ... There are other composers than Mozart, other ballet-makers than George Balanchine. But each is central to his art.” The connection between the “visual adventure” of New York’s light and Balanchine’s choreography was surely no accident. City Ballet is opening its six-week spring season with 12 Balanchine ballets in three different “Black and White” performances that represent one brilliant extreme of the Balanchine enterprise, with theater made solely of the interaction of music and dance without décor. The dancers wear a range of the pared-down attire (leotards, T-shirts, tights, tiny skirts) widely if inaccurately known as “practice costume,” — black and white, in most cases. Again and again, the choreography makes light itself an adventure.Balanchine was always the greatest choreographic master of formal geometry. Tuesday, opening night, began with the complementary but contrasting Stravinsky duo of “Monumentum pro Gesualdo” (1960) and “Movements for Piano and Orchestra” (1963): Each is a sparse affair for a ballerina, her partner and a female corps de ballet, but in “Monumentum,” in which each woman in the corps has a male partner, a gorgeous array of brilliantly changing patterns connects modernism to Renaissance harmony; while in “Movements,” modernism, though even sparser, keeps breaking its banks, with splinterings of line, male-female tensions, frequently asymmetrical arrangements, radical meters.On Tuesday, the quietly sensational Maria Kowroski, long experienced in this pairing but often muted by a certain diffidence of delivery, attained a new peak of authority. She and the female corps (six different women for each work) showed Balanchine’s style of visually anticipating the music better than I have seen in many years: As steps arrived a fraction ahead of the notes, they made an extraordinary effect, showing you physical form to which Stravinsky’s score then came as a confirmation.The quick succession of avenues, arcs, parabolas, zigzags and changing crosses that characterize Balanchine’s Bach classic “Concerto Barocco” (1941) are familiar, but they should never be taken for granted. Eight years ago, the company’s dancing of this ballet was shabby and subdued; but of late, the company — notably its corps of eight women — has demonstrated glowing pride in this choreography, boldly stepping out off-balance (on Tuesday, when one corps member slipped for a moment, it was the result of bravery) and announcing the movement in shapes and phrases that truly play with the music, now ahead of it, now lingering on a fraction after it.At this performance, the spring of these women’s feet had a special éclat — perhaps the result of the company’s rehearsing the extensive beats and jumps that characterize the choreography of August Bournonville; you could feel insteps tingling. (A program combining the company’s “Bournonville Divertissements” with a new production of his two-act “La Sylphide” joins the repertory next Thursday.) This exhilarating brio was exemplified by the ballerinas Teresa Reichlen and Sara Mearns in the “Barocco” lead roles; they’ve become the company’s pre-eminent pair in this ballet, and their duetting has the brilliant give-and-take of supreme musicianship.Amazingly, Balanchine began the adventure of paring away sets and costumes for “Concerto Barocco” as early as 1945. (My companion on Tuesday was proud to note that she danced a corps role in a 1945 Ballet Russe de Monte Carlo performance of the ballet; in those days the costumes were black.) Another early ballet for this process of reduction and concentration was “The Four Temperaments” (1946), whose Kurt Seligman costumes Balanchine began eliminating soon after the premiere. Today it’s always danced in black leotards (women) and white T-shirts and black tights (men); nobody should want it otherwise.In the opening duet, as a woman (the admirable Lydia Wellington on Tuesday) rotates her raised leg in three successive arcs of increasing height, we feel how Balanchine choreography opens up theatrical space; the leg acts like a searchlight. By the end, with ballerinas borne exultantly high along huge horizontal flight paths, the air itself has been galvanized.You can read “The Four Temperaments” — one of the richest and most abundantly expressive of all dances — as a creation myth. In the beginning “Male and female created he them” (in the King James Version words about the first pair of humans), and from this nucleus — with a series of three inseparable couples in the opening theme — Balanchine builds and builds, showing us men without women (the soloists of the Melancholic and Phlegmatic variations), woman and man meeting from afar and dancing as much independently as together (the lead couple of Sanguinic), and woman dancing alone (in the final, thunderous Choleric variation). We see social units, and finally a complex social order.Tuesday’s performance was not vintage Balanchine (Ashley Bouder is a redoubtable Choleric, though I’d rather her brilliance and high emphasis were applied to Sanguinic); but since I’d seen the Royal Ballet dance a conscientious but far less idiomatic version two weeks before, I was happy simply to see accentuations that felt like home. Ana Sophia Scheller, after a long absence, danced a lucid account of Sanguinic, one of the toughest of all roles.Each of the four sections of the Webern “Episodes” (1959) gives us a different exploration of light and of male-female drama at its most coolly experimental. Here both Jennie Somogyi and Rebecca Krohn were back after injuries and looking good; Ms. Somogyi, whose career has had many long interruptions this century, danced with a fluent assurance as if to say everybody else had been absent but never she.New York City Ballet’s spring season runs through June 7 at the David H. Koch Theater; nycballet.com. Advertisement