AdvertisementSupported byBy Zachary WoolfePRINCETON, N.J. — Most portraits don’t receive a serenade when they’re about to travel, but this isn’t most portraits.A 1748 painting of Johann Sebastian Bach, the most significant and well-preserved likeness of the great composer, has hung for more than 60 years in a modest living room here, part of the distinguished rare books and artifacts collection of the philanthropist William H. Scheide, who died last November at 100.Early next week, as Mr. Scheide instructed in his will, it will fly home to Leipzig, Germany, where Bach spent the final decades of his life and the Bach archive has its headquarters and a small museum.But not before being sent off in style: On Wednesday morning, a crowd that included the mayor of Leipzig and Germany’s consul general in New York gathered around the painting to sip Champagne and listen to the lustrous harmonies of two of the master’s chorales, sung by the Monteverdi Choir and conducted by John Eliot Gardiner. (They will appear at Carnegie Hall on Thursday and Friday performing works by Monteverdi).For Mr. Gardiner, it was more than a purely musical reunion. Before he became one of the world’s great Bach conductors — a few years, in fact, before he was born — the portrait, painted by Elias Gottlob Haussmann, was moved to his parents’ home in Dorset, England, for safekeeping after the outbreak of World War II. Mr. Gardiner, born in 1943, grew up passing it on the stairway landing. “Every night on my way to bed, I tried to avoid its forbidding stare,” he wrote in his 2013 study of the composer, “Bach: Music in the Castle of Heaven.”“When you’re a kid, your impressions are vivid but they’re not fully formed,” Mr. Gardiner said on Wednesday. “It takes an awful lot of years of conducting and studying the music to begin to get a feel of connection and deep understanding of the man. And I don’t feel I’ve got to the end of it. But I feel a lot closer than I did when I was 7 or 8.”In the portrait a bewigged, thickset Bach gazes warily at the viewer while holding the score for one of his canons. He has, Mr. Gardiner writes, “the look of a man etched with life’s travails — beetle-browed, with shallow eye sockets, asymmetrical eyes and slightly droopy eyelids.”The image at first seems of a piece with the notoriously unrevealing Bach, about whose life and character frustratingly little is known. Christoph Wolff described it in “Johann Sebastian Bach: The Learned Musician” (2000): “In the portrait, Bach the man takes a back seat to his work, and this is how we have always understood him.”But Mr. Gardiner locates in the painting slight yet telling clues to the composer’s personality, writing of “the fleshy lips and jowls that suggest a fondness for food and wine, as the records imply” and “how astutely Haussmann had captured opposed facets of his sitter’s character: the serious and the sensual.”The painting owned by Mr. Scheide, a lifelong admirer of the composer who founded the Bach Aria Group, a renowned performing ensemble, in 1946, is the slightly later of two versions by Haussmann. (The less pristine, less lively first rendering, from 1746, has been repeatedly overpainted and restored and is now owned by the Stadtgeschichtliches Museum in Leipzig.)Before Bach died, he passed the second portrait to his son Carl Philipp Emanuel, and it is included in the late-18th-century inventory of the estate of C. P. E. Bach’s widow. Its history then gets hazy for the better part of 100 years, but the painting reappeared in the possession of a family in Lower Silesia (part of present-day Poland) late in the 19th century.It stayed there until Europe teetered on the edge of World War II, when a descendant of the family that owned it, Walter Jenke, fled the rise of the Nazis and arrived in Dorset, where he had an old friend from a youth camp in Germany: Mr. Gardiner’s father.Transferred to the Gardiners when hostilities broke out and Jenke, as a German, was interned on the Isle of Man, the portrait was bought by Mr. Scheide in 1953.“Bill said once it was over one million dollars,” his wife, Judith Scheide, said in an interview. Mr. Scheide’s original plan was to require a German museum to buy it at its appraised price after his death, but last year he changed his mind and left it to the Bach archive outright.“This was his love and joy,” Mrs. Scheide said of the portrait. “He saw changes to the face every day. He said good morning to it every morning and good night every night until he died.”Meanwhile, Mr. Gardiner became one of the eminent musicians of his generation, particularly prized for his vibrant interpretations of early music. He founded the Monteverdi Choir in 1964 and the English Baroque Soloists in 1978, and in 2000 traveled with both ensembles on a sprawling journey they called the Bach Cantata Pilgrimage, going through 14 countries and performing nearly 200 of Bach’s church cantatas at the points on the liturgical calendar for which each was originally composed. “Any music that’s happened since Bach, even jazz, to me is unthinkable without him,” Mr. Gardiner said. Now Johann Sebastian will be united in Leipzig, inside the Bach archive’s “treasure room,” with the only known image of his father, Johann Ambrosius Bach.In short remarks just before leading the Monteverdi Choir, Mr. Gardiner pointed out the appropriateness of the title of the cantata from which the chorales were drawn: “Nimm, was dein ist, und gehe hin,” a phrase from the Gospel of Matthew that means “Take what is yours, and go on your way.”Advertisement