By JON CARAMANICAAPRIL 29, 2015
Even given the ever-shifting and unpredictable borders of contemporary country music, Tyler Farr is a man more or less without a state. He’s not a cool bro flirting with hip-hop references and not a faithful preservationist. And, despite his first huge hit, “Redneck Crazy,” he’s not trying to pass for a true backwoods kingpin. At his Tuesday night concert at Irving Plaza, he didn’t wear a cowboy hat (too traditional), and he didn’t wear a baseball cap (too bro). He was just a hatless guy working the stage with an athletic, mildly menacing prowl, singing scratched-up country songs that weren’t coy about their arena-rock ambition.Mr. Farr was celebrating the release of his second album, “Suffer in Peace” (Columbia Nashville), a surprisingly grimy collection of Southern rock cut through with real moments of tenderness. But even when Mr. Farr is vulnerable, his voice is determinedly gritty and strained; his warmth is never comforting, only unsettled.The moments when that tension was on display were the best ones at this show. Before he began playing “Hello Goodbye,” the crowd was distracted. The song, he said, was inspired by a real-life tragedy: finding his better half “playing naked Twister” with another man. “My pain is your pleasure,” he said, as the crowd giggled or ignored him.But then he began singing, and the audience quieted quickly. He was wounded but tough, getting louder as the pain got sharper. That’s the same pattern he followed on “Redneck Crazy,” which closed his main set here, howling like a swaggering 1980s rock singer. He also shined on “Withdrawals,” the anguished breakup song that’s a highlight of the new album, and the muscular love song “Better in Boots.”AdvertisementThe closest approximation to Mr. Farr’s blend of raw and callused is Lee Brice, but Mr. Brice has teddy-bear approachability; Mr. Farr looks like he’s fixing for a fight, with loads of energy to burn.AdvertisementHe’s young enough that he’s still chatty onstage: “We made it to our second album, and I didn’t die. I tried like hell, and it didn’t work.” Sometimes too chatty: After a male fan shouted something like “I love you” at the stage, Mr. Farr stopped the show to try to locate him and tossed what seemed to be an awkward gay joke back at him.Genre-wise, Mr. Farr is notionally reaching out past his sweet spot. Before he came onstage, the speakers were blasting the country chestnut “Tennessee Whiskey” bookended with Eminem and Kid Rock. And his superfluous encore was half made up of Foo Fighters covers, though his enthusiasm during this part of the show revealed his true comfort zone.Mr. Farr wants to be an old-fashioned Southern rock star. He’s a raucous, disruptive presence that even country’s biggest umbrella doesn’t quite cover. The opening song of his new album, and of this show, was titled “C.O.U.N.T.R.Y.,” though, with its lowdown, swampy, bluesy tang, it was less an advertisement for that genre and more a reminder of what’s still scarce there.A version of this review appears in print on April 30, 2015, on Page C5 of the New York edition with the headline: Flaunting Arena-Size Ambitions in Much Smaller Surroundings.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.