Mark Ronson’s song “Uptown Funk” has been the biggest pop hit of the year, logging 14 weeks at No. 1 with a sound that evokes 1970s and ’80s acts like the Time and Cameo. Now, in the latest example of disputed songwriting credits for a big pop hit, Mr. Ronson and his publishers have acknowledged a debt to the Gap Band’s 1979 track “I Don’t Believe You Want to Get Up and Dance (Oops, Up Side Your Head).” As Billboard reported early Friday, RCA, the label that released “Uptown Funk,” this week officially changed the credits to the song, adding the five writers of the Gap Band’s track to the six already credited on “Uptown Funk.”The change comes less than two months after a federal jury found that Robin Thicke’s 2013 hit “Blurred Lines” copied elements of Marvin Gaye’s “Got to Give It Up” without permission, and awarded Gaye’s family $7.4 million in damages from Mr. Thicke and Pharrell Williams. At the time, music industry commentators worried that the verdict would make contemporary songwriters more vulnerable to complaints about borrowing older material, even if intended as tribute or emulation. In January, it was reported that Sam Smith had agreed to change the credits for “Stay With Me” after a private complaint by Tom Petty and Jeff Lynne, the writers of Mr. Petty’s 1989 hit “I Won’t Back Down.”RCA declined to comment on the change to “Uptown Funk,” and representatives for Mr. Ronson and his publisher did not immediately respond to requests for comment. Billboard quoted Danny Zook, the manager of Trinidad James, one of the originally credited songwriters on “Uptown Funk” (under the name Nicholas Williams), as saying: “Everyone is being a little more cautious. Nobody wants to be involved in a lawsuit.” In the kind of pileup of songwriting credits that is increasingly common on big pop hits, “Uptown Funk” now lists 11 writers: Mr. Ronson, Bruno Mars (the featured vocalist), Jeff Bhasker, Philip Lawrence, the primary writers of the track; Mr. Williams and Devon Gallaspy, whose song “All Gold Everything” was sampled; and now Charles Wilson, Robert Wilson, Ronnie Wilson, Rudolph Taylor and Lonnie Simmons, who wrote “Oops.”A version of this article appears in print on 05/02/2015, on page C3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Who Wrote ‘Uptown Funk’? RCA Adds 5 to Credits.