Thornton Dial, the self-taught Alabama artist whose best-known work — dense, chaotic wall reliefs that exist somewhere between painting and sculpture — recently entered the collection of the Metropolitan Museum of Art, is moving into the Manhattan gallery ecosphere. Mr. Dial, 87, will be represented by the Marianne Boesky Gallery, whose roster includes artists like Frank Stella, the painter Barnaby Furnas and the director John Waters.Mr. Dial, who worked for the Pullman railcar company and later as a pipe fitter and carpenter before devoting himself to making art, has been represented for many years by William S. Arnett, the founder of the Souls Grown Deep Foundation in Atlanta, which recently donated a major collection of work by contemporary African-American artists from the South to the Met.The gallery move is, in a sense, an art homecoming for Mr. Dial, whose first solo museum exhibition was held in New York in 1993, jointly at the New Museum of Contemporary Art and the American Folk Art Museum. In 2011, the Indianapolis Museum of Art presented the first major survey of his work. His pieces are included in the permanent collections of the Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden, the Philadelphia Museum of Art and the Whitney Museum of American Art, New York, where he was included in the 2000 Biennial.His first exhibition with the Boesky gallery, featuring works on paper, will open on Nov. 5 at the gallery’s uptown location, 118 East 64th Street, and will remain on view through Dec. 19. Ms. Boesky, in a statement, said she was drawn to Mr. Dial’s work because it is “on par with the great artists of his generation” and because “the boundaries between outsider and insider are shifting: I watch academically trained artists work hard to shake loose from all the scholarship and technique to channel their emotions and experiences in more immediate material and formal ways.”A version of this article appears in print on 10/21/2015, on page C3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Self-Taught Artist Joins Boesky Gallery.