Is it in 3-D? Movie audiences ask that question a lot, sometimes in anticipation, sometimes in annoyance. After its increase in popularity in the 1950s, then another surge in the 1980s,  the use of contemporary 3-D picked up again in the early 2000s and seems like it’s here to stay. In the series “3D in the 21st Century,” BAMcinématek is looking at the most recent resurgence, showing films both highbrow (“Pina”) and low (“Jackass 3D”) to demonstrate the many ways the technology enhances storytelling.Although there have been a great many advances,  glasses are still  necessary  to watch these films in the same way our eyes looks at the world.Each of our eyes see from a slightly different angle. Those two images are combined in the brain to give a sense of depth perception. Films in 3-D create this sense by using two cameras to record images from different angles simulating our eyes. These slightly different angles are projected onto the same screen at once, and glasses help combine those separate images into a depth-filled one, mimicking what our brain does. Different glasses do this in different ways, and the BAMcinématek series is using a number of them. Here is a look at a four 3-D styles , a little about how they work and what films will use them.PrismaticWith these somewhat novelty glasses, the 3-D image is refracted through prisms in the lenses. The series is showing an experimental short from Jodie Mack, “Let Your Light Shine,” that will require prismatic glasses. The three-minute film uses pulsating colors and will screen with the 2012 concert documentary “Katy Perry: Part of Me 3D.”ChromadepthThese glasses conjure up 3-D images from 2-D using the color in those images. Red is pulled into the foreground and  the other colors are sorted  on different planes. They will be handy for Kerry Laitala’s abstract short film “Chromatic Frenzy,” screening with another film that experiments heavily with what 3-D can achieve, Jean Luc-Godard’s “Goodbye to Language.”AnaglyphAudiences might be familiar with these traditional red- and blue-lens glasses, which  use  opposing colors to filter the image for each eye. The series is running a number of shorts in this format, including Yoshi Sodeoka’s 2010 film “Psychedelic Death Vomit (Slight Return),” which features  blasts of neon. It will screen with “Piranha 3D.”RealDThese are the glasses most frequently found in theaters today. The projector switches between the left- and right-eye images at 144 frames per second. The screen has qualities that increase the brightness of the image. And the glasses use  circular polarization to create their effect. The image in the right eye is circularly polarized clockwise, allowing only the right image to become visible in that lens. And the left-eye image goes counterclockwise to expose that image in the left lens.  “Hugo,” “Coraline” and “Resident Evil: Retribution” along with other features will screen in this format.