Baroque in Rome. The Wonders of Art
Fondazione Roma Museo, Palazzo Cipolla.
Through July 26.Baroque, the lavish art style that took Europe by storm in the 17th century, is the focus of this exhibition, which trains its eye on the formative role that Rome played in the Continent-wide movement. Artworks include paintings, sketches and statues, and artists include the major names of the day, such as Bernini, Guido Reni and Giacinto Brandi. In addition to examining the output of Rome-based artists, the exhibition explores the role that the city’s elites (in particular the Vatican) played in forging the art movement.Fuji Paradigms: Visions of Mt. Fuji
Izu Photo Museum.
Through July 5.Japan’s highest mountain is the subject of this exhibition, which takes place in a small, hillside museum just miles from the mountain’s base. The exhibition is divided into two sections. The first shows photographs of Mount Fuji from the early days of photography until the mid-20th century. It focuses on how the mountain was depicted in tourist photographs, mountain climbers’ portraits and political propaganda. The second section focuses on Masanao Abe, a scientist and photographer who used pioneering techniques to document the mountain’s cloud cover.A selection of arts events taking place across the world in the coming week.Venice Biennale
Various venues.
May 9-Nov. 22.The world’s most significant biennale opens next week, curated this year by Okwui Enwezor, the director of the Haus der Kunst in Munich. Mr. Enwezor has focused efforts on making this year’s biennial political: The action centers around an auditorium where actors will read passages from Marx’s “Das Kapital” throughout the biennale’s run. Those on view include artworld figures like Marlene Dumas, Adrian Piper and Thomas Hirschhorn alongside emerging artists like Abounaddara, a Syrian video art group whose members keep their individual identities hidden. (Follow coverage of the event at nytimes.com/arts)Festival Internacional de las Luces
Various venues.
May 7-10.Mexico City’s historic city center will light up for this event. Artists including Laszlo Bordos of Hungary and the Máximo González of Argentina will show large-scale public light installations (some artworks will be projected onto the city’s most spectacular neoclassical facades in the evening). Associated events are planned during the day. Several artists will give talks, as will academics such as Cristóbal Cobo, a researcher in new and educational technologies, who will discuss how natural light affected historical church architecture.Mariko Mori: Rebirth
The Art Gallery of Western Australia.
Through June 29.The Tokyo-born installation artist Mariko Mori’s (born 1967) early works include self-portraits and performance art that slyly critique Japanese social roles. Recently, the artist has focused primarily on installations. “Rebirth” fills the installation’s galleries with atmospheric light and sound. Like many of her recent works, it evokes the extraterrestrial. It runs alongside another exhibition commemorating Australia’s role in the battle of Gallipoli in World War I.Opera Days
Various venues.
May 10-31.“The Big Easy,” an opera inspired by New Orleans’ famed big band processions; “King Size,” a liederabend featuring music by the Kinks; and a series of opera concerts set in volunteers’ homes all figure in this non-traditional festival of opera. On the weekend of May 9, opera houses across Europe will celebrate European Opera Days, opening their doors with free concerts aiming to attract non-traditional opera audiences. In Rotterdam, a May 10 concert featuring the soprano Channa Malkin will take place in the city’s Arboretum Trompenburg to mark the occasion. The bulk of the festival’s programming — which also includes traditional fare like a performance of Mahler’s Fifth Symphony by the Düsseldorfer Symphoniker — takes place from May 22-31.A Hundred Years of Shame
Para Site.
Through May 17.This exhibition’s title comes from a Chinese phrase used to describe the century that began in the mid-1800s, when Japanese and European imperial powers repeatedly plundered China. The exhibition brings together new and older works from artists — such as Hu Xiangqian, Cai Hui and Firenze Lai — from China and its surrounding areas. The video works, paintings and installations offer varying perspectives on the national pride that forms Chinese consciousness.Brighton Festival
Various venues.
May 2-24.A broad mix of pop music, classical concerts, dance performances and circus shows will take place on stages across this seaside city in May. Around 150 performances will take place, including an eclectic array of headliners, like the spoken word artist Kate Tempest; the prominent chamber orchestra the Britten Sinfonia; and the New York-based Public Theater, which will perform “The Apple Family Plays,” a series of real-time dramas set during major political events.Markus Lüpertz: Une Retrospective
Musée d’Art Moderne de la Ville de Paris.
Through July 19.Mr. Lüpertz (born 1941 in what is now the Czech Republic) came of age in 1960s Germany and forged a new style that evoked the country’s slightly older artistic bad boys (like Gerhard Richter and Joseph Beuys), but focused more on formal innovation than political critique. This exhibition brings together his best-known paintings and some of his unusual painted sculptures. It includes work from his early career to the present (including the recent “Arcadia” series).