By JAN BENZELMAY 1, 2015
MY breakfast this morning was a perfect croissant. I hadn’t realized such a thing existed in New York until a Parisian pointed me in its direction.“An American in Paris” opened on Broadway to accolades and a dozen Tony nominations. “Gigi,” arrived on Broadway, too, a musical with origins in a Colette story of a belle Époque courtesan-in-training. Lincoln Center has restored the French director Eric Rohmer’s 1984 “Full Moon in Paris,” about an interior designer’s complicated love life, and screened it along with a full roster of Rohmer films.All of this happened in April, which to New Yorkers, apparently, is the Frenchest month, although May is much nicer in Paris. May 1, in fact, is a holiday in France, Labor Day, and, coincidentally, the day to bestow lily-of-the-valley bouquets upon loved ones. As someone recently ensconced in New York after three years in Paris, I am homesick this spring in a reverse sort of way.I went to see “An American in Paris” twice — the second time less for the story or the lush Gershwin music or even the adorable cast members dancing their hearts out than to swoon again over Bob Crowley’s you-are-there set designs, which include magical projections of the buildings, the people, the light.AdvertisementMy life in Paris was not all fairy tale — dropping into a foreign culture is never easy — but it had its moments. I lived in a sweet, light-filled apartment in the Seventh Arrondissement — just around the corner from the Musée Rodin; just down the street from a jewel of a movie house, La Pagode; just across the Seine from the Grand Palais.I hear readers harrumphing already. “What does she know about Paris?” they grumble proprietarily. “She knows nothing of my city.” Paris, I’ve learned, inspires a fierce sense of ownership, even in those who’ve been there only once, for a weekend, say, in 1953.AdvertisementI developed an incurable crush on the Eiffel Tower and unabashedly took a photo of it practically every day. My college-age daughters made fun of me. (“Mom, the Eiffel Tower? Again?”) There was beauty everywhere I looked, perfect croissants all over the place. Still, it wasn’t home.But as I sat at the Palace Theater in New York, with narrow curving Parisian streets, filigree bridges, Montmartre, Pigalle, Place de la Concorde, materializing onstage to the swells of Gershwin and dissolving, one into the other, I felt a possessive pang of my own. The city portrayed in the show is the more beautiful for having emerged, bearing hurt and scars, from World War II. Decades later, the city I came to love is again carrying on after having suffered unthinkable violence.Since I won’t be back anytime soon, I’ve been seeking out hints of Paris in New York, just as I occasionally scanned Paris for a glimpse of home.It was easier over there. The United States has a grand presence in Paris, with its massive embassy at the foot of the Champs-Élysées, the American Cathedral on one side of the Seine and the American Church on the other. Those who miss home can always find a place to hear and speak English, and mingle with other American expats. Théâtre du Châtelet, the 19th-century salle where “An American in Paris” opened before the Broadway run, regularly puts on American musicals, (“Show Boat,” anyone?) with a particular fondness for Sondheim. If you crave your brand of peanut butter or breakfast cereal, you can find it at a shop called the Real McCoy — even if you do have to spend $14 for a box of Cheerios. A miniature version of the Statue of Liberty, France’s gift to New York Harbor, stands in Luxembourg Gardens. My yoga teacher was from New Jersey.Paris in New York is a bit more elusive. The art museums are obvious stops, rich as many of them — the Met, MoMA, the Guggenheim — are with works by French artists, including the much-beloved Impressionists. The Frick has a roomful of Fragonards.Long before Rosetta Stone, the French Institute Alliance Française began helping aspiring French speakers brush up their conversational skills. On Fifth Avenue, the cultural services arm of the French Embassy has a newish bookstore, Albertine, devoted to French literature. And it’s no wonder I overhear a lot of French conversation on the streets these days. According to a rough estimate by the French Consulate, there are some 50,000 French citizens living in New York City.AdvertisementBut for the street life of Paris, the pink light at dusk, the quiet of a Sunday morning that lasts until 11, when the church bells begin to ring, the scent of baked bread, the irresistible tiny strawberries and golden peaches beckoning at the markets, the one-room restaurants with only a few choices, always dictated by the season, written on a chalkboard and erased as the ingredients run out — it turns out my new neighborhood, Greenwich Village bordering on SoHo, is a good place to look.Washington Square Park has its arch, the Arc de Triomphe but smaller, and without the terrifying traffic. Cheerful blue Citi Bikes are as plentiful as the beige Vélib’ cycles are in Paris, and they work better. SoHo streets are evocatively old, narrow and cobblestoned. My new favorite yoga teacher is French, with a penchant for sweet, breathy songs performed by Carla Bruni (remember her?) and Brigitte Bardot.Truth be told, many Parisians and New Yorkers actually have more in common with their counterparts than with their compatriots. Much of what you hear or read or see about Paris and New York harps on cultural, culinary and attitudinal differences (the French graphic designer Vahram Muratyan created a clever blog a few years ago that became a clever little book, “Paris Versus New York,” which pits patisserie against pastrami, Quasimodo against King Kong, bagels against baguettes).There’s more symbiosis between the cities than standoff. Movies, for example. Both cities are full of enthusiastic cinephiles, and they embrace each other’s films. Paris is crazy for Woody Allen, whose work can be found on screen almost any time. Independent movie theaters still dot the map of downtown Manhattan; it’s a sure bet I can find a French film within six blocks of my apartment.It’s probably a good thing that it remains easier to eat like a Parisian in New York than to eat like an American in Paris. That ease is extending to food-shopping like a Parisian.Beyond the growing number of farmers’ markets, outposts of French patisseries founded by Eric Kayser and François Payard are multiplying. I shared an elevator the other day with a young woman of instantly recognizable Parisian loveliness (the scarf!) who pointed me to Ceci-Cela, a tiny French patisserie on Spring Street, where, she said, the croissants were the real thing. They are.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.With spring’s arrival, bistros are opening their facades to the street and setting up sidewalk cafes. On my first visit to Paris, my Francophile friend Linda, married to a French architect, was living in the Ninth Arrondissement. Lunch was a revelation. We haunted little family-run restaurants, where Madame did the cooking, cats sat at patrons’ feet and no English was spoken.Recently I came upon a spot like those: Parigot, on Grand Street. It’s not fancy, but it’s as French a place as I’ve ever seen in New York. Its name means, more or less, Parisian commoner, and it serves common fare: cassoulet, steak tartare, good French table wine. I returned for dinner with a friend, a “fellow slaughterer of the French tongue,” as the character in “An American in Paris” puts it, who mustered, as we left, the phrase that makes Parisians smile in spite of themselves:“À la prochaine,” he said, triumphantly. See you next time.Finding France in Manhattan: Where to GoPlaces with a Parisian flavor are sprinkled around Manhattan, particularly in Greenwich Village and SoHo. Here are a few.AdvertisementBALTHAZAR, 80 Spring Street, SoHo. The design and food (and decibel level) at this Keith McNally institution deliver on the Big Brasserie feel.BUVETTE, 42 Grove Street, West Village. This French “gastrothèque,” which sets up tables outdoors during warmer months, has a sister restaurant in the Pigalle neighborhood of Paris.CAFé UN DEUX TROIS, 123 West 44th Street. Diners entering this Midtown mainstay can count on a cheery “bonsoir.” The bustling bistro evokes the grand cafes of the Boulevard Saint-Germain with classic French dishes and snappy service. Go on, have those profiteroles.CECI-CELA, 55 Spring Street, NoLIta. At this hole-in-the-wall boulangerie, you can linger over your morning coffee, served French style, in bowllike cups. The croissants, slightly sweet, just the right degree of flaky, are the way to go.PARIGOT, 155 Grand Street, SoHo. The staff here is French, and so is the menu, which is akin to those found in neighborhood restaurants frequented by working-class Parisians.Other local spots for French culture:ASTOR WINE AND SPIRITS, 399 Lafayette Street, at East Fourth Street, East Village. Browsing the racks of French wines here, customers can tour the country’s varied terroir or attend a tasting.BROADWAY “An American in Paris” is at the Palace Theater, 1564 Broadway, at 47th Street, and “Gigi” is at the Neil Simon Theater, 250 West 52nd Street.FRENCH CINEMA It’s good to keep an eye on the Film Society of Lincoln Center’s website. Besides Rendezvous With French Cinema, an annual festival held in March, French films and series are often on the schedule.AdvertisementFRENCH CLASSES AND BOOKS In addition to lessons, French Institute Alliance Française, 22 East 60th Street, has a lively calendar of cultural events, including activities for children, as does Albertine, the bookstore run by the cultural arm of the French Embassy, at 972 Fifth Avenue.JACQUES TORRES, various locations. The chocolatier, who comes from the south of France, staked his first claim on the New York chocolate market in Brooklyn. Stop by any of his shops (there are two within walking distance of Washington Square Park) for a cup of rich, dark chocolat chaud or a box of festive truffles.MUSEUMS Tour the great trove of Impressionists at the Metropolitan Museum of Art on your own, or take a guided tour in English or in French. The Museum of Modern Art prizes its “Water Lilies,” by Monet, who painted many versions of them in his garden at Giverny, a short train ride from Paris. The Frick Collection, 1 East 70th Street, devotes a room to its Fragonards and has just unveiled an exhibition of Sèvres porcelain. JAN BENZELA version of this article appears in print on May 1, 2015, on Page C29 of the New York edition with the headline: Paris in the Springtime, in New York .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.