By KATHRYN SHATTUCKMAY 1, 2015
9 P.M. (Starz) GUARDIANS OF THE GALAXY (2014) A motley crew of baddies, led by Peter Quill (Chris Pratt), a heavily armed professional scavenger, join forces to stop a crazed warrior from taking over the universe in James Gunn’s interstellar western, based on the Marvel Comics characters. The cast includes Zoe Saldana as Gamora, a green, mean killing machine; Dave Bautista as the brute Drax; Glenn Close as a space-age Hillary Rodham Clinton; Bradley Cooper as the voice of the raccoon Rocket; and Vin Diesel as a gorgeous tree called Groot, who nibbles his own tender sprouts. Oh, yes — and a blue orb that has incited the mayhem in the first place. “That there’s a palpable directorial sensibility in ‘Guardians of the Galaxy,’ along with other signs of genuine life, helps separate this latest Marvel cash grab from a lot of off-the-rack movie cartoons,” Manohla Dargis wrote in The New York Times. “Here, a pulse, wit, beauty and a real sensibility have been slipped into the fray, alongside the clockwork guffaws, kabooms and splats.” She added: “The story may be confusing and generic by turns, but if you shake off the bonds of narrative coherency it’s liberating letting the weird words — Yondu, Necrocraft, Sakkaran — just slide right past you, much like the zigzagging, exploding 3-D spaceships. What sticks are the fantastical landscapes, the beautiful creature designs and the actors delivering lively performances, even with strata of makeup and digital wizardry.”8 A.M. (CUNY) TIMESTALKS Gilbert Cruz, the television editor for The Times, interviews Edie Falco about her seven-season, Emmy-winning role as a flawed New York City emergency room nurse in Showtime’s “Nurse Jackie.”9 P.M. (ABC) BEYOND THE TANK Ever wonder what happens to those eager entrepreneurs after they make their deals with the “Shark Tank” tycoons? This series picks up when the negotiations have ended and the real business begins. “Shark Tank” leads in at 8.10 P.M. (ABC) LOVE. WAR. RENEWAL. THE TAYA KYLE STORY In this “20/20” special, Robin Roberts interviews Taya Kyle, the widow of Chris Kyle, whose life inspired the Oscar-nominated film “American Sniper.” Mr. Kyle, a Navy SEAL, tallied 160 confirmed kills during four tours of duty in Iraq, only to be shot dead in Texas in 2013 by a Marine veteran he had taken to a gun range to help deal with post-traumatic stress disorder.Advertisement10 P.M. (Pivot) ANGRY PLANET The storm chaser George Kourounis examines the effects of climate change on Tuvalu in the South Pacific, which will be one of the first islands to vanish as ocean levels rise.Advertisement10 P.M. (13) EL POETA After his only son, Juan Francisco Sicilia, was killed in 2011 by a gang that claimed that he and five others had called in tips of drug activity to a hotline, the Mexican poet Javier Sicilia went to war. Calling on the government to address its drug policies, he rallied more than 100,000 protesters in Mexico City and ignited the Movement for Peace and Dignity, sending caravans around the country. Then he brought his campaign to the United States. This documentary, part of “Voces on PBS,” follows Mr. Sicilia’s journey across three years, as he and his supporters travel from crime-ravaged Mexican cities to places associated with civil rights in the American South, including Selma, Ala., and Washington.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.10 P.M. (HBO) REAL TIME WITH BILL MAHER Joseph Stiglitz, the Nobel-winning economist, and Garry Kasparov, the chess grandmaster and human rights activist, are the interview guests. Former Representative Jane Harman, Democrat of California; the comedian D. L. Hughley; and the foreign-policy adviser Dan Senor are seated at the round table.10 P.M. (Discovery) UNEARTHED Black-truffle foragers near Falls City, Ore., battle dangerous terrain, unpredictable weather and predators both animal and human as they seek a fungus more valuable than gold in this new series.1 A.M. (13) THEATER TALK The playwright David Hare and the director Stephen Daldry discuss “Skylight,” starring Carey Mulligan and Bill Nighy, now at the John Golden Theater.What’s Streaming NowYOUTH POWER  In this Taiwanese series, a woman (Tammy Chen) determined to pursue her passion for music despite her family’s government involvement finds herself in an election war when she meets a rising political star (Yao Yuan Hao). New episodes are available Fridays. (viki.com)A version of this article appears in print on May 1, 2015, on Page C15 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Friday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.