AdvertisementSupported byWeekend MiserBy Joshua BaroneIn case you haven’t heard, there’s a new Whitney. After moving from the Upper East Side to the rowdier meatpacking district, the Whitney Museum of American Art  opens on Friday. And like any good neighbor, it’s inviting everyone over for a party. On Saturday the museum will offer free admission (normally up to $22) and take over Gansevoort Street for a day of eclectic performances and activities called the Whitney Block Party. Gansevoort, once a hideaway for creative types, will become a brazenly artistic street fair. Getting into the museum on Saturday for its debut exhibition, “America Is Hard to See,” may be difficult; reservations were required and the event long since reached capacity. Still, some more free tickets will be available at the door for people willing to line up early.Even if you miss the show, there will be plenty of distractions outside. On the small side are booths and activities geared to various ages. Children may enjoy art workshops and mapmaking. They may also like karaoke, though they will have to wait in line behind all the adults wanting to belt their favorites. Performances, including puppetry, dance and music, will take place on a main stage. Guests include the Tracie Morris Band and the rapper Le1f, with his Camp & Street crew. (10:30 a.m. to 10 p.m.; 99 Gansevoort Street, at Washington Street; 212-570-3600; whitney.org.) MORE ART PARTIES The Whitney isn’t alone in giving a party this weekend. The Noguchi Museum  — named for the artist Isamu Noguchi who, as it happens, had his first United States retrospective at the Whitney — is hosting a few hours of free events on Friday night. Beer and wine will be $5. The evening’s main event is “Center of Attention,” an interactive conversation devoted to one artwork. The talk will focus on Noguchi’s “Rain Mountain,” one of more than 20 galvanized steel works he created for Gemini G.E.L. in 1982. According to the museum, Noguchi described “Rain Mountain” and its siblings as “short poems” based on places he had known throughout his life. Anything else to say about the origamilike sculpture will have to wait until Friday. (5 to 8 p.m., talk at 7 p.m.; 9-01 33rd Road, at Vernon Boulevard, Long Island City, Queens; 718-204-7088; noguchi.org.)Lest we forget, this weekend is also the first in May, which means it’s time for the Brooklyn Museum’s monthly party, Target First Saturdays. In addition to being a lively one-stop shop for art, film and music, the evening is also an occasion to see the audacious show “Kehinde Wiley: A New Republic,” if you haven’t had the chance. Fans of the exhibition can attend a curator talk about it at 6 p.m., or watch Jeff Dupre’s short documentary “Kehinde Wiley: An Economy of Grace” at 6:30 p.m. The rest of the night, while entertaining, is less educational. Expect dance and music, including the D.J. Juliana Huxtable’s blend of cyborg, priestess and witch beats.(5 to 11 p.m.; 200 Eastern Parkway, Prospect Heights; 718-638-5000; brooklynmuseum.org.)Advertisement