AdvertisementSupported by‘Folklore Family Day’Prime Minister Shinzo Abe of Japan might be wrapping up an official state visit to the United States, but on Sunday at Japan Society a cultural exchange between the two countries will be in full bloom during “Folklore Family Day: Celebrating Children’s Day Through Mukashi Banashi.” In honor of Children’s Day in Japan, a celebration in which families pray for the health of their children, Japan Society is dressing up three floors of its Modernist building in Manhattan with scenes from Japanese folk tales, or mukashi banashi, and characters from the stories will roam the halls. “Families will enter the main floor and immediately be immersed in the tales,” said Jeffrey Miller, director of education and family programs at Japan Society. One floor recreates the world of Momotaro, or Peach Boy (far right), a baby found inside of a peach. The child grows up with extraordinary strength and later rescues his town from a gang of ogres with the help of his animal companions. The troupe Theater Banana will perform the work, and the theater company Samurai Sword Soul will recreate the battle with the ogres in a safe, hands-on sword-fighting workshop.“We want to share the mystery of stories from a different culture,” Mr. Miller said. After immersing themselves in these Japanese folk tales, he said, children will see that “the humanity in these stories is common to all cultures.”The lower levels will feature an underwater scene from the story of Urashima Taro, a fisherman who saves a princess disguised as a tortoise and is thanked with a trip to the bottom of the sea. Here, children can make carp streamers (above, at a previous event) and participate in calligraphy and Japanese language lessons. For those who prefer to look at art, the exhibition “Life of Cats: Selections From the Hiraki Ukiyo-e Collection,” a collection of art depicting cats from the Edo period, will be open to all Children’s Day visitors. And if the youngsters want to hear something more familiar than Japanese, live cats will be available for petting and play, care of the ASPCA Adopt-a-Cat van: “Meow” readily translates into any language. (From 11 a.m. to 4 p.m., 333 East 47th Street, Manhattan; 212-715-1258, japansociety.org; $15; $8 for ages 3 through 12; $12 and $6 for members; free for 2 and under.) JONATHAN WOLFE‘Archaeology Zone: Discovering Treasures From Playgrounds to Palaces’ (Friday, Sunday through Tuesday, and Thursday) Children will step into the shoes of an explorer like Indiana Jones in this permanent exhibition at the Jewish Museum, but the adventures will be purely scholarly. Still, there is plenty of excitement in analyzing artifacts like a jar handle, a clay jug and a bangle and figuring out the purpose behind ancient pieces like a Greek helmet and a bull-shaped vessel. This interactive show, for ages 3 to 10, also includes a recreated room from the Ottoman period (about 1900), where young archaeologists can dress in costume. From 11 a.m. to 5:45 p.m.; until 8 p.m. on Thursdays; 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92nd Street, 212-423-3200, thejewishmuseum.org.‘A Band of Angels’ (Saturday, Sunday, and Tuesday through Thursday) New York City Children’s Theater used to be called Making Books Sing, and 10 years ago, it first produced this musical, based on a book whose subject was also singing: “A Band of Angels,” by Deborah Hopkinson. The book relates the history of the Fisk Jubilee Singers, established in 1871 at Fisk University in Nashville, one of the first educational institutions for freed slaves. Written by Myla Churchill and recommended for ages 8 and older, this adaptation follows Ella, a contemporary teenager, as she goes back in time and meets the Fisk singers. (Through May 10.) Saturday and Sunday at 2 and 4 p.m.; Tuesday through Thursday at 11 a.m.; Theater 3, 311 West 43rd Street, third floor, Clinton, 646-250-1178, nycchildrenstheater.org.‘Dig! Plant! Grow!: Wake Up, Garden!’ (Friday through Sunday) No garden could stay asleep after all that exhortation. In the Ruth Rea Howell Family Garden at the New York Botanical Garden, children will help get things up and growing by sowing seeds, planting seedlings and spreading compost; they can also observe germinating seeds through magnifiers and microscopes. From 1:30 to 6 p.m., New York Botanical Garden, Bronx River Parkway (Exit 7W) and Fordham Road, Bedford Park, the Bronx, 718-817-8700, nybg.org. (Search under calendar).Family Art Workshops (Saturday) The Drawing Center is offering free art workshops throughout the spring and this week’s program, “Portraits From the École des Beaux-Arts Paris,” focuses on making and experimenting with portraiture. A timely event in the age of the selfie, here, children from ages 7 to 12 can discuss the history of portrait drawings while they explore the collection of the École des Beaux-Arts Paris. Then they will turn their attention on themselves and draw portraits of one another. At 10:30 a.m., Drawing Center, 35 Wooster Street, SoHo, 212-219-2166, drawingcenter.org.Family Saturday at the French Institute Alliance Française (Saturday) Whether you think of it as Family Saturday or Samedi en Famille, this program offers fun and some exposure to French. It begins at 1:30 p.m. in the Florence Gould Hall with a performance of “Le Pot de Confiture” (“The Jam Jar”), in which the puppeteers of Compagnie des Zonzons will bring to life the amusing antics of the popular French puppet Guignol. Performed in French and English with 100-year-old puppets, the play is suitable for all ages. It will be followed, at 3:30 p.m., by an interactive puppetry workshop in Le Skyroom. Other activities will include a sale of French children’s books in the lobby from 9:30 a.m. to 4 p.m. Florence Gould Hall, 55 East 59th Street, Manhattan; Le Skyroom, 22 East 60th Street, Manhattan; 800-982-2787, fiaf.org; “Le Pot de Confiture”: $30; $25 for nonmembers; the workshop is sold as part of a package with the show. Other activities are free.‘The Flag With Fifty-Six Stars’  (Saturday) At this event, older children and their families can hear a firsthand account of the liberation of a concentration camp at the end of World War II. The program features Alan Moskin, an infantry combat soldier who helped free a subcamp of the Mauthausen complex, and Susan Goldman Rubin, the author of “The Flag With Fifty-Six Stars: A Gift From the Survivors of Mauthausen.” Her book tells the story of the prisoners at Mauthausen who stitched together an American flag as a gift for their liberators, and had erroneously added an extra row of stars. At 1:30 p.m., Anne Frank Center USA, 44 Park Place, at Church Street, Lower Manhattan, 212-431-7993, annefrank.com.‘The Gazillion Bubble Show: The Next Generation’  (Friday through Sunday, and Thursday) Children love bubbles, and this interactive show promises not just a gazillion but also some of the largest ever blown, along with light effects and lasers. The stars are the members of the Yang family: Fan and Ana Yang and their son Deni and others, who rotate as M.C.s for the production. Audience members may even find themselves in bubbles of their own. (The run is open-ended.) Friday at 7 p.m.; Saturday at 11 a.m. and 2 and 4:30 p.m.; Sunday at noon and 3 p.m.; Thursday at 11 a.m. and 2 p.m.; 340 West 50th Street, Clinton, 212-239-6200, gazillionbubbleshow.com. ‘Hatched’ (Friday, Saturday and next Friday) Field trips sometimes take city children to farms, but this piece takes the farm to the children. Written by Mara McEwin and presented by the troupe Treehouse Shakers, this production for the youngest theatergoers — infants to 6-year-olds — uses dance, storytelling and handmade puppets to recreate the experience of a chick breaking out of its shell and encountering other animals, including a rooster, a calf, a lamb and baby birds. Friday and Saturday at 11 a.m., Hillman Studio, Fisher Building, Brooklyn Academy of Music, 321 Ashland Place, near Lafayette Avenue, Fort Greene, 718-636-4100, bam.org; $20. Next Friday at 11 a.m., Ailey Citigroup Theater, 405 West 55th Street, Clinton, 212-405-9000, alvinailey.org; $20.‘Hello From Japan!’ (Friday through Sunday, and Tuesday through Thursday) Japanese culture comprises both unbridled whimsy and serene seriousness. Young visitors can get acquainted with these two sides at the Children’s Museum of Manhattan, which recreates different aspects of Tokyo in this new exhibition. One-half of the show, Kawaii Central, captures the fun of the city’s Harajuku district with the opportunity to sing karaoke, serve a Japanese meal and create cute, cartoonlike family mascots. The exhibition’s other half includes a Shinto shrine park, where young visitors can build a bridge, meet kami (spirits) and express their desires at a wishing tree. Programs, free with museum admission, accompany the show. (Through May 17.) Museum hours: 10 a.m. to 5 p.m.; to 7 p.m. on Saturdays; also open free from 5 to 8 p.m. on the first Friday of every month. Tisch Building, 212 West 83rd Street, 212-721-1223, cmom.org.‘Jack and the Beanstalk’ (Friday through Sunday, and Tuesday through Thursday) Many plants grow in Central Park, so why not a beanstalk? This one sprouts indoors at the Swedish Cottage Marionette Theater, which has revived Michael Alogna’s adaptation of the classic fairy tale about Jack, the Giant (here named Milford), Dolly the Cow and the famous Golden Goose. Bruce Cannon, the theater’s artistic director, has revised the script, and a human actor now stars in the show along with the company’s hand-built marionettes. Weekdays at 10:30 a.m. and noon, with an additional performance on Wednesdays at 2:30 p.m.; Saturday and Sunday at 1 p.m. (Some performances are sold out.) Reservations required. 79th Street and the West Drive, Central Park; 212-988-9093, cityparksfoundation.org/arts.‘The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe’  (Saturday) If the children of the Pevensie family could travel to the magical land of Narnia through something as simple as a wardrobe, why shouldn’t two hard-working actors be able to play them and all the characters found there? That’s what Abigail Taylor-Sansom and her husband, Rockford Sansom, are attempting in the Off Broadway Family Theater’s first production, le Clanché du Rand’s adaptation of C. S. Lewis’s classic novel. (The run is open-ended and continues on Saturdays.) At 11 a.m., St. Luke’s Theater, 308 West 46th Street, Clinton; 212-239-6200, narniaoffbroadway.com. ‘Manxmouse: The Mouse Who Knew No Fear’ (Saturday) Manxmouse actually has plenty to be afraid of: namely, the Manx cat. He also looks peculiar, with blue fur, rabbitlike ears and, of course, no tail. Presented by Theatergroep Kwatta, a Dutch children’s theater troupe, this adaptation of Paul Gallico’s 1968 novel, recommended for ages 6 through 10, follows Manxmouse’s many adventures en route to meet his feline nemesis. At 11 a.m. and 2 p.m., Fishman Space, Fisher Building, Brooklyn Academy of Music, 321 Ashland Place, near Lafayette Avenue, Fort Greene, 718-636-4100, bam.org/kids.Elizabeth Mitchell and You Are My Flower (Sunday) This concert is a family affair. Elizabeth Mitchell, who specializes in creating children’s versions of classic folk tunes, will perform with her daughter, Storey, and her husband, Daniel Littleton, at the Jewish Museum. Joining them will be Ms. Mitchell’s band You Are My Flower and assorted guests. Young listeners 3 and older can expect to hear original music, too, from Ms. Mitchell’s albums “Catch the Moon” and “Blue Clouds.” At 11:30 a.m., 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92nd Street, 212-423-3200, thejewishmuseum.org.MoMA Art Lab: Places and Spaces (Friday through Thursday) What’s an art lab? These interactive spaces for children at the Museum of Modern Art, free with museum admission, help introduce the institution’s collection through activities related to a theme: this time it’s Places and Spaces. Young visitors can design, draw and build as they explore spaces both real and imagined — landscapes, cityscapes, seascapes — as they appear in Modern art. (Through Aug. 31.) Daily, from 10:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.; to 6:30 p.m. on Fridays; Lewis B. and Dorothy Cullman Education and Research Building, 4 West 54th Street, Manhattan; 212-708-9805, moma.org/momaartlab.Morgan Library & Museum: Spring Family Fair  (Sunday) To some youngsters, the man in the tall hat and whiskers might look like a cartoon character brought to life, but this real-life Abraham Lincoln is actually the comedian Peter Strauss dressed up as the 16th president of the United States. Those attending this fair, for children ages 6 through 12, will learn about Honest Abe, collaborate on the creation of a community quilt, and listen to music by the New York-based string band, the Ebony Hillbillies. From 2 to 5 p.m., Morgan Library & Museum, 225 Madison Avenue, at 36th Street, 212-685-0008, themorgan.org.National Museum of the American Indian: Annual Children’s Festival (Saturday and Sunday) Shawn Termin, the museum’s cultural arts manager, used the animal imagery found in many of the more than 160 objects in the museum’s new exhibition, “Cerámica de los Ancestros: Central America’s Past Revealed,” to build the festival’s activities. Here, children can design jaguar masks, weave bracelets and buttons, and decorate animal pendants. Traditional songs and dances will be performed by indigenous groups from the Colotenango community in Guatemala. From noon to 4:30 p.m., National Museum of the American Indian’s George Gustav Heye Center, 1 Bowling Green, Lower Manhattan, 212-514-3700, nmai.si.edu.Prospect Park Audubon Center Nature Programs (Friday through Sunday, and Thursday) Spring is blooming all over, and so are related activities sponsored by the Prospect Park Audubon Center, which has expanded its open hours; it has also increased its Pop-Up Audubon programs, weekends from 11 a.m. to 4 p.m., to include two tents with themed nature investigations in different parts of the park. At the Eastwood tent, whose April theme is “Leaf Litter Critters,” children can learn about soil, fungus and decomposition; at the Peninsula tent, whose theme is “Animal Clues,” they can explore the lives of indigenous creatures. Both tents feature nature walks, bird-watching and opportunities to help the environment. At the Audubon Center itself, the fun includes nature games, bird identification and, on Thursdays and Fridays, an animal encounter. Another new feature: discovery packs, kits for self-guided exploration with activities like playing habitat bingo and designing a home for one of the park’s wild residents. Center hours: Thursdays and Fridays, noon to 4 p.m.; Saturdays and Sundays, 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. At the boathouse, near the Lincoln Road and Ocean Avenue park entrance, Brooklyn, 718-287-3400, prospectpark.org/audubon. All activities are free.‘Rapunzarella White: A Fairly Fractured Tale’ (Saturday, Sunday and Tuesday) Yes, it’s fractured, but it’s also blended: In this creative musical retelling, by June Rachelson-Ospa and Daniel Neiden, Rapunzel, Cinderella and Snow White are infant triplets abducted by an ill-tempered witch. These heroines aren’t like their traditional selves — Snow White, for instance, is allergic to apples — and neither are their princes, who may be more clumsy than charming. (Through June 14.) Saturday at 1 p.m., Sunday at noon, Tuesday at 7 p.m., 13th Street Repertory Theater, 50 West 13th Street, Greenwich Village, 212-352-3101, rapunzarellawhite.bpt.me.Sheep Shearing at the Queens Zoo (Saturday and Sunday) Now that spring is here, the sheep at the Queens Zoo are due for a haircut. After witnessing three different breeds of sheep receive a trim, zoogoers can learn about wool processing, craft felt beads and bracelets and watch wool spinners demonstrate their craft. From 11 a.m. to 4 p.m., Queens Zoo, 53-51 111th Street, Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, Queens, 718-271-1500, queenszoo.com.‘Tiny Giants’ (Friday through Thursday) The heroes of this film may be small, but they’re mighty in their will to survive. Inspired by the BBC television series “Hidden Kingdoms,” this new Imax movie at the American Museum of Natural History uses 3-D cameras to peer into the universes of two diminutive creatures: a forest chipmunk and a grasshopper mouse from the Arizona desert, noted for its ability to prey on scorpions. Narrated by Stephen Fry, the film allows viewers to see the world from their perspectives. (Through July 5.) Hourly from 10:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., with 2-D screenings at 11:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m.; all other screenings are 3-D. Central Park West and 79th Street, 212-769-5200, amnh.org.‘The Trials of Alice in Wonderland’ (Friday through Sunday, and Wednesday) Imagine that Lewis Carroll had traded Britain for Brooklyn. In this new musical adaptation from Tada! Youth Theater, by William Brooke, Eric Rockwell and Joanne Bogart, Alice, a contemporary girl, doesn’t feel that she belongs with the crowd of kids on the Coney Island boardwalk. Her adventures begin when she runs off to a fun house there, and her peers, who follow her, become the rest of the Wonderland cast. Alice also finds herself on trial. The charge? Growing and changing. (Through May 17.) Friday at 7 p.m.; Saturday and Sunday at 2 and 4 p.m.; Wednesday at 10 a.m. (sold out) and noon; Tada! Youth Theater, 15 West 28th Street, Manhattan, 212-252-1619, Ext. 5, tadatheater.com.‘Tunes With Tina’ (Sunday) That’s Tina deVaron, a jazz musician and singer, whose musical brunch for young people at the Measure Lounge at Langham Place, Fifth Avenue, a hotel in Midtown Manhattan, has returned. Ms. deVaron, who often sings show tunes for children, also improvises and gears her performances to the audience. On selected Sundays throughout the season, she will be accompanied by Broadway performers. Singing along is encouraged. (Through May 31.) At noon, 400 Fifth Avenue, at 36th Street, 212-695-4005, measurenyc.com.‘¡Viva Pinocho!’/’A Mexican Pinocchio!’ (Saturday) This Pinocchio is more than a wooden boy who longs to be human; he’s also a Mexican immigrant in search of his identity in a new land, the United States. Presented by Teatro Sea, which specializes in Latino theater for children, this show is the work of Manuel Antonio Morán, the company’s founder and director. Incorporating music, masks and several types of puppetry, it runs on Saturdays through May 23. At 3 p.m., Teatro Sea, Clemente Soto Vélez Cultural Center, 107 Suffolk Street, at Rivington Street, Lower East Side, 212-529-1545, teatrosea.org.‘A Voyage Through Jewish History’  (Sunday through Thursday) This journey involves not just miles, but years. In this permanent interactive exhibition at the Jewish Children’s Museum, young visitors can travel from Abraham and Sarah’s tent to the Western Wall in contemporary Jerusalem and beyond. Activities along the way include giving water to Rebecca’s camels, playing the strings on David’s harp (a high-tech version with beams of light that emit sounds when struck) and taking part in the exodus from Egypt. Museum hours: 10 a.m. to 4 p.m.; to 5:30 p.m. on Sundays; 792 Eastern Parkway, at Kingston Avenue, Crown Heights, Brooklyn; 718-907-8833, jcm.museum.‘A Year With Children 2015’  (through June 17) Most of the artists whose work is displayed at the Guggenheim Museum are well known. But now the museum is showing pieces by young — very young — aspiring artists. These are the projects created by students in grades 2 through 6 who have taken part in the museum’s Learning Through Art program, which sends artists into public schools to teach skills and techniques. More than 100 works from 10 schools are in the show, including drawings, paintings, collages and sculptures. From 10 a.m. to 5:45 p.m.; until 7:45 p.m. on Saturdays; 1071 Fifth Avenue, at 89th Street, 212-423-3500, guggenheim.org. Free with admission: $25; $18 for 65+ and students; free for children under 12 and members; pay what you wish on Saturdays from 5:45 to 7:45 p.m. LAUREL GRAEBER AND JONATHAN WOLFEAdvertisement