By JOSHUA BARONEAPRIL 30, 2015
Museums and SitesAmerican Museum of Natural History: ‘Milstein Science Series: Sea Turtles’ (Sunday) Turtles may have lived among dinosaurs 150 million years ago, but today they are threatened by climate change, poaching and habitat destruction. The museum presents a day of programming about turtles and conservation efforts, with a talk at 2:30 p.m. that includes the scientists Michael Coyne, Wallace J. Nichols, Eleanor Sterling and Mark Siddall. From 11 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., Central Park West and 79th Street, 212-769-5200, amnh.org.American Museum of Natural History: ‘Countdown to Zero’ (through July 12) Smallpox is the only human disease to have been eradicated, but what about Guinea worm, polio, malaria and others? This exhibition, presented in collaboration with the Carter Center, examines international efforts to control and wipe out infection. Daily from 10 a.m. to 5:45 p.m., Central Park West and 79th Street, 212-769-5200, amnh.org.BRIC and the Brooklyn Historical Society: ‘Mapping Brooklyn’ (through Sept. 6) This exhibition features artworks that incorporate themes of mapping and cartography from historical maps. The artists here are exploring the ways maps represent the practical and metaphorical aspects of life. The show is on view at BRIC House through Sunday. Tuesdays through Saturdays, from 10 a.m. to 8 p.m., Sundays to 6 p.m., 647 Fulton Street, at Rockwell Place, Fort Greene, Brooklyn, bricartsmedia.org. The show will also be at the Brooklyn Historical Society through Sept. 6. Wednesdays through Sundays from noon to 5 p.m., closed this Friday, 128 Pierrepont Street, near Clinton Street, Brooklyn Heights, 718-222-4111, brooklynhistory.org.Morgan Library & Museum: ‘Lincoln Speaks: Words That Transformed a Nation’ (through June 7) This exhibition, presented thematically and chronologically, homes in on Abraham Lincoln’s leadership and its relationship to language. In his exhibition review for The New York Times, Neil Genzlinger wrote: “For Lincoln admirers, simply being in the same room with so many artifacts he touched will be a delight. And if they give the exhibition the time it requires, they will certainly come away with a fuller appreciation of the man.” 225 Madison Avenue, at 36th Street, 212-685-0008, themorgan.org.AdvertisementMorgan Library & Museum: ‘In the Margins’ (Tuesday through May 17) The Morgan is holding a special pop-up exhibition to celebrate some of its latest acquisitions of books by authors who have won the Man Booker Prize. Examples include Hilary Mantel’s “Wolf Hall,” Ian McEwan’s “Amsterdam” and Julian Barnes’s “Metroland.” Each book comes with annotations, letters and other material from the author. 225 Madison Avenue, at 36th Street, 212-685-0008, themorgan.org.AdvertisementMuseum of the Moving Image: ‘Matthew Weiner’s “Mad Men” ’ (through June 14) As one of the most critically acclaimed TV shows in recent years nears its finale, “Mad Men” gets the exhibition treatment in this look at the series’s creative process. On display are large-scale sets, such as Don Draper’s office, as well as costumes, art and research material used by the show’s staff. Viewers should expect not only a look behind the scenes of the show, but also, as in “Mad Men” itself, a peek into the era it depicts. 35th Avenue at 37th Street, Astoria, Queens, 718-784-0077, movingimage.us.New-York Historical Society: ‘Audubon’s Aviary: The Final Flight (Part III of the Complete Flock)’ (through May 10) The third installment of “Audubon’s Aviary: The Complete Flock” comprises nearly 130 plates from the watercolors in John James Audubon’s “The Birds of America” collection, engraved by Robert Havell Jr. The exhibition, as William Grimes wrote in an article for The New York Times, “underlines the natural wealth of the American land, and Audubon’s remarkable talent for producing art as varied as his subject matter.” 170 Central Park West, at 77th Street, 212-873-3400, nyhistory.org.New York Transit Museum Grand Central Terminal Gallery Annex: ‘New York’s Transportation Landmarks’ (through Nov. 1) It’s been 50 years since New York passed its Landmarks Law, which covers over 30,000 buildings and structures around the city. To celebrate the anniversary, the New York Transit Museum has created an exhibition that explores the history of development, use and even rescue of these landmarks. More information: 212-878-0106, web.mta.info/mta/museum.New York Transit Museum: ‘Spanning the Narrows: The Verrazano Bridge at 50’ (through next fall) Photographs, maps, drawings, models and other archival materials related to the construction of the bridge (including correspondence from Robert Moses, who oversaw the project) are part of this exhibition commemorating its 50th anniversary. Boerum Place and Schermerhorn Street, Brooklyn Heights, 718-694-1600, mta.info/mta/museum.Gardens‘Night Lights at Wave Hill’  (Friday, Sunday and Thursday) Wave Hill, the public garden in the Bronx, is celebrating its 50th anniversary with a month of after-hours events. “The Lightening: a Project for Wave Hill’s Aquatic Garden,” an installation by the artist Chris Doyle, will be on display, and the Mark Twain Room will host piano performances that cover a range of classical and jazz standards. More information is at wavehill.org/events/categories/nightlights. (Through May 24.) At 6:30 p.m., West 249th Street and Independence Avenue, Riverdale, the Bronx, 718-549-3200.West Side Community Garden’s Annual Tulip Festival (Saturday and Sunday) The West Side Community Garden concludes its tulip festival this weekend, a way to welcome the warm weather that seemed so distant when the flowers were planted last November. The garden has a wide variety of trees and flowers in bloom, though the center of attention is the sea of tulips — about 12,000 of them, according to the festival’s organizers. From 11 a.m. to 4 p.m., West Side Community Garden, West 89th Street, between Columbus and Amsterdam Avenues, westsidecommunitygarden.org; free.Events‘Bascove/Bridges: Transporting the Metropolis’ (through July 12) This exhibition features more than 30 paintings and drawings of city bridges by the artist Anne Bascove, including the Brooklyn Bridge, the Outerbridge Crossing and the George Washington Bridge. Thursdays through Sundays from 1 to 5 p.m.; also by appointment; Noble Maritime Collection, Snug Harbor Cultural Center and Botanical Garden, 1000 Richmond Terrace, Livingston, Staten Island, 718-447-6490, noblemaritime.org.AdvertisementCultural Immigrant Festival  (Sunday) The Latin American Cultural Center of Queens celebrates the borough’s diversity with this festival, which features music and dance from emerging artists. Performers include Mariachi Hernandez, Fuerza Peruana, the Ecuadorean Dance group Sisa Pakari and Mestizo Quartet with Harold Gutierrez. From 2:30 to 5 p.m., P.S 69, 77-02 37th Avenue, Jackson Heights, Queens, 718-261-7664, laccq.org; free.Grand Gourmet (Thursday) The Grand Central Partnership hosts its annual tasting that showcases over 40 restaurants, bars, lounges and retailers in the train station’s neighborhood. Participants run the gamut, from coffee houses like Joe to restaurants like the Four Seasons. Proceeds from the event will go toward homeless service programs in Midtown Manhattan. At 7 p.m., Vanderbilt Hall at Grand Central Terminal, 89 East 42nd Street, Midtown East, 212-883-2420, grandcentralpartnership.nyc.Holi Hai (Saturday) NYC Bhangra Dance Company, in keeping with tradition, opens the first weekend of May with Holi, the Indian festival of colors. The celebration dates back centuries and involves people playfully throwing colorful powder and water on one another. Festival attendees would be smart to arrive dressed in all white (and in clothes that they wouldn’t mind throwing away the next day). At 11 a.m., Dag Hammarskjold Plaza, United Nations, East 47th Street, between First and Second Avenues, 212-372-8001, nycholi.com; free. ‘On the Town’  (Sunday) United Palace Theater’s classic movies series continues with a screening of “On the Town,” the 1949 movie musical starring Gene Kelly and Frank Sinatra. Lou Lumenick of the New York Post will introduce the film, and the evening will include a brief concert with cast members from the current Broadway production of the musical. At 4:30 p.m., United Palace Theater, 4140 Broadway, at 175th Street, Washington Heights, 212-568-6700, unitedpalace.org; free.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.PEN World Voices Festival of International Literature (Monday through May 10) The 11th edition of this festival homes in on Africa, with a range of readings, performances and workshops related to the continent and its diaspora. Highlights include “Prayer and Meditation” (Wednesday at 8 p.m.), a contemplative evening that features music by Nico Muhly and original prayers by writers such as Atticus Lish, Rachel Kushner and Colm Toibin. The festival’s lineup is at worldvoices.pen.org. At various times and locations, 646-779-4829.Re-enactor Baseball (Saturday) Old Stone House hosts an afternoon of old-fashioned baseball — 1864 to be exact. Three teams will compete throughout the afternoon: Flemington Neshanock Base Ball Club, the New York Gothams and the Bog Iron Boys of Allaire Village. At 1 p.m., 336 Third Street, between Fourth and Fifth Avenues, Park Slope, Brooklyn, 718-768-3195, theoldstonehouse.org.Videology Presents Movie Trivia (Tuesdays) Videology, the Brooklyn bar and cinema, hosts a free film-themed trivia contest every week. The game varies; you will want to know theme songs, facts, quotations (especially ones from Nicolas Cage) and more. The winning team receives a free round of drinks, and there are chances to win drinks each round. At 8:30 p.m., 308 Bedford Avenue, at South First Street, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, 718-782-3468, videology.info.Spoken WordAlan Cumming (Wednesday) Abigail Pogrebin, the author and former “60 Minutes” producer, interviews Alan Cumming. The actor is fresh from his run in “Cabaret” on Broadway, as well as the publication of his memoir, “Not My Father’s Son.” The two will talk about the book, and Mr. Cumming will sign books after. At 7 p.m., JCC in Manhattan, 334 Amsterdam Avenue, at 76th Street, 646-504-5708, jccmanhattan.org.An Evening with Karl Ove Knausgaard  (Wednesday) The Norwegian author Karl Ove Knausgaard stops at Symphony Space to promote Part 4 of his six-volume autobiographical novel, “My Struggle,” which was recently translated into English. Actors, including Holly Hunter and Corey Stoll, will read from the book, and Mr. Knausgaard will talk with the author Hari Kunzru. At 7:30 p.m., Symphony Space, 2537 Broadway, at 95th Street, 212-864-5400, symphonyspace.org.Amber Tamblyn and Ira Glass (Thursday) The Golden Globe-nominated actress Amber Tamblyn has a second life as a poet, with contributions to Poetry Foundation, Bust Magazine and Amy Poehler’s Smart Girls at the Party. She will be joined by Ira Glass, host of “This American Life,” to discuss her latest poetry collection, “Dark Sparkler,” which features art by Marilyn Manson and David Lynch. At 7 p.m., Strand Book Store, 828 Broadway, at 12th Street, 212-473-1452, strandbooks.com.AdvertisementWalking ToursBryant Park Public Tours (Wednesdays) Bryant Park hasn’t always been the clean, open space it is today. This tour provides some insights on its history, including its darker days as a “needle park” in the 1970s, as well as its award-winning design and maintenance efforts. The tour meets at the fountain at 41st Street at Sixth Avenue. Registration is required. At 11 a.m., Bryant Park, 212-768-4242, bryantpark.org.Flatiron District Walking Tour (Sundays) This free tour meets at 11 a.m. on the southwest corner of Madison Square Park, at 23rd Street and Broadway, in front of the William Seward statue. Sponsored by the Flatiron/23rd Street Partnership; discoverflatiron.org.History of Wall Street Tour (weekdays) Stops on this tour, led by Wall Street Walks, include the New York Stock Exchange, Trinity Church, the Wall Street Bull, and ground zero and the Sept. 11 memorial. The tours last 90 minutes and begin at 11 a.m. and 1:30 p.m. (Also at 3 p.m. on Tuesdays and Fridays.) More details: wallstreetwalks.com.Irish Hunger Memorial Tour (Sunday) Brian Tolle, the Irish Hunger Memorial’s designer, leads a tour of the landmark tucked among the towers of Battery Park City. The memorial, a replica of an Irish countryside’s hill, contains plants native to the country; a horticulturist will be on hand to discuss them. The historian Lynn Rogers will also talk about the famine and immigration to New York. At 2 p.m., Irish Hunger Memorial, Vesey Street, at North End Avenue, 212-267-9700, bpcparks.org; free.Jane’s Walk (Friday through Sunday) The Municipal Art Society of New York hosts over 200 guided walks that celebrate the city’s diverse neighborhoods and the journalist and activist Jane Jacobs. The tours cover all five boroughs and range from the expected (“A Statuary Stroll Through Central Park”) to the very specific (“Gay Bars That Are Gone”). The schedule is at mas.org/janeswalk. At various times, 212-935-3960, mas.org; free.A Taste of Jewish New York (Sundays) Participants in this tour will get an insider’s look at Borough Park, Brooklyn, by learning about the customs of its Hasidic residents. There will also be the chance to try a range of food. This tour includes a stop at a lively shopping area, as well as at a matzo bakery — with free samples, of course. The tour meets at 9:45 a.m. at Fort Hamilton Parkway and 44th Street; 718-339-2302, timelinetouring.com.Union Square: Crossroads of New York (Saturdays) Sponsored by the Union Square Partnership, this free year-round tour focuses on the area’s political and social histories. The walk, led by guides from Big Onion Walking Tours, meets at 2 p.m. by the statue of Lincoln in Union Square Park, near the 16th Street transverse. 212-517-1826, unionsquarenyc.org. Information on events for possible inclusion in Spare Times should be sent to weekend@nytimes.com by Monday at 5 p.m. for publication that week. Longer versions of Around Town and For Children listings are in a searchable guide at nytimes.com/events.A version of this schedule appears in print on May 1, 2015, on Page C32 of the New York edition with the headline: Spare Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.