APRIL 30, 2015
ClassicalFull reviews of recent classical performances: nytimes.com/classical. A searchable guide to these and other performances is at nytimes.com/events.Opera‘Un Ballo in Maschera’  (Saturday and Wednesday) David Alden’s 2012 production of Verdi’s “Ballo in Maschera” is back and on this viewing its strengths came through more forcefully. With geometric sets and contemporary costumes evoking film noir, the production captures the emotional darkness of the story of the self-destructive King Gustavo, who is pursuing Amelia, the wife of his trusted adviser. James Levine conducts this revival insightfully; the strong cast is headed by the bright, youthful-sounding tenor Piotr Beczala as Gustavo and Sondra Radvanovsky, who makes an affecting Amelia.. Saturday at 1 p.m. and Wednesday at 7:30 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Anthony Tommasini)‘The Merry Widow’ (Thursday) Returning after its initial run this winter, the Broadway veteran Susan Stroman’s staging of Lehar’s classic operetta still hasn’t moved from depressing to irrepressible, though Susan Graham, singing and acting with easygoing naturalness, is an improvement over Renée Fleming in the title role and Fabio Luisi teases more suavity from the orchestra. At 7:30 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Zachary Woolfe)‘The Rake’s Progress’  (Friday and Monday) James Levine conducts one of his favorite 20th-century operas, which last played at the house in 2003. For this return the Met has an enticing cast, headed by the fine young tenor Paul Appleby as Tom Rakewell, the soprano Layla Claire as his sweetheart Anne Trulove, and the baritone Gerald Finley as the diabolical Nick Shadow, who leads Tom to ruin. . Friday and Monday at 7:30 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Tommasini)Advertisement‘Cavalleria Rusticana’ and ‘Pagliacci’  (Saturday and Tuesday) It was about time for the Metropolitan Opera to replace its 1970 Franco Zeffirelli production of Mascagni’s “Cavalleria Rusticana” and Leoncavallo’s “Pagliacci,” opera’s most enduring double bill. In his new staging, the director David McVicar brings an intriguing, sometimes uneasy mix of abstraction and realism to “Cavalleria,” marred by the overuse of an annoying rotating stage platform, a heavy-handed touch. For “Pagliacci,” the action is updated to a grimy truck stop near a church in an Italian town in 1948; the commedia dell’arte troupe becomes a band of zany vaudevillians. The cast is strong, especially the tireless tenor Marcelo Álvarez, who takes on both Turiddu in “Cavalleria” and Canio in “Pagliacci,” a formidable challenge. The soprano Eva-Maria Westbroek is a wrenching Santuzza in “Cavalleria,” and the soprano Patricia Racette a feisty Nedda in “Pagliacci.” Fabio Luisi conducts surging, textured and lucid accounts of both scores. (Carl Tanner takes over for Mr. Alvarez in Saturday’s performance.) Saturday at 8:30 p.m. and Tuesday at 7:30 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Tommasini)AdvertisementClassical MusicAmerican Composers Orchestra  (Wednesday and Thursday) The ink is still wet on the scores by seven up-and-coming composers chosen for this year’s Annual Underwood New Music Readings, conducted by George Manahan. Wednesday’s open rehearsal offers a glimpse into the working process; Thursday evening brings the world premiere performances. Wednesday at 10 a.m., Thursday at 7:30 p.m. DiMenna Center for Classical Music, 450 West 37th Street, Manhattan, americancomposers.org. (Corinna da Fonseca-Wollheim)Emanuel Ax  (Thursday) As part of the Great Performers series, this eminent pianist returns to Alice Tully Hall for a program of French repertory, including Bizet’s “Variations chromatiques,” Rameau’s “Pièces de clavecin” and works by Debussy. Also on the lineup are Chopin’s Four Scherzos. At 7:30 p.m., Alice Tully Hall, Lincoln Center, 212-721-6500, lcgreatperformers.org. (Vivien Schweitzer)The Cecilia Chorus of New York  (Saturday) Mark Shapiro leads this respected ensemble in an all-Beethoven program including the “Choral Fantasy,” the Mass in C, and the finale from “Fidelio.” Soloists include the mezzo-soprano Shirin Eskandani and the soprano Adrienne Danrich. At 8 p.m., Stern Auditorium, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Schweitzer)★ Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center  (Sunday and Thursday) On Sunday, the pianist Jeremy Denk joins colleagues from the society for Beethoven’s majestic “Archduke” Trio. On Thursday, a contemporary music program features recent and 20th century works by composers including Andy Akiho, Yevgeniy Sharlat and Lutoslawski. Sunday at 5 p.m., Alice Tully Hall, Lincoln Center; Thursday at 7:30 p.m., Kaplan Penthouse, Lincoln Center, 165 West 65th Street, 212-875-5788, chambermusicsociety.org. (Schweitzer)Claire Chase and Anthony Roth Costanzo  (Thursday) The one-woman new-music powerhouse and flutist Claire Chase teams up with Anthony Roth Costanzo, one of the most versatile countertenors today in a new composition by Mohammed Fairouz based on texts by Wallace Stevens. At 7:30 p.m., SubCulture: Arts Underground, 45 Bleecker Street, near Lafayette Street, East Village, 212-533-5470, subculturenewyork.com. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Juilliard415  (Saturday) David Hill leads the Juilliard School’s early-music group and the Yale Schola Cantorum in a varied program of recent works by Daniel Kellogg and Roderick Williams, plus Haydn’s “Surprise” Symphony and Beethoven’s Mass in C. At 8 p.m., Alice Tully Hall, Lincoln Center, 212-769-7406, juilliard.edu. (David Allen)Henry Kramer (Wednesday) Juilliard’s William Petschek Piano Recital Award, a prestigious honor, fosters the careers of rising artists, and the 2015 winner is Henry Kramer, making his Alice Tully Hall recital debut. Mr. Kramer, who gave a thrilling account of Prokofiev’s Sixth Sonata at Weill Recital Hall in 2011, has certainly chosen a daunting program for this occasion. There are works by Liszt and Aaron Jay Kernis, Ravel’s “Gaspard de la Nuit” and Chopin’s 24 Preludes, Op. 28. At 8 p.m., Alice Tully Hall, Lincoln Center, 212-721-6500 , events.juilliard.edu. (Tommasini)Look & Listen Festival  (Friday through Sunday) New-music royalty including the violinist Miranda Cuckson, So Percussion and the cellist Jeffrey Zeigler take to art venues in Brooklyn and Manhattan for this wide-ranging festival. Full details are online at lookandlisten.org. Friday at 8 p.m., BRIC House, 647 Fulton Street, at Rockwell Place, Fort Greene, Brooklyn; Saturday at 8 p.m. and Sunday at 7 p.m., Whitebox Art Center, 329 Broome Street, between Bowery and Chrystie Street, Lower East Side. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)Advertisement★ Meredith Monk and Vocal Ensemble (Saturday) To cap the season-long celebrations of her career’s 50th anniversary, the peerless Ms. Monk and her longtime ensemble present a retrospective of selections from her work, starting with her early experimental solos, moving on to “Dolmen Music” and extending as far as the recent “On Behalf of Nature.” At 7:30 p.m., Zankel Hall, Carnegie Hall, Manhattan, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Woolfe)Musicians from Marlboro  (Saturday) As part of the wallet-friendly Peoples’ Symphony Concert series, which presents first rate artists at affordable ticket prices, Musicians from Marlboro — the touring arm of the Marlboro Festival in Vermont —offers a program of Beethoven’s Sextet in E Flat, Brahms’s String Quartet in C Minor, and Mozart’s Divertimento No. 11 in D Major. At 8 p.m., Washington Irving High School, Irving Place at 16th Street, Manhattan, 212-586-4680, pscny.org. (Schweitzer)★ New York Philharmonic  (Wednesday, May 8 and 9) The Philharmonic returns from a successful European tour with two programs. On Wednesday, there are works by Ravel, Stravinsky and Strauss. Next Friday comes Schubert’s dark, unfinished B minor symphony and the American premiere of Peter Eötvös’s new one-act opera, “Senza Sangue,” with the soloists Anne Sofie von Otter and Russell Braun. Alan Gilbert conducts. Wednesday at 7:30 p.m., next Friday and May 9 at 8 p.m., Avery Fisher Hall, Lincoln Center, 212-875-5656, nyphil.org. (Allen)Oratorio Society of New York (Tuesday) The singers of the Oratorio Society and the Choristers of the Cathedral of St. John the Divine bring together two 20th-century works, Leonard Bernstein’s “Chichester Psalms” and Carl Orff’s “Carmina Burana.” The soloists are Jennifer Zetlan, Peter Tantsits and Takaoki Onishi, and the conductors are Kent Tritle and David Rosenmeyer. At 8 p.m., Stern Auditorium, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Allen)★ ‘The Road of Promise’  (Wednesday and Thursday) Kurt Weill’s 1937 opera-theater piece on the strength of community despite adversity comes to life with video projections by Wendall Harrington, in its American premiere performances. Ted Sperling conducts the Collegiate Chorale and the Orchestra of St. Luke’s with a star cast including the tenor Anthony Dean Griffey and the baritone Mark Delavan. Wednesday at 8 p.m., Thursday at 7 p.m., Stern Auditorium, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Allen)★ Tectonics Festival  (Thursday through Saturday) This enterprising new-music festival offers a focus on experimental performance and multidisciplinary works. The opening concert at the First Unitarian Congregational Society in Brooklyn features the intrepid ensemble Yarn/Wire as well as the organist James Rushford in works by Klaus Lang and Morton Feldman. The festival moves to the Abrons Arts Center in Manhattan on Friday where it offers a look back to the New York avant-garde with music by David Behrman, Julius Eastman and John McGuire. Brass instruments undergo unusual treatment on Saturday in a program that includes the brazenly exploratory TILT Brass ensemble and the trumpeter and composer Nate Wooley in the premiere performance of his own “Seven Storey Mountain V.” Full details online on issueprojectroom.org. Thursday at 8 p.m., First Unitarian Congregational Society, 116 Pierrepont Street, Brooklyn; Friday and Saturday at 8 p.m., Abrons Arts Center, 466 Grand Street, at Pitt Street, Lower East Side. ( da Fonseca-Wollheim)A classical music entry in the Listings pages on Friday, about the Oratorio Society of New York at Carnegie Hall tonight, misidentified one of the choral groups that will perform. It is the Choristers of the Cathedral of St. John the Divine, not the Cathedral Choir.A version of this schedule appears in print on May 1, 2015, on Page C13 of the New York edition with the headline: The Listings.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.