APRIL 30, 2015
Full reviews of recent dance performances: nytimes.com/dance. A searchable guide to these and other performances is at nytimes.com/events.★ Alonzo King Lines Ballet (Tuesday through May 10) At first glance, Alonzo King and San Francisco make an unlikely pair. The city has a crunchy past and high-tech present while Mr. King’s Lines Ballet is the picture of refined classicism. Yet there’s a California ease and earthiness to his work, too. Lines Ballet returns to the Joyce with two New York premieres: “Writing Ground,” set to an omnistic score of religious chants with a libretto by the Irish writer Colum McCann, and “Concerto for Two Violins,” set to Bach. Tuesday and Wednesday at 7:30 p.m., Thursday through May 9 at 8 p.m., May 9 and 10 at 2 p.m., Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-242-0800, joyce.org. (Brian Schaefer)Damagedance (Thursday through May 9) The choreographer Jessica Taylor is celebrating five years of creating dance under the name Damagedance, which suggests work that is dark, moody and fractured. Stylistically, she’s a proponent of the kind of contemporary dance that merges the drama and polish of modern dance with spastic postmodern gestures, switching regularly from contemplative to urgent. At 7:30 p.m., Dixon Place, 161A Chrystie Street, between Rivington and Delancey Streets, Lower East Side, 212-219-0736, dixonplace.org. (Schaefer)Rebecca Davis (through May 9) The title of Ms. Davis’s new work, “Bloowst windku,” welds parts of recognizable words (bloom, twist, windmill, haiku) into something unrecognizable. The same may be true of the movement, light and sound in this carefully constructed trio. In another twist on the ordinary, hundreds of security envelopes, amassed over three years, are put to inventive architectural use. At 8:30 p.m., Here, 145 Avenue of the Americas, at Dominick Street, South Village, 212-352-3101, here.org. (Siobhan Burke)AdvertisementMilka Djordjevich and Chris Peck (through Saturday) Ms. Djordjevich, a choreographer, and Mr. Peck, a composer, unveil a new phase of their longstanding collaboration. “Mass” features three women — Jessica Cook, Kyli Kleven and Ms. Djordjevich — interpreting a complex score of dance and song in deliberately effortful ways. Building on ideas from “Kinetic Makeover,” her 2013 solo, Ms. Djordevich attends closely to the relationship between the female body and the black box theater. At 8 p.m., the Kitchen, 512 West 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-255-5793, thekitchen.org. (Burke)Advertisement★ Food for Thought (through Saturday) In this eclectic series, which benefits the St. Mark’s Church food distribution programs, Danspace Project invites three artist-curators to envision distinctive evenings of dance. On Friday, in “Charged Space,” David Thomson brings together three performers with a certain kind of electricity. On Saturday, Iréne Hultman offers “A.N.D. YES!,” named for its participants (Alex Escalante, Niall Jones and Dai Jian), whom she describes as “delicious, funny and sincere.” A discount on admission is given to those contributing two cans of food. At 8 p.m., Danspace Project, St. Mark’s Church, 131 East 10th Street, East Village, 866-811-4111, danspaceproject.org. (Burke)Marjani Forte (Wednesday through May 9) For three years, the Harlem-based choreographer Marjani Forte has been investigating the ways mental illness, addiction and poverty feed and follow each other in an endless cycle. “Being Here.../this time” is the final expression of that research. A powerful previous iteration focused on the personal; here Ms. Marjani implicates institutions. An evocative aural atmosphere, from composer and sound designer Everett Saunders, reaches the audience via individual headphones. At 7:30 p.m., Gibney Dance Performing Arts Center, 280 Broadway, near Chambers Street, Lower Manhattan, 646-837-6809, gibneydance.org. (Schaefer)Kandake Dance Theater  (Wednesday) It’s clear that Kandake Dance Theater has a preoccupation with queens: The company’s name refers to an ancient title for monarchs, and its latest work, which it calls a “rock-ballet,” pays homage to the storytelling empress Scheherazade. “1001 Nights: Love Stories on Death Row” takes the famous tale of royal clemency and translates it to the modern criminal justice system, becoming a commentary on the “American prison-industrial complex.” At 7:30 p.m., Dixon Place, 161A Chrystie Street, between Rivington and Delancey Streets, Lower East Side, 866-811-4111, dixonplace.org. (Schaefer)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Lyon Opera Ballet  (Saturday and Sunday) This company from Lyon, France, has a long tradition of fostering innovation in ballet. The troupe returns to New York with the work of three influential choreographers, chief among them William Forsythe, whose 1985 “Steptext,” for one woman and three men, plays with the gender dynamics of a traditional pas de deux. The program also includes Benjamin Millepied’s “Sarabande,” for four male dancers, and a New York premiere by the Israeli choreographer Emanuel Gat, less often seen on this side of the Atlantic. Saturday at 2 and 8 p.m.; Sunday at 2 and 7:30 p.m.; Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-242-0800, joyce.org. (Burke)Mariela Franganillo Company  (Saturday) Tango isn’t just for smoky Argentine nightclubs: In “Recuerdo Tango,” co-directors Mariela Franganillo and Bob McAndrew use the sultry dance to escort us through the 20th century, situating it in grand ballrooms and subway cars, among other locales. Skirt lengths shorten, men trade tuxes for leather jackets, and a same-sex duet nods to changing times. With eight dancers, a live string quartet and a significant cinematic component, “Recuerdo Tango” is a bustling journey. At 8 p.m., Kingsborough Performing Arts Center, Kingsborough Community College, 2001 Oriental Boulevard, Manhattan Beach, Brooklyn, 718-368-5596, onstageatkingsborough.org. (Schaefer)★ Mark Dendy Projects  (Wednesday through May 9) Before it was home to the Public Theater, the Blue Man Group and Indochine, Astor Place spawned the Astor Library, a precursor to the New York Public Library. In the guise of William B. Astor Jr., son of the area’s millionaire namesake, choreographer Mark Dendy explores the history of these storied blocks with the help of a cabal of characters. In the process, he ponders gentrification, race relations, tabloid news and more. At 7 p.m., with an additional performance on May 9 at 9 p.m., Joe’s Pub, at the Public Theater, 425 Lafayette Street, at Astor Place, East Village, 212-967-7555, joespub.com. (Schaefer)★ New York City Ballet (through June 7) Thirty-one ballets are in store for City Ballet’s spring season, dating from 1862 (August Bournonville’s “La Sylphide,” newly staged by Peter Martins) to 2015 (Justin Peck’s “Rodeo: Four Dance Episodes”). This week the company continues its “Black and White” festival, celebrating the stark and stripped down pinnacle of the Balanchine aesthetic. Many of the featured works — “Agon,” “Concerto Barocco,” “The Four Temperaments” — are decades old and still feel as startling and new as spring. At Thursday’s gala, Mr. Martins salutes his Danish heritage with his take on “La Sylphide,” a staple of the romantic Danish repertoire, and “Bournonville Divertissements,” a sampling of the Dane’s signature fluttering footwork. Tuesdays through Thursdays at 7:30 p.m. (Thursday gala at 7 p.m.); Fridays at 8 p.m.; Saturdays at 2 and 8 p.m.; Sundays at 3 p.m.; David H. Koch Theater, Lincoln Center, 212-496-0600, nycballet.com. (Burke and Schaefer)Work Up (through Saturday) Gibney Dance Center continues its inaugural spring series for emerging choreographers. The final edition features Lauren Ree Slone, Eli Tamondong/Projectile Imagery and Jacob Slominski. At 7:30 p.m., Gibney Dance Performing Arts Center, 280 Broadway, near Chambers Street, Lower Manhattan, 646-837-6809, gibneydance.org. (Burke)Ann Liv Young  (Wednesdays through May 20) The irreverent Ms. Young presents “Elektra Cabaret” at Joe’s Pub, casting a character often portrayed as wicked in a compassionate light. In this reimagined version of her full-length “Elektra,” she is joined by Marissa Mickelberg (chorus), Bailey Nolan (Klytemnestra), Charley Parden (Orestes) and Vanessa Soudan (Chrysothemis). At 9:30 p.m., Joe’s Pub, at the Public Theater, 425 Lafayette Street, at Astor Place, East Village, 212-967-7555, joespub.com. (Burke)A version of this schedule appears in print on May 1, 2015, on Page C14 of the New York edition with the headline: The Listings: Dance.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.