AdvertisementSupported byBy Roberta SmithLisa Yuskavage’s paintings need to push more envelopes. Their societal salvos are well aimed, but formally and stylistically they should unsettle notions about painting in more profound, less completely parodic ways. With their protruding chests, slinky pelvises and scanty dress, Ms. Yuskavage’s creatures inhabit greasy surfaced, pastel worlds whose acid hues often hijack the modernist love of color for color’s sake. Rankling several standards of taste, she reclaims women’s pleasure as their own while sometimes evoking metaphorically the repressions such freedom can invite. “Triptych,” the largest painting in Ms. Yuskavage’s previous solo show at Zwirner (in 2011), suggested the blood sacrifice of one of her sprites by stern pioneer women from the Old West.In her latest efforts, Ms. Yuskavage delves into another segment of American history with paintings of hippies and also turns to depicting seminude men. These new characters, blond and dewy-fleshed, may be partly inspired by John Currin’s work, but unlike Mr. Currin, Ms. Yuskavage grants them no more coverage than her women. An overt, possibly transgender androgyny is the result in “Dude of Sorrows” and “Dude Looks Like Jesus,” if not in the triumphal illicitness of “The Neighbors.” In “Striped Socks,” Ms. Yuskavage gives us a shocking image that also achieves a symmetrical, almost geometric strangeness, and in “Sari” her approach to the female body loses some of its satiric edge, suggesting new possibilities.Ms. Yuskavage’s message is very much in her medium. We get her points through looking, which is as it should be, but the experience is not engaging enough. The tradition of painters simultaneously altering perceptions of painting and the body includes figures like Max Beckmann, Marsden Hartley and David Park, and more recently, Dana Schutz, Nicole Eisenman and Ella Kruglyanskaya. It’s a crowded field, within which Ms. Yuskavage has established a prominent jumping-off point. Now she needs to jump.David Zwirner 533 West 19th Street, Chelsea Through June 13 Advertisement