AdvertisementSupported byJane the VirginBy Pilot Viruet“Jane the Virgin” is often fast-paced and full of complicated plot mechanics. And that approach ensures that viewers remain interested. There can be too much, however, as we saw this week.This episode has a lot that it wants to say, but not enough time to devote to fully exploring each of these story lines. The biggest — and best written — one is about Jane’s love triangle, something that the show has done remarkably well (especially considering how easy it is to mess up). The episode employs a cute device: a “Bachelorette” Jane all dazzled up in fancy sequin dresses (a stark contrast to the real Jane, who, as we learn in the cold open, has not showered for a week), who shows up as a “tipsy hallucination” to help Jane choose between Michael and Rafael. It becomes clear that both men are wonderful options. Even Jane’s mother and grandmother have strong opinions on #TeamMichael or #TeamRafael.At this point, it’s impossible for Jane to choose between the two. Michael is comforting, someone whom she’s long loved, someone whom she hoped to eventually have a family with. Rafael has basically given her a family (albeit unintentionally) and he’s shown that he knows the way to Jane’s heart: not through a honeymoon suite, but through a room full of baby products for Mateo. Jane is honest, telling the men that she’s in love with them both. It’s an admission that is only going to further complicate things.Outside the love triangle, there is still so much going on in this episode that it’s hard to keep track. First, there is Kesha in a guest role as a neighbor who keeps Jane and Mateo awake with loud music. This plotline seems like a nonstarter (and just a way to have Kesha appear, although she wasn’t around as much as I’d like), but a stolen amp and a visit from the police lead Alba to come to an important and emotional decision: She’s going to apply for her green card. It’s the most “tugging-at-your-heartstrings” part of the episode, especially when Alba sits shaking and crying in her room, positively terrified that she’ll be deported. The only misstep is that Xo is stuck on a cruise ship to Cuba working on her relationship with Rogelio. Alba’s decision is revealed through a videochat, instead of having the three women in a room together — which would have made it all the more powerful.Between the cruise ship high jinks (leading to a fun sailor-themed duet with Rogelio and Xo, and the realization that they should step back from their Vegas marriage and instead work on dating), a Petra story line in which she is blackmailed by Scott for a promotion, as well as the less interesting real estate thread, “Chapter Twenty-Four” can feel a bit too crowded with twisty bombshells. The cruise ship could’ve easily been a B-plot in another episode — there is so much happening with Jane that it’s easy to forgive the writers if they had decided to explore Xo and Rogelio a little later on. And while it is funny to use on-screen scribbles to depict all the backstabbing between Rafael, Petra and Lachlan, the ultimate betrayal near the end of the episode doesn’t fully land. It’s not just because it’s completely predictable, but because we’re all so engrossed in the love triangle (and Xo and Rogelio’s relationship) that it seems tame by comparison and hastily thrown in. It adds drama, sure, but isn’t there enough drama already?Because even outside all of this, there is still more plot to keep in mind: Michael tells Jane about Sin Rostro changing appearances, leading Jane to have nightmares about Rose returning to harm Mateo; Rafael suspects Petra is pregnant with Scott’s child; Petra confirms her pregnancy with a test (immediately after learning of another work-related backstabbing); and a call from the sperm clinic alerts Rafael to the fact that he’s actually the father of Petra’s baby. It’s a great reveal, but it’s one that loses a little punch when it’s thrown in with the other subplots, and it feels as if the episode rushes through the last 10 minutes to make up for how much it’s juggling.“Chapter Twenty-Four” is a solid offering that pushes forward everyone’s narrative. But it also shows that the writers can sometimes stand to take a deep breath and slow down the pacing.Advertisement