AdvertisementSupported byBy Stephen Holden“Songs From My Living Room” was the informal title of Audra McDonald’s forward-looking Carnegie Hall concert on Wednesday evening. That meant a mixture of recent theater songs and vintage show tunes, many associated with her musical role models — Chita Rivera, Betty Buckley, Barbara Cook, Judy Garland — when she was growing up in Fresno, Calif., dreaming of Broadway stardom. Vocally, the concert felt like an about-face from her uncanny Billie Holiday impersonation in “Lady Day at Emerson’s Bar and Grill.” There was not a smidgen of jazz or swing. In semi-operatic mode, Ms. McDonald, accompanied on piano by her musical director Andy Einhorn, with Mark Vanderpoel on bass and Gene Lewin on drums, applied her lustrous lyric soprano to a showcase of musical-theater obscurities of varying quality. A number of lesser-known tunes were from relatively recent shows like “The Mystery of Edwin Drood” (“Writing on the Wall”), “The Rink” (“Chief Cook and Bottle Washer”), “Evita” (“Rainbow High”), “The Baker’s Wife” (“Proud Lady,” with revised lyrics by Stephen Schwartz) and “The Scottsboro Boys” (“Go Back Home,” the title song of her recent Nonesuch album, released two years ago.)Not even Ms. McDonald’s majestic voice could magically transform them into standards-in-waiting. They are just not as substantial as the more famous songs from those shows.In some ways the concert was a continuation of Ms. McDonald’s thrilling 1998 debut album, “Way Back to Paradise,” which showcased work by Adam Guettel, Ricky Ian Gordon and Michael John LaChiusa that blurred the boundaries between art song and pop. That album and her supporting concerts heralded a musical-theater revolution that didn’t happen. The younger writers Ms. McDonald introduced on Wednesday included Kate Miller-Heidke, whose “Facebook Song” is a contemptuous kiss-off to a boor, peppered with profanity, which Ms. McDonald said distilled “heartbreak in the 21st century,” and Shaina Taub’s “The Tale of Bear and Otter,” a clever but rambling children’s tale divided into chapters, which has no musical center of gravity. The strongest of the newer songs was the extravagantly passionate ballad “No One Else,” from “Natasha, Pierre and the Great Comet of 1812,” Dave Malloy’s electropop pastiche of “War and Peace.” Sad to say, but these songs, for all of their innovation, are musically inferior to those on “Way Back to Paradise.”Confronted with so much unfamiliar material, the audience was warmly receptive but less than ecstatic. The strongest numbers were those in which Ms. McDonald’s voice and theatrical skill carried them to new dramatic heights. The concert’s pinnacle was a devastating rendition of “Maybe This Time,” from “Cabaret,” in which Ms. McDonald revealed its full measure of desperation and self-doubt. “Climb Ev’ry Mountain,” “Make Someone Happy” and “Over the Rainbow” were surefire crowd-pleasers, and “Vanilla Ice Cream,” from “She Loves Me,” her Barbara Cook tribute, lived up to the impossibly high standard established by Ms. Cook. Ms. McDonald’s willingness to take chances, whatever you think of her choices, remains a heroic endeavor from the heart, to be encouraged.Advertisement