AdvertisementSupported byArt ReviewBy Ken JohnsonMost Frank Lloyd Wright fans know that he was influenced by Japanese aesthetics. Fewer are aware that during the first quarter of the 20th century that American architect pursued a lucrative side career as a dealer in Japanese prints. When he was working on designs for the Imperial Hotel in Tokyo, Wright said that print vendors lined up outside his office door. This business helped save his architectural practice during its less solvent periods. Years later he recalled that sales of Japanese prints “practically built Taliesin I and II.” One of his major buyers happened to be the Metropolitan Museum of Art. Between 1918 and 1922 he sold the museum almost 400 prints, most of which were purchased in two sales totaling $20,000. A selection of Wright acquisitions, small woodblock prints representing Kabuki actors, is included in “Discovering Japanese Art: American Collectors and the Met,” a gorgeous exhibition at the museum.Organized by Monika Bincsik, an assistant curator in the Met’s Asian art department, the show presents more than 200 superb paintings, drawings, prints, scrolls, folding screens, ceramics, lacquer ware and works in other mediums and genres, mostly from the fourth century to the late-19th century. The exhibition groups its contents according to collectors who sold or gave them to the museum from the 1880s to the near-present. Among the early benefactors were Stephen Whitney Phoenix (1839-1881), a dilettante scholar and collector from a wealthy, politically influential New York family, whose 1881 gift included Japanese lacquers. (His was the first official bequest to the Met.) Another was Louisine Havemeyer (1855-1929), wife of the sugar baron Henry O. Havemeyer. Her 1929 bequest of European and Japanese works was one of the most important donations received by the Met up to that time. It included a fine, early impression of Hokusai’s 19th-century woodblock print “The Great Wave,” which is in the current show. With its intense blues and whites, it looks as fresh as if it had been made yesterday. The exhibition’s enchanting selection of the small, fanciful toggles called netsuke is from a trove of 2,500 gathered by the ardent philanthropist Margaret Olivia Slocum Sage (1828-1918), wife of the railroad tycoon Russell Sage. She donated her collection in 1910. Among these delightfully imaginative objects is “Seated Baku,” an exquisite carving in ivory representing a chimerical beast that eats dreams and nightmares. While the museum’s department of Asian art was founded in 1915, not until 1987 did it have enough breadth and depth to present a comprehensive history of Japanese art. That became possible thanks to a 1975 gift and purchase of more than 400 artworks — including archaeological material, medieval Buddhist sculptures and paintings, Edo-period screens and hanging scrolls and ceramics — from Harry G. C. Packard (1914-1991). Many of the exhibition’s most striking works are from the Packard Collection, including “The Old Plum” (1647) by Kano Sansetsu, a spectacular set of four sliding doors bearing the image of extravagantly gnarly fruit tree branches rendered in black on a gold-leaf ground. Also from the Packard collection is the exhibition’s oldest piece, a stoneware vase with a horn-shaped neck and a spherical body covered by crusty glazes in muted colors. It’s dated between 300 and 710, but you could mistake it for the work of a mid-20th-century Modernist. Packard was a colorful character as well as a true connoisseur. He began to acquire Japanese artworks as a language officer with the Marines in a Japanese repatriation camp in northern China. As Julia Meech, a former Met curator, told it in her 2010 lecture “Who Was Harry Packard?,” a fellow officer wrote disparagingly that Packard offered to help repatriate people to Japan in exchange for artworks, an ethically dubious proposition. In the ensuing decades he worked and traveled tirelessly to develop a Japanese art collection of encyclopedic scope.The Met’s acquisition of the Packard collection is a story in itself. Under the direction of Thomas Hoving, the museum bought it for $5.1 million, then the most it had paid for a single group of objects, according to Ms. Meech. To cover that cost, Hoving and Wen Fong, a special consultant for Far Eastern affairs, persuaded curators in all other departments to suspend their own purchases for the several years it would take to pay down the bill. Not the most altruistic of donors, Packard had had his collection appraised in Japan for more than $11 million, so an agreement was eventually reached to call the purchase a partial gift, which is why Packard’s name appears on so many object labels in the Met’s collection. (Perhaps that was a tax boon for Packard.) There’s a lot more to Packard’s story, but you’ll learn little of it from this show, which has no catalog and describes collectors, donors, dealers and the museum’s past curators of Japanese art in anodyne, minimally informative wall texts. Not a single dollar amount is mentioned and no juicy scandals are aired. You could come away from the show believing that all the museum’s acquisitions were scrupulously shenanigan-free. Fortunately, you don’t have to be particularly interested in the history and sociology of collecting to be enthralled by this wonderful display of the Met’s greatest hits of Japanese art. “Discovering Japanese Art: American Collectors and the Met” continues through Sept. 27 at the Metropolitan Museum of Art; 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org. Advertisement