AdvertisementSupported byInside ArtBy Robin Pogrebin and Serge F. KovaleskiThe 1952 house in Phoenix that Frank Lloyd Wright designed for his son, David, and daughter-in-law, Gladys, continues to create controversy. First, the property faced demolition by its owners, who planned to replace it with new homes. Then it was sold in 2012 to Zach Rawling, who comes from Phoenix and said he wanted to preserve it.Now Mr. Rawling has applied for a special city permit to open the house to the public for tours, education programs and cultural events, including art exhibitions. He has also proposed a museum, cafe and bookstore, and he anticipates as many annual visitors as those to Wright’s Taliesin West in Scottsdale, Ariz.: about 120,000.Some neighbors strongly object. “The preservation was simply a pretext,” said Peter V. Sperling, a homeowner in the area. “There will be several hundred thousand visitors a year to this property, which in my opinion completely disrupts the long-term semirural character of the neighborhood,” he added. “It’s turned out to be a fiasco.”Mr. Rawling said that he and the recently established nonprofit David and Gladys Wright House Foundation — for which is president — were trying to preserve and provide public access to an important historic property. “These are a small group of neighbors who are well funded trying to make it as difficult as possible,” he said. With a cylindrical design reminiscent of Wright’s Guggenheim Museum in New York, the house had become a cause célèbre and prompted debate over preservation versus property rights. In the Arcadia neighborhood overlooking the Camelback Mountains, the house is regarded by experts as among Wright’s most significant later works.ANN FREEDMAN AT PHILLIPSAnn Freedman was president of the Knoedler & Company gallery when it sold fake artworks for tens of millions of dollars; according to federal authorities, many pieces were falsely attributed to Modernist masters.Now, she is consulting for the Phillips auction house on its contemporary art sale on May 14.The nature of her consulting remains unclear. A Phillips spokeswoman, Alex Godwin-Brown, said Ms. Freedman was not authenticating works or attracting consignments, but she declined to elaborate.“When it comes down to a niche genre or niche area, we do consult from time to time with renowned experts in their fields,” Ms. Godwin-Brown said, adding that Ms. Freedman has experience with Color Field paintings and is working as a one-time consultant to enhance the quality of the “Color Wars” sale section.Ms. Freedman, who now runs an Upper East Side gallery, will be paid, Ms. Godwin-Brown said.Ms. Freedman has said she believed the Knoedler works to be authentic. She was never charged with a crime. But clients sued her and the gallery, arguing that they knew — or should have known — that the works were phony.Glafira Rosales, the Long Island dealer who provided the works to Knoedler, pleaded guilty to fraud. The 165-year-old gallery closed in 2011. In a statement released this week by Luke Nikas, Ms. Freedman’s lawyer, to Marion Maneker of the Art Market Monitor website, Ms. Freedman described herself as a specialist in Color Field, a postwar style of abstraction, and said she often advises collectors, auction houses, curators and writers. SERGE F. KOVALESKI ART AT A POST OFFICEThe James A. Farley Post Office Building, on Eighth Avenue at 33rd Street in Manhattan, remains a ripe target for real estate development. But in the meantime, it will also become the site of a multimedia art installation. In October, the artist Simon Birch plans to transform the expansive former sorting room on the post office’s second floor into “The 14th Factory,” the self-described “biggest independent art project in the world this year.”The title alludes to the “13 Factories,” or hongs, of Canton (also known as Guangzhou), an 18th-century foreign trading site that led to some of the West’s violent interactions with China. Mr. Birch’s 14th factory imagines a lost space of the “unknown hong” that also represents his mixed identity as a British-born artist with Polish and Armenian parents who lives and works in Hong Kong.“In some ways the post office has become ingrained in the concept of the whole project,” Mr. Birch said in a telephone interview from Hong Kong and “the idea of the factory as a place of human labor.”For the installation, Mr. Birch will team up with people from other creative industries, including the architecture firm Foster & Partners; the film studio Ridley Scott Associates; the Beijing artists Cang Xin, Li Wei and Yang Zhichao; and the New York composer Gary Gunn.“There’s an army of about 20 collaborators,” Mr. Birch said. “We’re kind of a one big family now.”Known for his oil paintings of partially deconstructed figures, Mr. Birch in 2010 opened another multimedia show, “Hope & Glory — A Conceptual Circus,” in Hong Kong.Admission will be free to “The 14th Factory,” a nonprofit exhibition funded by donations and Mr. Birch’s painting sales.CALATRAVA ON PARK AVENUENew Yorkers may not be in the mood for more Santiago Calatrava right about now, given the cost overruns and scheduling delays of his $4 billion World Trade Center transportation hub in Lower Manhattan. Nevertheless, seven of his new aluminum sculptures painted red, black and silver will soon start cropping up along the Park Avenue median between 52nd and 55th Streets.The exhibition — organized by the Marlborough Gallery, the New York City Parks Department and the Fund for Park Avenue — will run from June 8 to mid-November.The sculptures have “a certain relationship aesthetically with the structure which people will see at the hub,” said Pierre Levai, Marlborough’s president. “They are the same spirit, the same angles and the same formal appearance.”Two of the works are tension compression structures held in place by barely perceptible cables so that they appear to grow from the ground, suggesting what Mr. Calatrava in a statement described as “a link between man and nature, implying the sculptures are found objects in a human forest.”Advertisement