By BRUCE WEBERAPRIL 29, 2015
Sid Tepper, half of a songwriting team whose ballads, pop tunes and novelty numbers were recorded by the musical stars of the 1940s and 1950s and live on in Elvis Presley movies and elevators around the world, died on April 24 at his home in Aventura, Fla. He was 96.His son Warren confirmed the death.Mr. Tepper and his writing partner, Roy C. Bennett (sometimes credited as Roy Brodsky), produced dozens of songs in the quarter-century after World War II, many of which were recorded in numerous versions, easy listening and otherwise, by a variety of artists.Their early hit “Red Roses for a Blue Lady,” written in the late 1940s after Mr. Tepper had quarreled with his new wife, then sent her flowers as an apology, was originally recorded by Vaughn Monroe and His Orchestra and covered by Guy Lombardo and His Royal Canadians and the Count Basie Orchestra, not to mention a roster of male crooners including Paul Anka, Eddy Arnold, Pat Boone, Vic Dana, Wayne Newton, Al Martino, Bobby Darin, Andy Williams and Dean Martin.Their mid-1950s composition “The Naughty Lady of Shady Lane,” a syncopated story-song with a hint of Latin heat, was also recorded by Martin, as well as the Ames Brothers (who had a Top 10 hit with it), Ray Charles and, much later, the Roches. Its cagey lyric suggests that a new female arrival has unsettled the menfolk of a quiet suburban neighborhood:You should see how she carries on with her admirers galoreShe must be giving them quite a thrill the way they flock to her doorAdvertisementShe throws those come-hither glances at every Tom, Dick and Joe,When offered some liquid refreshment, the lady never says no.AdvertisementThe song, however, was inspired by the pregnancy of Mr. Tepper’s wife, Lillian, and in the final line, the naughty lady turns out to be “only nine days old.”Mr. Tepper and Mr. Bennett, who had been neighbors growing up in Brooklyn, shared writing duties for both music and lyrics, although, Warren Tepper said, his father was not a trained musician and it was Mr. Bennett who played the piano. For much of their partnership they worked in the Brill Building, the celebrated songwriters’ hive in Midtown Manhattan. Together they wrote more than three dozen songs for Elvis Presley, most of them for his movies.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Oddly enough, Mr. Tepper said in interviews, because they conducted all their business with Presley by mail and through the conduit of movie producers like Hal B. Wallis, they never met the King himself. Nonetheless, their work provided some of his signature screen performances, including the title song of “G.I. Blues” (1960), a comic anthem for homesick American soldiers in Germany; “Puppet on a String,” sung to an enraptured Shelley Fabares in “Girl Happy” (1965); and “The Lady Loves Me,” a flirty poolside duet with Ann-Margret in “Viva Las Vegas” (1964) that ends with Elvis shoved fully clothed off a diving board. The last line? “The gentleman’s all wet.”Sidney Tepper was born on June 25, 1918, in Brooklyn, where his parents, Abraham and Anne, ran what Warren Tepper described as a delicatessen and stationery store. Sidney was not musical as a boy, and he said in interviews that there was little music in his home when he was growing up but that he wrote poetry as a teenager. When he joined the Army after high school, he ended up in special services, writing shows to entertain troops during World War II. He married Lillian Ruth Monkarsh after the war, and he and Mr. Bennett began their productive collaboration.Lillian Tepper died in 2005. In addition to his son Warren, Mr. Tepper is survived by another son, Brian; three daughters, Susan Kopacz, Michelle Kapit and Jackie Tepper; seven grandchildren; and three great-grandchildren.Among other notable works by Mr. Tepper and Mr. Bennett are “Glad All Over,” a 1957 love song with a rockabilly beat recorded by Carl Perkins and later covered by the Beatles, with George Harrison on vocals (not to be confused with the Dave Clark Five hit song of the same title); “The Young Ones,” a late-1950s hit for Cliff Richard and the Shadows featured in a 1962 British musical film known as “The Young Ones” and later as “Wonderful to Be Young,” about an aspiring singer (Mr. Richard), directed by Sidney J. Furie; and “Nuttin’ for Christmas,” the spirited lament of a boy being punished for mischief-making that was a mid-1950s hit in multiple recordings:I did a dance on Mommy’s plantsClimbed a tree and tore my pantsFilled that sugar bowl with antsSomebody snitched on me.I’m getting nuttin’ for ChristmasMommy and Daddy are madI’m getting nuttin’ for ChristmasCause I ain’t been nuttin’ but bad.A version of this article appears in print on May 1, 2015, on Page A28 of the New York edition with the headline: Sid Tepper, Songwriter Who Delivered, Dies at 96 .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.