By MARGALIT FOXAPRIL 28, 2015
Elizabeth Brown Pryor, a biographer and retired diplomat who drew on long-unseen documents to illuminate the lives of Clara Barton and Robert E. Lee, died on April 13 in a car crash in Richmond, Va. She was 64.As was widely reported, Ms. Pryor was killed after an S.U.V. traveling at high speed hit her car from behind. The driver of the S.U.V., Robert Stevens Gentil, has been charged with involuntary manslaughter.Ms. Pryor, who served more than two decades in the State Department, was the author of “Clara Barton: Professional Angel” (1987) and “Reading the Man: A Portrait of Robert E. Lee Through His Private Letters” (2007). The first book made use of Barton’s journals, bricked up for decades in a wall; the second was born of two trunks filled with correspondence between Lee and his associates that were discovered in a bank vault in Alexandria, Va., in 2002.Ms. Pryor was the first scholar granted full access to the Lee trove, and the resulting biography earned a string of laurels, including the Lincoln Prize, the Jefferson Davis Award and the Richard B. Harwell Award, all presented to books on Civil War subjects.AdvertisementDrawing on Lee’s letters and other sources — some 10,000 documents in all — Ms. Pryor assembled a montage of his life before and after the Civil War that, reviewers said, helped flesh out received views of him. Virginia born and West Point educated, Lee commanded the Confederate Army of Northern Virginia from 1862 onward, becoming commander in chief of all the Confederate forces shortly before his surrender to Gen. Ulysses S. Grant at Appomattox on April 9, 1865.AdvertisementThough Lee is often cast by history as a brilliant general, Ms. Pryor, examining the strategic errors that led to his retreat at Antietam in 1862 and sweeping defeat at Gettysburg the next year, judged him “bright but not brilliant.”Addressing Lee’s stance on slavery, she acknowledged, with other historians, that he harbored deep misgivings on the subject. However, Ms. Pryor wrote, those misgivings stemmed not from his opposition to the institution itself, but from his resentment of the managerial burdens it could place on white slave owners.As a slaveholder, Ms. Pryor showed, Lee was a cruel master, once forcing a runaway slave to endure 50 lashes and then have brine poured on the wounds. He routinely sundered slaves’ families if selling a slave was expedient, and by 1860 “he had broken up every family but one” on his Arlington plantation, she wrote.Reviewing “Reading the Man,” The Journal of Southern History called it “a finely crafted and important book,” adding that Ms. Pryor “succeeds in bringing a new perspective to this familiar figure.”In “Clara Barton: Professional Angel,” Ms. Pryor also tapped a long-hidden wellspring to create a nuanced profile of a totemic American. Barton, the Civil War battlefield heroine who founded the American Red Cross in 1881, zealously guarded her public image as a paragon of virtue, confiding darker emotions only in her diaries.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Fearing disclosure, she sealed the diaries behind a wall of her home in Glen Echo, Md., before her death in 1912. They remained undiscovered until the late 20th century.Ms. Pryor mined them for her biography, producing a portrait of a complex, even flawed woman who was subject to depression, professional jealousies and a nearly incessant hunger for the limelight.Mary Elizabeth Brown was born on March 15, 1951, in Gary, Ind. After earning a bachelor’s degree in history from Northwestern University, she received a master’s in the field from the University of Pennsylvania.AdvertisementShe began her government career with the National Park Service, running the elevator at the Washington Monument. She later worked as a Park Service historian before joining the State Department in 1983.Serving largely in Europe, Ms. Pryor took part in arms-control talks in the late 1980s that led to the Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe. Signed by more than two dozen countries, the treaty entered into force in 1992.She helped draft the Constitution of Moldova after it declared independence from the Soviet Union in 1991 and, in the mid-1990s, served in a devastated Sarajevo at the end of the Bosnian war. She also wrote the State Department’s official policy paper urging the United States to rejoin Unesco — the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization — from which it had withdrawn in 1984 amid Cold War tensions. The United States rejoined the organization in 2003.Ms. Pryor’s first marriage, to Anthony Pryor, ended in divorce, as did her second, to Frank Parker. Survivors include her mother, Mary Brown Hamingson, and two sisters, Beverly Louise Brown and Peggy A. Brown.At her death, Ms. Pryor was completing a manuscript titled “Democracy and Its Demons: Six Unexpected Encounters With Abraham Lincoln.”A version of this article appears in print on May 1, 2015, on Page A29 of the New York edition with the headline: Elizabeth Brown Pryor, 64, Biographer.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.