Season 1, Episode 13: “The Watch”Oftentimes, when a TV show nears the end of a season, it invests in a table setting episode. That is, it produces a single episode that doesn’t necessarily move the plot forward but instead focuses on making sure that its characters are conveniently positioned for whatever the endgame has in store. On the surface, that’s precisely what this episode of “Outlander” appeared to be. In reality, “The Watch” turned out to be something much more mystifying: completely unnecessary.By far the most interesting aspect of “The Watch,” as it pertains to the greater “Outlander” universe, is that it’s the first episode that exists almost wholly outside of the realm of book adaptation. (Minor book spoilers to follow.) In Diana Gabaldon’s novel, Jamie is captured by the Watch after the man whose child he protected in the last episode turns him in as a form of retribution. Additionally, in the novel, Claire has very little experience with childbirth and is largely a spectator when Jenny gives birth, as opposed to the sole facilitator of the delivery process. (End spoilers.)The episode takes a decidedly different path but leaves little indication as to why it makes the choices it does. At the end of “Lallybroch,” Claire comes across Jamie being held at gunpoint by a group of strange men who are revealed this week to be the eponymous Watch. The outlaws roam the countryside offering protection in exchange for money, and are suspicious of Jamie’s presence at Lallybroch, only backing down when Jenny assures them that Jamie is merely a cousin who has come to visit with his new bride. She lies, mindful of the price on Jamie’s head, and all carries on, albeit tensely. When a late arrival pops up in the form of Horrocks, the Redcoat deserter who informed Jamie that the man he’s accused of murdering was actually killed by Captain Randall, things are further intensified: Lallybroch now shelters a duplicitous man who is well aware of Jamie’s true identity and the bounty he carries.The story is meant to provide a fair bit of tension, but stretched over an hour, it feels absolutely plodding. Meanwhile, Claire and Jenny are isolated in a plot of their own, as Jenny goes into labor and the midwife is unavailable, leaving Claire to handle the breech birth, despite her limited experience. Though it provides time for the two women to bond, it feels strangely sudden, given the unnecessary friction the series added to their relationship upon last week’s meeting. It also means that Claire is given plenty of time to pore over her own suspected infertility and how she hasn’t disclosed these uncertainties to Jamie.By the episode’s end, Claire has admitted her fertility fears to Jamie, which he immediately accepts in the most fantastical way possible, assuring her that it’s probably a good thing she can’t get pregnant because he couldn’t bear to see her suffer. (As an aside, this, along with Jenny’s insistence that Ian not be informed of any complications regarding the birth of their daughter, reveals how the show continues to display a preternatural concern with shielding men from the horror of acknowledging the pain of their female counterparts. There’s being strong women, and there’s fetishization of male emotion, and it seems like occasionally the show struggles to tell the two apart.) Jenny gives birth to a beautiful baby girl, Jamie and Ian ride with the Watch into an ambush and Jamie ends up recaptured by the Redcoats.The problem with all of this, ultimately, is the fact that at end of the day, give or take a baby, the characters end up precisely where they were, or could have been, at the conclusion of “Lallybroch.” There wasn’t a significant amount of character growth or deepening. Jamie, who ended last episode surrounded by the Watch, could just have easily been turned over to the Redcoats at the beginning of this episode, giving the series an additional hour to work with as it heads into its final episodes. Instead, we have “The Watch,” a strangely airless episode that neither sets the table, nor clears it, and leaves a typically propulsive show to kill time, when it has anything but time to kill.Other Gossip