Maurizio Pollini played Chopin. Deborah Voigt, James Taylor and Kathleen Battle sang. And although Marilyn Horne was listed as just a speaker, and noted that she no longer sings in public, she was moved to perform two William Bolcom songs in her unmistakable mezzo-soprano.They were all part of a starry sendoff on Monday afternoon for Ronald A. Wilford, the legendary manager of maestros and divas who became one of the most powerful figures in classical music during the second half of the 20th century, and who died in June at 87. Mr. Wilford, who rose to new heights of power from a perch at Columbia Artists Management by representing the music directors who led many, if not most, of the world’s top orchestras and opera houses, was remembered at the memorial by his many nicknames.The Silver Fox. The Barracuda. The Dark Knight of 57th Street.“He loved ‘the Silver Fox,’ ” Ms. Horne said. “He loved ‘the Barracuda.’ And I think basically he loved that he was not thought of in any way except powerfully — and that, of course, was one of his aces.”But Ms. Horne came up with her own nickname for him when he was upset by something that had been written about him. “I said, ‘You know, you’re not always Charlie Charm,’ ” she recalled to laughter. “Well, that pushed a button. ‘You really think that?’ I said, “Yes, I do.’ We held on to that forever, because I’d call him Charlie.”André Previn said that Mr. Wilford had saved him from “working in a plantation called MGM Studios writing reams of music, which were kinds of encyclopedias of bad taste,” by suggesting that he try his luck as a conductor under his management for a year. He recalled being sent to lead the Philadelphia Orchestra in a performance of Richard Strauss.“The orchestra played with its customary, mind-blowing brilliance, and with my lack of experience I thought it had been me,” Mr. Previn said. “I called Ronald, thrilled, and I told him how good I had been.”Mr. Wilford then asked him when he would next be playing the piece. Mr. Previn checked his schedule, and found that he would be playing it in a small southern city that he could barely find on a map. “He said, ‘When you come back from there, call me.’ ”The memorial was held at the Richard Rodgers Theater, where the musical “Hamilton” is playing. Peter Gelb, the general manager of the Metropolitan Opera and a former protégé of Mr. Wilford’s who worked with him at Columbia Artists, said, “I believe that Ronald would have been pleased to be celebrated on the site of Broadway’s hottest new hit.’’ Mr. Gelb said that he was working at the Boston Symphony Orchestra when he was summoned to meet Mr. Wilford at his home in the Berkshires. Mr. Wilford was upset that an advertisement that Mr. Gelb had placed in an effort to boost the career of Seiji Ozawa, the music director of the Boston Symphony and a client and friend of Mr. Wilford’s, had backfired. “Offering me a glass of wine, he decided to let me off the hook,” Mr. Gelb said. “ ‘You know, if I wasn’t in analysis, you might have made me very angry,’ he said. And that was the beginning of a mentorship and friendship that lasted for four decades.’’There were personal reminiscences from Mr. Wilford’s son, Chris, who recalled taking him to a Kiss concert in the 1970s, and from his widow, Sara, who shared one of the few pieces of video she could find of Mr. Wilford, who avoided publicity: a heartfelt toast at one of her birthday parties. Stephen Rubin, who wrote a lively profile of Mr. Wilford in The New York Times in 1971, which carried the headline “Ronald Wilford: Muscle Man Behind the Maestros” and which Mr. Wilford disliked, spoke of how they unexpectedly struck up a warm friendship decades later.One of Mr. Wilford’s protégés, James Levine, the music director of the Met, sent his regrets that could not attend because he was preparing to lead “Tannhäuser” that night, said Mr. Gelb, who read a note from Mr. Levine in which he recalled first meeting Mr. Wilford. “We spoke of everything — music, art, life, philosophy, history, dreams — and we continued these discussions twice a week for more than 50 years,” Mr. Levine wrote. “He became the only manager I ever had, and even better, one of my most beloved friends.”But it was Ms. Horne who may have best summed up his unique place in classical music.“He’s the last,’’ she said. “He’s that last of the big, big managers who had big vision, who knew how to really run a career, and knew how to talk to you in a way that was always helpful, that wasn’t destructive.”