AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn Shattuck9 P.M. (HBO) DRAFT DAY (2014) Sonny Weaver Jr. (Kevin Costner), the beleaguered general manager of the Cleveland Browns, tries to rebuild his flailing team by choosing from among a Heisman Trophy-winning quarterback (Josh Pence), a gold-hearted linebacker (Chadwick Boseman) and a troubled but gifted running back (Arian Foster) at the N.F.L. draft. But first there’s some wheeling and dealing to be done. Frank Langella plays the Browns’ imperious owner; Denis Leary is their bellicose coach; and Jennifer Garner is the executive in charge of salaries — and of Sonny’s affections. “Mr. Costner handles it all with his usual gruff grace, allowing you to entertain the possibility that he might be a jerk or a loser just long enough to be gratified when he turns out to be a great guy in every way,” A. O. Scott wrote in The New York Times about this Ivan Reitman film. “He has a knack for making born winners look like underdogs, and for making you root for him at his most brazenly manipulative. I don’t really buy ‘Draft Day’ — it’s a shallow and evasive movie, built more around corporate wish fulfillment than around reality — but I have to say that it sells itself beautifully.”10:30 A.M. (13) RELIGION & ETHICS NEWSWEEKLY Bob Abernethy talks with Bishop Eugene Taylor Sutton of the Episcopal Diocese of Maryland about how clergy members and community leaders are working for peace and justice in Baltimore.NOON (13) THE OPEN MIND Ted Kaufman, a former adviser to Joseph R. Biden who was appointed senator from Delaware when Mr. Biden became vice president, discusses financial reform.8 P.M. (Oxygen) ANA MARIA IN NOVELA LAND (2015) A Los Angeles woman (Edy Ganem) obsessed with a steamy Mexican telenovela finds herself magically trading places with its melodramatic character, allowing her to live out her fantasies. But there’s no escape from reality. Elizabeth Peña, who died in October, plays Ana Maria’s mother in this Spanish-English production.8 P.M. (Lifetime) CLEVELAND ABDUCTION (2015) In August 2002, Michelle Knight, then 21, was kidnapped by Ariel Castro and imprisoned in his Cleveland home, where she endured more than a decade of brutality along with two other women before being rescued in May 2013. Taryn Manning, Raymond Cruz, Pam Grier and Joe Morton star in this re-creation of Ms. Knight’s ordeal.9 P.M. (HMC) MURDER, SHE BAKED: A CHOCOLATE CHIP COOKIE MURDER MYSTERY (2015) Hannah Swensen (Alison Sweeney), a baker in a small Minnesota town, turns crime-solver when someone is killed at her shop. Then a dishy investigator arrives just as her mother has persuaded her to date the local dentist. Now Hannah has two mysteries to solve.9 P.M. (CUNY) THE SYRIAN BRIDE (2005) Mona Salman (Clara Khoury), a bride-to-be from the Golan Heights, faces the realization that she will never be allowed back once she leaves her village for an arranged marriage with a cousin (Derar Sliman) who is a television star in Damascus. But first there’s the matter of stamping her passport. “The no man’s land in which the Salmans wait with mounting anger looms as the ultimate metaphor for stalemate and indecision,” Stephen Holden wrote in The Times about Eran Riklis’s tightly wound film. “The impasse comes at an especially sensitive moment: The succession of Bashar al-Assad to the presidency of Syria after the death of his father has prompted demonstrations and raised border tensions.” He added: “The excellent ensemble provides a finely shaded group portrait of the clan whose internal tensions are exacerbated by politics. The movie’s final moments suggest that only a brave leap into the unknown can begin to untangle the mess.”11:30 P.M. (NBC) SATURDAY NIGHT LIVE Scarlett Johansson hosts for the fourth time; Wiz Khalifa is the musical guest.What’s Streaming NowWITNESSES When corpses from desecrated graves start appearing in model homes in northern France, two very different cops — Sandra Winckler (Marie Dompnier), a young lead detective, and Paul Maisonneuve (Thierry Lhermitte), a retired crime-squad legend — find themselves thrown into an uncomfortable collaboration in this French mystery thriller. The six-part series, in French with English subtitles, is available on Netflix, Amazon and iTunes. (netflix.com, amazon.com, iTunes)Advertisement