MAY 1, 2015
Bloowst WindkuThrough May 9 at Here, 145 Avenue of the Americas, at Dominick Street, South Village; 212-352-3101, here.org.“Bloowst Windku,” the title of the dance by Rebecca Davis that debuted at Here on Thursday, is a compression of “bloom, twist, windmill haiku.” The work’s many mostly short, spare segments are indeed haiku-like, separated by the blackouts of Kathy Kaufman’s expert lighting. There’s also a Japanese elegance to the set’s L-shaped screen, artfully constructed from Ms. Davis’s collection of security envelopes. As light slowly dawns through the screen, the blues and grays of its tiles of paper and windows glow golden, like a painting by Gustav Klimt.This transfiguration of everyday materials is beautiful to sit and watch, which is all the captivatingly controlled Carolyn Hall does for a long while. She and Lydia Chrisman and Kay Ottinger spend almost all of the dance’s 55 minutes floor-bound, swapping positions during the blackouts, shifting among seated poses at once languorous, ultraprecise and slightly strange. With their eyelids snapping open and closed or fluttering, they could be androids.At least that’s suggested by Zach Layton’s sound design, which could be the score for an art-house sci-fi film. The whole work establishes that kind of meditative environment, though Ms. Davis squanders much of what she carefully creates. When the women finally stand, it feels momentous, yet the dance just keeps going, as if on autopilot. BRIAN SEIBERTAdvertisementMASSThrough Saturday at the Kitchen, 512 West 19th Street, Chelsea; 212-255-5793, thekitchen.orgThe choreographer Milka Djordjevich and the composer Chris Peck share equal billing for “MASS,” which opened at the Kitchen on Thursday. Their respective materials — the body, sound — merge exquisitely in this hourlong dance-song (song-dance?) for three women on and around a hulking rectangular pedestal.AdvertisementThat set, designed by Sara C. Walsh, calls to mind ceremonial sites like church altars and tombstones. It comes into view slowly, under Madeline Best’s fine-tuned lighting, as do the dancers (Ms. Djordjevich, Kyli Kleven and Jessica Cook, wrapped in Naomi Luppescu’s tricolor pastel costumes). At first we see only the sole of a foot or crook of an elbow rising up and receding behind the platform, submerged in Mr. Peck’s oceanic score. Then come legs and headless torsos, squirming across its surface, dangling over its edge.Ms. Djordjevich is transfixingly patient in her reveal of bodies — pure mass — as people with voices. As the dancers make their way to standing on the ground, linked by crisscrossing arms, they morph into a multitasking choir. A rhythmic, bewitching, increasingly atonal chant overlays a repeating pattern for the legs, with basic ballet steps slightly skewed. Gestures grow more sensuous: circling hips, hands over buttocks and breasts. The words of the hymn describe both the movement’s precision and its room for error: “without imperfections,” “loving the flaw.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.If the body has mass, does the voice have mass? Is music matter? It feels that way in “MASS,” as the song unravels into something wild, then plain, bodies as they are. SIOBHAN BURKELyon Opera BalletThrough Sunday at the Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea; 212-242-0800, joyce.org.The Lyon Opera Ballet wants you to understand that it is not an old-fashioned ballet company. The program at the Joyce Theater on Wednesday culminated in William Forsythe’s 1985 quartet “Steptext,” in which the theater’s lights and a recording of a Bach violin partita keep turning off and on in an ostentatious flouting of theatrical conventions.These coy games of Mr. Forsythe have long since become dull conventions of their own. You have to ignore them to appreciate his stretching of classical vocabulary and syntax. Those more enduring virtues were apparent on Wednesday, with Ashley Wright as the famously extended woman in red. But more speed and force are required if the work’s valuable boldness is to be distinguished from its impertinence.“Sunshine” (2014), an ensemble piece by Emanuel Gat, shares some of Mr. Forsythe’s strategies of frustration. The soundtrack is of an orchestra rehearsing a bit of Handel’s Water Music; perhaps three musical cadences are completed. Resembling a flash mob, the attractive dancers race from one asymmetrical tableau to another, sometimes adding eccentric gestures without the frisson of true strangeness. The piece has the look of an improvisational game, the kind ill suited to a proscenium framing.In Benjamin Millepied’s “Sarabande” (2009), Bach pieces are played live and uninterrupted, and four casually dressed men dance as if the music were inspiring them. Mr. Millepied’s pleasant version of this Jerome Robbins mode is less persuasive in its meandering and would-be playfulness than when it expands into virtuosic turns and leaps. One moment of inspiration is unfeigned. As a section of trio partnering is repeated, a fourth man joins the pattern, and it suddenly feels as though he had been there all along — not like music intermittently heard, but like a ghost. BRIAN SEIBERTWe’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.