By GIA KOURLASMAY 1, 2015
Adrian Danchig-Waring, who made his debut as Apollo on Wednesday at the David H. Koch Theater, didn’t need to be told he had big slippers to fill. The two Apollos of recent seasons at New York City Ballet have been superlative: In Robert Fairchild, there is a raw, athletic exuberance and in Chase Finlay, a cool, unassailable polish. With both unavailable — Mr. Fairchild is performing on Broadway in “An American in Paris,” and Mr. Finlay is recovering from an injury — two new dancers are getting a shot at the lead in George Balanchine’s “Apollo,” the oldest work in the company’s repertory. (On Tuesday, Zachary Catazaro takes over.)When the curtain rose, Mr. Danchig-Waring stood in profile windmilling an arm, slowly, sensually and then with more fervor to Stravinsky’s score. From the start, he seemed less of a boy becoming a god than a jittery animal, alert to his senses and ready to strike, which he did with a flourish in urgent jumps that traveled across the stage.While he didn’t sustain that early intensity — as the ballet drew on, he stiffened into shapes instead of growing into them — he managed to make the most of his body, in which an erect back and muscular thighs can give him the look of a superhero. Though his Apollo never attained real elegance of form, he was absorbingly sinuous.Tiler Peck, with typical poise and creamy musicality, held the ballet together as the muse Terpsichore. Lauren Lovette as Calliope and Ashly Isaacs — who, in a Polyhymnia debut, impressed with a springy jump and crisp pirouettes — infused the performance with gusto. Did they overshoot? A bit — it sometimes felt like Calliope and Polyhymnia were antsy for a night out on the town.Ashley Bouder, Taylor Stanley and members of New York City Ballet in “Square Dance.” Choreography by George Balanchine/George Balanchine TrustThe dances that followed on Wednesday and Thursday, continuing the company’s “Balanchine Black & White” programming, bore traces of “Apollo,” including “Square Dance” (1957), set to music by Vivaldi and Corelli, in which Ashley Bouder matched her pyrotechnical speed with emphatic flourish and lightness — her partner, Taylor Stanley, had trouble keeping up — and “Le Tombeau de Couperin” (1975). Set to Ravel, this ballet for eight couples distills classical ballet into a jewel of manners and modesty for a splendid corps de ballet.AdvertisementThe 1957 masterpiece “Agon” is anchored by a coiling, undulating pas de deux, bracingly performed by Maria Kowroski and Amar Ramasar, who also united for “Stravinsky Violin Concerto” (1972). In each, their pairing was full of vitality. The season is early, but Ms. Kowroski is dancing with newfound impulsiveness; Mr. Ramasar, with more depth himself, gives her the power to be free.Advertisement“Symphony in Three Movements,” from 1972, was sweepingly thrilling. In what other dance do you see such a tremendous female corps de ballet, their ponytails lashing, as they cut across the stage like an exclamation point? Also from 1972 was “Duo Concertant,” which underwent a transformation with the pairing of Anthony Huxley, in a vivid debut, and Ms. Bouder.Both technical wonders, these dancers presented “Duo” as a musical offering grounded by flashing, stretched feet and impeccable carriage. Their relationship hinted more at playmates than lovers, which gave the spot-lit ending the aura of a muse saying goodbye after having passed on the art of dance to a young god.Ms. Bouder could have overpowered Mr. Huxley, but instead she was nurturing, driving him to loosen up and follow her lead: This is our dance and dancing is precious, so let’s live in the moment. The result, of course, is that Balanchine does, too.New York City Ballet’s spring season continues through June 7 at the David H. Koch Theater, Lincoln Center; nycballet.com. A version of this review appears in print on May 2, 2015, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline: Immortality in the Form of Dance.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.