AdvertisementSupported byBy Alastair MacaulayTrisha Brown, one of the founding figures of postmodern dance in the 1960s, choreographed her last work in 2011. Since then, the dance company that bears her name has found ways to keep her work before the public. In its latest project — “Trisha Brown: In Plain Site” — the troupe selects items from her multidecade repertory for specific locations; each of these events will be named for its setting.So the series begins with “Trisha Brown: In Plain Site, 101 Spring Street, NYC” on Friday and Saturday; I attended a preview on Thursday. A five-story 1870 cast-iron building, 101 Spring Street is the former home of the artist Donald Judd and today houses the Judd Foundation. Dances were on the ground, second, fourth and fifth floors. This was the kind of new approach to dance that Ms. Brown helped pioneer: dances that the audience had to walk about to observe in different places.Thursday was a New York idyll, with the huge windows bathing the space with daylight. The dances, however, felt as unlived-in as the building: Everything could have been labeled “of academic and historical interest.” A long-term believer in the best of Ms. Brown’s work, I’m keen to see more “In Plain Site” performances, but they need more dance content and juice. Playfulness, texture, fullness were in short supply.The program consists of five short dances: the solo “Accumulation” (1971) on the ground floor; the male duet “Rogues” (2011) on the second; two quartets, “Sticks IV” (1973) and “Figure Eight” (1974), on the fourth floor; and, in the fifth-floor bedroom, a solo from “M.O.” (1995). Jamie Scott has often been a marvelous dancer (she was one of the last members of the Merce Cunningham Dance Company), but hers was a demure, polite “Accumulation”; and, though Diane Madden was in the original cast of “M.O.” 20 years ago, the same applies to the solo she gave from it. The mood, as in the two quartets, was clinical, dry, contained.Best was “Rogues,” performed here by Marc Crousillat and Stuart Shugg. You could feel the fun of how a leg-swing lifted the foot of the supporting leg off the floor. And, as torsos and limbs tilted and bent in changing lines, you sensed Ms. Brown’s keenly exploratory wit.“Trisha Brown: In Plain Site” runs through Saturday at 101 Spring Street, SoHo; trishabrowncompany.org. Advertisement