By MELENA RYZIKMAY 1, 2015
“You are not dressed if you don’t have your smile on” commands the sign in a Popeyes fried chicken restaurant in Kansas City, Mo. In front of it, a man in an apron, half-smiling, stands over the fryer with a basket of chicken in his tattooed hand.A co-worker captured this everyday moment in a cellphone snapshot, documenting the daily life of low-wage workers. Now it’s framed and showcased in a gallery in Kansas City, for a politically and socially-charged photo exhibition.The photographers were about two dozen employees from chains like McDonald’s, Taco Bell, Subway and Burger King, who turned their cameras on their neighborhoods and families, their errands and needs. They took pictures of greasy burgers, stacks of pre-made fries in cardboard boxes and homes with empty refrigerators and bare living rooms. Children peer out of abutting cribs. A woman’s back-of-the-envelope budget calculation, scrupulously accounting for $1.50 in cash, finds that, after bills at the end of the month, there is barely $77 left over for food, transportation and community college courses.The exhibition aims to show the lives of the working poor, as they push to unionize and increase the minimum wage to $15 an hour. The show, “I, Too, Am America,” opened on Friday — International Workers’ Day — and will run all month at the Talk Shop gallery. In Kansas City, home to leaders in the “Fight for $15” movement, organizers and participants hope that these first-person accounts will help humanize the issue.Advertisement“I want you to understand what it’s like to live in poverty, not being able to pay for the necessities we need,” said Melinda Robinson, 38, and a 22-year-veteran of the fast-food industry, with a $9-an-hour job at Taco Bell, who has been active in the effort to unionize. Even with her husband’s $11 an hour wage as a cabinet builder, they have fallen behind on rent and had their lights cut off. In the exhibition, Ms. Robinson’s photos focus on her seven children, feeding each other bottles or at play with makeshift toys.AdvertisementChristin Fernandez, a spokeswoman for the National Restaurant Association, a trade group that has criticized the call for a higher minimum wage, said that while the photo exhibition “may be well-intentioned, it does not paint the full picture of an industry that provides real pathways to achieving success.”“This is an industry with no barrier to entry,” she added. “Americans of all backgrounds, ages and skill levels can start in a restaurant job and move up quickly.”The idea to track workers’ lives came from the employees themselves; Michael M. Enriquez, an activist with Stand Up KC, a local arm of the Fight for 15 campaign; and Steve Hebert, a freelance photojournalist in Kansas City, who has covered the protests and gotten to know the participants. Over the last year, some of the workers who took part in the project were given smartphones, bought by Stand Up KC, powered only to take photos.They delivered an emotional range of pictures: protests, but also baby showers and funerals. Mr. Hebert, who has covered conflicts in the Middle East, and whose photos have appeared in The New York Times, led monthly reviews of the work. In the end, he received more than 3,900 images, many of which startled even him. “We were trying to train people to turn the cameras on the little things in their lives,” he said. “I started seeing these pictures of empty living rooms; empty refrigerators; the neighborhoods they walked in, with boarded up homes; beds on floors — all these little moments that we take for granted.”In their restaurants, the employees sometimes had to tread lightly, asking permission or skirting their managers. “We didn’t want people to get fired,” said Mr. Hebert, who stressed that they should only point the lens when they felt comfortable. Since the photo project started, the Fight for 15, now 2 1/2 years old, has gained ground; last month, McDonald’s announced that it would raise wages and add benefits at its corporate-owned stores. (Two of the exhibition participants work in corporate stores; the 750,000 people employed at franchises are still unaffected.) In what many activists consider a ripple effect, several cities have  increased their minimum wage to $13 or $15 hourly.Krystal McLemore, a Taco Bell employee featured in the exhibition, saw a metaphor in one of the photos, by Casey Dampier. It shows an empty chair in the center of a dim, barely furnished room, the TV tuned to a court show and a sliver of sunshine entering from the right side of the frame. “That’s a really powerful picture to me,” she said. “It shows, I make do with what I have. The lighting in the picture, it’s light but then it’s also dark; it’s a searching-for-your-way-out kind of picture.” That reminded her of own path to a living wage. “We’re trying to climb through a dark tunnel to get to the light,” she said. “That’s what this campaign is about.”A version of this article appears in print on May 2, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: Snapshots of Life, Taken by Workers Living on the Edge.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.