AdvertisementSupported byBy Mike HaleFew actresses are more fun to watch than Eva Green when she’s in her warrior-princess mode, and Showtime’s “Penny Dreadful” takes full advantage of this fact. Playing an intrepid Victorian monster hunter who communes with the dead and is, inconveniently, semi-possessed by a nasty Egyptian goddess, Ms. Green throws her huge eyes open wide and writhes, jerks and gibbers with spine-tingling grace and gravity. If there were a factor that measured the convergence of sexy, scary, silly and self-aware on television, her performance would top the chart.Ms. Green is the primary (but not only) reason to watch “Penny Dreadful,” which returns for a 10-episode second season on Sunday night. On a weekend when “Avengers: Age of Ultron” is poised to challenge box-office records, “Dreadful” offers a smaller, quieter alternative in the category of tortured bands of heroes uniting to save the world.Reminiscent of Alan Moore’s comic book “The League of Extraordinary Gentlemen” (which was turned into an ordinary feature film in 2003), the show throws together characters from a handful of classic British genre tales, in this case the Dracula, Frankenstein and Dorian Gray stories. It also adds in werewolves, Egyptology and a Bill Hickok-style Wild West-show gunslinger.Season 1 focused on the search by Sir Malcolm Murray (Timothy Dalton) and Vanessa Ives (Ms. Green) for Murray’s daughter, Mina, who had been abducted by a vampirelike creature. They were aided by the American gunman Ethan Chandler (Josh Hartnett) and by a young, callow Victor Frankenstein (Harry Treadaway). In an intertwined plot, Caliban (Rory Kinnear), the result of Frankenstein’s moonlighting in reanimation, came back to haunt his creator, demanding that Frankenstein build him a mate. Season 2 begins with Mina buried, Caliban and Frankenstein waiting for a lightning storm, and Ethan revealed as a werewolf.Chandler — both a strutting showman and a good guy to have around in a fight with vampires or, in the second season’s premiere, naked, hairless female demons — reflects the way the show’s creator and writer, John Logan, makes theatricality and the world of the stage a central motif of “Penny Dreadful.” (Mr. Logan won a Tony Award for the play “Red” before moving on to write big screenplays like “Hugo” and “Skyfall.”)Some of the best moments of Season 1 involved Caliban’s finding refuge as a stagehand for a theater company that put on bloody horror shows. The symbolism — the theater as “a place where the malformed find grace,” the transformation of the gruesome into the sublime — and the connections to “The Elephant Man,” “The Hunchback of Notre Dame” and Vincent Price’s Hammer films were clear but not heavy-handed. While Mr. Logan’s dialogue can be strained (which is perhaps the effect of writing every episode), his structure and his characters have been solid.Equally important, though, has been the show’s casting, the glories of which don’t end with Ms. Green. Mr. Kinnear is one of Britain’s most accomplished stage actors, particularly noted as a Shakespearean, and he’s marvelous as the tragic Caliban, his restraint and quiet intensity bringing out the character’s mix of anger and pathetic loneliness. Another top-rank British theater star, Simon Russell Beale, is hilarious in the smaller role of a fussy Egyptologist. Mr. Hartnett is surprisingly subtle and likable as Chandler, raising his game to match the company around him.Beyond the elaborate production design and the stately but genuinely gory and frightening Gothic bloodletting, “Penny Dreadful” is a fairly typical story of troubled people — all the main characters are hiding something, in their pasts or in their bodies — who manage to do the right thing. That it’s the best of its kind on TV right now, along with “The Strain” on FX, has to do with Mr. Logan’s ability to render over-the-top action and emotions in human terms and to choose actors who can see what he’s trying to do.Advertisement