Spirits were high at the Apollo Theater on Monday night, when the New York Dance and Performance Awards, known as the Bessies, were handed out. Lucy Sexton, the  executive director of the awards, was not the only participant to remark on the difficulties that New York dance artists face, but she also noted that the number of dance companies in the city was higher than it was a decade ago. “We haven’t all moved to Detroit,” she said.The performance artist Carmelita Tropicana and Jock Soto, a former principal dancer with New York City Ballet, were the hosts, trading quips and a feathered headdress throughout the evening. The award categories, which have been comically unwieldy in the past, followed a more simplified model adopted last year, with lots of nominees and lots of winners.  Twelve people were nominated for outstanding performer, and five won: Lauren Grant (of the Mark Morris Dance Group); Amar Ramasar (of New York City Ballet); Ryoji Sasamoto (in Kota Yamazaki’s “OQ”); Melissa Toogood (for work with an astonishingly long list of companies and choreographers, just in the past year); and, for work with Ivy Baldwin Dance, Lawrence Cassella, who died recently. Twelve shows were nominated for outstanding production, and four won: Dorrance Dance and Toshi Reagon’s “The Blues Project,” David Neumann’s “I Understand Everything Better,” Justin Peck’s “Rodeo: Four Dance Episodes” for New York City Ballet and Roger Guenveur Smith’s “Rodney King.” The award for outstanding revival went to Alexei Ratmansky’s “The Sleeping Beauty” at American Ballet Theater. Camille A. Brown, whose “Mr. TOL E. RAncE” won outstanding production last year, performed the closing solo from that work. Storyboard P, who won outstanding emerging choreographer this year, also performed, although, perhaps in tribute to the theater, he mostly let himself be upstaged by Moses Harper, a skilled Michael Jackson impersonator.  Lisa Nelson danced a duet with a piece of string in honor of Steve Paxton, the winner of the lifetime achievement award. Mr. Paxton, who is performing in France this week, gave his thanks via a prerecorded video, repeating the words “thank you” in various intonations and rhythms. Then, over Skype, he recommended that “everybody do a piece of choreography in your life,” adding, “It’s very handy.”The loudest ovation came for the winner of service to the field of dance: Movement Research, a collective organization that has organized classes, publications and performances for nearly four decades. A quarter of the audience, it seemed, flooded onstage to accept the award. A version of this article appears in print on 10/21/2015, on page C3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Big Ears Festival Announces Its Lineup.