

Season 4, Episode 4: “Tehran”“I could not be more likable if I’d given both of my kidneys to some sick kid!” crows President Selina Meyer, giddy with adrenaline after helping secure the release of an American jailed in Iran. “God almighty! Gary, I want some champagne.”We first see Selina in the cabin of Air Force One. Her Middle East trip has gone unexpectedly well, largely because she’s been put in the position of “negotiating” the release of Leon West, a reporter. That her administration also allowed him to be detained for two weeks seems of no import.But her almost delirious joy — heightened only by the delirious sleep-deprivation of the now Ambien-addled Ben — quickly heads south. First, a newly released Leon quickly realizes he’s been exploited for political purposes, and threatens to share his story.“Some people might think that the American government detaining an American journalist so that you can have a photo op might look bad,” Leon tells the president. “Can you see that?”Indeed she can, settling on the only course of action she can think of — holding Leon hostage yet again, this time on Air Force One, to prevent him from getting back to the press plane and spilling the beans. Even though Mike and Gary are not on board, she orders the plane to take off immediately.“Leon, you gotta sit down,” says an increasingly drowsy Ben. “I’m a bad flier and I might need somebody to hold me.”“Are you seriously detaining me again?” demands Leon, not too outraged to note the irony. “Am I being rendered?”“No,” comes the reply from Ben, “You’re being friendered, so just please accept our compulsory hospitality.”Air Force One begins taxiing — and Mike and Gary, inside the terminal, are horrified when they look out the window to see the giant Boeing VC-25 lifting off.“Oh my God, what the hell is happening?” cries Gary. “Why are they leaving us?”“Are we at war?” wonders Mike — the only possible reason he can fathom for being left behind, and a telling glimpse into the benign narcissism that exists in all of the characters on “Veep.”Back in Washington, informed that Mike and Gary have been left behind in Iran, Selina’s communications director says: “Wonderful. ‘Black Hawk Down’ with Laurel and Hardy.”And so begins a frantic effort to get out of Tehran through any means possible, even if it means the press plane, where Selina’s aides are roundly disdained. Beginning to dump airline liquor bottles into clear plastic bags, Mike explains that their only path is through bribery: “We have booze, Gary, and they have a crippling dependency,” he says. “In a dry country, the man with all the booze holds the cards.”But as they run through the airport, one of the bags breaks, sending the miniature bottles skittering everywhere and setting up the best physical comedy scene of the episode, as Gary and Mike flop around the airport floor, trying to collect them.“Pick them up! Pick them up!” Mike urges. “I don’t want to go to jail over here. We’ve got about 10 seconds to drink everything and then eat the bottles.”Elsewhere, Selina is fending off more bad news, in the form of Vice President Doyle. Doyle’s team, having learned that Kent — despite promises not to — has polled people about replacing Doyle on the ticket, is livid. They have decided to beat Team Potus at its own game, leaking news that the vice president is unhappy with the top of the ticket and is thinking about bolting.In a seemingly counterintuitive move, Selina’s aides decide that the only way to combat Doyle’s disloyalty is to tell him and his staff about the data breach from episode three; it will bind him to them, they reason, by implicating him, as well.“God, that is some elaborate self-sabotage right there,” Amy says when informed of the plan. “That is Cirque du Soleil suicide bombing.”Turning to Dan, her unlikely companion at the bar, she moans: “I feel like I’m on a life-support machine and they keep pulling the plug — to charge their phones.”Selina’s initial high has also disappeared and, stuck in the cabin of Air Force One, she turns to Ben. “Why don’t I know what’s going on here?” she asks. “I’m supposed to have my finger on the button. But for all I know, it’s been rewired and I’m just operating some sort of light in a closet somewhere.”And herein lies the crux of the show, and the dirty secret, it often feels, of actually being president — her finger should be on the button, ready to launch a nuclear warhead. But more often than not, she could not be more powerless, simply struggling to respond to forces outside her control. It’s hard to imagine that most modern presidents don’t sometimes feel the same way.The episode ends with Mike sprawled dejectedly on the airport floor, glumly talking into his cellphone: “I’m not going to make it to the cottage, Wendy,” he tells his wife. “I’m in Iran. Turns out you can’t buy a boarding pass with tiny bottles of Jack Daniel’s.”Great Lines• Dan, who has taken a job in a lobbying shop, is asked to go up against Amy on CNN as a talking head. But he must also accommodate an odd request — one of his firm’s clients is a maker of candied glacé cherries, and it wants him to mention the fruit in his talking points.“You could say, uh, that the president’s Iran visit puts a delicious glacé cherry on the cake of Selina Meyer’s tour,” Dan says on air, offering a little shimmy of private triumph.• Selina, upon learning of the plan to tell the vice president of the data breach — in which stolen data was used to target recently bereaved parents with direct mail — upbraids her aides to at least use code words. Use “cupcake” instead of “data,” she suggests, and “happy” instead of “bereaved.” The ensuing linguistic gymnastics are wonderful.“He will be as involved as the rest of us, in targeting happy parents after stealing cupcakes about their dead children,” tries Kent, referring to Doyle.“Fine, inject him with the happy cupcake virus,” Selina retorts. “I hope he swells up and dies. That’s not code, by the way.”Later, Selina laments to Ben how her presidency has spiraled out of control: “Leon, Kent’s polling, dead kids baked in the cupcakes.”Indeed.