Season 6, Episode 21: “Don’t Fail”Florrick Polmar. Get used to it — you may be seeing it on business cards, briefings boxes and even a conference room wall before long.The next-to-last “Good Wife” episode of this season took care of a lot of business. It got Alicia Florrick out of her post-political-scandal funk and back into a courtroom. It gave fans some Kalinda closure after the character’s abrupt departure last week. (The show’s creators have indicated that Archie Panjabi’s Kalinda will appear in the season finale next week as well, presumably not restricted to flashbacks as she was here.)And walking back the sleaze and cynicism of the season-long state’s attorney campaign, it restored (awfully quickly) some of Alicia’s old idealism. After a conveniently timed encounter with a former client put her at the defense table — where she used her six seasons of experience to once again bend the rules, this time for the right reasons — she summoned Finn Polmar and asked him to join her in a new firm. To make their relationship legal, as it were. Yes, she acknowledged, she’d done this before. But now she’d only take on cases that mattered.We’ll see how that goes. In the meantime, it was an episode (written by the show’s creators, Michelle and Robert King) that had some very nice touches. The opening scene was a neat illustration of Alicia’s suspended state of boredom and humiliation after being forced to drop out of the state’s attorney’s election that she had honestly won. Sitting for an interview with the ghost writer of the memoir that will never be written, she kept breaking away eagerly to take calls — “this might be from my campaign” — that turned out to be marketing robopitches. (The writer was played by Ian Unterman, who looked for just a moment as if he might be her therapist.) The theme continued as we watched the stir-crazy Alicia refinishing a door (seriously?), peering into her college-dorm-empty refrigerator (bottled water, mustard, pickles) and continually looking at the clock. Finally it was time to pop the red wine and crack a smile. She was given something useful to do when a package arrived from Eli with the phone numbers of donors she needed to call and thank. That was the set-up for the case of the week, the first in quite a while to involve Alicia directly. (Diane, who’s been carrying the courtroom weight all season, appeared in the episode only briefly, in a flashback.) The former client, Brett Tatro (Dorian Missick of “Southland”), a strip-club bouncer she had defended in an attempted-murder case six years before, was now being accused of murder because the victim had died of a stroke. Alicia, hesitant at first — “I can’t take another failure,” she told Finn, to which he replied with the episode’s title, “Don’t fail” — eventually signed on as co-counsel with Brett’s inexperienced lawyer, Amber (Aya Cash, up-and-coming star of FX’s “You’re the Worst”). Her heart was in the right place, but it also helped that her old adversary Matan made the big mistake of being insufferably smug when he saw her and making a belittling reference to Peter. Alicia won, of course, getting the case thrown out by impugning the reputation of the original detective on the case in a way that was underhanded but not strictly illegal. She won the respect of the sympathetic but impatient judge (the always welcome Kurt Fuller) and avoided a contempt of court citation. The trial’s real importance, though, was as an exercise in nostalgia. The original case was retrospectively cast as the first one on which Alicia and Cary had worked together, and Cary returned in the present to help her out. (They seemed unnaturally chummy given that Cary had acquiesced in Alicia’s being tossed aside by her old firm the week before.) And it was also portrayed as the case that brought Alicia and Kalinda together as friends. Alicia flashed back to sharing a drink with Kalinda, during which Kalinda began her role as guru, telling her, “It’s all right for you to do everything within the law” to defend a client. Oh that Kalinda, always right. Soon Alicia was imparting the same wisdom to the chirpy, idealistic Amber. And the cycle of law goes on.The Kings worked in even more sentiment, in a manipulative but effective scene in which Alicia discovered that an audio tape that was an important piece of evidence had been recorded over by her mother-in-law, Jackie, who used it to help Zach practice a presentation. That led into a truly nice scene in which Alicia, having been inspired to get back on the horse, had Grace help her clean out Zach’s room and set it up as a temporary office, using the unfinished door as a desktop. At that point Zach called from college (apparently for the first time in a while) and announced he was coming home for a visit. Oops.The episode, with its theme of cleansing and its quiet tone, felt more like an early- than a late-season episode. Assuming there will be some sort of cliff-hanging drama in next week’s finale, where do you think it will come from? Trouble between Alicia and Finn? Trouble between Alicia and Lockhart Agos & Lee? A revelation of duplicity on the part of Peter (the betting favorite of some of our commenters)? Let us know where you think this is going, and register your thoughts on “Don’t Fail,” in the comments. (One more nostalgic, bow-tying touch: Did you notice the name on the file boxes from the earlier case when they arrived at Alicia’s apartment? Stern Lockhart & Gardner, the firm as it existed before Hurricane Alicia changed everything.)