Here be spoilers and snakes.Season 5, Episode 4: “The Sons of the Harpy”Sunday’s episode of “Game of Thrones” felt like the first one of the fifth season to have a bit of the old verve. After Season 4 capped off so many subplots — Tywin vs. Tyrion, Arya vs. the Hound and Night’s Watch vs. the Wildlings, among others — the first few episodes back had to set several new pieces of the story into motion. This was the first hour in which they felt like they were cruising along under their own power.Parallel developments transpired all over the known world. The Lannister brothers each took fateful boat trips, religious sects sparked panic in the streets of King’s Landing and Meereen, and Rhaegar Targaryen, a dead cypher who nevertheless casts a broad shadow over this story, made what I think was his first substantive appearance in the show, as the subject of lore, in separate conversations held thousands of miles apart.It was also a brutal week, after the expository drift of the first few episodes — though Janos, Mance Rayder and a few flayed northerners might counter that they were plenty eventful — gave way to blood-letting from sea to narrow sea. Ser Barristan and that greedy Pentosi ship captain arguably got the worst of it, but there was plenty to go around.[Interview: Keisha Castle-Hughes On the Sand Snakes]Even Tyrion took one across the chops, as we received confirmation that Jorah did, in fact, aim to buy his way back into Khaleesi’s good graces with the gift of a rich black sheep on the lam.The fantasy epic on HBO.We opened on Jorah decking some poor fisherman, taking his boat and dropping Tyrion inside like a sack of dirty clothes. “What a waste of a good kidnapping,” Tyrion mocked once he had learned the destination, which, combined with his incisive needling and hilariously annoying gag-singing, was more than Jorah could bear. Out went Tyrion’s lights — see you next week, maybe.Jorah’s backhand was a better fate than Tyrion’s brother plans to confer, we were led to believe. “If I ever see him, I’ll split him in two,” Jaime told Bronn, a far more agreeable shipmate than either Tyrion or Jorah, based on the evidence.Do we believe Jaime? I certainly don’t. (I do believe he feels deeply betrayed.) But such is the power of Cersei’s hold on him, he says what she wants to hear even when she’s not around to hear it.Bronn knows the score, all but openly defying Jaime when he described Myrcella as his “niece.” Later, Bronn went even more explicitly there during a game of How Do You Want to Die?“In the arms of the woman I love,” Jaime answered.“Does she want the same thing?”Well not at the moment, Bronn, which is why we’re on this daunting mission that I’m afraid will end in your death. (Man I hope not but I don’t feel great about it.) That said, Bronn did get the best of that totally undeadly milk snake (red-on-black, although perhaps the Westerosi reptile kingdom diverges from our own) so let’s hope the foreshadowing bodes well for him.Any further pondering would have to wait, at any rate, until after Bronn and Jaime dispatched a posse of Dornish swordsmen. It was an excellent scene, inventive and visually coherent even as swords swung frenetically, horses tossed their stuntmen and fighters tumbled down hills. Jaime passed his first hand-to-gold-hand combat test and discovered a new superpower in the process, as the Kingslayer became the Swordcatcher.But it was all just a warm-up, we know, for the eventual Sand Snake showdown to come.And how about those Sand Snakes, who finally made their debut? They have been  some of the most eagerly anticipated new characters of the season, thanks to that objectively awesome shot in the trailers of one of them bull-whipping a barrel off the head of a man buried up to the neck. The episode dispensed with that quickly — we now know that the immobilized, scorpion-draped and soon-to-be-skewered head belonged to the ship captain Jaime paid for his silence, or so he thought. (Jaime’s assumption that the man would remain quiet seemed implausibly credulous, as Bronn wearily pointed out. But Jaime’s never been the sharpest sword in the armory.)In case it wasn’t clear: the Sand Snakes are the illegitimate daughters of the late, besplattered Oberyn Martell, raised as warriors and out to avenge their dad’s death. (There are apparently more of them in the books.) I’m not sure whether they realize Oberyn volunteered for the fight that ended his life. I certainly wouldn’t count on the revenge-addled Ellaria Sand to share that tidbit, lest it mitigate the bloodlust she hopes to unleash on the nearest Lannister.Tyene, the one with the daggers, belongs to Ellaria. The others — Obara, with spear, and Nymeria, with whip — kept their distance but confirmed that they, too, were on board. Will it be peace or war? Ellaria asked. “I made my choice long ago,” Obara said, moments after airing out the captain’s melon. And the wheel of vengeance rolls on and on …Another version of the same, meanwhile, took rowdy shape in King’s Landing. We wondered last week about Cersei’s eventual plans for both the Sparrows and Margaery, and we didn’t have to wait long. That escalated quickly.Cousin Lancel warned in the premiere that the Sparrows were ready to dole out some justice and on Sunday, as they morphed into the Faith Militant, we saw what their version looks like. Surprise: it’s violent and intolerant and self-serving. When has that ever been the case with sectarian militants? (Lancel, you stooge, you may have found religion and scarified yourself but Cersei’s still using you.)Did Cersei’s deal with the High Sparrow-cum-Septon scan to you? Seemed a little drastic, right? Cersei going straight from drawing-room gibes to the nuclear option in her beef with the daughter-in-law.We knew something was afoot when she sent Lord Tyrell away with her flunky, Meryn Trant, but she had to know that in elevating the High Sparrow and arming his followers, she was neutering her delicate boy-king in the process. And by allowing — encouraging, actually — Loras to be imprisoned, she’s bascially deep-sixing her relationship with the Tyrells, which is the only thing keeping the Lannisters financially afloat. In addition, Cersei knows too much about the nature of power to think she can just cram the Sparrow genie back in the bottle when it suits her.The case in favor, from a narrative standpoint: Cersei is cornered. Her father is dead, her son is married to a sexy usurper and is trying to shunt her off to Casterly Rock, where she’s presumably not all that welcome anyway, seeing as it’s overseen by Uncle Kevan. She doesn’t even have her one-handed brother-lover around anymore to protect her. We know Cersei’s credo; we know she plays for keeps.But I don’t see how this can ultimately work out in her favor, especially once Lady Olenna Tyrell gets involved. (Lady Tyrell perhaps has all this coming, karmically speaking, after helping to kill Joffrey, although Cersei doesn’t know that.) So we shall see.As homophobic terrorism raged in Westeros, Ser Barristan regaled Daenerys Targaryen in Meereen with tales of her brother Rhaegar, who died before Dany was born and who, you’ll recall from the flashback in the premiere, was briefly intended to wed Cersei before he paired off with other key ladies in the story (more on that below). It was a generous, warm-hearted moment, the kind that usually signifies, if you’re a sympathetic minor character on this show, that you’re about to die.Sure enough, Harpies were soon rampaging and, aided again by the Mata Hari of Meereen, they cornered the Unsullied and took them apart. Ser Barristan fought bravely one last time but the gold masked ones were too numerous, and he and Grey Worm, former knight and former slave, fell together in defense of the democratic dragon republic. Ser Barristan seemed pretty dead, alas, but I’m crossing my fingers that Grey Worm — maybe, perhaps, hopefully — might live to fight again. He’s certainly survived worse.In some ways it was Rhaegar Targaryen, who died years before the show started, who tied together the various threads this week. In general I’m reluctant to go too deeply into the show’s labyrinthine lore — and I haven’t read the books, I’m just piecing it together like any other viewer — but it did come up this week, so …The story Littlefinger told Sansa in the Winterfell crypt, of Rhaegar throwing over his wife (Oberyn’s sister) in favor of Lyanna Stark (Ned’s sister), seems to be more or less the inciting incident of the show. The war that followed led eventually to Dany’s exile, the ever more tangled relationships between the Baratheons, Starks and Lannisters, the Martell revenge quest.Yes that Rhaegar was quite a guy, Sansa responded, abducting and raping my aunt and all. Littlefinger held his tongue and one wonders: does that sound like the actions of a man who, as Ser Barristan said, would rather sing than kill?At Castle Black, meanwhile, Stannis countered his wife’s digs about Jon Snow’s illicit parentage: “That wasn’t Ned Stark’s way.” This aligns with a popular fan theory that has Jon’s actual parents being Lyanna and Rhaegar, which could potentially give Jon both great abilities and a claim on the Iron Throne. “There’s power in you,” Melisandre told him later. “You resist it and that’s your mistake.” Also, you know nothing, per usual.Maybe the rest of us do, too. Make of all this what you will. I’m only the raven here.(Homework: Read the preceding few paragraphs to someone who’s never watched “Game of Thrones.” Enjoy the reaction.)A few thoughts while we hug our daughter• “Greyscale,” the leprous skin disease that afflicts little Shireen and those godforsaken “Stone Men” out in Valyria, keeps coming up this season and I can’t quite figure out why. That was a nice scene between Shireen and Stannis — hats off to young Kerry Ingram and Stephen Dillane — but come on, are we really supposed to believe that the sullen Lord of Dragonstone is really some doting father who… what’s that? Oh it’s nothing. Just some dust in my eye…• Speaking of tender moments, did you catch Jaime the sentimentalist reflecting warmly when the merchant ship passed Tarth, home of his old pal Brienne?• “Aren’t you and mother getting along?” Oh Tommen, you adorable doofus.• Jon Snow has to wonder what it will take for people to stop telling him he knows nothing. I keep wanting him to flip out — “I DO know stuff! I’m the Lord Commander! I’m a man!” — but it seems unlikely. (I do realize, of course, he was shaken by memories of Ygritte when Melisandre said it.)• Maester Pycelle, after Lord Tyrell’s speedy send-off: “The small council grows smaller and smaller.” Cersei: “Not small enough.” I never tire of watching her belittle that guy.• All the boating this week reminded me of Gendry. Remember him? The Baratheon bastard who Melisandre got freaky-leechy with back in Season 3? He was last seen leaving Dragonstone in a skiff, rowing toward King’s Landing, and he hasn’t been seen since. Last year I called him this show’s Russian in the woods and with each passing week this seems more likely, but I haven’t given up hope. I believe in you Gendry!• What say you? Will Bronn survive the Dornish adventure? If he doesn’t, will he at least give the singers a good ending? What’s your favorite recipe for grilled snake? Feel free to weigh in on whatever in the comments.