LONDON — Emma Rice, the co-artistic director of Kneehigh, a spectacle-based theater company headquartered in Cornwall, England, will take over as the next artistic director of Shakespeare’s Globe in the spring of 2016, the theater announced.Ms. Rice will serve as the company’s third artistic director, after Dominic Dromgoole and the actor Mark Rylance. Mr. Dromgoole, like Mr. Rylance, will have held his position for a decade when he steps down. The theater publicly announced the search for Mr. Dromgoole’s successor in January.At Kneehigh, Ms. Rice has created a number of productions that incorporate music, dance and elements of the circus — like a spin on the medieval fable “Tristan & Yseult;” a re-working of the Hans Christian Andersen fable “Red Shoes;” and an adaptation of the movie “Brief Encounter” that moved to Studio 54.  In large part due to Ms. Rice’s adaptations, the company — which was founded in 1980, and which she runs with Mike Shepherd — has expanded in recent years from a well-regarded local enterprise to one of the United Kingdom’s best-known theaters, with a significant presence in London’s commercial West End and on international tours.The appointment still comes as something of a surprise: Ms. Rice’s major Shakespeare-related directing credit is a re-working of “Cymbeline,” which she created for Kneehigh and the Royal Shakespeare Company in 2006.Mr. Dromgoole, a prolific director, has overseen a busy period for the Globe, which last winter completed construction of its Sam Wanamaker Playhouse, a candlelit theater, and the second major stage on the Globe’s South Bank campus. Mr. Dromgoole has also overseen “Globe to Globe Hamlet,” a tour of “Hamlet” that the company plans to take to every country in the world by the spring of 2016 (it has already visited around half of them). Mr. Dromgoole will step down when the tour finishes next spring.In a statement, Mr. Dromgoole called the choice of Ms. Rice an “excellent appointment.” He said: “Emma has created at Kneehigh a body of work that shares the same principles of imagination, populism, wit and passion that have always been central to the Globe. Kneehigh have also pulled off the same happy trick of a fierce local attachment in Cornwall and a broad international reach, which is so important to the Globe.”A version of this article appears in print on 05/04/2015, on page C3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Shakespeareu2019s Globe Gets New Director.