AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn Shattuck10 P.M. (Showtime) PENNY DREADFUL Drawing on characters from 19th-century literature and historical events like the Jack the Ripper murders, the series begins a second season as Vanessa Ives (Eva Green, above) is haunted by macabre occult images conjured by the mysterious Evelyn Poole (Helen McCrory). Ethan Chandler (Josh Hartnett), meanwhile, decides to leave London in the aftermath of the massacre he committed at the Mariner’s Inn. The Creature (Rory Kinnear) pressures Dr. Frankenstein (Harry Treadaway) to resurrect Brona (Billie Piper). And Sir Malcolm (Timothy Dalton) returns to London to encounter a new evil. Mike Hale, writing in The New York Times, called the show “the best of its kind on TV right now.”10 A.M. (E!) JULIE & JULIA (2009) Meryl Streep, left, portrays the chef Julia Child in this film written and directed by Nora Ephron. Amy Adams is Julie Powell, who spends a year working her way through “Mastering the Art of French Cooking” (Ms. Child was one of the authors) and blogging about it. “By now this actress has exhausted every superlative that exists, and to suggest that she has outdone herself is only to say that she’s done it again,” A. O. Scott wrote in The Times about Ms. Streep. “Her performance goes beyond physical imitation, though she has the rounded shoulders and the fluting voice down perfectly.” In “It’s Complicated” (2009), at noon on TBS, Ms. Streep plays Jane Adler, a California restaurateur who is blindsided by advances from her ex-husband (Alec Baldwin), who left her a decade earlier for a pretty young thing (Lake Bell). Steve Martin is thrown into the mix as Jane’s architect, and he is not without his own charms. Writing in The Times, Manohla Dargis called this a “pleasurable, daffy if at times daft” comedy from Nancy Meyers that “transforms a divorced couple into a romantic couple, which suggests a belief in love enduring even after a marriage dies.”10 A.M. (Fox) FOX NEWS SUNDAY Representative Donna Edwards, Democrat of Maryland, discusses the protests in Baltimore after the death of Freddie Gray.10:30 A.M. (CBS) FACE THE NATION Cornell William Brooks, the president of the N.A.A.C.P., talks of events in Baltimore; also, a report on the recovery efforts after the earthquake in Nepal.10:30 A.M. (NBC) MEET THE PRESS The House speaker, John A. Boehner, discusses the actions of the six Baltimore officers charged in the death of Freddie Gray, and the relationship between African-Americans and the police around the country.8 P.M. (13, 49) CALL THE MIDWIFE A diabetic teenager whose boyfriend has a criminal past becomes pregnant. At 9, the characters of “Mr. Selfridge” spiral into despair. And in “Wolf Hall,” at 10, Henry VIII (Damian Lewis) starts to eye Jane Seymour (Kate Phillips) with Anne Boleyn (Claire Foy) pregnant and away from court.8 P.M. (CBS) MADAM SECRETARY Elizabeth (Téa Leoni) remembers a job offer that would have changed the course of her life. In “The Good Wife,” at 9, Alicia (Julianna Margulies) remembers her early days as a lawyer.10:30 P.M. (HBO) VEEP Selina (Julia Louis-Dreyfus, left) makes a trip to Iran as part of her Middle East peace-talks tour. Back in Washington, Vice President Doyle (Phil Reeves) takes her place at a Rainbow Jersey event with a gay N.B.A. star.What’s Streaming NowCURTAIN: POIROT’S LAST CASE In August “Agatha Christie’s Poirot” ended its 25-year run as an ailing Poirot (David Suchet) returned with Captain Hastings (Hugh Fraser) to Styles, the gloomy estate where they solved their first murder, to work their final case — this one involving a string of suicides that may not be what it seems. For the first time Acorn TV has submitted the show for Emmy consideration, based on this finale, which had its premiere in the United States. (acorn.tv)PENNY DREADFUL Benny and Rafi Fine, the brothers behind the React video series, recap the first season of Showtime’s “Penny Dreadful” in a fast-talking eight-minute take that dedicates one minute to each episode. (sho.com)Advertisement