Lupita Nyong’o is coming to Broadway.The film star and fashion icon, who won an Academy Award for her role in “12 Years a Slave” and who next appears in “Star Wars: The Force Awakens,” will reprise on Broadway a role she is now playing in an Off Broadway production of “Eclipsed” at the Public Theater. The play is a wrenching drama about the relationships among a group of women who are detained and raped by a Liberian rebel officer; the Public production has been extended twice and is sold out.“Eclipsed,” by Danai Gurira, will be the rare play written by a woman to get a Broadway production. Thus far this season there is only one other that has been announced: “Thérèse Raquin,” an adaptation by the British playwright Helen Edmundson of the novel by Émile Zola. “Eclipsed,” which is scheduled to begin Broadway performances in February, will arrive seven years after another acclaimed play that dealt with rape in Africa, “Ruined,” by Lynn Nottage, won the Pulitzer Prize. That play’s failure to make it to Broadway, despite its honors and multiple extensions of its Off Broadway run, has been the subject of some handwringing in the theater community.“Broadway will be better for having ‘Eclipsed’ on it, and I hope it will break a barrier that will stay broken, if it proves that shows like this can make it on Broadway,” Oskar Eustis, the artistic director of the Public Theater, said. “It’s an incredibly emotional play, and by the end very deeply touching and harrowing, and yet Danai has written it so beautifully it ultimately feels life-affirming, about how women in horrible circumstances are able to find their own agency.”The production of “Eclipsed” will join a Broadway season already noted for its unusual diversity, including “Amazing Grace” (about a British slave trader who becomes an abolitionist), “Hamilton” (which uses black and Hispanic actors to play America’s Founding Fathers), “Spring Awakening” (featuring deaf actors), “The Gin Game” (with James Earl Jones and Cicely Tyson in roles previously played by white actors), “On Your Feet!” (about the rise of Gloria and Emilio Estefan), “Allegiance,” (about Japanese-American internment camps), “The Color Purple,” (about black women in rural Georgia), “Hughie” (featuring Forest Whitaker in a lead role previously played by white actors) and “Shuffle Along” (about an unusual early 20th Century musical that featured a black cast). Not only does “Eclipsed” deal with a subject matter little seen on Broadway but it also has the rare diverse team behind it, including not only Ms. Gurira, who is Zimbabwean-American, and Ms. Nyong’o, who was born in Mexico and raised in Kenya, but also a director born in South Africa, Liesl Tommy, and two African-American lead producers, Stephen Byrd and Alia Jones-Harvey.“There’s a market out there that has not really been addressed with plays that can draw a cross-section of people to theater,” Mr. Byrd said. “It’s going to be an interesting season, and it’s very healthy for Broadway.”Mr. Byrd said the production of “Eclipsed” was driven by Ms. Nyong’o — he said she had turned down three film opportunities because she was so committed to doing the play.Ms. Gurira, a prolific playwright, is best known for an acting role: she plays  the  sword-wielding Michonne in television’s “The Walking Dead.”The Public production of “Eclipsed” is scheduled to end Nov. 29; the Broadway production (with the Public Theater among the co-producers) is to begin previews Feb. 23 and have an official opening March 6 at the Golden Theater (now home to “The Gin Game”). Mr. Byrd said he expected the run to last 17 weeks, and to include the same cast as the Public Theater production.A version of this article appears in print on 10/21/2015, on page C3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Nyongu2019o, in u2018Eclipsed,u2019 Is Heading to Broadway.