AdvertisementSupported byPlaylistBy Ben RatliffEve RisserDES PAS SUR LA NEIGE The French pianist Eve Risser works with improvised ensembles of many sizes: a duo with the Japanese drummer Yuko Oshima called Donkey Monkey; a quartet called the New Songs; an 11-piece group with brass and electronics called White Desert Orchestra. But some of her strongest work happens when she plays alone. “Des Pas Sur La Neige” (“Footprints in the Snow”) (Clean Feed) is her first solo piano recording, three long pieces that remain quiet and complex, elegant but tense. It’s not any kind of typical free-improvisation piano record; in fact, piano notes created in the customary way, by striking a key, are in the minority among the sounds on this record. Most of what you hear is made by scraping and tapping and knocking and brushing inside the instrument, in focused, flexible patterns. (There’s also a great sense of physical space in this recording, produced either by multiple microphones or overdubs, as well as some layers of sound I can’t quite place, including a faint electronic tone.) The album lasts for little more than an hour, and remains cohesive in concept and sound. It’s great not to know exactly how she does that.Van HuntTHE FUN RISES, THE FUN SETS After a number of tries releasing his idiosyncratic neo-soul through various major labels, the singer and songwriter Van Hunt moved from Atlanta to Los Angeles and struck out on his own, recording almost all the parts of his new music himself and making his music wobble in whatever directions he pleased. “The Fun Rises, the Fun Sets,” on his own label, Godless Hotspot, is the second of these no-boundaries records since 20011; as of now he sounds sort of like an imagined scenario of solitary weirdos collaborating across the aisle of rock and funk, as if R. Stevie Moore at the time of “Glad Music” and Sly Stone at the time of “Fresh” worked on tracks together. Choppy rhythm-guitar lines, super-spartan funk rhythms, falsettos and background sounds blur together through bizarre twists of song structure; it’s like walking through a series of trapdoors. This is Mr. Hunt’s preferred zone: Some people need to be free to do what they want to do, looking for a kind of music that has no name or direct pedigree. “Teach me a new language,” he sings in a song with that title. “A world without words/No noun or verb in the way.” Casey JTHE TRUTH The young singer and elementary school teacher Casey J, from Atlanta, is working on a version of gospel that deviates slightly from the commercial gospel norm — a little less thundering funk and abrupt style-switching, and a little more acoustic guitar; a little less prescriptive real-talk, and a little more contemplative interior monologue. “The Truth” (Tyscot), her first album, was mostly recorded at Fresh Start Church in Duluth, Ga. And its sound is typical for the genre, as well as some of its repertory, with songs building up to strong repetitions and emotional surges, whether with rock beats and echoing, U2-like guitars, new-country stomps, or power-ballad dynamics. (“Fill Me Up” is her current, five-and-a-half-minute, extended-praise showstopper, hitting its first high mark with a church-bell tone a little before two minutes in, and thereafter setting up one peak after another.) But there are also suggestions of what sets her apart: “Journal,” which starts with the sound of pencil scratches and admits to fear and unworthiness; “No Not One,” a short and traditional spiritual sung with her grandmother Dorothy Mae Choates; and the half-ambient, half-zealous “Have Your Way,” with the singer Jason Nelson, master of the slow burn.William BasinskiCASCADE The latest record by William Basinski, builder of tape loops, repeater of sonic excerpts, long-game manipulator of feelings, works on your hearing much the same as his other albums (including his four-album opus “The Disintegration Loops,” from 2002-3). “Cascade” (2062 Records) is a single 40-minute piece that uses a recorded clip of solo piano music, about nine seconds long, repeating in staggered layers, gradually altered through reverb and becoming blurry both in fidelity and tonality. (It sounds basically minor-key, but with the all the bleed-through it’s hard to tell what notes you’re hearing exactly.) At the end there’s a small surprise, a change in direction. The standard comment about Mr. Basinski’s work is that its evocation of decay grips your emotions and reduces you to jelly, though I don’t get that so much from “Cascade.” More so from “The Deluge,” a live variation of the same piece performed at Issue Project Room in Brooklyn, and available as a free download with “Cascade,” which you can order from mmlxii.com. It’s even more blurry, more amniotic; the tones dissolve into what sound like choirs of the dead. And it has an even more startling ending.Advertisement