By ROSLYN SULCASMAY 1, 2015
“Yesssss!” Peter Martins yelled with relish, as he pulled a scarf out of a caldron and brandished it overhead. “Wipe the floor with him!” Mr. Martins was enthusiastically demonstrating a moment in his new production of “La Sylphide,” when the witch Madge gives a poisoned scarf to the hero James. Two dancers, watching nearby, laughed. “He is so enjoying this,” one said to the other.Members of New York City Ballet, which will present the premiere of “La Sylphide,” together with “Bournonville Divertissements,” at the company’s spring gala on Thursday, were onstage in late February at the David H. Koch Theater, enjoying the unusual luxury of an orchestra and costume rehearsal three months before opening night. And Mr. Martins, the company’s ballet master in chief, was making the most of the opportunity to show the dancers just how clearly the ballet’s extensive mime passages and varieties of dance tone had to read to the audience.“La Sylphide,” created in 1836 by the Danish choreographer August Bournonville (who took the idea from an 1832 version by Filippo Taglioni), is set to music by Herman Lovenskjold, and offers the tale of a young Scottish farmer, James, who jilts his fiancée, Effie, on their wedding day after becoming entranced by an ethereal woodland sprite. (“Sylphide” comes from “silva,” Latin for forest.)The ballet is the oldest of the 19th-century works still commonly performed all over the world. And it’s the one that established the Romantic idea of the ballerina as a luminously unattainable object of desire, partly through its extensive use of pointe work — a relatively newfangled idea — to create an effect of lightness and flight.AdvertisementIt isn’t exactly an obvious choice for City Ballet, home to the great modernist oeuvre of George Balanchine, and harbinger of the balletically new. But “La Sylphide” is a deep part of the dance heritage of Mr. Martins, who was born in Copenhagen, trained at the Royal Danish Ballet School and danced with the Royal Danish Ballet. He first performed in a child’s role in the ballet when he was 8, then danced corps de ballet parts when he entered the company. Later, when already a star in New York, he returned to the Danish company as a guest to dance James.Advertisement“I brought it to City Ballet because there is a history of Bournonville and Danish teaching and dancing here, and I wanted it to be part of the dancers’ educational process,” Mr. Martins said in an interview in his office at the theater. “It was Balanchine who went to Stanley Williams, who had been my teacher at the Royal Danish Ballet School, and said please put together ‘Bournonville Divertissments,’ an audience should know this work. Stanley did it, and Balanchine never missed a performance. He once said to me, ‘Bournonville entertained with steps, like Petipa.’ No psychology, just the steps.”Mr. Martins has staged “La Sylphide” before; he set it on the Pennsylvania Ballet in 1985, and has kept the designs from that production, by Susan Tammany, for the City Ballet version. In both instances, he did not change the Bournonville choreography. “It is too good to tamper with,” he said.To help master Bournonville style, which emphasizes fleet footwork, a bouncy jump and an almost static torso with arms held low, Mr. Martins invited Petrusjka Broholm, a former Royal Danish Ballet dancer and teacher, to coach the dancers.“It’s a different coordination to what they are used to here,” Ms. Broholm said in a break during the rehearsal. “There is a lot going on with the feet, nothing on top, and the musicality is very different. Balanchine uses the downbeat to go up, Bournonville is the opposite. It’s like changing the way you walk. Not easy, but the dancers here can adapt to anything.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.That adaptation was tough, said Sterling Hyltin, who is dancing the title character, with Joaquin De Luz as James, on opening night. “The big difference is that you can’t use your arms to jump up, only when you are landing,” she said. “It gives an incredibly light look, but for the first weeks, I felt like I had the flu because my legs hurt so badly.”The ballet’s extensive mime sequences presented even more of a challenge than the Bournonville technique, Mr. Martins said. “It’s the key to getting the ballet across,” he said. “In Denmark, we had mime classes from 12 years old; I know that mime, it is in me. These dancers are not trained in that way. The art of mime is very important to me, and I am determined to get them to convey what they are actually saying. It can’t look like sign language, it must resonate. So I tell them you have to say it out loud while practicing it.”The character that drives the “Sylphide” story is the witch Madge. (The role is often played by a man; the great Danish dancer Erik Bruhn was both a famous James and a famous Madge.) Insulted by James early on in the ballet — “he knows instinctively she is evil,” Mikhail Baryshnikov wrote in an interesting account of the ballet. After James winds the scarf around the Sylphide, she dies in his arms. Utterly bereft, he sees Effie go by in a marriage procession with his friend Gurn.Georgina Pazcoguin, who plays Madge, said she had been amazed by the level of detail written into the role. “Just turning your palm one way or another can make the meaning of a gesture completely different,” she said. “I don’t know how it will translate to our audience who aren’t used to mime, but Peter has been really emphatic about it all.” She added: “I think he secretly really wants to do Madge.”Mr. Martins laughed when that was put to him. “Madge became a vehicle for stars, and I don’t want to go there,” he said. In any case, his approach to dancing Bournonville had never been an orthodox one. “I allow them to dance the way they dance and not be confined to an image of the past,” he said. “As much as ‘Sylphide’ is historic, it cannot be approached like a lithograph or an old photo. It doesn’t mean you can’t approximate a stylistic accuracy, but you don’t have to be a slave. It has to move the way we dance now.”An article last Sunday about the New York City Ballet’s coming production of “La Sylphide” misstated the name of the company for whom Peter Martins staged “La Sylphide” in 1985. It is the Pennsylvania Ballet, not the Philadelphia Ballet.A version of this article appears in print on May 3, 2015, on Page AR15 of the New York edition with the headline: A Fairy, a Witch and a Lot of Leg Work.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.