AdvertisementSupported byBy Lee SiegelCARLSTADT, N.J. — It’s been more than 20 years since Alexander’s department store in nearby Paramus shut down, but many who grew up in the area while it still stood at the intersection of Routes 4 and 17 remember the giant mural that adorned its facade. Painted by the artist Stefan Knapp on steel, glass and enamel in 1961, it incited strong responses. The vast expanse looked to some people like a map of the world, and to others like giant globs of red, purple and green paint in the process of dissolving and sliding down into the enormous parking lot below. “My parents thought it was ugly,” said the musician Matt Mondanile, who grew up in Ridgewood, N.J., and remembers driving by the mural when he was a child. Now his band, Real Estate, has used an image of it on the cover of its most recent album, “Atlas.” “It was kind of an enchanting, magical thing,” he recalled.Once touted as the largest public mural in the world, the work — comprising 280 panels, weighing a total of 250 tons — lies dismantled in stacks, wrapped in plastic and bound with masking tape, stored in a garage at the Department of Public Works here. Alongside the panel’s pieces are piles of truck tires, a junked Snow Cone Jolly Trolley and a behemoth new garbage truck. After sitting unseen for nearly two decades in the garage, the mural is poised to lose its home, and some unusual caretakers are grappling with how to preserve what they consider an important piece of New Jersey art history. Bruce Young, until recently the director of the department, said in November that he had always felt protective of the mural. “It goes back to my childhood,” he said. “It was almost like the Wonders of the World. We actually had our own little, you might say, Empire State Building, pyramid thing right there in Paramus.”But Joseph Crifasi, Mr. Young’s successor, says he feels no emotional attachment to the work, “except for respecting history and other people’s causes.” He wants to get it out of the garage by July 1 to make room for more equipment. The Alexander’s mural has always been an emblem of the sometimes outsize dreams of the people caught up in its fate. Mr. Knapp, who died in 1996, was born in Poland, spent time in one of Stalin’s gulags and later flew for the Royal Air Force, settling in England after World War II. His widow, Cathy Knapp, said her husband regarded the Paramus mural as his masterpiece. “It was his Mona Lisa,” she said by phone from Wales, where she runs an art center. She added that he considered it to be a map of the world, inspired by the aerial views he saw as a pilot.Edward Heath, a craftsman, helped Mr. Knapp assemble the mural in an airplane hangar outside London. Mr. Heath recalled with fondness the glamorous life he and Mr. Knapp lived after the mural was mounted on the front of the store and the artist became something of a celebrity. Life magazine even featured photographs of Mr. Knapp painting the mural, employing the custom-wrapped skis he used to slide about the surface. “He was an enormous character and a great personality,” Mr. Heath said. “He was quite exciting. He loved parties.”For decades the mural was a striking, if divisive, addition to the landscape. But in the early 1990s, the Alexander’s franchise declared bankruptcy and was taken over in 1995 by Vornado Realty Trust. Three years later, before the shuttered store was demolished, the mural was taken down to be preserved. There are conflicting memories of just how the mural was saved. Steven Roth, the chairman of Vornado, credits his wife and mother-in-law. “They just thought it was a piece of art, and you don’t destroy pieces of art,” he said. William Roseman, the mayor of Carlstadt, remembers driving by when the store was being prepared for demolition. “The mural was really, I thought, an institution,” he said. “There were a lot of people who didn’t like it, but that’s the whole idea behind abstract art. It’s to evoke emotion.” Mr. Roseman said that he immediately called Mr. Roth to see if the mural could be preserved. (Mr. Roth said he has no memory of that conversation.)As Dorothy Nicklus, the longtime vice president of the Bergen Museum of Art and Science, then located in Paramus, remembers it, she was driving by the store with a member of the museum’s board when they both had the idea to find a new home for the mural and soon contacted Mr. Roth. (Mr. Roth has no memory of that either.) What everyone agrees on is that Mr. Roth spared the mural when the store was demolished; Mr. Roseman extended an invitation to store it in the Carlstadt garage; and the Bergen Museum offered to accept the mural as a donation, thus enabling Vornado to give it over as a charitable donation and offset the money it cost to dismantle the work and transport it to the garage.Today the museum has troubles of its own. Having lost its lease in 2007 on a space in a shopping mall, the museum now exists only in cyberspace as it tries to raise the funds to find a new home. Over coffee at the Meadowlands Diner on Route 46, Ms. Nicklus and James Waldron, the museum’s current president and executive director, talked about the hopes that were dashed after the mural was saved. First, a shopping mall to be called Xanadu was reportedly planning to put the mural up on its site in the Meadowlands, but the mall was aborted. Attempts to place the mural with institutions like Bergen Community College fell short. Nowadays, Mr. Waldron is hoping the developers of American Dream, a new mall proposed for the site where Xanadu sits unfinished, will want the work, though so far, he said, there has been no interest. In their heyday, Alexander’s and its mural embodied the gritty gargantuanism of Jersey ambition. The department store chain was the brainchild of George Farkas, who established his first store in 1928 in the Bronx. In the depths of the Depression, Mr. Farkas had the innovative idea of trimming down the concept of the department store to its bare essentials. He offered no credit or layaway plans and wouldn’t deliver or make alterations, so he was able to offer stylish clothing at low prices. Foreseeing the migration from the cities into the suburbs after the Second World War, Mr. Farkas expanded. By the time the Paramus branch opened in 1961, Alexander’s had stores in Queens, Westchester and Connecticut. (I grew up in Paramus and worked at Alexander’s in my youth as a stock boy and salesman.)Mr. Farkas made regular trips to Europe, where he acquired a taste for European art, spending lavishly on modernist paintings. He commissioned Mr. Knapp to make works for his stores after seeing the murals he painted for London’s Heathrow Airport.Jody Patterson, a professor of art and visual history at Plymouth University in England and a specialist on public art, said that the Paramus mural was “a monumental effort to bring modern art to a mass public audience outside the gallery.” It made, she added, “modernism visible on a daily basis.” To Mr. Waldron, who has a Ph.D in chemical engineering, selling or leasing the mural is a key to the Bergen Museum finding a physical home. He seems to be, however, something of an outsider to the art world. Among the more colorful descriptions of his background, he said he used to run with the Hells Angels, studied with the photographer Minor White, was married to a member of the Shirelles and once played a chess grandmaster to a draw. He became the leader of the Bergen Museum in 2007 after designing its website.For his part, Mr. Roseman, the mayor of Carlstadt, said he would staunchly oppose the mural leaving for any faraway place. “My dream has always been that it will stay in Bergen County,” he said. “A lot of younger people, a whole generation, don’t remember it.” As the July deadline looms, the mural’s best hope, for now, may be for the Department of Public Works to move it into a giant storage container. “My initiative,” said Mr. Crifasi, the new director, “is just going to be finding a piece of area on our complex that I can store it safe and secure to sit there probably another 20 years.”Advertisement