“Doctor Zhivago,” a musical based on the sprawling Boris Pasternak novel that took more than a decade to get to Broadway, with stops in Australia and South Korea, will close on Sunday, after 26 previews and 23 regular performances.The Broadway production, a passion project of the composer Lucy Simon, was pummeled by critics, who described it as bombastic and tedious. And the nominating committee for Tony Awards was also unimpressed; the show was among five new musicals this season that received no nominations.“Zhivago,” a complex five-way love story set against the backdrop of the Russian Revolution, was unable to find enough ticket-buyers to justify a sustained run. Last week, the first full week since the show’s official opening, it performed to 68 percent of capacity, grossing $515,163. As of Sunday night, it had grossed a total of $2,659,983 over six weeks of performances, according to the Broadway League. By contrast, the most successful Broadway musicals bring in more than $1 million a week.“Right now, it does take a bit of courage to do an epic historical love story that isn’t riddled with irony,” the show’s director, Des McAnuff, said on Sunday evening (before the announcement of the closing), on a panel at the 92nd Street Y about the creation of the show.“I think we live in the age of parody, and I think there is a resistance to the epic love story, and it may have everything to do with the times we’re going through,” said Mr. McAnuff, who won Tony Awards in 1985 for directing “Big River” and in 1993 for directing “The Who’s Tommy.”The failure of “Zhivago” is an enormous disappointment for its creators, who have been working on it for years, and had been counting on a nostalgic fondness for the 1965 movie, which starred Omar Sharif and Julie Christie, to help attract audiences. The musical had its premiere at La Jolla Playhouse in San Diego, and had two later productions overseas, before coming to New York.“We’ve had a lot of bumps,” Ms. Simon acknowledged during the panel discussion. “I think we were very brave to do it — it was a big challenge, and some people really love it, which is wonderful.”Ms. Simon, who was nominated for a Tony Award in 1991 for the score of “The Secret Garden,” wrote the music for “Zhivago.” The book is by Michael Weller, with lyrics by Michael Korie and Amy Powers; the show stars Tam Mutu, a well-regarded performer in London’s West End who is making his Broadway debut as the title character, Yuri Zhivago, and Kelli Barrett (“Baby It’s You!”) as Lara Guishar, the woman desired by Dr. Zhivago and two other men.A version of this article appears in print on 05/06/2015, on page C3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Tony Nominations Spur Sales; ‘Zhivago’ to Close.