By JEREMY EGNERMAY 4, 2015
“Gotham,” Fox’s Batman origin story, wraps up its first season on Monday, as the mob wars, dirty-cop rivalries and criminal grudges that have simmered for weeks reach a climax.At the center of everything will be Oswald Cobblepot, a.k.a. the Penguin. As portrayed by Robin Lord Taylor, Oswald is a psychopathic schemer, killing, cultivating or double- and triple-crossing nearly every other major character as he claws his way toward the top of the city’s underworld.And while he is one of the most familiar villains in the “Batman” story, Mr. Taylor has made the character his own.His natty suits and ghoulish appearance – chalky skin, stained teeth – hark back to earlier versions, like those played by Danny DeVito and Burgess Meredith, but he is something altogether different, equal parts charismatic operator and gutter-punk killer. Mr. Taylor drew inspiration, he said, from sources as diverse as “A Clockwork Orange” and the Clash to “Richard III.”Advertisement“He was another grotesque man who has this insane ambition,” Mr. Taylor said of Richard III, Shakespeare’s hunchbacked protagonist. “This sheer lust for power fueled by his physical deformities.”AdvertisementA native of tiny Schueyville, Iowa, Mr. Taylor moved to New York about 15 years ago with other actor friends from Northwestern University, joining a social circle that included his college buddy Billy Eichner, he of the lunatic “Billy on the Street” interviews. The two collaborated for years – Mr. Taylor was the cameraman for Mr. Eichner’s earliest interviews — and remain close friends.Mr. Taylor, who lives on the Upper West Side of Manhattan, showed up for a recent lunch in Hell’s Kitchen with his naturally blond hair still dyed Penguin black, even though shooting had wrapped on the series. The intense production schedule of a network series — filming on the second season is set to begin in June – means he is stuck with it for the foreseeable future. “I’ve made my peace with it — champagne problems,” he said.These are edited excerpts from the conversation.What appealed to you about “Gotham”?Even though it’s “Batman” and even though it’s larger than life and very colorful, there really is an attempt to show the human side to these characters, because we’re exploring how they become who we know them to be. Ideally, in some weird way, you could see them existing in our world.So is that what you’re aiming for? Some level of plausibility?Yes, definitely. A lot of the feedback I get is “Oswald does terrible things, but for some reason I still root for him.” It’s not that I want him to win; I just want him to make sense to people. He’s a product of his environment like the rest of us are.Most of us can relate to wanting to make something of ourselves, which in his own skewed way is what he’s all about.Up until this point, his entire life he was written off, discounted, bullied, treated like he was less than. So all of that feeds into his outsize ambition and is also what drives him to be so manipulative. He wants to read people and their motivations mostly so that he can understand and use them, and not let them get the better of him. Because that’s happened to him his entire life to this point.You’re a theater guy who grew up in small-town Iowa. Was that sense of alienation something you were able to channel? Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Oh yeah. I grew up in a very “Friday Night Lights,” sports-focused town. I did not play the sports. I was never bullied physically but I was called names. I was also an overweight kid. I knew what it’s like to feel like the other, to feel written off for things that were not in my control — my appearance, my interests. Which is not to say I had an incredibly hard childhood. I never felt the extent of the alienation that Oswald feels, but I understand where he’s coming from.AdvertisementAnd I’d be lying if I didn’t say my own personal ambition is fed by that, too, in the same way Oswald’s is. You move to New York. You want to be the biggest, most fully realized version of yourself you can be. A lot of that is fueled by this desire to not feel small, and to make a name for myself and establish myself in a way that wasn’t expected of me.When did it hit you that this is your job now, playing this outrageous character?It hits me constantly, all the time — there’s really no getting used to it. My identity until this was that of a struggling actor. The ultimate dream would be that I’d be a series regular. To have that happen and have the show be not just any show, but part of this giant pop culture institution — there’s no preparing you for that.What has changed?There’s a fleeting sense of comfort. My health insurance isn’t going to lapse for a while, that’s nice. Being recognized in the street. Social media sort of exploded for me this year. Of course, I was on Facebook before and I did have Twitter, but no one cared. I can’t tell if I preferred it that way or this way.“Batman,” like most comic book stories, has a passionate fan base. The fans feel ownership over these characters. They’ve grown up with them and studied them intensely. It’s mythology for them, which is fantastic, because you want to be part of something that people really care about deeply. But it can be overwhelming because you don’t want to disappoint anybody. You want to have the character make sense in the story we’re doing, which is a departure, but you still want people to respond to it and have it make sense to them. And then some troll will tweet you out of nowhere and say, “You are the worst thing that ever happened to this character in 76 years of ‘Batman.’” I know that’s part and parcel of the job, but at the same time, you know ....You’re still a human being.I’m still a human being! And I’m working really hard on this thing! And it’s like, ”Who the hell are you to take time out of your day to say this?” You rationalize it. But there are times when someone says something and I draft a tweet, and then I sit there and I look at it, and just walk away.Did you have a favorite Penguin?There’s something about Danny DeVito’s sheer maniacal glee in “Batman Returns,” coupled with the fact that he looks a million times grosser than I do. I think of him often, and also of Burgess Meredith’s portrayal on the old TV show. Despite how the character looks, they brought such charisma, and I realized that’s integral to Oswald’s personality.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.