Season 2, Episode 4: “The Lady”This was another mostly unfunny episode of “Silicon Valley,” and even when it attempted to make a point, the barbs often fell flat. Also, nothing much happened. For a show about a culture in which things supposedly move at the speed of light, “Silicon Valley” can sure feel plodding sometimes. These guys have been working on their compression app for months, and they keep talking about being able to hack breakthrough code over a weekend. So why, so many weeks after winning Techrunch’s startup contest, do they have so little to show for it? Much of the episode was eaten up by Erlich’s wounded feelings. He’s the crass oaf who owns the house that Pied Piper has been using as its headquarters. But Richard, the company’s chief executive, doesn’t want to give Erlich any more say in the firm’s operations. So when Richard cuts Erlich out of a hiring decision, we get a lot of whining about Erlich’s yogurts, and he stages a temper tantrum at a board meeting that costs the company $30,000. In the end — after an even more tedious side story involving Jian Yang, the houseboy who is supposed to be funny, I think, because he has a heavy accent — Erlich and Richard bury the hatchet. So the whole point of the Erlich-Richard thing was … what?The main plot (this episode was titled, simply, “The Lady”) takes a look at the lack of women in tech, though the effort felt so pointedly cautious you wondered if producers were deliberately straining to say nothing about the issue. “Silicon Valley” was criticized for featuring only handful of women in its first season, and the few who had made it on to the show didn’t have any power in the Valley — there were no hot-shot female coders, venture capitalists or tech founders. You could defend the show on the grounds of verisimilitude; after all, the culture it is  parodying has not been a place known for its inclusiveness of women. But that felt like a half-hearted defense, and its creators apparently agreed. This season, “Silicon Valley” has attempted to address its shortcomings by adding a handful of powerful characters to the cast. Earlier this season, we got Laurie Bream, a hypnotically awkward venture capitalist. Now the show gives us its first female programmer, Carla Walton, played by Alice Wetterlund. But while she’s a bit feisty — she fools the other guys into thinking she makes more than they do — the character feels hollow and not really all that funny.One obvious problem is that Carla looks like a pop culture cliché: the punky female programmer. You may remember this archetype from “Halt and Catch Fire,” the AMC show about the early personal computer industry in which Mackenzie Davis went full punk in playing Cameron Howe, the short-haired lady coder who never heard a guitar riff that didn’t inspire some programming trick. Or see Trinity from “The Matrix,” or the ne plus ultra of punk-girl programmer, Lisbeth Salander from “The Girl With the Dragon Tattoo.” That reference is so on point that after meeting Carla, Jared, the company’s business manager, can’t help but mention that he loves the book.The big joke about Carla is that Jared keeps tying himself into knots to explain why it’s O.K. to favor hiring a woman for Pied Piper. He wants to hire a woman because none work at Pied Piper, but he also doesn’t want to hire a woman simply because she’s a woman but because she’s the best engineer — though he’d prefer if the best engineer were a woman and not a man. Carla rejects his attempt at outreach. “I’m not a woman engineer,” she makes clear in the interview. “I’m an engineer.” To which Jared replies: “We want to hire the best people — who happen to be women, regardless of whether or not they are women. That part is irrelevant.”Sure, there’s maybe something droll in seeing people get tongue-tied in defending outreach for outreach’s sake. But in going for the mildly amusing I wonder if the producers missed a chance to make a more grandly subversive defense of gender diversity: That fostering a diverse workforce of view is in and of itself a savvy strategy at a company whose future depends on creative leaps, and that, particularly in a startup composed of small teams, every addition that brings a new point of view can radically improve a firm’s chances of coming up with something brilliant. Why should Pied Piper hire a woman? Because diversity might shake up the cozy way of doing business at the company, and perhaps make the whole team better at their jobs. But nobody here is interested in making that case. 