

Season 7, Episode 12: “Lost Horizon”The 90th episode of “Mad Men” dramatized two very different visions of top-of-the-ladder success. For Joan, Don, Peggy and Roger, the first days at McCann confirm everything they’d feared about selling out to a bigger company: The boxed lunches are great — that is, if you can swallow the roast beef along with the corporate bureaucracy and naked misogyny. The period drama on AMC.On the other hand, this trippy, angry, spooky, goofy, messy, melancholic romp of an episode was itself a more optimistic vision of how Matthew Weiner has leveraged the show’s success into what feels like total creative freedom: Beautifully shot and willfully idiosyncratic, the third-to-last episode of the series did not go quietly; it spent best-show-ever capital in the most outlandish ways on characters who have earned their peculiar weirdness: Peggy Olsen gets drunk and roller skates, then gets a slo-mo gangster strut. Roger Sterling plays ghostly keys and quips. Don Draper hits the road, yet again, as a traveling con artist. Joan gets backed into a corner and fights back. Unlike earlier episodes, this one didn’t just reprise old themes, it pushed characters into uncomfortable and strange new places, while delivering an onslaught of fan-friendly clips.This was the episode fans of Joan (and Christina Hendricks) have been craving: It doesn’t take her more than a couple days to realize how bad it will be for her at McCann. The authority she’d slowly accrued over the years at the various iterations of Sterling Cooper means nothing there. She will not be taken seriously. After clashing with Dennis (“Who told you you got to get pissed off?”) and being harassed by Ferg (“I’m not expecting anything more than a good time”), she takes the fight to her new boss Jim. After trying to work things out, she lets him have it. In a tough, sharp, aggressive conversation, she threatens to call in her lawyers, the Equal Opportunity Commission, Betty Friedan and the ACLU.  Joan says everything she can say, as well as anyone could possibly say it. Only, it’s not quite enough. Joan’s furious, clenched threat is rousing. But it becomes clear that a legal battle would just cost too much in time, money and heartache. “I’d rather give it to a lawyer,” says Jim Hobart, of the 50 percent of her cash he plans to keep. Soon, she folds. “It’s not about the money,” Joan tells Roger.
“It’s only about the money,” he says. She knows he’s right. Joan loses half of her stake, and her job. But she leaves with her dignity intact. (And without calling “a guy” to intimidate the brass, as her new beau suggested.) For Joan, a golden parachute escape feels like victory. As Roger’s secretary says to him, with obvious double meaning, “Advertising is not a very comfortable place for everyone.”Pathetic Harry is thrilled by the idea of an executive dining room. But nostalgic Roger and ambitious Peggy knock around the old office like ghosts, complete with an eerie soundtrack. Was there ever an organ in the Sterling Cooper offices? Who cares? Who doesn’t want to see Roger play spooky music while Peggy roller skates through the wreckage? It’s a lovely pairing that shows just how much both characters have evolved over the years.“This business doesn’t have feelings… You get bought, you get sold, you get fired,” says Roger, who knows he shouldn’t get “attached to some walls.” Peggy, who’s gotten much better about saying what she wants, says, “Hopefully I’ll have that problem some day.” Roger’s approving smile in that scene says everything. Roger offers her Bert Cooper’s Japanese painting of an octopus orally pleasing a woman. (“The Dream of the Fisherman’s Wife.”) “You know that I need to make men feel at ease,” says Peggy sensibly, turning it down. But after Joan’s brutal trials, it’s a rush to see Peggy strut into the McCann office on her own terms (and in slo-mo!), wearing sunglasses, dangling a cigarette from her red lips and flaunting that lewd picture for everyone to see. Peggy is going to make the McCann men feel very uneasy indeed. Meanwhile, what the hell is going on with Don? Each character dealt with the reality of selling out in his or her own way, and Don certainly dealt with it in his — by escaping. Against the backdrop of worries over a “feminized” Miller Lite beer, Don finds his manly independence threatened. His new boss calls him his “white whale,” like he’s just another man’s trophy. Ferg does an awful, insulting (and terrible) impression of Don as an office lackey, saying “I’m working very diligently!” Then, when Don is urged to announce, like a trained animal, “I’m Don Draper from McCann Erickson,” it plays like humbling capitulation. It’s worth noting that Don announces his new McCann identity shortly after we see the social security card emblazoned with the name Dick Whitman stole, “Don Draper.” Don still doesn’t know who he is; he’s still trying on identities. Before long, he’s introducing himself as “Bill Phillips, Connolly Research,” possibly because of what he saw in that conference room: Another sharp man, much like himself, saying smart enough things about selling beer, in his exact cadence. Ted is content to be another suit at the table, but Don is not. So he grabs his roast beef and leaves.  Soon, Don’s back on the road. When Bert Cooper appears in Don’s passenger seat, it’s yet another haunting in this episode: Bert tells him, bluntly, “You like to play the stranger.” Just as bluntly, they talk Jack Kerouac’s “On the Road” and quote a line (“Whither goest thou, America, in thy shiny car in the night?”) that could be a tagline for Chevy.When Don arrives in Racine, Wis., looking for the waitress Diana, he lies so easily it’s astonishing. Yet he doesn’t seem particularly disappointed or even surprised that Diana is gone, or that other men have also been pursuing her, or that she’s “a tornado, just leaving a trail of broken bodies behind her.” (Like Peter Pan, she’s always been more metaphor than flesh. Does everyone around her talk like an overwrought narrator?) Don just drives on. When a hitchhiker asks him for a ride to St. Paul, Minn. — hundreds of miles to the west — Don agrees.I was happy that Don didn’t find Diana. And I’m excited, too, that with just two episodes left, I have no idea where he’s going to end up.A quick note: These recaps are not intended to be exhaustive; that would be exhausting for all of us. I’ll just try to pick a theme each week and continue the conversation. So please share your thoughts in the comments. Will Peggy have better luck at McCann than Joan? Will we see Diana again? And will Don ever drive back to New York? And what are we to make of Betty’s Freud period?Logan Hill is a journalist who has contributed to The New York Times, New York, Rolling Stone, “This American Life,” Cosmopolitan, Glamour, Wired and others. You can follow him on Twitter at @loganhill33.