This post contains spoilers for Sunday’s episode, “The Sons of the Harpy.”Keisha Castle-Hughes made a memorable debut on Sunday’s episode of “Game of Thrones.” After a brief monologue, her character Obara Sand flung her spear through a buried man’s head.[Recap: “The Sons of the Harpy”]Blame grief. Obara and her half-sisters, Nymeria (Jessica Henwick) and Tyene (Rosabell Laurenti Sellers), collectively known as the Sand Snakes, arrived on the show to avenge last season’s killing of their father, Oberyn Martell, the Dornish prince played by Pedro Pascal.The fantasy epic on HBO.“Losing him has affected her deeply but she’s not a very emotional person,” Ms. Hughes said. “So she shows it in other ways, such as throwing spears through poor merchant captains’s heads.”Only 25, Ms. Hughes has been acting professionally for well over a decade. In 2003 she became the youngest person ever nominated for a best actress Oscar, for “Whale Rider,” (Quvenzhané Wallis broke her record in 2013) and has since appeared in “Star Wars: Episode III – Revenge of the Sith,” among other films and television shows.As an avid reader of the George R. R. Martin books that inspired “Game of Thrones,” her interest in the series was primarily as a fan until Oberyn showed up last season. She asked her manager to keep an eye out for any future Dornish character casting calls. “I was like, ‘I could be related to Pedro Pascal. Let’s make that happen!’ ” she said.Once cast, she underwent Wushu martial arts instruction to approximate the “warrior monk” ethos the show’s creators had in mind for Obara, as well as coordinated weapon training. Each Sand Snake has her own signature weapon — spear for Obara, daggers for Tyene and a whip for Nymeria. So the most important job, at least in the early days, was just “understanding how to be in each other’s space and not hurt each other.” She called from Los Angeles recently to discuss bullwhip tolerance and nipple armor. These are edited excerpts from the conversation.Was that your first on-screen killing?Yes I believe it was. I’ve been killed on screen before but I think that was the first time I’ve been the killer.Definitely your first spear through a buried man’s head, I imagine.It is quite an epic kill isn’t it? You really get a sense of exactly who this woman is from that moment alone.You’ve read the books so you were familiar with these characters, but what did the producers tell you about them going into it?The physicality of Obara was always very important, because she’s described as being very brutish. Of all of the Sand Snakes, she’s the most warrior-like and the least feminine. She was described as a warrior monk. She meditates and kills in equal measure, which seems absolutely bizarre. But in the world of Dorne, it makes a lot of sense.What sort of training did you have to undergo?Those three girls always fight together; they never fight alone. So it was very important that the three of us were comfortable with each other’s weapons, and comfortable in each other’s space. Jessica Henwick plays Nymeria Sand, and she has a 12-foot bullwhip. I don’t know if you’ve heard a bullwhip crack, but it’s one of the loudest things in the world. So one of the most important things was Rosie and I getting used to that sound. But obviously we’re only human, so for the first month and a half every time it cracked, we’d jump. A lot of it was the stunt coordinator just literally cracking the whip while we were training for hours and hours on end, every day, until we got used to that.The show has some strong female characters, but you’ve talked about how this trio is different because they all work together. It would be easy to have the focus on them being annoyed by each other or bitchy to each other, and that doesn’t happen. It was really nice to play with other women and not have this underlying tone of being at each other’s throats. It was just women working together.Did you hear about the flap over the “nipple armor”? I did, it’s so funny. I think it’s a still image thing — there’s lots of detailing on the armor. While I was wearing it, I would have noticed that. Oberyn was driven by a desire for revenge, and it sounds like his daughters are now driven by the same thing. They’ve been brought up with this mentality that no matter how long it takes, you avenge the death of your family members. They’ve grown up with a father who waited his entire life to avenge the death of his sister.That didn’t turn out so well for him. They’re totally unswayed by that. It’s interesting, in terms of how much they know about what happened. I don’t know that they’re aware that he volunteered himself. All they know is that he didn’t come back alive, and blood has to be paid for that.So maybe the lesson is if you have your enemy down, don’t gloat like Oberyn did.Exactly. Maybe just finish the job quickly.