AdvertisementSupported byBy Zachary WoolfeFor those in search of unusual listening: In this week’s Arts & Leisure, Corinna da Fonseca-Wollheim described a world of impossible sounds being made by today’s new-music artists.Following Our CriticsMeanwhile, David Allen thought that the young British pianist Benjamin Grosvenor met the hype in advance of his Carnegie Hall recital debut, calling Mr. Grosvenor, in a phrase destined for news-release immortality, “a boy lord of the piano.”I was disappointed by a new Wolfgang Rihm concerto for violin and cello. James R. Oestreich lauded the American Classical Orchestra’s performance of a Telemann rarity.Vivien Schweitzer put in a good word for the Sphinx Organization, doing its part to make classical music a more diverse place. (On the same night, the New York Philharmonic, which currently has a single African-American member, paid tribute to four black singers from its past.)Quotes Around the Internet“The word itself has been misused. It’s called makeup.” — Kenneth Kellogg, bass, on blackface in a fascinating discussion in The Washington Post with five black singers about race in opera.“English National Opera is staging a modern-day version of ‘La Bohème’ in which the lead female character is a heroin user rather than a consumptive.” — The Telegraph (U.K.)“There is undoubtedly a social dimension to the composer’s creative process, but we tend not to discuss it because of prevailing romantic notions about the solitary artist.” — the composer John Supko, in a conversation with the critic Jeff EdelsteinComing Up, Under the RadarAvant-trumpeter Nate Wooley’s six-night residency at the Stone (Starts Tuesday)“Vincent Persichetti: A Centennial Tribute” at the Juilliard School (Tuesday)Michael Gordon’s bassoon septet “Rushes” at the Park Avenue Armory (Friday)Happy Birthday, Albert Lortzing!If you don’t live in a German-speaking country, it’s entirely possible you’ve never heard of Lortzing (born Oct. 23, 1801), whose comic operas were immensely popular in their day and remain expertly crafted pieces of entertainment.You don’t have to speak a word of the language or understand an iota of the context to get the wit of this quintet from “Der Wildschütz” (1842)......Or the charm of this aria from “Zar und Zimmermann” (1837), sung with elegance by the great tenor Fritz Wunderlich.And You, Too, Charles Ives!Ives (born Oct. 20, 1874) seems to grow more contemporary by the day, the influence of his sophisticated yet exuberant collision of styles ever more obvious.Here are two facets of the Piano Sonata No. 2, “Concord, Mass., 1840–60.” First, Jeremy Denk playing the third movement, “The Alcotts”......And, the abandoned, recently reconstructed, altogether extraordinary “Emerson Overture” (or “Emerson Concerto”) for piano and orchestra, portions of which were “translated,” as he put it, into the sonata’s first movement, “Emerson”:Bravo to both these gentlemen! And let me know if you have other Lortzing or Ives recommendations: Put them in the comments, email zach.woolfe@nytimes.com or tweet @zwoolfe. Happy listening!Advertisement