AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn Shattuck9:30 P.M. (CBS) DAVID LETTERMAN: A LIFE ON TELEVISION When he retires on May 20, Mr. Letterman, above, will have reigned over 6,028 late-night talk-show broadcasts across 33 years — more than any other host. This salute, M.C.’d by Ray Romano, mines Mr. Letterman’s video vault to present his interviews with world leaders, sports figures and stars in entertainment, as well as his show from Sept. 17, 2001, his first after the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks.3 P.M. (CBS) LET’S MAKE A DEAL The game show celebrates its 1,001st episode with more than $370,000 in prizes, including the chance to win $50,000 in “Smash for Cash.” Perhaps even better, each audience member will receive a surprise gift worth $1,001.4 P.M. (Encore) BUTCH CASSIDY AND THE SUNDANCE KID (1969) Does it get any prettier than this? Paul Newman and Robert Redford star as the legendary Wild West outlaws on the lam — destination: Bolivia — with Katharine Ross as the woman who sets each of their hearts aflutter. The soundtrack to their lives: Burt Bacharach’s Oscar-winning score, featuring “Raindrops Keep Fallin’ on My Head,” which won for best original song, written with Hal David. Much of the movie “is very funny in a strictly contemporary way — the last exuberant word on movies about the men of the mythic American West who have outlived their day,” Vincent Canby wrote in The New York Times. And while there are “some bothersome technical things about the movie (the camera is all zoom, zoom, zoom),” he added, “the overall production is very handsome, and the performances fine, especially Newman, Redford and Miss Ross, who must be broadly funny and straight, almost simultaneously. They succeed even if the movie does not.” (Night owls can watch a repeat at 10:20 p.m.)7 P.M. (HBO) NON-STOP (2014) An air marshal (Liam Neeson), consumed by heartache and a complicated past, tries to outwit a villain on a flight from New York to London who has vowed to kill a passenger every 20 minutes unless $150 million is transferred to a bank account. In this thriller directed by Jaume Collet-Serra, Julianne Moore, Corey Stoll, Michelle Dockery, Scoot McNairy, Lupita Nyong’o, Linus Roache and Shea Whigham add to the suspense in their roles as prospective heroes or villains. And while the movie doesn’t always make sense, that’s “incidental to the pleasures of a slow-season Liam Neeson release as diverting as this one,” Manohla Dargis wrote in The Times. “A lot has been written about Mr. Neeson’s surprising resurrection as an older action hero, which has sometimes been more rewarding theoretically than cinematically. Mr. Collet-Serra, however, makes good on that promise with a sure genre hand and real feeling for what Mr. Neeson brings to the screen at this stage of his career, including beauty etched by time and a still-imposing body that moves with the heaviness and grandeur of an old warrior raising his sword one last time. When Mr. Neeson runs through the aisles, he can sometimes seem too big for this vehicle, even if he turns out to be exactly right.”8 P.M. (Fox Business) WARREN BUFFETT’S AMERICA Liz Claman goes behind the scenes at Berkshire Hathaway’s shareholder meeting to interview Mr. Buffett, the company’s president and chief executive, about his 50 years leading the company. She also speaks with Charles Munger, the vice chairman, and Bill Gates, a board member.9 P.M. (HBO) KURT COBAIN: MONTAGE OF HECK (2015) With the approval of Cobain’s widow, Courtney Love, and their daughter, Frances Bean Cobain, Brett Morgen draws on art, music, journals, home movies and audio montages from Cobain’s archives to profile the leader of Nirvana. He also interviews Cobain’s mother, father and sister, his bandmate Krist Novoselic and Ms. Love. (Above, Cobain at 13.) Mr. Morgen’s “exhilarating, exhausting, two-hour-plus film, both an artful mosaic and a hammering barrage, reflects years of rummaging through that trove,” Mike Hale wrote in The Times. What’s Streaming NowTHE BROKENWOOD MYSTERIES When fishermen discover a farmer’s body in a river, Detective Inspector Mike Shepherd (Neill Rea), a legendary if mysterious New Zealand cop, arrives to investigate in the country town of Brokenwood, where secrets lurk in unlikely places. The four-part series has its United States premiere on Monday, with a new episode each week. (acorn.tv) KATHRYN SHATTUCKAdvertisement