By ALASTAIR MACAULAYMAY 3, 2015
Leave this world behind. All choreography takes us on a trip, but where? It’s curious that in the Romantic ballets of the 19th century the journey takes us into the risky terrain of unconfined nature. Into the woods!All dance transforms the time and space in which it occurs. Rhythm, phrasing, line, gesture — no matter how small their scale — radically alter our sense of human activity. In the greatest formal creations of dance theater, the whole box of stage space around the dancers becomes illumined by energy and charged by meter. We sense physics — the movement of matter through space and time — as drama.New York City Ballet has always been the world’s foremost home of ballet modernism, from George Balanchine and Jerome Robbins through to Alexei Ratmansky and Justin Peck. The curtain rises, and in most of its repertory we’re at once in a world charged by dance dynamism. On Thursday, however, it presents its first production of “La Sylphide,” the 1832 French creation that established dualism as the basis of Romantic ballet.Here’s this world, Romantic ballet says, where ballet is the exception — but there’s also another world, where ballet is at home. And the transition between these two worlds happens not through the looking-glass or a wardrobe or by the hero rubbing a lamp. Instead it happens in the great outdoors — and usually in a forest. Academic ballet, with women in point and with limbs stretched and turned out to 180 degrees, is an intensely civilized activity; but the conjuring trick of Romanticism made ballet seem natural in the woods, by the lakes, on the mountain slopes.AdvertisementWhen “La Sylphide” was new, pointe work was young: The transfigured foot is part of this ballet’s magic. We mainly know “Sylphide” from its 1836 Danish adaptation by August Bournonville (same story, different music, his choreography, with far more dancing for the hero). In Copenhagen, this has never fallen out of repertory — and, since World War II, has entered international repertory. It’s the version that City’s ballet master in chief, Peter Martins — Danish-born and still a Danish citizen — is presenting here.In “La Sylphide” the curtain rises on the real world, a Scottish farmhouse. James, the farmer hero, is asleep in an armchair. There’s just one alien element: At his feet kneels a sylph, a winged spirit of the air who has come from the woods. (The original meaning of “sylph” is probably “sylvan spirit.” In Virgil’s “Aeneid,” the nymph Iaera is called “sylvestris,” meaning “of the woods.”) When James awakens, he realizes he’s been dreaming of this very sylph. And she, though seemingly innocent, now entices James away from the world he knows, away from his mortal fiancée, Effie, away to the woods that are her natural habitat.It’s been astutely said that the pervading subject of the 19th-century novel is adultery. We could say the same of 19th-century ballet — yet that may be to overstress the moral side of these works. Yes, James dumps Effie; yes, he’s just another cheating man; and yes, he’s just another in a long line of duplicitous ballet cads (witness “Giselle,” “Esmeralda,” “Swan Lake,” “La Bayadère” and others). But what the sylph offers James isn’t genuine adultery. She’s so physically elusive that he can seldom if ever touch her.AdvertisementInstead what she brings him is release, purity, transcendence — and dance. This evasion of moral issues actually disturbed Bournonville, whose ballets celebrate this world rather than escapism. In his memoirs, he refers to “the poisoned breath” of “La Sylphide,” which he calls — both ballet and heroine — a “dark angel.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In a good production of this classic, two moments should be ravishingly sensuous; revelatory too. In Act One, the farmhouse casement window blows open to show us the Sylph with all the woods behind her; we feel the loveliness not just of this heroine but also of the wider natural world she represents. And at one point in Act Two, James re-enters and discovers that this forest contains not one sylph but many. Though he is true enough to hunt for the one among the many, the stage image has the force of a scientific or philosophical breakthrough — a glimpse of a whole new layer of being.In several later Romantic ballets, the hero enters the woods because he’s a hunter. What he doesn’t know is that this hunt will lead to a vision of the sublime and to love. Siegfried in “Swan Lake” is hunting swans when he loses his heart to Odette the swan maiden, beneath the trees and beside the water. And he finds, to his amazement, that she is queen to a flock of many swan-maidens. When Prince Désiré in “The Sleeping Beauty,” resting from a hunt, discovers that the vision of the sleeping Princess Aurora is all his privileged life has been missing, he’s then granted an extended vision of her amid a multiplicity of woodland nymphs.It so happens that City Ballet’s new “Sylphide” comes near the start of a two-month New York ballet period that abounds in Romantic-classical ballets that are this work’s descendants: “Giselle,” “Swan Lake,” “The Sleeping Beauty” and “Les Sylphides” (all at American Ballet Theater); “A Midsummer Night’s Dream” (at New York City Ballet); “The Dream” (Royal Ballet, in its season at the David H. Koch Theater, June 23 to June 28). Not all of these are 19th-century works. By the time “Les Sylphides” was created (1908-9), no story was needed: The curtain rises on a plotless reverie — located in the woods, of course — with a poet suspended in a realm peopled otherwise only by sylphs.This in turn leads to Balanchine’s “Serenade” (1934), where there is no longer even any scenery, but which is, like most of the classic Romantic ballets, implicitly a nocturne set in the moonlight: It’s Romantic, classical and modernist all at the same time. It’s possible that this kind of ballet more or less ended with Balanchine’s death in 1983. But it began with “La Sylphide”; and so to find that City Ballet is staging this work seems fitting.We go into the woods to leave behind the world we know. Dante does so at the start of “The Divine Comedy”; so do people in more than one Shakespeare play. All were following figures in Greek mythology — notably the hunter Actaeon, who in Ovid’s “Metamorphoses” chances, with catastrophic effect, upon the goddess Diana bathing. (Ovid also calls her Titania.) What do the woods contain? A parallel universe where movement and perception are transfigured. Away from the known world, the transformative physics of ballet become free, transporting, life-changing.A version of this review appears in print on May 4, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: Pointe Work and Drama for Romantic Ballet Fans.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.