By JON PARELESMAY 3, 2015
Nozinja, a South African producer and D.J., started a chant during his set at Villain in Williamsburg on Friday night: “One! Eight! Nine!” That was for 189 beats per minute, the frenetic pace of the dance music he has pioneered, Shangaan Electro. “You must be ready to dance!” he shouted. A heartbeat that fast would be tachycardia.Nozinja was headlining “Electronic Africa,” the first show of this year’s Red Bull Music Academy Festival, which prides itself on drawing attention to music from stylistic fringes. The lineup included DJ Spoko from South Africa and the rapper and dancer Titica from Angola. It was a glimpse of how African cultures regenerate themselves with digital tools, and of how even D.J.s can dance.Nozinja (the stage name of Richard Mthetwa) had his electronics set up behind three dancing singers: two women and a man, who all showed how to shimmy their hips at 189 beats per minute. “All you need to do is watch the legs, the waist, and see how fast we are going,” he boasted before he joined them.The songs were recognizably South African pop: call-and-response refrains bouncing along briskly on two or three chords and a crisp 4/4 beat.AdvertisementBut the speed was throttled way up, and Nozinja surrounded the songs with a pointillistic barrage: marimba-like plinks at superhuman speed, thin electropop synthesizer lines, quick stereo spatters of programmed tom-toms and pitched-up sampled vocals, arriving all around the beat in a whirlwind of syncopation. Turning most dance music upside-down, all the action in Nozinja’s music is in the upper registers. Bass lines are absent, and the music is no less propulsive without them. His first album under his name, “Nozinja Lodge” (Warp), is expected June 2.DJ Spoko, who has worked with Nozinja, brought music that was downright ascetic by comparison; he calls his style “Bacardi House” after the favorite drink in the clubs where he forged his style. Nearly his entire set used tracks with just three components: a programmed beat and two synthesizer lines, usually a high hook and a midrange comeback, sometimes joined by rapped or sung vocals. It was all he needed.AdvertisementThe beats were variants on kwaito, which mingles South African township rhythms with a kind of freeze-dried house music, and the hopping, sliding, blipping synthesizer lines were endlessly catchy, teasing back and forth. Lyrics arrived now and then, hinting at the more ominous undertones of the titles of DJ Spoko’s releases, like his EP “Ghost Town” and his album “War God.” He had a front line of five dancing women who shared line-dance moves or staged competitive sequences, and he sometimes stepped up front to join them — tall, lanky and, like his music, making plenty of angular moves.A brief set by Titica was sandwiched between the South Africans. Her music is kuduro, a galloping electronic beat from Angola that her tracks sometimes mix with the sounds of traditional drums or the electric guitars of soukous. A major star in Angola, she is a transgender woman who flaunts uninhibited, rat-a-tat rhymes in Portuguese. Dressed in silver lamé, she made her set as much about her churning, pumping hips as about her rapping, and not even a midset technical shutdown could stop her for long.Two globally minded New York City disc jockeys, Dubbel Dutch and Chief Boima, opened and closed the party.A version of this review appears in print on May 4, 2015, on Page C6 of the New York edition with the headline: Breakneck Dance Rhythms .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.