By CHARLES CURKINMAY 3, 2015
Destruction is a New York tradition. There was the beloved Pennsylvania Station, designed by McKim, Mead & White; destroyed in 1963. The Solomon’s Temple of punk rock, CBGB, that couldn’t be saved from closure in 2006; replaced by an upscale fashion boutique. The Frank Lloyd Wright-designed Hoffman Auto Showroom at 430 Park Avenue; disemboweled by developers in 2013. The list goes on and on.So far ABC No Rio, a nonprofit cultural center on the Lower East Side, has beaten the odds. In celebration of Lower East Side History Month and the 25th anniversary of the all-ages punk-rock matinees that made ABC a totem of the New York scene, an exhibit chronicling the first two years of the shows’ existence is set to open on Thursday and will continue through June 4. Called “The Saturday Matinee at ABC No Rio 1990-91: A Visual Retrospective,” it was assembled by founding members of the ABC No Rio collective — Freddy Alva, John Woods and Mike Bromberg — who dusted off more than 200 pieces of ephemera that will be displayed in the first-floor gallery, where bands have played since 1990.For more than 30 years, ABC No Rio has been a haven for like-minded artists and activist groups like Books Through Bars, which sends books to prisoners. It was established in 1980, when squatters annexed a building of dubious structural integrity at 156 Rivington Street, a Hispanic area at the time, one block north of the Williamsburg Bridge, where ABC has remained ever since. In 1989, when hard-core punk shows were outlawed at venues like the Pyramid Club and CBGB because of violence, stranded members of the scene found a refuge at ABC, where Mr. Bromberg took the lead in booking regular Saturday afternoon shows. It quickly became a migration center for influential bands like Rorschach, Citizens Arrest, SFA and Born Against, and for graffiti legends like Sane, Hush, Natz and Stak to “bomb” — artists’ slang for paint — in the backyard. The center is now sacred ground for D.I.Y. punks two and three generations removed from its founding.Mr. Alva, 45, an acupuncturist, writer and record-label owner from Queens by way of Peru, is best known for the watershed tape compilation “New Breed,” an underground classic originally released in 1989. Arguably his biggest contribution to ABC was upgrading the venue’s bush-league sound equipment. “The sound system was rinky-dink,” Mr. Alva said. “It was a RadioShack speaker and Fisher Price microphone. That kind of thing.” He writes historical pieces and reminiscences about the old days of the scene for the music websites Noisey and No Echo. This exhibition is a natural extension of those stories.AdvertisementHe and Mr. Woods have unearthed 120 photographs by the scene’s annalists — Brett Beach, Justine DeMetrick, Chris Boarts Larson, Tracy Sham and Jon Hiltz, the drummer for Born Against — as well as various zines and fliers from the period. A rare video recording of an early Citizens Arrest set will be given a proper screening for the first time at ABC on May 15.AdvertisementABC was and still is run by volunteers. Originally there were about 25. The die-hards would show up early in the afternoon and divvy up responsibilities: taking money at the door, sound maintenance and cleaning up. Rules were quickly set in place: “No racist, sexist, or anti-gay bands will be booked,” an early flier written by Mr. Bromberg reads. (Later came an amendment prohibiting bands with major labels from being booked.)Based on the success of a one-off show in April 1989 — and after the moratorium on hard-core punk shows throughout New York — Mr. Bromberg, 46, better known as Mike B.S., pushed to make Saturday matinees at ABC No Rio a weekly event. And he recalls, as if it were yesterday, the violence that nearly killed the scene. “People got hurt every week,” he said. “There were guys who’d go into the pit with hammers, with a sock filled with billiard balls. It was crazy.” The establishment of ABC No Rio as a kind of safe space away from the madness could not have come at a more opportune time.Throughout the ’90s, ABC became a destination for bands the world over. Rennie Resmini, the singer and founder of Starkweather, an influential underground metal band from Philadelphia, would make the trip up to ABC No Rio when the venue was still in its infancy. “It was the only game in Manhattan proper during the matinee ban at CBGB,” recalled Mr. Resmini. “It was killer to finally get to play there since it has such a storied history.”Although the area is now a hive for hip young people to live, Daryl Kahan, a member of Citizens Arrest, remembers how it used to be. “Replace the trendy eateries, bars and out-of-town partyers,” Mr. Kahan said, “with danger, open-air drug markets and violence, and you will get a clearer picture of what things were like in New York City back in those days.”In 2006 the collective bought the building from the city for $1, under the condition that it raise the money to bring it up to code. That called for a complete demolition and rebuilding. The collective continues to raise money and review designs for the new building, and no date for demolition has been set. But it is safe to say that the spirit of ABC No Rio will not die, even if its home must. According to Mr. Alva, nothing has really changed there since 1990.“Depending on who you talk to,” he said with a laugh, “that could be good or bad.”“The Saturday Matinee At ABC No Rio 1990-91: A Visual Retrospective” opens on Thursday and continues through June 4 at ABC No Rio, 156 Rivington Street; 212-254-3697, abcnorio.org A version of this article appears in print on May 4, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: Haven for Fury Fondly Recalls Its Gritty Youth.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.