AdvertisementSupported byBy Corinna da Fonseca-WollheimThe composer, performance artist and vocal wizard Meredith Monk has been weaving her strange magic in a series of concerts at Carnegie Hall this season, where she has been composer in residence. On Saturday she concluded this run, billed as a celebration of 50 years of work created and performed in New York. Addressing the audience in the sold-out auditorium of Zankel Hall, she said her aim that night was above all to thank and celebrate the musicians who have traveled and performed alongside her.In a recent interview with The New York Times, Ms. Monk, who is 72, spoke about the challenges of notating her unusual vocal techniques so that future generations could perform her work. Saturday’s mesmerizing performance of old and recent works, in which she was joined by a dozen singers and instrumentalists, showed once again how important it is to save this musical world, with its language and rituals, from the threat of extinction. Musically, Ms. Monk’s language is built on translucent harmonies needled, here and there, by microtonal slips and pinpricks. A complex arsenal of extended vocal techniques, including sighs and hoarse inhalations, keening glissandos, whoops and yodels, combines with nonsense syllables and pure vowels to form enigmatic songs that can resemble incantations, lamentations or children’s games.Mystery and humor are never far apart. This was especially true of the selection of miniatures with which Ms. Monk opened, including a two-part solo made up of dreamy humming and rhythmic tongue clicks. Many of these musical koans are held together by the contradiction of stillness and movement with hyperkinetic streams of tiny notes forming sound sculptures that appear to hover in space.In “Panda Chant I” from “The Games,” Ms. Monk and the vocalists Katie Geissinger and Theo Bleckmann created a kind of disco ball of sound with shards of bright, high notes flashing out like refracted light. “Hocket” from “Facing North” also played on a mirror effect with Ms. Geissinger and Mr. Bleckmann passing hummed notes and startled “ha” sounds back and forth in voices that were so meticulously matched that it was difficult to tell who was singing what.The highlight of the program was “Dolmen Music” for six singers and cello (Brian Snow). Seated in a semicircle in a position of communal concentration, the musicians resembled a support group for sufferers of an unspecified predicament. Chants and babbled murmurs ebbed and swelled, interspersed with heated utterances that hinted at ferocious power struggles within the group.The second half of the program featured selections from “Mercy,” “Impermanence” and “On Behalf of Nature,” all recent works written for a combination of vocal ensemble and instrumental accompaniment. The percussionist John Hollenbeck, the multi-instrumentalist and vocalist Allison Sniffin and the woodwind player Bohdan Hilash created delicate textures with a whiff of jazzy harmonies from one side of the stage. These pieces were some of the most carefully choreographed of the evening , with singers performing in geometric formations and adding ritualistic gestures and movements, some disarmingly goofy. But the guileless instrumental accompaniment here had a tendency to take the edge off the discomfort, which makes Ms. Monk’s best music so compelling as it teeters on the spidery line between alienation and revelation.Advertisement