AdvertisementSupported byCritic’s NotebookBy James R. OestreichCarnegie Hall’s groundbreaking early-music festival Before Bach, a varied and eventful journey, ended on Friday evening more or less where it had begun on April 7, in the young but ebullient world of 17th-century Italian opera.John Eliot Gardiner and his Monteverdi Choir and English Baroque Soloists, after a grand performance of Monteverdi’s 1610 Vespers in Carnegie’s Stern Auditorium on Thursday evening, brought down the curtain (and the house) there with a concert performance of Monteverdi’s first opera, “L’Orfeo,” of 1607. Taken together, those performances constituted a significant event in themselves.For the performers, this was the culmination of a two-week American tour, a sort of sentimental journey appended to last year’s commemorations of the 50th anniversary of the founding of the Monteverdi Choir and Orchestra by Mr. Gardiner with a performance of the 1610 Vespers in 1964. (He disbanded the modern-instrument Monteverdi Orchestra in 1978, replacing it with the English Baroque Soloists, using period instruments or replicas.)For Carnegie, the concerts made a resplendent finale to its new festival. Apart from an afternoon of Purcell opera performed by the Canadian band Les Violons du Roy on April 12, these were the only concerts presented in the large Stern Auditorium, which can be a problematic space for small-scale chamber or early-music concerts.Mr. Gardiner has always favored a gutty, full-bodied approach to Monteverdi’s music. To some extent, he has written in “Bach: Music in the Castle of Heaven” (2013), “the Monteverdi Choir started life as an antichoir — in reaction to the well-mannered euphony and blend” favored in certain British circles at the time.Their mantra, he adds, was “Never louder than lovely.”For the Carnegie Vespers, he often encouraged the magnificent chorus, 34 strong, to sing at full shout. Though undeniably powerful, this somewhat blunt approach in Carnegie’s bright, clear acoustics may not always have best served music that delights in echo effects and thrives on churchy reverberation, a sound that seems to emanate from dark corners bearing a mystery, a mood, an atmosphere.Mr. Gardiner did achieve fascinating spatial effects at times, dispatching a vocal soloist and chitarrone (long-necked lute) accompanist to a side or rear balcony. And the soloists, drawn from the choir, were mostly superb, none more so than the soprano Francesca Aspromonte and the tenor Andrew Tortise.But there were also disappointments, in the great aria “Nigra sum” (“I am dark”), which has often been done in New York with greater artistry, in productions by the Green Mountain Project and others, and in the flagging energy and control of the cornetto playing toward the end of the evening. (Can there be a more difficult instrument to play than the cornetto?)With all due respect to Carnegie’s formative role in the enterprise, the Stern Auditorium may also not have been the ideal place to hear the production of “L’Orfeo.” In fact, Mr. Gardiner and company performed the work in the intimate Richardson Auditorium at Princeton University (some 900 seats against Carnegie’s 2,800) on Wednesday evening to better effect.The opera, based in mythology, unfolds amid a Thracian community of shepherds. Orfeo marries Euridice. Euridice, bitten by a snake, dies suddenly. Orfeo is allowed to reclaim her from the underworld on a seemingly simple condition that he fails to meet. Euridice is gone again, but Monteverdi’s version, unlike others, is fitted out with a happy ending.The Gardiner performance offered elements of light staging: characters moving about, interacting, even dancing. It drew a listener in, more in the Richardson’s close quarters than in Carnegie’s broader spaces.As it happened, the casting changed slightly from Richardson to Carnegie, too, though a program insert at Carnegie failed to register the changes. Ms. Aspromonte, who sang a variety of roles in Princeton (Music, Euridice, Hope) traded assignments with Mariana Flores (the Messenger there).As fine as Ms. Flores was in those larger roles, Ms. Aspromonte was somewhat missed. Still, her portrayal of the bringer of bad news was lustrous from its opening phrases and ultimately haunting.Inevitably, though, the real star of the production was the tenor Krystian Adam, who sailed through the long and difficult part of Orfeo on both evenings. Mr. Tortise was again excellent, as the ubiquitous First Shepherd and Apollo.Of Before Bach’s 13 concerts, I caught eight, and they were uniformly excellent in execution if not all completely to my taste. Oddly the biggest letdown came from the group I anticipated most, those master improvisers of L’Arpeggiata, who followed a revelatory Cavalli evening with another Purcell-based program, which often descended into watery jazz or New Age.In a similar imbalance, Jordi Savall’s solo program on viola da gamba conveyed much deeper emotion and insight than the fairly routine program of French Baroque works that he led with his Les Concert des Nations. I caught only one of the Tallis Scholars’ two concerts, but it was a beauty, a program that grew out a weeklong workshop for pre-professional singers, who helped populate a performance of Thomas Tallis’s 40-part motet, “Spem in Alium.” (That performance took place in the Church of St. Ignatius Loyola, which might have better served Mr. Gardiner’s Monteverdi Vespers.)You have to hope that Carnegie, with blessed access to such top-level performers, will return to this theme or one like it soon. But you also have to hope that it will widen its net a bit to include more American performers.The only native group represented here was the choir Pomerium in a modest concert in Weill Recital Hall. Carnegie’s interest in early music, American style, seems to remain regrettably shallow.Advertisement