AdvertisementSupported byBy Alastair MacaulayAmerican Ballet Theater at the Koch TheaterIt sometimes seems that American Ballet Theater, in its two-week fall seasons at the David H. Koch Theater, brings us more riches than in its eight-week spring season at the Metropolitan Opera House across the plaza. The 2015-16 season, however, looks more complex. The May-July repertory has now been announced: only three of its eight weeks are given to 19th-century stalwarts; three weeks will be dedicated to 20th-century ballets (two by Frederick Ashton); and, amazingly, two weeks to three 21st-century programs (all by Alexei Ratmansky).The fall season, opening on Wednesday, certainly offers a range of unfamiliar fascinations. Nine pieces are programmed, by nine choreographers — and paced so that you have to attend at least five performances to catch them all. They cover more than a century of modernist choreography, from Michel Fokine’s neo-Romantic pas de deux “Le Spectre de la Rose” (1911) to the world premiere of Marcelo Gomes’s “AfterEffect,” which is set to Tchaikovsky’s “Souvenirs de Florence.”It’s a rich assortment. Ashton (“Monotones I and II”) and George Balanchine (“Valse-Fantaisie,” his 1967 response to a Glinka score that some companies dance in his older, 1953 version) are both represented. So are three American choreographers who emerged from modern dance: Paul Taylor (“Company B”), Twyla Tharp (“Brahms-Haydn Variations”), and Mark Morris (  “After You,” which had its New York premiere earlier this month).Included is a famous dance work I’ve never seen in live performance, Kurt Jooss’s “The Green Table” (1932); this study of the futility of war is a divisive piece, deemed a classic by some and ludicrous by others. (The British critics Mary Clarke and Clement Crisp collaborated on many books as good friends; one of them was deeply moved by “The Green Table,” the other thought it hilarious.) Another piece with political connotations is Alexei Ratmansky’s Shostakovich “Piano Concerto No. 1,” in which it’s easy to feel the choreography reflects the shadowlands of artists working in the Soviet regime.Pennsylvania Ballet and Kyra NicholsThis weekend the Pennsylvania Ballet presents a program of George Balanchine’s “Concerto Barocco,” Christopher Wheeldon’s “DGV: Danse à Grande Vitesse” and Wayne McGregor’s “Chroma.” “DGV” and “Chroma” have been among the ballets most in demand internationally since their premieres (on the same night at the Royal Ballet in 2006); “Barocco” has been in international repertory since the 1940s. What’s of particular interest here is that this “Barocco” is the first Balanchine staging by the ballerina Kyra Nichols, that paragon of purest style whose decades as a dancer began in the last years of Balanchine’s lifetime to her farewell in 2007.Advertisement