By SCOTT REYBURNMAY 1, 2015
Charles Rennie Mackintosh and Le Corbusier were gifted artists as well as revolutionary architects. Alberto Giacometti made bronze sculpture and his brother Diego made bronze furniture. Francis Bacon worked as an interior designer before becoming a painter.Art and design have been close relatives since the late 19th century. Yet the two disciplines elicit different responses in the minds and wallets of 21st-century collectors, as was made clear last week at events in London and Brussels.Justifiably or not, design is viewed by many as an esoteric niche market. Yet signature pieces by coveted names can fetch spectacular prices. On Tuesday evening in London, a circa 1990 Lockheed Lounge chair by the Australian designer Marc Newson sold to a telephone bidder for 2.4 million pounds with fees, or about $3.7 million, at the plush new Phillips auction rooms in Mayfair.The price, just below the pre-sale upper estimate of £2.5 million, was an auction record for any work by a living designer, not accounting for inflation.Advertisement“It continues to be seen as an icon by blue-chip collectors of contemporary culture,” Alexander Payne, Phillips’s worldwide head of design, said of the high-tech chaise longue. He declined to identify the buyer.AdvertisementAn unlikely but compelling marriage of rococo curves with aeronautical riveted aluminum, the Lockheed Lounge is emblematic of the “design art” boom of the 1990s and early 2000s, when fashionable designers were marketed like contemporary artists, with prices to match.While demand for designers like Zaha Hadid and Amanda Levete has fallen since the financial crash of 2008, Mr. Newson’s Lockheed Lounge has retained the status of a design classic. He made 15 of the chairs; one of them sold for $2.1 million at Phillips in New York in May 2010.The auction market for design remains relatively small, however. In 2014, public sales of 20th- and 21st-century design raised 314 million euros, or about $350 million, an increase of 2 percent over the previous year, according to a report published by the European Fine Art Foundation in March. By comparison, auction sales of art from the same periods racked up a gargantuan €5.9 billion in 2014, up 19 percent from 2013, according to the report.“It’s a smaller audience,” said Rabih Hage, an interior designer and design consultant based in London. “Just five or six galleries have the top names, and there are barely 1,000 collectors.”Although the employees staffing telephones often outnumbered the audience at Phillips’s two-part design sale, the 230 lots nonetheless raised £8.6 million, and 77 percent of the works sold.With contemporary design no longer the force that it once was in the market, specialist sales tend to be dominated by mid-20th-century classics by such revered designers as Jean Prouvé, Pierre Jeanneret (Le Corbusier’s cousin and collaborator) and Gio Ponti. At the Phillips sale, a Prouvé aluminum and wood demountable house from 1944-45 sold to a telephone bidder for £602,500. A 1959 Ponti walnut dining table climbed to £194,500, more than three times the low estimate.The Newson chair was one of only three pieces by living designers included in the 56-lot evening sale. A 2006 Hadid white “Aqua” table in the preceding day auction illustrated how the “design art” bubble has burst.In April 2005, the London design gallery Established & Sons sold a prototype polyurethane “Aqua” dining table by the Iraqi-British architect for £45,000, or about $87,000 at the time. Eight months later, the same table was sold by Phillips de Pury (as the Phillips auction house was known at the time) in New York for $296,000 with fees. Last week in London, the No.4 table from the edition of 12 failed to sell against an estimate of £40,000 to £60,000.AdvertisementBy contrast, the market for contemporary art has a seemingly continuous supply of works by living artists that excite collectors both as something to own and as an investment.One of Europe’s foremost “discovery fairs” is Art Brussels, where works by emerging talent can be acquired at a relatively early stage of the market cycle.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The event’s 33rd edition, held last week for the final time at Brussels Expo on the edge of the city before moving next year to the more centrally located Tour & Taxis Royal Customs House, was revitalized by 57 newcomers among the 191 exhibitors.These included the New York gallerist James Cohan, who, like most first-timers, was seeking to make contact with Belgium’s vibrant community of contemporary art collectors.“Belgium has a reputation for very serious, thoughtful collectors who are acquisitive and very knowledgeable,” said Mr. Cohan, who sold a Bill Viola single-panel video piece, “Fire Martyr,” to a Belgian family foundation for €190,000.The three-day fair attracted 30,836 visitors. International collectors were in evidence — among them the Americans Michael and Susan Hort, specialists in unearthing emerging talent, who bought several works — but it was the local Belgians’ viewing and buying by committee at the April 24 preview that gave Art Brussels its special flavor.At one point, six Belgians clustered around a pair of typically enigmatic 2014 panels by the American painter R.H. Quaytman at the booth of the Gladstone Gallery, which has branches in New York and Brussels. Incorporating the motif of a needle piercing frayed rope, “O Topico, Chapter 27” was priced at $105,000.“I was with a collection of collectors,” said André Gordts, a Belgian collector and adviser. “I advised them to buy it. Two of them were for it, but three voted against.”AdvertisementLater in the day, another Belgian collector bought the piece.Elsewhere at the fair, there were plenty of big, bold gestural paintings to be had for a fraction of the cost of a Gerhard Richter “Abstraktes Bild.”The New York dealers Eleven Rivington sold at least three 2015 abstract portraits by the New York painter Jackie Saccoccio, priced from $35,000 to $40,000 each.Galerie Krinzinger from Vienna sold all nine of its recent abstract paintings by Jannis Varelas, priced at €17,000 or €19,000 each, depending on size. Collected by Charles Saatchi, among others, Mr. Varelas, 38, is a Greek artist with a studio in Los Angeles who has recently dropped collage figuration in favor of exuberant bursts of color. His work may well be seen soon at a Phillips contemporary art auction at a rather higher price.Because, like it or not, the art market’s growth is continually fueled by new works that can be bought and sold for a profit. Unless design can recapture some of that energy, it will remain a distant relative.A version of this article appears in print on May 4, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.