When Daniel Clowes started his comics series Eightball in 1989, it was miles away from the superhero fare that then dominated comics (and still does). With an acrid storytelling voice and a clean, spare drawing style, Mr. Clowes used Eightball — which usually contained four or five unrelated short stories per issue — to skewer pop culture, spin surrealistic horrors and sympathetically portray youth adrift. Eightball made Mr. Clowes, now 54, one of the leaders of the alternative comics boon in the 1990s, and his  work eventually attracted Hollywood: “Ghost World,” in 2001, starring Thora Birch and Scarlett Johansson, was based on an Eightball story, as was “Art School Confidential” in 2006. Next month Fantagraphics Books, Mr. Clowes’s first publisher, will publish “The Complete Eightball” in a $120 deluxe slipcase edition that one could imagine Enid Coleslaw, the wisecracking character in “Ghost World,” mocking for its elaborate packaging. (The book collects the first 18 issues of Eightball. The comic’s five further issues were devoted to single story lines that have been reprinted elsewhere, and in recent years Mr. Clowes has written book-length graphic novels like “Wilson.”)Speaking by phone from his home in Oakland, Calif., Mr. Clowes (rhymes with “wows”) discussed Eightball’s history and his latest graphic novel, “Patience,” a 180-page time-travel adventure due next March from Fantagraphics, the company that the difficult-to-impress Mr. Clowes called “obviously the greatest publisher of comics of all time.” Here are edited excerpts from the conversation.Did you begin Eightball thinking, “I’m going to challenge the comics establishment”?Oh God, no. That would have been so hopeless. I felt like what I was doing was being treated as though it was inherently not worthy of respect. That’s what I was always fighting against.What was it like to look back at the early days of Eightball? The thing that always comes to mind is what a small world it was back then. We were selling in very small numbers, through this byzantine network of old comics stores. Guys who ran comics stores back then were actively hostile to the kinds of comics I was doing. It was more about the fantasy aspect of it, the superheroes, the gaming. I’ve heard many stories of people trying to buy my comics back then and having the store owner say, “Why do you want this?” How did you get past that?My comics — and Love and Rockets by the Hernandez brothers, and Peter Bagge’s Hate — they were sort of the first ones to catch on with people who weren’t in the world of comics. There was this burgeoning zine culture that was very much against the monoculture that the mainstream was in the early ’90s, and this crowd became our audience. For most of its run Eightball was an anthology, and there’s a huge variety of material there.I worked seven days a week, 10 or more hours a day struggling to do this stuff. There’s a certain tragedy to that when you look at it — here’s a record of all the things I didn’t do during the prime of my youth! Do you still work the same way you did 25 years ago, drawing by hand at a table?Yes. I was just at an antiquarian book fair, and I picked up this catalog for a cartooning correspondence course from 1921. There was a photo of all the tools you need to use for cartooning in 1921, and it could be a photo of my drawing board: T-square, a watercolor brush, some ink, a pen, an eraser and a pencil. I do the coloring on a computer, but for the drawing I need to not have any screens around me at all.Your new book, “Patience,” is a time-travel story, a very common comic-book trope. How did you come to that theme?At a certain point I realized that the time-travel story, as many times as it’s been done, is an archetype that can go off in any direction. I didn’t want it to be about science of time travel. It’s more about the psychological aspect of what that would mean. I feel like a lot of my work is about time travel in other ways, about memory and living multiple lives at the same time. “Patience” is sort of about chasing after a relationship to make it perfect. That’s a poignant topic regardless of the sci-fi aspect. It had a lot to it, which is why is why I made it as long as it is. One of the main rules I have for working is that as soon as it becomes boring I either get rid of what I have and start over, or go in a completely new direction. And I have to say this one was never boring. It was really energizing to work on from start to finish, even though it was five years.Did you go into this thinking it would be your longest book?You’re always aiming to be as concise as possible in comics. With my last book, “Wilson,” it was a matter of cutting out dozens and dozens of stories until it was as bare-bones as it could possibly be. This one is the opposite. I wanted it to be the most visual thing I’ve done, where it’s expansive and big and has that kind of visual space that you don’t see in my comics that much. This is the first book where I really want you to be immersed in the world of the story and you don’t even know you’re turning the pages. That’s the kind of book I like to read.There’s a theme in your work of characters who have super-powers but aren’t morally up to handling them, and that turns up here.I think I have a terror of myself ever having any kind of power, because God knows I wouldn’t know what to do with it.Isn’t that part of what comics are about, the total control of the creator and the history of catering to young boys’ fantasies?Certainly doing comics the way I do it is the ultimate power trip. And I try to be a benevolent dictator as much as I can. You try to let your characters be themselves and have their own space. But ultimately you’re nudging them in various directions against their will, for your own amusement.