AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn Shattuck4:05 P.M. (Starz Cinema) COFFEE AND CIGARETTES (2004) Jim Jarmusch spent 17 years tapping into the vices of celebrities — sometimes playing themselves, sometimes not — in this anthology of conversations, ideas and insights starring Bill Murray, the Wu-Tang Clan, Cate Blanchett, Steve Buscemi, Jack and Meg White, Steven Wright, Roberto Benigni, Iggy Pop, Tom Waits, Steve Coogan and Alfred Molina. Some vignettes are merely anecdotal; others are tangles of passive aggression, racial hostility or repellent one-upmanship. “Under the influence of nicotine and caffeine, and with too much time on their hands, people have a way of getting on one another’s nerves,” A. O. Scott wrote in The Times.8 P.M. (Fox) GRANDFATHERED Jimmy raises children’s birthday bashes to the next level by bringing in Criss Angel and Richie Sambora to help the 2-year-old Edie celebrate hers. In “The Grinder,” at 8:30, Stewart and Deb wonder if they’ve become friend magnets because everyone wants to meet Dean. And in “Scream Queens,” at 9, the Kappas decide to hold a killer slumber party.8:30 P.M. (Esquire) WALL STREET (1987) What’s in a name? Michael Douglas plays Gordon Gekko, Oliver Stone’s reptilian corporate raider, and Charlie Sheen is the young stockbroker willing to do anything to make it to the top. Gekko is “ruthless, ironic and, under the circumstances, completely practical, and Mr. Douglas, in the funniest, canniest performance of his career, plays him with the wit and charm of Old Scratch wearing an Italian-designer wardrobe,” Vincent Canby wrote in The Times.9 P.M. (CW) iZOMBIE Liv swills pinot grigio and consumes fashion after eating the brains of a trophy wife pushed to her death from the balcony of her dream home by a hit man.9 P.M. (Discovery Life) BEN CARSON: THE LOST TAPES Before he was a Republican presidential candidate, Ben Carson was the director of pediatric neurosurgery at Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore from 1984 to 2013, and was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom in 2008 by President George W. Bush. This special looks at some of his noteworthy surgeries, including the separation of conjoined twins.9 P.M. (BET) BEING MARY JANE Gabrielle Union returns as the Atlanta news anchor Mary Jane Paul, who begins a third season recovering from the car crash she had after learning that her lover, David, and her best friend, Lisa, had been having a relationship behind her back. Meanwhile, her on-air replacement has been generating a loud buzz. (Image: Ms. Union)10 P.M. (Spike) SWEAT INC. The fitness guru Jillian Michaels — or, as she calls herself, America’s toughest trainer, guaranteed to provoke tears — looks for the next big thing in the exercise industry, with the winner receiving $100,000, a feature in Women’s Health magazine and the chance to place a program in Retro Fitness locations around the country.What’s Streaming NowTRAINWRECK (2015) A men’s magazine writer taught from childhood that monogamy isn’t realistic — her dad says so — ponders giving up her commitment-free existence when she falls for the sports doctor she’s profiling in this comedy from Judd Apatow, written by and starring the inimitable Amy Schumer. Bill Hader plays the object of her affection; Tilda Swinton is her editor at S’Nuff. With Ms. Schumer subdued into a more vanilla version of the flawed women she skewers in her Comedy Central series, this film may not approach the radicalness of her best work. But she’s “my kind of superhero — she stops haters dead,” Manohla Dargis wrote in The New York Times. And she’s at her strongest when she insists, Ms. Dargis writes, “that women aren’t distressed damsels but — as they toddle, walk and race in the highest of heels, the tightest of skirts, the sexiest, mightiest of poses — the absolute agents of their lives and desires.” (amazon.com, iTunes) (Image: Ms. Schumer and Mr. Hader)Advertisement