AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn Shattuck4:10 P.M. (Flix) SECRETS & LIES (1996) Hortense (Marianne Jean-Baptiste), a black London optometrist who was adopted as an infant, discovers that her birth mother, Cynthia (Brenda Blethyn), is a white, lower-class factory worker with a dysfunctional family in this Mike Leigh drama. Timothy Spall (the star of Mr. Leigh’s “Mr. Turner”), Phyllis Logan (Mrs. Hughes on “Downton Abbey”) and Claire Rushbrook play Cynthia’s brother, sister-in-law and daughter, who have secrets of their own. “In a performance that lurches thrillingly from grief to comedy to compassion, never losing its tart humor, her Cynthia rises up from the sodden mess of her life to face regret over the past and uncharacteristic hope for the future,” Janet Maslin wrote in The New York Times about Ms. Blethyn, who along with Ms. Jean-Baptiste and Mr. Leigh received Oscar nominations. “Soap opera?” Ms. Maslin asked. “Never. Mr. Leigh’s wry and magnanimous intelligence keeps ‘Secrets & Lies’ determinedly unsentimental, helped immeasurably by Cynthia’s fine, tough resilience and idiomatic verve.”10 A.M. (BET) I THINK I LOVE MY WIFE (2007) Chris Rock, left plays an investment banker who seems to have it all: a beautiful wife (Gina Torres), two adorable children, a lovely house in the suburbs and a good job with a high-end Manhattan firm. But he’s bored. Then along comes Nikki (Kerry Washington), and with her, trouble. Mr. Rock directed this film and wrote the script, which he adapted with Louis C. K. from Eric Rohmer’s “Chloe in the Afternoon.” “In attempting to synthesize the later French New Wave of the late 1960s and early ’70s with the upscale African-American romantic comedies that flourished in Hollywood in the late 1990s, Mr. Rock has not only done his best work as a director and screenwriter but has also made an unusually insightful and funny mainstream American movie about the predicaments of modern marriage,” A. O. Scott wrote in The Times.9 P.M. (CW) iZOMBIE Liv (Rose McIver) gets a little too personal with Clive (Malcolm Goodwin) after eating the brains of a radio-show host who specializes in relationship advice.9 P.M. (Fox) NEW GIRL While Coach (Damon Wayans Jr.) prepares to move out of the loft, Schmidt (Max Greenfield) decides to purge his nonessentials — and discovers what has real meaning for him. Jess (Zooey Deschanel) and Nick (Jake Johnson), meanwhile, ponder their feelings for each other.10 P.M. (13, 49) OUTBREAK “Frontline” investigates the genesis of the Ebola outbreak — the funeral of a traditional healer on the border between Guinea and Sierra Leone is the most likely culprit — and why it wasn’t stopped sooner, speaking with officials from health organizations who admit to mistakes. “The ‘Frontline’ examination does a nice job of at least beginning to ask the questions that need to be asked while keeping the human drama front and center,” Neil Genzlinger wrote in The Times.10 P.M. (TV Land) YOUNGER When her ex-husband fails to come up with a tuition payment Liza (Sutton Foster) gets creative with clothing to make some extra money. Kelsey (Hilary Duff) continues to mix pleasure and work.10:30 P.M. (Comedy Central) INSIDE AMY SCHUMER A jury of 12 angry men decides Ms. Schumer’s fate.What’s Streaming NowKINGS OF PASTRY (2010) This documentary by Chris Hegedus and D. A. Pennebaker goes behind the scenes of the Meilleurs Ouvriers de France finals in pastry making, a three-day contest held in Lyon every four years. In France any chef can wear the pleated white toque and the expression of having sniffed curdled milk. But those who don the winner’s jacket with the blue-white-and-red collar have to earn it. (Frauds can face jail time.) From delicate puffs tufted with cream and chocolates crowned by flecks of gold leaf to nougat-and-jam-filled wedding cakes and the bijou — a museum-quality sugar sculpture presented in a glass box — every morsel counts for the 16 chefs who hope to reap a medal, a title and a handshake from the president of France. But a shot at stardom can crash and burn as quickly as a six-foot-tall sugar sculpture can disintegrate. This film is one of 11 in “Culinary Cinema,” a collection on SundanceNow Doc Club. (docclub.com)Advertisement