AdvertisementSupported byBy Brian SeibertBarnard/Columbia Dances, a project produced by Barnard College’s department of dance, matches students from Barnard and Columbia University with notable choreographers and puts on a show with what they make together. The program that opened at the Miller Theater on Friday was unusual in including an early-’80s classic, Mark Morris’s “Gloria.” That is great material, although the crucial material in these programs is the cast of students.The most successful works for this project tend to capitalize on the students’ intelligence without making them fake greater experience than they have. Jodi Melnick’s “Grace Notes” largely followed this model. To a soundtrack by Robert Boston that rotated among von Biber Baroque, silence and nighttime neighborhood noises, seven dancers passed around steps as they passed around curious props (bags of frozen vegetables, ice scrapers), occasionally snapping into collective order. With its suggestions of courtliness and swishing hips, the many-layered work could be read as notes on different kinds of grace. The students caught different facets of the choreographer’s personal style, and the stage often resembled a party of mini-Melnicks, with Maya Lee-Parritz a standout among equals.The play of idiosyncrasy against the collective was even stronger in John Heginbotham’s whimsical “Empty Pockets.” The songs of Connie Converse sound at first like your average 1950s folk music, but closer listening reveals quirkier attitudes and sardonic humor. Similarly, in Mr. Heginbotham’s dance, 13 women in identical floral-print dresses linked hands and bounced happily in group patterns, sometimes sticking their legs in the air to represent trees and mountains in the lyrics. But the work bristled with unconventional details. Oddballs and misfits found passing moments of harmony.For Diane Coburn Bruning’s “Siege,” the music was live: a few movements of Gorecki and another piece by Mr. Boston, performed by the Osso String Quartet. But there didn’t seem to be any point to the women performing on point. The work’s melodramatic, militaristic formations had a modern-dance weightedness and became perplexingly stuck, with the dancer’s feet fixed like those of people pretending to ski.“Gloria” was supposed to have live music. It didn’t, but more was missing than live voices singing Vivaldi. The staging, by the former Mark Morris dancer Marjorie Folkman, was a noble effort, danced with touching effort by the students, especially in the more joyful, formal sections. Yet the performance presented the letter of the choreography absent the spirit. Bodies dragged themselves across the floor without understanding, not quite reaching grace or glory.Advertisement