AdvertisementSupported byBy Gia KourlasMythology has long been a pool that choreographers have dipped their toes in for inspiration. Martha Graham had her way with Medea and Clytemnestra; Mark Morris’s gorgeous “Dido and Aeneas,” a danced opera, is a classic. But the choreographer Jonah Bokaer wants to steer mythology into the present. For “Other Myths,” which made its New York premiere on Sunday at Lightbox, in Manhattan, he created a setting in which his dancers, five performers mainly from Eastern Europe, could explore their own myths. According to program notes, each chose a myth with roots in the Carpathian Mountain region; Mr. Bokaer then interpreted and choreographed the stories, producing results that were hardly linear. Bare-bones and coolly intimate, “Other Myths” was performed in near darkness on a gray stage delineated by white tape; the audience stood or sat around it, enclosing the performance area like a cocoon as a score by Soundwalk Collective played field recordings of sounds collected from the perimeter of the Black Sea. Once the dancers entered the performance space, they never left it. Katharina Illnar and Evin Hadzialjevic pressed their hands together and slowly lay down on the floor where they reclined with the tops of their heads touching — a motif repeated throughout the dance. Karolina Susa stood apart and gradually lowered into a plié as her arms billowed out. All the while, video from earlier performances in Budapest (at a museum) and Zagreb (outdoors and in the rain) played on two walls, providing an echo of the live performance that, at various times, was lulling or tedious. Zoltan Grecso and Szabi Pataki stared meaningfully at the video, yet what so engrossed them was a mystery. Later, their interplay became increasingly physical as they narrowly missed touching each other in a sequence of body tilts and head rolls that showed, particularly from the deft Mr. Pataki, sinuous strength. It was also a rare sight. Mr. Bokaer reduces much of his movement to a minimum, spending so much time on its detail and angles that his overall structure becomes sluggish. When he loosened the reins and revealed earthier, more human moments in brief flashes — a hand to the head, for instance, instantly conjured a distressing memory — the stage bloomed with life. In the arresting conclusion, Ms. Hadzialjevic, spinning as the others curled into fetal positions, stopped to tip each body onto its other side. She backed out slowly, surveying the spooky scene: the carnage was unmistakable. Advertisement