AdvertisementSupported byBy Mike HaleAs Vimeo tries to change its image from business-oriented video-sharing site to viewer-oriented video-on-demand site, it sets itself up for comparisons to the leaders in its new field — Netflix, Amazon, Hulu. But its choices so far suggest a different identity: farm team for HBO.Its most high-profile offering, the online series “High Maintenance,” has the artful, low-fi anomie of the HBO winter-Sunday-night comedy, like “Girls” and “Togetherness” down pat. The loosely connected vignettes of boho Brooklyn lives replicate a certain HBO vibe so closely that the cable channel is producing the show’s next six episodes.The connection is just as strong in intent, if not in quality, with another Vimeo series, “Hunting Season,” which will have its second season debut on Tuesday. (New episodes will be posted weekly.) Narrated by a young writer who works for Gawker while maintaining an anonymous blog about his sex life, its desire to be a gay “Sex and the City” couldn’t be more poignantly obvious. It’s not hard to imagine that there were silent cheers among the show’s creative team when HBO canceled “Looking,” opening up the gay “Sex-and-the-City” slot.But “Hunting Season,” created and mostly written by Jon Marcus (a producer on films like “Boys Don’t Cry” and “Party Monster”), is less premium-cable-ready than “High Maintenance.” There’s some charm and humor in its late-night West Village and Chelsea milieu, where Alex (Ben Baur) can’t help running into his old boyfriends (and other hookups who were unknowing fodder for his blog). And the intertwined, comic and bittersweet romances among Alex’s posse of friends are reasonably deftly plotted, if familiar. But Mr. Marcus’s writing has its flat, stilted patches, and Mr. Baur is appealing but perhaps not quite ready to move beyond the laptop screen.It doesn’t help that the new episodes have been expanded from standard Web length (around 10 minutes) to television length (around 20). “High Maintenance” has been smart to stay under 20 minutes, though even there the newer, more serious episodes have tended toward the twee and sentimental. With the more plot-driven “Hunting Season,” the greater length allows for more development but also points up the staginess and slight banality of the material. In baseball terms, it may be a show destined for a career in the minor leagues.Advertisement