By MICHAEL WHITEMAY 4, 2015
LONDON — It’s a curse of modern opera staging that directors want to tell you too much. Certainty replaces mystery. Meanings aren’t suggested but proclaimed in semaphore. And the poetic pleasures of a piece like Karol Szymanowski’s “Krol Roger” (King Roger) turn prosaic — as they do in the otherwise welcome new production that opened on Friday at Covent Garden, directed by Kasper Holten, designed by Steffen Aarfing and conducted by Antonio Pappano.“Krol Roger” is usually an indulgence of the kind that Sally Bowles in “Cabaret” would call divinely decadent. A perfumed ceremony of religion, ritual and sex, it asks for scenic spectacle, large forces and a lot of effort teaching everyone to sing in Polish — all for a running time of less than 90 minutes, which makes it one of those exotic baubles that opera audiences collect but that opera companies don’t usually schedule. Outside Poland, where it counts as a national treasure, it’s a rare thing. So this Covent Garden staging, which runs until May 19, was a must-see.It turned out to be a production for our times, however: low on perfume and glamour, high on explanation. To be fair, there was one single gesture toward spectacle: a massive sculpted head that all but filled the stage during most of the production and seemed to come to life as video projections played across its features. Referencing the sort of statuary erected to old-time dictators, its immediate message was of power: King Roger as a mighty ruler.But the story of this opera is about how easily the mighty fall, and Mr. Holten doesn’t let the head just sit there doing nothing. It disintegrates in Act III, indicating the collapse of his authority. In Act II, meanwhile, it revolves, we see inside, and its interior becomes a space where the internal conflicts of King Roger’s mind are acted out, as classic, Freudian-era psychodrama.AdvertisementSzymanowski’s opera is fair game for this kind of interpretation. Written in the 1920s in the wake of Strauss’s “Frau ohne Schatten,” Bartok’s “Bluebeard” and other lyric-theater scores that haunt the shadowlands of myth and dream, “Krol Roger” is a myth about an ordered world — the King’s court, shored up by elaborate rituals and governance — reduced to chaos by a charismatic stranger. The stranger at first seems Christ-like but turns dangerously Dionysiac, seducing all around him with a hedonistic gospel of love, liberty and pleasure. Roger’s wife, Roxana, is won over by him. Roger struggles and succumbs, but by the end appears to have regained some kind of equilibrium between the old ways and the new.AdvertisementIt doesn’t take deep reading to appreciate that all this is an image of the human will caught in the old dilemma between Bacchus and Apollo: instinct against reason. At Covent Garden it’s explained with pristine clarity in case we fail to catch on. When Act II reveals the inside of the massive head, its upper half is filled with books (which end up on a bonfire) while the lower one is packed with writhing bodies.Any questions? As it happens, Mr. Holten did something similar in his last Covent Garden staging — a “Don Giovanni” dominated by a turning architectural module meant to represent the inner landscape of Giovanni’s mind. But repetition wasn’t the problem here: It was the replacement of allusive magic by didacticism, with the audience forced into the role of students at a first-year Freudian Studies lecture.With the magic went the allure of the mysterious stranger, who’s supposed to be a shepherd but was dressed here like a foppish extra from an episode of Dr. Who — time-traveling but vaguely Regency. As costume errors go, this was substantial and did nothing to supply another missing aspect of the piece: erotic charge.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Krol Roger” is, at least in part, confessional, reflecting Szymanowski’s sexual awakening on a trip to Sicily, where the opera is set and where the appeal of local peasant boys had some bearing on his choice of subject.Roger’s infatuation with the shepherd isn’t theoretical but a traumatized surrender to desire. Apart from writhing bodies in the mental basement, Mr. Holten gave us curiously little about that.But what the staging lacked, the score delivered in the hands of a conductor who brought the sensuousness of this music into being. The orchestral sound was ravishing, the chorus strong but supple. And though the generally slow pace of Szymanowski’s writing makes it hard for voices to sustain good tone against the stockpiled consonants of Polish, it was mostly well-sung by the principals.The set design seemed to absorb their sound, especially when the massive head was there. But Saimir Pirgu overcame initial rawness (and the nonsense of his strawberry frock-coat) to become a creditable if unsubtle shepherd. Georgia Jarman delivered Roxana’s show-stealing coloratura with immaculate style. And Mariusz Kwiecien, who had the advantage of being a Polish baritone with past experience of singing Roger, snatched victory from the jaws of defeat in a performance that faltered in the first half but flourished in the second — after a midway announcement that he wasn’t well.The convention of the front-of-curtain plea for understanding is peculiar to opera: You’re unlikely to see someone on a concert platform pleading for a pianist with a stiff wrist. But it tends to work like magic: Suddenly the pressure drops, the singer finds new voice. And if you really want a lesson in psychology, there’s one worth sitting through.Krol Roger.  Directed by Kasper Holten. Royal Opera House Covent Garden. Through May 19.A version of this review appears in print on May 5, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.