AdvertisementSupported byBy Nate ChinenFor his encore at Madison Square Garden on Sunday night, Eric Clapton reconvened all four of the guitarists he had brought on as guests in the show for a climactic tear through “High Time We Went,” the Joe Cocker song. Their solos ran down the line, brief but full of distinguishing traits: shapely but biting for Doyle Bramhall II; ecstatic but measured for John Mayer; flinty and raw for Jimmie Vaughan; fluid and singing for Derek Trucks.But there was no solo by Mr. Clapton, who stood off to one side with a Fender Stratocaster, facing the others at times like an encouraging scout leader. He radiated satisfaction and security, basking in the warmth of a guitar-centric brotherhood and his exalted place in it. Why spoil all that with his own exertion? Doesn’t a gracious host let others do most of the talking, even as he takes his seat at the head of the table?Mr. Clapton had a commemorative hook for this show, and for an all-but-identically plotted one in the same arena on Friday. He turned 70 in late March; these were his only tour dates before a series of concerts in the coming weeks at the Royal Albert Hall in London. “Thank you for coming out and helping me to celebrate this wonderful birthday,” he said at the top of the encore, in the evening’s single nod to the occasion.By all other measures, notwithstanding the guests, the show was business as usual for Mr. Clapton, whose mature performance style has always suggested a master clinician more than a showman. His band is stocked with longtime associates who excel at laying firm bedrock, like the bassist Nathan East and the drummer Steve Gadd.A pair of background singers, Michelle John and Sharon White, bolstered Mr. Clapton’s choruses, while Chris Stainton fleshed out the band’s sound on piano. Paul Carrack did some stirring work on organ, and he took a soulful vocal lead on a couple of songs, “High Time We Went” and another Cocker staple, “You Are So Beautiful.” (Mr. East stepped out front, too, taking Steve Winwood’s lead vocal on the Blind Faith song “Can’t Find My Way Home.”)Mr. Clapton drafted his set list as a pledge of allegiance: His own songs formed a minority amid covers of his blues totems, including Bo Diddley, Johnny Moore, Willie Dixon and Muddy Waters. But because Mr. Clapton has been traveling this road so long, those borrowed blues also qualify as beloved fixtures of his catalog.Two of his best moments came on a pair of Robert Johnson tunes he has memorably recorded: “Crossroads,” with winningly gruff singing and a stomping cadence; and “Little Queen of Spades,” with lapidary guitar interjections over a slow, circuitous triplet beat.Elsewhere, Mr. Clapton took what felt like a dutiful tour through his hit parade, blazing through Bob Marley and the Wailers’ “I Shot the Sheriff” and bringing a more unfortunate lite-reggae lilt to his ballad “Tears in Heaven.” He played “Layla” in an arrangement similar to the one on his 1992 album “Unplugged,” but with a more unpredictable and expressive acoustic guitar solo. “Wonderful Tonight” was warmed-over treacle, and an inconvenient reminder of the constriction that age has imposed on Mr. Clapton’s voice.Predictably, given his recorded history and his more recent stewardship of the Crossroads Guitar Festival, Mr. Clapton perked up every time he had another guitar player onstage. Mr. Mayer brought a respectfully assertive presence to “Pretending,” and Mr. Vaughan — Stevie Ray Vaughan’s older brother, and at 64, essentially Mr. Clapton’s peer — was workmanlike but likably punchy on “Before You Accuse Me.”Even better was a version of “Let It Rain,” from Mr. Clapton’s self-titled 1970 studio debut, featuring Mr. Bramhall and Mr. Trucks. Both guitarists have toured in Mr. Clapton’s bands, and their easy familiarity was an evident asset. Mr. Trucks especially, without his customary slide, worked up to an incantatory outflow. And this time, Mr. Clapton joined the fray: unpressured and unhurried, but compelling all the same.Advertisement