AdvertisementSupported byBy Corinna da Fonseca-WollheimBlink and you’ve missed it. On Friday evening the Metropolitan Opera revived Jonathan Miller’s stylish and moving production of Stravinsky’s “The Rake’s Progress,” with James Levine conducting a cast led by a radiant Paul Appleby in the lead role. This coming Saturday afternoon it will once again pack up Peter J. Davison’s handsome sets and stash them away alongside Judy Levin’s spectacular 1920s costumes in a storage room marked with a sign that reads: Neglect Until Further Notice.According to an interview posted on the Met’s website, “The Rake’s Progress” is dear to Mr. Levine’s heart. Then why is this only the second time he has brought it back since 1997, when Mr. Miller’s delightful production first took the stage at the Met? And why only for three performances? The opera is no hard sell. The whip-smart libretto by W. H. Auden and Chester Kallman tells of Tom Rakewell, an impressionable young man who jilts his fiancée for get-rich-quick promises made by the sinister Nick Shadow, who instead leads Tom down a road of debauchery and bankruptcy before revealing himself to be the Devil. The story is based on a 1735 series of engravings by William Hogarth, and Stravinsky’s score has the etched-in-acid precision of that medium as well as classical mastery of line and proportion.On Friday, it took a few numbers for things to click between the orchestra and the singers. But once they did, the result was sparkling music laced with a delicious dose of acerbic deviancy.Mr. Appleby was in spectacular form as Tom. Floppy-limbed and animated by idle nervous energy, he was every inch the “shuttle-headed lad” described in the libretto. His roomy, relaxed tenor was a source of unalloyed pleasure, especially in crescendos in which it bloomed without any hint of strain or steel. If this performance is any indication, his turn next season as Belmonte in Mozart’s “The Abduction From the Seraglio” will be one to watch.Gerald Finley was suave and assured as Tom’s nemesis, Nick, singing with an unfailingly elegant baritone. That elegance sometimes got in the way of menace, and there were moments when the drama seemed to call for a darker-hued voice.The soprano Layla Claire was sweet-toned and nimble as Anne Trulove, growing in both vocal stature and pathos throughout the evening. Her aria “No Word From Tom” showcased the kaleidoscopic colors of her top notes but also exposed the underdeveloped power of her lower range. The appealing bass Brindley Sherratt made an authoritative Met debut as Anne’s father, Trulove.Stephanie Blythe was deliciously funny — even if her voice has lost some of its characteristic depth and polish — as Baba the Turk, the bearded lady who can make cardinals swoon and entices Tom into a cynical marriage. Vocally she risked being upstaged by Margaret Lattimore, who brought an auburn glow to the part of Mother Goose. The Met chorus did splendid work, especially in the heartbreaking asylum scene in which Tom, by then insane, is reunited with Anne. It’s about as spellbinding a moment as any in opera.“The Rake’s Progress” repeats on Saturday afternoon at the Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center; 212-362-6000, metopera.org.Advertisement