Since the news broke last week that six writers had withdrawn from PEN American Center’s annual gala to protest an award to the French satirical magazine Charlie Hebdo, social media and op-ed pages around the world have been flooded with debate about free speech, blasphemy and anti-Muslim prejudice.Now, Charlie Hebdo itself has weighed in. The cover of its new issue, released on Wednesday, features a double-entendre referencing the PEN fracas and the continuing political family feud between Marine Le Pen, the leader of the right-wing, anti-immigrant National Front, and her father, Jean-Marie Le Pen.The cover shows the Le Pens in contorted silhouette, shouting “Croak, Le Pen!” at each other. (Earlier this week, Ms. Le Pen suspended her father from the party he founded, prompting him to say she should “change her name.”) Inside, a centerfold package of articles and cartoons addresses the PEN controversy.In an opinion column written in a serious tone in contrast to the comic cartoons surrounding it, Philippe Lançon, a journalist shot in the face in the attack on Charlie Hebdo’s offices by Muslim extremists in January that left 12 dead, expresses his surprise at the PEN dissenters. He writes that he understands that some writers might want to distance themselves from PEN, and that the magazine itself mistrusts such institutions, “so as not to become one itself — one of those places where it’s indispensable to show how bien-pensant you are in order to get ahead and believe you’re loved.”“It’s not their abstention that shocks me; it’s the nature of their arguments,” Mr. Lançon continues. “That novelists of such quality — Peter Carey, Michael Ondaatje, Francine Prose, Teju Cole, Rachel Kushner, Taiye Selasi — come to say so many misinformed stupidities in so few words, with all the vanity of good souls, is what saddens the reader in me.”During the PEN controversy, defenders of the magazine have charged its critics with ignorance of the magazine’s contents and context. Charlie Hebdo, they pointed out, is a leftist magazine with a longstanding history of anti-racist activism, and in fact has pilloried the anti-immigrant policies of the National Front far more often than it mocked Islam. In an interview with the New York Times editorial board on Tuesday, Gérard Biard, Charlie Hebdo’s top editor, said its attacks on religion were part of a tradition of equal-opportunity blasphemy, not racism. “When we mock a religion, we don’t knock believers, we don’t mock people,” he said. “We mock institutions. We mock ideas.”The new Charlie Hebdo issue also takes on the prominent center-left historian and demographer Emmanuel Todd, whose new book “Who Is Charlie?,” published in France on May 7, criticizes the “Je suis Charlie” solidarity movement that swept France after the attacks as a “fraud” that brought together France’s urban, historically atheist elite and rural, Roman Catholic, traditionally anti-republican demographic, but excluded France’s Muslim underclass.“Todd isn’t Charlie,” a headline on the cover reads. “So much the better!”