Times critics share what they’ve been listening to lately.BEETHOVEN, HAYDN, MOZART: Songs
Mark Padmore, tenor; Kristian Bezuidenhout, fortepiano
(Harmonia Mundi) 
Don’t assume that the British tenor Mark Padmore is an opera lightweight from the ethereal sound and almost choirboy purity of his voice. In the right role, like Captain Vere in Britten’s “Billy Budd,” he can sing with penetrating intensity. And he’s a riveting actor. Still, his is an intimate tenor voice, ideally suited to the Evangelist in Bach’s “St. Matthew Passion,” and, as this new recording again demonstrates, the lieder repertory. Joined by the vibrant fortepianist Kristian Bezuidenhout, Mr. Padmore sings songs by Haydn, Mozart’s seldom-heard “Masonic Cantata,” and a diverse selection of Beethoven songs, including the composer’s only cycle, the great “An die ferne Geliebte.” This is eloquent lieder singing driven by astute and sensitive attention to the texts. (Anthony Tommasini) MENDELSSOHN: Symphony No. 5, ‘Ruy Blas’ Overture, ‘Calm Sea and Prosperous Voyage’ 
John Eliot Gardiner, conductor; London Symphony Orchestra
(LSO Live) 
Mr. Gardiner has conducted a number of works celebrating the Lutheran Reformation during his career, probably most of them by Bach. Here he offers Mendelssohn’s “Reformation” Symphony along with the overture to Victor Hugo’s play “Ruy Blas” and the concert overture “Calm Sea and Prosperous Voyage.” Inevitably you wonder how these performances might have sounded if played by Mr. Gardiner’s period band, the Orchestre Révolutionnaire et Romantique, but the London Symphony performances, crisp and driving, are attractive and satisfying on their own terms. (James R. Oestreich)REICH: Music for 18 Musicians 
Brad Lubman, conductor; Ensemble Signal
(Harmonia Mundi)
Even if more recordings are released next year to celebrate the 40th anniversary of this work, Steve Reich’s instant classic, none will likely be more sensational than this. Taped at Empac in Troy, N.Y., in 2011, the augmented players of the Ensemble Signal joyously meld rhythmic precision and transparency of sound with a startling ability to shade colors. It’s like hearing a ritual unfold and made radical once more. (David Allen)‘BACH & BEYOND: PART 2’: Johann Sebastian Bach, Bela Bartok, Kaija Saariaho
Jennifer Koh, violin
(Cedille)
Ms. Koh, one of our most thoughtful and intense musicians, continues her series of programs and recordings pairing Bach with modern and contemporary works. This installment focuses on composers’ first works for solo violin: Bach’s Sonata in G minor (and his little-performed B-minor Partita), Bartok’s shadowy Sonata for Solo Violin and Ms. Saariaho’s shimmering “Frises” for violin and electronics, with sounds hovering atop one another. (Zachary Woolfe)SPOTIFY PLAYLIST
Tracks from the recordings discussed this week. (Spotify users can also find it here.)