By KATHRYN SHATTUCKMAY 6, 2015
9 P.M. (Pivot) GARDENERS OF EDEN Kristin Davis (“Sex and the City”) travels to the David Sheldrick Wildlife Trust in Kenya, where conservationists are battling the poaching of elephants for the illegal ivory trade while rescuing orphaned offspring that are eventually returned to the wild. (Above, an orphan visiting a Trust keeper, Benjamin Kyalo.) She also examines the elephant’s role in maintaining the habitats that support it and other species.2 P.M. (Syfy) THE ADJUSTMENT BUREAU (2011) Matt Damon, his toothy grin reminiscent of Robert F. Kennedy’s, portrays David Norris, a Democratic son of Brooklyn and a favorite in the race for the United States Senate. That is, until a damaging photo from his past ruins his campaign, and he meets Elise (Emily Blunt), a dancer who innocently causes him to veer off the path that a team of mystery men have secretly plotted for him. Their plan does not include Elise, nor free will on David’s part. Now he must decide whether to give in to their machinations or reclaim his life. If George Nolfi, who directed this film and wrote the screenplay, based on a short story by Philip K. Dick, “doesn’t go deep in ‘The Adjustment Bureau,’ a drilling down to where it hurts (he would rather entertain than pain you), he skates on the gray-blue surfaces of his film with confidence,” Manohla Dargis wrote in The New York Times.2:30 P.M. (FXX) MONEYBALL (2011) Brad Pitt received an Oscar nomination for his portrayal of Billy Beane, the general manager of the Oakland Athletics, who transformed a team with one of the lowest payrolls in baseball into a contender against wealthier franchises by rethinking everything he had been taught about the game in this fictionalized adaptation of the book by Michael Lewis. Jonah Hill, also nominated, plays Peter Brand, a computer whiz and a disciple of Bill James, the statistician who devised new ways to interpret baseball data. And Philip Seymour Hoffman is the team’s manager, Art Howe, who isn’t about to buy into the approach. Manohla Dargis, writing in The Times, said the director, Bennett Miller, “takes all this seemingly dry, dusty, inside-baseball stuff and turns it into the kind of all-too-rare pleasurable Hollywood diversion that gives you a contact high.”8 P.M. (NBC) THE MYSTERIES OF LAURA The death of a club kid is linked to a string of jewel heists in the Diamond District. Jake (Josh Lucas), meanwhile, breaches divorced-parent etiquette, causing Laura (Debra Messing) to rethink her relationship with Tony (Neal Bledsoe). In “Law & Order: Special Victims Unit,” at 9, the daughter (Samira Wiley) of a man imprisoned for incest and rape decides to recant her testimony and set her father free. But when a judge refuses to reopen the 17-year-old case, Captain Cragen (Dann Florek) returns from retirement with evidence that could change the man’s fate.Advertisement9 P.M. (ABC) MODERN FAMILY Claire (Julie Bowen) and Phil (Ty Burrell) try to persuade the school principal to let Alex (Ariel Winter) and her nemesis break the tie for class valedictorian by running a mile in gym class. Gloria (Sofia Vergara) loses her concentration while studying for her citizenship exam when her ex (Benjamin Bratt) shows up. And Mitchell (Jesse Tyler Ferguson) and Cam (Eric Stonestreet) agree to protest a restaurant that they actually want to dine at. In “black-ish,” at 9:30, Bow (Tracee Ellis Ross) thinks it’s time that Dre (Anthony Anderson) tell his mother (Jenifer Lewis) that his sister (Raven-Symoné) is gay.10 P.M. (ABC) NASHVILLE Juliette (Hayden Panettiere) sounds like her old self in a rooftop performance, but her team worries that she may have postpartum depression. Rayna (Connie Britton) and Deacon (Charles Esten) wonder what their future will hold when his cancer diagnosis is made public.AdvertisementWhat’s Streaming NowJOHN CASSAVETES COLLECTION Shout! Factory TV salutes the festival season with a roster of art house films, including six directed by or starring (or sometimes both) Mr. Cassavetes: “A Woman Under the Influence” (1974), starring Gena Rowlands, right; “Faces” (1968); “Mikey and Nicky” (1976); “Opening Night” (1977); “Shadows” (1961); and “The Killing of a Chinese Bookie” (1976). (shoutfactorytv.com) KATHRYN SHATTUCKA version of this schedule appears in print on May 6, 2015, on Page C7 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Wednesday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.