AdvertisementSupported byBy Nate ChinenThe emblematic gesture on “Foreign Territory,” an impressive new album by the trumpeter John Raymond, could be summed up by a track called “Deeper.” It’s an original composition based on familiar chord changes — for a songbook standard, “How Deep Is the Ocean?” So, it’s the sort of thing that jazz musicians have been doing more or less since the beginning. Which means the difference is in the details.Opening with a flutter of brushes by the drummer Billy Hart, “Deeper” unfolds in a percolating but unhurried 7/4 meter, a groove that’s now a staple of the modern-jazz tool kit. Mr. Raymond makes his entrance with a coolly annunciatory melody, shadowed first by his bassist, Joe Martin, and then also by his pianist, Dan Tepfer. The piece conveys chamberlike sobriety but also unmistakable post-bop interplay, especially during the trumpet solo, which rings exploratory but assuredly grounded.So this is an album about finding new possibilities within a recognizable framework; it’s more rational than radical, with a thoughtful relationship to mainstream convention. It’s also a substantial leap forward for Mr. Raymond, whose only previous album — “Strength & Song,” self-released in 2012 — made a fair but too-insistent point of its youthful, jazz-rockish streamlining.Mr. Raymond, who hails from Minneapolis, has fluent technique and a strong but pliable tone, which can evoke a bebop ace like Kenny Dorham or a modal swashbuckler like Freddie Hubbard. He subdues the brassier side of his sound here, like the British trumpeter and composer Kenny Wheeler, whose flowingly elegant “Mark Time” is the album’s only cover song.At the same time, “Foreign Territory” (Fresh Sound New Talent), which was produced by another veteran trumpeter, John McNeil, is more of a band recording than a solo vehicle. Mr. Raymond has a hardy rapport with Mr. Hart, the album’s wellspring of wisdom and experience. Mr. Tepfer and Mr. Martin, meanwhile, help strike an endless negotiation of volatility and stability, neither side ever tipping the scales.Above all, the quartet, which appears at Subculture on Sunday, has a lived-in sound: There’s nothing provisional about it, even during a group improvisation like “Rest/Peace.” Mr. Raymond deserves credit for that, though he probably knows better than to take it.Advertisement