AdvertisementSupported byCritic’s NotebookBy Neil GenzlingerThis would have been an interesting moment in television game-show evolution even without the show that is having its premiere Wednesday night on TLC. But that debut elevates it to near historic status. “Labor Games” may be simultaneously the most brilliant and the most head-shaking game-show idea ever.The concept: Expectant parents try to win prizes by answering trivia questions in a delivery room while the woman is in labor. While the woman is in labor. Presumably “Cash Cavity,” in which root-canal patients answer questions while being operated on by a dentist, was rejected because potential contestants couldn’t make themselves heard.The idea of “Labor Games” may make you blanch, but you have to admire its genius. Game shows built around trivia have had an enduring popularity. So has televised childbirth. What have many scripted series done when ratings flagged? Gotten a character pregnant and then spent an entire season building up to delivery day.The show, which offers two sneak-peek episodes in advance of Mother’s Day, with the full series to begin later this year, keeps us updated on the strength of the woman’s contractions as the couple answers questions related to baby-having and baby-rearing. “According to healthychildren.org, how long should your child’s ‘timeouts’ last?”There’s also a participatory element. A father-to-be named Aaron must identify baby foods by taste. Can the adult palate distinguish between “turkey, rice and vegetables” and “mixed vegetables and chicken”? Assorted baby-related prizes and a $10,000 college fund are at stake.Answering questions under duress has been a game-show staple forever, but the duress certainly seems to be getting duress-ier. Last week, at its upfront presentation, the History channel announced a new digital series called “Shotgun.” The description: “It’s a game show on the road! Contestants try to answer questions while riding ‘shotgun’ in a high-performance racecar that’s flying around a track at top speed.”Let’s hope the producers of “Shotgun” and the producers of “Labor Games” never meet. “Contestants try to answer questions while riding in the back of a high-performance ambulance on their way to the hospital.”These kinds of offerings make the game-show landscape seem a bit out of control, but this is also a moment to appreciate old-school series, ones that are less hazardous though no less frenetic. On Monday the classic show “Let’s Make a Deal,” on CBS, broadcast its 1,001st episode, turning the occasion into a rather amusing spectacle.The show, of course, is a spectacle every episode as audience members, most of them wearing ridiculous costumes, debase themselves shamelessly for the chance to win prizes. The 1,001 theme ran throughout Monday’s show and was amusingly executed by the host, Wayne Brady, who has become as skilled at his job as anyone in game-show-dom.One contestant, for instance, was told that behind one curtain was a prize that weighed at least 1,001 pounds while behind another was something worth at least $1,001. The festivities built to an Oprah moment: Mr. Brady gave everyone in the studio audience a trip to Las Vegas — valued, of course, at $1,001.It’s heartening to know that a relatively simple show like “Let’s Make a Deal” can still work. A new series on GSN called “Lie Detectors,” which had its debut last month and runs on Wednesday nights, proves that with a little updating, a classic concept still amuses. It’s a who’s-lying show, just like “To Tell the Truth,” which was first seen on television almost 60 years ago.In “Lie Detectors,” three comedians describe an obscure product, or a celebrity Twitter outburst, or a recent news story, or whatever. Two of them are just making stuff up, one is telling the truth.  The gimmick is that rather than have individual contestants, the whole studio audience plays, using instant voting gizmos. Then, at the end, the audience member who was quickest and most accurate gets a shot at a big prize. No state capitals or other “Jeopardy!”-like factoids here. To succeed on this show, you have to be able to guess whether the little rubbery sleeve is a finger-protector for guitar players, an invention to keep fingerprints off your cellphone screen or a condom for dogs. So this is a moment to savor classic shows and classic ideas while also being fascinated, in a train-wreck sort of way, by a show like “Labor Games.” If your head is spinning after the sneak peak, just wait until May 19. Nat Geo Wild is promoting a “mini-series event” beginning that night called “Are You Smarter Than ...,” in which people compete against animals. “Our contestants — both human and nonhuman — are put through a series of tests,” the show’s description says, “including cracking a safe, identifying priceless art, recognizing criminals and other incredible feats, to discover who has the best memory, spatial awareness, problem-solving skills and navigational prowess.” Put your money on the animals.Advertisement