AdvertisementSupported byBy Stephen HoldenWho remembers “The Piccolino,” an Irving Berlin novelty from the 1935 movie musical “Top Hat”? This giddy production number, a playful attempt to initiate a dance craze like the Continental and the Carioca, rhymes the title with “casino,” “bambino,” “vino” and “scallopino.”Three years later came the Berlin song “The Yam,” from “Carefree,” which invited dancers to “Come on, shake your depression/ Let’s have a yam session.” It was followed by “Back to Back,” from the 1939 Berlin musical, “Second Fiddle,” starring the unlikely pair of Sonja Henie and Tyrone Power. The song imagined a dance in which couples faced away from each other, the better to ogle other dancers.These delicacies were among the high points of the frothy opening-night performance on Saturday evening of “All Dancing! All Singing! Irving Berlin in Hollywood,” the newest program in the 92nd Street Y’s Lyrics and Lyricists series. As three couples danced “Back to Back,” I laughed out loud.Directed and choreographed by Randy Skinner, this lighter-than-air revue of Berlin movie songs featured six singer-dancers (Darien Crago, Danny Gardner, Drew Humphrey, Kristie Kerwin, Con O’Shea-Creal and Kristen Beth Williams) who reprised the gliding ballroom style of Fred Astaire and Ginger Rogers. Mr. Skinner, who has received three Tony nominations for his choreography, may not be young, but he is a graceful dancer in the Astaire mode. Two special guests, Don Correia and Sandy Duncan, recreated “A Couple of Swells,” the vaudevillian turn of Astaire and Judy Garland from the 1948 musical “Easter Parade.”“All Dancing! All Singing!” smoothly accomplished what Depression-era movie musicals did so skillfully. They whisked you away to a realm of pure entertainment and made the difficult look easy. Stitching together the pieces, Barry Kleinbort’s witty libretto, read mostly by Mr. Skinner, related the history of Berlin’s often fraught relationship with Hollywood and emphasized his hard-nosed business acumen.The show was a welcome reminder of the importance of dance to musical comedy and its capacity to sweep you up and carry you halfway to heaven.Through May 4 at the 92nd St. Y. (Lexington Ave. and 92nd St.; 212-415-5500)Advertisement