AdvertisementSupported byBy James R. OestreichThematic programming has long served the classical music world, sometimes leading listeners to profound insights and connections. Leon Botstein has turned such programming into something of a mandate with his American Symphony Orchestra in recent decades, often to excellent effect.But a weakly drawn or belabored theme can distract more than enlighten. Mr. Botstein and the orchestra opened their Carnegie Hall season on Friday with a colorful program of music by Gunther Schuller, Henri Dutilleux, Nico Muhly and Richard Strauss, obscurely titled “Mimesis: Musical Representations.”Mr. Botstein himself, in a preconcert lecture, referred to the “somewhat not obvious title.” The program, he added in a Playbill note, “seeks to inspire each of us to ask: How does music mean?”But representation — through, say, tone painting or the underlining of a text or story — is altogether different from inherent musical meaning. And presumably all music means something, so Mr. Botstein’s choice of four unrelated works, however fine and meaningful individually, seemed merely arbitrary, the very quality thematic programming is meant to avoid.There, see how distracted we are already?“Seven Studies on Themes of Paul Klee” (1959), by Mr. Schuller, who died in June, is a wonderfully imaginative response to works by a painter drawn to musical themes, what Mr. Schuller calls “a retranslation into musical terms of the ‘musical’ elements.” Not all of the Klee paintings chosen are musical, and “Arab Village” draws the most elaborate flight from Mr. Schuller, with offstage flute (beautifully played by Karla Moe) and exotic harmonic tensions between oboe and viola (Alexandra Knoll and William Frampton, similarly impressive). Given the preoccupation with meanings and representations, musical and otherwise, it would have been ideal to show the paintings in the Playbill, if not in projections.“Correspondances” (2003), by Dutilleux, who died in 2013, is an evocative setting of poems by Rilke and Prithwindra Mukherjee and letters by Solzhenitsyn and van Gogh for soprano. Sophia Burgos sang them with soaring ease, lovely tone and fine sensibility. Mr. Muhly’s “Seeing Is Believing,” a sort of concerto for six-string electric violin and chamber orchestra from 2007, now in a full orchestration, is meant somehow to represent the mapping of the sky, which could in no way be gleaned without access to a written program. Despite the violinist Tracy Silverman’s best efforts, the work bogged down at times in repetitious detail. Strauss’s Nietzsche-based “Also Sprach Zarathustra” completed the evening in a sometimes heavy-footed performance.Leon Botstein and the American Symphony Orchestra return to Carnegie Hall on Dec. 17 with “Russia’s Jewish Composers”; 212-868-9276, americansymphony­.org.Advertisement