By ANTHONY TOMMASINIMAY 5, 2015
Every student who aspires to a career in classical music should be able to do what the pianist Jeremy Denk did on Sunday afternoon at Alice Tully Hall. I’m not just talking about playing beautifully, as he did in works by Beethoven and Ligeti for a program with the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center.I’m referring to the chatty and insightful prep-talk Mr. Denk gave before performing Ligeti’s Trio for Violin, Horn and Piano, “Hommage à Brahms,” a seminal 1982 work by this  giant, who died at 83 in 2006. Mr. Denk began by pointing to the oversized printed scores that his colleagues (the violinist Erin Keefe and the horn player Jennifer Montone) had placed on their music stands, a “sure sign,” Mr. Denk said, that we had come to “the notorious new music portion of the program.”But Ligeti’s trio, he assured the audience, is a stunning masterpiece, an ingenious modern work that also looks back at music with “nostalgia, distance, loss and farewell.” The piece nods to Brahms’s trio for the same instruments. Ligeti uses one of the most familiar tropes in music, a horn call, as a crucial motif. Mr. Denk played that familiar flourish on the piano and showed how it has been used in ridiculous ways, quoting a passage from Tchaikovsky’s “1812” Overture, and sublime ones, playing the opening of Beethoven’s “Les Adieux” Piano Sonata.He asked Ms. Keefe to demonstrate how Ligeti introduces the horn call in the violin in a tweaked, unsettled way. Then he had Ms. Montone show how the horn sometimes spins off into passages of high harmonics that are not “out of tune, as you may imagine,” but natural sounds meant to be a little jarring.AdvertisementHe explained that the breathless second movement was like a combination of Bulgarian folk dance and bebop, a succinct, perceptive description. He verbally sputtered the jagged rhythms of the third movement, calling it a “diabolical march” that avoids settling into any steady pulse. It’s “deliberately discombobulating,” Mr. Denk said. The finale movement, true to its title, is a wrenching lament. Though Ligeti wrote other laments, this one is the “most shattering, most extreme of all,” he said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.After that introduction, there was almost a palpable sense of anticipation in the hall. The performance, no surprise, was exhilarating, even that crushing finale, which came across here as an angry, slashing lament. During the ovation many people stood and cheered.The spirited performance of Beethoven’s early, ebullient Quintet in E flat for Oboe, Clarinet, Bassoon, Horn and Piano (Op. 16) may have also put the audience in a receptive mood for the adventures of the Ligeti. Along with Mr. Denk and Ms. Montone, the superb musicians included the oboist James Austin Smith, the clarinetist David Shifrin and the bassoonist Peter Kolkay.AdvertisementAfter intermission Mr. Denk, Ms. Keefe and the fine cellist Efe Baltacigil gave a commanding account of Beethoven’s “Archduke” Trio, full of character and alert to the audacious things that happen in a piece that can seem, on the surface, so magisterial.A version of this article appears in print on May 6, 2015, on Page C4 of the New York edition with the headline: A Lesson (and Performance) in Ligeti.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.