AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn Shattuck10 P.M. (NBC) TOM BROKAW: A LUCKY LIFE INTERRUPTED In conversations with his wife, children and medical team, Mr. Brokaw recounts his diagnosis of multiple myeloma in 2013, his treatment and, finally, his remission in this “Dateline NBC” special. He also investigates the effect that cancer has on the American health care system and discusses his coming book, “A Lucky Life Interrupted: A Memoir of Hope.” “It never occurred to me that I was going to die,” he says. “That’s unrealistic in some ways.”8 P.M. (CBS) THE BIG BANG THEORY Sheldon (Jim Parsons) tries to get Leonard (Johnny Galecki) and Penny (Kaley Cuoco-Sweeting) to set a wedding date. In “The Odd Couple,” at 8:30, Felix (Thomas Lennon) substitutes for a yoga teacher and alienates the class, including Steve, a student played by Weird Al Yankovic. Oscar (Matthew Perry) and Dani (Yvette Nicole Brown) are trapped on a subway car, along with Walter (Regis Philbin). And Murph (Geoff Stults) wants Teddy (Wendell Pierce) to be his agent when he’s asked to be the spokesman for a Norwegian health supplement. In a second episode, at 9, Oscar becomes obsessed after discovering that the woman he’s dating used to see Murph, too. And Emily (Lindsay Sloane) volunteers for a historical re-enactment on Ellis Island to spend more time with Felix, who’s too busy to notice.8 P.M. (Fox) BONES When the body of a high school student is found in a ditch, Brennan (Emily Deschanel) suspects bullying — until she discovers how similar the victim’s life was to her own. Later, she and Booth (David Boreanaz) race to prove that the serial killer Alex Rockwell (Gabriel Salvador), who is to be executed in 48 hours, may not have done it after all.8 P.M. (ABC) GREY’S ANATOMY In a season of catastrophes, the hospital in Seattle is rocked yet again. At 9, in “Scandal,” Vice President Ross (Artemis Pebdani) goes against the wishes of the Grant administration by hiring Olivia (Kerry Washington) to defend a woman in the Navy. And in “American Crime,” at 10, Barb (Felicity Huffman) reaches the end of her rope when Aubry (Caitlin Gerard) makes damaging statements about her son Matt, prompting Russ (Timothy Hutton) to take over the fight. Carter (Elvis Nolasco) gets a second chance, while Hector (Richard Cabral) is turned over to the Mexican authorities. And Alonzo (Benito Martinez) struggles to find character witnesses for Tony (Johnny Ortiz).9 P.M. (NBC) THE BLACKLIST Taking their lead from Red (James Spader), the F.B.I. goes after the Russian assassin Karakurt, with Liz (Megan Boone) and Ressler (Diego Klattenhoff) gleaning information from Russian counterintelligence. Turns out they know a lot, including the identity of Liz’s mother. Meanwhile, Mr. Brimley (Teddy Coluca) returns.10 P.M. (FX) THE COMEDIANS Josh (Josh Gad) is rumored to be up for a movie role, which makes Billy (Billy Crystal) unhappy in this episode directed by Larry David. In “Louie,” at 10:30, Jane (Ursula Parker) goes to the doctor.10 P.M. (Nat Geo) DEAD END EXPRESS No man is an island — even when living off the grid. This new series follows Brice Barnes, a jet-boat captain; Andy Breland, who oversees a team of packhorses; Rob Kinkade, a pilot; Roger Phillips, a freight hauler; and Jeff Hemann, a dog musher, as they deliver crucial supplies to wilderness dwellers.What’s Streaming NowI AM BIG BIRD: THE CAROLL SPINNEY STORY (2015) For some 45 years, Mr. Spinney has been the force behind — or rather, inside — Big Bird on “Sesame Street.” (He’s also responsible for Oscar the Grouch’s snarls.) In this documentary, Mr. Spinney, now 81, reflects on the road from bullied child to childhood legend. On the way, he almost quit the job and was nearly aboard the Challenger space shuttle that disintegrated in 1986. “The film gets a little syrupy at times, but Mr. Spinney is forthright and engaging throughout,” Neil Genzlinger wrote in The New York Times. “It seems as if Big Bird has been around forever. This film, by Dave LaMattina and Chad Walker, reminds us that even the most omnipresent cultural phenomena were created by someone, usually through a combination of hard work and happenstance.” (amazon.com, iTunes)Advertisement