The Tony-winning director Diane Paulus, who is having a challenging spring on Broadway after three consecutive triumphs, will try her hand Off Broadway next season, bringing a new musical about American aid workers to Second Stage Theater.The musical, “Invisible Thread,” has been substantially revised since it premiered last year, under the title “Witness Uganda,” at the American Repertory Theater in Cambridge, Mass., where Ms. Paulus is the artistic director.“Invisible Thread” is one of two productions transferring from Boston-area theaters that will be featured in Second Stage’s next season. The nonprofit will also present “Smart People,” a play by Lydia R. Diamond (“Stick Fly“) that had its premiere at the Huntington Theater. “Smart People” will be directed by Kenny Leon, who won a Tony last year for his direction of “A Raisin in the Sun.”Carole Rothman, the artistic director of Second Stage, said both plays were being reworked as they are developed for the New York productions. “I’ve always wanted to work with Diane Paulus, and I’m thrilled to have Kenny Leon here,” she said. “Invisible Thread” will be staged this fall, and “Smart People” in early 2016.“Invisible Thread,” by Matt Gould and Griffin Matthews, is a fictionalized story inspired by the men’s experiences as volunteers in Africa. They have been developing the show with a commercial producer, Kevin McCollum, who said the Second Stage production of the musical was a good marriage of “a very powerful show and a very sophisticated audience.”Ms. Paulus won a Tony in 2013 for her direction of “Pippin” and was nominated for Tonys for directing “The Gershwins’ Porgy and Bess” in 2012 and “Hair” in 2009. This year she has had less critical success with her direction of “Finding Neverland,” which was snubbed by the Tony Award nominating committee, but which has been selling well and has already announced a national tour.“Smart People” is a drama about the relationships of four people affiliated with Harvard on the eve of Barack Obama’s election as president; Ms. Rothman called it “a fascinating, funny play about race in America.”A version of this article appears in print on 05/08/2015, on page C2 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Diane Paulus to Direct Off Broadway Musical.