PARIS — It’s showtime for an enormous oil painting by Gustave Courbet that has become the star of reality entertainment in the Musée d’Orsay here.“The Artist’s Studio,” on display on the ground floor of the museum’s Amont Pavilion, has been encased since December by a cube of temporary glass screens in the middle of the museum so the public can view its restoration by a rotating team of technicians. On Wednesday, museum officials also added a new high-tech system for viewers to immerse themselves with electronic tablets and headphones in the 160-year-old painting of Courbet’s own studio.Visitors can point the tablets toward the work and view X-ray photos of the images below the dark varnish. They can also listen to some first-person stories from the more than 30 poor and prominent figures in the painting, who include the poet Charles Baudelaire and his mistress.The museum is spending more than $760,000 on the project, supported in part by an online crowd funding campaign that as of Thursday had raised more than $176,000. Orange, the French telecommunications company, donated the technical support to create the system and is working on other similar projects now for the Louvre museum and the palace of Versailles.The studio painting will also be available for study online (beginning Thursday night Paris time), but museum officials were wary of live-streaming the delicate work of restorers for all to see beyond its walls.“The problem is it’s a little risky,” said Cécile Bringuier, who heads the team of restorers, which is expected to finish their task by the end of the year. “There are things that we do that need to be explained as we do them, otherwise they might be misunderstood,” because the technicians behind the screens do not have the ability to stop and answer questions.Flecks of missing paint are visible in the work, which was painted in 1855. Courbet said it signified “the whole world coming to me to be painted.” Since it was acquired initially by the Louvre in 1920, it has been revarnished several times, which has made the images more opaque and dark. Ms. Bringuier said the restorers had uncovered missing elements, such as a pipe that the figure of Baudelaire is smoking while absorbed in a book.The notion of showing the inner workings of museums is part of an evolving trend among public institutions, according to Mark Walhimer, managing partner of a design firm, Museum Planning, in San Francisco. (One example is the Smithsonian American Art Museum, which allows visitors into its storage center.) The idea “is to involve the public in the care of the collection,” he said, noting that museums are under pressure because of the expense of housing works that the public doesn’t see.