AdvertisementSupported byTheater ReviewBy Matt WolfLONDON — Politics is serious business, so it comes as a delightful surprise that a play about a community of South Londoners casting their ballots should prove the most fiendishly funny evening in town.That Donmar Warehouse’s limited run of “The Vote” will also be history as of Friday is part of the point of a self-described “play for theater and television” from the inspired team of the writer James Graham and the director Josie Rourke, and with a bustling cast that includes Judi Dench. Their collaboration last year on “Privacy” at the same theater pushed the boundaries in its own way — asking audiences, for instance, to turn on their cellphones as part of a larger inquiry into the interface between the individual and technology.“The Vote” is less structurally audacious, though any theater piece with a cast of more than 40 represents a brave endeavor in both financial and organizational terms. One wonders in passing how the bijou Donmar accommodates all these people in the wings.But what Mr. Graham has done here is apply the madcap energy of, say, a Kaufman and Hart comedy from the 1930s to a consideration of the democratic process in the 90 minutes before the polls close.The conceptual fillip is that Thursday’s final performance will be broadcast live in Britain on the More4 channel, which means that Britons fresh from ticking boxes in real life can tune in to watch the cast make their own fictional choices from a lineup that includes the Pirate Party. (I had assumed that moniker was a joke, but it isn’t.)Not that Mr. Graham’s firecracker of a play spends time debating the candidates. The focus instead is on the cross-section of society who come to vote: The polling station functions as a locus of activity in the way that a restaurant or a taxi dispatch office might in a television sitcom. There are those, of course, who staff the center and whose largely well-meaning malfeasance gives the play what plot it has, but they share the stage both with various candidates and a motley parade of the citizenry at large.An excitable lesbian couple fresh, we’re told, from eating scallops pops in early on, giving way later to a Portuguese woman eager to know which is the socialist candidate and then several young women — first-time voters all — who, in desperation, ask their cellphones for advice as to whom to choose.The casting makes its own rather sweet point about democracy in theatrical terms, given that the swirl of actors both well-known and not includes a 2014 Tony nominee (Paul Chahidi as a single-issue candidate of singular hilarity), several musical theater names (Rosalie Craig is especially funny as Nicholas Burns’s frosty, moneyed wife) and Ms. Dench. The octogenarian dame shows up in the final 20 minutes to play a retired nurse who turns out to be a stickler for grammar.At one point, Ms. Dench does a mad little dance to demonstrate that there’s life in her character yet. And Mr. Graham would surely argue that — for all its fractiousness and partisanship — so there is too in a free country’s whirligig of politics.Two other recent openings offer further glimpses into contemporary life, albeit at opposite ends of the social spectrum. Make that a “reopening,” in the case of “The Audience,” which has returned to the West End with a new dame — Kristin Scott Thomas — playing Queen Elizabeth II, even as the part’s Olivier Award-winning originator, Helen Mirren, continues with Peter Morgan’s play on Broadway. (Ms. Mirren is widely considered the front-runner for this year’s best actress Tony Award for her performance.)How does Ms. Scott Thomas measure up? Quite charmingly, notwithstanding various line flubs at the performance I saw. Perhaps more naturally regal — and, if possible, even more beautiful — than Ms. Mirren, Ms. Scott Thomas has the disadvantage of coming afresh to a challenge that her predecessor had previously met on screen.If Ms. Scott Thomas is still finding her way into this imagined view of Her Majesty’s weekly audiences with her various prime ministers, the natural empathy she brings to the role is already apparent. She mines the ready humor that animates what could merely be a parade of conversational tableaux were the director, Stephen Daldry, less deft at finding the pulse behind the postage stamp, to co-opt a notably clever line that Mr. Morgan’s Elizabeth uses to describe herself. (Ms. Scott Thomas has a field day with the late sequence where the queen dozes off mid-debriefing.)While she never especially sounds like the long-serving monarch — a certain high-pitched clipped-ness isn’t there — the actress appears to relish a cut-and-thrust that places the world’s most famous woman opposite politicians the queen is said to have adored — including the Labour leader Harold Wilson, played here by Nicholas Woodeson, making the most of a prime supporting role — and/or disliked. That second category is energetically fleshed out by Sylvestra Le Touzel, easily the best of the three Margaret Thatchers I have now seen in this play.Near the end, we see the queen concluding her final audience with the current prime minister, David Cameron (Mark Dexter, doubling effortlessly as Tony Blair), by wishing him well as he heads toward re-election. Will Mr. Morgan have to write a new character into the script with whom Ms. Scott Thomas can additionally reflect on a royal’s life and times? We’ll soon find out.“The Audience” benefits from lifting a voyeuristic veil on a person about whom by definition we actually know very little. At the same time, few among us, whether occupying the rarefied realm of the royal family or otherwise, have much awareness of the contract cleaners who keep so many businesses going and whose nocturnal routine forms the bruising substance of “Beyond Caring,” running through May 16 in the National’s inelegantly named Temporary Theater.A transfer from the Yard Theater in East London, where the writer-director Alexander Zeldin’s production (devised with the company) had its premiere last summer, the play takes a hypnotic look at three women who are recruited to work the night shift in a sausage factory. They have been hired on contracts with none-too-cheerful conditions and no guarantee of work. (The issue of zero-hours contracts, widely regarded as exploitative, has become a hot-button topic in Britain’s election.)Without once engaging directly with politics, Mr. Zeldin and his remarkable quintet of actors remind us of the quiet desperation of which, so the quotation goes, so many lives consist. While the officious Ian (Luke Clarke) charges about with his clipboard, pausing only to announce to the very workers whom he is busy patronizing just how “spiritual” he is, our hearts bleed for these new recruits. Becky (Victoria Moseley) has a child that her expanded shifts won’t allow her to see, while the cautious Grace (Janet Etuk) has a medical condition that is visibly worsening. The skittish, sweet-faced Susan (Kristin Hutchinson, remarkable down to the character’s fretful gait) would appear to be homeless and has seized on this workplace as a place to rest her head, not realizing that Ian is interested only in the punching of timeclocks.Running 100 minutes, with no intermission, the production wheels center-stage a fairly forbidding array of machines that seem to gain in complexity, thereby reducing these workers — the stalwart if emotionally abject Phil (Sean O’Callaghan) included — to so many pieces of meat. By the finish there are no words, just the whir of activity at once relentless and deadening. “Beyond Caring” is beyond praise. The Vote.  Directed by Josie Rourke.Donmar Warehouse. Through Thursday. (The final performance will be broadcast live in Britain on More4 and will be available on demand in Britain from Friday at www.channel4.com)  The Audience.  Directed by Stephen Daldry. Apollo Theater. Through July 25.  Beyond Caring.  Directed by Alexander Zeldin. National Theater’s Temporary Theater. Through May 16. Advertisement