AdvertisementSupported byBy Neil GenzlingerThe discussion of aging often doesn’t get much further than: “Your parent has Alzheimer’s, and you’re caring for her? That must be hard.” A PBS special on Thursday night (check local listings) at least tries to go deeper. Though it still spends considerable time on elder-care anecdotes — stories that are heart-rending but at this point familiar — it also acknowledges difficult questions of costs, rights and medical capabilities.The program, “Caring for Mom & Dad,” starts out with a fact everyone probably knows. “America is facing a new reality,” Meryl Streep, the narrator, says. “Soon the old will outnumber the young, and most will live longer than ever before.”The show gives us the obligatory stories of a few people who care for an elderly parent and have made sacrifices to do so. But it is at its most useful when it looks at the costs these kinds of home-care situations entail, both emotional and financial.“There are many scenarios in which by the time this is over, Mom and Dad are broke and so are you,” says Jane Gross, a former reporter at The New York Times, author of “A Bittersweet Season: Caring for Our Aging Parents — and Ourselves” and the most blunt voice in a program that could have used more of them.An initiative in southwestern Ohio is given a fair amount of attention. There, residents approved a tax to finance home health aides and such.“If we want in this country to not institutionalize everyone who’s old or disabled,” says Laurie Petrie of the Council on Aging of Southwestern Ohio, “if we want to care for them in the community, that means the community has to step up.”But paying for services is only one element in a complex equation, and this hourlong program doesn’t have time to examine issues like whether there will be enough caregivers to go around and how they should be trained. It also nods to but doesn’t delve too far into the murky issue of whether having the medical ability to prolong life means that we should.There is, in short, much more to be said on this whole subject. Because, as Ms. Gross candidly puts it, “We live too long, and we die too slowly.”Advertisement