AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael CooperMost nights find Susan Tammany working at the David H. Koch Theater — dressed in black, wearing a name tag, handing out programs and helping balletomanes to their seats. But she won’t be working as an usher on Thursday night at City Ballet’s spring gala. “I said to her, ‘Opening night, you take off — because you’ve got to take a bow!’ ” said Peter Martins, the company’s ballet master in chief.That is because Ms. Tammany will be playing a very different role that night: designer of the sets and costumes for City Ballet’s new production of August Bournonville’s 1836 ballet “La Sylphide,” staged by Mr. Martins, which is having its premiere at the gala. For Ms. Tammany, an artist by day who moonlights as an usher, the job was a reunion of sorts. She designed “La Sylphide” when Mr. Martins first staged it 30 years ago for the Pennsylvania Ballet, in a production that was later broadcast on public television. But she said she was stunned when Mr. Martins approached her about doing it again at City Ballet.“I was in the theater,” Ms. Tammany recalled. “He said he’d been looking for me, but I sometimes get sent to different tiers. Then he said, ‘I want you to do this again.’ I said, ‘Okaaay, let’s do it again!’ I was astonished.”Some of Ms. Tammany’s designs are bolder, and more modern, than those typically used in Romantic ballets. The painted backdrop for the forest scene in the second act is an almost phantasmagorical explosion of color, quite unlike the demure landscape-painting-type backdrops of many a story ballet. Its colors may dazzle dancegoers who have spent the last week watching the company perform the more austerely designed “Black and White” Balanchine ballets. Her day job and night job have intersected before — dancers and choreographers, including Mr. Martins, have collected her paintings. But Ms. Tammany said it had been thrilling to see her designs built on a scale big enough to fill the stage of the Koch Theater, and to be able to watch as scenic artists turned her artwork into an enormous backdrop.“I took pictures of them painting it,” she said. “It’s like they have these big brushes on sticks — it’s amazing, just amazing.”Mr. Martins said he had long hoped to bring “La Sylphide,” in which he danced when he was a boy training with the Royal Danish Ballet School, to City Ballet, noting that George Balanchine, City Ballet’s founder and guiding spirit, had been an admirer of Bournonville. After reviewing a videotape of the old production, he said, he grew determined to stage it in New York — and to keep Ms. Tammany’s designs.“I thought, ‘Do I need a new designer?’ ” he said. “I looked at it carefully, and I thought: ‘Why? This is exactly how it should be.’ I love it today as much as I loved it then.” The original sets have been lost, he said. And Ms. Tammany made some changes for this new production, redesigning the first act and the costumes, and tweaking the sets so the ballet could be performed without an intermission. She also reimagined the witch’s caldron, taking inspiration from the mysterious Gundestrup Caldron, an ancient silver vessel that is now in the National Museum of Denmark. “I wanted to make it much more spooky,” she said. “It’s not a caldron they make soup in, do you know what I mean? It’s a caldron that they do bad things in.”Ms. Tammany has worked on and off as an usher for decades, while painting and teaching. She said being an usher has been in many ways ideal for someone who came to love ballet as a little girl after seeing the film “The Red Shoes.” “It gives me the time to do what I need to do, and the music is beautiful,” she said.But she acknowledged that it might be odd when she returns to work later in the run of “La Sylphide” and watches the audiences she seats as they react to her work.“It’s going to be weird,” she said. “Maybe people will come out and say, ‘I hate it.’ I’ll just say, ‘Hmpph, what do you know?’ ”Advertisement