By MICHAEL COOPERMAY 6, 2015
When they gather for their conclave on Monday, the 124 eminent electors will be asked to surrender their cellphones. Then they will deliberate and, through means opaque to the outside world, select a leader to guide their venerable, revered institution farther into the 21st century.No, there will be no white smoke, and these are not cardinals in the Sistine Chapel. These voters are the tenured musicians of the Berlin Philharmonic, and they are set to meet at 10 a.m. on Monday at an undisclosed location in Berlin to make one of the most prestigious appointments in classical music: a new chief conductor and artistic director, who will succeed Simon Rattle when he leaves the orchestra in 2018.Since the Berlin Philharmonic regularly sits at or near the top of lists of the world’s great orchestras and has legions of fans through its huge catalog of recordings, regular tours and Digital Concert Hall streaming service, the election is being watched closely around the world. The choice rests with the players of the orchestra, a self-governing body, which serves only to make it more intriguing.But it is a difficult election to handicap: There is no application process, so the major candidates are not even officially declared, except perhaps through strategically aimed winks and nods. That has in no way dampened the frenzy of speculation, as classical music writers have started to pen the kind of relentless who’s-up-and-who’s-down horse-race coverage more often seen in the political pages than the arts section.AdvertisementThere has even been polling, of a highly unscientific nature. Andris Nelsons, the 36-year-old Latvian-born music director of the Boston Symphony Orchestra, received the most votes when Berliner Morgenpost and a German radio station recently surveyed 1,318 concertgoers outside the Philharmonie, the Berlin orchestra’s famed hall. Of course, it was not exactly an unbiased polling sample: That weekend, the audiences had gone there to hear Mr. Nelsons conduct Mahler.AdvertisementElisabeth Hilsdorf, a spokeswoman for the orchestra, said that while some of the near-daily coverage seemed “over the top” to her, she was pleased that the orchestra was receiving such widespread attention. “If it helps to make classical music more popular, or if it helps people realize that there’s this world of classical music, I’m happy with it,” she said.The choice confronting the Philharmonic’s players on Monday is widely seen as one between youth and experience. Some would like to see the orchestra take a chance on one of the rising 30-something conducting stars of recent years, like Mr. Nelsons or perhaps Gustavo Dudamel, who has conducted high-profile concerts with the Berlin Philharmonic but who recently lengthened his odds by extending his contract as music director of the Los Angeles Philharmonic.Others expect the orchestra to go with an older, more established maestro — perhaps for a shorter, transitional term. One would-be elder statesman, Daniel Barenboim, the music director of the Staatsoper in Berlin, recently announced that he was not a candidate. Another, Mariss Jansons, 72, the principal conductor of the Bavarian Radio Symphony Orchestra, will be the last to conduct the orchestra before the vote, leading the players this weekend in sold-out concerts of music by Bartok, Ravel and Shostakovich. He is described as “a close friend of the Berliner Philharmoniker” on the orchestra’s website, but he has had health problems recently, and is leaving his post as principal conductor of the Royal Concertgebouw Orchestra in Amsterdam.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A sizable contingent of players is thought to be leaning toward Christian Thielemann, 56, the principal conductor of the Staatskapelle Dresden. Mr. Thielemann, a protégé of Herbert von Karajan, is known as a skilled conductor of the core Germanic repertory. But his career has also produced offstage Sturm und Drang — including artistic and managerial disputes, questions about his conservative political views, and allegations, which he has strongly denied, that he once made comments tinged with anti-Semitism about Mr. Barenboim, a rival conductor who is Jewish.Other conductors whose names have been floated include Riccardo Chailly, the music director of the Leipzig Gewandhaus Orchestra and the new principal conductor at Teatro alla Scala in Milan; Yannick Nézet-Séguin, the music director of the Philadelphia Orchestra, who just happened to announce this week that he would leave his post as music director of the Rotterdam Philharmonic Orchestra in 2018; Riccardo Muti, the music director of the Chicago Symphony Orchestra; Kirill Petrenko, the music director of the Bavarian State Opera; and Vladimir Jurowski, the principal conductor of the London Philharmonic Orchestra.Even in an era when the magical aura surrounding conductors has faded a bit, with the weakening of the recording industry and its once-prodigious image-making powers, it still means a great deal to ascend to the Berlin podium, a post that has been held over the years by giants including Furtwängler, Karajan and Claudio Abbado.The election will be held away from the Philharmonie, which is being readied for an event on Tuesday commemorating 50 years of diplomatic relations between Germany and Israel. Adding to the sense of mystery, the news media will not be told the location of the meeting until the morning of the vote.It will begin with a secret ballot: The musicians will be invited to vote for “any living conductor,” and the first round will be tallied by an electoral committee of four members of the orchestra. The orchestra declined to say how the subsequent rounds of voting would work — whether a runoff would be held among the top candidates, or the candidates with the fewest votes would slowly be eliminated, or the players would be asked to rank their preferences.At some point, though, the orchestra expects a conductor to have a necessary clear majority. But even then the election will not be over. The newly elected artistic director will be contacted and invited to take the job — but there is always a risk the offer could be declined. It has apparently happened before: Carlos Kleiber is said to have politely rebuffed an invitation to succeed Karajan. The post went to Abbado instead.AdvertisementAs Mr. Nelsons put it in an interview last year: “You could almost write an opera about the selection of music directors for orchestras. The intrigues are really interesting, and then at the end, the results are completely unexpected.”Melissa Eddy contributed reporting from Berlin.A version of this article appears in print on May 7, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: Guesswork in Berlin Vote for Conductor.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.