By JOSHUA BARONEOCT. 1, 2015
Museums and SitesAmerican Museum of Natural History: ‘Countdown to Zero’ (continuing) Smallpox is the only human disease to have been eradicated, but what about Guinea worm, polio, malaria and others? This exhibition, presented in collaboration with the Carter Center, examines international efforts to control and wipe out infection. Daily from 10 a.m. to 5:45 p.m., Central Park West and 79th Street, 212-769-5200, amnh.org.‘Ruth Asawa: Line by Line’ (closes on Saturday) In 2013, a Christie’s exhibition marked the first comprehensive solo show in New York in over 50 years for Ruth Asawa, an artist who learned to draw while living in a Japanese-American internment camp during World War II and later became renown for her woven-wire sculptures. Asawa died several months after that successful exhibition, but interest in her work has continued to grow. In this new show, Christie’s offers another look at the artist — this time with a focus on the relationship between her drawings and sculptures. It features more than 60 pieces, including many that are on display for the first time. On view daily from 10 a.m. to 5 p.m., 1230 Avenue of the Americas, at 49th Street, 212-636-2000, christies.com; free.Center for Jewish History: ‘Allied in the Fight: Jews, Blacks and the Struggle for Civil Rights’ (through next Friday) Told through photos, letters, archival materials and film, this exhibition looks at the complicated role that Jewish people played in the American civil rights movement, with a focus on the shared projects and joint organizational efforts of black and Jewish people in the fight against injustice. 15 West 16th Street, Flatiron district, 212-294-8301, cjh.org.‘Global Citizen: The Architecture of Moshe Safdie’ (through Jan. 10) This touring exhibition, a retrospective of Mr. Safdie’s career of more than 50 years, makes its way to New York with new material based on the architect’s recent work related to dense urbanism in Asia. Donald Albrecht from the Museum of the City of New York organized the material in this show, which also explores Mr. Safdie’s design philosophy that buildings should be extensions of their physical, historical and cultural contexts. National Academy Museum, 1083 Fifth Avenue, at 89th Street, 212-369-4880, nationalacademy.org.AdvertisementMorgan Library and Museum: ‘Alice: 150 Years of Wonderland’ (through Oct. 12) The centerpiece of this exhibition is the original manuscript of Lewis Carroll’s “Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland,” traveling from the British Library in London. Joining the book are letters, drawings, photographs and more that shed light on how the beloved book came to be, and why it still holds our attention after 150 years. 225 Madison Avenue, at 36th Street, 212-685-0008, themorgan.org.Museum of Chinese in America: ‘Sub Urbanisms: Casino Urbanization, Chinatowns and the Contested American Landscape’ (through January) Stephen Fan, an architecture professor and curator, examines the trend of Chinese casino workers in Connecticut converting suburban homes into multifamily communities. This exhibition is both creative and historical; it takes the present to imagine the future of housing design while looking back on the events that created the trend of suburban migration. 215 Centre Street, between Howard and Grand Streets, Lower Manhattan, 212-619-4785, mocanyc.org.Museum of the Moving Image: ‘How Cats Took Over the Internet’ (through January) Even people who hate cats can’t easily get through an hour of browsing online without coming across some kind of feline clickbait. This exhibition takes a critical look at and tells the story of how we, as a society, got to this point. Yes, there are cat GIFs. 35th Avenue at 37th Street, Astoria, Queens, 718-784-0077, movingimage.us.AdvertisementNational Museum of the American Indian: ‘Meryl McMaster: Second Self’ (through Dec. 11) Meryl McMaster, an artist from Canada and a Plains Cree member of the Siksika Nation, shows her “Second Self” photography series, which uses portraiture to explore the complex ways in which identity is constructed. 1 Bowling Green, Lower Manhattan, 212-514-3700, nmai.si.edu; free.New York Transit Museum: ‘Bringing Back the City’ (ongoing) This new exhibition comes three years after Hurricane Sandy took a swipe at the city’s infrastructure. But what of the people who put the pieces back together? “Bringing Back the City” tells the stories of everyday services — like electricity and mass transit — that become extraordinary in times of crisis. Boerum Place, at Schermerhorn Street, Downtown Brooklyn, 718-694-1600, bringingbackthecity.com.New York Transit Museum Grand Central Terminal Gallery Annex: ‘New York’s Transportation Landmarks’ (through Nov. 1) It’s been 50 years since New York passed its Landmarks Law, which covers over 30,000 buildings and structures around the city. To celebrate the anniversary, the New York Transit Museum has created an exhibition that explores the history of development, use and even rescue of these landmarks. More information: 212-878-0106, web.mta.info/mta/museum.New York Transit Museum: ‘Spanning the Narrows: The Verrazano Bridge at 50’ (through Oct. 18) Photographs, maps, drawings, models and other archival materials related to the construction of the bridge (including correspondence from Robert Moses, who oversaw the project) are part of this exhibition commemorating its 50th anniversary. Boerum Place and Schermerhorn Street, Brooklyn Heights, 718-694-1600, mta.info/mta/museum.New-York Historical Society: ‘The Hirschfeld Century: The Art of Al Hirschfeld’ (through Oct. 12) This exhibition includes over 100 original drawings by the illustrator Al Hirschfeld (1903-2003), who was known in particular for his drawings of celebrities. The show has a special emphasis on his work for The New York Times, where he was a contributor for more than 70 years. Tickets are available at the museum or in advance online. 170 Central Park West, at 77th Street, 212-873-3400, nyhistory.org.Old Stone House: ‘In Search of One City: Sensing (in)equality’ (through Oct. 10) This exhibition, with a variety of works gathered by the artist Katherine Gressel, explores the role of artists in investigating, making sense of and possibly even reconciling problems of income inequality in New York. Art from the show includes, for example, posters that advise poor people on how to suffer politely, as well a jukebox that plays interviews with low-wage workers. On view Fridays from 3 to 6 p.m. and by appointment, 336 Third Street, between Fourth and Fifth Avenues, Park Slope, Brooklyn, 718-768-3195, theoldstonehouse.org.‘Sea Level: Five Boroughs at Water’s Edge’ (through December) In its first pop-up exhibition for the Seaport Culture District, the American Institute of Architects presents a water’s eye view of the city through photos by Elizabeth Felicella and accompanying essays by Robert Sullivan. The panoramic view of New York starts at New York Harbor and makes its way along the East River, showing the shore of each borough along the way. Center @ the Seaport, 181 Front Street, South Street Seaport, Lower Manhattan, 212-683-0023, cfa.aiany.org.‘Webtoon’ (through Oct. 29) This exhibition highlights the culture of Korean webtoons — comics specifically made for the Internet. In addition to displaying the comics, this show will also take a look at the media and commercial products that have been inspired by popular webtoons. Korean Cultural Service New York, Gallery Korea, 460 Park Avenue, at 57th Street, Manhattan, 212-759-9550, koreanculture.org.AdvertisementEventsAutumn Crafts Festival (Saturday and Sunday) Handcrafted treasures from makers around the country — about 250 of them — are on display in this event that takes over Lincoln Center for two weekends. There will be craft demonstrations, as well as live entertainment. (Also on Oct. 10 and 11.) From 11 a.m. to 8:30 p.m. on Saturdays; from 10 a.m. to 6:30 p.m. on Sundays, West 64th Street, at Columbus Avenue, Upper West Side, 973-746-0091, craftsatlincoln.org.Designers & Books Fair (Friday through Sunday) At the Fashion Institute of Technology. See photo highlight. This festival is about design as a broad idea: the small, like household products, and the very large, like architecture and urban design. Speakers include the widely hailed book designer Irma Boom, who will speak with the Museum of Modern Art’s Juliet Kinchin about her plans to create (with careful selections) the Irma Boom Library. (Saturday at 3:30 p.m.) Anyone who purchases a book at the fair will be entered automatically in raffles to win prizes like tickets to special events and chances to meet the authors. More information, along with the lineup, is at designbookfair.com. At various times, Fashion Institute of Technology, Seventh Avenue, at West 27th Street, Chelsea, 212-777-9080; free, though seats can be reserved for $10.Halloween Harvest (Saturday and Sunday, through Nov. 1) For the next six weekends, Halloween is taking over Luna Park’s activities, games and rides. For example, Jack’s Pumpkin Shack will give visitors a chance to guess the weight of a giant pumpkin, and Camp Luna will be a s’mores-making station. More information is at lunaparknyc.com. 1000 Surf Avenue, Coney Island, Brooklyn, 718-373-5862.Lower East Side Art Drive  (Sunday) The Lower East Side’s art crowd is assembling for this fund-raiser to benefit the Bowery Mission. Theis weekend’s festivities start the drive, which continues through Nov. 1, with music, poetry and gallery-hopping. Most of the event will take place at Ludlow Studios, though some off-campus options include a tour of the exhibition “Face New York,” tied to the art drive and on view at the Bowery Mission. From noon to 3 p.m., Ludlow Studios, 40 Ludlow Street, between Grand and Hester Streets, Lower East Side, 212-674-3456, bowery.org.New York Gypsy Festival (Sunday) This annual showcase of Gypsy music, which began on Sept. 18, wraps up with a brass showdown of New York bands: Frank London’s Klezmer Brass Allstars (featuring Eleanor Reissa), Slavic Soul Party, Hungry March Band and Underground Horns. At 7:30 p.m., Michael Schimmel Center for the Arts, Pace University, 3 Spruce Street, between Park Row and Gold Street, Lower Manhattan, nygypsyfest.com.New York Super Week (Monday through Oct. 11) This festival is a sort of warm-up act and partner for New York Comic Con, which begins on Thursday, and will turn the city into a playground for fans of super heroes, vampires, zombies — typical Comic Con fare. There are dozens of events, from comedy shows and concerts to food tastings and lectures, planned covering a broad range of locations and topics. The lineup is at newyorksuperweek.com.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The New Yorker Festival (Friday through Sunday) Few festivals try to capture the zeitgeist as comprehensively as this three-day series of talks, screenings and events; even fewer succeed this much. While a few of the festival’s programs have sold out, at time of press, there was still space at some noteworthy events, including conversations with Jeffrey Tambor, star of Amazon’s “Transparent” and Jesse Eisenberg (“The Social Network,” “American Ultra”). At various times and locations, festival.newyorker.com.NYC Craft Coffee Festival (Saturday) There will be 20 specialty roasters to choose from in this small festival for coffee-lovers. The approach is straightforward: Show up, sample some delicious coffee and enjoy live music. General admission sessions beginning at 10 a.m. and 2 p.m.; V.I.P. options are available for early entrance. At Villain, 50 North Third Street, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, nyccraftcoffeefest.com.Target First Saturdays at Brooklyn Museum (Saturday) The theme this month is Hispanic heritage, tied to the new exhibition “Impressionism and the Caribbean: Francisco Oller and His Transatlantic World.” Programs throughout the evening include gallery tours and lectures, as well as concerts and art-making activities. From 5 to 11 p.m., 200 Eastern Parkway, at Prospect Park, Brooklyn, 718-638-5000, brooklynmuseum.org/visit/first_saturdays; free.AdvertisementVideology Presents Movie Trivia (Tuesday) Videology, the Brooklyn bar and cinema, hosts a free film-themed trivia contest every week. The game varies; you will want to know theme songs, facts, quotations (especially ones from Nicolas Cage) and more. The winning team receives a free round of drinks, and there are chances to win drinks each round. At 8:30 p.m., 308 Bedford Avenue, at South First Street, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, 718-782-3468, videologybarandcinema.com.Spoken Word‘Avec Plaisir: Ceremonies of Love & Desire’ (Wednesday) Elaine Sciolino, a writer for The New York Times, has an entire book dedicated to exploring how seduction pervades much of French culture. So it comes as no surprise that the French Institute Alliance Française is hosting a series of talks called “The Art of Sex & Seduction.” First up is a screening and conversation with one of France’s most famous dominatrices, Catherine Robbe-Grillet, and the woman who serves her, Beverly Charpentier. The journalist Toni Bentley will moderate. At 7 p.m., Florence Gould Hall, 55 East 59th Street, Manhattan, 800-982-2787, fiaf.org.Inventing Preservation (Thursday) One of New York’s most famous fights for historic preservation was the failed effort to save the old Penn Station in the 1960s. But this type of activism has been going on in the city since the late 19th century. Here, a panel discusses the city’s preservation pioneers, like Andrew H. Green and Albert Bard. Speakers include Michael Miscione, a Manhattan historian; Anthony Wood, founder of the New York Preservation Archive Project; Amy Freitag, executive director of the JM Kaplan Fund; and Seri Worden from the National Trust for Historic Preservation. At 6:30 p.m., Museum of the City of New York, Fifth Avenue at 103rd Street, 212-534-1672, mcny.org.Poets Forum (Thursday) The Academy of American Poets Chancellors hosts this annual event, which begins with a lineup of readings that includes Claudia Rankine, Mark Doty and the United States poet laureate Juan Felipe Herrera. (Other events at various locations continue through Oct. 10.) At 6:30 p.m., Skirball Center for the Performing Arts, 566 La Guardia Place, at Washington Square South, Greenwich Village, 866-811-4111; poets.org.REDISCOVERING HarperLee (Wednesday) Are you still wondering just what happened when the manuscript for Harper Lee’s novel “Go Set a Watchman” was discovered? Jonathan Burnham, a senior vice president and publisher at HarperCollins, provides some insights in a panel discussion with The New Yorker’s Joan Acocella and the Baruch College professor Tuzyline Allan. They will also talk about Ms. Lee’s lasting importance in American culture. At 7 p.m., Graduate Center, CUNY, 365 Fifth Avenue, at 34th Street, Manhattan, 212-817-7000, gc.cuny.edu; free, but registration is required.Stars Support Poetry (Tuesday) The actor Bill Irwin, the artist Robert Taplin and the directors Jonathan Demme and John Sayles are among the participants in this reading of Daniel Wolff’s poetry from his latest collection, “The Names of Birds.” Proceeds from ticket sales will benefit Four Way Books, a nonprofit literary press. At 7 p.m., Le Poisson Rouge, 158 Bleecker Street, near Thompson Street, Greenwich Village, 212-505-3474, lepoissonrouge.com.Vertigo: A Night of Movement and Conversation (Thursday) Vertigo, a dance company from Israel, lifts the veil on its artistic process from start to finish at this event. In addition to a live performance, the choreographer Noa Wertheim will talk about making dance and the company’s art village outside Jerusalem. Afterward, attendees can meet some of Vertigo’s members during an onstage wine reception. At 7:30 p.m., JCC in Manhattan, 334 Amsterdam Avenue, at 76th Street, 646-504-5708, jccmanhattan.org.Walking Tours Long Island City Tours: Queens Cool Uncovered (Sunday) The idea behind this tour is that Queens is due for more attention, starting with Long Island City. The tour includes highlights of the neighborhood’s history and arts scene, with stops at galleries and crafts and food vendors. The meeting location is given at registration. At 2:30 p.m., 212-209-3370, bqetours.com.AdvertisementBryant Park Public Tours (Wednesday) Bryant Park hasn’t always been the clean, open space it is today. This tour provides some insights on its history, including its darker days as a “needle park” in the 1970s, as well as its award-winning design and maintenance efforts. The tour meets at the fountain at 41st Street at Avenue of the Americas. Registration is required. At 11 a.m., Bryant Park, 212-768-4242, bryantpark.org.Central Park (Tuesday) Central Park’s green-leafed days are numbered. This walking tour — which stops at places like the Bethesda Terrace, Belvedere Castle and the Ramble — could be a good chance to explore the park before its welcoming lawns like Sheep Meadow say goodbye until the spring. History will also figure heavily into discussions; the park is more than 150 years old, after all. The tour meets at 11 a.m. at Central Park West between 66th and 67th Streets, Upper West Side, 888-606-9255, bigonion.com.City of Dreams Tour (Friday, Monday and Thursday) This tour covers the East Village, Bowery and Little Italy and follows the immigrant histories that shaped New York. Stops include a drink at McSorley’s Old Ale House — established in 1854, it’s one of the city’s oldest — and a trip to a Jewish bakery and an Italian store for food samples. Historical anecdotes feature a variety of famous characters, like Peter Stuyvesant and Jimi Hendrix. The starting point, which is available upon registration, is near Astor Place in the East Village. Friday and Monday at 10 a.m., Thursday at 2:30 p.m., 347-464-9335, cityroverwalks.com.Flatiron District Walking Tour (Sunday) This free tour meets at 11 a.m. on the southwest corner of Madison Square Park, at 23rd Street and Broadway, in front of the William Seward statue. Sponsored by the Flatiron/23rd Street Partnership; discoverflatiron.org.Green-Wood House Tour (Sunday) Well, it’s not a house tour exactly. Some of Green-Wood cemetery’s mausoleums, normally closed to the public, will be open for a self-guided tour that includes, for example, an Egyptian-style tomb for one of the Metropolitan Museum of Art’s early presidents, John Taylor Johnston. A docent at each “house” will provide historical information and anecdotes about its permanent residents. Noon to 6 p.m., Fifth Avenue and 25th Street, Greenwood Heights, Brooklyn, 718-768-7300, green-wood.comHistory of Wall Street Tour (weekdays) Stops on this tour, led by Wall Street Walks, include the New York Stock Exchange, Trinity Church, the Wall Street Bull, and ground zero and the Sept. 11 memorial. The tours last 90 minutes and begin at 11 a.m. and 1:30 p.m. (Also at 3 p.m. on Tuesdays and Fridays.) More details: wallstreetwalks.com.Save the Village (Saturday, Sunday and Tuesday) Last year the Steven Kasher Gallery in Chelsea put on an exhibition with the photography of Fred W. McDarrah, who documented the changing scene of Greenwich Village since the 1960s. Now, the spirit of that show has taken the form of this walking tour, which includes stops at the places McDarrah captured on film: locales like Washington Square Park and the Stonewall Inn. At 10 a.m.; the tour meets at Christopher Park, Stonewall Place, at Seventh Avenue, West Village, savethevillagetours.com.Union Square: Crossroads of New York (Saturday) Sponsored by the Union Square Partnership, this free year-round tour focuses on the area’s political and social histories. The walk, led by guides from Big Onion Walking Tours, meets at 2 p.m. by the statue of Lincoln in Union Square Park, near the 16th Street transverse. 212-517-1826, unionsquarenyc.org.JOSHUA BARONEInformation on events for possible inclusion in Spare Times should be sent to weekend@nytimes.com by Friday at 5 p.m. for publication that week. Longer versions of Around Town and For Children listings are in a searchable guide at nytimes.com/events. A version of this schedule appears in print on October 2, 2015, on Page C16 of the New York edition with the headline: Spare Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.