AdvertisementSupported byBy Janelle CarriganALICE SPRINGS, Australia — Two months ago, Prime Minister Tony Abbott set off a national firestorm with just a few words. Speaking about a proposal to cut off all funding for government services in about 150 Aboriginal communities, Mr. Abbott said it was not the job of the taxpayer to “endlessly subsidize lifestyle choices.” He was presumably referring to the Aboriginals’ “choice” to live on ancestral land in very remote locations that nevertheless still need services like power and education.Aboriginal advisers to the government quickly criticized his comments, and thousands attended public rallies across Australia — including one last Friday — to protest the cuts.The artist Fiona Hall, meanwhile, was putting the finishing touches on a series she had created in collaboration with women from Aboriginal communities in some of the most remote parts of the country. It will be on view in Australia’s pavilion at the 56th Venice Biennale, which opens to the public on Saturday.“Kuka Irititja (Animals From Another Time)” is a collection of hand-made figures of native, often endangered, animals. The figures, created with hardy tjanpi grass and other natural materials, are the result of a partnership between Ms. Hall, Australia’s representative artist at the biennale, and the Tjanpi Desert Weavers, a social enterprise of more than 400 Aboriginal women from dozens of communities scattered across 350,000 square kilometers in western and central Australia. The multi-layered work touches on issues that dovetail with those raised by Mr. Abbott’s comments, particularly the effects of colonization and the destruction of communities.Ms. Hall, 61, is a painter, sculptor and photographer from Adelaide, whose works delve into the perilous state of the world. She is showing her often political installation, which includes hundreds of intricate works alongside “Kuka Irititja,” in Australia’s new pavilion, the first 21st-century building in the biennale’s main venue, the Giardini.The collision of art and politics is to be expected at the biennale, whose theme this year is “All the World’s Futures.” Ms. Hall’s installation, “Wrong Way Time,” comprises works she made that explore global politics, world finances and the environment. “Kuka Irititja” is the only collaborative work in the pavilion. The government arts body, the Australia Council, contributes financing for the country’s participation in the biennale, but Ms. Hall was free to explore sensitive political issues. For her, Mr. Abbott’s comments were indicative of a bias against Aboriginals that she has tried to counter with “Kuka Irititja.” “I’m just so dismayed and heartbroken from a white Australian perspective about the continued erosion physically and culturally on Aboriginal people and their country,” she said.(Western Australia’s minister for Aboriginal affairs, Peter Collier, said there was no official list of services to be shut down for Aboriginal communities in the region. “Changes will occur over time and will ensure appropriate services and opportunities are available for people living in remote communities,” he said.)The Tjanpi Desert Weavers, established in 1995, say the group is an important vehicle for continuing Aboriginal artistic traditions. Key pieces are on display in state galleries, and the association is a much-needed source of income for the women involved. The group, an outlet of NPY Women’s Council, buys the intricate baskets, animals and other works from the artists and sells to art galleries and retail outlets across the country.To make the tjanpi animals, Ms. Hall spent several weeks last year with 11 weavers at an artists’ camp near Pilakatilyuru in Western Australia. Some of the women spoke recently in their lyrical tongue, Pitjantjatjara, of the desert animals that no longer roam the land. The banded anteater, the golden bandicoot, the spotted-tailed quoll — all gone, except for the stories passed down and the likenesses the women create.“The work we did was calling upon the memories of our grandparents’ stories — telling us how they hunted” animals, as well as what they looked like and how they ate them, said Rene Kulitja, who was at the camp with Ms. Hall and will be attending the biennale to speak about the project. She added that the works also incorporated Tjukurrpa, or ancient Aboriginal lore.Ms. Hall, who the women called “spidermaker” for the fantastical creatures she made at the camp, introduced camouflage fabric from British and Australian military uniforms to the women. This was subsequently woven into some of the animals, which were shown at the TarraWarra Biennial in Victoria last year before making their way to Venice.The camouflage fabric represents the old agonies of Aboriginal people, particularly what they see as their suffering under colonial rule, Ms. Hall said. This includes the fallout from secret British nuclear bomb tests conducted in the 1950s and ’60s in remote pockets of the Australian desert, including a tract of Aboriginal land in Maralinga, South Australia. A government inquiry was opened in 1984, which resulted in a report about Aboriginal people being exposed to radiation and the state’s failure to safely decontaminate sites.“A lot of us believe that when the atomic bomb testing was carried out, the fallout from those bombs came down onto the land and it killed off groups of animals,” Ms. Kulitja said. Many people also “got incredibly sick and many died.”Simon Mordant, Australia’s commissioner for the 2015 Venice Biennale, said “Kuka Irititja” is a central part of the exhibition. But he added that there were many facets to Ms. Hall’s work.The rest of the artist’s installation, curated by Linda Michael, uses a wide variety of materials, from bread sculptures to sardine tins and bronze casts. The notion behind the title “Wrong Way Time,” that the world is devolving, plays into such current issues as refugees dying in capsized boats in the Mediterranean, the destruction of Syrian communities in the civil war there and environmental degradation worldwide. “We are all being thrown together in ways that are unsettling and globally we’re not dealing with it very well,” Ms. Hall said.She said that the new permanent pavilion was more artist-friendly than the old, narrow temporary building, which was built in 1988. The striking new black granite box features large panels that can be opened to reveal the interior.That Australia even has a new pavilion is somewhat of a coup. The 29 national pavilions in the Giardini are tightly held architectural time capsules. All of the other pavilions there, except South Korea’s, are heritage listed. Australia’s old pavilion wasn’t heritage protected because of its temporary status.“Part of the joy of these gardens is they represent what each country stood for at the time that they were built,” Mr. Mordant said. The German pavilion was built in 1909 with Grecian-style columns but was remodeled under Hitler’s Nazi regime in 1938 to follow National-Socialist architectural forms.Australia’s clean and sleek space speaks volumes about the country and what it represents today, Mr. Mordant said: “It will talk about our confidence, it will talk about our boldness but it will also talk about us being understated.”A record number of Australian artists feature at the biennale this year. Seven are in the official curated central exhibition, “All the World’s Futures,” including two Aboriginals: the late painter Emily Kame Kngwarreye and the young artist Daniel Boyd.Advertisement