By CORINNA da FONSECA-WOLLHEIMOCT. 19, 2015
“Come, dream with us”: When the visual artist and director Doug Fitch addressed the audience at National Sawdust on Sunday afternoon ahead of the performance of Mussorgsky’s “Pictures at an Exhibition” that he created with the pianist Alessio Bax, he recalled the invitation he had received from Paola Prestini, the creative and executive director of this new performance space in Williamsburg, Brooklyn.Throwing together artists from different disciplines and giving them free rein to play is part of Ms. Prestini’s vision for this composer-driven nonprofit center. An after-hours performance presented the previous night as part of the American Composers Orchestra’s Sonic festival featured one of her own compositions accompanied by film. That program, “Visualizing Music,” also included a piece for percussion and video art and an improvised performance that blended passages of medieval music with electronics, live computer-drawn visuals and tap dancing.“Pictures at an Exhibition” fared especially well in this environment, with Mr. Bax and Mr. Fitch teasing out both the humor and the oppressive broodiness of the score. Mr. Fitch described Mussorgsky’s musical gallery, conceived for solo piano as a tribute to the artist and architect Viktor Hartmann, as the product “of a crazy time for avant-garde people trying things out.”Working with a team of assistants, Mr. Fitch improvised short scenes in different media for each of the tableaus, which were filmed and projected onto a screen behind the piano. Whimsical soap bubbles danced around a leafy branch during the garrulous “Tuileries.” Chicken footprints raced across a moving paper scroll, trying to keep up with the “Ballet of the Chicks in Their Shells.”AdvertisementMussorgsky’s title “Two Polish Jews” materialized in a few quick brush strokes on a slate board that had been heated to make the watery lines evaporate almost as soon as they were drawn. The “Catacombae” were illustrated with ink splashes blooming in water, each drop of black or red carefully coordinated with the piano’s chords. In scenes like these, Mr. Fitch’s visuals evoked not only the atmosphere of Mussorgsky’s “Pictures” but also the ephemeral nature of sound itself.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.This was also a connection made, subtly but memorably, on Saturday night in Christopher Cerrone’s “Memory Palace.” Francesco Simeti created an evocative video for this liquid, shimmering piece for solo percussion (Jonny Allen) that explored processes of lingering decay and sudden rupture. In keeping with the subject of the work, Mr. Simeti’s film only started late in the piece, almost as an afterthought or recollection.Holding off visual accompaniment is a smart strategy in performances involving percussionists, because their playing is itself so visually stimulating. In fact, during Ms. Prestini’s multilayered “Listen Quiet” for cello (Jeffrey Zeigler), percussion (Ian David Rosenbaum) and electronics, I found Mr. Rosenbaum’s movements far more interesting to watch than S. Katy Tucker’s slow-motion video images of wispy nude women sitting in a pool of dark water.AdvertisementFor Bora Yoon’s “Sons Nouveaux,” which quotes material by the medieval composer Hildegard von Bingen, the artist Joshue Ott created flickering abstract images that also struggled to hold their own against the nervous rhythmic accompaniment provided by the tap dancer Andrew Nemr and Ms. Yoon’s own clear-voiced singing.A version of this review appears in print on October 20, 2015, on Page C6 of the New York edition with the headline: Scores to See as Well as Hear  .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.