The great Bolshoi ballerina Maya Plisetskaya died on Saturday at 89. I saw her only once, in 1988, at a gala in her honor in Boston; an announcer proclaimed the priceless words: “And now Maya Plisetskaya will dance her immortal Dying Swan” — which she validated by dancing it twice. And that’s what many people remember her for, the number of times her Swan would dance and die. (One colleague remembers her dancing it six times in a row.)That Boston gala (in which Mikhail Baryshnikov danced Apollo) also showed a famous film of her entrance as Kitri in Act I of “Don Quixote,” which, on a big screen in the theater, made an immense impression. In those days, “Don Quixote” was not as ubiquitous as it has become; it was easy to acclaim Ms. Plisetskaya’s rendition as definitive. Even today — when many ballet companies churn out multiple casts of “Don Quixote” most seasons and Natalia Osipova’s performance as Kitri is reasonably hailed in superlative terms — Ms. Plisetskaya’s entrance remains the yardstick, the classic account.The Bolshoi first appeared in New York in 1959, the year of this film. The way she virtually kicks the back of her head at the climax of some voracious jumps is something generations of dancers have been imitating ever since: it’s still widely known as “the Plisetskaya head-kick.” (Many Russian dancers also seem to have copied the brave carriage of her marvelously firm chin and jaw.)Probably over the years we’ve now seen some dancers leap as high and kick their heads more emphatically, but what Ms. Plisetskaya here exemplifies is a huge, merry and heroic generosity of spirit. She’s the epitome of the old Bolshoi larger-than-life tradition. The dance critic Edward Willinger wrote to me: “I’m not sure whether I love this or her ‘Laurencia’ solo better for unmatched ebullience and effrontery”; when you check out the clips of her “Laurencia,” you see what he means. Check out, too, her dancing in old Bolshoi highlight “Walpurgis Night.”If you keep watching her Kitri after that first dance, you find a wealth of artistic resources. Her daring! Her speed! Her backbends! (I would send theater artists to these clips just to study how she uses her fan – often funny and never monotonous.) If you want to see a dancer who performs as if her life depended on it, there’s no better example. The ballet’s climax tends to be the Act III grand pas de deux; this is usually associated with other dancers, but nonetheless I’d always hoped to see how she delivered it. Only with her death did I at last discover footage of this; and it’s wonderful – musical, spirited, personal. In the famous solo variation to the harp (it starts at 4:55 — again, that exhilarating use of the fan), there’s something almost frightening about her attack, her entire vitality. Much of the Bolshoi Ballet’s tradition has been to do with the ardor with which its dancers transcended trash. Their choreography was (and is) seldom rewarding to study for its own sake, but these artists made it life-enhancing. I was amazed to be sent – by the Bolshoi’s own press officer – this clip of Ms. Plisetskaya modeling a variety of couture, and, watching, I rejoiced. Some of the chalk-white makeup and changing coiffures and wigs are bizarre, but so what? Just parading on the catwalk to a collage of swinging-’60s numbers, Ms. Plisetskaya – astoundingly free, defiant, bold – is, as ever, hungry for life and having a ball. 