AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn Shattuck7:10 P.M. (HBO Signature) BELLE (2014) The biracial daughter (Gugu Mbatha-Raw) of a British Navy captain (Matthew Goode) struggles to transcend the problems of living as a black woman in slave-trading England after being raised in privilege by her aristocratic uncle and aunt (Tom Wilkinson and Emily Watson), and alongside her white cousin (Sarah Gadon). This biopic about Dido Elizabeth Belle (1761-1804), directed by Amma Asante and written by Misan Sagay, chronicles the difficult love life of Belle, an educated beauty — including a dashing suitor, John Davinier (Sam Reid), as well as several not-so-charming ones. The movie also covers Belle’s uncle, the Lord Chief Justice, who must decide on a case involving a slave ship on which more than 130 Africans were massacred for an insurance payment. “The movie plays with the historical record for dramatic effect, as is often the case when the past is disinterred for entertainment, and its realism at times groans under the weight of too many passionate speeches,” Manohla Dargis wrote in The New York Times. “Yet the weave of the personal and the political finally proves as irresistible as it is moving, partly because it has been drawn from extraordinary life.”8 A.M. (CUNY) TIMESTALKS Claire Danes, the star of Showtime’s “Homeland,” speaks with Dave Itzkoff, a culture reporter for The New York Times, about the show’s coming season.11:30 A.M. (Showtime 2) LEE DANIELS’ THE BUTLER (2013) Inspired by the real story of Eugene Allen, Mr. Daniels follows a White House butler, Cecil Gaines (Forest Whitaker), and his wife, Gloria (Oprah Winfrey), as history unfolds. A. O. Scott, writing in The Times, called the film “a brilliantly truthful movie on a subject that is usually shrouded in wishful thinking, mythmongering and outright denial.” Robin Williams portrays Dwight D. Eisenhower; Liev Schreiber is Lyndon B. Johnson; and Alan Rickman is Ronald Reagan, with Jane Fonda as his wife, Nancy; Cuba Gooding Jr. and Lenny Kravitz are the fellow butlers who become Cecil’s close friends; and David Oyelowo is the older son whose politics Cecil eschews.8 P.M. (Fox Business) AMERICA’S TRUST DEFICIT Neil Cavuto examines how the recession changed investment habits in the United States and whether financial institutions can earn back the trust of Americans.8:15 P.M. (Starz Cinema) CLOSER (2004) Julia Roberts, Jude Law, Clive Owen and Natalie Portman star as entangled Londoners in this Mike Nichols adaptation of Patrick Marber’s play about toxic romance. “They are four characters in search of an objective correlative, their intimacies obstructed by lofty words — honesty, cowardice, love — that seem, after a while, to mean nothing at all,” A. O. Scott wrote in The Times.10 P.M. (HBO) REAL TIME WITH BILL MAHER The comedian Billy Crystal and the consumer advocate Erin Brockovich are the interview guests. Will Cain, an analyst for The Blaze; former Gov. Lincoln Chafee of Rhode Island; and the MSNBC host Alex Wagner are seated at the round table.10 P.M. (Pivot) ANGRY PLANET The storm chaser George Kourounis investigates climate change in the Amazon wilderness by navigating the Roosevelt River — formerly called the Rio da Dúvida, or River of Doubt — renamed for Theodore Roosevelt, who traveled the region with the Brazilian explorer Cândido Rondon in 1913 and 1914.1 A.M. (13) THEATER TALK Helen Mirren, who has received a Tony nomination for her portrayal of Queen Elizabeth II in Peter Morgan’s “The Audience,” at the Gerald Schoenfeld Theater, talks about playing royalty.What’s Streaming NowTHE QUEEN (2006) Queen Elizabeth II and Tony Blair struggle with the death of Diana, Princess of Wales, in this semibiographical drama directed by Stephen Frears from a screenplay by Peter Morgan (“The Last King of Scotland”). Helen Mirren won the best-actress Oscar for her portrayal of Queen Elizabeth in a performance that Manohla Dargis, writing in The Times, called “remarkable in its art and lack of sentimentalism.” James Cromwell plays Prince Philip as a dim bulb; Michael Sheen is the newly elected Mr. Blair; Helen McCrory bristles as his wife, Cherie; and Alex Jennings is “both sniveling and sly,” Ms. Dargis said, as Prince Charles. (iTunes)Advertisement