AdvertisementSupported byMusic ReviewBy James R. OestreichOn a more modest scale, K. Scott Warren, the artistic director of Sacred Music in a Sacred Space and director of music ministries at the Church of St. Ignatius Loyola on Park Avenue, may feel the way Christoph von Dohnanyi did when he became music director of the Cleveland Orchestra in 1984. “We give a great concert,” Mr. Dohnanyi would say, “and George Szell gets a great review.”It is hard to speak about the wonderful concert series Sacred Music in a Sacred Space without mentioning Kent Tritle, who founded the program at St. Ignatius in 1989 and directed it for 22 years. It may since have lost its pioneering energy and some of its prominence on the New York scene, but it is good to see that it has maintained high musical standards under Mr. Warren, who took over in 2012.Those standards were on vivid display in the work of the Choir and Orchestra of St. Ignatius Loyola on Wednesday evening in a stirring performance of Bach’s Mass in B minor. The choir, in particular, remains superbly trained.With crisp articulation of texts and exquisite balance among the voices, the inner parts came through with unusual clarity. What is often heard mostly as harmonic support became a teeming world of countermelodies and motifs.Given that richness, Mr. Warren’s brisk tempos in the second Kyrie eleison and the Gratias agimus tibi may have been slightly ill advised, allowing too little time for the luxuriant sound to sort itself out in the church’s reverberant acoustics. But the exultant moments — Gloria, Et resurrexit, Et expecto resurrectionem — were positively thrilling, the voices chiming with trumpets and timpani.The orchestra, using modern instruments, was also strong. But the vocal soloists were mostly not on the same level. Two singers — the contralto, Heather Petrie, and the bass, Enrico Lagasca — produced beautiful sounds within a potential not yet fully developed.The matter of embellishment also needed rethinking. Many performers have begun to ornament melodic lines in Bach, in presumed period style yet often to excess, though most remain chary of doing so in a monument like the B minor Mass. Here a triumphant upward swoop from the second soprano at the end of Laudamus te and a few twiddles from instrumentalists seemed, in their isolation, merely distracting, There needed to be either more (unlikely) or less. Advertisement