By LAUREL GRAEBERMAY 7, 2015
Spring FlingIt’s hard to sing around a campfire in the middle of Manhattan, so this weekend Lincoln Center offers children an urban alternative: singing around a fountain. And the man who will lead the joyful noise there promises to be way cooler than your average summer counselor.He’s Dan Zanes, the thistle-haired rocker and folk performer whose children’s albums generate their own kind of heat. Mr. Zanes will conduct a 45-minute singalong at the Revson Fountain in Josie Robertson Plaza as part of Spring Fling, a free event on Saturday that celebrates not only the season but also something blossoming at the center itself: the Lincoln Center Kids Program.“We wanted to create more entry points for families,” said Peter Duffin, Lincoln Center’s senior vice president for brands and marketing. The two-year-old membership program, which offers benefits like special family events and free and discounted performance tickets, will now comprise two more annual subscription levels: one for $125 and one that’s free. The expanded program, soon to roll out a revamped website, will also increase the number of child-friendly shows.“We’re taking some of our programs that only schools could previously take advantage of and making them available to the public,” Mr. Duffin said.AdvertisementSpring Fling will showcase what he called “a smorgasbord,” including music from the Mariachi Academy of New York and excerpts from the Little Orchestra Society’s “Things That Go Bang,” a concert introduction to percussion. Dancing Classrooms, a nonprofit that brings ballroom dance to city schools, will do a show, followed by dance lessons in Damrosch Park.AdvertisementThose who gravitate more to ballet than to ballroom can hear Katharine Holabird, author of the Angelina Ballerina books, read in the David Rubenstein Atrium. Her title character, a pirouetting mouse, will present an interactive demonstration.“We’re hoping that some of the kids show up in tutus as well,” Mr. Duffin said.Another leggy heroine, Betty Boop, will appear in two of the 1930s cartoons that the Film Society of Lincoln Center plans to screen in the atrium; it will also show classic 1920s Buster Keaton shorts.And what better way to master the Lincoln Center campus than a scavenger hunt for its signature spots? A typical clue, Mr. Duffin said, might be, “Throw a penny into this and make a wish.”So tossing coins into the Paul Milstein Pool is encouraged?“We love those traditions,” Mr. Duffin said, seeming to acknowledge that tiny investments may one day lead to big ones.(Saturday, 11 a.m. to 2 p.m. Schedule: kids.lincolncenter.org/events.)‘Archaeology Zone: Discovering Treasures From Playgrounds to Palaces’ (Friday, Sunday through Tuesday, and Thursday) Children will step into the shoes of an explorer like Indiana Jones in this permanent exhibition at the Jewish Museum, but the adventures will be purely scholarly. Still, there is plenty of excitement in analyzing artifacts like a jar handle, a clay jug and a bangle and figuring out the purpose behind ancient pieces like a Greek helmet and a bull-shaped vessel. This interactive show, for ages 3 to 10, also includes a recreated room from the Ottoman period (about 1900), where young archaeologists can dress in costume. From 11 a.m. to 5:45 p.m.; until 8 p.m. on Thursdays; 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92nd Street, 212-423-3200, thejewishmuseum.org.‘The Bad Birthday’ (Saturday and Sunday) A birthday really can be bad when everyone wants a piece of it — specifically, a piece of the cake that the young twins in this story can’t afford to bake for themselves. Presented by the World Voices Program of the New Perspectives Theater Company, “The Bad Birthday” chronicles the children’s efforts to obtain ingredients with the help of their neighbors, who demand cake in return, leaving the twins with the prospect of none. Actors and puppets both have roles in Rick Balian’s script, which is based on a Mexican folk tale and shows how the birthday kids manage to have their cake and eat it, too. At 11 a.m., New Perspectives Studio, 458 West 37th Street, Manhattan, 212-630-9945, nptnyc.org.‘A Band of Angels’ (Friday through Sunday, and Wednesday and Thursday) New York City Children’s Theater used to be called Making Books Sing, and 10 years ago, it first produced this musical, based on a book whose subject was also singing: “A Band of Angels,” by Deborah Hopkinson. The book relates the history of the Fisk Jubilee Singers, established in 1871 at Fisk University in Nashville, one of the first educational institutions for freed slaves. Written by Myla Churchill and recommended for ages 8 and older, this adaptation follows Ella, a contemporary teenager, as she goes back in time and meets the Fisk singers. (Through May 17.) Friday at 11 a.m. (sold out); Saturday and Sunday at 2 and 4 p.m.; Wednesday at 11 a.m.; Theater 3, 311 West 43rd Street, third floor, Clinton, 646-250-1178, nycchildrenstheater.org. Bronx Zoo Birdathon (Saturday) The Bronx Zoo has plenty of birds, but this event will focus as much on the species that just pass through the zoo as on those that are its permanent residents. Starting early in the morning, visitors will receive a checklist of migratory and local wild birds that might be glimpsed during a trip through the zoo. Participants who see the most birds on the checklist can win prizes; children’s activities will also include building feeders and nest boxes, trying out binoculars, dressing as favorite species and talking to zoo ornithologists. On both Saturday and Sunday at 11:30 a.m. and 2 p.m., and again on May 16, 17, 23 and 24, the zoo will also hold demonstrations at which Animal Behavior & Conservation Connections show wild birds in flight. From 7 a.m. to 2 p.m., Bronx River Parkway and Fordham Road, Fordham, 718-367-1010, bronxzoo.com.AdvertisementFamily Programs at the Rubin Museum of Art (Saturday and Sunday) It’s time to explore the Himalayas. That region is the specialty of the Rubin Museum of Art, and children can investigate it in two programs this weekend. On Saturday, from 2 to 4 p.m., Family Art Lab will present “Magical Masks,” a workshop to invent creative disguises. Young participants will use the museum’s show “Becoming Another: The Power of Masks” as a springboard. On Sunday, from 1 to 4 p.m., the museum will host its continuing Family Sundays program, a series consisting of gallery exploration and art making. May’s theme is origami, a craft thought to have beneficial effects on the practitioner. At 150 West 17th Street, Chelsea, 212-620-5000, rubinmuseum.org.‘The Gazillion Bubble Show: The Next Generation’  (Friday through Sunday, and Thursday) Children love bubbles, and this interactive show promises not just a gazillion but also some of the largest ever blown, along with light effects and lasers. The stars are the members of the Yang family: Fan and Ana Yang and their son Deni and others, who rotate as M.C.s for the production. Audience members may even find themselves in bubbles of their own. (The run is open-ended.) Friday at 7 p.m.; Saturday at 11 a.m. and 2 and 4:30 p.m.; Sunday at noon and 3 p.m.; Thursday at 11 a.m. and 2 p.m.; 340 West 50th Street, Clinton, 212-239-6200, gazillionbubbleshow.com.Harlem Children’s Theater Festival (Saturday) The City College of New York is one of the few institutions nationwide to offer a graduate program in educational theater, and once a year, local children can reap the benefits of that training. This free event, formerly called Family Arts Day, features activities and games devised by the students. Geared to ages 2 to 10, the day will include storytelling, play performances, singalongs and a raffle. From 10 a.m. to 1 p.m., Aaron Davis Hall, Theater B, City College, West 135th Street and Convent Avenue, Hamilton Heights, ccny.cuny.edu.‘Hatched’ (Friday) Field trips sometimes take city children to farms, but this piece takes the farm to the children. Written by Mara McEwin and presented by the troupe Treehouse Shakers, this production for the youngest theatergoers — infants to 6-year-olds — uses dance, storytelling and handmade puppets to recreate the experience of a chick breaking out of its shell and encountering other animals, including a rooster, a calf, a lamb and baby birds. At 11 a.m., Ailey Citigroup Theater, 405 West 55th Street, Clinton, 212-405-9000, hatchedailey15.bpt.me; $20.‘Hello From Japan!’ (Friday through Sunday, and Tuesday through Thursday) Japanese culture comprises both unbridled whimsy and serene seriousness. Young visitors can get acquainted with these two sides at the Children’s Museum of Manhattan, which recreates different aspects of Tokyo in this new exhibition. One-half of the show, Kawaii Central, captures the fun of the city’s Harajuku district with the opportunity to sing karaoke, serve a Japanese meal and create cute, cartoonlike family mascots. The exhibition’s other half includes a Shinto shrine park, where young visitors can build a bridge, meet kami (spirits) and express their desires at a wishing tree. Programs, free with museum admission, accompany the show. (Through May 17.) Museum hours: 10 a.m. to 5 p.m.; to 7 p.m. on Saturdays; also open free from 5 to 8 p.m. on the first Friday of every month. Tisch Building, 212 West 83rd Street, 212-721-1223, cmom.org.‘Jack and the Beanstalk’ (Friday through Sunday, and Tuesday through Thursday) Many plants grow in Central Park, so why not a beanstalk? This one sprouts indoors at the Swedish Cottage Marionette Theater, which has revived Michael Alogna’s adaptation of the classic fairy tale about Jack, the Giant (here named Milford), Dolly the Cow and the famous Golden Goose. Bruce Cannon, the theater’s artistic director, has revised the script, and a human actor now stars in the show along with the company’s hand-built marionettes. Weekdays at 10:30 a.m. and noon, with an additional performance on Wednesdays at 2:30 p.m.; Saturday and Sunday at 1 p.m., with an additional 3 p.m. show this Sunday. (Some performances are sold out.) Reservations required. 79th Street and the West Drive, Central Park; 212-988-9093, cityparksfoundation.org/arts.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.‘The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe’  (Saturday) If the children of the Pevensie family could travel to the magical land of Narnia through something as simple as a wardrobe, why shouldn’t two hard-working actors be able to play them and all the characters found there? That’s what Chris Boerner and Erin Layton, who recently stepped into the roles, are attempting in the Off Broadway Family Theater’s first production, le Clanché du Rand’s adaptation of C. S. Lewis’s classic novel. (The run is open-ended and continues on Saturdays.) At 11 a.m., St. Luke’s Theater, 308 West 46th Street, Clinton; 212-239-6200, narniaoffbroadway.com.‘Meet the Fledglings With the Wild Bird Fund’ (Sunday) The Wild Bird Fund is like an E.R. for animals: Injured wildlife, especially the winged variety, is taken there every day for treatment. In conjunction with the “Audubon’s Aviary” exhibition at the New-York Historical Society, the Fund will visit the Society’s DiMenna Children’s History Museum in a program for visitors 5 and older. Children will learn about New York bird species and their rehabilitation, make nests for the fund’s “patients” and not only meet baby birds, but also feed them. (Only children at least 5 can take part in this activity.) From 2 to 4 p.m., 170 Central Park West, at 77th Street, 212-485-9240, nyhistory.org/childrens-museum.MoMA Art Lab: Places and Spaces (Friday through Thursday) What’s an art lab? These interactive spaces for children at the Museum of Modern Art, free with museum admission, help introduce the institution’s collection through activities related to a theme: this time it’s Places and Spaces. Young visitors can design, draw and build as they explore spaces both real and imagined — landscapes, cityscapes, seascapes — as they appear in Modern art. (Through Aug. 31.) Daily, from 10:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.; to 6:30 p.m. on Fridays; Lewis B. and Dorothy Cullman Education and Research Building, 4 West 54th Street, Manhattan; 212-708-9805, moma.org/momaartlab.AdvertisementMontefiore Teddy Bear Hospital (Saturday) Hospitals aren’t known for being fun, but this free event promises to offer plenty of cheer while also educating young visitors about emergency room procedures in a nonscary setting. Children are invited to bring their teddies and other stuffed animals — those that are sick and injured, that is — to Montefiore Medical Center, where the toy patients will experience triage and treatment. The day will also include a tour of the emergency department; a chance to explore an ambulance; safety information from visiting firefighters and police officers; and refreshments and giveaways. From 10 a.m. to 2 p.m., Wakefield Hospital, Montefiore Medical Center, 600 East 233rd Street, Wakefield, the Bronx, 800-636-6683, montefiore.org/montefiore-community-events-and-activities.Mother’s Day Weekend at Wave Hill (Saturday and Sunday) Mother’s Day often includes flowers, one of the specialties of Wave Hill, the public garden in the Bronx. This weekend families can celebrate both the occasion and the blooms through garden activities. On both Saturday and Sunday, from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m., the family art project will consist of making Mother’s Day cards and sweet-smelling sachets. On Sunday only, at 1 p.m., children can discover that flowers contribute more than beautiful scents. Gabriel Willow, a naturalist and educator, will discuss their roles in the ecosystem during a Blossom and Bloom Family Walk. At West 249th Street and Independence Avenue, Riverdale, 718-549-3200, wavehill.org.Mother’s Day Weekend Festival (Saturday and Sunday) At this celebration, the Children’s Museum of Manhattan is inviting young visitors to salute their mothers in ways both homey and high-tech. Little ones 4 and younger can make and decorate oven mitts as gifts, while those over 5 can mix and mold soaps. Children of all ages will be able to enlist their mothers in building Lego robots at a drop-in workshop. And students from the Fashion Institute of Technology will help everyone create family portraits with disposable cameras. At the Tisch Building, 212 West 83rd Street, 212-721-1223, cmom.org; schedule is on the website.New York Children’s Theater Festival (Friday through Sunday) They may remind you of Harold and Maude, but these two are only friends: Howard is 8, and Lillian is 80. They’re the central characters in “Help Save the Monkey!,” the show that is playing in the third weekend of this year’s New York Children’s Theater Festival, a monthlong celebration whose productions — a new one each week — are chosen from submissions sent to a large group of theater professionals. Created by Liz Hara and Marta Mozelle MacRostie, the production deals with the pair’s efforts to rescue Lillian’s monkey, which is about to land from outer space. (Through May 17.) Friday at 5 p.m.; Saturday at 11 a.m. and 2 p.m.; Sunday at 2 p.m.; the Players Theater, 115 Macdougal Street, at Minetta Lane, Greenwich Village, 866-811-4111, nyctfest.org.New York Philharmonic Young People’s Concert: ‘Dance Transformed’ (Saturday) How many ways can you waltz? The Philharmonic will examine the evolution of this dance form in this final concert in the season’s Young People’s Concert series, Super Sonic Music Box. Alan Gilbert, the orchestra’s music director, will make his New York debut leading one of these programs. The bill will range from Johann Strauss II’s “On the Beautiful Blue Danube” to Bernstein’s “Mambo” from “West Side Story,” and, as usual, children arriving early can expect musical demonstrations and videos before the concert begins. (The Philharmonic and Uniqlo will also be conducting a clothing drive for the homeless; audience members can bring gently used garments to deposit in bins around the hall.) At 2 p.m. (preconcert activities at 1 p.m.), Avery Fisher Hall, Lincoln Center, 212-875-5656, nyphil.org. (Seats are limited.)‘Pinocchio’ (Saturday) Here’s one Oscar screening that will intrigue even the youngest film fans. The Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences is celebrating the 75th anniversary of the Disney movie adaptation of “Pinocchio,” the studio’s second animated feature, by showing it to a new generation. The film historian J.B. Kaufman, author of the forthcoming book “Pinocchio: The Making of the Disney Epic,” will introduce the film, which includes effects that were groundbreaking for its era. At 11 a.m., Academy Theater, 111 East 59th Street, Manhattan, oscars.org/events.‘Rapunzarella White: A Fairly Fractured Tale’ (Saturday and Sunday) Yes, it’s fractured, but it’s also blended: In this creative musical retelling, by June Rachelson-Ospa and Daniel Neiden, Rapunzel, Cinderella and Snow White are infant triplets abducted by an ill-tempered witch. These heroines aren’t like their traditional selves — Snow White, for instance, is allergic to apples — and neither are their princes, who may be more clumsy than charming. (Through June 14.) Saturday at 1 p.m., Sunday at noon, 13th Street Repertory Theater, 50 West 13th Street, Greenwich Village, 212-352-3101, rapunzarellawhite.bpt.me.‘Tiny Giants’ (Friday through Thursday) The heroes of this film may be small, but they’re mighty in their will to survive. Inspired by the BBC television series “Hidden Kingdoms,” this new Imax movie at the American Museum of Natural History uses 3-D cameras to peer into the universes of two diminutive creatures: a forest chipmunk and a grasshopper mouse from the Arizona desert, noted for its ability to prey on scorpions. Narrated by Stephen Fry, the film allows viewers to see the world from their perspectives. (Through July 5.) Hourly from 10:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., with 2-D screenings at 11:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m.; all other screenings are 3-D. Central Park West and 79th Street, 212-769-5200, amnh.org.Advertisement‘The Trials of Alice in Wonderland’ (Saturday) Imagine that Lewis Carroll had traded Britain for Brooklyn. In this new musical adaptation from Tada! Youth Theater, by William Brooke, Eric Rockwell and Joanne Bogart, Alice, a contemporary girl, doesn’t feel that she belongs with the crowd of kids on the Coney Island boardwalk. Her adventures begin when she runs off to a fun house there, and her peers, who follow her, become the rest of the Wonderland cast. Alice also finds herself on trial. The charge? Growing and changing. (Through May 17.) At 2 and 4 p.m., Tada! Youth Theater, 15 West 28th Street, Manhattan, 212-252-1619, Ext. 5, tadatheater.com.‘Tunes With Tina’ (Sunday) That’s Tina deVaron, a jazz musician and singer, whose musical brunch for young people at the Measure Lounge at Langham Place, Fifth Avenue, a hotel in Midtown Manhattan, has returned. Ms. deVaron, who often sings show tunes for children, also improvises and gears her performances to the audience. On selected Sundays throughout the season, she will be accompanied by Broadway performers. Singing along is encouraged. (Through May 31.) At noon, 400 Fifth Avenue, at 36th Street, 212-695-4005, measurenyc.com.‘A Voyage Through Jewish History’  (Sunday through Thursday) This journey involves not just miles, but years. In this permanent interactive exhibition at the Jewish Children’s Museum, young visitors can travel from Abraham and Sarah’s tent to the Western Wall in contemporary Jerusalem and beyond. Activities along the way include giving water to Rebecca’s camels, playing the strings on David’s harp (a high-tech version with beams of light that emit sounds when struck) and taking part in the exodus from Egypt. On Sundays through May 17, the museum is also holding its “Torah Unwrapped” workshop, in which children can learn about torahs, mix ink, scrape hides for parchment and watch a scribe do his work. Museum hours: 10 a.m. to 4 p.m.; to 5:30 p.m. on Sundays; 792 Eastern Parkway, at Kingston Avenue, Crown Heights, Brooklyn; 718-907-8833, jcm.museum.‘A Year With Children 2015’  (through June 17) Most of the artists whose work is displayed at the Guggenheim Museum are well known. But now the museum is showing pieces by young — very young — aspiring artists. These are the projects created by students in grades 2 through 6 who have taken part in the museum’s Learning Through Art program, which sends artists into public schools to teach skills and techniques. More than 100 works from 10 schools are in the show, including drawings, paintings, collages and sculptures. From 10 a.m. to 5:45 p.m.; until 7:45 p.m. on Saturdays; 1071 Fifth Avenue, at 89th Street, 212-423-3500, guggenheim.org.Yorkville Scavenger Hunt (Saturday) The Friends of the Upper East Side Historic Districts, a preservation organization, is challenging families to discover traces of old Germany in contemporary Manhattan. Participants in this scavenger hunt — they can come in teams or be assigned to them on arrival — will explore the Yorkville neighborhood and earn points by carrying out tasks like discovering a 150-year-old farmhouse or tracking down the world’s best apple strudel. Prizes, a reception and a deeper knowledge of local history will all follow. The event is free, but registration is required at the website or via an email to info@friends-ues.org. From 1 to 3 p.m., meeting at the southwest corner of 91st Street and Second Avenue, friends-ues.org/yorkville. LAUREL GRAEBERA version of this schedule appears in print on May 8, 2015, on Page C18 of the New York edition with the headline: Spare Times: For Children.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.