By SIOBHAN BURKEMAY 7, 2015
Marjani Forté’s “being Here.../this time” begins on the sidewalk outside of Gibney Dance: Agnes Varis Performing Arts Center, on a block of Chambers Street bordering City Hall Park. As spectators gathered there on Wednesday, a woman in a wool coat and sneakers came gesticulating toward us, the courthouse as her backdrop. A vagrant evangelical, she preached about “His glory” and shouted at confused pedestrians — a convincing display of what New Yorkers habitually dismiss as “crazy.” Only her gauzy white veil, metallic body paint and a hovering cameraman gave her away as a performer.This work is the culmination of a trilogy in which Ms. Forté, since 2012, has been exploring an endemic urban trifecta: substance abuse, poverty and mental illness. Most of the final installment happens in the Agnes Varis Performance Lab, a ground-floor room much more confined than the theater upstairs.That spatial choice matters, as does Ms. Forté’s decision to equip every viewer with a headset, sealing each of us in an auditory world shaped by the sound designer and composer Everett Saunders. Are others hearing the same thing? “Being Here” wrestles with legacies of entrapment — legal, economic, neurological — and Ms. Forté seems to want to impart a sense of isolation, of needing to break free.To that end, she inundates us with information: images and text and, not least, the strikingly agitated movement of her three powerful dancers (Ni’Ja Whitson, Tendayi Kuumba and Jasmine Hearn). The ever-shifting sound, along with Wendell Cooper’s projections, take us back and forward in time: through scenes from American slavery, through “a brief history of the drug war,” through scientific research on addiction. A tongue-in-cheek motif of intergalactic visuals highlights the fact that these issues belong not to some distant future or past; they define our present.“This is the path,” a woman’s voice repeatedly whispers. Riffling through the space around them, the dancers, in Monstah Black’s artfully tattered costumes, often seem disoriented, tugged in conflicting directions. In “Systems of Oppression,” a show within the show, they lurch between the walls, gasping and grappling, to theme music from “The Price is Right.” Another voice pronounces gleefully, “Our best systems of oppression are tough to navigate and almost impossible to get out of!”“Being Here” is tough to absorb in one take, and it borders on being too didactic. Yet it serves as a potent reminder of those seemingly immovable systems and the possibility of moving them.“being Here.../this time” runs through Saturday at Gibney Dance: Agnes Varis Performing Arts Center, 280 Broadway, near Chambers Street, Lower Manhattan; 646-837-6809, gibneydance.org. A version of this review appears in print on May 8, 2015, on Page C11 of the New York edition with the headline: Mental Illness, Poverty, Addiction and Art.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.