AdvertisementSupported byFull reviews of recent dance performances: nytimes.com/dance. A searchable guide to these and other performances is at nytimes.com/events.★ American Ballet Theater (Monday through July 4) American Ballet Theater opens its Metropolitan Opera House season — and the next stretch of its 75th anniversary — with a series of mixed bills under the heading “Classic ABT.” The selected repertory includes George Balanchine’s resplendent “Theme and Variations,” Agnes de Mille’s boisterous “Rodeo” and Michel Fokine’s “Les Sylphides,” an early depiction of the ballerina as fairy. Mondays through Fridays at 7:30 p.m. (May 18 gala at 6:30 p.m.); Saturdays at 8 p.m.; matinees on Wednesdays and Saturdays at 2 p.m.; Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, abt.org. (Siobhan Burke)Brooklyn Studios for Dance Studio Show (Friday) It’s been a productive spring for Pepper Fajans, the founder of this new space at Cadman Congregational Church in Fort Greene. With an ambitious volunteer team, Mr. Fajans, a dancer, choreographer and stage technician, has transformed the church’s dilapidated gym into a light-filled arena for classes, performances and other gatherings, equipped with dance-friendly infrastructure like a sprung floor. An inaugural five-week series continues with performances by Hadar Ahuvia, Julian Barnett, Maiko Kikuchi and Mr. Fajans, before the space closes for more renovations this summer. At 8 p.m., 210 Lafayette Avenue, at Clinton Avenue, bksd.org (Burke)Sophia Cleary  (Friday and Saturday) “Emerging Artist,” that vague yet ubiquitous term, is the title and subject of Ms. Cleary’s latest work. What does it mean, really, to emerge? Ms. Cleary replaces notions of budding promise with something intriguingly funereal. “I challenge the belief that the ‘emerging artist’ is someone who is full of potential,” she writes. “The emerging artist is someone who is dying and/or already dead.” Collective rebirth will also be explored. 8 p.m., the Performing Garage, 33 Wooster Street, near Grand Street, SoHo, theperforminggarage.org. (Burke)Damagedance  (Friday and Saturday) The choreographer Jessica Taylor is celebrating five years of creating dance under the name Damagedance, which suggests work that is dark, moody and fractured. Stylistically, she’s a proponent of the kind of contemporary pieces that merge the drama and polish of modern dance with spastic postmodern gestures, switching regularly from contemplative to urgent. At 7:30 p.m., Dixon Place, 161A Chrystie Street, between Rivington and Delancey Streets, Lower East Side, 212-219-0736, dixonplace.org. (Brian Schaefer)Rebecca Davis  (Friday and Saturday) The title of Ms. Davis’s new work, “Bloowst windku,” welds parts of recognizable words (bloom, twist, windmill, haiku) into something unrecognizable. The same may be true of the movement, light and sound in this carefully constructed trio. In another twist on the ordinary, hundreds of security envelopes, amassed over three years, are put to inventive architectural use. At 8:30 p.m., Here, 145 Avenue of the Americas, at Dominick Street, South Village, 212-352-3101, here.org. (Burke)★ Mark Dendy Projects  (Friday and Saturday) Before Astor Place was home to the Public Theater, the Blue Man Group and Indochine, it spawned the Astor Library, a precursor to the New York Public Library. In the guise of William B. Astor II, grandson of John Jacob Astor, the millionaire for which the place is named, the choreographer Mark Dendy explores the history of these storied blocks in “NewYorknewyork @ Astor Place,” with the help of a cabal of characters. In the process, he ponders gentrification, race relations, tabloid news and more. At 7 p.m., with an additional performance on Saturday at 9 p.m., Joe’s Pub, at the Public Theater, 425 Lafayette Street, at Astor Place, East Village, 212-967-7555, joespub.com. (Schaefer)Marjani Forte  (Friday and Saturday) For three years, the Harlem-based choreographer Marjani Forte has been investigating the ways mental illness, addiction and poverty feed and follow one another in an endless cycle. “Being Here ... /this time” is the final expression of that research. A powerful previous iteration focused on the personal; here, Ms. Marjani implicates institutions. An evocative aural atmosphere, from the composer and sound designer Everett Saunders, reaches the audience via individual headphones. At 7:30 p.m., Gibney Dance Performing Arts Center, 280 Broadway, near Chambers Street, Lower Manhattan, 646-837-6809, gibneydance.org. (Schaefer)Gibney Dance Company  (Wednesday through May 16) In its 24 years, this ensemble has performed only the work of its founder and artistic director, Gina Gibney. Departing from that model, the troupe now presents “Work by Women,” an evening of choreography by Amy Miller — the company’s associate artistic director and one of its finest dancers — and Hilary Easton. Ms. Miller offers “Still and Still Moving,” created with the composer Peter Swendsen, and Ms. Easton reprises excerpts from “The Short-Cut,” a 2005 work inspired by the progressive-era management guru Frederick Winslow Taylor. At 7:30 p.m., Gibney Dance Performing Arts Center, 280 Broadway, near Chambers Street, Lower Manhattan, 646-837-6809, gibneydance.org. (Burke)Rennie Harris (Friday through May 17) Mr. Harris and his Philadelphia-based company, RHAW (Rennie Harris Awe-Inspiring Works), return to the New Victory Theater with their latest foray into narrative, youth-empowering hip-hop. “LUV: American-Style,” featuring about a dozen young performers, tells the story of a daydreaming teenager who unjustly lands in prison. A classic-rock soundtrack sets the unconventional backdrop for styles like popping, locking and boogaloo. Fridays at 7 p.m.; Saturdays at 2 and 7 p.m.; Sundays at noon and 5 p.m.; 209 West 42nd Street, Manhattan, 646-223-3010, newvictory.org. (Burke)Hubbard Street Dance Chicago  (Tuesday through May 24) If the Midwest has a hub for European choreographers, Hubbard Street is it. This troupe of exceptional dancers, who thrive in many modes of contemporary ballet, travels east with two programs of works created at home and abroad. These include Jiri Kylian’s stark and percussive “Falling Angels,” Nacho Duato’s Mediterranean-tinged “Gnawa,” a Crystal Pite solo and a tribute to George Balanchine by the Spanish choreographer Gustavo Ramírez Sansano. The resident artist Alejandro Cerrudo contributes two pieces, one on each program. Tuesday and Wednesday at 7:30 p.m.; Thursday through May 9 at 8 p.m.; May 9 and 10 at 2 p.m.; Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-242-0800, joyce.org. (Burke)★ Alonzo King Lines Ballet  (Friday through Sunday) At first glance, Alonzo King and San Francisco make an unlikely pair. The city has a hippie past and a high-tech present, while Mr. King’s Lines Ballet is the picture of refined classicism. Yet there’s a California ease and earthiness to his work, too. Lines Ballet returns to the Joyce with two New York premieres: “Writing Ground,” set to an omnist score of religious chants, with a libretto by the Irish writer Colum McCann, and “Concerto for Two Violins,” set to Bach. Friday and Saturday at 8 p.m.; Saturday and Sunday at 2 p.m.; Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-242-0800, joyce.org. (Schaefer)Cherylyn Lavagnino Dance (Thursday through May 16) In recent years, Ms. Lavagnino has turned to themes of political oppression in her ballet-based work. Her company’s quadruple bill at St. Mark’s Church includes the premiere of “Nadeje,” which draws inspiration from Czech artists and writers to reflect on freedom of expression. Also on the program are last year’s “RU,” about a young Vietnamese political refugee, along with “Snapshots” (2010) and “Will” (2009), examining various facets of interpersonal relationships. At 8 p.m., Danspace Project, St. Mark’s Church, 131 East 10th Street, East Village, 866-811-4111, danspaceproject.org. (Burke)★ New York City Ballet  (through June 7) The spring season continues with a variety of all-Balanchine programs (Friday through Sunday), Peter Martins’s new staging of “La Sylphide” (Tuesday), a Jerome Robbins double bill (“The Goldberg Variations” and “West Side Story Suite,” on Wednesday) and a program of “21st Century Choreographers,” featuring works by Mr. Martins, Christopher Wheeldon and Justin Peck (Thursday). Tuesdays through Thursdays at 7:30 p.m.; Fridays at 8 p.m.; Saturdays at 2 and 8 p.m.; Sundays at 3 p.m.; David H. Koch Theater, Lincoln Center, 212-496-0600, nycballet.com. (Burke)Ann Liv Young  (Wednesdays through May 20) The irreverent Ms. Young presents “Elektra Cabaret” at Joe’s Pub, casting a character often portrayed as wicked in a compassionate light. In this reimagined version of her full-length “Elektra,” she is joined by Marissa Mickelberg (chorus), Bailey Nolan (Klytemnestra), Charley Parden (Orestes) and Vanessa Soudan (Chrysothemis). At 9:30 p.m., Joe’s Pub, at the Public Theater, 425 Lafayette Street, at Astor Place, East Village, 212-967-7555, joespub.com. (Burke)Advertisement