AdvertisementSupported byFull reviews of recent classical performances: nytimes.com/classical. A searchable guide to these and other performances is at nytimes.com/events.Opera‘Un Ballo in Maschera’  (Saturday) David Alden’s 2012 production of Verdi’s “Ballo in Maschera” is back, and this time, its strengths come through more forcefully. With geometric sets and contemporary costumes evoking film noir, the production captures the emotional darkness of the story of the self-destructive King Gustavo, who is pursuing Amelia, the wife of his trusted adviser. Mr. Alden embraces the opera’s curious elements of Gallic humor, and these scenes take on a surreal quality. James Levine conducts this revival insightfully; the strong cast is headed by the bright, youthful-sounding tenor Piotr Beczala as Gustavo, and Sondra Radvanovsky, who makes an affecting Amelia. The baritone Alexey Markov sings Anckarstrom, Amelia’s husband. Saturday at 8 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Anthony Tommasini)★ ‘Cavalleria Rusticana’ and ‘Pagliacci’  (Friday) It was about time for the Metropolitan Opera to replace its 1970 Franco Zeffirelli production of Mascagni’s “Cavalleria Rusticana” and Leoncavallo’s “Pagliacci,” opera’s most enduring double bill. In his new staging, the director David McVicar brings an intriguing, sometimes uneasy mix of abstraction and realism to “Cavalleria,” marred by the overuse of an annoying rotating stage platform, a heavy-handed touch. For “Pagliacci,” the action is updated to a grimy truck stop near a church in an Italian town in 1948; the commedia dell’arte troupe becomes a band of zany vaudevillians. The cast is strong, especially the tireless tenor Marcelo Álvarez, who takes on both Turiddu in “Cavalleria” and Canio in “Pagliacci,” a formidable challenge. The soprano Eva-Maria Westbroek is a wrenching Santuzza in “Cavalleria,” and the soprano Patricia Racette a feisty Nedda in “Pagliacci.” Fabio Luisi conducts surging, textured and lucid accounts of both scores. Friday at 7:30 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Tommasini)‘Don Giovanni’ (Friday through Sunday, and Thursday) Douglas Martin conducts Amore Opera’s fresh-faced cast in Mozart’s ever-popular tragic comedy in a fully staged production that’s directed by Nathan Hull. (Through May 24.) At 7:30 p.m., except for Sunday, whose performance is at 2 p.m., Connelly Theater, 220 East Fourth Street, East Village, 866-811-4111, amoreopera.org. (Corinna da Fonseca-Wollheim)★ ‘The Rake’s Progress’  (Saturday) The tenor Paul Appleby gives a standout performance as the titular hero in the Met’s mini-revival of Jonathan Miller’s handsome and stylish production. James Levine conducts a uniformly fine cast that includes the baritone Gerald Finley as a suave Nick Shadow, and the sweet-toned soprano Layla Claire as Anne. The mezzo Stephanie Blythe shows off her comic genius as Baba the Turk. At 1 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)Classical MusicEmanuel Ax  (Saturday) In a Peoples’ Symphony concert, this reliable, insightful pianist plays music by Debussy, Rameau and Chopin, including a complete performance of Chopin’s four virtuosic Scherzi. At 8 p.m., Washington Irving High School, Irving Place at 16th Street, Manhattan, 212-586-4680, pscny.org. (David Allen)★ ‘Bach, Revisited’ (Friday) Miller Theater’s final concert of the year looks enticing, probing the close relationship between Sofia Gubaidulina and Johann Sebastian Bach. Ms. Gubaidulina’s “Chaconne” and “Meditation” refer directly to Bach, who is represented by his Triple Concerto in A minor, among other works. The intelligent harpsichordist Kristian Bezuidenhout stars, and Brad Lubman conducts the Ensemble Signal. At 8 p.m., Miller Theater, Broadway at 116th Street, Morningside Heights, 212-854-7799, millertheatre.com. (Allen)★ Bargemusic  (Friday through Sunday) As a married couple, Alessio Bax and Lucille Chung are used to invading each other’s space. On Saturday, these two fine pianists squeeze onto one bench for a program of four-hands piano music by Mendelssohn, Schubert, Ravel and Piazzolla and a new work by Heather Schmidt. The Apollo Trio holds court on Friday with works by Beethoven, Clara Schumann and Ravel; Sunday’s concert features more piano trios — by Beethoven, Strauss and Brahms — played by the Sassmannshaus-DeSilva Piano Trio. Friday and Saturday at 8 p.m., Sunday at 4 p.m., Fulton Ferry Landing, next to the Brooklyn Bridge, Brooklyn, 800-838-3006, bargemusic.org. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)★ Beethoven Piano Sonata Marathon  (Saturday) Twenty pianists playing over 13 hours of music in six concerts: It must be another Beethoven sonata smorgasbord, presented by WQXR and the Brooklyn Academy of Music. There’s a mix of established, young and unexpected pianists here, but watch out especially for Timo Andres playing the “Waldstein”; Adam Golka taking on the “Hammerklavier”; Inon Barnatan in the “Appassionata”; and Daria Rabotkina bringing everything to a close with the last sonata, sometime shortly before midnight. At 10 a.m., and 12:15, 2:30, 4:45, 7 and 9:15 p.m., Fisher and Fisher Hillman Studio, Brooklyn Academy of Music, 321 Ashland Place, near Lafayette Avenue, Fort Greene, 718-636-4100, bam.org. (Allen)Camerata Notturna  (Saturday) A special guest joins this chamber orchestra for Mahler’s soaring “Rückert-Lieder”: the brilliant mezzo-soprano Jamie Barton. Also on the program are Janacek’s Suite for Strings and Beethoven’s Second Symphony. At 8 p.m., Good Shepherd-Faith Presbyterian Church, 152 West 66th Street, Manhattan, camerata-notturna.org. (Zachary Woolfe)Europa Galante (Sunday) The young Mozart made three extended trips to Italy, where he absorbed the styles and practices of the musical culture, especially in opera. The splendid Italian period-instrument ensemble Europa Galante, and its dynamic conductor (and violinist) Fabio Biondi, have put together a program of early Mozart and works by three Milanese composers of that period: Sammartini, Scaccia and Brioschi. Sunday at 5 p.m., Alice Tully Hall, Lincoln Center, 212-721-6500, lincolncenter.org. (Tommasini)★ Stephen Hough  (Saturday) This brilliant writer-composer-pianist sometimes plays one of his own compositions or arrangements for an encore. The program here, featuring Chopin’s four Ballades and works by Debussy, is more traditional than his recent forays into little-known corners of the repertory. But Mr. Hough will undoubtedly reveal new insights in these oft-performed works. At 8 p.m., Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Vivien Schweitzer)John King Residency  (Friday through Sunday) This composer, guitarist and violist completes his weeklong residency at the Stone with six sets, two each evening, featuring such artists as the pianist Jenny Lin, the Flux Quartet and the soprano Carol To, along with appearances by Mr. King himself. At 8 and 10 p.m., the Stone, Avenue C and Second Street, East Village, thestonenyc.com. (Woolfe)Lang Lang  (Thursday) This popular pianist performs as part of the Metropolitan Museum’s celebrations of the centennial of the Department of Asian Art, in conjunction with the current exhibition “China: Through the Looking Glass.” Mr. Lang’s program features compositions by Chopin, Tchaikovsky, Wu Zuqiang, Du Mingxin and Lu Wencheng. At 8 p.m., Great Hall, Metropolitan Museum of Art, 212-570-3949, metmuseum.org. (Schweitzer)Loadbang  (Monday) Members of an ensemble consisting of trumpet, trombone, bass clarinet and baritone voice have to be energetic about finding repertory to play. So Loadbang (a group of that instrumentation) solicits music through its Call for Scores competition. This performance will feature a work by Chris Fisher-Lochhead, the 2014 winner, as well as music by Elizabeth Hoffman, Scott Lee, Jeff Myers, Adam Zahller, Taylor Brook and Helmut Oehring. At 7:30 p.m., National Opera Center, 330 Seventh Avenue, at 29th Street, seventh floor, Chelsea, loadbang.com. (Schweitzer)New York Philharmonic  (Friday, Saturday, Monday and Thursday) Back from its European tour, the Philharmonic dives right back into typically diverse fare. The weekend’s programs, conducted by Alan Gilbert, feature the American concert premiere of a new one-act opera, “Senza Sangue,” by the Hungarian modernist composer Peter Eotvos, alongside Schubert’s “Unfinished” Symphony. On Monday, members of the orchestra head downtown and underground for a Contact! program of contemporary music from Italy by composers including Luciano Berio and Salvatore Sciarrino. And “what’s the big idea” on Thursday? Why, “Bugs Bunny at the Symphony,” with the orchestra playing live to the screened cartoons. Details of times and locations are at nyphil.org. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)Philadelphia Orchestra  (Thursday) This orchestra gave the premiere of Rachmaninoff’s Symphony No. 3 in 1936, and its music director, Yannick Nézet-Séguin, brings it to Carnegie Hall again for this concert. Also on the bill is the New York premiere of Nico Muhly’s “Mixed Messages”; you doubt that there will be any of those in Beethoven’s Piano Concerto No. 3, with Emanuel Ax. At 8 p.m., Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Allen)St. Luke’s Chamber Ensemble  (Sunday, Wednesday and next Friday) The chamber arm of the excellent Orchestra of St. Luke’s offers a musical snapshot spanning the 17th to 21st centuries, featuring works by Telemann, Farina, Rameau and Boccherini, as well as the premiere of the electronic “NYC Sonic Scores” by the Brooklyn-based composer and D.J. Maria Chavez. Sunday at 2 p.m., Cantor Auditorium, Brooklyn Museum, 200 Eastern Parkway, at Prospect Park; Wednesday and next Friday at 7:30 p.m., Morgan Library & Museum, 225 Madison Avenue, at 36th Street, 212-594-6100, oslmusic.org. (Schweitzer)St. Thomas Choir and Concert Royal (Wednesday) The consistently excellent St. Thomas Choir of Men and Boys, joined by Concert Royal, the estimable period-instrument ensemble, and several enticing vocal soloists perform Handel’s popular biblical oratorio “Israel in Egypt.” John Scott conducts. Wednesday at 7:30 p.m., St. Thomas Church, Fifth Avenue at 53rd Street, 212-664-9360, saintthomaschurch.org. (Tommasini)Kate Soper  (Monday) The works of this crafty composer and singer — alternately witty and poignant — appear alongside those of Machaut, Hildegard of Bingen and Bach in this cleverly devised concert, part of the Music Mondays series. Ms. Soper is joined by two other sopranos, Gelsey Bell and Brett Umlauf, as well as the flutist Erin Lesser, the percussionist Ian Antonio and the violinist Joshua Modney. At 7:30 p.m., Advent Lutheran Church, 2504 Broadway, at 93rd Street, musicmondays.org. (Woolfe)★ Tectonics Festival  (Friday and Saturday) This new-music festival, founded in Iceland in 2012, has since spread internationally. Its second annual iteration in New York features a rich helping of musical border crossings, under the auspices of Issue Project Room. Friday’s program includes works by the multimedia artist David Behrman; a set performed by the pianist Joseph Kubera; a duo performance by James Rushford and Klaus Lang; and a piece by John McGuire for the soprano Beth Griffith. The premiere of a new installment of “Seven Storey Mountain V,” a sprawling, continuing work by the experimental trumpeter and composer Nate Wooley, is a highlight on Saturday. At 8 p.m., Abrons Arts Center, 466 Grand Street, at Pitt Street, Lower East Side, 718-330-0313, issueprojectroom.org. (Woolfe)Advertisement