AdvertisementSupported by For full reviews of recent concerts: nytimes.com/music. A searchable guide to these and other shows is at nytimes.com/events.Azealia Banks  (Monday) In the video for the single “212,” this rapper-singer from Harlem delivers exuberantly filthy couplets while clad in a Mickey Mouse sweater, and her gleeful bawdiness is a marvel to behold. Since that formidable debut, the controversy-courting artist has released her first studio album, “Broke With Expensive Taste,” an uneven but still charismatic effort that does not recapture her previous level of infamy. With Strange Names. At 7 p.m., Irving Plaza, 17 Irving Place, at 15th Street, Manhattan, 212-777-6800, irvingplaza.com. (Stacey Anderson)★ Dig Deeper Presents: Derrick Morgan  (Saturday) Each month, this cult-hit soul party invites veteran musicians to share their original hits with appreciative young audiences, leaving all involved with full hearts and sore feet. This installment features a rare area set by Derrick Morgan, a prolific Jamaican ska and reggae singer who reached radio fame in the 1960s. At 9 p.m., Littlefield, 622 Degraw Street, between Third and Fourth Avenues, Gowanus, Brooklyn, littlefieldnyc.com. (Anderson)Jane’s Addiction (Wednesday) These hard-nosed “Been Caught Stealing” rockers have maintained a bizarre revolving door of breakups and reunions since 1991: The original bassist, Eric Avery, flitted in and out and was replaced by the former Guns N’ Roses member Duff McKagan, and then by TV on the Radio’s multi-instrumentalist Dave Sitek. The band’s fourth disc, “The Great Escape Artist,” was released in 2011; at Brooklyn Bowl, the group performs its 1988 album, “Nothing’s Shocking,” in full. At 9 p.m., Brooklyn Bowl, 61 Wythe Avenue, between North 11th and 12th Streets, Williamsburg, 718-963-3369, brooklynbowl.com. (Anderson)Kaiser Chiefs  (Wednesday) In 2011, when these excitable British postpunks unveiled the album “The Future Is Medieval,” it was less of a fourth studio release than an intrepid Ponzi scheme. Fans were encouraged to cut their own versions from a selection of songs and artwork online, then sell their modified iterations to friends and receive a slice of the profits. For their latest album, “Education, Education, Education & War,” however, they went the more straightforward route of 10 set tracks, including a rousing oath to brotherhood, “Bows & Arrows.” With Priory. At 7 p.m., Irving Plaza, 17 Irving Place, at 15th Street, Manhattan, 212-777-6800, irvingplaza.com. (Anderson)Lo-Fang  (Monday) Lorde’s former tour mate is a prodigal talent in his own right, an emotive and downbeat electro-pop singer-songwriter (real name, Matthew Hemerlein) who plays several instruments on his debut album, “Blue Film.” Shout-out to his moony, chamber-inflected cover of the “Grease” soundtrack classic “You’re the One That I Want.” At 8 p.m., Le Poisson Rouge, 158 Bleecker Street, near Thompson Street, Greenwich Village, 212-505-3474, lepoissonrouge.com. (Anderson)The Month in Cabaret (through May 30) Judy Collins, the enduring wild angel of pop, has visited more musical planets than any other singer of her generation. A short list would include Stephen Sondheim, Joni Mitchell, Bob Dylan and Leonard Cohen. And there is also her own considerable body of sturdy original songs. Her return to Café Carlyle for an engagement that runs through May 16 is this month’s cabaret high point. Also at the Carlyle, the Southern California singer-songwriter J.D. Souther performs on Saturday, and that brash blond bombshell Megan Hilty returns from May 19 through 30. Tuesdays through Fridays at 8:45 p.m.; Saturdays at 8:45 and 10:45 p.m.; 35 East 76th Street, Manhattan, 212-744-1600, thecarlyle.com. The pop-jazz belter Diane Schuur makes her debut at Birdland, from May 19 through 23, to celebrate her 60th birthday and a new album. At 8:30 and 11 p.m., 315 West 44th Street, Clinton, 212-581-3080, birdlandjazz.com. At 54 Below, the many events include a memorial tribute to Julie Wilson (Saturday and Thursday); 254 West 54th Street, Manhattan, 646-476-3551, 54below.com. Leading the list of several rising talents at the Metropolitan Room this month is the young baritone Arlo Hill, who just began a four-performance engagement, singing the work of Frank Loesser. Thursday and May 21 at 9:30 p.m.; May 28 at 7 p.m.; 34 West 22nd Street, Flatiron district, 212-206-0440, metropolitanroom.com. (Stephen Holden)★ Muse  (Friday) For a band once widely considered a Radiohead facsimile — especially as it released its 2003 mainstream smash, “Absolution” — Muse has veered to a different course ever since, packing its art-rock discs with dramatic, arena-baiting hooks atop symphonic and progressive experimentation. Its 2012 release, “The 2nd Law,” cavorted in the band’s most epic spaces yet, complete with disco and dubstep interjections; the topically titled follow-up, “Drones,” is to be released in June. At 8 p.m., Webster Hall, 125 East 11th Street, East Village, 212-353-1600, websterhall.com/events. (Anderson)★ Oh Land  (Friday) This Danish singer-songwriter, whose real name is Nanna Oland Fabricius, employs her jazz-inflected quiver to make even her harshest dismissals, like the wryly near-expletive “Sun of a Gun,” register with vulnerability. Her third electro-pop album, “Wish Bone,” shares the smart, club-ready charisma of Robyn and Lykke Li but with additional flourishes; her fourth album, “Earth Sick,” was released in November. With I Am Strikes. At 9 p.m., Music Hall of Williamsburg, 66 North Sixth Street, Brooklyn, 718-486-5400, musichallofwilliamsburg.com. (Anderson)★ Passion Pit  (Monday) “Kindred,” the new record by this thoughtful electro-pop troupe from Massachusetts, unspools as a resolute appraisal of the singer Michael Angelakos’s demons; the urgency also transfers to the band’s synthetic orchestrations, reaching grandiose new heights. The earnest spirituality, however, grounds the vast ambitions. With Holychild. At 8 p.m., Kings Theater, 1027 Flatbush Avenue, near Tilden Avenue, Flatbush, Brooklyn, kingstheatre.com. (Anderson)Penguin Prison  (Saturday) The D.J.-producer Chris Glover, a.k.a. Penguin Prison, tweaks Euro-derived electro into his spinning sets, some of the most engaging on the Williamsburg dance scene. For this set, he adds live vocals for a new sensory jolt. He recently previewed his coming solo album, “Lost in New York,” in a sweaty set at the Coachella Valley Music & Arts Festival. With Midnight Magic and Rush Midnight. At 9 p.m., Music Hall of Williamsburg, 66 North Sixth Street, Brooklyn, 718-486-5400, musichallofwilliamsburg.com. (Anderson)____ Jeans  (Saturday) Not much less abrasive than its (unpublishable) full name, this torpid band from Allentown, Pa., tweaks grunge heaviness with sludge-metal’s potent thrum; the result is a generally unholy union akin to Mudhoney’s fusing with Eyehategod. Its scorching fourth album, “Honeys,” breaks the tension with portentous growls and the frontman Matt Korvette’s raw apologies for past misogyny; it’s a fascinating act of repentance. With Vexx. At 8 and 11:59 p.m., Baby’s All Right, 146 Broadway, near Bedford Avenue, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, babysallright.ticketfly.com. (Anderson)Sunflower Bean  (Friday) Made up of old souls in photogenic forms, this teenage psychedelic rock trio mixes metal-influenced guitar squall with Arctic New Wave vocals; its bassist-vocalist, Julia Cumming, also moonlights as a model for Saint Laurent. The group, based in Bushwick, Brooklyn, released its farsighted debut EP, “Show Me Your Seven Secrets,” in January. With Honduras, Slingshot Dakota and Field Trip. At 8 p.m., the Studio at Webster Hall, 125 East 11th Street, East Village, 212-353-1600, websterhall.com/events. (Anderson)★ Tanlines  (Wednesday and Thursday) This wickedly clever pop duo from Brooklyn, made up of Eric Emm and Jesse Cohen, outdid themselves last month when they unveiled their new website, which mimics the Netflix home page exactly, down to fake movie posters for tracks from their forthcoming album, “Highlights.” (It also links to such seminal film categories as “Movies and TV That You Might Not Have Realized Are About Jews.”) Via these amusing trailers, the new album (out May 19) reveals itself as a spry furtherance of the pair’s lilting tropicalia melodies, African percussion and tidy, club-ready synths. With Mas Ysa. Wednesday at 9 p.m., Rough Trade NYC, 64 North Ninth Street, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, roughtradenyc.com. Thursday at 9 p.m., Bowery Ballroom, 6 Delancey Street, near the Bowery, Lower East Side, 800-745-3000, boweryballroom.com. (Anderson)Tennis  (Wednesday) Patrick Riley and Alaina Moore, a husband-and-wife duo, created their first disc, the twee “Cape Dory,” as they sailed down the East Coast; their latest album, “Ritual in Repeat,” adopts a more succinct rock edge and was recorded on dry land. With Kuroma. At 9 p.m., Music Hall of Williamsburg, 66 North Sixth Street, Brooklyn, 718-486-5400, musichallofwilliamsburg.com. (Anderson)Advertisement