By BEN RATLIFFMAY 7, 2015
The story of the Instant Composers Pool, a squirrelly, interrogative, original group of improvisers based in Amsterdam, began in the late 1960s. By a generous definition, the 10-piece ICP Orchestra, which assumed its present shape and sound in the 1980s, may be one of the longest-running entities active in jazz, if you choose to call what it does jazz.You’re justified if you do. The group’s concert at Roulette on Wednesday night, the first of a three-night stand with guests, included two songs by Thelonious Monk and a customized version of the standard “Perdido.” There were plenty of solos — by Michael Moore on clarinet, Tobias Delius on tenor saxophone, Guus Janssen on piano, Han Bennink on drums — that connected directly to the elegant and organized older languages of jazz, as defined by Monk, Sidney Bechet, Big Sid Catlett and so on.To some degree, the ICP Orchestra regularly shows its love for that stuff. But the band shows discomfort with it to an equal degree, using dissonance and ruptures and squeaks and finicky or absurdist behavior, causing musical arguments within itself and toward its material.That split isn’t a liability; it defines the group’s shared disposition, even during a middling performance like Wednesday’s, in which the New York-based trombonist Ray Anderson and the singer Fay Victor joined the group.AdvertisementThe founders of the Instant Composers Pool were the saxophonist Willem Breuker, the pianist Misha Mengelberg and Mr. Bennink. Mr. Breuker split off to found his own group in 1974. (He died five years ago.) Mr. Mengelberg had served as more or less the band’s spiritual guide, writing a lot of its repertory and cultivating its ad-lib structural strategies: Various members can cue an organized diversion from the tune at hand, or otherwise work against the flow in a way that invigorates the music rather than shutting it down. But since 2013, progressive dementia has made it impossible for Mr. Mengelberg to tour with the band, and Mr. Janssen has taken over as pianist. Now the burden of connecting to the band’s essence rests on Mr. Bennink, who can carry it: At 73, his energy and reflexes, and his power to spread an idea through the group with a single rhythmic gesture, remain extraordinary.Wednesday’s music alternated between set pieces — originals or written arrangements of standards — and more open sections. These could take the form of a subgroup — bass, cello and two trombones, for instance — playing a free-improvised workout for five minutes, or of Ms. Victor singing a slow and floating version of “ ’Round Midnight” with the band, using the far reaches of her voice and working with Mr. Bennink’s strong rhythmic shifts.AdvertisementThe last ICP concert I saw, in January during Winter Jazzfest at Le Poisson Rouge, was theatrical and aurally intimate, full of humor and pathos and surprise. You could hear the particulars of each musician’s individual sound, from the grain of Tristan Honsinger’s cello strokes (and of his hectoring singing voice) to the great crack of Mr. Bennink’s brush against a snare drum, driving the band in swing sections. But Roulette’s echoey school-auditorium acoustics don’t flatter a group with a sound as motley as ICP’s, and this had consequences. It altered the mood of the concert. The band’s sound is changeable: That’s almost written into its charter. But here the performance couldn’t quite change beyond a speculative and workshoplike feeling; it couldn’t quite get toward magic.The Instant Composers Pool Orchestra continues through Friday night at Roulette, 509 Atlantic Avenue, near Third Avenue, Boerum Hill, Brooklyn. Guests on Friday will be Will Holshouser and Vincent Chancey; roulette.org. A version of this review appears in print on May 8, 2015, on Page C2 of the New York edition with the headline: Sharing a Stage, and a Disposition.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.