AdvertisementSupported byFriday FileBy Mary Jo Murphy101 YEARS AGOPresident Woodrow Wilson made Mother’s Day official in May 1914, The New York Times reported, with a proclamation inviting “the people of the United States to display the flag at their homes or other suitable places on the second Sunday in May, as a public expression of our love and reverence for the mothers of our country.”Anna Jarvis, of Philadelphia, had been campaigning for such a day since 1907, and a number of states had already heeded her call. It was not a universally loved idea. A letter to the editor of The Times shortly after the proclamation, signed More Justice, from Cooperstown, N.Y., facetiously suggested dates for further commemorations, along with corresponding buttonhole flowers. (The official one for Mother’s Day was a white carnation.) A few were July 21, “Maiden Aunty’s Day ... Bleeding Heart”; Oct. 30, “Baby’s Day ... Milkweed”; and Nov. 4, “Household Pet Day ... Catnip.”But mommy-lovers prevailed, and the day began its ascent. On May 7, 1922, an item in The Times directed readers to “write a letter or send a gift to your mother. Go home unless your presence will mean added work for tired hands.” The article reminded readers that the day “is not one of maudlin sentiment, but rather tends to emphasize the home as the highest inspiration of our individual and national lives.”In 1925, an article in The Times reported that “Mother’s Day was more generally observed here yesterday than ever before. In the streets, in the parks, in the subways, in hotel lobbies and elsewhere the carnation, the original symbol of Mother’s Day, was seen in great numbers.” In addition, “nearly 10,000 persons gathered on the Mall in Central Park.”Who would halt this amiable charge?From an article in 1923, with a Philadelphia dateline: “Miss Anna Jarvis, the founder of Mother’s Day, engaged in a verbal tilt with members of the Associated Retail Confectioners of the United States at their convention today. She charged them with having profiteered and ‘gouged the public’ through the commercialization of Mother’s Day symbols.‘I want to tell you that you are using a beautiful idea as a means of profiteering,’ she began. ‘As the founder of Mother’s Day, I demand that it cease.’ ”Oh, Miss Jarvis. You have no idea. MARY JO MURPHYAdvertisement