
Inside Art By                     
 ROBERTA SMITH and
 

BARBARA GRAUSTARK

MAY 7, 2015
VENICE — “Jackson Pollock’s ‘Mural’: Energy Made Visible” at the Peggy Guggenheim Collection here is a small show built around a leviathan. “Mural” is the 20-foot-wide breakthrough painting that resulted in 1943 when Guggenheim commissioned Pollock to make a painting for a wall in her New York townhouse. And because she gave the work to the University of Iowa Museum of Art in 1948, it has been seen elsewhere infrequently, which makes it one of the least familiar landmarks of 20th-century painting.“Mural” was Pollock’s first really big painting, one of the biggest he would ever make. Its size, abstractness and rolling, all-over composition set the stage for his later work — though he would take a few years to fully absorb its implications — and has influenced generations of artists.The work has never been in Italy; this is also one of its first showings since the recent completion of its cleaning, conducted over 18 months at the Getty Conservation Institute in Los Angeles. The process seems to have brought more loft and airiness to its brushwork — a combination of scythe-like long strokes and curling commas — and more punch to its palette of black and white highlighted by jewel-bright yellows, magentas and blues.The rooms of the slightly bunkeresque palazzo on the Grand Canal where Guggenheim lived, and that now houses her collection, are neither large nor high-ceilinged. This forces an intimacy that supports the Abstract Expressionists’ belief that their paintings were big but meant to be experienced up close.AdvertisementDavid Anfam, a specialist in Abstract Expressionism and a senior consulting curator at the Clyfford Still Museum in Denver, organized the show with the Iowa museum and gives a fascinating account of its making in the catalog, including the influence of motion photography on Pollock’s technique. Here, he has grouped “Mural” with works by Robert Motherwell, David Smith and Lee Krasner as well as several Pollocks that Guggenheim kept.AdvertisementA few inches away hangs “The Moon Woman,” an intoxicating work from 1942 that features mythic symbols and emphasizes the dark pinks and turquoise blues of its giant neighbor. Across the way is “Alchemy,” an early drip painting from 1946, also recently cleaned, in which the flung paint has a brittle, straight-line velocity that Mr. Anfam relates to photographs of antiaircraft fire taken during World War II. Closer in spirit to “Mural” are two other 1946 canvases, “Eyes in the Heat” and “Croak Movement,” where the drip process seems buried within unruly textures, yearning to be free.In the catalog, Mr. Anfam likens “Mural” to Picasso’s “Les Demoiselles d’Avignon” as an explosive work in which you can feel history shifting gears. Whether this is entirely true, it is true enough. Pollock’s leviathan noisily announces the arrival of an artistic potential of unknown extent. It is astounding to encounter it here, more than 70 years on, as if in someone’s living room. ROBERTA SMITHAUSTRALIA’S BLACK BOX AT THE BIENNALEVENICE — Not even the presence of Cate Blanchett, cultural and political dignitaries, a cleansing smoke ceremony to create positive energy or a didgeridoo performance by two indigenous artists could guarantee the new Australian pavilion at the Venice Biennale a stress-free debut.“The pest control man came to fumigate on Sunday night,” Fiona Hall, the 61-year-old Sydney-born artist chosen to inaugurate the structure, said cheerfully at its opening on Tuesday.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The elegant black granite pavilion, by Denton Corker Marshall of Melbourne, is the first building constructed in the Giardini area of the Biennale in 20 years. (The last one was the pavilion for South Korea.) Some 36 Australian artists over that time have exhibited in a well-loved temporary structure built of fiber cement and steel, but it was difficult to maintain, and in 2009 Simon Mordant, a banker and arts patron who is commissioner for Australia at this Biennale, began a campaign with his wife, Catriona, to build what he called “a 21st-century building in Venice” that was “distinctive, durable and breathtakingly simple.”The pavilion was built on the bank of the Rio dei Giardini, at a cost of 7.5 million Australian dollars (about $6 million), with most of that coming from private donors, including Ms. Blanchett.The Biennale is the oldest established international arts exhibition in the world, dating to 1895, a year before the first modern Olympic Games. In 1907, individual countries began to build national pavilions, with distinctive flair and architecture.John Denton and his team built Australia’s pavilion from Zimbabwe granite, transporting it to the site on barges. “I thought of it as an enigmatic black box appearing in the Giardini,” he said, adding about the design that it “was an Australian trait to be a little on the reserved side, and not too pushy.”AdvertisementBut pantry moths had smuggled aboard, burrowing into some of Ms. Hall’s sculptures, which are made of bread. So on Sunday night, nature and culture were clashing, and the pest controller came to spray. Luckily, only two sculptures had crumbled and needed rebaking.Ms. Hall’s show, “Wrong Way Time,” takes as its themes global conflict, economic crisis and the minefield of “madness, badness and sadness in equal measure,” she has said. There were bird nests made of shredded dollar bills and dangling figures made of shredded camouflage material and knitted death masks.One of her newest sculptures, “Crust,” was a capsized refugee ship made of bread, a commentary, she said, on the “fragmentation of communities and families” caused by the deaths of migrants in the Mediterranean. BARBARA GRAUSTARKAn earlier version of this column erroneously attributed a distinction to the Peggy Guggenheim Collection’s display of Jackson Pollock’s “Mural.” It is not the first time the work has been shown since its cleaning at the Getty Conservation Institute in Los Angeles; the painting was displayed at the J. Paul Getty Museum in 2014.A report in the Inside Art column on Friday about the display of Jackson Pollock’s “Mural” at the Peggy Guggenheim Collection in Venice misstated the year that the work was given to the University of Iowa Museum of Art. It was 1948, not 1959.A version of this article appears in print on May 8, 2015, on Page C20 of the New York edition with the headline: First Trip to Venice for a Pollock.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »