AdvertisementSupported byBy Ken JohnsonIn 1962, at the Ferus Gallery in Los Angeles, Andy Warhol had his first solo painting exhibition. It consisted of 32 canvases, each bearing the image of a Campbell’s soup can rendered as if by a grocery store sign painter. Except for red letters spelling the name of a different variety on each label — Tomato, Minestrone, etc. — they appear nearly identical.Five of the paintings sold, including one to the actor Dennis Hopper. But then the gallery’s director, Irving Blum, decided he wanted the set for himself. So he bought back the sold pieces and purchased the rest from Warhol for $1,000. He held onto the series until 1996, when he turned it over to the Museum of Modern Art as a combination gift and sale reportedly valued at $15 million.Since then, the museum has exhibited the paintings in grid formation, unlike in the Ferus exhibition, where they were displayed resting on narrow shelves all at the same level. Now for the first time at MoMA they are presented in a similarly horizontal array as the centerpiece of “Andy Warhol: ‘Campbell’s Soup Cans’ and Other Works, 1953-1967,” an exhibition that revisits Warhol’s prescient early years with revealing economy.Organized by Starr Figura, a curator in MoMA’s drawings and prints department, the exhibition sandwiches the soup cans between selected works from before and after, all from MoMA’s permanent collection. You might think you don’t need to see yet another Warhol show. This one is remarkable not only because it offers more immediate access to the soup cans than the grid presentation allows, but also for how concisely it puts them into the context of Warhol’s early development.A skeptic might argue that to see one of the soup cans is to see them all. Viewers may notice that the penciled underdrawing is exposed here and there, and that the bands of gold fleurs-de-lis near the bottom edge of the cans are irregularly stamped, not painted. But this isn’t the kind of painting whose formal and technical subtleties invite a connoisseur’s delectation. Warhol evidently wanted to make them devoid of traditional aesthetics or painterly flair. Yet seen in the art gallery now, resting on narrow ledges and spread out across the walls, they have a palpable expressiveness. In their deadpan, laconic way they seem to speak eloquently of life in 20th-century America.When Blum asked Warhol why exactly 32, the artist responded that Campbell made 32 varieties. He was a realist, and numbers had everything to do with the reality of a can of Campbell’s soup: How many were then produced and consumed, how much did a can cost, what was the profit margin? Campbell’s soup used to be a staple in middle-class American households. If you grew up in the 1950s and ’60s, you probably recall consuming gallons of it. Warhol said he had eaten Campbell’s soup every day for 20 years. It was a time when industrialized production and universal distribution of food seemed a miracle of modern progress. Warhol made art about things that were most real to the masses and to himself: food, money, the home, cheap entertainment and death.At the beginning of the exhibition, works from the 1950s show Warhol in transition from commercial to fine art. Sweetly humorous cartoon lithographs depicting women’s shoes from around 1955 reflect his successful early career as a commercial illustrator. With a black-and-white painting of an ad for water heaters from 1961 and a large 1962 drawing of paper money in a roll tied by a piece of string, you see him focusing on basic needs. A set of images of commercial products like Coca-Cola drawn on blue mimeograph stencils presages his conversion to silk-screening, the commercial technology he discovered soon after completing the soup can series.The exhibition concludes with silk-screen-based works picturing celebrities. Made shortly after Marilyn Monroe’s 1962 death from a drug overdose, “Gold Marilyn Monroe” has the actress’s face embedded within a field of gold-colored paint, framing her as a kind of modern goddess. Dark prints of Jacqueline Kennedy from 1965, based on news photographs taken shortly after President Kennedy’s assassination, turn the widow into a personification of national mourning. In “Double Elvis” (1963), the overlapping images of a bigger-than-life, gunslinging Elvis Presley printed in black on a silver field envision that pop star as a figure of Dionysian insurgency.At once banal and mythic, these later images cast an ambiguous light back on the soup cans. They might represent the soul-deadening effects of mass production, but arranged as they are like icons in a church, they also could be containers of spiritual nourishment. If that sounds far-fetched, recall that Warhol was to the end of his life a  churchgoing Catholic. He was an artist of both the sacred and the profane.“Andy Warhol: ‘Campbell’s Soup Cans’ and Other Works, 1953-1967” runs through Oct. 18 at the Museum of Modern Art, Manhattan; 212-708-9400, moma.org. Advertisement