By DANIEL McDERMONMAY 7, 2015
Need to make plans for the weekend?The Times’s arts team is here to help.We realize that you have plenty of entertainment options available to you right this very minute via the device in front of you.The problem, as Willy Wonka might put it, is that there is so little time and so much to see.So we posed a question to our colleagues at The Times: What’s one thing that they would recommend doing this weekend?I saw “Hamilton” last week – not a brag! just a fact! – and was moved and impressed, of course. When I got home, I started deep-diving on the musical’s creator and star Lin-Manuel Miranda’s hip-hop improv troupe, Freestyle Love Supreme. Skip the crew’s variety show on the Pivot network and dig back eight or nine years on YouTube, where Mr. Miranda can be seen rapping about mimosas on his birthday while his longtime creative collaborator Christopher Jackson — George Washington in “Hamilton” — cradles a baby. (See more on YouTube. Bonus tip: Freestyle Love Supreme performs at Joe’s Pub in June.)“Freedomland,” by Richard Price, is a dark, electric thriller that begins with the disappearance of a child and unfolds into a harrowing examination of the politics of race and class in a New Jersey town. (Buy it or find it in a library.)Advertisement“Wild Tales,” currently in theaters, comes from Argentina but don’t let the subtitles put you off. It’s a highly watchable compendium of six vignettes about modern life and its frustrations. Who hasn’t wanted to get revenge for a parking ticket? Also, the final scene rivals the “Red Wedding” episode of “Game of Thrones” for nuptials gone bad. (Find showtimes.)The big news in online shows this week is Netflix’s comedy “Grace and Frankie,” starring Jane Fonda and Lily Tomlin, which goes up on Friday. But don’t forget that on the same day the service is posting five new episodes of the charming children’s show “The Adventures of Puss in Boots,” which has some of the wit and sophistication of DreamWorks Animation’s “Shrek” heyday. (See it on Netflix.)On his debut comedy album, “Effable,” the fiercely smart stand-up Guy Branum, a veteran writer for “Chelsea Lately” and “Totally Biased with W. Kamau Bell,” manages to be swaggeringly opinionated and sweetly vulnerable, as gifted with an argumentative rant as an old-fashioned punch line. It’s only May and we already have a strong candidate for best special of the year. (Buy it on iTunes.)AdvertisementCheck ‘em out and report back; we want to know how we’re doing. Is there something else we could do to help you sort out your cultural diet? Let us know at thearts@nytimes.com, or tweet @nytimesarts.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.