AdvertisementSupported byBy Jon CaramanicaLAS VEGAS — You watch the crash because you want to see how it will end: near miss or carnage, relief or horror, laughter or tears. Part of the appeal is the feeling of helplessness — you are a viewer, but not an agent. Whatever happens, you’ll be affected, but you can’t chart the course. And looking away is never the right choice.In the case of late-period Mariah Carey, it’s the high notes that you can’t avert your eyes — and ears — from. When she began her career in the early 1990s, she was capable of outrageous vocal feats, singing whole octaves higher than almost everyone else, stringing together dog-pitch bleats into ecstatic runs. She brought something superhuman into the otherwise grounded world of pop-soul.But the notes have not been there for Ms. Carey of late: Some performances have been markedly off-base, the subject of intense scrutiny. Ms. Carey is still durable, and sometimes excellent, but her once-transcendent voice is like decaying manufacturing machinery: It still churns, but the product might be polished or dinged. You don’t know until it happens.On Wednesday night, Ms. Carey performed for a largely difficult two hours at the Colosseum at Caesars Palace here, the first show in what’s to be a two-year residency totaling more than 50 concerts. That she’s embarking upon something like this is already a sign of defeat: The show consists of her 18 No. 1 Billboard hits, and the last of those came in 2008. (There’s a new song, too, called “Infinity” — it won’t be No. 19.)But Ms. Carey, 45, has long had a taste for the outsized and gauche, and Vegas, with its grandeur and glitz, seemed like just the place to find redemption. Her portrait, airbrushed and glamorous, graces the covers of Las Vegas and Vegas Player magazines, which are laid out on coffee tables in hotel rooms across town. Last month, at the rollout event for her residency, she arrived in a pink 1936 convertible trailed by 18 billboard trucks bearing the names of each of the hits she would be performing. Maybe the new performance spectacle could resurrect the old vocal spectacle.When it came to the notes, though, the struggle was real. From the beginning of the night, she was tentative and inconsistent. She sang parts of several songs an octave lower than the recordings. Often she appeared to be holding back, as if to build up to a big moment, only to shy away from it. As she’s aged, her voice has gotten huskier, but sometimes the rasp felt like a glitch, not a goal.On power ballads like “I Don’t Wanna Cry” and “Love Takes Time,” she vacillated between hitting big notes and whiffing. The same happened on her Jackson 5 cover “I’ll Be There,” sung with her longtime backup singer Trey Lorenz. They famously performed a blistering version of this song on “MTV Unplugged” in 1992, but here Mr. Lorenz appeared to be restraining himself so as not to overpower the boss.On faster songs, like “Dreamlover,” “Honey” and “Fantasy,” Ms. Carey was practically tiptoeing. “Fantasy” featured Ol’ Dirty Bastard, who died in 2004, rapping via video, and he felt more alive than Ms. Carey, who was right there onstage.None of this changes the fact that, somewhere in there, Ms. Carey has one of the greatest pop voices of the last three decades. In the first half of the 1990s, she was unstoppable; in the second half, very close to that. She had at least one No. 1 song each year of that decade.Las Vegas has become a safe haven for setting stars, from Celine to Shania to Britney: Ms. Carey’s arrival here was practically inscribed in stone. And yet, in the relatively fallow period since she last topped the charts, she’s made some strong music, especially on “Me. I Am Mariah ... The Elusive Chanteuse” (Def Jam), from last year. Carey has a new record deal, with Epic, and a hits collection, “#1 to Infinity,” due this month.)But there’s no room for that in this show. Performing her No. 1s in chronological order is a convenient conceit, but not one best suited to Ms. Carey’s catalog, or her vocal gift. She seemed to be holding back on up-tempo songs so as to have something to give on slower ones with fewer places to hide. Hits like the elegant “Can’t Let Go” and the breezy “Shake It Off” didn’t make the cut.All in all, this show displayed a minimum of imagination and effort, from the song order — although she did rally near the end, on “We Belong Together” and “Don’t Forget About Us” — to the strategically lethargic band to the constant reminders of the things Ms. Carey wasn’t doing. During his introduction, the show’s director, Ken Ehrlich, ran down a list of behind-the-scenes people — “Mariah’s asked me to thank them for her” — and it was Mr. Lorenz’s task to introduce the dancers and band members. Even Ms. Carey’s movements were kept to a minimum. Several times, she was wheeled out on stage — singing in a pink convertible, singing on a Jet Ski, singing on a round bed.She stood the most still when she was aiming the highest: not for the run-of-the-mill big notes, but the stratospheric ones that made her untouchable 25 years ago. She has a routine. Before she sings them, she pauses for a bit, puts her hand to her eardrum, then points to the sky as the laserlike shrieks come out.All those gestures were there during this show — at the end of “Emotions,” and on “Heartbreaker” and on “I’ll Be There.” But as the night wore on, it became increasingly unclear whether the sounds coming through the speakers were coming from her mouth. They were crisp and clean, while many of her lesser notes were gruff and unsteady. It’s possible she shines most at the highest difficulty level, but it’s more probable that to fail at those places would have been too great a tragedy to bear.And so went this show, which was far more about defense than offense. Whether the decision to undertake this project was born of necessity, hubris or obliviousness, it has put Ms. Carey in a precarious position — she is in decline and trapped in a cage of her own making. It would be so much easier to turn away if the spotlight weren’t so bright.Mariah Carey is to perform regularly over the next two years at the Colosseum at Caesars Palace; mariahcarey.com.Advertisement