AdvertisementSupported byBy Jada F. SmithWASHINGTON — The Mark Twain Prize for American Humor celebrates humorists who broach thorny social issues. Eddie Murphy, who accepted the award at the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts here on Sunday, fit the bill in his acceptance speech with a few Bill Cosby jokes.“He should do one show where he just comes out and talks crazy now,” Mr. Murphy said of Mr. Cosby, the comedian who won the same prize in 2009 and has been accused by dozens of women of sexual assault. Mr. Murphy even dusted off his old Cosby voice and imagined what Mr. Cosby might say on a comedy show.“I would like to talk to some of the people who feel that I should give back some of my” trophies, Mr. Murphy intoned in character.The ceremony’s roster included Trevor Noah, the new host of “The Daily Show,” who called comedy “a pressure valve of sorts.”“It acts as a place where people can come together and acknowledge that things are happening around them,” Mr. Noah continued, “and then get to address those issues in a space that hopefully doesn’t turn it into a negative experience. I think that’s really a powerful position that a lot of comedians have.”The evening included stalwart comedians telling jokes and stories about Mr. Murphy, 54, while revisiting highlights of his career. Arsenio Hall, the comedian and talk show host, recalled the time he and Mr. Murphy were practicing for the film “Coming to America” and walked around New York dressed as the older characters they played in a barbershop scene, striking up conversations with random people in the characters’ voices. “We ran into an old lady, like 80 years old,” he said. “And Eddie started hitting on her!”Tracy Morgan, the comedian who was severely injured and in a coma after a car accident in 2014, told of his best memory of Mr. Murphy.“First thing out of my coma, I spoke to Eddie on the phone,” Mr. Morgan said. “He was the first one to make me laugh. And that’s why I love him.”The night before the gala, the comedian Kathy Griffin said, a group gathered in Mr. Murphy’s hotel room after a dinner in his honor to watch Mr. Morgan’s return to “Saturday Night Live,” which he hosted.The Kennedy Center show was a benefit and will be shown on PBS on Nov. 23. The Mark Twain Prize has been awarded annually since 1998, when the center honored Richard Pryor. Other honorees include Steve Martin, Tina Fey, Carol Burnett and George Carlin.“Usually when people have evenings like this, the person’s really, really old, or unless you’re really one of the greatest, funniest people of all time,” Mr. Murphy said. “I’m standing here alive and looking like myself.”Advertisement