Season 1, Episode 14: “The Search”And just like that, “Outlander” transformed into a road movie.“The Search,” is a fascinating episode of television that incorporates many of the elements that make “Outlander” such a simultaneously incisive and subversive series, but what’s more impressive is that it does so by building out from one of the show’s weakest aspects: the deification of Jamie Fraser. Upon learning of Jamie’s capture by the redcoats, Claire is spurred into action, readying herself to hunt him down and free him. Ian, having lost his wooden leg in the redcoat ambush, is in no shape to accompany her, but sets about making her a map of the area. Things get really interesting  when Jenny announces that she will be joining Claire in her search, much to everyone’s surprise, given that she’s a nursing mother.The way the story subverts the usual tropes is clear, with Jamie standing in as the damsel in distress and Claire and Jenny  as the knights in shining armor. The women prove remarkably adept at their rescue mission, thanks largely to Jenny’s impeccable tracking skills, honed when she was but a child growing up with her two brothers. It’s not long before they come across the redcoats in question, and they quickly capture one and start questioning him, with Jenny rapidly resorting to torture to get information. Eventually, they learn that Jamie has escaped via the river and is likely to be headed north. As Claire moves to bandage their captive’s wounds, Jenny questions her actions, as it’s clear they’ll have to kill the man to evade being discovered. It’s at this moment that Murtagh  appears, killing the soldier and alleviating the need for the women to bloody their hands further.But what matters more than action in this moment is intent. While Jenny feels as though Claire’s earlier hesitation about their hostage was some kind of judgment because she herself was willing to kill the man, Claire assures her that she was preparing to kill him herself. They are allied in their fervent love and devotion to Jamie, and it has formed an unbreakable bond. When, shortly thereafter, Jenny returns home to Lallybroch to attend to her bairn, Murtagh, the only person in the world whose love for Jamie rivals that of the two women, steps in to take her place. But before Jenny leaves, Claire pulls her aside and instructs her to plant potatoes, as many as she can, because war and famine and destruction are coming and she must do everything possible to prepare for it. Jenny takes her at her word, unfazed by the prophecy, confessing that Jamie had mentioned that something like this might happen, telling her that no matter how mad it sounded, she was to do precisely what Claire instructed. Jenny leaves knowing that Claire will do whatever it takes to bring her brother home to her, and for Jenny, there’s really no higher compliment.What happens next is nothing short of revelatory. Instead of trying to track down a a likely-to-be-well-hidden Jamie, the pair start to slowly travel the countryside, offering medical care to those in need and providing entertainment, in the form of dancing and singing and palm reading, with the hopes that tales of their existence would eventually make their way to wherever Jamie was lying low. Murtagh understands the impossibility of finding a needle in a haystack, so his strategy instead is to hope that the needle can find them. But things take a turn for the brilliant when Murtagh decides that they would draw more notice with Claire dressed up like a man and singing a bawdy classic song to a decidedly unlikely tune.Having Claire use the tune to “Boogie Woogie Bugle Boy” was absolute genius, providing one of the most memorable moments of the television season and a perfect summation of Claire’s continuing existence caught between two worlds. A staple from the world she left becomes her saving grace in the world she’s joined and the two seem destined to find Jamie in short order. Until, that is, the gypsies get involved and put on their own “Singing Sassenach” show, making it impossible for Jamie, if he learned of their exploits, to determine which Sassenach was which. Claire attempts to persuade the gypsies of her pure-hearted intent in performing the song as a secret message to her husband and pays them off, assuring them that once Jamie is found, she’ll never perform the song again and it would then become theirs for the taking, a decision that the untrusting Murtagh just can’t abide.The two continue traversing the countryside, performing and searching, ever hopeful that Jamie will show up, until they finally run out of land and find themselves holed up by the sea, unsure of how to proceed. Murtagh is livid, lashing out at Claire for giving money to the gypsies who he believes will never honor their promise, his bitterness and pain brimming over into words he cannot take back. Claire is just as upset, blaming his strategy, not her bribery, for their failure. They tear at each other because it’s all they know to do now. Claire accuses Murtagh of never having lost someone that he loved and, taken aback, he tells her a tale from a long time ago.The story Murtagh tells is sweet and somber, revealing a side of him that hasn’t been witnessed before. Trying to prove himself worthy of the love of the woman, trying to be the man she desired, he killed the boar at the McKenzie hunt with a dagger,  and had the tusks made into bracelets for his beloved. Those bracelets were the same ones given to Claire last episode by Jenny. They had belonged to her mother, but Ellen Fraser never explained their origin. Murtagh ends his story by telling Claire that she thinks she’s the only one who loves Jamie, but that Jamie is like a son to him. The moment is moving and delicate and Murtagh and Claire connect in that instance in a way they’ve never managed before and from it, decide to begin their search again, seeking the man they both love so dearly.In time they are approached again by the gypsies, telling them where they can find what they seek and the pair rush off in the hope that their efforts have finally paid off. But instead of Jamie they find Dougal, who informs them that Jamie has been recaptured by the redcoats, taken in the process of being lured by Claire’s song. He’s being held at Wentworth Prison, where he stood trial and was sentenced to death. To Dougal, there is nothing left to do but move on, and, in his very Dougal way, that means trying to make a move on Claire in order to become the new laird of Lallybroch. Dougal doesn’t deny her accusations but insists that with Jamie dead, that’s the only way he can keep Claire safe, and, honestly, he’s probably not wrong. But Claire is in no mood to declare her husband dead without proof, and she insists on traveling to Wentworth to try to free her love, telling Dougal that she’ll marry him if she can’t save Jamie or if he’s already dead, anything to get him to allow her the opportunity to try. Dougal doesn’t want to give her men for her suicide mission but agrees that any men who choose to travel with her will be free to do so. In the end, Rupert, Angus and Willie volunteer, and the five begin the trek to Wentworth.“The Search” thrives by its change of scenery, and even more so by indulging in pairing off characters that provide new and illuminating insights into the world and how it works. While typically the series is not at its finest when it ventures too far into “Everybody Loves Jamie” territory, this episode took that liability and turned it into an asset, making Jamie-love into a religion that aligned even the most fractious of followers. The episode also sings by having Claire indulge in her agency, having her call the shots in the attempt to rescue her husband. She is ferocious and undaunted, willing to humiliate herself repeatedly and invest in seemingly pointless endeavors if it means that she’ll have even the merest opportunity to be reunited with Jamie. There are few shows on the air as revelatory as “Outlander” when it’s at the top of its game and “The Search” is another fine example.Other gossipThe relationship between Murtagh and Claire is one of the finest elements the show has and while it’s nice they don’t overuse it, it would be nice to have it featured more prominently.
I fear we won’t see Jenny again for quite some time, a shame given how wonderful Laura Donnelly is.For as large a role as they played in earlier episodes, it’s strange that the element of Scottish politics has largely fallen by the wayside. In honesty, I’d kind of forgotten than Dougal existed.Still marveling at “Boogie Woogie Bugle Boy.” I can’t say I saw that one coming.