AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn Shattuck2 P.M. (FX) WANDERLUST (2012) Jennifer Aniston and Paul Rudd star as Linda and George, out-of-work Manhattanites unable to sell their “microloft” in the West Village. Then they stumble onto Elysium, an “intentional community” in rural Georgia, where good vibrations — and not a little smoke — fill the air. Established decades earlier by Carvin (Alan Alda), now in a wheelchair and battling memory loss, and his hippie friends, the commune is home to a touchy-feely guitar-strumming collage led by Seth (Justin Theroux), a creepy Lothario; and a novelist and nudist (Joe Lo Truglio) who wears the occasional sanitary pouch (like a hairnet, but lower) when he’s crushing grapes for homemade wine. “Part of what gives this movie unexpected resonance is that Linda and George have joined only somewhat voluntarily,” Manohla Dargis wrote in The New York Times about this “mostly funny comedy” from David Wain. “Like other Americans seeking simplicity and maybe a chicken coop out back, they want off the road, at least for a while. There’s something touching about this desire, though Mr. Wain doesn’t let Linda and George fly their freak flags for long.”NOON (13) THE OPEN MIND Alexander Heffner interviews Susie Essman (“Curb Your Enthusiasm”) about comedy and Larry David’s observation that you can double your laughs by using profanity.9 P.M. (CUNY) MY FATHER MY LORD (2007) Abraham (Assi Dayan), an ultra-Orthodox rabbi, dotes on Menachem (Ilan Griff), his only son with his wife, Esther (Sharon Hacohen Bar). But his religious strictures leave an emotional gap between the impish child and the stern father. “The film has a circular narrative that begins and ends on a note of crushing grief,” Stephen Holden wrote in The Times about the director David Volach’s retelling of the story of Abraham and Isaac. “For Abraham and Esther, the ultimate parental nightmare is the ultimate test of faith. We know that for the rest of their lives, unanswerable questions will scream in their heads. How could their righteousness be rewarded with such calamity? Are they to blame? ‘My Father My Lord’ has the glowing simplicity and force of a biblical parable.”10 P.M. (FYI) SAY IT TO MY FACE Chefs and restaurant owners get the chance to redeem themselves with their toughest online adversaries by airing grievances face to face and then making changes in the hope that their critics will change their reviews.10 P.M. (CBS) 48 HOURS After Uta von Schwedler was found submerged in the bathtub of her Salt Lake City home in 2011, the autopsy report listed the cause of death as drowning and the manner of that drowning as undetermined. Some suspected suicide. But her son Pelle Wall suspected his father, Johnny Wall, of murder. Susan Spencer reports.10 P.M. (Cinemax) WE’RE THE MILLERS (2013) A drug dealer (Jason Sudeikis) in trouble with his boss (Ed Helms) recruits a stripper (Jennifer Aniston) and a couple of street urchins (Will Poulter and Emma Roberts) to impersonate an all-American family known as the Millers. Their mission: to transport a few tons of marijuana from Mexico to Denver in their camper. And in no time at all they’re caring about one another more than they want to admit. “What really drives the movie is its own search for something to make fun of, and for a comic style that can feel credibly naughty while remaining ultimately safe and affirmative,” A. O. Scott wrote in The Times.11:30 P.M. (NBC) SATURDAY NIGHT LIVE Reese Witherspoon hosts for the first time in nearly 14 years; Florence + the Machine is the musical guest.What’s Streaming NowGRACE AND FRANKIE A couple of frenemies are thrust together after their law-partner husbands announce that they are longtime lovers and intend to marry each other in what Alessandra Stanley, writing in The Times, called “a senior angst comedy that somehow doesn’t seem fusty and out of date.” Grace (Jane Fonda), a vain retired cosmetics executive, and Frankie (Lily Tomlin), a New Agey artist, discover that without important men (Martin Sheen and Sam Waterston) in their lives, they vanish. But there is an upside, Frankie notes, after stealing a pack of cigarettes when a male store clerk ignores her for a younger woman. “We have a superpower,” she says. “You can’t see me, you can’t stop me.” “Grace and Frankie feel invisible, but here they stand out,” Ms. Stanley added. (netflix.com)Advertisement