By MIKE HALEMAY 8, 2015
“Stockholm, Pennsylvania” is not your grandmother’s Lifetime movie. Its premise — a woman kidnapped at 4 and kept in a basement for 18 years is reunited with the parents she doesn’t remember — fits the channel’s female-in-extremis profile. But its release pattern is highly unusual: from the Sundance Film Festival in January straight to basic cable in May.With broadcast networks, cable channels and video sites fighting ever harder to draw attention to their “exclusive” dramas, Lifetime is spicing up its roster of made-for-television movies with acquisitions like “Stockholm” and, later this month, “Grace of Monaco,” which played at Cannes but will be making its United States premiere on TV.One benefit for the channel and for viewers is star power. Olivier Dahan’s “Grace” stars Nicole Kidman as Grace Kelly. And “Stockholm,” which has its premiere on Saturday night, offers two superb actresses, a casting coup for a small independent feature, at least on paper: Saoirse Ronan (“Atonement”) as the abductee, Leia, and Cynthia Nixon (“Sex and the City”) as her mother, Marcy.Written and directed by the playwright and first-time filmmaker Nikole Beckwith, the movie also departs from Lifetime practice by starting after a woman has escaped from peril — the opening scene shows the rescued Leia being brought home to her parents; the details of her abduction and captivity are sketched in later. New trials await her, however, as Marcy’s slightly manic good cheer gives way to anger and paranoia when Leia fails to embrace her new-old life.AdvertisementThere are some interesting ideas in Ms. Beckwith’s hushed, chilly film, which begins as an unusual take on the child-kidnapping genre and gradually morphs into what feels like a standard psychological thriller. As the on-the-nose title suggests, Leia is deeply attached to the mild-mannered end-of-days cultist (Jason Isaacs, in a small role) who kidnapped her and cut her off from the outside world. But that enforced seclusion also means that at 22 she’s facing the childhood challenges and embarrassments of learning how to operate in the adult world. (It’s the very serious side of the scenario treated comically in Netflix’s “Unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt.”)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.As the story progresses, though, Leia’s issues recede and Marcy’s come forward. The plot developments — let’s just say that the title keeps taking on more meaning — may be plausible, strictly speaking, but Ms. Beckwith’s unwillingness or inability to depart from a mood of muted, sinister apprehension makes it hard to take them seriously. There’s probably an idea at work here, too — that the repression of style and tone reflect the situation on screen — but it’s an awfully undramatic one.You can see why the screenplay, which is essentially an intense two-hander (there are small roles for Leia’s father and therapist), would attract a pair of smart and adventurous actresses. Ms. Nixon fares relatively well, simply because she has more to do — Marcy carries most of the emotional weight, and Ms. Nixon is typically fine at delineating her shifts from hopefulness to fear to grim determination.AdvertisementMs. Ronan is an arresting, shimmering presence, as always, and she gets across Leia’s mix of defiance and vulnerability. But she’s hamstrung — it seems pretty clear that she’s been directed to make everything about the character interior, which doesn’t play into her strengths. It’s an odd choice to hire one of the most expressive, lyrical young actresses in the business and then tell her to play an entire movie with the same look on her face.A version of this review appears in print on May 9, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: Stuck in Prison, Even After a Release.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.