AdvertisementSupported byBy Alastair MacaulayThe new double bill at New York City Ballet, choreography by the great Danish ballet master August Bournonville (1805-79), presents the oldest pieces in the company’s repertory. Yet Bournonville’s ideas remain fresh and modern in these dances; and the program shows how today’s performers are challenged, focused and refreshed by them. Apart from one or two over-bright smiles as dancers sail through brilliant series of rapidly beaten jumps, they’re as engaged as if Bournonville himself was watching in the wings. And their steps are stitched, gleamingly and tightly, into their musicThe ballets opened on Thursday night at City Ballet’s spring gala. They aren’t really of a piece. The opening “Bournonville Divertissements” is pure dance, consisting of excerpts from ballets choreographed from 1842 to 1858; the closing “La Sylphide,” from 1836, while its individual dancers aren’t quite so remarkable, is memorable both as an enchanting vehicle for a ballerina (Sterling Hyltin on Thursday) and as a tragic narrative.What’s more, the two ballets are designed very differently. The “Divertissements” employs three successive sets, all realistic examples of scene painting, attractive and conventional in style; but, though these excerpts are from ballets set in warmer countries the first and third of the décors, by Alain Vaes are realistic views of Copenhagen, Bournonville’s home city to the north.By contrast, “La Sylphide” is designed in two different styles by Susan Tammany. The set for Act I gives us an economical view of the farmer James’s manor house, but the versions of Scottish attire are both garish and twee. The hero, James, not only wears a kilt of purple tartan (with a bright white sporran), but wears matching socks and jacket; and (similar to most productions of this ballet) the women are, unlike proper attire for Scotswomen, wearing tartan kilts (here extended into calf-length dresses).Then the forest of Act II — part-Fauve, part-cartoon — gives us more garish hues. The green, purple and orange schemes may be intended to evoke the grass, trees, heather and bracken of Scotland, but they transport us to a much more oddly blazing locale. And the set’s peculiar complexity clashes with the traditional costumes while distracting attention from the dancing.As the Sylph, Ms. Hyltin’s only shortcoming is that she could use slightly stronger eye makeup. Her head looks particularly beautiful in the sylph headdress, but, though she certainly uses her eyes, their outlines are almost invisible. She has the role’s intoxicating lightness and charm, its mercurial changes of mood; she makes us feel that pointwork is a new invention; and, best of all, her whole torso moves with marvelous expressiveness. Joaquin De Luz’s James vividly demonstrates the Romantic hero’s panache and ardor.Around them, however, Peter Martins’s production is unduly brisk. He not only removes the intermission but he rushes some of the storytelling. Like the designs, his staging is an odd mixture of realism and cartoon. Georgina Pazcoguin gives an exuberantly acted account of the witch Madge, but costume and dramaturgy here push her toward quasi-Kabuki caricature. Bournonville was a painstaking realist; Madge can be (and Ms. Pazcoguin can deliver) a character of far more detail and depth than we’re shown.The program honors a triple link between this company and Bournonville’s Royal Danish Ballet: George Balanchine, Stanley Williams and Mr. Martins. Balanchine, City Ballet’s founding ballet master, had worked in Copenhagen in the early 1930s. Later, in New York, he gave an important teaching post at the School of American Ballet to the Danish teacher Stanley Williams (1925-1997). It was Mr. Williams, who is remembered as one of the greatest of all ballet teachers, who first staged this “Bournonville Divertissements” in 1977 at City Ballet. And Mr. Martins, who has directed City Ballet since Balanchine’s death and studied with Williams, began his career with the Royal Danes and then for several seasons danced brilliantly in the original City Ballet production.“Bournonville Divertissements” went through several changes of content in the 1970s and ’80s, but was it ever so short as in this program? (More, please.) These excerpts start with the Ballabile from Act I of the 1842 “Napoli” (a brisk ensemble framing a male-female couple); they continue to the 1858 “Flower Festival in Genzano” pas de deux, a celebrated piece of springtime romance coupled with jubilant virtuosity; and they end with the pas de six from “Napoli” Act III (supplemented by material from the 1855 “Abdallah”), one of the great suites of classical style, and its ebullient group tarantella.I’m happy to see all of them; the density and fecundity of these dances is dazzling. You can feel how articulate the dancers’ insteps become as they beat and quiver and write rings in the air, and you can feel the marvelous combination of technical control and expansive impetus in the long, tight-packed phrases of jumps and turns.Sara Mearns and Tyler Angle rise with glowing luster to the “Flower Festival” duet, while the “Napoli”/“Abdallah” dances showcase five women and four men. Lauren King (above all), Rebecca Krohn, Adrian Danchig-Waring and Anthony Huxley all make bright, striking new advances; it will be good to renew acquaintance with these and other performances. Bournonville himself will reward further visits too. These dances show him to be the choreographic equivalent of Rossini, Bellini and Donizetti, whose era he shared.New York City Ballet’s spring season runs through June 7 at the David H. Koch Theater; nycballet.com. Advertisement