AdvertisementSupported byBy Roslyn SulcasLONDON — “I don’t normally dress up for an interview,” the artist Grayson Perry said, opening the door of his studio. “But I’m going to a Royal Academy council meeting straight afterward.” Mr. Perry wasn’t wearing a suit and tie. He was dressed in a voluminous A-line dress in a shiny plastic fabric (“It’s lined”) decorated with brightly colored circles, accessorized with orange tights, pink pumps and matching bangles. A circle of rouge was neatly inscribed on each cheek; his large gray-blue eyes were framed by false lashes and a tequila sunrise application of pink and orange eye shadow.Mr. Perry, 55, who won the Turner Prize in 2003 and will give a lecture titled “Playing to the Gallery” at the Metropolitan Museum of Art on Monday, has become almost as famous for his cross-dressing as for his beautiful and subversive ceramics, tapestries and sculptures. In recent years, he has acquired a significant popular following here through his television programs about taste, class and identity, in which he has proved to be a genial and perceptive interviewer, unafraid to ask tough questions and eager to demystify the process of creating his art.“Playing to the Gallery” is also the title of his new book, published in the United States on Tuesday, and based on the talks he gave for the BBC’s 2013 Reith Lectures. Mr. Perry is also keen to debunk the rarefied world of contemporary art, doing so with sleight-of-hand casual charm that folds art history and knowledge into aphorisms and insights. (On whether art still has the power to shock: “The last truly dangerous thing — the one thing you won’t see — is underarm hair.”)With his combination of eccentricity, wry humor, intelligence and populism, Mr. Perry seems particularly English. He likes to wear frilly, clownish little-girl outfits but is also a mountain bike enthusiast and is married to the psychotherapist Philippa Perry, with whom he has a daughter, Flo. It’s a combination that seems to have endeared him to a broad swathe of the British public, though doesn’t always please the British art media, in which he has been accused of playing at cross-dressing for publicity.“When I’m dressed like this, I get a lot of taxi drivers leaning out the window and yelling, ‘Oi, Grayson, love yer work!’ at me,” he said. “That gives me a lot of pleasure.”Mr. Perry is relatively unknown in the United States, where he has had few museum or gallery shows, although the Museum of Modern Art has his work in its collection. “I think I’m going to have to explain who I am,” he said when asked what he plans to speak about at the Met. “Exposure of any artist has to do with market representation, which has been slow to recognize Perry’s work,” Sheena Wagstaff, the British-born chairwoman of modern and contemporary art at the Met, said in an email. “It may be that now America has only just become prepared for the advent of Grayson.” Ms. Wagstaff cited Mr. Perry’s 2011 British Museum exhibition, “The Tomb of the Unknown Craftsman,” as evidence of his knowledge of, and interest in, historic collections like that of the Met. That exhibition, in which Mr. Perry put together his own work with objects from the institution’s vast collection, was a daring step for the artist and the museum, its director, Neil MacGregor, said. “He put himself on the line very publicly, by choosing objects by unknown people that were often seen as rather secondary,” Mr. MacGregor said. “I was certainly nervous about whether it would work, but what emerged was that to be a human being is to have a primal need to make what is visually pleasing.”Mr. Perry said that he had always wanted to show contemporary art as another kind of artifact. “Treating contemporary art with suspicion is part of what I do,” he said. That suspicion derives in part from his upbringing. He grew up in Chelmsford in Essex, close to London, in what he described as “a book- and art-free zone.” His father was an electrical engineer, his mother a housewife who had an affair with, then married, the milkman. (“This is why I particularly hate clichés,” Mr. Perry said grimly.) The loss of his father and his dislike for his stepfather profoundly affected his childhood, he said, and he sought consolation in a fantasy world populated by his teddy bear and mythical enemies and armies. After attending art college, Mr. Perry experimented with film and sculpture, belonged to a neo-naturist group (“mainly about doing stuff naked”) and lived on unemployment benefits. In 1983, his girlfriend suggested he try pottery classes. “I wasn’t initially committed to it at all,” he said. “I was dabbling. But it was so uncool that my friends thought it was kind of cool. And I quite quickly sold some stuff, which kept me going.”He began to make plates and vases that combined explicit, often autobiographical, scenes of sadomasochism, fetishism and cross-dressing with beautiful form and color and references to traditional ceramic forms, colors and techniques. His breakthrough came with an exhibition at the Stedelijk Museum in Amsterdam in 2002, which led to his nomination for the Turner Prize. Today his work fetches between $15,000 for a drawing and $700,000 for a large-scale sculpture, and he has major exhibitions this year at the Turner Contemporary in Margate, England, and at the Museum of Contemporary Art in Sydney, Australia. Mr. Perry said that although he now earns a comfortable amount of money, he creates his work slowly and alone. “I believe in a direct relationship with the material, with what I’m making,” he said. Beauty and seriousness, he added, are “perhaps the most shocking tactics left to artists these days.” Advertisement