By JON PARELESMAY 8, 2015
Vintage 1970s-style funk and ancient Jewish prayers shared the double bill of African music that opened the three-night Global Beat festival at the Winter Garden at Brookfield Place (the former World Financial Center) on Thursday night. It brought together Feedel Band, a Washington group built around musicians from Ethiopia, and the Libyans, a group from Israel that has researched and reconstructed traditional songs from the Jews of Libya.Feedel Band plays the kind of dense, gnarled funk that was recorded in Ethiopia in the 1960s and 1970s; one of its saxophonists, Moges Habte, was a member of a leading Ethiopian group of that era, the Walias Band. Ethio-jazz, as the music is sometimes called, was discovered by a new worldwide audience with the release of the Ethiopiques series of reissues that began in 1998. The songs use distinctive minor modes and diminished harmonies, long zigzagging melodies and a brooding, smoldering groove that often moves in six-beat rhythms rather than the 4/4 of American funk.Feedel is a funk band that also uses electric versions of two traditional Ethiopian instruments, the krar (lyre) and the mesenko (one-stringed fiddle). It brought along dancers — three women and two men — who, with moves said to be based on tribal traditions, illuminated the rhythmic crosscurrents within the songs.The songs were defined by brawny unison lines for two saxophones and trombone over the circular riffs of the rhythm section, with drums and percussion working in double time over steadfast bass lines; electric piano and guitar set them in a psychedelic haze, or cleared to reveal the nasal insistence of the mesenko.AdvertisementWhen the dancers joined the band, the music locked into its most hypnotic momentum, at once visceral and timeless.The Libyans are led by Yaniv Rava, who plays the oud and is the son of a cantor with Libyan roots. It’s a traditionalist Middle Eastern group — with oud, qanun (hammer dulcimer), nay (reed flute) and hand drum — updated with an electric bass; Yankale Segal, the bassist, who produces the band with Mr. Rava. The band revives ancient poems and melodies for tunes that were once heard at weddings, Sabbath gatherings and other community rituals. The electric bass provides an extra rhythmic nudge, but true to Middle Eastern tradition, the melodies are always in the foreground, hinting at reverence, lament or celebration.AdvertisementThe tunes reflect Libya’s history and geography, with elements of Turkish and Egyptian music alongside Western influences from across the Mediterranean. Onstage the group’s lead singer, Dvir Cohen Eraki, described one ancient poem as being about the relationship between God and Israel: “a beautiful dance of love and longing.”An earlier version of this review referred incorrectly to the venue where the Global Beat festival was held. It is Brookfield Place, not the World Financial Center, which was its former name.A version of this review appears in print on May 9, 2015, on Page C6 of the New York edition with the headline: Prayers and Funk, Both Born in Africa.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.