AdvertisementSupported byBy Anthony TommasiniThe New York Philharmonic’s program on Friday night at David Geffen Hall, featuring the towering pianist Maurizio Pollini in Chopin’s Piano Concerto No. 1, was both a one-time special event and a gesture to rectify an oversight. It had been more than 20 years since Mr. Pollini’s last appearance with the Philharmonic. In a news release, the ensemble’s music director, Alan Gilbert, explaining what an honor it was to be performing with this legendary artist, said that when he needed a “musical pickup” he listened to Mr. Pollini’s recordings of Chopin’s études, including the early one, made shortly after the pianist, then 18, won first prize in the 1960 Chopin Competition in Warsaw.There have been concerns in recent years over Mr. Pollini’s health and its possible toll on his playing. He took time off a few years ago because of an unspecified illness. In a reassuring solo recital on Oct. 11 at Carnegie Hall, Mr. Pollini, 73, played with searching musicianship and exquisite pianism, except for some occasional shaky moments.His performance of the Chopin concerto, though rich with poetic grace, lovely sound and flashes of brilliance, was less confident. There were tentative passages, including a couple of stretches when Mr. Pollini seemed in danger of losing his way.Still, it was clear why the audience rose to its feet immediately for a long ovation at the end: Despite flawed moments, Mr. Pollini played this demanding work with profound integrity. At his first entrance, when the piano plays the main theme in heroic chords and octaves followed by downwardly cascading passagework, Mr. Pollini sounded nervous and jumpy. Once the piano settled into the movement’s wistful contrasting theme, Mr. Pollini was in his element, shaping the melody (surely inspired by Chopin’s love of Bellini) with the lyrical grace of a bel canto opera singer. In fact, you could sometimes hear Mr. Pollini singing along. Under Mr. Gilbert the Philharmonic players provided alert, supple support.Throughout the performance Mr. Pollini’s intentions regarding phrasing, inner voices and colorings consistently came through, even when his fingers did not always do what he wanted them to. You can’t expect the stunning virtuosity he demonstrated in his classic 1960 recording of the piece. Still, this performance offered a lifetime of insight. The sweetly melancholic second movement had wonderful delicacy and poise. He brought fleetness and joy to the finale, a dancing rondo.During the first half Mr. Gilbert conducted a rousing account of Berlioz’s dazzling “Le Corsaire” Overture and a refreshingly direct, unsentimental performance of Tchaikovsky’s “Romeo and Juliet” Overture-Fantasy.Maurizio Pollini plays works by Beethoven and Schoenberg in a recital on Oct. 25 at Carnegie Hall; 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.orgAdvertisement