By ZACHARY WOOLFEMAY 8, 2015
In the vast sanctuary of the First Unitarian Congregational Society in Brooklyn Heights on Thursday, with the lights dimmed to a sepulchral shadowiness, the music seemed as simmering and enveloping as a primordial ritual. “Immersion” was the title of the first piece, by Annea Lockwood, but it could just as easily have been applied to the other five works, too.It was the first of three events over successive evenings at the Tectonics Festival New York, the second annual spinoff of an event that the conductor Ilan Volkov started in Iceland in 2012. Thursday’s concert took place where it did for a simple reason: an organ. The core of the program was a flurry of contemporary solo organ works, starting with James Rushford’s performance of Morton Feldman’s “Principal Sound” (1980), with its vibrating, shifting sonic waves shot through with stun-gun pulsations.Klaus Lang then played two of his own compositions: “marias mantel” (2005), its texture soft and sustained, and the stunning “ABD,” structured as a triptych that begins with an eruption of saturated color. It drops to a quieter, more tender section, eventually leaving a bright filament of tone surrounded by a husky halo, before another ferocious full blast of sound.These organ works needed a church setting, but the rest of the program, presented by Issue Project Room, also benefited from the space’s aura of mystery. Ms. Lockwood’s “Immersion,” played by Ian Antonio and Russell Greenberg, the percussionists of the new-music quartet Yarn/Wire, begins with a reverberating gong and uses a marimba to gradually add faint, low layers of drone, occasionally cut by slices of sound made by bowing the gong’s edge.AdvertisementMr. Lang’s “the whitebearded man. the six frogs.” (2008) placed Laura Barger, one of Yarn/Wire’s two pianists, across the room from the percussion, a physical approximation of the sense of yawning distances evoked by the music. A slow, moody piano line was punctuated by a soft, ominous drumbeat that turned by the end of the mournful piece into a vaguely martial rat-a-tat.A darkly propulsive new work for ensemble by Nate Young and Mario Diaz de Leon, “Standard Deviance One,” also spread performers through the space, with two trombonists and a flutist playing in the church’s aisle, adding muted, even strangled tones to an alluringly industrial and distorted sound world.AdvertisementTectonics Festival continued at the Abrons Arts Center on Friday with works by David Behrman and John McGuire, as well as a set by the pianist Joseph Kubera. Saturday brings the premiere of “Seven Storey Mountain V,” the latest iteration of a project by the brilliant experimental trumpeter and composer Nate Wooley. It’s a varied yet cohesive festival, delving into a sensually abrasive corner of the new-music world too little explored in New York.The festival continues through Saturday at the Abrons Arts Center, 466 Grand Street, at Pitt Street, Lower East Side; issueprojectroom.org,718-330-0313. A version of this review appears in print on May 9, 2015, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline: Perfect Site to Cross Musical Borders.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.