By VIVIEN SCHWEITZERMAY 8, 2015
Anonymity in the performing arts is usually restricted to publicity-shy donors. But on Thursday evening at Carnegie Hall, it was the Voice of God that remained elusive, a booming tenor attributed only to “Anonymous” in the program for Kurt Weill’s “The Road of Promise.”The unseen deity is a significant role in this unclassifiable work, presented here in the American premiere of Ed Harsh’s concert arrangement of Weill’s “The Eternal Road,” with Ted Sperling conducting the Collegiate Chorale.Weill was a master of genre blending, although this eclectic work flirts awkwardly with multiple idioms. Set to a libretto by Franz Werfel and completed in 1935, Weill wrote it at the request of the American impresario Meyer Weisgal, a Zionist who hoped to warn the international community about the dangers facing German Jews. The four-hour extravaganza, staged in 1937 as an epic spectacle with a five-level set and some 250 actors and singers, relates the history of the Jews and depicts a contemporary Jewish congregation hiding in a synagogue. It had a (then unusually large) run of 153 performances on Broadway.Trimming the vast score to a more manageable length, Mr. Harsh cut scenes he deemed extraneous or problematic, along with some of the lengthy dialogue. One goal was to preserve the crucial tension between the gentle Rabbi, sung with dignified demeanor and mellifluous tone by the tenor Anthony Dean Griffey, and the questioning, vehement Adversary, a speaking role dynamically rendered by Ron Rifkin. The 13-year-old Boy — vibrantly enacted by Eli Tokash — serves as an innocent dreamer, and symbol of hope and renewal.AdvertisementIn a preconcert lecture, Mr. Sperling said it seemed an ideal time to program the work both because of increased anti-Semitism in Europe and simply because it’s a “great piece of music.” While the eclecticism at times renders the overall score, which lacks Weill’s trademark bite, rather odd, there are certainly alluring moments. The chorus, which sang well throughout, delivered passages evoking the Bach Passions with intensity. The Orchestra of St. Luke’s played with flair and vividly revealed the work’s disparate elements, which range from Romantic, almost Wagnerian orchestral surges to hints of cabaret as the chorus softly hums while the Rabbi sings about Jacob and his dreams.Images of biblical scenes were projected onto the wall above the stage along with parts of the libretto.AdvertisementThe other cast members included Mark Delavan, solid as Moses and Abraham, and Philip Cutlip, who performed with dramatic nuance as Joseph, Solomon and Jeremiah. Megan Marino demonstrated a lovely mezzo as Miriam and Ruth, and the soprano Lauren Michelle sang beautifully as Rachel and Naomi.A version of this review appears in print on May 9, 2015, on Page C6 of the New York edition with the headline: Using God to Sound Warning About Germany .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.