AdvertisementSupported byDance ReviewBy Gia KourlasStacked books arranged like city blocks fill the diminutive stage of Joe’s Pub at the Public Theater. The book covers are white; there are no titles. Instead, the names of writers are projected against the back wall as a voice reads aloud: Samuel Beckett, Mark Twain, Upton Sinclair, Grace Paley. A feather-slim woman, Mei Yamanaka, winds around the stacks with nimble pliés and razor-sharp turns until her legs and arms turn deadly, and she demolishes the literary landscape. (Make way for e-readers.) Mark Dendy’s “NewYorknewyork @Astor Place,” which opened on Wednesday, isn’t too cryptic, but it is site-specific. The Public Theater building was originally the Astor Library. In this multilayered dance-theater production, presented by DanceNOW (NYC), the Joe’s Pub stage serves as a gateway for a cast of historical and contemporary characters from the area, including Mr. Dendy as William Backhouse Astor II. Seated in a chair for the duration, Mr. Dendy is amusing, playing Astor as a cross between a lifeguard and Alistair Cooke. “This bawdy nightclub we find ourselves in this evening was once the great Astor Library,” he says, “as you see by the columns, the molding, the ceiling work.” Mr. Dendy calls his cast “shape-shifting time travelers,” but aren’t we all? Even though we can all agree that rents are too high, and that the only equalizer is death, Mr. Dendy’s premise grows increasingly tedious.Ms. Yamanaka, portraying the Greek chorus, is a slippery presence whose agitated thrashings take a violent turn when the soundtrack plays John Zorn’s band Naked City. Other characters include a reporter, a real estate agent, a male stripper and a librarian, along with three witches from “Macbeth.” Taylor Swift’s “Welcome to New York” follows Lou Reed’s “Walk on the Wild Side” — it’s a cruel comparison — leading to a dreamy, wistful dance, but too much of the work feels like school, not theater. Leslie Cuyjet, playing herself, discusses how she got rid of her books — a “protective insulation for my isolation” — then pines for “the weight of a page” as dancers balance books on their hips. Mr. Dendy has issues on his mind, but there’s no room for subtlety. Mark Dendy Projects continues through Saturday at Joe’s Pub at the Public Theater, 425 Lafayette Street between East Fourth Street and Astor Place; 212-967-7557, joespub.com. Advertisement