By STEPHEN HOLDENMAY 8, 2015
The charismatic theater singer Arlo Hill aimed for the bull’s-eye in his Frank Loesser tribute, “I’ve Been in Love Before,” on Thursday evening at the Metropolitan Room. The 28-year-old performer, accompanied on piano by Rick Hip-Flores, didn’t merely sing the work of the songwriter who turned Broadway on its ear 65 years ago with “Guys and Dolls.” He became Loesser’s champion and surrogate, punching out his songs in the brash, unpretty voice of a scrappy, streetwise rebel against the polite, polished musical theater of Rodgers and Hammerstein.He also demonstrated that Loesser, in his semioperatic masterpiece, “The Most Happy Fella,” could compete with them on their own turf. The cheerfully combative show, which included 29 Loesser songs, in full or in part, focused on Loesser’s rebellion from his intellectually highbrow family, which disdained Broadway. To draw a very rough analogy, he was a Beastie Boy of his time.The show was divided into four parts, starting with Loesser’s Tin Pan Alley days when he wrote only lyrics to tunes by the likes of Hoagy Carmichael, Burton Lane and Jule Styne. Mr. Hill showed that he could dance as well as sing as he glided across the stage in his version of “Once in Love With Amy,” a song he credited with extending the run of the 1948 show “Where’s Charley?” once it became a singalong with the audience.For the jaunty, girl-watching “Standing on the Corner” he harmonized with Ryan Bauer-Walsh and Daniel Schwait. “Never Will I Marry,” from “Greenwillow” was a ferocious declaration of independence whose last line — “Born to wander till I’m dead” — he imparted with a grim finality.Throughout the performance, Mr. Hill reminded me of the comedian Martin Short in his hawk-eyed deadpan mode. Balancing his charm was the sense that nothing escapes Mr. Hill’s notice. The show left me feeling that Loesser had the same quality of knowing much more than he let on; that in some fundamental way he was a creature of the night and of the street, a kitchen-sink realist with a zany sense of humor: sui generis.Arlo Hill performs each Thursday through May 28 at the Metropolitan Room, 34 West 22nd Street, Flatiron district; 212-206-0440, metropolitanroom.com. A version of this review appears in print on May 9, 2015, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline: Once, and Always, in Love With Loesser.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.