By RANDY KENNEDYMAY 8, 2015
VENICE —  A provocative art installation in the form of a functioning mosque opened here on Friday for prayers, attended by dozens of Muslim worshipers who were outnumbered through much of the day by art spectators crowding the city for the 56th Venice Biennale.The project, by the Swiss-Icelandic artist Christoph Büchel, serves as Iceland’s national pavilion for the Biennale and is intended in part to highlight the absence of a mosque in the historic heart of Venice, a city whose art and architecture were deeply influenced by Islamic trade and culture. But the idea has upset Venetian city officials and police authorities, who have warned that the mosque poses a security threat because of possible violence either by anti-Islamic extremists or Islamic extremists upset that the mosque has been created inside a disused Catholic church. City officials have also argued that special legal permission is needed within Venice to create a place of worship, and they have rejected claims by Mr. Büchel and Icelandic art officials that the mosque is a simply a work of art functioning as a place of worship.In a letter from the city on Friday morning to Bjorg Stefansdottir, the director of the Icelandic Art Center and the commissioner of Iceland’s pavilion, municipal officials warned that the installation, in the Cannaregio neighborhood, would not be allowed to continue if it functioned as a place of worship.“The pavilion is not and cannot be a place of worship, as the promotional material issued in recent days suggests it is,” the letter said. It added that even acts of preparation for worship, such as the washing of feet, would not be allowed and that people who entered the church building could not wear clothing “different from that worn at any other place of exhibition at the Venice Biennale,” though officials were not specific about what kind of clothing would be prohibited. (Some Muslim men and women who live in and around greater Venice, a population estimated at 15,000 to 20,000, wear head coverings, overgarments and robes.)City officials made no move on Friday to close the mosque installation, where prayers were conducted, music was played and food was served in a festive atmosphere throughout the day. Icelandic art officials said their lawyers were reviewing the city’s letter. Mr. Büchel and Venetian Islamic leaders who collaborated with him to create the mosque said they intended to open the doors again Saturday unless told they could not. (Mr. Büchel’s plan has been to keep the mosque operating through the end of the Biennale in November; the former Catholic church that houses the mosque, Santa Maria della Misericordia, is privately owned. Iceland rented it for Mr. Büchel’s installation.)During the opening ceremony, the building was packed with camera-wielding international art pilgrims and with Venetian Muslims, the men praying together in the middle of the space and the women gathered near the back, where they prayed separately. Tehmina Janjua, Pakistan’s ambassador to Italy, spoke during the opening ceremony, thanking Mr. Büchel and the project’s curator, Nina Magnusdottir, for “a place of worship, a place of art, a place where communities can come together and talk, can dialogue with each other.”A version of this article appears in print on May 9, 2015, on Page C2 of the New York edition with the headline: Officials in Venice Challenge Mosque Installation.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.