By MICHAEL COOPERMAY 7, 2015
The orchestra world is all too familiar with vicious cycles of mounting deficits, dwindling audiences, difficulty raising money and cuts. But at the Cincinnati Symphony Orchestra, things are moving happily in the opposite direction: think crescendo, not diminuendo.The orchestra announced Thursday that a successful fund-raising campaign, and a new contract that it reached with its musicians, would allow it to hire 14 more full-time players over the next four years, expanding the size of the ensemble to 90 as other orchestras around the country, from Philadelphia to Atlanta, have shed positions to save money.At a moment when many other American orchestras and performing arts organizations have resorted to spending heavily from their endowments to meet their annual operating costs, Cincinnati has kept its draw in recent years to the more prudent rate of 5 percent — and it says that it has raised enough money to reduce that to 4.5 percent by 2020. (The New York Philharmonic and the Metropolitan Opera, by contrast, both draw more than 5 percent a year.)It is a significant turnaround for an orchestra that faced a precarious situation in 2009, when its endowment had dwindled to $56 million from a high of $92.7 million a decade earlier.Advertisement“We didn’t have enough cash to make the next payroll,” recalled Trey Devey, who became the orchestra’s president that year, as he discussed the steps labor and management had taken together to save the venerable orchestra, which dates to 1895.AdvertisementOf course, there are still risks ahead. While the orchestra has sold out many more shows in recent seasons and attendance has risen, it is still projected to average only 69 percent of capacity this season at its home, Music Hall, which seats 3,417. A $125 million renovation of the hall planned for the 2016-17 season poses its own challenges. But orchestra officials believe that the steps they have taken in recent years have put the organization on a far more solid footing.It began with sacrifice in 2009, when the musicians and the administration agreed to cuts that reduced personnel costs by 15 percent. By showing that the orchestra was serious about getting its finances in order, those cuts helped pave the way for an enormous act of philanthropy that rescued the ensemble: Louise Dieterle Nippert, a wealthy arts patron who sang Mahler with the ensemble in 1957, established an $85 million fund to support classical music in Cincinnati, in large part by helping the orchestra.But even after that gift, the Champagne wasn’t popped right away: in 2011 the players agreed to delay a promised raise to help the orchestra address its large unfunded pension liability. Paul Frankenfeld, an associate principal violist in the orchestra who is the president of Local 1 of the American Federation of Musicians, said that the delayed raise “showed that the entire institution was really serious about keeping the ship righted, so to speak.”Donors did not ease up after the gift, either, and annual giving has increased by 60 percent since 2009. The orchestra drafted plans to eliminate its persistent structural deficit, which has fallen to less than half a million dollars a year from nearly $6.5 million in 2009, and raised a special bridge fund so it would no longer have to rely on endowment draws and bequests to fill shortfalls. It embarked on a $20 million campaign to build up its endowment fund — and ended up surpassing its goal, raising $26 million. The endowment is now valued at $136.9 million.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The orchestra moved forward artistically as well, tapping Louis Langrée, known to New Yorkers for his work as music director of Lincoln Center’s Mostly Mozart Festival, to become its 13th music director in 2013.Some of the recent $26 million fund-raising campaign was meant to increase the size of the orchestra, as both players and management said that they wanted to make sure that the recent cuts did not endanger its artistic health. The complement of full-time tenured musicians had fallen to 76, augmented by 10 players on one-year contracts and other temporary musicians who played when needed.Ted Nelson, a cellist who serves as the chairman of the orchestra’s players committee, said that getting the orchestra back to full strength was important to the musicians. “Our number one priority as an orchestra had to be how we were going to restore these positions,” he said.The orchestra plans to add the first five tenure-track musicians next season. The musicians, whose pay has returned to where it was before they agreed to 11 percent wage cuts in 2009, will see their salaries rise as well: the contract will offer the players 1.5-percent wage increases in each of the next five years, along with a one-time payment that the orchestra said would effectively increase their pay by 3 percent a year over the course of the agreement.AdvertisementAnd some of the endowment money will pay for additional weeks of work. The Cincinnati Symphony Orchestra’s musicians are paid 52 weeks a year, but even with the work they do performing as the Cincinnati Pops and with the Cincinnati Ballet, the Cincinnati Opera, the Cincinnati May Festival and others, their number of vacation weeks had effectively grown to 10. The recent fund-raising campaign will shift two of those vacations weeks to work weeks, and, in the process, help the orchestra eliminate its structural deficit.New Yorkers will be the beneficiaries of one of those extra weeks of work next year: one will be used when the orchestra plays a Tchaikovsky program on Jan. 6 at Avery Fisher Hall under the baton of Mr. Langrée, as part of Lincoln Center’s Great Performers series.Musicians and management said that they were hopeful that the recent steps they have taken, and their good working relationship, would help the orchestra thrive. Mr. Devey, the orchestra’s president, admitted that many of the ideas and strategies that seem to have worked were unorthodox. “I think in the world of orchestras,” he said, “if you’ve got normal conversations, that’s not generally a good thing.”A version of this article appears in print on May 9, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: Labor Deal to Nurture Cincinnati Orchestra.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.