AdvertisementSupported byBy Daniel E. SlotnikOn weekdays, Benjamin F. Logan worked as a mathematician and electrical engineer at AT&T Bell Laboratories in New Jersey. On nights and weekends, he donned a 10-gallon hat and took to the stage as a pre-eminent bluegrass fiddler.Dr. Logan, who balanced these two seemingly mismatched passions until he retired from Bell in 1993, died on April 24 in Morristown, N.J. He was 87.The cause was a heart attack, said Jody Logan, his daughter. Usually billed as Tex Logan, he was a deft and hare-swift fiddler. He often played with Bill Monroe, universally acknowledged as the father of bluegrass. He also performed with the singer and music historian Mike Seeger and with Jerry Garcia (better known for playing guitar and singing with the Grateful Dead). Dr. Logan wrote the songs “Diamond Joe,” which was covered by the New Riders of the Purple Sage and Bob Dylan, and “Christmas Time’s a-Comin’, ” which he wrote for Mr. Monroe and which was later recorded by Johnny Cash and Emmylou Harris. He took sabbaticals from studying and lab work to tour and play at folk festivals with groups like the Lilly Brothers and the Northeast Seaboard Band, which he formed in the late 1970s. He also held barbecues that drew major figures from the bluegrass scene to his home in Madison, N.J., where they played until dawn.“Tex always brought raw creative power to every note he played,” Peter Rowan, a Grammy-winning singer, musician and songwriter who toured with Dr. Logan as part of the Green Grass Gringos, said in a tribute on the website Bluegrass Today. As an engineer and mathematician, Dr. Logan patented a device that reduced echoes over telephone lines with his Bell Labs colleague John Kelly and, with the mathematician Lawrence Shepp, devised mathematical methods to interpret CT scan data into accurate images. His studies helped make it possible for chemists and astronomers to draw accurate interpretations from incomplete data.Dr. David Donoho, a professor of statistics at Stanford University, said that Dr. Logan’s two careers were not as incongruous as they seemed. In an interview on Friday he described Dr. Logan’s scientific studies as attempts to break signals into their simplest parts and his music as creating complex sounds out of simple notes. “His day job was analysis,” Dr. Donoho said. “His night job was synthesis.” Benjamin Franklin Logan Jr. was born on June 6, 1927, in Coahoma, Tex., to Benjamin and Mabel Logan. He earned a bachelor’s degree in electrical engineering from Texas Technical College (now Texas Tech University) when he was a teenager, then became a research assistant at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. He arrived in Boston in 1947 and started playing with a country band. He said in 1972 that he was making so much money performing that he walked away from M.I.T. to play with a group out of Wheeling, W.Va. His career as a sideman did not last.“Road life takes a lot of the enjoyment out of it,” Dr. Logan said.After earning his master’s in 1956, he accepted a position at Bell Labs and worked at night toward his doctorate, which he received from Columbia University in 1965.His wife, the former Carolyn Margaret Keddie, died in 2008. In addition to their daughter, Jody, he is survived by two brothers, Russell and Samuel, and two grandsons. Another daughter, Laura Logan, died in 2004.Dr. Logan was honored as a pioneer by the International Bluegrass Music Museum in Owensboro, Ky., and received the International Bluegrass Music Association’s Distinguished Achievement Award in 2010.Advertisement