On this week’s episode of “Veep,” Amy Brookheimer (Anna Chlumsky) was infuriated and had finally had enough. Fed up with being frozen out of the loop by yes-woman Karen Collins (Lennon Parham), the manager in the presidential re-election campaign of Selina Meyer (Julia Louis-Dreyfus), she went down in flames in the middle of the convention with an expletive-filled tirade. (“I wouldn’t let you run a bath without having the Coast Guard and the Fire Department standing by. But yet, here you are, running America. You are the worst thing that has happened to this country since food in buckets. And maybe slavery.”)Ms. Chlumsky spoke about her character’s meltdown. These are edited excerpts from that conversation. Why was this the moment when Amy finally reached the end of her rope? She’s been put through a lot. You do have to ask yourself, “Why not when she had to pretend she was pregnant?” and all these different reasons. She’s tasked with securing victory for this incumbent president whom she has no access to anymore, and the stakes of that are enormous. Every election is historic, but this one particularly, no matter what the outcome is, will go down in history.  So why quit now? She loves her job. She wants to win. But as the hours tick by, she realizes that Selina has made it virtually impossible for a woman to get elected again. To Amy, it’s that big. That’s why it ends up being as dramatic as it is.  Why did Karen get under Amy’s skin so deeply?  Karen became the symbol for Amy of everything she couldn’t achieve with Selina. That’s why it gets emotional and personal. She’s devoted so much of her life to Selina and this moment. From the second Selina brings Karen in, Amy starts to think she’s being sabotaged. She starts to go, “Hey, who’s this new girl? Why do you have to listen to this person?” And, of course, this person is saying nothing. That’s why it becomes so untenable. It’s not business as usual anymore. It’s personal. How long had you known this plot development was coming for Amy? They told me at the beginning of the season there would be a standoff. And I said, “All right, then it’s my job to earn that from the get-go.” We have a large cast and very complex episodes, and I was aware I didn’t have the luxury of a lot of time to build up to this. So every seed had to be planted in the background. It was always my priority. When you got the script and saw you had this big speech, did you get nervous about whether you’d be able to nail it? I wasn’t nervous so much as excited. From the work I’ve done in other venues, I know that I can unleash the beast, to put it mildly. So I was champing at the bit. Now that she’s on the outs with the administration, will Amy rekindle her love-hate relationship with fellow persona non grata Dan Egan? Certainly. They’re each other’s lifeboats. They’re so alike deep down that they crave each other in some ways. Whether it’s negative or positive attention, it doesn’t matter. Professionally, if you are a pariah for a little bit after this kind of thing happens, to reach out to the other pariah means you’re less alone. This was Hugh Laurie’s first episode as Selina’s universally beloved new running mate, Tom James. How was it having him join the cast? He’s terrific. He’s so game. I expected nothing less because of his pedigree. He came from this kind of ensemble comedy. He’s wonderful at it. You could see he was enjoying it. And what a fun role. We don’t get to have truly good characters often. How aware are you of the fact that some people might view this season of “Veep” as a commentary on Hillary Clinton’s campaign to become the first female president? That’s definitely not what we were doing. Armando Iannucci’s comedy isn’t so gender-based. He has a point of view, and it’s clear and well-executed, but we’re so much more interested in exploring the human condition in the political realm than in putting a stamp on any particular gender.  Armando’s leaving the show after this season. Are you feeling separation anxiety? I’ll miss him terribly. I love his merry band of troubadours from across the pond. They’ll move on to do wonderful things. For us, it’ll be like being on a new show. We’ll see what comes of it. That’s how new ideas get born. Does it feel like you’re on a new show this season since Selina became president? Yes, when we came in for the new season, all our scenes were on West Wing sets. It was like, “Oh my gosh, we’re doing a different thing now.”