Season 4, Episode 5: “Convention”This week’s “Veep” takes place largely at President Selina Meyer’s nominating convention. And like any convention, this one has its share of behind-the scenes crises and onstage oddities. (Think Tropical Storm Isaac and Clint Eastwood for Mitt Romney in 2012.)The first problem comes in the form of news about Selina’s opponent, who has chosen a bold and compelling running mate of his own, who goes by the unofficial nickname Sexy Mexy.“Montez? New Mexico Senator Laura Montez?” moans Selina upon hearing the pick. “She’s brilliant. She’s pretty. She’s charming. She’s a woman. She’s [expletive] ethnic.”“This is Latina-geddon,” agrees Amy, her campaign manager. Selina, who fears she is stuck with Vice President Doyle (“Steve Martin’s boring older brother,” in her estimation) gets momentary good news when Doyle — at his breaking point having finally learned of the dead-children data breach from earlier this season — comes to her with the announcement he plans to resign after the inauguration. “I am furious!” Selina says, barely unable to contain her giddy excitement. Though Doyle plans to say he is resigning on principle, Selina’s team quickly blackmails him, using his chief of staff’s repeated sexual harassment of Jonah. In the end, Doyle begrudgingly claims prostrate problems. “Well, it was a joint decision made by the president, the vice president and the vice president’s … prostate doctor?” says Mike, trying to spin the news.But Selina’s glee quickly heads south when she can’t find someone willing to replace Doyle on the ticket. First Danny Chung — an Asian-American (played by Randall Park, the father on “Fresh Off the Boat” and Kim Jong-Un in “The Interview”) with military experience and, Amy hopes, the campaign’s “minority retort” to Montez — turns down the job, because he can’t quite stomach the way the president operates. Then Selina just can’t bring herself to give the job to George Maddox (“Minority! Military!”). Watching Selina and her aides run around, scrambling to find the perfect vice president, is a lesson in identity politics — and only a slightly caricatured version of the calculations that go into selecting our actual V.P. candidates. When one of her aides suggests another woman for the No. 2 slot, Selina laughs: “Are you trying to blow up the universe now? Who’s going to go for two women on the ticket? (Sound familiar? Operatives all around Washington are having versions of this very conversation, explaining away the odds of Hillary Clinton’s choosing Elizabeth Warren, or any woman for that matter, as her running mate.)Amy, for her part, has been unsuccessfully pushing for Senator Tom James (Hugh Laurie, Dr. “House” himself), who is a charismatic white man. “He has a disabled son — check. Wounded serving his country — check,” agrees Kent. “Is the checklist complete? Yes.”But Selina wants a “Tom James-y type,” but “from the South. And Latino.”Because choosing a vice-presidential running mate — despite all assurances that he or she is simply the person best qualified to be president — is really, at its most cynical, an exercise in what they can bring to the ticket, be it gender or ethnicity or the state of Ohio, or simply the balm of a white male to offset a presidential candidate who is already trying to break one too many barriers.But Selina’s dismissal of Tom James yet again is a step too far for Amy, who all episode has been dogged by Karen, the president’s opinion-free boot licker of a best friend, who has weaseled her way into Selina’s good graces while undermining Amy at every turn. (More on Karen in a minute.)When Karen offers yet another safely vanilla assessment of a potential V.P., Amy explodes. “Have you been sent from the future to destroy me? Because it’s working,” she says, her fists clenched tight, before snidely mimicking Karen.Then Amy turns on Selina, shaking with rage. “You have two settings: no decision and bad decision,” she says. “I wouldn’t let you run a bath without having the Coast Guard and the fire department standing by. But yet here you are, running America. You are the worst thing that has happened to this country since food in buckets. And maybe slavery.”Amy’s monologue is actually quite funny, but she delivers it with such controlled yet barely contained anger that it takes on a serious note. Amy says she is “done” but then turns back for one to-the-quick parting shot: “You have achieved nothing, apart from one thing,” she concludes. “The fact that you are a woman means that we will have no more women presidents,” because there was one, she says (with saltier language), and she was awful. This seems to be a turning point for Selina. She ultimately brings Tom in to offer him the job. “Guys! Guys!” shouts Selina, so overcome with joy at having finally found her running mate that she begins pointing at Tom like a trophy. “Look what I got! Look what I got!”And in a gratifying scene for anyone who has ever had to deal with a mealy-mouthed sycophant at work, the episode ends with Karen’s being shown the door. “I don’t know what to think,” says Karen.Ben’s response: “Precisely.”This week’s best lines.• The episode opens with Catherine, the first daughter, rather woodenly practicing her convention speech: “Last year, I met a guy called Jason and we fell in love,” she says, before her mom cuts her off.“Alright, sweetheart,” says Selina. “It doesn’t sound like you’re in love to me. It sounds like you’ve been kidnapped by the Taliban.”• Dan, trying to earn his keep at his new lobbying firm, unsuccessfully tries to impress a zucchini magnate, who wants to be put in the room with some “big dogs.”“Well, I’m such a zucchini fan, I practically photosynthesize,” Dan says.Going one step further, Dan’s boss offers this gem: “He’s fresh from the White House. He’s got a Rolodex as crammed as a drug mule’s poop pocket.”• The best moment of pure physical comedy came when Selina, frantic to convince Danny Chung to accept the No. 2 slot, grabs him by the back of his jacket and points out that the vice president is just one heartbeat away from the presidency.“And you never know, someday, somebody just might — ” she says, her face contorted in a mix of frenzied desperation, yet her voice optimistic, as she mimes putting a gun to her head. “Phfff!”