Season 2, Episode 5: “Server Space”Creating software is necessarily complex, and it is complex in ways that often surprise even software engineers and the companies that employ them. The difficulty explains why coders are sometimes fought over with pay packages that rival those of professional athletes, and why computer programming is rightly seen to be the dark art that’s taking over the world. Software is a field in which mediocrity is tantamount to failure; the best software engineers — sometimes dubbed “10x engineers”— often come up with creative breakthroughs that would never occur to their lesser counterparts. It’s also a field in which you can’t throw manpower at the problem, as the software theorist Fred Brooks famously pointed out: “Nine women can’t make a baby in one month.”Many programmers and journalists have tried to explain why software is so complicated, but describing the hidden complexities of coding to non-coders can be terrifically boring. That’s why “Silicon Valley” is such an unusual show. And, to the insiders of the industry it’s describing, sometimes such a thrilling one. Although I’ve frequently criticized the show’s creators for their preference for verisimilitude at the expense of laugh-out-load humor, when they hit the right balance, as they do in this episode, “Silicon Valley” kicks into a higher register of pleasure. Like little else on TV — maybe this was what local drug dealers felt when watching “The Wire,” or what mobsters experienced seeing Tony Soprano for the first time — this show can entertainingly describe a complex (and legal, unlike those other two) pursuit in a way that makes sense to a mainstream audience, yet still somehow strikes the people who know the business as generally authentic. This episode teemed with plot points that carried this balance perfectly. First, there was Gilfoyle’s brilliant, out-of-nowhere solution to Pied Piper’s server problem. Because Hooli has bullied public server companies against renting space to the start-up, Gilfoyle proposes building bespoke servers that use lightning-quick video processing chips customized to Pied Piper’s code. In fact, this solution isn’t novel in the Valley—Larry Page and Sergey Brin built their own servers when they created Google—but as a plot point, the idea elegantly shows off the value of a 10x engineer. The way that Jared reacts to Gilfoyle’s idea shows how novel it is in the universe of the show: “Servers are essentially a utility — you wouldn’t dig a well for water, or build a generator for power.” But Gilfoyle, like the best software guys, understands the computer scientist Alan Kay’s famous maxim: “People who are really serious about software should make their own hardware.” Whatever the cost to Pied Piper — including the chance to relocate to an office with fashion models — it can’t afford not to build its own servers.The other moment that beautifully conveys the difficulty of software comes right at the end, when Gavin Belson announces that he has signed a deal for Hooli to stream an Ultimate Fighting Championship matchup using Nucleus, the tech giant’s competitor to Pied Piper’s software. The fight is in a month’s time, but Belson has apparently been assured by the leaders of the Nucleus’ team that the software will be ready by then.Except Belson has been given the wrong message. As we see in a series of quick, clever conversations that end the show, each management layer of the Nucleus hierarchy has been strategically lying to the one above. The software is late, and nobody quite knows how late. Nucleus, composed of a sprawling team of developers who can’t communicate with one another, is experiencing an archetypal software project failure — too many people, too little communication, the classic mess that scores of software theorists have long sought to explain. The surprising fact that tiny teams of software engineers can sometimes be more productive and creative than larger ones is crucial for this show to get across. It is the only reason that it makes sense for tiny Pied Piper to keep fighting the giant Hooli. In a larger sense, the very fact that Davids often beat Goliaths is the whole reason that Silicon Valley, as a place and an idea, continues to thrive. And in this single, deft scene showing Nucleus’s mismanagement, “Silicon Valley” brilliantly conveys this.There was more good stuff in this episode, including some big laughs. But as one of the new residents of a pleasant and irrepressibly boring suburb in Silicon Valley, my favorite bit was Erlich’s incensed speech to his neighbor. “You’re always going on and on about why this is such a good neighborhood,” he says. But why is that? Why are tiny, broken-down homes purchased for peanuts in the 1970s worth millions today? “It’s because of people like us moving in and starting illegal businesses in our garages,” Erlich says. “That is why Silicon Valley is one of the hottest neighborhoods in the world. Because of people like us, not because of people like you.” “Silicon Valley” often snarkily skewers tech people. But in a national climate in which techies are often portrayed as greedy, objectionable, and generally unloved, Erlich’s speech was an impassioned paean to the value of tech people. It was pretty glorious. 