It wasn’t long ago that it seemed that James Levine might never conduct a Metropolitan Opera performance again. After suffering a serious spinal injury, Mr. Levine was sidelined for two full seasons starting in 2011; a brilliant and exhaustive career seemed to be in its twilight.Scratch that. Mr. Levine, 71, finished up the Met Opera’s season on Saturday by conducting a double header of “The Rake’s Progress” at 1 p.m. and “Un Ballo in Maschera” at 8 p.m. It was his first two-performance day since 2005, and capped off his first full comeback season, in which he conducted 35 performances from his motorized wheelchair. “I didn’t want to promise in the brochure that I would reach the last day of the season and feel perfect,” Mr. Levine said. “But I was feeling good, and it’s always a very exciting juxtaposition.” Mr. Levine has conducted some 2,500 performances with the Met, making him far and away its all-time leader. After suffering through illness and injury for several years, Mr. Levine returned as a workhorse this year, guiding the Met Opera through “Le Nozze di Figaro,” “Les Contes d’Hoffmann,” and “Ernani,” to name a few. “He’s been famous for doing Herculean-like feats that other conductors would never consider,” said Peter Gelb, the Met’s general manager. “His season was quite extraordinary and very important for the company — it ensured that the orchestra, chorus and singers, were being served by one of the greatest conductors of all time.” It was unclear whether Mr. Levine would conduct the season finale of “Un Ballo in Maschera” until that afternoon. “When he finished ‘Rake,’ he said he wanted to take a nap and think about it,” said Mr. Gelb. “But clearly, he was determined to do it. It was a very strong performance, and one of the best ones of the run.”Mr. Levine himself played down the achievement, noting that there are often dress rehearsals in the morning before performances: “It happens even though the public is not aware of it.” Still, this doubleheader was special for another reason: it was the 50th time he conducted two operas in one day. He easily remembered his first, “Luisa Miller” and “Tosca” in December 1971, as well as other unique pairings like “Otello” and “Falstaff,” Verdi’s last two operas. As for Saturday’s duo, Mr. Levine said: “It’s a great pair — very highly contrasted. The deep fans of one are often different from the deep fans of the other. But on the last day of the season, people who love opera and are passionately devoted to it just wanted to get their last taste until September.”