LOS ANGELES —In the olden days of movie marketing, extravagant ad campaigns could solve anything. Terrible movie? No matter. Just throw open the promotional flood gates and a sizeable crowd reliably turned up on opening weekend.But the game has changed in the age of social media, which quickens word of mouth, as “Hot Pursuit” demonstrated over the weekend. Backed by an aggressive Warner Bros. marketing effort, “Hot Pursuit,” which received almost universally negative reviews, took in a paltry $13.5 million from 3,003 theaters in North America. That total gave Reese Witherspoon one of the worst openings of her career. Ms. Witherspoon, who produced the PG-13 comedy, co-starred with the television actress Sofia Vergara.Ticket buyers gave “Hot Pursuit” a C-plus grade in CinemaScore exit polls. “Hot Pursuit” was made by Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer and Warner’s New Line for about $35 million. Analysts estimated that marketing added roughly $40 million to the cost.“Unfortunately, we didn’t get that broad audience that you often see for female-driven comedies,” Jeffrey B. Goldstein, Warner’s executive vice president for domestic distribution, said in a telephone interview on Sunday. Mr. Goldstein noted that “Hot Pursuit” did play better than expected in areas like Texas, Florida and Southern California, where Ms. Vergara has a strong Hispanic fan base. “Hot Pursuit” was the weekend’s only new wide-release film. As expected, “The Avengers: Age of Ultron” (Walt Disney Studios) easily repeated as the No. 1 movie, taking in an estimated $77.2 million, for a two-week domestic total of $312.9 million, according to Rentrak, which compiles box office data.While generating enormous interest, “Age of Ultron” is nonetheless under-performing expectations in the United States and Canada by about 15 percent; the preceding “Avengers” movie collected $373 million in its first two weeks. Overseas, “Age of Ultron” has so far taken in $562.4 million, a total that Disney described as roughly 20 percent better than comparable ticket sales for the film’s franchise predecessor.A version of this article appears in print on 05/11/2015, on page C3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: ‘Avengers: Age of Ultron’ Still Tops at Box Office.