By KATHRYN SHATTUCKMAY 10, 2015
3 P.M. (FX Movie Channel) THE GIRL WITH THE DRAGON TATTOO (2011) Daniel Craig stars as a Swedish journalist hired by an industrialist (Christopher Plummer) to investigate the disappearance of his niece 40 years earlier in this adaptation of the Stieg Larsson novel, directed by David Fincher. Rooney Mara, above, in an Oscar-nominated performance, is Lisbeth Salander, the vulnerable yet ruthlessly competent computer hacker who helps him solve the mystery. “She is a marvelous pop-culture character, stranger and more complex than the average superhero and more intriguing than the usual boy wizards and vampire brides,” A. O. Scott wrote in The New York Times. “It has been her fate, unfortunately, to make her furious, uninspiring way through a series of plodding and ungainly stories.” And “despite the slick intensity of Mr. Fincher’s style, his movie is not immune to the same lumbering proceduralism,” Mr. Scott said.10 A.M. (Fox) FOX NEWS SUNDAY  Ben Carson, a Republican, talks about his presidential campaign. Former Gov. Mike Huckabee, a Republican, and Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont, an independent seeking the Democratic nomination, discuss theirs on “Face the Nation,” at 10:30 on CBS.3 P.M. (FX) THIS IS 40 (2012) In this film written and directed by Judd Apatow, Pete (Paul Rudd) and Debbie (Leslie Mann) and their daughters (Iris and Maude Apatow, the real-life daughters of Ms. Mann and Mr. Apatow) inhabit a big white house in a nice Los Angeles ZIP code. They undergo a series of crises as the parents’ milestone birthdays approach: financial woes at Pete’s record label; an embezzling employee at Debbie’s boutique; mother-and-daughter hormones; and, not least, their marriage. “Do you still even like me?” Debbie asks Pete in a moment of vulnerability. “ ‘This Is 40’ is an intensely, at times embarrassingly, personal film, by a man who has worked hard, lucked out and wants to share some of his happiness and its attendant worries with the rest of us,” A. O. Scott wrote in The Times. In other words, he said, it “should not be mistaken for satire.”7 P.M. (CBS) 60 MINUTES In a double episode, Jack Barsky, who was born Albrecht Dittrich in East Germany, recounts his days as a spy for the K.G.B.; the ballerina Misty Copeland discusses her path from a difficult childhood to becoming a soloist for American Ballet Theater; Michael Blutrich talks about being a Mafia informant; Robert Ballard encourages exploration of United States territorial waters; and Greg Glassman gives a tour of his CrossFit empire.Advertisement7 P.M. (MTV) THE PARENT TRAP (1998) Lindsay Lohan, left, does double duty as separated-at-birth twins who meet at camp, change places and plot to reunite their divorced parents: He (Dennis Quaid) is a Napa Valley vintner; she (Natasha Richardson) is a high-end bridal gown designer. Janet Maslin, writing in The Times, called this film a “lavish, super-cute new version” of the 1961 Disney comedy.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.9 P.M. (CBS) THE GOOD WIFE Alicia (Julianna Margulies) must decide what’s next as the season — and possibly her career — comes to a close. Meanwhile, she receives a suspicious call from a client who is being held at a secret police site where people are detained without being officially booked.Advertisement10 P.M. (13, 49) WOLF HALL The season ends as the love of Henry VIII (Damian Lewis, left) for his queen Anne Boleyn (Claire Foy) turns to anger and distrust, prompting him to instruct Cromwell (Mark Rylance) to get rid of her. Anne’s enemies, sensing her weakness, converge.10 P.M. (AMC) MAD MEN In the penultimate episode of the series, Don (Jon Hamm) can’t sleep and Pete (Vincent Kartheiser) is blindsided by a friend.What’s Streaming NowA ROOM WITH A VIEW (1986) An Englishwoman (Helena Bonham Carter) is torn between her strait-laced fiancé (Daniel Day-Lewis) and a young bohemian (Julian Sands) in this Merchant-Ivory adaptation of E. M. Forster’s 1908 novel, with an Oscar-winning screenplay by Ruth Prawer Jhabvala. Writing in The Times, Vincent Canby said the film “is like a holiday out of time.” (netflix.com)  KATHRYN SHATTUCKA version of this schedule appears in print on May 10, 2015, on Page SP11 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Sunday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.