AdvertisementSupported byBy Jon CaramanicaNORTH LAS VEGAS, NEV. — On the small patio at the far-from-it-all apartment here that the singer Shamir shares with two friends, an ashtray sat on a small table, though you could barely see it underneath the lava flow of cigarette butts erupting out of it. He was perched on a high chair, puffing his way through a Maverick, lamenting the disarray, and also passing the buck.This is where Shamir keeps a residence — the city where he was raised, in a house across the street from a pig farm — but doesn’t quite live, ever since he coolly sauntered his way into modern musical micro-celebrity last year with the release of his debut single, “If It Wasn’t True” (Godmode), a cooling blast of D.I.Y. disco. And so even though he was back, on an almost warm April afternoon, it wasn’t for long. On May 19, he’ll release his solo debut album, “Ratchet” (XL), obligations for which will once again pull him away from the sleepy pace of the place.“I thought I’d have to work hard to prove myself,” Shamir said later that afternoon, sitting at an In-N-Out Burger overlooking a dusty lot of land. He was wearing a baby-blue Nelson Mandela T-shirt of his own design, tight mustard jeans and chipped nail polish. His dreadlocks were collected into a regal, nestlike crown. It was midday, and everything in this town was dead still, as he prefers it.“Before this,” he said, “people used to make fun of the music that I did. They used to make fun of my voice. Now it’s a thing that people talk about.”That voice is one of the things that sets Shamir apart — high-pitched but not reed-thin, rhythmic but distant, emotionally ambiguous. Sometimes he sounds like he’s been caught on tape accidentally while musing to himself.On the sugar-rush fun “Ratchet,” it’s used in all sorts of ways. On “Vegas,” it’s woozily imperfect, while on “Darker” he employs gospel-like inflections. On “On the Regular,” Shamir is lightly rapping, almost in a schoolyard style, while on “Call It Off” he sings almost ecstatically. He writes lyrics like sleepover chitchat: intimate revelations that smack of first discovery. “I’ve been trying to find a reason to keep us together/Tried to make up my bed of lies and call denial my shelter,” he sighs on “Call It Off.” Sometimes, he’s just cheeky: “Don’t try me, I’m not a free sample/Step to me and you will be handled.”The album was produced by Nick Sylvester, owner of the Godmode label, whom Shamir contacted via email two years ago, and who immediately flew him to New York to record music. The templates are early 1980s electro-pop, classic house music, original-issue post-punk and its mid 2000s revival (in the form of DFA Records), finished off with a few R&B and no-wave gestures.For many years, though, all Shamir, now 20, wanted to sing was country. On Sundays, “while everyone else was listening to church music, I was listening to country oldies,” he said. When he was 12 or 13, he saw Taylor Swift on television: “I was like: ‘Who is this goddess? She’s perfect, she’s simple, she’s not half-dressed, she writes good songs and she’s 16. I want to be her.’ ”He learned to play guitar and mandolin, and tried recording with a local producer, though he was told his voice wasn’t up to snuff, which is odd considering that the most striking song in Shamir’s catalog remains “Lived and Died Alone,” a cover of a song by the tough Canadian country singer Lindi Ortega, released on his Godmode EP, “Northtown,” last year. “That’s the kind of singing I’m most comfortable doing — it’s effortless for me,” he said.And he’s right: The vocals on that song are thicker and more robust than anything on “Ratchet,” which arrives after a period in which Shamir went out of his way to de-emphasize his voice in a no-fi band called Anorexia, which he formed after discovering the scratchy punk band Vivian Girls. Following advice gleaned from a Courtney Love interview, he tried roughing up his voice, to little effect: “I’ve been a smoker for four years, and I’m still waiting for my smoker’s voice,” he deadpanned.But after emailing Mr. Sylvester with a rough demo of skeletal dance music, his path shifted. For a while, when he was recording his album, he lived at the Silent Barn, the artist space in Bushwick, Brooklyn. He even interned for the bigger label that signed him in 2014, XL Recordings. When he returned home to his mother’s house after recording his album in New York, she embarked on a quick spiritual disinfection, he said. “She made me strip and sprayed me with this stuff called dragon’s blood and made me take a bath in herbs,” Shamir recalled, “but I was good in New York.” The speed with which Shamir moved from high school student in a band to worldwide Internet musical renown was so quick that he didn’t leave much of a digital trail. One thing that comes up, however, is a 2013 stand-up comedy audition video.In it, he’s 18, and instantly recognizable: loud shirt, radiant cheer, dry wit. Most of his five-minute routine is about how people confuse him for a woman: “Hello, I’m Shamir, and I’m an 18-year-old black man with the voice of a 14-year-old white girl.” He tells a story about being given a key to the women’s bathroom at a convenience store. He likens himself to a clown fish, which has the capacity to change sex, but gripes, “they’re not even a cute fish anyway.”When Shamir was young, “I looked like a little boy,” he said, but “when everyone else was becoming a man I was becoming a woman.” He laughed — he’s joking a little — then raised his eyebrows and sighed. “People think my androgyny is a thing or a gimmick, but no, I’m naturally androgynous; I don’t try to be.” As a teenager, Shamir looked around and saw little in the way of pure androgyny in popular music or culture. “David Bowie wore makeup and onesies and high heels — you’d never catch me in that,” he said. Whom he looked up to most was the transgender model Andreja Pejic, who was born Andrej and, until last year, publicly self-identified as an androgynous man, working in campaigns and runway shows for both men’s and women’s clothing.Seeing Ms. Pejic, Shamir said, gave him “a huge feeling of not being alone.” In person, Shamir is affable and whimsical, happy to talk about the Kardashians (Khloé is his favorite) or why he passes on hard drugs. His air is one of extreme nonchalance — he’ll talk, then send casual selfies out to friends and fans on Snapchat, then seamlessly go back to talking.Narrow-mindedness occasionally inserts itself into Shamir’s path. In March, he released a video for “Call It Off” in connection with the YouTube Music Awards, perhaps the widest platform he’s yet had, one that landed him in front of people who had never heard of him before, and not all of them tolerant. He received many hostile or ignorant responses online, he said, so he wrote on Twitter, “To those who keep asking, I have no gender, no sexuality,” and added a spirited, slightly profane kiss-off. (Shamir describes himself as pansexual: “I’m more attracted to personality.”)The glare that comes with rising celebrity is doubly tough considering that Shamir, in his own telling, would rather not be famous. “I’m not trying to be a household name,” he said. “I don’t want to say that I don’t want the record to do well, but I don’t want it to do amazingly. I just want to sell enough so I don’t bankrupt XL Records.” He sees his future in comedy, perhaps as a screenwriter. “If this all ended right now,” he said, “I’m not going to cry.”He said this in the car on the way to the Las Vegas Strip. Hoping to take advantage of the precious little time he had back home, Shamir was headed for the Fashion Show Mall, where until not that long ago he worked at Topshop. “I was a good employee,” he said. “I was honest.”Within seconds, he was embraced by a former fellow worker: “Your song just played like 10 minutes ago!” Shamir is constitutionally unfazed. “I get, like, a penny for that.” He greets old colleagues, laments that there are no places to play an all-ages show in town and helps out in the fitting room while gabbing with a friend.After about a half-hour of catch-up — bolstered by some Twitter and Snapchat back-and-forth — he left and walked through the mall to Lush, the handmade-cosmetics chain, where he selected a couple of bath bombs, which are designed to bring fragrance and fizz to the tub. They weren’t for his currently filthy apartment here, he said. Rather, he’d be saving them for Los Angeles, where his record label has a house with a fantastic tub, and where, even though he’ll be away from home, he’d prefer not to feel that way.Advertisement