Three of the four Tony Award nominees for best new musical had their best week of sales yet at the box office, while one is struggling.“An American in Paris,” the dance-heavy adaptation of the 1951 film, continues to stand out as the commercial hit of the moment, bringing in $1,298,817 last week, according to Broadway League figures released on Monday. “Something Rotten!,” the Elizabethan-era comedy, also boasted its biggest week yet, with $903,211 in ticket sales. To call attention to the development, one of the show’s publicists posted a message on Twitter featuring Shakespeare, who is spoofed in the musical, on a $10 bill (which in real life features Alexander Hamilton, who is the title character in the presumptive big musical of next season, “Hamilton”). “Fun Home,” operating in the smallest theater used by a best-new-musical nominee, brought in $571,495. The show, about the cartoonist Alison Bechdel’s effort to understand her childhood, played to 101-percent-capacity audiences.By contrast, the fourth best musical nominee, “The Visit,” played to 55-percent-capacity audiences, bringing in $208,077.With theater operators around the country gathering this week for an annual spring conference, several Tony nominated shows are announcing national tours.Over the last week, “The Curious Incident of the Dog in the Night-Time,” a leading contender for the best play award, said it would begin a national tour in October of 2016. “The King and I,” a contender for the best musical revival, said that show, initially scheduled to run until July 5, would be extended indefinitely and begin a national tour in November 2016. And “On the Town,” also a contender for best musical revival, said it, too, would go on tour next year, with its star Tony Yazbeck, who has been nominated for a Tony as leading actor in the show.“An American in Paris” had earlier announced a tour.Gina Vernaci, the executive producer of Playhouse Square in Cleveland and the president of the Independent Presenters Network, cautioned that not all announced tours actually happen, because some producers are ultimately unable to secure enough bookings.She said the plans are probably aimed less at swaying Tony voters than at getting the attention of the theater operators outside New York.“It’s a crowded marketplace, and this is a way to drive buzz,” Ms. Vernaci said. “It’s a second wave to say, ‘Hey, we’re here’.”The dynamic can work even for shows that are not contending for awards. “Finding Neverland,” which was not nominated for any Tonys, has been eager to demonstrate that, even if critics were not impressed, the public is: the show has sold more than $1 million in tickets every week (last week it grossed $1,041,008) and has also announced a national tour starting next year.A version of this article appears in print on 05/12/2015, on page C3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Tony-Nominated Musicals Are (Mostly) Soaring.