Familiar collaborators will be front and center next season at the Public Theater, which will offer two new musicals by composers who have been regular presences there: “First Daughter Suite,” Michael John LaChiusa’s sequel of sorts to his 1993 “First Lady Suite”; and “The Total Bent,” by Stew and Heidi Rodewald, whose “Passing Strange” went from the Public to Broadway in 2008.The theater on Monday announced its 2015-16 season, which also features the return of the playwrights Robert O’Hara (“Insurrection: Holding History”) and Tarell Alvin McCraney (“The Brother/Sister Plays”), and another visit by the  experimental theater troupe Gob Squad (“Super Night Shot”).  Mr. O’Hara’s “Barbecue,” about a family holding an intervention with an addicted sister, begins performances Sept. 22; Mr. McCraney’s “Head of Passes,” loosely based on the Book of Job and a coproduction with Berkeley Repertory Theater, starts on March 15.For the third year running, the Public’s season will open with the musicalization of a classic, staged for free at the Delacorte Theater in Central Park. This year, the director Lear deBessonet and the composer Todd Almond will present their take on Homer’s “The Odyssey” in a Public Works production running Sept. 4 to 7.This season’s big story at the Public was the acclaimed musical “Hamilton.” With that show set to move to Broadway later this summer, its director, Thomas Kail, will oversee the world premiere of what the Public describes as a “viciously, deliciously funny new drama” about the American economy: “Dry Powder,” by Sarah Burgess, which begins performances on March 1. Like “First Lady Suite,” which explored the inner lives of Jacqueline Kennedy, Eleanor Roosevelt and others, “First Daughter Suite” will give musical form to the stories of Tricia and Julie Nixon, Amy Carter and Patti Davis — and their mothers — among others. Performances begin Oct. 6.And “The Total Bent” — about a British record producer and a young black musical prodigy — starts on May 10. The show was postponed from this season’s Public schedule because its director, Joanna Settle, was ill. 