Season 6, Episode 22: ‘Wanna Partner?’Were Julianna Margulies and Archie Panjabi actually sitting at the same bar during Alicia Florrick and Kalinda Sharma’s goodbye scene in the Season 6 finale of “The Good Wife” on Sunday night? Word will come out soon enough, but my guess is that they weren’t. Too much of the scene was obviously filmed with the actresses talking to stand-ins, and in the moments when we could see both their faces, their bodies never crossed. If I’m right, was this proof that the rumors of a seasons-long Margulies-Panjabi feud are true? That’s just another thing that we may find out someday.Separate shots would also explain why the scene was so stilted and anticlimactic, in keeping with a generally tepid season finale. There was an awful lot going on in the episode, a great rush to set up some stories for next season. So as the hour began we got Peter dropping a bombshell — the most casual “I’m running for president” announcement in history — and as it ended we got a decent but small twist, as Alicia opened her apartment door expecting to see Finn but instead saw Louis Canning, who asked if she wanted to partner with him as the season faded out.The framework for the episode was a case involving Jacob Rickter, whom Alicia represented in a murder case way back in the Season 2 finale. This was a good example of the show’s self-referential, bow-tying nature. In that earlier episode, “Closing Arguments,” Peter was considering his run for governor, Alicia and Kalinda’s friendship hit its lowest point, and Alicia and Will finally broke down and got a room (actually a presidential suite), all plot points echoed on Sunday night. (Another echo: Jane Alexander played the judge in both episodes.)The case, in which Rickter was grabbed by the Chicago police and held without charge in an unmarked “black site,” was thin but allowed for some nice film-noir visuals as Alicia hit the mean industrial streets in search of her client. It was also an excuse for Alicia and Finn to work a case together and demonstrate some more sexual tension before Finn (who revealed that he’s dating his ex-wife) changed course and announced that he couldn’t start a new firm with Alicia because, well, too much sexual tension. Peter, meanwhile, assembled the family to tell them he’d been asked by the Illinois Democratic party to enter the presidential race with the idea of making himself a viable vice-presidential choice. (Do state parties actually do that?) Zach was excited, Grace was hesitant, and Alicia called Peter on his passive-aggressive attempt to offload the decision onto them. When he petulantly asked what she really wanted and she said she didn’t want him to run, the stage was set for a lot of Season 7 agita.Back at the nearly forgotten offices of Lockhart, Agos & Lee, Diane actually got a little screen time. A new paralegal at the firm turned out to be Louis Canning’s wife, who had applied for the job under her maiden name. Cary and David wanted her fired immediately as a spy; Diane sympathized with her, buying her story that she just wanted to accomplish something on her own and that she wouldn’t reveal anything to her husband. (Do we really think Diane wouldn’t have immediately marched her out of the building?) The men prevailed, leading to a surprisingly spry Louis storming into their offices.The most important business of the episode, of course, was providing closure for Kalinda, who officially disappeared two weeks ago. Lemond Bishop’s fixer, Charles Lester, began making appearances at Alicia’s apartment and at Lockhart, Agos, trying to track her down. (After he asked Diane and Cary where Kalinda was, Diane said to Cary, “He’s after Kalinda,” in an example of the kind of help-for-the-feeble underlining that’s rife on CBS dramas but usually absent on “The Good Wife.”)This was an excuse for Ms. Panjabi to make a series of dramatic appearances, with a full-leather-jacket Kalinda ambushing Lester in a supermarket and an Apple store and (illusorily?) sliding onto the barstool next to Alicia. She lied to Lester, saying she hadn’t betrayed Lemond, but then told Alicia that the letter she had left was a confession and that Alicia should give it to Lester to protect herself, a contradiction that became moot when Alicia burned the letter in front of Lester. After all that, Kalinda simply revealed that the files she downloaded from Lemond’s laptop two episodes ago contained incriminating information about Lester. He agreed to pretend that he couldn’t find her, and she slipped on a big pair of sunglasses and sashayed off the show.So Alicia, already cast out from her old law firm, definitively lost her one-time best friend, Kalinda; was once again distanced from her husband, who’s obviously going to ignore her wishes regarding a presidential campaign; and had her romantic hopes dashed by Finn. The episode stripped her down and left her alone in her apartment in the final moments, without even Saint Grace for company. Her eyes lit up when the doorbell rang — she thought it would be Finn, but it was an angry Canning, bitter at Lockhart, Agos and looking for a way to stick it to them. “Want to partner?” he asked. I think we know the answer.Let us know your thoughts about “Wanna Partner,” and the sixth season of “The Good Wife,” in the comments.