Season 7, Episode 13: “The Milk and Honey Route”In the pilot episode of “Mad Men,” “Smoke Gets In Your Eyes,” Don Draper aced a pitch for Lucky Strike cigarettes by sidestepping the established science of lung cancer. “We can say anything we want,” he said, arguing that the best way to deal with the facts was to blow smoke so thick you couldn’t see them. “Everybody else’s tobacco is poisonous. Lucky Strike’s is toasted.”Season 3 began with a similar endorsement of hokum. The brand London Fog, Lane Pryce explained, was based on a myth: There was never any fog in London. There was just the polluted, carcinogenic soot of the industrial era, made poetic by the warm glow of nostalgia and the long con of advertising. “I don’t care what they say — London Fog is a great name,” Bert Cooper said. The period drama on AMC.From Lucky Strike and London Fog to napalm-hustling Dow Chemical, “Mad Men” has tended to view advertising as an alluring but amoral form of con artistry, with Don as the master of the con’s dark arts. In retrospect, when a waiter lit Don’s Lucky Strike in the show’s very first scene, he was lighting a fuse. Strung through seven seasons, it finally blows up in this episode: Betty is dying of lung cancer. And lies are catching up with everyone.Since the very beginning, there’s been a kind of hypocritical reaction to the women in Don’s life: Fans know Don is an awful, womanizing liar, while simultaneously attacking each of his partners for somehow not being good enough for him. Betty has long been one of the show’s most divisive characters, mostly reasonably so. She has often seemed trapped in a dollhouse façade of her own meticulous construction. Particularly after the divorce, Betty didn’t quite know what to do with herself — and neither did the show.In the series’ penultimate episode, we hear some of the most common critiques of her character. Her own husband wonders if she’s “stubborn or vain,” as if he can’t imagine a third option. Sally tells her she “won’t get treatment because you love tragedy.” Betty’s strong-willed response to her family — and her impending death — feels like the show’s rebuke to critics who thought less of her. There was always strength in her chiffon.Henry reacts to his wife’s crisis like a stereotypical politician, with bombast, threats and angry rants that cover up anything that might resemble doubt or fear. Then he breaks down on Sally’s bed. On the other hand, Betty, like Trudy, sees things as they are. For a while now, neither woman has had the privilege of believing lies because they, unlike the men in their lives, have both had to live with their consequences. Despite her vanity, Betty has “fought for a lot,” as she tells Sally. She’s always seen through Don’s lies better than anyone. And, whereas Don has specialized in beginnings, the episode reminds us that she has been acutely aware of endings. Betty’s advice to Sally is so good, you think she might have actually learned something in psychology class: “I’ve learned to trust people when they say it’s over,” she says. “They don’t want to say it. So it’s usually the truth.”Meanwhile, doesn’t it seem so perversely true to form that “Mad Men” kills off Betty on Mother’s Day and then gives perhaps its happiest ending to the show’s most despised regular character? Pete isn’t just getting half his payout, like Joan. If events hold, he’s getting his family back and a raise. Plus a private Learjet. Is this show saying that if you do good deeds in this world you’ll receive your just karmic reward? No. It’s saying that the 1 percent take care of their own. Pete gets the job because he’s a “real knickerbocker … right schools, right family.” There’s great value in making elite white men feel comfortable.Why Pete and Trudy get back together is more complex. Over the past seven seasons, Pete’s behavior has ranged from petulant to monstrous. He sexually assaulted the au pair down the hallway, cheated on Trudy repeatedly, made a grand display of fly-by parenting and distinguished himself for his whiny, selfish, scheming behavior in an office of whiny, selfish schemers. In one aspect, though, he says he is willing to change: He swears he won’t hurt Trudy anymore. They’ve always had terrific chemistry (Alison Brie and Vincent Kartheiser have been wonderful together on the show). But Pete isn’t selfless. He’s finally learned that hurting Trudy hurts himself. “It feels good,” he tells his brother about his history as a cheater, “and then it doesn’t.” Of course, Pete is still the show’s most noxious embodiment of entitlement, always believing that the world owes him whatever happiness he encounters — even if it’s an absurd fortune and a private jet. “We’re entitled to more,” he tells Trudy, telling her he’s received a “supernatural” blessing, as if God saw his brave work for Dow Chemical and smiled upon him. Trudy corrects him, but only gently. “Then we’re entitled to something new,” he says. Trudy agrees. Kansas has seen plenty of tornadoes. Still, Wichita may not be ready for the Campbells. (Except, maybe, for Glen Campbell, of “Wichita Lineman” fame.)So: Betty’s dying and Pete’s getting the happy ending he’s always known he deserves. What else?  Oh, yes: The drifter. Don.This episode of truth and consequences begins with Don’s nightmare, in which he’s finally caught in a lie. “We’ve been looking for you,” the dream cop says. “We knew we would catch up with you eventually.” Soon, he’s getting his face smashed with a phone book. Only, Don is beat up for a crime he didn’t commit, instead of one of the ones he did.Don’s road trip could have taken any number of sharp left turns. One second, it seemed like he might fall for the brunette by the pool. Another, it seemed like he might move to Nowheresville and set up shop as a handyman. At the V.A. fund-raiser, it briefly seemed like he might be recognized by a fellow veteran and exposed for what, and who, he really is. Then he meets a young con-artist version of himself, who reminds him of all the lies he’s told over the years — and how good at lying he has become. He gives the kid a second chance (in the form of his Cadillac), and when he sits there at the bus stop and smiles, it looks like Don feels like he deserves his own second chance too. Is Don’s grand road trip a brilliant gambit for this risky series? Or a massive metaphorical folly? Until we see the finale, it’s going to be hard to say. Don has left everyone else behind. He seems to be rejecting the lie of his life and the lies he was paid to tell on Madison Avenue, while making peace with his past. If this bold gamble continues, it’s possible we will never see him on-screen with another of the show’s stars. But where will he end up? The veterans’ mantra is “You just do what you have to do to come home.” Will Don end up back where he began, as small-town Dick Whitman? What does “home” even mean for him anymore? And isn’t home just another line guys like him made up to sell real estate?Maybe the engine’s broken and the series will stall out. But there’s something exciting about the idea that this show, which has been embraced by advertisers for seven seasons (and made auto pitchmen and fashion models of its stars), might reject advertising and New York entirely. We’ll see soon enough. As Don tells the receptionist: “Let’s take it one night at a time: I’m an optimist.” After all, there’s just one night left.A quick note: These recaps are not intended to be exhaustive; that would be exhausting for all of us. I’ll just try to pick a theme each week and continue the conversation. Wasn’t Alison Brie wonderful? What are your final wishes for the show? Joan, Ken and Betty seem like they’re off the board now, but what do you hope to see for Peggy and Roger in the finale? Where will Don end up? Logan Hill is a journalist who has contributed to The New York Times, New York, Rolling Stone, “This American Life,” Cosmopolitan, Glamour, Wired and others. You can follow him on Twitter at @loganhill33.
