Season 5, Episode 5, “Kill the Boy”
Here be spoilers and a waiter who sleeps in a kennel.
Early last season I congratulated Stannis, Selyse and Melisandre for setting the record for the world’s worst dinner party. Ladies and gentlemen… I think we have a new champion!
Sunday’s House Bolton feast was like that Thanksgiving when your sister brought home the dude with the face tattoo, only if that guy had killed half your family and the caterer had incinerated your baby brothers (as far as you knew). Even poor “Fat Walda” Bolton, Roose’s unfortunately monikered wife, had awkward ties as the granddaughter of Walder Frey, the host of the Red Wedding.   
'Game of Thrones'The fantasy epic on HBO.Is He Really Dead? And Where Does ‘Game of Thrones’ Stand for Season 6?Gwendoline Christie Discusses Brienne’s Big Move on ‘Game of Thrones’‘Game of Thrones’ Finale Recap: Shocking Deaths and a Walk of Shame

It was “The Real World: Winterfell” — we found out what happens when Sansa, Ramsay and everyone else stopped being polite and started getting real. Elsewhere, Jon Snow “killed the boy” in order to let his inner man grow, Tyrion had multiple scaly encounters and this show continued its assault on the institution of marriage, apparently betrothing Daenerys Targaryen to the reptilian Hizdahr zo Loraq. (Though that could be an attractive quality to a Dragon Queen.)
The proposal was an intriguing capper to what was the most encouraging Dany episode we’ve seen since she arrived in Meereen. But first, back to Winterfell. Because for pure matrimonial disgrace, nothing compares to Ram-sa.
Sansa at least stopped pretending she was anything other than disgusted by the whole thing. This must seem like a strange place to you, Walda said at dinner, trying to break the ice. “This isn’t a strange place. This is my home,” Sansa said. “It’s the people who are strange.”
Irredeemable is more like it, and seriously Sansa, you do not know the half of it. Brutalizing and breaking your de facto adopted brother Theon was only like the eighth worst thing we’ve seen Ramsay do, and on Sunday we learned that he was conceived when his father raped his mother beneath the lynched body of her husband. So that’s not getting fixed, in other words. He was born this way.
Roose told Ramsay’s origin story in a scene that was the tonal and emotional inverse of Stannis’s poignant tale for Shireen last week, though the conclusion was more or less the same. “You are my son,” Roose told Ramsay, who was visibly moved and renewed his pledge to help his father fight Stannis. Which was the point. That unborn son will do Roose no good in the battle to come — he’ll tell Ramsay whatever he needs to in order to keep him flaying folks for Team Bolton. (That said, if I were Walda, I’d be sleeping with the door locked and one eye open.)
Ramsay, on his best behavior when he met Sansa a couple weeks ago, gave her a taste of the sort of treatment she can expect from now on when he tapped Reek to walk her down the aisle. It will get worse.
“If you ever have trouble,” the devoted servant tells Sansa, presumably passing along Brienne’s message, “light a candle in the highest window of the broken tower.” LIGHT IT NOW, SANSA. Before your wedding night, I’m begging you.
At Castle Black, Jon Snow did Jon Snow things, winning over Wildlings and alienating his fellow knights. (The big meeting scenes feel like pool feeds from a goth House of Commons.) He, Tormund and some others are headed to Hardhome, apparently, to try to persuade the free folk to come south of the wall, where they’ll be safe from the White Walkers. We’ll check in on them in more depth next time.
In Meereen, the Dragon Queen finally lived up to the name, letting her young’uns torch and eat a Meereenese honcho to send a message in the wake of Ser Barristan’s killing. Message received, said a jailed Hizdahr. I was only trying to look cool earlier when I thought I was next and was all, “valar morghulis.”
O.K., Dany said. In that case, let’s get married.
Huh?
Hizdahr didn’t expect it and neither did I. But perhaps Dany knows better than us here. Maybe I’m being overly optimistic, but the episode seemed to finally signal the sort of emergence in Dany that we’ve all been hoping for, if only to end the tedious stalemate in Meereen.
Most obviously, as we noted above, we finally see the Dragon Queen use her dragons to break her enemies. Perhaps more meaningful: A woman who began this story as a matrimonial offering to a barbarian ruler is now using a political marriage to her own advantage. Perhaps it’s a bookend that  — along with the murder of the literal old guard, her caretaker and adviser Ser Barristan — marks the beginning of the end of her long gestational period as a would-be leader and conquerer of worlds.
Or maybe we’ll have five more dreary Meereen episodes after this. We shall see.
Finally, we wondered just last week why greyscale and the stone men kept coming up, and lo and behold, they came up again, this time in the scaly flesh. Or “came down” is more accurate, dropping fiendishly from the rocks looking like the love children of the Thing and Uncle Fester.
Not sure what I expected and I’m also not sure what drives their boat-attacking rage, aside from the whole rabid greyscale thing. That’s probably enough.
Jorah acquitted himself bravely, but his luck hasn’t gotten any better. That touch of greyscale he and we saw on his arm? It probably wasn’t going to impress his beloved Dany, even if she hadn’t already made wedding plans. The good news, Khaleesi, is I brought you a prize Lannister dwarf. The bad news? I’ve infected your whole Pyramid with skin-rot.
Speaking of Tyrion, he didn’t notice the affliction and one wonders: What does this mean for him on the road to Meereen? Jorah’s been manhandling him pretty consistently since the moment they met  — one more backhand and suddenly Tyrion’s trajectory becomes a good deal scalier.
Of course, it was probably headed in that direction anyway, albeit involving a slightly different kind of scale. His glimpse of a soaring Drogon, the sighting we’ve been waiting for since the trailer came out, had the stink of destiny. The sequence of their boat floating through the ruins of Valyria as the pair recited a poem about its destruction was a visually striking one, tense and reminiscent in feel of one of the original “Lord of the Rings” films.
PhotoPeter Dinklage in "Game of Thrones."Credit Helen Sloan/HBO
A few thoughts while we plumb the dark corners of the dog shed:
• So now that Reek has been confronted by someone who knew him as Theon, how do we think it will affect him? Will he spiral deeper into Reekness? Or will Sansa’s arrival and probable near-future distress rekindle whatever self-respect or valor he has left? And do we think he’ll tell Sansa the truth: that he actually didn’t kill Bran and Rickon back in Season 2?
• More dead Wildlings means “less enemies for us,” a black knight argued. “Fewer,” Stannis corrected under his breath. Last week, we learned he’s a doting father, this week a grammarian. The guy’s full of surprises. Underestimate him — on the battlefield, in the carpool lane, at a spelling bee — at your own peril. Keep reading up on White Walker killing, he tells Sam. I’ll be marching on the Boltons and hoping a giant pale warrior with a grudge doesn’t complicate things along the way.
• The Known World is a cruel place, Exhibit ZZZ: Everywhere we look, we see terrible marriages and abusive relationships. Yet one of the story’s only endearing romances, Missandei and Grey Worm, is destined to remain unsullied, so to speak, thanks to past cruelties. Here’s hoping those star-crossed kids find a way to make it happen.
• What say you? Has there ever been a show with a dimmer view of marriage? Did you get a Roman Empire vibe from Valyria? And who lets the guy who sleeps in the kennel pour the wine? Please weigh in on anything you like in the comments.
Here be spoilers and a waiter who sleeps in a kennel.Early last season I congratulated Stannis, Selyse and Melisandre for setting the record for the world’s worst dinner party. Ladies and gentlemen… I think we have a new champion!Sunday’s House Bolton feast was like that Thanksgiving when your sister brought home the dude with the face tattoo, only if that guy had killed half your family and the caterer had incinerated your baby brothers (as far as you knew). Even poor “Fat Walda” Bolton, Roose’s unfortunately monikered wife, had awkward ties as the granddaughter of Walder Frey, the host of the Red Wedding.   The fantasy epic on HBO.It was “The Real World: Winterfell” — we found out what happens when Sansa, Ramsay and everyone else stopped being polite and started getting real. Elsewhere, Jon Snow “killed the boy” in order to let his inner man grow, Tyrion had multiple scaly encounters and this show continued its assault on the institution of marriage, apparently betrothing Daenerys Targaryen to the reptilian Hizdahr zo Loraq. (Though that could be an attractive quality to a Dragon Queen.)The proposal was an intriguing capper to what was the most encouraging Dany episode we’ve seen since she arrived in Meereen. But first, back to Winterfell. Because for pure matrimonial disgrace, nothing compares to Ram-sa.Sansa at least stopped pretending she was anything other than disgusted by the whole thing. This must seem like a strange place to you, Walda said at dinner, trying to break the ice. “This isn’t a strange place. This is my home,” Sansa said. “It’s the people who are strange.”Irredeemable is more like it, and seriously Sansa, you do not know the half of it. Brutalizing and breaking your de facto adopted brother Theon was only like the eighth worst thing we’ve seen Ramsay do, and on Sunday we learned that he was conceived when his father raped his mother beneath the lynched body of her husband. So that’s not getting fixed, in other words. He was born this way.Roose told Ramsay’s origin story in a scene that was the tonal and emotional inverse of Stannis’s poignant tale for Shireen last week, though the conclusion was more or less the same. “You are my son,” Roose told Ramsay, who was visibly moved and renewed his pledge to help his father fight Stannis. Which was the point. That unborn son will do Roose no good in the battle to come — he’ll tell Ramsay whatever he needs to in order to keep him flaying folks for Team Bolton. (That said, if I were Walda, I’d be sleeping with the door locked and one eye open.)Ramsay, on his best behavior when he met Sansa a couple weeks ago, gave her a taste of the sort of treatment she can expect from now on when he tapped Reek to walk her down the aisle. It will get worse.“If you ever have trouble,” the devoted servant tells Sansa, presumably passing along Brienne’s message, “light a candle in the highest window of the broken tower.” LIGHT IT NOW, SANSA. Before your wedding night, I’m begging you.At Castle Black, Jon Snow did Jon Snow things, winning over Wildlings and alienating his fellow knights. (The big meeting scenes feel like pool feeds from a goth House of Commons.) He, Tormund and some others are headed to Hardhome, apparently, to try to persuade the free folk to come south of the wall, where they’ll be safe from the White Walkers. We’ll check in on them in more depth next time.In Meereen, the Dragon Queen finally lived up to the name, letting her young’uns torch and eat a Meereenese honcho to send a message in the wake of Ser Barristan’s killing. Message received, said a jailed Hizdahr. I was only trying to look cool earlier when I thought I was next and was all, “valar morghulis.”O.K., Dany said. In that case, let’s get married.Huh?Hizdahr didn’t expect it and neither did I. But perhaps Dany knows better than us here. Maybe I’m being overly optimistic, but the episode seemed to finally signal the sort of emergence in Dany that we’ve all been hoping for, if only to end the tedious stalemate in Meereen.Most obviously, as we noted above, we finally see the Dragon Queen use her dragons to break her enemies. Perhaps more meaningful: A woman who began this story as a matrimonial offering to a barbarian ruler is now using a political marriage to her own advantage. Perhaps it’s a bookend that  — along with the murder of the literal old guard, her caretaker and adviser Ser Barristan — marks the beginning of the end of her long gestational period as a would-be leader and conquerer of worlds.Or maybe we’ll have five more dreary Meereen episodes after this. We shall see.Finally, we wondered just last week why greyscale and the stone men kept coming up, and lo and behold, they came up again, this time in the scaly flesh. Or “came down” is more accurate, dropping fiendishly from the rocks looking like the love children of the Thing and Uncle Fester.Not sure what I expected and I’m also not sure what drives their boat-attacking rage, aside from the whole rabid greyscale thing. That’s probably enough.Jorah acquitted himself bravely, but his luck hasn’t gotten any better. That touch of greyscale he and we saw on his arm? It probably wasn’t going to impress his beloved Dany, even if she hadn’t already made wedding plans. The good news, Khaleesi, is I brought you a prize Lannister dwarf. The bad news? I’ve infected your whole Pyramid with skin-rot.Speaking of Tyrion, he didn’t notice the affliction and one wonders: What does this mean for him on the road to Meereen? Jorah’s been manhandling him pretty consistently since the moment they met  — one more backhand and suddenly Tyrion’s trajectory becomes a good deal scalier.Of course, it was probably headed in that direction anyway, albeit involving a slightly different kind of scale. His glimpse of a soaring Drogon, the sighting we’ve been waiting for since the trailer came out, had the stink of destiny. The sequence of their boat floating through the ruins of Valyria as the pair recited a poem about its destruction was a visually striking one, tense and reminiscent in feel of one of the original “Lord of the Rings” films.A few thoughts while we plumb the dark corners of the dog shed:• So now that Reek has been confronted by someone who knew him as Theon, how do we think it will affect him? Will he spiral deeper into Reekness? Or will Sansa’s arrival and probable near-future distress rekindle whatever self-respect or valor he has left? And do we think he’ll tell Sansa the truth: that he actually didn’t kill Bran and Rickon back in Season 2?• More dead Wildlings means “less enemies for us,” a black knight argued. “Fewer,” Stannis corrected under his breath. Last week, we learned he’s a doting father, this week a grammarian. The guy’s full of surprises. Underestimate him — on the battlefield, in the carpool lane, at a spelling bee — at your own peril. Keep reading up on White Walker killing, he tells Sam. I’ll be marching on the Boltons and hoping a giant pale warrior with a grudge doesn’t complicate things along the way.• The Known World is a cruel place, Exhibit ZZZ: Everywhere we look, we see terrible marriages and abusive relationships. Yet one of the story’s only endearing romances, Missandei and Grey Worm, is destined to remain unsullied, so to speak, thanks to past cruelties. Here’s hoping those star-crossed kids find a way to make it happen.• What say you? Has there ever been a show with a dimmer view of marriage? Did you get a Roman Empire vibe from Valyria? And who lets the guy who sleeps in the kennel pour the wine? Please weigh in on anything you like in the comments.