AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn Shattuck11:30 A.M. (Showtime) FRUITVALE STATION (2013) On Jan. 1, 2009, Oscar Grant III, a 22-year-old black father, was shot in the back by a white Bay Area Rapid Transit police officer on a subway platform in Oakland, Calif., his killing captured on cellphone. Ryan Coogler’s feature directorial debut reconstructs the final 24 hours in the life of Mr. Grant (played by Michael B. Jordan, above with Ariana Neal) who, after two stints in prison, had returned to selling drugs after losing his job at a supermarket because of chronic lateness. Octavia Spencer plays his mother and Melonie Diaz the mother of his daughter, with whom he’s trying to stay. Mr. Coogler’s “main intention — and his great achievement, as well as Mr. Jordan’s — is to make Oscar a fully human presence, to pay him the respect of acknowledging his complexities and contradictions,” A. O. Scott wrote in The New York Times. “The radicalism of ‘Fruitvale Station’ lies precisely here, in its refusal to turn a man into a symbol. Nearly every black man, whether or not he is president, tends to be flattened out by popular culture and the psychopathology of everyday American life, rendered as an innocent victim, a noble warrior or a menace to society. There is a dehumanizing violence in this habit, a willed, toxic blindness that ‘Fruitvale Station’ at once exposes and resists.”10:05 A.M. (Starz Cinema) L’AUBERGE ESPAGNOLE (2002) Xavier Rousseau, an uptight Parisian student played by Romain Duris, moves into a communal apartment in Barcelona and soon learns the international language of love and friendship in this comedy from Cédric Klapisch. Audrey Tautou is Xavier’s worried girlfriend; from top left, Kevin Bishop, Federico D’Anna, Kelly Reilly, Barnaby Metschurat and Cristina Brondo round out the cast. “ ‘L’Auberge Espagnole’ presents an appealing and persuasive picture of European integration, in which national differences, which once sparked military and political conflict, are preserved because they make life sexier and more interesting,” A. O. Scott wrote in The Times. “The ending, though, feels like a bit of a cop-out, as Mr. Klapisch decides that Xavier’s pleasant year abroad must yield a lesson.” That is, his job with the European Union and his freedom in Barcelona are aspects of the same phenomenon: “The transformation of Europe from a battleground to a consumerist, hedonist playground.”8 P.M. (CBS) 2 BROKE GIRLS Max (Kat Dennings) and Caroline (Beth Behrs) help open the newest branch of the High at Kennedy Airport. Sophie (Jennifer Coolidge) discovers that Oleg (Jonathan Kite) may not want to marry her for the right reasons. In “Mike & Molly,” at 8:30, Carl (Reno Wilson) decides to propose to Victoria (Katy Mixon) after having a near-death experience.10 P.M. (13) BORN TO FLY: ELIZABETH STREB VS. GRAVITY (2014) “Part of the deal is, you walk into the room and you might get a little hurt,” says Ms. Streb, a dancer and choreography in her 60s, and the creator of PopAction technique, which pushes the limits of physicality in the belief that fear might enhance experiences. “Anything that’s too safe is not action,” she adds. “Independent Lens” watches as Ms. Streb’s dancers, above, whom she calls gladiators, hurl themselves against plexiglass panes and dodge flying I-beams. “A singularly focused and avant-garde talent, Ms. Streb bends the messy rush of risk to her indomitable will,” Jeannette Catsoulis wrote in The Times. “And if wounded buildings and jarred joints follow along, they’re just the price you pay when your lifelong quest is to see human beings fly.” 10:30 P.M. (Al Jazeera America) ALI VELSHI ON TARGET Mr. Velshi begins his new, nightly current affairs program by exploring the debt crisis in Greece in an interview with Mohamed A. El-Erian, the chief economic adviser at the financial services company Allianz. He also speaks with Allen P. Cappelli, a Metropolitan Transportation Authority board member, about the decision to ban political advertising on New York subways, buses and commuter railroads. What’s Streaming NowWE THE ECONOMY More than 80 actors, artists and experts — among them Amy Poehler, Adrian Grenier, Werner Herzog, Jeffrey Sachs and Robert F. Kennedy Jr. — help create a primer in American economics by explaining 20 key topics in this series, whose producers include the Microsoft co-founder Paul G. Allen and the filmmaker Morgan Spurlock. (crackle.com) KATHRYN SHATTUCKAdvertisement