AdvertisementSupported byThe TV WatchBy Alessandra StanleyIt is possible to be a pregnant virgin. That was the starting joke of the CW’s “Jane the Virgin.” The first season will end on Monday, having delivered another miracle: A TV show that taps into the oldest stereotypes about Hispanic-Americans and turns them upside down.“Jane the Virgin” is a delicious and dizzyingly arch look at three generations of Latinas in Miami — a screwball romantic comedy served up as a spoof of a telenovela.And the main characters’ ethnicity is both crucial and beside the point.The heroine, Jane (Gina Rodriguez), is a waitress and aspiring writer who took a vow of no sex before marriage. She has a fiancé, but because of a medical mix-up, Jane becomes artificially inseminated with the sperm of the tall, dark and handsome man she has a crush on, who is also her boss.The story is adapted from a Venezuelan soap, “Juana la Virgen,” but the American version is a farcical fairy tale. The set design is as whimsical as the script: The brightly colored Miami hotel interiors look as if they were designed by Tory Burch on psilocybin.A Latin-lovery narrator annotates the action with sardonic asides. Tongue-in-cheek emojis, info bubbles, text message exchanges and hashtags serve as a kind of pop-up Greek chorus.In one episode, Jane’s grandmother Alba (Ivonne Coll) is admitted to the hospital after an accident, and is forced to reveal that she is in the country illegally and could face deportation. The screen flashed #immigrationreform.The approach is irreverent but also familiar and intimate. “Jane the Virgin” uses all that ironical distance to draw viewers in close.Characters sometimes speak in Spanish, but their ethnicity is barely mentioned, just as race is rarely mentioned in “Empire,” a look at sex, money and power in the hip-hop business. That Fox hit is one of the few network shows with an almost entirely African-American cast, yet race isn’t the driving force. The music world is a glamorous milieu, much the way the Colorado oil business was the backdrop of “Dynasty.”“Looking,” an HBO series about gay men in San Francisco which just ended after two seasons, was not as funny as “Jane the Virgin” or as fun as “Empire” but it too offered total immersion into a homogeneous culture — the one thing no one is seeking on “Looking” is a straight male.And that’s a noticeable shift. In earlier days, when diversity on television was relatively unusual, shows often resorted to making race, gender or sexual orientation a plot point; minorities served as catalysts for dramatic tension or comic misunderstandings.Stereotypes were underscored and Latin women in particular were cast mostly as maids or sexpots — Rosario on “Will & Grace,” or Gloria on “Modern Family.”“George Lopez,” which ran on ABC from 2002 to 2007, had a mostly Hispanic cast and made a point of avoiding easy caricatures, but it was still tethered by the conventions and clichés of the multiple camera sitcom.Even now, plenty of sitcoms still use characters’ origins to gin up a fish-out-of-water conceit. ABC alone introduced three sitcoms this past fall that pivot on a cultural collision. On “Cristela,” which was canceled last week, a Latina law student interns at a fancy, all-white law firm. On “Fresh Off the Boat,” an Asian-American family tries to navigate the alien world of Orlando, Fla. “Black-ish” is the best of the lot, possibly because it has a fresher, more playful take on assimilation: A well-to-do African-American father thinks his kids are so blended into the rootless affluence of Los Angeles that he has to tutor them about their heritage.“Ugly Betty,” an ABC series that began in 2006, was a loose adaptation of a Colombian soap opera, and it had much the same mix of sweetness and snark as “Jane the Virgin.” But even on that show, the heroine’s minority status was stressed. Betty was a dowdy Mexican-American from Queens trying to make it as an assistant at a snooty fashion magazine.Lifetime’s “Devious Maids” makes fun of stereotypes but is rooted in the class divide between snooty, white employers and their Hispanic domestic helpers.On “Jane,” the main character is a waitress; her mother, Xiomara (Andrea Navedo), is a sexy chanteuse, but they don’t confront social prejudice or try to overcome their origins. It’s Miami — almost everyone has Latin roots.Mainly, Jane is a pregnant virgin torn between a nice, boring police detective, Michael (Brett Dier), and Rafael (Justin Baldoni), a dashing and married hotel owner. Rafael and his sexy, deceitful wife, Petra (Yael Grobglas), divorce, but Petra sticks around to make trouble, including having affairs with good and evil twins.)Everybody on that show has preposterous romantic entanglements, including Xiomara, a single mother who rekindles her romance with Jane’s long-lost father, Rogelio (Jaime Camil), a hilariously vain, dimwitted star of a popular telenovela. (“I take my craft very seriously, which you can see by my use of the word ‘craft,’  ” Rogelio says.)Even the deeply religious Alba — who replies in Spanish even when spoken to in English and is so devout and prudish she made Jane promise to remain a virgin until marriage — has a secret crush. Unfortunately, no one told Alba that the courtly gentleman is a priest. Religion, like race or class, is treated as just another organic part of life, not a teaching moment.“Jane the Virgin” is an inspired swirl of Latin music, romance and telenovela kitsch that takes its ethnic identity as a given. And that makes it a show that shouldn’t be taken for granted.Advertisement