AdvertisementSupported byBy Corinna da Fonseca-WollheimWith its Bach, Revisited series, the Miller Theater at Columbia University says it seeks to prompt a dialogue between contemporary composers and this Baroque master. But recently that conversation has been faltering. Writing in The New York Times, of a concert pairing Bach with the composer Michael Gordon, the critic James R. Oestreich had trouble making out any connection. “How,” he asked, “did the Bach half relate to the Gordon half?” On Friday the Russian-born composer Sofia Gubaidulina, the subject of the final installment of this series, revealed her affinity for Bach more readily. But this time it was Bach who remained tongue-tied in performances that came across as academic and dry. The performers were Kristian Bezuidenhout, a star virtuoso on historical keyboards, and members of the new-music powerhouse Ensemble Signal, conducted by Brad Lubman. The chemistry fell flat in their joint reading of Bach’s Triple Concerto in A minor with the flutist Kelli Kathman and the violinist Courtney Orlando playing the solo parts alongside Mr. Bezuidenhout. Even with the Signal musicians playing one to a part, with feathery bowing and minimal vibrato, Mr. Bezuidenhout’s harpsichord could barely be heard. And in the fast movements the music never quite took flight, with any spontaneity dampened by Mr. Lubman’s conducting, which was unnecessary in the first place, surely, with so small an ensemble. A string arrangement of the Ricercar à 6 from Bach’s “Musical Offering” (by Torsten Johann), played with lean sound and frugal expression, also suggested that Baroque music is not Signal’s forte. Bach’s Ricercar inspired a violin concerto by Ms. Gubaidulina, “Offertorium,” but that work was not on the Miller program: a conversation starter left dangling. Mr. Bezuidenhout’s brilliant technique was able to shine in Lars Ulrik Mortensen’s arrangement for harpsichord of Bach’s Chaconne from the D minor Partita for solo violin. But though Mr. Bezuidenhout’s rendition was dazzling, Bach’s searching music lost much of its emotional muscle played on a keyboard, with none of the heroic struggle and pathos inherent in a violinist’s efforts to build worlds out of a lone voice. Struggle and pathos were in no short supply in two works by Ms. Gubaidulina that openly pay homage to Bach. The pianist Daniel Pesca performed her student-day Chaconne with rich sonic contrasts and solemn articulation of the eight-bar bass line that anchors it. He switched to harpsichord when he joined his fellow Signal players for Ms. Gubaidulina’s “Meditation on the Bach Chorale: Vor deinen Thron tret ich hiermit,” an atmospheric, ruminating work with a strong obsessive streak. Bach’s chorale prelude is picked apart, distorted and transformed in a series of dissonant gestures that, now heated, now wispy, create an irresistible smoky turbulence. Here the Signal players were in their element, bringing finesse and personality to Ms. Gubaidulina’s ingenious arsenal of extended techniques, including a light gurgling sound created by rubbing the metal screw of the bow on a cello’s strings. Like Bach, Ms. Gubaidulina delights in numerological puzzles. She borrowed his system of assigning numbers to letters to write her own name — Sofia — into the score alongside his: an endearingly groupie-like practice, more redolent of fervent one-sided infatuation than of the placid meditation suggested by the title.Advertisement