AdvertisementSupported byBy Stephen HoldenCarolyn Montgomery-Forant, a singer, songwriter and humorist who recently returned to the cabaret stage after an extended sabbatical, has the gift of gab. When this smart, complicated storyteller sings, you don’t pay attention to the notes as much as you follow the performance’s conversational flow. Although she has a reasonably strong singing voice, what captures your attention is the clarity and gusto with which she puts her personal stamp on lyrics, whether her own or someone else’s. At the Laurie Beechman Theater on Friday evening, where she appeared with a pop-jazz ensemble led by the pianist Jon Weber, her new show, “Visible Phoenix,” titled after an original song, had the energy and spirit of a late-night party at which she was the guest of honor. That song, which cheerfully notes, “you’re born with an expiration date,” marks Ms. Montgomery-Forant as a realist. One indication of her down-to-earth attitude was her deflationary treatment of “If Ever I Would Leave You,” from “Camelot,” which she delivered as a ’50s-style doo-wop ballad about parental devotion, with three backup singers. A streak of headstrong sensuality ran through a program that included Amanda McBroom’s “Hot in Here,” about late-night cruising, and Rupert Holmes’s witty “Lunch Hour,” whose diners are on the prowl for more than just a sandwich. Her original songs were a mixed bag. “Mean Girls” didn’t go nearly far enough in skewering its target to register. Most, but not all, of the songs were leavened by her gregarious sense of humor.John Prine’s starkly bleak “Angel From Montgomery,” and Richard Maltby and David Shire’s “Life Story,” a feminist’s turbulent biography, were intense, carefully shaded portraits. By the end of the show, I felt I had absorbed the confessions of several guests at a celebration whose revelers opened up and spilled their deepest feelings. Performances continue through June 12 at the Laurie Beechman Theater at the West Bank Cafe, 407 West 42nd Street, Clinton; 212-695-6909, westbankcafe.com.Advertisement