By ANTHONY TOMMASINIMAY 10, 2015
It takes gumption for a composer to write a one-act opera intending it to be paired with “Bluebeard’s Castle,” Bartok’s chilling one-act masterpiece.But why shouldn’t a composer think big? Especially when that composer is the formidable Hungarian modernist Peter Eotvos.On Friday night, Alan Gilbert, continuing a hot streak of exciting commissions for the New York Philharmonic, conducted the American premiere of Mr. Eotvos’s 10th opera, “Senza Sangue” (“Without Blood”), in a concert performance at Avery Fisher Hall. (Mr. Gilbert recently conducted its world premiere on tour with the Philharmonic in Cologne, Germany.) “Senza Sangue,” based on a 2002 Italian novella by Alessandro Baricco, tells of a troubled woman bent on seeking revenge over the men who murdered her father and brother during a civil war in an unspecified country.In the molten concert performance Mr. Gilbert led, “Senza Sangue” seemed a plausible candidate for a double bill with Bartok’s “Bluebeard’s Castle.” Both are psychological thrillers written for just two singers: a baritone and a soprano (or mezzo-soprano). Bartok’s opera has a Hungarian libretto while Mr. Eotvos’s, true to its source, employs an Italian one, adapted by Mari Mezei. The instrumentation is the same but for Bartok’s use of an organ.AdvertisementMr. Eotvos has never fit into any stylistic camp of contemporary music. That ambiguity is exactly what made his score for “Senza Sangue” so engrossing. An orchestral introduction establishes the forbidding mood of the story and the work’s musical language. Subdued, weighty, elusive sonorities spread throughout the orchestra, and spread is the right word: Mr. Eotvos has uncanny skill at giving sound a spatial dimension. The music groans and heaves, punctured with eerie glissandos. Eventually sound masses swell and move in waves that creep higher and turn cosmic.The Baricco novella begins with a terrifying scene in which a father, seeing a group of hostile men approaching his house, tells his son to arm himself but orders his young daughter to hide under a trapdoor on the floor, in a cramped space dug in the dirt. The attackers murder the father and son. But the youngest of them, just 20, finding the girl, keeps her presence secret and leaves her be.AdvertisementThe opera picks up the story decades after this event. That girl, Nina, has become a wealthy woman, unstable yet coolly determined. She has come to a town square where an elderly man sells lottery tickets at a kiosk. He is the long-ago attacker who let her live. The horrific past events are recalled through strained, cagey conversation between the two characters called The Woman, sung here by the veteran mezzo-soprano Anne Sofie von Otter, and The Man, the solid baritone Russell Braun.Much of the torturous emotional heft of the story comes through in the orchestra writing, and the scoring can be thick and overpowering. If Ms. von Otter sounded a little pale at times, she sang with affecting expressivity and anguish. She was at her best during a wrenching monologue, a rumination on the instinct in life to return to whatever has broken us. Nina wants to fathom this man who spared her, even more than exacting revenge.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Man has been anticipating this confrontation for years as his comrades from that incident died under mysterious circumstances, because, it is suggested, of Nina’s machinations. Mr. Braun achingly conveyed the haunted man’s panic and defensiveness.Mr. Gilbert emphasized the myriad colors and fitful agitation of this inexorable 45-minute score. Taking a bow, Mr. Eotvos looked gratified by the rousing ovation.To begin the program, Mr. Gilbert conducted Schubert’s 24-minute “Unfinished” Symphony, followed by an intermission. Though I didn’t see the logic behind this pairing, the Schubert performance was taut, transparent and somberly beautiful.A version of this review appears in print on May 11, 2015, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline: A Revenge-Tale Thriller in Myriad Colors and Sounds.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.