AdvertisementSupported byBy Brian SeibertAs kids and adults settled into their seats at the New Victory Theater on Saturday, rock anthems by Bon Jovi and Guns N’ Roses set the mood. At the same time, projected text informed the audience about the disproportionate incarceration rates of African-American youth. A police officer jokingly arrested an audience member for using his cellphone, and then a hip-hop dance show began.This was an apt introduction to “LUV: American-Style” by Rennie Harris RHAW, the junior company of the Philadelphia hip-hop master Rennie Harris. The production’s mix of seemingly incongruous elements — hip-hop dancing to white rock, a cartoonish treatment of a deadly serious subject — is the source both of its intense excitement and its incoherence.The show tells the story of Brandyn, a big, sweet high school kid (Mr. Harris’s son Brandyn) initially too shy to talk to his crush (Katia Cruz). He has a sidekick nicknamed Mouse (the effortlessly acrobatic Shafeek Westbrook), a lovable loudmouth who gets beat up for lunch money by the school bully and plays it for comedy. Everyone is harassed by the black cop from the preshow bit, Officer McKnight (Rodney Mason), a buffoonish authority figure who borrows phrases from the Jack Nicholson character in “A Few Good Men” like, “You can’t handle the truth!” (Supposedly set in the present, the show is laden with nostalgic Generation X references.)The opening scenes of high school life are staged and danced with irresistible energy and skill, if also with way too much slow motion. The hip-hop treatment of “Smells Like Teen Spirit” and “Under Pressure” is thrillingly fresh. When Brandyn is arrested, to the sounds of “Bohemian Rhapsody,” the taciturn character expresses his pain and confusion — he’s committed no crime — in hyper-articulate pops. Plugging into the current of electric guitar, he’s like a marionette jolted by high voltage. It’s terrifying. But after Brandyn goes to prison, the story, already dramaturgically muddled and derivative, falls apart, and the broad comedy and dancing (some fine vintage boogaloo) feel terribly out of place. There’s a point to how the schoolyard dynamics are repeated behind bars, but the way that Brandyn gains his freedom only through a fairy-tale reprieve seems to tell the audience that it can’t handle the truth. In a program note, the elder Mr. Harris presents “LUV” as “light during the dark times.” That’s always welcome, but he and his crew are capable of more powerful illumination.“LUV: American-Style” continues through Sunday at the New Victory Theater, 209 West 42nd Street, Manhattan; 646-223-3010, newvictory.org. Advertisement