By DAVE ITZKOFFMAY 10, 2015
Mr. Corden is the host of the “Late Late Show With James Corden” on CBS. The questions and answers below have been edited and condensed. You’re less than two months into your hosting duties. Do you feel you’ve got the hang of the gig?I’m thrilled at the response. But it’s really about September and [Stephen] Colbert starting [at “Late Show”]. This is just us finding our feet, and it really feels like we found them, and know what they look like, and now we can start running.Are creating viral videos an important part of your show’s mission? Can this be overdone?It’s a weird thing, this idea of things going viral. You cannot be chasing that, because it’s futile. If you just want to have a great viral clip, I’ll just strip naked and run down Sunset Boulevard. That will get loads of views. On our show, all we try and do is go: Who’s on the show? What’s the most fun thing we can do tonight? And in that respect, it’s no different than what anyone making a successful late night show has tried to do.AdvertisementIn preparing for your show, did you think about how it would fit together with David Letterman’s “Late Show”?AdvertisementWe would talk about it in terms of atmosphere, and we’d go, what’s the show that’s on before us? It’s “Late Show With David Letterman” and it’s going to come from a Broadway theater that seats about 400 to 500 people. OK, well, where would you go after you’ve been to the theater? You’d go to somewhere that feels more intimate. So then we were like, What if we have a bar, and we’ll bring the audience closer? And then what if we have all of our guests out at the same time? I don’t know if we’re right. We could be very, very wrong.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Do you expect a recalibration after Stephen Colbert takes over?Of course. Our job is to sit on the same seesaw as him, but the other end. No one starts watching television at 12:30. No one goes, “Oh! It’s 12:30. Let’s put the TV on.” Our viewers are inherited from the show before. I think. So I’m really excited to see Stephen’s show. I pinch myself at the thought that our little show is going to follow David Letterman’s last-ever show. And then we’re going to follow Stephen Colbert’s first-ever show.As they delve further into celebrity comedy sketches and other out-of-the-box segments, are late night shows losing sight of what they’re meant to do?I don’t think so. I think we’re just living in a different world now. When my dad went to the Gulf War, I remember him saying to me, “When I signed up to join the Royal Air Force, it never once entered my head that there would be another war.” That [era of] snarkiness, that thing of skewering people and being a little more snipe-y, it was very comfortable to watch those things then. I feel like now – the post-9/11 of it all – is that before people fall asleep at night, they want someone to say, “I know it’s tough but it’s going to be all right, and we’re going to try to make you smile.”Are you feeling optimistic about the future of the genre?I’m realizing that people have their time and they have their guy. In the same way that you have a band: People just love U2, and they go, “This is my band, and they understand me and they get me. And I don’t like Charli XCX.” It is such an intimate and personal connection that you’re making. But at some point, we’ll be sitting somewhere, sharing a drink, going, “Ugh, when Fallon used to come out, he wouldn’t do any of this! He wouldn’t do any of this 3-D virtual camera stuff. He’d just come out and do lip-sync battles, and they were the great days.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.