

      By DANIEL MCDERMON

UPDATED November 9, 2015

The past 10 years have seen a steady increase in the top prices that collectors are willing to pay at auction for singular works by the most sought-after artists. 

Here is a look back at some highlights.
Related Article
In recent auction seasons, Christie’s has focused on building sales around top-tier works that can command prices well into nine figures. Monday night’s themed sale, “The Artist’s Muse,” was built around this work, which was estimated at $100 million. Play our art auction game »Christie’s New YorkThe price in a May sale at Christie’s is the highest on record for a work of art sold at auction, and was well over its estimate of $140 million.Christie’s New YorkThis bronze figure had been in the same private collection for 45 years.Christie’s New York 2015The painting was purchased by Elaine Wynn, a co-founder of the Wynn casino empire. (Adjusted for inflation, the price is approximately $143.5 million.)Christie’s New YorkThis work is one of four double-panel car-crash works that Warhol made in 1963. (Adjusted for inflation: $105.3 million.)Sotheby’s New YorkMunch made four versions of “The Scream.” Three are now in Norwegian museums; this was the only one still in private hands. (Adjusted for inflation, the price was about $122.6 million.)Sotheby’s New YorkThe painting was sold along with several other works from the collection of David Pincus, a Philadelphia clothing manufacturer, who died in 2011. (Adjusted for inflation: about $88.9 million.)Christie’s New YorkPicasso created this work in a single day in March 1932. (Adjusted for inflation, the price was about $114.6 million.)Christie’s New York“Walking Man I” was cast in an edition of six, with four artist’s proofs. It was originally intended to stand outside Chase Manhattan Plaza in downtown Manhattan, but the installation was never realized. (Adjusted for inflation: $112.3 million.)Sotheby’s LondonThe painting was sold in May 2008, in a moment of high anxiety for the auction market, as the economy began to falter. (Adjusted for inflation: about $94.1 million.)Sotheby’s New YorkThe buyer of this work, still unidentified, was not familiar to auction-house employees, who usually recognize those who are competing at bid levels this high. (Adjusted for inflation: $110.8 million.)Sotheby’s New YorkThis portrait sold just months after the cosmetics magnate and arts philanthropist Ronald Lauder bought a related work, “Adele Bloch-Bauer I” (1907) in a private sale for $135 million. (Adjusted for inflation, “Portait of Adele Bloch-Bauer II”  would be about $102.34. The adjusted price of the earlier portrait, now on display at the Neue Galerie, would be about $157.2 million.)Christie’s New YorkAuction prices include fees.Advertisement