In 1977, two London art dealers bought a 13th-century “Madonna and Child” that they believed had been painted by an early-Renaissance master, Duccio di Buoninsegna. Ownership shares were divided among several partners, but in 1986, the work went missing from a vault in Geneva.Its location was unknown until January 2014 when Sotheby’s put the item up for auction in New York, identifying it as the work of a “Florentine painter within the ambit of Cimabue,” himself an important Italian master, according to a lawsuit filed by the federal authorities last year.The court papers said that the work had been stolen by one of the co-owners and that it had been spotted as being up for sale by the Art Recovery Group, a London investigative agency. Sotheby’s withdrew the painting from the auction, federal officials seized it, and the consignor and the heirs to the original owners went to court. On Tuesday, the parties agreed to a settlement in which they will receive the painting back and will divide any proceeds from an intended future sale, according to Christopher A. Marinello, head of the Art Recovery Group. As for the work’s attribution, Sotheby’s last year said the work “undoubtedly shares an affinity with models by Duccio di Buoninsegna” but estimated its value at $600,000 to $800,000. In 2004, the Metropolitan Museum of Art paid more than $45 million for a Duccio the size of a sheet of typing paper.Mr. Marinello said the owners’ belief in the Duccio attribution was supported by a 1984 report in Apollo magazine by Alastair Smart, a British fine arts professor who died in 1992. In the report, Mr. Smart said he thought that the work had been painted by the Italian master.  “It’s rare to recover a work that has been missing so long,” said Leila A. Amineddoleh, the lawyer who negotiated the settlement with her colleague, David J. Galluzzo.  A version of this article appears in print on 05/14/2015, on page C3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Owners to Recover Missing Painting.