By KATHRYN SHATTUCKMAY 12, 2015
4:10 P.M. (Cinemax) THE PLAYER (1992) In this Oscar-nominated movie by Robert Altman, Griffin Mill (Tim Robbins), who manages production at a Hollywood studio, tries to figure out who is writing him poison-pen postcards while he fends off a young genius (Peter Gallagher) rumored to be his replacement. When the author of the hate mail — a screenwriter (Vincent D’Onofrio) Griffin failed to get back to — turns up dead, Griffin becomes a suspect, partly for having fallen in love with the writer’s girlfriend (Greta Scacchi, above with Mr. Robbins). Whoopi Goldberg and Lyle Lovett play the detectives who make Griffin squirm. “As a satire, ‘The Player’ tickles,” Vincent Canby wrote in The New York Times. “It doesn’t draw blood.” Mr. Altman’s most subversive message, he added, “is not that it’s possible to get away with murder in Hollywood, but that the most grievous sin, in Hollywood terms anyway, is to make a film that flops.”12:50 P.M. (HBO2) CHARLIE AND THE CHOCOLATE FACTORY (2005) Tim Burton’s sugar rush, based on the book by Roald Dahl, stars Johnny Depp, left, as an oddly sinister candy maker and Freddie Highmore as a boy who wants nothing more than to swim in chocolate. Well, who wouldn’t? Despite burdening Willy Wonka with a psychological back story, “there is simply too much pleasure to be found in Wonka’s world to get too hung up about his relationship with his dad,” A. O. Scott wrote in The Times. “The real lesson of ‘Charlie and the Chocolate Factory’ is — or should be — that pleasure and curiosity are their own rewards.”8:30 P.M. (ABC Family) DARK SHADOWS (2012) Johnny Depp summons the spirit of the romantic vampire hero Barnabas Collins in Tim Burton’s revisiting of a soap opera from the 1960s and early ’70s. Eva Green, right, plays the maid Angelique, who paws at Barnabas; Bella Heathcote is Josette, who runs off with his heart. Three’s a crowd, and the witchy Angelique casts a spell that leaves Josette dead and Barnabas in a deep grave, where, after 200 years of entombment, he awakens in 1972. “Barnabas’s liberation does the same for Mr. Depp’s performance, and it’s delightful to watch how the actor handles the vampire’s readjustment to the world of the living, which, after he has thrown back some invigorating human Slurpees and faced down a ‘demon’ (a car), he does with both lofty entitlement and abject bewilderment,” Manohla Dargis wrote in The Times. “ ‘Dark Shadows’ isn’t among Mr. Burton’s most richly realized works, but it’s very enjoyable, visually sumptuous and, despite its lugubrious source material and a sporadic tremor of violence, surprisingly effervescent.” She added, “And while there may not be any deeper resonance lurking in his ‘Dark Shadows’ — the show first surfaced in the middle of the Vietnam War, when real horror was playing out daily in the news — Mr. Burton’s gift for deviant beauty and laughter has its own liberating power.”10 P.M. (TV Land) YOUNGER Liza (Sutton Foster) flirts with the idea of dating someone more age-appropriate when the publisher (Peter Hermann) asks her to babysit. Kelsey (Hilary Duff) prepares to accompany the author Anton Bjornberg (Thorbjorn Harr) to an awards ceremony.Advertisement10:30 P.M. (Comedy Central) INSIDE AMY SCHUMER Amy directs a pizza commercial, interviews a gigolo and says she’s sorry.11 P.M. (CUNY) THE STOLER REPORT The producers Barbara Whitman, Kristin Caskey and Mike Isaacson, along with Paul Libin, an owner of Circle in the Square Theater, trace the journey of the show “Fun Home” from the Public Theater to Broadway.AdvertisementWhat’s Streaming NowMAGICAL UNIVERSE (2014) Jeremy Workman follows the octogenarian artist Al Carbee, who died in 2005, as he goes through his daily routine of constructing and photographing intricate dioramas starring Barbie. “Mr. Carbee’s work has a professional polish and a svelte pop beauty, and his softly voiced, sincere commentary and the opaque video quality suggest a dreamy public-access TV show,” Nicolas Rapold wrote in The Times. “But while Mr. Workman evidently respects Mr. Carbee’s talent, he also frames his movie as a trite narrative about a kind of lovably odd acquaintance who comes out of his shell, without many incisive ideas about shaping or broadening the material.” (Netflix) KATHRYN SHATTUCKA version of this schedule appears in print on May 12, 2015, on Page C7 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Tuesday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.