AdvertisementSupported byBy Mike HaleThe Irish actor Chris O’Dowd has kept a full and varied schedule the last few years — starring in the British cult-favorite sitcom “The I.T. Crowd,” playing Brendan Gleeson’s antagonist in the grim indie feature “Calvary,” voicing Dr. Cockroach in the Nickelodeon series “Monsters vs. Aliens,” popping up in “Thor: The Dark World.” But his passion project has clearly been “Moone Boy,” the winsome little Irish comedy he writes (with Nick Vincent Murphy) and stars in. The show’s third and final season, the entirety of which is available on Wednesday on Hulu, is even more of an O’Dowd production — he directed all six episodes.On-screen, Mr. O’Dowd is actually the second banana in this semiautobiographical show, which is set in the Irish town of Boyle (where he grew up) and by Season 3 has arrived in the early 1990s. He plays Sean Murphy, the towering, eager, slightly pathetic imaginary friend of young Martin Moone (David Rawle), a schoolboy whose sunny disposition and complete obliviousness to the opinions of others are enabled by Sean’s dogged encouragement.Mr. Rawle, now 14, has been marvelous throughout the show’s run, and he’s on form in the early episodes of Season 3 as Martin pays a visit to his sketchy Uncle Danny (Steve Wall) in Dublin and learns the joys of petty shoplifting at home in Boyle. He moves seamlessly among Martin’s customary modes: blissful dreaminess, nervous scheming and slowly growing alarm when his absurd plans go sideways.“Moone Boy” is at heart a standard chaotic-family sitcom, with Martin under the thumb of his terminally blasé sisters and the siblings mortified by their bumbling, well-meaning parents. And its retrospective structure — narration is supplied not by the main character but by his imaginary friend — is reminiscent of American shows from “The Wonder Years” to “The Goldbergs.” But the show is more imaginative and detailed than others of its type, with a loopy idiosyncrasy that trumps synthetic American quirkiness, and its offhand, seemingly throwaway comic touches come with a dash of Irish poetry. When a family of travelers moved into the field next door to the Moones in Season 2 (amid many whispered admonitions not to use the word “Gypsy”), and Martin received his first kiss from their wise-beyond-her-years daughter, Sean appeared next to him reciting passionately from the great, bittersweet Irish comedy “The Playboy of the Western World.” The new season — which, under Mr. O’Dowd’s direction, feels a touch more prosaic than its predecessors — focuses more on other Moone family members and on Martin’s irrepressibly pompous nonimaginary friend, Padraic. This is all to the good, given the fine performances of Ian O’Reilly as Padraic and Deirdre O’Kane and Peter McDonald as Martin’s parents. Mr. McDonald’s Liam Moone, in particular, is a winning creation, a clean-cut, mostly mild-mannered Irish version of Homer Simpson.The engine of the show remains the relationship between the adult but childlike and insecure Sean and the immature but wise and impervious Martin, who between them form one perfectly happy person despite the imperfections of family, country and decade. As Sean says when Padraic appears to have fled his squabbling parents: “Why would anyone run away from Boyle? That just makes no sense.”Advertisement