AdvertisementSupported byBy Stephen HoldenIf the quirky world of New York cabaret were a high school class, Jennifer Sheehan would qualify for valedictorian, prom queen and the person most likely to succeed. Her new show, “Stardust: A Night in the Cosmos,” which she performed at 54 Below on Saturday, is a leap forward for a performer who initially evoked a demure, traditional ingénue playing by the rules. “A Night in the Cosmos” is much more than a collection of love songs about romantic stargazing and the dreamy contemplation of heavenly orbs. It is a speculative, poetic musical treatise on interstellar travel wound around the story of Voyager 1, the NASA spacecraft. The program, which began with “Stairway to the Stars” and ended with an a cappella rendition of “Star Dust,” is a wonder of craftsmanship that took the audience on an exhilarating journey into the unknown with Carl Sagan serving as a conceptual space captain.Accompanying Ms. Sheehan were the pianist James Followell, Steven Bargonetti on guitar, Jered Egan on bass and Dan Gross on percussion, with Mr. Bargonetti the crucial textural colorist.Vocally, Ms. Sheehan is a straightforward pop singer whose strength is her pure, lovely lower register. She has exquisite taste in songs and their placement in a set that includes Melody Gardot’s “If the Stars Were Mine”; Joni Mitchell’s “Moon at the Window”; and a passionately sung version of Maxwell Anderson and Kurt Weill’s mind-spinning “Lost in the Stars.” Ms. Sheehan also danced in a sinuous, undulating style for “Caravan.”Capping the trip was “Henya,” an eerie exploration into “the blue of me and you where quietly I’m torn in two,” with music by Ambrose Akinmusire and lyrics by Gretchen Parlato. Even the all-purpose feel-good song “What a Wonderful World” took on new life as an evocation of contemplating Earth from afar. Enthralling is the word.Jennifer Sheehan appears through May 20 at 54 Below, 254 West 54th Street, Manhattan; 646-476-3551, 54below.com. Advertisement