AdvertisementSupported byBy Anthony TommasiniThe novelist George Sand, who had a volatile 10-year relationship with Chopin, used to quip to mutual friends in Paris that Chopin was more Polish than Poland.To Sand and her circle it must have seemed so. Chopin had a lifelong cultural and emotional connection to his homeland. Yet his father was French, a translator and educator who moved to Poland, married a Polish woman and raised a family there. Seeking a musically richer environment, Chopin left Warsaw at 20, eventually settled in Paris and never set foot in Poland again. He fit comfortably into the world of Parisian salons. (He died at 39 in 1849.) Recently, two major pianists, Emanuel Ax and Stephen Hough, explored the French side of Chopin. That their programs were conceptually so similar was most likely a coincidence. On Thursday at Alice Tully Hall, Mr. Ax, playing with his customary elegance and wonderful impetuosity, presented Chopin within the heritage of French music, offering works by Bizet, Rameau and Debussy in the first half, and then taking on the four dazzling Chopin scherzos. On Saturday at Carnegie Hall, Mr. Hough gave technically superb and rhapsodic accounts of the four Chopin ballades, placing them in the center of a program that began and ended with Debussy, including two works that, as it happened, Mr. Ax also played: the 1903 suite “Estampes” (“Prints”) and the seductive, dancing and unabashedly carnal “L’Isle Joyeuse” (“The Joyous Island”), completed in 1904.Mr. Hough, also a composer, is a lively writer who maintains a newsy blog. Commenting on this program, he describes both Chopin and Debussy as “inventors of sonority,” composers who “changed the way we hear the sound of the piano.” I agree. It also strikes me that living in Paris, apart from the cities where the great Germanic heritage dominated, emboldened Chopin’s instincts as a composer. The imposing shadow of Beethoven the monumental symphonist meant nothing to Chopin. He reveled in writing sonorous ballades, dreamy nocturnes, bittersweet mazurkas and personal pieces. Mr. Ax began with a vibrant account of a rarity: Bizet’s “Variations Chromatiques,” an elaborate set of variations on a stern theme, music that nods to Liszt in its explorations of daring chromatic harmony. He shifted to a Baroque pioneer of French keyboard music, Rameau, playing articulate, vividly characterized excerpts from “Nouvelles Suites de Pièces de Clavecin.” It was an inspired idea to play Debussy’s stately “Hommage à Rameau.” He excelled in the three pieces of Debussy’s “Estampes,” especially the whirlwind flights of “Jardins Sous la Pluie.” Mr. Ax ended the first half with “L’Isle Joyeuse,” keeping the dance reined in at first, then building slowly to the ecstatic final outbreak.Debussy, who revered Chopin and loved the milky harmonies and lush colorings of his piano music, prepared an edition of the composer’s works for the publisher Durand. Having just heard all that French music, especially the Debussy, I was primed to detect hints of watery French-style sonorities and lacy textures in the Chopin scherzos, qualities that came through in Mr. Ax’s performances. The first three are among Chopin’s most intensely dramatic, brilliantly pianistic pieces. There was plenty of fire in Mr. Ax’s playing, though he brought silken sound to the wistfully lyrical middle section of the first scherzo and magisterial beauty to the contrasting episode of the third. Best of all was the Scherzo No. 4 in E, a playful piece with a coy theme that keeps breaking into bursts of light chords leaping up the keyboard and spiraling runs. Mr. Hough opened with Debussy’s “La Plus que Lente” (“More Than Slow”), a piece beholden to French salon music, though Mr. Hough had it sounding sublime in his refined performance. He gave a richly colorful account of “Estampes” and brought charm galore to Debussy’s “Children’s Corner” suite. In a program note, he suggested that Chopin’s ballades are “epic tales in scope, if not in length; operas in miniature,” a quality captured in his performances. For all the contrasts between frenzied outbursts and lyrical episodes, a compelling narrative line ran through each piece.After these recitals the Chopin-Debussy connection seemed undeniable. I’d love to hear, say, an evening devoted to preludes: one book of Debussy’s, and all 24 of Chopin’s. Mr. Ax? Mr. Hough? Anyone?Advertisement