By MICHAEL WHITEMAY 11, 2015
LONDON — When an opera company finds itself in trouble, there’s always Gilbert and Sullivan. Having been in serious trouble for months, it was lucky that the English National Opera had plans for a new production of “The Pirates of Penzance,” which opened on Saturday and has already proved so popular that the run has been extended. Say what you like about this repertoire, it sells.But there’s an added reason for the box-office excitement. This production, playing until July 4, is a first attempt at opera by the playwright and film and stage director Mike Leigh, whose credits include the films “Mr. Turner” and “Secrets & Lies,” and the play “Abigail’s Party.” Mr. Leigh also directed the Gilbert and Sullivan biopic “Topsy-Turvy.”“Topsy-Turvy” was released in 1999, so it has been quite a wait. And although Mr. Leigh has meanwhile become president of the Sir Arthur Sullivan Society and the W.S. Gilbert Society, he has never actually worked in lyric theater — partly because he likes to write his own material, but also because of his painstaking rehearsal methods, which aren’t tailored to opera companies’ schedules.But English National in recent years has made a point of welcoming established West End/Broadway/film directors with no opera experience, in the hopes of bringing fresh vision to a potentially closed world. Although it has been a high-risk policy — with flops like Mike Figgis’s “Lucrezia Borgia” that failed to recognize the degree to which opera is a self-referencing culture with its own rules about story-telling, pace and movement — it has also produced startling work from mavericks like Terry Gilliam with a natural instinct for the medium. Mr. Leigh’s “Pirates of Penzance” proves otherwise.AdvertisementOf all the Sullivan scores, “Pirates” is perhaps the closest to real opera as opposed to operetta. Its official first performance, in New York, was threatened by a strike: The musicians demanded extra pay because the music was more “operatic” than they had bargained for. But it is still wafer-thin in its invention and technique, designed to please Victorian bourgeois audiences with easy tunes and parodies that only demonstrate the vast superiority of the original over the copy. Much of it is meretricious, only saved by its relationship with Gilbert’s words — which do have genius, albeit time-locked.A director working with this repertoire must somehow rise above the music and unlock the text into contemporary relevance, a hard task. It explains why Gilbert and Sullivan works better these days as an amateur participation sport — the stuff of singalongs in church halls — rather than a serious undertaking. Experience suggests that the only viable alternative to the robustness of the village hall is an extreme one: the supremely slick, sophisticated re-imagining exemplified by Jonathan Miller’s celebrated take on “The Mikado” — first done for the English National Opera in 1986 and still in repertory around the world.AdvertisementThe problem with Mr. Leigh’s “Pirates” is that it is neither robust nor re-imagined with sophisticated brilliance. It is conventionally staged in 19th-century costume much as the D’Oyly Carte Opera Company would have envisioned — with the token modernism of a streamlined, semi-abstract set by Alison Chitty. If there’s a message, it’s that Gilbert and Sullivan needs no clever interventions or adornment. And what it appears to be above all, in the hands of Mr. Leigh, is quietly weird: the quality that no doubt draws him to it.Given the socially engaged, left-leaning nature of his film and stage work, he’s not everybody’s idea of a Gilbert and Sullivan enthusiast. But what he likes is the “topsy turvy” element acknowledged in the title of his film: the sense of crazily subversive anarchy that rules a piece like “Pirates,” where the plot concerns a band of tender-hearted brigands who drink sherry, love the queen (Victoria) and turn out to be members of the House of Lords “gone wrong,” as the libretto has it.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Leigh’s reductive presentation style is meant, presumably, to give the weirdness more exposure. And it does. But at the same time it’s low-key and under-energized, also exposing the bald fact that this is a director who has never paid his dues in opera and is learning on the job. It’s all too stand-and-sing, with little sense of how to move a chorus — other than fall back on the old D’Oyly Carte routines of marching up and down (for men) and irritatingly unfocused dancing (women).In the first night’s patchy cast, there was a thankfully assertive Pirate King from Joshua Bloom who lit up the stage whenever he was on it; a deliciously deadpan Police Sergeant from Jonathan Lemalu; and attractive coloratura singing from Claudia Boyle as Mabel. But Andrew Shore didn’t quite deliver the panache expected from the very model of a modern Major-General. And though the conductor David Parry is as safe a pair of hands as Gilbert and Sullivan could ask for, his panache was on the low side here as well.Will that matter much to the aficionados scrambling for tickets? Perhaps not. For them and others, worldwide screenings are planned for May 19 at selected cinemas, as well as at the London Coliseum.Pirates of Penzance.  Directed by Mike Leigh. English National Opera. Through July 4.A version of this review appears in print on May 12, 2015, on Page C5 of the New York edition with the headline: New Hand on Deck for Opera Anarchy.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.