By BEN RATLIFFMAY 11, 2015
BALTIMORE —  “You look around, and the system is broken,” Prince said about two hours into his “Rally 4 Peace” concert at the Royal Farms Arena here on Sunday night.“It’s gonna take the young people to fix it this time,” he continued. “We need new ideas, new life. Most of all, we need new peace. And the kind of peace I’m talking about is spelled p-i-e-c-e. Next time I come to Baltimore, I want to stay in a hotel owned by one of you.”Those comments — during “Purple Rain” — were the most direct sermonizing in a strong two-and-a-half-hour concert, some of whose proceeds, according to information from Live Nation, the concert’s promoter, would be donated to youth charities based in Baltimore.There were special guests, as advertised. One was the rapper Doug E. Fresh, emerging several times to freestyle and beatbox; another was the singer Estelle, sharing the vocals on “Purple Rain”; and another was Miguel, who sang a modified version of the Staple Singers’ “When Will We Be Paid,” a song often interpreted as a call for reparations.AdvertisementAnother guest, briefly, was Marilyn J. Mosby, the state’s attorney for Baltimore. She sat on a leather couch on the left side of the stage, and about 20 minutes into the concert she was led to the center by Prince. She wasn’t introduced by name, and waved before quickly returning to her seat. Prince turned back to the audience. “Those who have lost loved ones,” he said, “we are your servants here tonight. They say there’s no curfew, so I don’t know how long this is gonna go.”For the most part, this was a flow of hits from the early ’80s to early the ’90s, studded with a few songs of protest and resistance, including “Baltimore,” the stolid, upbeat track Prince released online Saturday, which suggests “peace is more than the absence of war,” and “let’s take all the guns away.” The song’s lyrics contained the only mention of Freddie Gray, whose death last month from injuries sustained in police custody provoked protests around the city and the country. Most of the guests, and the commentary, occurred after the first hour, which was free on the music-streaming service Tidal.AdvertisementThe concert was announced only last week as a stand-alone event, but was in keeping with the nature of Prince’s current “Hit ’n’ Run” American tour: performances around the country whose sites are disclosed with little lead time, as he did in Europe last year. (Tickets for the Baltimore concert cost $22 to $497, and the audience looked like a typical Prince crowd, largely middle-aged and of all races. Many wore something gray, as the concert’s flier requested — presumably to honor Mr. Gray.)This is all a way for a perennial performer, at 56, to stay spontaneous and casual, backed by his current band, 3rdeyegirl, and horns and keyboards as needed. There were a few video backdrops, none spectacular. A simple purple scrim hung in front of the stage before the show started.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.All the rest was what he’s good at: hard funk, falsetto ballads, a few extraordinary guitar solos and exhortations to party. The contentious citywide curfew here ended a week before Sunday’s show, but Prince came back to it repeatedly to rile the crowd. “No curfew,” he said several times, as he returned for multiple encores.The concert began with a slow, stomping, almost proto-metal version of “Let’s Go Crazy.” It established the notion that no matter how the repertory changed and the number of musicians expanded through the night, there was a rock band at the center: the guitarist Donna Grantis, the bassist Ida Nielsen and the drummer Hannah Ford Welton.Ms. Grantis took a few compressed solos, but more often, the band served as the support system for Prince’s much less compressed string of actions. Those included a chaotic, rhythm-propelled synthesizer solo on “Hot Thing” and a couple of guitar solos — in back-to-back versions of his own “The One” and Muddy Waters’s “Electric Man” — that slowly grew from strict, organized blues toward gestural, intensified flashes of sound.A version of this article appears in print on May 12, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: A Flow of Hits Interrupted Only for the Occasional Sermon .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.