CANNES, France — In the film that opens the 68th Cannes International Film festival today, Catherine Deneuve plays a French judge who must rule on the fate of a sometimes violent juvenile delinquent. The jurors for the festival competition this year seem to be taking a softer approach.“I know how important it is for any filmmaker to get recognized,” the Mexican director Guillermo del Toro said Wednesday at a news conference here with other members of the jury. “I know we’re not a panel of stern judges who’ll say what’s good and what’s bad.” He added: “It’s a guideline from a group of people rather than a sentence of freedom or prison.”For her part, Ms. Denueve said at another news conference that opening the festival with “Standing Tall,” a tough and decidedly unglamorous film by the French director Emmanuelle Bercot, was “a response to a difficult year in Europe, especially in France.”Attacks by Muslim extremists that killed 17 people in January at the Charlie Hebdo satirical magazine and a kosher supermarket have rattled the country — and also led to heightened security at this year’s festival.“Standing Tall,” which is not in the official competition, is only the second film directed by a woman to open Cannes, after “A Man in Love,” by the French director Diane Kurys, in 1987.At the news conference with Ms. Deneuve, Ms. Bercot played down the significance of this milestone. “It’s the selection of the film that’s an honor,” she said. “I don’t at all feel like a minority.” She said that in France, female directors can’t say that “they suffer discrimination,” adding: “I know it’s different in other countries.” (On Tuesday, the American Civil Liberties Union announced it would open an investigation into hiring practices in Hollywood.)This year the French director Agnès Varda will receive an honorary Palme d’Or award, given to a director whose work has never won the festival’s top prize. And this year’s festival poster features the luminous face of Ingrid Bergman, whose daughter, the actress Isabella Rossellini, is presiding over the jury of the festival’s Un Certain Regard section this year.Ethan and Joel Coen are co-chairs of the competition jury, which will award the Palme d’Or and other prizes to the 19 films in competition. Over the years, the Coen brothers have won many Cannes prizes, including the Palme d’Or in 1991 for “Barton Fink” and the Grand Prix second prize for “Inside Llewyn Davis” in 2013.Other competition jurors this year are the Spanish actress Rossy de Palma; the wunderkind Québécois actor and director Xavier Dolan, whose “Mommy” shared the Jury Prize here last year; the actors Sienna Miller, Sophie Marceau and Jake Gyllenhaal; and the Malian singer Rokia Traoré.If the Coen brothers have vast differences in taste between them, they weren’t letting on. But they were united in what they called their indifference to television. “It’s not that I don’t like TV, I just don’t watch it,” Ethan Coen said at the jury news conference. “I haven’t watched a TV show in decades,” he added. “It’s something we’re alienated from.”Asked by a journalist what he thought of new ways of watching movies, Joel Coen paused. “You mean how do we feel about people watching ‘Lawrence of Arabia’ on their iPhone?” he said, to applause. “I think there’s something special about sitting in a cinema with a big crowd of people and an 80-foot screen,” he said. “Nothing can compete with that and that’s something that film festivals like this keep alive. It’s great.”