Times critics share what they’ve been listening to lately.‘SPIRIT OF THE AMERICAN RANGE': Piston, Antheil and Copland
Carlos Kalmar, conductor; Oregon Symphony
(Pentatone)
When the Oregon Symphony made its acclaimed Carnegie Hall debut in 2011, this impressive ensemble won many admirers among New York concertgoers and critics. That the orchestra continues to thrive under Carlos Kalmar, its dynamic Uruguayan music director, is clear from this exciting recording, taken from live performances at its home hall. Piston’s charming, inventive Suite from “The Incredible Flutist,” a ballet, receives a supple, colorful performance. Antheil’s “A Jazz Symphony” (the 1955 version), a piece that can sound slick for all its raucous energy, emerges here as a savvy, audacious score. Best of all is an urgent, superbly played account of Copland’s Third Symphony. (Anthony Tommasini)STEINBERG: ‘Passion Week’; RIMSKY-KORSAKOV: Chants for Holy Week 
Alexander Lingas, conductor; Cappella Romana
(Cappella Romana)
“Passion Week,” a significant liturgical work written in St. Petersburg (then Leningrad) by the Lithuanian, Jewish-born Maximilian Steinberg in the 1920s, when most religious music was banned in the Soviet Union, surfaced in recent years with a tale far too long to recount here. Steven Fox and the Clarion Choir introduced the work to New York in October. Consisting of 11 movements for a cappella choir, it is on a scale with the great sacred works of Tchaikovsky and Rachmaninoff, though in a slightly more advanced idiom, and is quite simply beautiful. Steinberg (pronounced SHTAYN-bairg) married a daughter of his mentor, Rimsky-Korsakov, in 1908, the reason he converted to Russian Orthodoxy. So it was a nice touch for Mr. Lingas and the Pacific Northwest-based Cappella Romana, to add five chants by Rimsky covering some of the same material. (James R. Oestreich)SCHUMANN: Violin Concerto, Piano Trio No. 3
Isabelle Faust, violin; Jean-Guihen Queyras, cello; Alexander Melnikov, piano; Pablo Heras-Casado, conductor; Freiburg Baroque Orchestra
(Harmonia Mundi) 
The violinist Isabelle Faust has shown her versatility in a range of repertory recently. Here, performing on a period instrument, she offers a sweet-toned, passionate performance of Schumann’s infrequently heard Violin Concerto, elegantly accompanied by the Freiburg Baroque Orchestra. She is joined by two superb frequent collaborators — the pianist Alexander Melnikov and the cellist Jean-Guihen Queyras — for a richly hued rendition of Schumann’s Piano Trio No. 3. (Vivien Schweitzer)BEETHOVEN: Symphony No. 9
Camilla Nylund, soprano; Ekaterina Gubanova, mezzo-soprano; Matthew Polenzani, tenor; Eric Owens, bass-baritone; Riccardo Muti, conductor; Chicago Symphony Orchestra and Chicago Symphony Chorus
Recorded in September and now streaming at cso.org/beethoven9, this performance shows Riccardo Muti in elegant elder-statesman mode, leading Beethoven’s sprawling, deathless symphony with silky, Italianate lyricism, a manner recalling, in certain ways, that of his onetime rival, Claudio Abbado. The vocal soloists are excellent, as is the radiant Chicago Symphony Chorus. (Zachary Woolfe)SPOTIFY PLAYLIST
Tracks from the recordings discussed this week. (Spotify users can also find it here.)