AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn Shattuck1:20 A.M. (Starz) BLUE JASMINE (2013) Cate Blanchett, above with Peter Sarsgaard, won an Oscar for her role as Jasmine French, a Park Avenue matron fallen on hard times after her husband, Hal (Alec Baldwin), lands in prison for bilking his clients, leaving her with little more than her pearls, Chanel jacket, Hermès bag and Louis Vuitton luggage. Destitute, in a manner of speaking, Jasmine flies first-class to San Francisco to begin life anew with her sister, Ginger (Sally Hawkins), whose scrappy existence and brutish men Jasmine can barely stomach without self-medicating with vodka and Xanax. Then she meets a diplomatic type (Mr. Sarsgaard) with an appreciation for her decorating talents and designer threads and starts to see light at the end of her dark tunnel. With intimations of Ruth Madoff and Blanche DuBois, this shattered woman is “brilliantly brought to quivering life by Ms. Blanchett,” Manohla Dargis wrote in The New York Times, in Woody Allen’s “most sustained, satisfying and resonant film since ‘Match Point.’ ”8 P.M. (13, 49) ANIMAL CHILDHOOD Almost every child leaves home at some point, even in the animal kingdom. “Nature” watches as black bears in Minnesota, ibex in Israel and elephants in Kenya prepare their offspring for independence. In “Lethal Seas,” at 9 on Channel 13 and 10 on Channel 49, “Nova” visits a coral garden in Papua New Guinea to investigate how rising acidity in oceans, caused by the absorption of carbon emissions, is destroying the skeletons and shells of marine creatures that form the foundation of life in the world’s waters.9 P.M. (ABC) MODERN FAMILY Phil (Ty Burrell), Luke (Nolan Gould) and Haley (Sarah Hyland) force Alex (Ariel Winter) to skip school on senior ditch day. Claire (Julie Bowen) is puzzled by the reaction of Jay (Ed O’Neill) when she receives a job offer from a hotel chain. And Gloria (Sofia Vergara) tries to break up Manny (Rico Rodriguez) and his girlfriend. In “black-ish,” at 9:30, Dre (Anthony Anderson) and Bow (Tracee Ellis Ross) lose it after Junior (Marcus Scribner) joins a Young Republican Club to impress a girl.9 P.M. (NBC) LAW & ORDER: SPECIAL VICTIMS UNIT The squad investigates the possible kidnapping of a boy (Kaeden Ruparel) whose mother (Brooke Bloom) received a ransom request after he disappeared from school. Surveillance video shows he recognized his abductor. 9 P.M. (CBS) CSI: CYBER The team delves into a power failure in Detroit that was used to camouflage a jewelry store robbery resulting in a death. At 10, Avery (Patricia Arquette) finds the hacker who released a patient’s confidential information online. 10 P.M. (ABC) NASHVILLE Juliette (Hayden Panettiere) is determined to finish her album, whatever the cost. Deacon (Charles Esten) hangs on for dear life with Rayna (Connie Britton), Daphne (Maisy Stella) and Maddie (Lennon Stella) at his side.10 P.M. (Pop) SING IT ON Five a cappella groups — the AcaBelles and All Night Yahtzee from Florida State University; No Comment from the University of Illinois; and the Nor’easters and Pitch, Please! from Northeastern University — croon their hearts out for a spot at the International Championship of Collegiate a Cappella.10 P.M. (CNBC) CONSUMED: THE REAL RESTAURANT BUSINESS Five New York restaurants fight for a slice of a multibillion-dollar industry in this new documentary series, which begins with a tour of the Meatball Shop empire; Melba’s, a Harlem comfort food spot with national ambitions; and Ann & Tony’s, a multigenerational joint in the Bronx that is struggling to fill seats.What’s Streaming NowMOONE BOY Chris O’Dowd, at right with David Rawle, plays Sean Murphy, the imaginary friend of Martin Moone (Mr. Rawle), a schoolboy with a sunny disposition and a total obliviousness to the opinion of others. Sean lives in Boyle, Ireland, where Mr. O’Dowd — who wrote and directed this series’s final six episodes — grew up. The show may be reminiscent of “The Wonder Years” and “The Goldbergs,” but “is more imaginative and detailed than others of its type, with a loopy idiosyncrasy that trumps synthetic American quirkiness, and its offhand, seemingly throwaway comic touches come with a dash of Irish poetry,” Mike Hale wrote in The Times. (hulu.com) KATHRYN SHATTUCKAdvertisement