AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn ShattuckBACK TO THE FUTURE DAY Hoverboards, flying cars and self-lacing shoes — sure. But the Cubs win the World Series? That’s what greeted Marty McFly and Dr. Emmett Brown in “Back to the Future II” (1989) when they dialed their DeLorean time machine to 4:29 p.m. on Oct. 21, 2015. Celebrate the day with the “Back to the Future” trilogy, starting at noon on the Esquire Network and at 7 p.m. on Discovery Family.Want more? Michael J. Fox, Christopher Lloyd and Lea Thompson reunite on “Today” at 7 a.m. on NBC. Mr. Fox also appears on “Jimmy Kimmel Live” at 11:35 p.m. on ABC. Robert Zemeckis, the “Back to the Future” trilogy’s director, and Steven Spielberg join those cast members in “Back in Time” (2015), a documentary about the films’ cultural whammy, streaming on Amazon, iTunes and Netflix. (Image: Mr. Fox in the 1989 film.)7 P.M. (FX Movie Channel) THE CURIOUS CASE OF BENJAMIN BUTTON (2008) Brad Pitt ages in reverse while Cate Blanchett grows old the usual way in this tale, adapted from an F. Scott Fitzgerald short story, about a man born in his 80s in 1918 New Orleans and the dancer who loves him. And “Empire” wasn’t even a glimmer in Taraji P. Henson’s eye when she played the nursing home caretaker who raises Benjamin after his father abandons him. David Fincher directed what A. O. Scott, writing in The New York Times, called “a lush, romantic hothouse bloom.”8 P.M. (13, 49) PETS: WILD AT HEART Those rambunctious puppies and kittens aren’t being adorable merely to rack up the Facebook “likes.” They’re practicing survival skills innate to their species — learning their place in a pack or how to use teamwork to bring down prey — before domestication tens of thousands of years ago transformed them into kinder, gentler beasts. Here, “Nature” uses spy cams and X-rays to capture the hidden powers of our pets.9 P.M. (Fox) EMPIRE Adam Rodriguez (“Magic Mike XXL”), playing the concert promoter Laz Delgado, prepares to take a bite out of the delicious Cookie by helping the Lyon Dynasty label hold a block party to promote Hakeem’s anthem. Jamal preps for the brotherly competition by teaming up with Ne-Yo.9 P.M. (NBC) LAW & ORDER: SPECIAL VICTIMS UNIT When a famous violinist accuses a colleague of raping her at a Manhattan hotel, the suspect says that a hired escort drugged and robbed him. Cue Rollins’s fugitive sister.9 P.M. (ABC) MODERN FAMILY Claire tries to impress Haley and Alex during a take-your-daughter-to-work day. Phil does community service with Luke and Manny’s class. And Gloria wants desperately to put her United States citizenship to use with jury duty. In “black-ish,” at 9:30, Dre and Bow take the family to church.9:45 P.M. (TCM) ALL THE PRESIDENT’S MEN (1976) Woodward and Bernstein. Redford and Hoffman. And four Oscars for Alan J. Pakula’s retelling of the Watergate scandal. In The Times, Vincent Canby called it “the thinking man’s ‘Jaws.’ ”10 P.M. (FX) AMERICAN HORROR STORY: HOTEL Alex cracks when Scarlett reminds her of Holden. Donovan becomes a target of a lethal rival of the Countess.10 P.M. (CNBC) JAY LENO’S GARAGE Mr. Leno delves into Laurence Fishburne’s passion for cars.10 P.M. (Comedy Central) SOUTH PARK Cartman quits Twitter after being body-shamed.What’s Streaming NowTHIS CHANGES EVERYTHING (2015) The young owners of a Montana goat ranch battle a ruptured Exxon pipeline. Poor Indians use their bodies to rally against the building of power plants on wetlands. And indigenous Canadians fight against toxic spills on ancestral lands. Naomi Klein’s 2014 book inspired Avi Lewis’s documentary about communities on the front line of climate change. (iTunes) (Image: A sugar cane field in El Salvador.)Advertisement