AdvertisementSupported byBy Scott ReyburnIt was a hard act to follow. Just one day after Christie’s raised $705.9 million from its experimental auction of cherry-picked 20th-century masterworks, Sotheby’s responded with a mainstream evening sale on Tuesday that aimed to remind the art world that there is more than one auction house in New York.Sotheby’s auction of American-oriented contemporary pieces raised $379.7 million with fees from the 63 lots offered, seven of which failed to sell. The company had predicted a total of $320 million before fees. The total was a marginal improvement on the $364.4 million the company achieved at its equivalent sale last year.“It was a pretty good sale,” said the New York dealer Fergus McCaffrey. “Sotheby’s has settled down. They’re more stable and confident than they were last year. It’s just that Christie’s is running rings round everyone at the moment with the financial resources they’re throwing at the market.”The sale was kick-started with a series of works by artists who are favored by American collectors. At least 10 bidders in the packed room and on telephones tried to buy the 2015 mixed-media and collage abstract “Smear” by Mark Bradford, who now mainly paints for museums and whose works are virtually unobtainable from galleries. It fetched $4.4 million, an auction high for the artist (the upper estimate was $700,000).Another artist’s high was the $6.5 million paid for Mark Grotjahn’s 2011 abstracted face painting, “Untitled (Into and Behind the Green Eyes of the Tiger Monkey Face 43.18),” against a high estimate of $3 million. Both paintings sold to telephone bidders.Even higher was the $29.9 million paid by a telephone bidder against determined opposition from the New York dealer Philippe Ségalot for the American artist Christopher Wool’s monumental 1990 black and white word painting, “Riot.” Admired for its “drippiness,” said Alexander Rotter, the co-head of worldwide contemporary art at Sotheby’s, the enamel on aluminum painting from the artist’s most coveted series had been valued at $12 million to $18 million. The auction high for Mr. Wool was helped by the fact that the work had never been offered at a public sale before.“It’s a status game, mainly driven by Americans,” said the Montreal collector François Odermatt. “People want instantly recognizable images by these artists. It’s also about investment. I have 90 percent of my assets in art.”Mr. Odermatt was gratified to see the high price for the Wool work. With a fellow collector-investor, John Sayegh-Belchatowski, he paid $14.2 million in November for a similar Wool word painting, “Fool,” at Christie’s.The most expensive of the night’s big-ticket works was a 1954 Mark Rothko abstract, “Untitled (Yellow and Blue),” which had once been owned by the American collectors Paul and Rachel Lambert “Bunny” Mellon. More recently, it had been in the collection of Christie’s owner, François Pinault, who sold it in 2013 to the seller at Sotheby’s.With its broad band of blue, evoking a sunlit seascape, this unusually uplifting Rothko sold for $46.45 million against a low estimate of $40 million. It was bought by a client on the telephone with Isabelle Paagman, a specialist in Sotheby’s contemporary art department in London.But in today’s auction market, which relies heavily on opaque financial arrangements to attract high-value artworks from wealthy collectors, the euphoria created by multiple bidding can quickly be tempered by a disappointing price for a guaranteed work.Roy Lichtenstein’s 1962 Pop Art canvas “The Ring (Engagement)” had been estimated to fetch $50 million. The 4-foot-high-by-5-foot-10-inch-wide painting, showing a close-up of a male hand slipping an engagement ring on a woman’s finger, had been offered by the Chicago collector Stefan T. Edlis, who had been guaranteed a minimum price by Sotheby’s. Pop Art paintings from the 1960s are currently among the most sought-after prizes, and this work featured extensive passages of Lichtenstein’s trademark Ben-Day dots. But it lacked the comic-book speech bubbles that add millions to a Lichtenstein, and the painting attracted little competition, knocked down to a telephone bidder, represented by Patti Wong, chairwoman of Sotheby’s Asia, for $41.7 million with fees.With sellers not paying commissions and getting a portion of buyers’ premiums, profit margins are notoriously thin for high-value auction lots. A shortfall of nearly $10 million on the estimate of the Lichtenstein would have dented Sotheby’s figures.The auction house was more successful with Sigmar Polke’s 1967 painting “Dschungel (Jungle),” which was part-owned by Sotheby’s, despite having been bought in 2011 by its seller for about $9.2 million, at Sotheby’s in London. Polke has recently been the subject of major retrospectives at the Museum of Modern Art in New York and the Tate Modern in London. Museum validation helped push up the price of this unusually approachable image of a sunset seen through exotic foliage. The painting sold to a telephone bidder for $27.1 million, above its $20 million estimate.Advertisement