By ALESSANDRA STANLEYMAY 12, 2015
There are remedies for insomnia — Ambien, Lunesta and “Wayward Pines.”M. Night Shyamalan is one of the creators of this Fox thriller and directed the premiere that airs on Thursday. It sounds so promising: Terrence Howard (“Empire”) and Melissa Leo (“The Fighter”) are villains and Matt Dillon (“Crash”) stars as Ethan Burke, a Secret Service agent who finds himself trapped in Wayward Pines, an idyllic small town in the scenic Northwest where things are not how they seem.“Wayward Pines” does have more than a hint of “Twin Peaks,” but it’s not nearly as weird and imaginative. It’s a 10-episode thriller based on a series of novels by Blake Crouch that feels plodding. A small town can be sleepy, but the mystery that binds its residents shouldn’t also be soporific.Part of the problem is the pace. “Wayward Pines” takes a slow, ritualistic and gloomy death march through the obvious. Ethan is on assignment in Idaho, investigating the disappearance of two other agents, when he has a car accident and awakens in a suspiciously empty and creepy hospital in Wayward Pines. The only person he sees there is Nurse Pam (Ms. Leo) and her perky cheer quickly curdles into Nurse Ratched-like menace.It turns out that Nurse Pam and Sheriff Pope (Mr. Howard) are despots in a place where the storefronts are quaint, the air is clear, the phones don’t make outgoing calls and the residents are under constant camera surveillance. Nobody is supposed to talk about the past or question the present.AdvertisementThe people of Wayward Pines are obedient, but they are terrible actors. Their instructions are to act as placid as Stepford wives, but almost everyone has a shifty look.AdvertisementEven the porch furniture looks duplicitous.Viewers who haven’t seen other Shyamalan movies like “The Sixth Sense” and “Signs” will nevertheless notice the series’ stylized and overstated cinematography — colors are drained to the brink of black and white and even the midday sun is wan. Faces, interiors and moonlit pine forests all have a luminous, neo-film-noir look.It’s not an unfamiliar look on television. In fact, it’s all too common. Dramas like “The Knick” on Cinemax, which is set in a New York hospital at the turn of the 20th century, “Hannibal” on NBC, a riff on the Hannibal Lecter saga, and “The Walking Dead,” a dystopian thriller adapted from a graphic novel, share a sepulchral look, but they have better reasons for painterly gloom. “Wayward Pines” looks histrionic and affected, and with diminishing returns: If everything is sinister, then nothing really is.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.And the performances are similarly over-the-top. Ms. Leo and Mr. Howard are cartoonishly fiendish — Nurse Pam dons a Nazi-ish black leather coat when she delivers a hissy paean to order and discipline. Mr. Dillon’s pallor is lustrous, but his anguish is hammy. Even the wonderful Hope Davis, who plays a school principal, is so sulfurous she looks as if she will burst into flames at any second.So “Wayward Pines” is a cautionary tale, not about the dangers of entering brave new towns, but about the difficulty of meeting the rising bar of storytelling on television. Even series on the basic broadcast networks look more and more like movies and increasingly unfold like novels.“Wayward Pines” has the artsy, distinctive look of an auteur-driven television show, but its energy and creativity exist solely on the surface. The writing is not as inventive or sophisticated as “American Crime” on ABC or “Aquarius,” an NBC crime series set in the 1960s that begins later this month.This also requires a suspension of disbelief, which brings it closer in spirit to “Under the Dome,” the CBS series based on a Stephen King novel, yet it lacks even that soapy sci-fi thriller’s energy and suspense.“Wayward Pines” is supposed to be so scary it keeps people awake at night. I’ve never slept better.A version of this review appears in print on May 13, 2015, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline:  Cameras Everywhere, but the Mystery Remains .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.