AdvertisementSupported byBy Alastair MacaulayOther cities around the world have more than one major ballet company, but no balletomane delirium compares to that arising from the annual Lincoln Center fever. For four weeks, American Ballet Theater and New York City Ballet play simultaneously (Ballet Theater eight performances per week, City Ballet seven) at the Metropolitan Opera House and the David H. Koch Theater. And choosing between the two adjacent houses becomes a crazed annual luxury that makes other ballet scenes look parched. There are loyalists who would never pay a visit to the other company; but for those who attend both, the differences make the world of ballet seem vast and rich. This year’s fever began this week. Ballet Theater, celebrating its 75th anniversary, opened its season on Monday with three one-act ballets that honor its illustrious opening decade. These will alternate with three other works from the same era throughout this first week; the six, by five celebrated choreographers — Michel Fokine, George Balanchine, Agnes de Mille, Antony Tudor (two are by him) and Jerome Robbins, admirably show much of the range of what ballet theater (as well as Ballet Theater) has to offer. Monday’s three were Fokine’s “Les Sylphides,” Tudor’s “Pillar of Fire” and Robbins’s “Fancy Free.” The second and third proved keenly effective, the first less so.It was with “Les Sylphides” (Fokine’s 1909 adaptation of his 1908 “Chopiniana”) that Ballet Theater first began in 1940; and it started many of the company’s later seasons. This work — often (not quite accurately) acclaimed as the first plotless ballet — seemed the quintessence of ballet poetry for decades; and its admirers include the choreographers Balanchine, Frederick Ashton, Robbins and Mark Morris. (It begins with a frozen tableau that then comes into dance life, a compositional device Balanchine adopted for the vast majority of his own works.)People were probably already complaining in the 1940s that “Sylphides” was not danced well enough. Certainly they were by the time I first watched this ballet in the 1970s. (I began by seeing six different troupes dance it in 1977-78. Everyone older than me agreed that there were some virtues and some failings in each production, and it has been bewildering ever since trying to pin down what characterizes a correct or inspired “Sylphides.”) On Monday, the work came to life most often with Isabella Boylston, her jumps and runs on point catching the breeze of Romantic rapture.Everyone else (Hee Seo, Melanie Hamrick, Thomas Forster, the all-female corps de ballet) looked glazed and inhibited, determined not to stray beyond the narrow boundaries of politeness. They’re less to be blamed than is a widespread misunderstanding of style; this “Sylphides” torpor is nothing new and may be found in other Western companies. But this is a beautiful ballet that deserves more: more épaulement (shouldering), more nuance in the use of eyes, heads and fingers, more detailed pointing of musical moments, more full-bodied support of arm gestures and more pliancy throughout the torso. The Benjamin Britten orchestration, rediscovered in Ballet Theater’s archives in 2013, continues to freshen the texture of this poetic score.“Pillar of Fire” stays grippingly alive at Ballet Theater because of the acute eloquence of Tudor’s musicality. Dance and music in Tudor ballets are often on quite different wavelengths; but there are many moments and phrases of brilliant timing that show how the two wavelengths coexist. It’s this that creates much of Tudor’s drama.“Pillar of Fire” (1942), perhaps the first classic to be created for this company, is famous for its portrayal of sexual repression and transgression. (Those who know their Bette Davis films — Tudor did — will recognize that it’s very “Now, Voyager,” though its story is also close to that of Janacek’s life-enhancing opera “Jenufa.”) And yet, on revisiting it, what’s always surprising — refreshing — is the severity and economy with which Tudor tells his tale. Even big moments are delivered quickly, precisely. The score is Schoenberg’s “Verklärte Nacht” (well conducted, like that of “Sylphides,” by Ormsby Wilkins); much of the rich emotion we feel by the end is thanks both to this glorious music and Tudor’s deft way of making us hear it as if in the heroine’s mind.On Monday, Gillian Murphy’s performance as Hagar — austere, vulnerable, anguished, focused — earned and won an ovation. (I have noticed her Bette Davis face before, and was newly grateful for it on this occasion.) Though this redoubtable and complex artist has always undertaken intensely dramatic roles, there have been times when she ha let us see her switch her acting on and off, usually while changing gears. Not so on Monday; let’s hope this marks the next step in the ladder of her ascent to interpretive blaze.It’s a particular pleasure to return to “Fancy Free” with “On the Town” fresh in memory. Both the ballet and the musical, telling the tales of three sailors on shore leave in New York for 24 hours, were composed by Leonard Bernstein and choreographed by Jerome Robbins. Though the first was the prototype for the second, neither loses by comparison with the other. (The plots and scores differ.) “Fancy Free,” one of the most endearing and beloved of all ballets, is a cartoon constantly illumined by touching detail (I love the different ways the three men wear their hats); we get to see all of its characters from more than one side.It seldom fails in performance, but Monday’s rendition — conducted by David LaMarche and led by Marcelo Gomes, Cory Stearns and Herman Cornejo — was as good as any I’ve seen. Luciana Paris, Ms. Boylston, and Leann Underwood were the three women, all excellent; Ms. Boylston, an admirable dancer now immeasurably brighter than even a year ago, had several moments that seemed the finest in the show — though that’s unfair to the three endlessly engaging heroes.Mr. Gomes, dancing the third solo (the rumba), plays the most emphatic and hectoring one, but the evening showed that he now, even more than the miraculous Mr. Cornejo and the beautiful Mr. Stearns, is Ballet Theater’s finest artist and its subtlest. He had already been superbly simple as the most sexual figure in “Pillar of Fire”; in “Fancy Free,” I would like to watch his performance from the farthest row of the highest gallery to check if his tiniest moments register as well as I think they must. Anyone can learn from how he lifts his face a half-inch, the slightest flicker of his hands, the least inclination of his torso. With dancers of this caliber, the Ballet Theater season that lies ahead offers marvels.American Ballet Theater’s opening programs run through May 16 at the Metropolitan Opera House; 212-362-6000, abt.org. Advertisement