AdvertisementSupported byBy Zachary WoolfeIt has been heartening, as Meredith Monk’s 50th-anniversary season has gone on, to hear not just examples of her own work but also her continued influence on younger artists. In the extended vocal techniques, the flirting with nonsense, the juxtaposition of levity and melancholy in ensembles like Roomful of Teeth and Carmina Slovenica and events like the Resonant Bodies Festival, Ms. Monk’s fingerprints have been visible.They were, too, in Monday’s performance of works by the searching composer and vocalist Kate Soper, the season finale of the vibrant, free Music Mondays series at Advent Lutheran Church on the Upper West Side.Ms. Monk stands like a tutelary deity behind the vocal line’s skittish babble in Ms. Soper’s “Cipher” (2012) and the ferocious fluttering in “Only the Words Themselves Mean What They Say” (2011). When, in one passage of “Cipher,” the pronoun “I” is relentlessly repeated, you realize that both these composers are focused on the assertion of identity — female identity — through music, a political protest submerged just below the alluring surfaces.But Ms. Soper’s pieces have their own concerns, too. While Ms. Monk largely abandoned texts, Ms. Soper is keenly interested in them, if only to chart the degree to which their words become incomprehensible when set in song. She wants to get at how and what music can communicate. And even whether it can: In “The Top” (written in 2013 and newly revised as a duet for live solo voice and taped elements), the words of a brief Kafka parable are mashed and fragmented, the mood an alternation of otherworldly calm and frantic, disjointed whirlpools.These lines of inquiry about communication were thoughtfully advanced by both Ms. Soper’s music and selections (two each) from the medieval composers Hildegard of Bingen and Guillaume de Machaut. In the ambling lines of Machaut’s rondeau “Doulz viaire gracieus,” arranged by Ms. Soper for flute, violin and voice, the lovelorn words occasionally emerge just to blur back into pure melody, just as they do in the overlapping chants and keening harmonies of Ms. Soper’s opera “Here Be Sirens” (2014), three selections from which gave a taste of its dazzling charms.The opera’s texts are drawn from sources that include Plato, Dante, Milton and Ms. Soper herself, and its style ranges accordingly, encompassing both soaring Hildegard-like incantations and cozy parlor-song lullabies in a work that investigates — to unexpectedly poignant, funny effect — both the mythical fascinations of sirens and the ways artists have immortalized them through the ages.As a performer Ms. Soper was, as ever, a powerful advocate for her music, as were the luminous yet earthy Brett Umlauf and Gelsey Bell. The flutist Erin Lesser, the violinist Joshua Modney and, on electronics, Sam Pluta made valuable contributions: These works demand precise interplay between vocalists and instrumentalists, and these musicians rose adroitly to the challenge.Advertisement