AdvertisementSupported byBy Corinna da Fonseca-WollheimLocation, location, location.Logistically, it might have been easiest for the New York Philharmonic to use one of the smaller spaces at Lincoln Center for its Contact! series of contemporary chamber music. Instead, it has divided the series between performances at the Metropolitan Museum of Art and, as on Monday in a program devoted to new music from Italy, at SubCulture in the East Village. This basement space, with its subdued lighting, a bar serving cocktails and seats outfitted with cup holders, exudes an air of unforced cool that the Philharmonic should continue to cultivate — especially when it meshes so well with the fearless and poised playing of its musicians.The program was devised and introduced by Vittorio Montalti, an Italian composer who, at 30, is young enough to be the grandson of the great 20th-century composer Luciano Berio. He opened with Berio’s “Différences” for viola, cello, flute, clarinet, harp and tape, a work whose blend of live acoustic instruments and recorded sounds was brand-new at its premiere in 1959, even as it harked back, as Mr. Montalti suggested, to the baroque form of the concerto grosso.The conductor Joshua Gersen led a shapely performance notable for the warmth of the acoustic sound and the dramatic, sometimes humorous way in which the live instruments interacted with the taped components, rendered with luscious clarity by SubCulture’s excellent sound system.The cellist Maria Kitsopoulos and the percussionist Daniel Druckman gave a compelling performance of Mr. Montalti’s “Passacaglia” for marimba and cello. Built on a sequence of four high squeals of the cello, the piece borrows a certain head-on energy from rock music, with both players pushing to transcend the limitations of a rigidly repetitive structure. The cello also struggles to transcend its own cello-ness with extended techniques producing sounds that are breathy and furry; at one point Ms. Kitsopoulos bowed the instrument’s backside while Mr. Druckman played the resonant tubes underneath the marimba’s keys.Extended technique and special effects are the trademark of Salvatore Sciarrino, who builds them, in Mr. Montalti’s words, into “a theater of sound.” The violist Dawn Hannay, the flutist Yoobin Son and the bassoonist Kim Laskowski joined forces for a profoundly expressive reading of “Tre Duetti con L’eco” (“Three Duets With Echo”). The attention is turned inward in these quiet and intimate miniatures. In fact, the resulting sounds — inhalations amplified through the flute, the crunchy pressure of bow on viola string — seem to hint at the private lives of the instruments themselves and the extreme energy fluctuations they live through.The sense of sound as a living organism was especially strong in Luca Francesconi’s “Encore Da Capo” for flute, clarinet, vibraphone, piano and cello. There is a fresh fluency to the writing here, which sets it apart from the other more self-consciously sculpted pieces on the program. The musicians imbued it with a strong sense of pulse and deeply hued colors, bringing exuberance to the agitated passages and serenity to its moments of stillness.The final concert in the Contact! series will be on June 5 at the Metropolitan Museum of Art; 212-875-5656, nyphil.org. Advertisement