John E. McGrath, the artistic director of the National Theater Wales, will become the chief executive and artistic director of the Manchester International Festival, taking over from Alex Poots, who has led the festival since it began in 2007. Mr. Poots gave the biennial Manchester festival its distinctive identity by programming only new work, and he established it as a major international event. He is leaving after this year’s edition to run a new arts space, Culture Shed, in New York.National Theater Wales has also acquired a distinctive identity under Mr. McGrath. The company has no physical home, and since he became its founding director in 2009, he has programmed site-specific productions all over Britain, as well as internationally and online. These have included “Coriolan/us,” performed in an aircraft hangar, and “The Radicalization of Bradley Manning,” which opened at Tasker Milward School in Wales, where Mr. Manning was a student.Mr. McGrath, 53, who will take up his new job in September, worked in Manchester as the artistic director of the theater Contact from 1999 to 2008. Before that, he spent almost a decade in New York, working during some of that time for the experimental theater company Mabou Mines. On the National Theater Wales website, he describes New York as “the place that shaped me as a theater director.”In a statement, Mr. McGrath said that his time with National Theater Wales had been “a joyful and deeply rewarding experience,” and he expressed his excitement at the Manchester appointment. “The speed and success with which the Manchester International Festival has established itself in the top tier of festivals worldwide has been astonishing,” he said.This year’s festival, which runs from July 2 to 18, will again include the surprising collaborations for which it has become known, including a performance by the artist Gerhard Richter and the composer Arvo Part; a music and theater event with the Scottish conceptual artist Douglas Gordon, the French pianist Hélène Grimaud and the actress Charlotte Rampling; a new musical, “wonder.land,” directed by Rufus Norris and composed by Damon Albarn; and a concert by Bjork.A version of this article appears in print on 05/15/2015, on page C2 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Manchester Festival Appoints New Artistic Director.