By KATHRYN SHATTUCKMAY 14, 2015
9:40 A.M. (TMC) THE DIVING BELL AND THE BUTTERFLY (2007) Jean-Dominique Bauby, a 43-year-old French magazine editor and something of a playboy, had a stroke in 1995 that left him with a condition in which he retained vision, hearing and a functioning mind but was almost completely paralyzed. He told his story in a book that he dictated to an assistant by blinking. In this film from the artist Julian Schnabel, Mr. Bauby is played by Mathieu Amalric; Emmanuelle Seigner is Céline, the longtime partner he has recently left and the mother of his three children; and Marie-Josée Croze is a speech therapist who teaches him to use his left eyelid to communicate. “The phrase ‘triumph of the human spirit’ hovers over ‘The Diving Bell and the Butterfly,’ along with a swarm of other empty, uplifting clichés,” A. O. Scott wrote in The New York Times. “But Mr. Schnabel and the screenwriter, Ronald Harwood, have other themes in mind” — among them, limitation, constraint and incarceration — Mr. Scott said. (Both men were nominated for Oscars.) “Their common subject, however, is freedom, the self-willed liberation of a difficult, defiant individual,” he added, noting that Mr. Schnabel demonstrated this with “imaginative freedom in every frame and sequence, dispensing with narrative and expository conventions in favor of a wild, intuitive honesty.”7:40 A.M. (MoreMax) THE END OF THE AFFAIR (1999) Ralph Fiennes and Julianne Moore portray Graham Greene’s illicit lovers in wartime London, gambling with far more than either could have imagined. Janet Maslin, writing in The Times, called Neil Jordan’s adaptation “intoxicating,” adding that “the film’s real marvel is in making the time, place and emotions in which this story could unfold so fully alive.”6 P.M. (TMC) THE TEMPEST (2010) Prospera (Helen Mirren), a vengeful sorceress, unleashes her powers against shipwrecked enemies in Julie Taymor’s stormy adaptation of Shakespeare’s drama. Felicity Jones plays Miranda, Prospera’s doted-on daughter; Djimon Hounsou is the slave Caliban; and Ben Whishaw is Ariel, the puckish spirit. “But rather than cohere into a compellingly new — or satisfyingly traditional — rendering of the play, they slosh around, generating glimmers of insight, slivers of feeling and spasms of sensation, as well as empty dazzle and frustration,” A. O. Scott wrote in The Times.8 P.M. (ABC) GREY’S ANATOMY The doctors confront a crisis of epic proportions. In “Scandal,” at 9, Olivia (Kerry Washington) and her crew begin their takedown of Command (Joe Morton). And in “American Crime,” at 10, the case comes to a shocking end.Advertisement8 P.M. (Flix) A WALK ON THE MOON (1999) Diane Lane plays Pearl Kantrowitz, who totes her ironing board, children and mother-in-law to the Catskills each summer, while her husband, Marty (Liev Schreiber), stays in New York, repairing televisions. Viggo Mortensen is the hippie salesman who turns her life upside down in 1969. “Even when it turns turbulent, the film sustains its warm summer glow, and makes itself a conversation piece about the moral issues it means to raise,” Janet Maslin wrote in The Times about this romance.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.9 P.M. (Fox) WAYWARD PINES A Secret Service agent (Matt Dillon) is trapped in an idyllic town in the Northwest where things aren’t as they seem in this “Twin Peaks”-esque thriller based on novels by Blake Crouch. M. Night Shyamalan is among the show’s creators. Melissa Leo plays the resident Nurse Ratched; Terrence Howard is the fiendish Sheriff Pope. “ ‘Wayward Pines’ is supposed to be so scary it keeps people awake at night,” Alessandra Stanley wrote in The Times. “I’ve never slept better.”10 P.M. (FX) THE COMEDIANS Billy (Billy Crystal) and Josh (Josh Gad) try to create diversity by hiring a black writer. In “Louie,” at 10:30, Jane (Ursula Parker) has a sleepover.AdvertisementWhat’s Streaming NowLANG LANG AT THE MET The Metropolitan Museum of Art celebrates its exhibition “China: Through the Looking Glass” and the 100th anniversary of its Asian art department with this performance by the pianist Lang Lang. The program will be streamed live at 8 p.m. Thursday from the Great Hall. (metmuseum.org/livestream)A version of this schedule appears in print on May 14, 2015, on Page C7 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Thursday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.