By BRUCE WEBERMAY 13, 2015
Johnny Gimble, a virtuoso Texas fiddler who played with a roster of country superstars including Bob Wills, Marty Robbins, Merle Haggard, Willie Nelson and George Strait, died on Saturday in Marble Falls, Tex., northwest of Austin. He was 88. His wife, Barbara, said the cause was a stroke.Mr. Gimble’s musical life began before he was a teenager, when he started playing with his brothers in East Texas in a group that came to be called the Rose City Swingsters. It lasted well into the contemporary era of country music, when he recorded with Vince Gill and shared a stage with Carrie Underwood at the Grammy Awards. He was a gifted mandolin picker and was known to strum a banjo, but it was on fiddle that he became a celebrated sideman.Early on, his repertoire was a conventional one for country dances — waltzes and reels, jug-band music, a touch of mountain rag. But by his teenage years the swing era had arrived and the jazz-tinged style known as Western swing had evolved, bringing improvisation and invention to the standard hillbilly band.Mr. Gimble became known as the style’s foremost purveyor on the fiddle, someone who could whip off a melody worthy of a line dance and follow it with 32 bars of vividly twangy variations on a theme. It was the swing fiddler Cliff Bruner, Mr. Gimble recalled, who gave him memorable advice about playing jazz, or what was then called “hokum” by Texas old-timers who didn’t like it: Translate what you’re already hearing in your head.Advertisement“He said, ‘Can you hum it?’” Mr. Gimble said in a television interview in 2011.“I said, ‘It goes around in my head all the time, I hum it all day long.’ He said, ‘Practice your instrument until you can play what you hum, play what you think, and you’ll start branching out and playing some licks.’”Mr. Gimble’s career had two distinct halves. In the 1950s, he played with Bob Wills and His Texas Playboys, the most popular Western swing band of the day, sometimes adding a fifth string to his fiddle to achieve a lower, rounder and louder sound. (Wills also played fiddle.) For a time he was part of the house band at a club Wills had opened in Dallas. He was featured on recordings by Marty Robbins, Lefty Frizzell and Ray Price, among others, and he was the host of a musical television show in Waco, Tex., “Johnny Gimble and the Homefolks” (for which he hired Willie Nelson to play bass in the band).But toward the end of the decade, with the rise of rock ‘n’ roll, the music he liked began to fade out of vogue, and Mr. Gimble, never thrilled by the life of a touring country band, mostly withdrew from full-time playing and earned a living for several years as a barber.AdvertisementThen, in the late 1960s, he moved to Nashville, where he became one of country music’s most sought-after session players. He recorded with Chet Atkins, Merle Haggard, Conway Twitty and Dolly Parton, among others, and was a member of the Million Dollar Band, an all-star ensemble including Atkins, Roy Clark and Floyd Cramer that was featured on the television show “Hee Haw.”After returning to Texas, he played regularly in Mr. Nelson’s band. He can be heard on George Strait’s 1983 album “Right or Wrong,” which reached No. 1 on Billboard’s country chart. He portrayed Bob Wills in the 1982 film “Honkytonk Man,” directed by and starring Clint Eastwood.John Paul Gimble was born in or around Tyler, Tex., on May 30, 1926. His father was a telegraph operator for a railroad. The Rose City Swingsters, the family band, played on local radio and on the back of a flatbed truck that parked on streets around East Texas.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He was drafted at 18 and spent two years in Austria, working behind a desk in the special services division and at night, following Cliff Bruner’s advice, playing along in his room with the big bands on Armed Forces Radio. After his discharge he played with a number of dance bands and radio bands in Texas; he was in Corpus Christi with a group called the Rhythmaires when he was asked to join Wills’s Playboys. He married Barbara Kemp, who was related to members of the Rhythmaires, in 1949. They divorced twice and remarried twice.“It was a rough life being married to a musician on the road,” she said in an interview. “But a happy one.”Mr. Gimble’s other survivors include a brother, Gene; a sister, Josephine Parker; two daughters, Cyndy Gimble and Paula Gay Bullock; a son, Dick; four grandchildren; and three great-grandchildren.Among Mr. Gimble’s many awards are two Grammys for his work with the band Asleep at the Wheel. He was also named instrumentalist of the year by the Country Music Association five times in all. In 1994 he received a National Heritage Fellowship, an award that honors lifelong contributions to traditional American arts, from the National Endowment for the Arts.“We got home and my wife said she never had slept with a national relic before,” Mr. Gimble recalled on Garrison Keillor’s radio show, “A Prairie Home Companion,” where he was an occasional guest.“One of our favorite people,” Mr. Keillor said about him, and then proceeded to sing a song he’d written as a tribute to his guest. It went, in part, like this:His name’s Johnny Gimble, and now he’s a symbol for his fabulous fiddling skills,He can play ‘Darling Nelly’ like Stéphane Grappelli, and tunes that are old as the hills,He can play that ‘Orange Blossom’ so the people would toss ‘em dimes, quarters and some dollar bills,AdvertisementHe played shows and dances from Texas to Kansas with a fiddler by the name of Bob Wills.Because of an editing error, an obituary on Thursday about the fiddle player Johnny Gimble misstated the period during which he served in Austria with the Army. It was in the early years of the Allied occupation, not during World War II.A version of this article appears in print on May 14, 2015, on Page B19 of the New York edition with the headline: Johnny Gimble, Who Fiddled His Way From a Flatbed Truck to Fame, Dies at 88.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.