AdvertisementSupported byCritic’s NotebookBy Gia KourlasA point shoe descends in slow motion, aiming its tip like a dagger as it hits the center of a spotlight. The voice of Jennifer Homans, author of “Apollo’s Angels: A History of Ballet,” gently, almost coaxingly, speaks about the ritual the art form requires, starting with the ballet positions a dancer works through each morning. She says of the daily practice, “It’s a kind of freedom.”In another glacial moment, we see Hee Seo, a principal with American Ballet Theater, falling backward into the arms of her partner, Cory Stearns. “You lose yourself,” Ms. Homans continues, “and then you have a kind of transcendent experience.”But with its bizarre fixation on slow motion, “American Ballet Theater: A History,” an “American Masters” documentary on Friday night on PBS, is more sluggish than transcendent.The film, directed by Ric Burns, is also more of a love letter to ballet than a thorough portrait of Ballet Theater, currently celebrating its 75th anniversary at the Metropolitan Opera House and performing some of the early works highlighted here, like Antony Tudor’s “Pillar of Fire” and Jerome Robbins’s “Fancy Free.”Interviews with critics, dancers and directors include Alicia Alonso; Julie Kent; Susan Jaffe; Lucia Chase, who led the company with Oliver Smith from 1945 to 1980; and the current artistic director, Kevin McKenzie. Mikhail Baryshnikov, the company’s visionary leader from 1980 to 1989, is part of the story, though the extent of his contributions — especially the inventive choreographers he brought in — is overlooked.While Ms. Homans describes the uncanny, intimate thrill of watching ballet — she calls it “the chemistry of dance” — the film has a harder time connecting the Ballet Theater of the 1940s, which Alexei Ratmansky, artist in residence, calls “an incredible time, so inspiring,” with that of today.Oddly, there’s also no mention of the company’s constant rotation of guest artists, but in Ms. Kent, a veteran member who speaks more authoritatively about the company than just about anyone, there is a sense of the link from one generation to the next. Before her debut in “La Bayadère,” she recalls how Natalia Makarova, who staged the ballet, left a note on her dressing-room table about how beauty could save the world. It’s an idea that has resonated with Ms. Kent for years. “Beauty and humanity, which is so clear in dance,” she says, “is the closest that we can get to that salvation.”Mr. Ratmansky, another authoritative voice, explains that dancers perform “the steps that were invented by the bodies and minds of the past. So when you do the step, this is our way to talk to the past.” The wonderful part about ballet, he continues, is that “you’re not alone, you’re supported by all this — you can call them spirits.”Of course, even that sentiment is undercut by its accompanying visual: shadows of dancers moving against a wall. All the while, the relentless use of slow-motion with equally cloying music shares too much with a nature documentary. Instead of birds taking flight with their wings spraying dew toward the heavens, dancers leap in the haze of a spotlight. At times it seems less like a documentary than a ballet advertorial.Advertisement