AdvertisementSupported byBy Gia KourlasHubbard Street Dance Chicago is a confusing company though it’s easy to see why talented dancers flock to it. They want to perform, and if this group has anything, it’s an abundance of contemporary repertory. Its identity is harder to pin down. Led by the artistic director Glenn Edgerton, Hubbard Street returned to the Joyce Theater on Tuesday with five dances, four of which were so monotonous in lighting and tone — a generic blending of windmilling arms, darting changes of directions and accented gestures — that in the end, it seemed like one long piece with interruptions.The company’s resident choreographer, Alejandro Cerrudo, offers two works: an excerpt from “Second to Last,” set to well-trodden Arvo Part, and “Cloudless,” which features Ana Lopez and Jacqueline Burnett. In “Second” five couples exhibit elastic stretch, but there’s too little to differentiate one pair from the next; their fluidity, while lovely, is like wallpaper. For “Cloudless,” Mr. Cerrudo focuses on mirroring movement as the two women wind together and apart until they merge as one, turning as if a spindle on a turntable. In “Waxing Moon,” by Robyn Mineko Williams, a love triangle ends similarly as Ms. Burnett, held horizontally with her legs and arms outstretched, is spun by Andrew Murdock. The watery dance, in which a man contemplates two potential lovers, has a voyeur edge, but no real distinction. Crystal Pite’s gimmicky “A Picture of You Falling” features a voice-over and the dancer Jason Hortin reacting to statements like, “This is how you collapse.” At least it shows Mr. Hortin’s nimble proficiency for stuttering, slippery movement. The evening’s final dance, Gustavo Ramírez Sansano’s “I Am Mister B,” created in tribute to George Balanchine, has energy; sadly, that doesn’t make it any less appalling. Set to the same Tchaikovsky music Balanchine used for “Theme and Variations,” the work, according to a program note, aims to keep the “feeling of that classic piece alive.”Jesse Bechard, speaking as Balanchine, announces, “Good evening, we are Mr. B.” as the dancers, wearing thin bow ties in the choreographer’s honor, react to the music with frenetic scribbles of shapes that border on convulsions. (At one point, the score accidentally stopped playing. Was it Balanchine? Tchaikovsky? God?) Bounding this way and that, they strangle the music instead of dancing to it. It’s hardly reverence. Hubbard Street Dance Chicago continues performances through May 24 at the Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue at 19th Street, Chelsea; 212-242-0800, joyce.org. Advertisement