AdvertisementSupported byBy Brian SeibertAmerican Ballet Theater is celebrating its 75th anniversary by presenting a half-dozen one-act ballets from its first decade. Having opened its season at the Metropolitan Opera House on Monday with three selections, the company followed up on Tuesday with the remainder. This second grouping of three underscored the marvelous range that Ballet Theater offered during those early years: traditional and modern, pure-form and narrative, European and American. It showed the durability of great choreography, even in less than ideal performances.George Balanchine made “Theme and Variations” for the company in 1947. A “ballet in the grand manner” was requested, and that is what he delivered, a scintillating encapsulation of imperial Russian classicism. The palatial architecture of the choreography is built not to fail; in tandem with its Tchaikovsky score, the dance rises regally, majestically, transportingly. As the lead couple, Sarah Lane and Herman Cornejo were physically compatible. During passages of side-by-side footwork, they were particularly in accord. But Ms. Lane, a soloist in a ballerina role, met the ballet’s lofty challenges with sufficiency of skill rather than a glamorous surfeit. Mr. Cornejo has more than enough technical aplomb — the notorious chains of turns and turning jumps in the man’s solo are almost too easy for him — and yet his gently gallant performance was oddly contained and low in energy.The dancers in Antony Tudor’s “Jardin aux Lilas” are supposed to look restricted. This 1936 British work, imported by Ballet Theater during its inaugural 1940 season, is a masterpiece of repressed emotion, set during a garden party before the heroine, Caroline, is to marry a man she does not love. Here the geometry is interpersonal, psychological. Where “Theme and Variations” promises and gratifies, “Jardin” succeeds by denying satisfaction.As the Man She Must Marry, Roman Zhurbin was exemplary in eloquent stiffness. Veronika Part was well cast as the Episode in His Past, her coarseness conveying volatile desperation. As the man Caroline does love, Cory Stearns was swoon-worthy in his romantic swooning. But Hee Seo, temperamentally reserved, is not enough of an actress to make us feel what does not happen. Her Caroline was a cipher, and with her at its center, the ballet lacked its full tragic impact.Agnes de Mille made “Rodeo” for the Ballet Russe de Monte Carlo in 1942, but when Ballet Theater adopted it in 1950, the company took a step toward earning the title of American Ballet Theater. (That came in 1957.) This is a cowboy ballet, imperishably charming, and the square dance in its middle was the liveliest moment of Tuesday’s program. If this evening’s cowboys were a bit tame, de Mille’s balleticized folk dances always catch the lyric tone of the great Aaron Copland score.As the tomboyish cowgirl who can’t land a man until she dons a dress, Xiomara Reyes, retiring this season, has one of her best roles. Here, as in earlier years, she was endearing, if not terribly exciting. James Whiteside was likewise likable; with his goofiness and horsy tap dancing, he’s a misfit, too, and thus a fine match for the cowgirl. “Rodeo” has built-in spaces for laughs that sounded a little empty on Tuesday, but it’s a mark of Ballet Theater’s achievement that the spaces are still there to fill.American Ballet Theater’s “Classic ABT” programs run through Saturday at the Metropolitan Opera House; 212-362-6000, abt.org. Advertisement