AdvertisementSupported byBy Roslyn SulcasBRUSSELS — The dancer tilted her body to one side with slow exactitude, lifting a leg, then angling it to the floor behind her. She almost knocked into a tiny child who had toddled up unsteadily and was staring in wonder at the strange, slowly moving creature. No embarrassed parent rushed up; no curtain was lowered. It was one of many moments during Anne Teresa De Keersmaeker’s act on Saturday that the public threaded its way through dancers and musicians, got in their way, and occasionally even spoke to them. That’s because the performance, “Work/Travail/Arbeid,” is a dance piece that is also a museum exhibition, at the Wiels Contemporary Art Center.Although “Work/Travail/Arbeid” began in late March, it is also part of the Kunstenfestivaldesarts, an annual performing arts festival that opened here on Friday. The performance is held during the seven hours a day that the Wiels center is open; by the end of its run on Sunday, about 23,000 people will have seen at least some portion of the work. Dance in museums isn’t a new idea. Trisha Brown and Yvonne Rainer were staging pieces in galleries in the 1960s and 1970s, and in recent years, the contemporary art world has embraced dance and performance art, while the dance world has rushed eagerly toward the prestige and exposure offered by major museums. The Tate Modern in London has a dedicated space, the Tanks, for the genre. This weekend, Boris Charmatz and around 90 choreographers and dancers will inhabit not just the Tanks but also the entire Tate Modern, calling it the Musée de la Danse and filling the building with performances, debates and group dances that involve the public.But Mr. Charmatz’s event, like most dance pop-ups in museums, has a specific time-frame. By inhabiting Wiels for an exhibition-long duration, Ms. De Keersmaeker is doing something rather different. At least in theory, this is dance as an artwork, to be wandered around, considered, revisited or abandoned at will. It isn’t exactly an installation, in which the entire environment is the work of art; it isn’t exactly a performance with a temporal beginning and end. The work is configured in nine-hour segments, so even if you stayed all day, you couldn’t see the entire piece. And what would an “entire piece” mean in this case?It’s a fascinating idea, and on Saturday a large crowd was at Wiels, many there also to see Ms. De Keersmaeker perform a 30-minute solo that she has created as a response to watching her dancers and the public over the last few weeks. The solo, in a large empty space identical to the one her dancers were performing in one floor below, was a sketchy, inward affair that began with a breathtaking flute solo (from Salvatore Sciarrino’s “Opera per Flauto”) by Chryssi Dimitriou, whose extreme upper body movements, as she played, provided a kind of dance of their own. Ms. De Keersmaeker at first echoed Ms. Dimitriou’s movements, then later danced in silence, working her way around the space — and sometimes through a knot of observers — with small hesitant steps, and looping runs. It didn’t feel like a particularly coherent theatrical event; then again, it wasn’t a theatrical event, and part of the entertainment, as with “Work,” was provided by watching the people watching.What emerged during “Work” was that audiences, conditioned by watching live performance in theaters, often behave in the same way in a gallery or museum, despite the occasional. Mostly, people stood or sat quietly along the walls on all sides, occasionally moving when the dancers themselves shifted between the two spaces (one larger) that they performed in. There was little chatter, a few people took photographs, and when spectators moved around, they tended to tiptoe quietly and self-consciously. Most seemed to stay for at least the full hour’s stretch of each segment, often longer. (Between segments, the dancers, seven in all, dressed in white or beige jeans and tops and vibrantly colored sneakers, stood quietly against the walls, or redrew chalk circles and geometric figures inscribed on the floor.)The sections I saw on Saturday were all small scale; one, two or three dancers, with a matching number of musicians from the Ictus Ensemble playing alongside. Ms. De Keersmaeker has deconstructed a 2013 work, “Vortex Temporum,” set to music by the experimental composer Gérard Grisey, dissecting ensembles into their component parts and pairing dancers with specific instruments. Part of the fascination of “Work” — and why, I suspect, people stayed for long stretches — is the chance to see these highly skilled artists up close; the technique, control and precision of both the dancers and the musicians was breathtakingly evident. (Mr. Grisey’s music, which emphasizes pure sound and its transformations, isn’t easy, but no one seemed to mind.)Does putting the work in this setting alter the way one watches dance? Does it provide new possibilities for the form as an ongoing mobile artwork? Conceptually, yes; experientially perhaps not.The Kunstenfestival opened on Friday with Jérôme Bel’s performance “Gala,” a nod and a wink to a more traditional kind of opening. In many ways, “Gala” is the direct opposite of “Work/Travail/Arbeid.” It celebrates the proscenium arch (it begins with a slide show of theaters, famous and unknown, formal and decorated as well as bare, makeshift spaces) and its performers are amateurs, with few technical skills. Mr. Bel, who describes himself as a conceptual choreographer and has considerable technical skills, puts 19 children and adults of varying ages, all sorts of body types and colors, and a woman in a wheelchair, on stage and appears to let them try out being dancers. In short turns, they attempt a variety of dance forms: ballet, a waltz, Michael Jackson moves, improvisation. Then several alternate performing a solo, which the others attempt to copy. It soon becomes touchingly clear that the music they have each chosen represents their dreams of themselves as artists.It could all have gone horribly wrong. But in a 90-minute stretch, as mostly untrained bodies attempt movement that is (mostly) way beyond their capacities, Mr. Bel shows, through rigorous structure and timing, how hard it is to master the body, how vulnerable performers are and must be, and how much human beings love to dance.“Gala” forces audience expectations to the fore, and blurs the lines between failure and success in performance as it suggests that theater is community, both onstage and off. It’s a tour de force, wildly entertaining, and through the deliberate exploitation of conventional form, truly radical. “Work/Travail/Arbeid” continues through May 17. “Gala” will be performed again from May 28 through 30. Advertisement