
MAY 15, 2015

The weather warms up and — suddenly, it seems — arts festivals are everywhere. So, for fans of pop, dance, theater and classical music, here’s a look at potential cultural pilgrimages: from Verdi in Cooperstown to Shakespeare in Oregon, from Trisha Brown in Charleston to Kendrick Lamar in New Orleans.
Now in its 30th year, SummerStage festival remains the quixotic ideal of New York entertainment for its talented and diverse performers, its luxurious al fresco locales throughout the five boroughs and its reliably giddy audiences. In this anniversary season, the festival’s organizers, City Parks Foundation, up the offerings by a good 15 percent and host more events in Central Park, a welcome development. The season opens with a free performance by the Tedeschi Trucks Band in Central Park and continues with Jungle, Angelique Kidjo, Caribou and more. As always, the beloved subseries the Charlie Parker Jazz Festival returns to uphold its reputation as the best free jazz weekend in the city.cityparksfoundation.orgMotor City dance denizens pride themselves on being decades ahead of the curve; the city was a bustling hub for house and techno music well before the bawdy hybrid form of dubstep stormed the American mainstream. The internationally acclaimed Movement Festival caters to fans of such formative electronic genres; last year, the young D.J.’s Jacques Greene and Seth Troxler spun arresting sets alongside such lauded veterans as Richie Hawtin and Pete Tong. This year’s lineup is even stronger, with appearances by the local techno linchpins Stacey Pullen and Carl Craig, the acid-house and drum-and-bass alchemist Squarepusher, the London dancepop stars Disclosure, the Nigerian deep house doyenne Nicole Moudaber and more.movement.usThis free, 37th annual arts showcase offers a wholesome, idyllic beauty; under the gleaming Prospect Park Bandshell, inspired performers commune with a sea of appreciative listeners, most spread on picnic blankets and merrily noshing on local barbecue. This year, powerhouse female vocalists rule the roost: Chaka Khan, Esperanza Spalding, Rhiannon Giddens and Tune-Yards headline, as do the clever dance electropop duo Sylvan Esso, the Malian singer-guitarist Vieux Farka Touré and more.bricartsmedia.org/cbWith its strong emphasis on jazz education, the D.C. Jazz Festival serves as an exuberant meeting point for both bop loyalists and neophytes. The reliably elegant showcases pull from the strongest contemporary talent in the country and command dozens of clubs, parks and restaurants across the city; now in its 11th year, the series boasts centerpiece sets by the Charlie Hunter Trio, Afrohorn, Common, Femi Kuti and the Positive Force, Esperanza Spalding Presents Emily’s D+Evolution, the Bad Plus Joshua Redman and more.dcjazzfest.orgSome New York music fans may be reluctant to travel for festivals; after all, in the warmer months, Manhattanites can’t swing a fist without hitting an enticing pop or rock concert. Governors Ball, now in its fifth year, asks only of a short ferry ride to the placid Randalls Island, and rewards with one of the best contemporary lineups of the season. This year, Drake has top billing; other top-shelf acts include Björk, Florence + the Machine, the Black Keys, Ryan Adams, Sharon Van Etten, St. Vincent and Tame Impala. The popular lawn games and Silent Disco also return for encores.governorsballmusicfestival.comThis sprawling bohemian utopia of dust and dazzle attracts close to 100,000 attendees annually and, unlike most major festivals, allows its performers to frolic well into the wee hours (and its drum circles thrive well after that). Bonnaroo has become such a cultural touchstone since it started in 2002 that it has even prompted a namesake ice cream by Ben & Jerry’s (Bonnaroo Buzz, a blend of coffee and caramel). This year, Billy Joel, Mumford & Sons, Kendrick Lamar and Deadmau5 headline the festivities; mindful folk and bluegrass acts provide an especially strong draw with My Morning Jacket, Punch Brothers, and Robert Plant and the Sensational Space Shifters. Also, the terrific London and New York tribute series “Atomic Bomb! Who Is William Onyeabor?” reprises with Jamie Lidell, Luke Jenner and other prominent fans of that Nigerian funk pioneer. Chris Hardwick, Reggie Watts and Natasha Leggero are in the comedy lineup, still the strongest in the country. bonnaroo.comThe largest free blues festival in the world, as proud Windy City residents readily trumpet, this soulful staple enters its 32nd year of hosting international and local talents. Last year, Dr. John and Bettye LaVette delivered barn-burning sets; this year features the overdue return of the local blues eminence Buddy Guy, as well as promising sets from the Taj Mahal Trio, Zora Young and Syl Johnson.cityofchicago.orgAmid all the entertainment offerings of this hectic season, Summerfest stands apart as the Spinal Tap of rock festivals: It’s louder, zanier, and it goes to 11 (days). Every year, nearly 900,000 attendees storm the shores of Lake Michigan to watch over 800 artists who span rock, R&B, country and more. This year offers the Rolling Stones, Zac Brown Band, Kendrick Lamar, Keith Urban, Ed Sheeran, Mavis Staples, Buddy Guy, Sheryl Crow and many, many more.summerfest.comDespite some persistent stereotypes to the contrary, New Yorkers have no problem kicking up their heels to country music, as recent sold-out concerts by Blake Shelton and Luke Bryan at Madison Square Garden demonstrated. Farmborough, a new festival devoted to the rollicking genre, debuts this year with sets by the heavy-hitters Mr. Bryan, Brad Paisley and Dierks Bentley. The event aims to promote a family-friendly environment, as well, with no age restrictions for admission and free entry for children under 6.farmboroughfestival.comBetween the juggernaut, multigenre draws that are the New Orleans Jazz and Heritage Festival in the spring and the Voodoo Music + Arts Experience the fall, the superbly stacked Essence Festival is often overlooked. But its concentration on neo-soul, hip-hop and R&B allows for each genre to unfurl fully, celebrating its established superstars while championing its innovative up-and-comers. Mary J. Blige, Missy Elliott, Kendrick Lamar and Erykah Badu top a robust lineup that also features the dynamic Christian rapper Lecrae, the sensual soul crooner Bilal and the Norwegian R&B-hip-hop duo Nico & Vinz.essence.com/festivalThe Coachella Valley Music and Arts Annual Festival may have pool parties and palm trees, and South by Southwest may offer an on-site tattoo artist for V.I.P. denizens, but only Green River Festival delivers hot-air balloons. The jazz, folk and country-heavy event, which celebrates its 29th season this year, evolved from an annual balloon festival on the same grounds, and it still launches several in tribute each year. This summer’s roster veers toward folk and experimental-rock direction with sets by Tune-Yards, Punch Brothers, and J Mascis, as well as a heavy roots and jazz contingent in Steve Earle and the Dukes, Valerie June and Marco Benevento.greenriverfestival.comThe leading online music portal Pitchfork recently expanded in an improbable direction: a physical, pulp-and-print quarterly journal, the sort of relic widely thought to be heading toward extinction. In those pages and on the website’s reams of erudite record reviews, contributors have waxed rhapsodic about the languorous electro-hip-hop producer-rapper iLoveMakonnen, the righteous punk-rock trio Sleater-Kinney, the pensive folk-rockers Wilco and the skillful young electronic producer Jamie xx; the 10th annual Pitchfork Music Festival folds in these artists as well as Chance the Rapper, Courtney Barnett, Run the Jewels, Panda Bear and more.pitchforkmusicfestival.comWhat began 24 years ago as a glimmer in the eye of Perry Farrell, outré lead singer of the heavy-metal band Jane’s Addiction, still endures as one of the world’s hippest and best-organized rock festivals; besides this Midwest flagship event, the franchise has also expanded to Argentina, Chile and Brazil. (A German leg will also debut in September.) This year, Paul McCartney, Metallica and Florence + the Machine will jam against the dramatic backdrop of the Chicago skyline; Alt-J, Alabama Shakes, Bassnectar, Sam Smith, Kaskade and TV on the Radio round out the excellently varied offerings.lollapalooza.comThe Bay Area’s most prominent rock festival also has its culinary bona fides: It features a “Wine Lands” mobile vineyard that pulls from the celebrated Napa Valley region, a “Taste of the Bay Area” food truck corral that offers traditional and fusion snacks, and a newly added third section called “Gastromagic” boasts cooking competitions. Once stomachs are stuffed, the pop music offerings are satiating, too: Elton John, the Black Keys and Mumford & Sons headline a bill that also includes Sam Smith, Porter Robinson, St. Vincent, and D’Angelo and the Vanguard.sfoutsidelands.comDecadent raves are now 10-a-penny in America, and so are their drawbacks: unyielding and assaultive decibel levels, dire grounds stacked ankle-deep in garbage. This upstart festival, expanded from its Belgian origins and now in its third year, has leapt up the ranks of electronic dance music soirees for its upscaling of the standard dance festival experience; it recruits thoughtful and nuanced dance authorities to host its stages (this year, Pete Tong and Hardwell lead the pack), decamps to the lush and spacious grounds of Chattahoochee Hills, cleans its facilities with unusual aplomb and restricts its attendee age to 21 and older to weed out some of the more overeager debauchery.tomorrowworld.comAs usual at this prominent festival, snug in the Berkshires, there’s an abundance of riches for music lovers of all aesthetic preferences. Andris Nelsons celebrates his first Tanglewood season as music director of the Boston Symphony Orchestra in grand style with Mahler’s “Symphony of a Thousand.” For opera fans, there is Bryn Terfel and Sondra Radvanovsky in Act I of “Tosca.” And in honor of the 75th anniversary of the Tanglewood Music Center, there are 30 commissions on the lineup, from composers including Steven Mackey, Ned Rorem, Bright Sheng, Augusta Read Thomas and Charles Wuorinen. As part of the Festival of Contemporary Music, Michael Tilson Thomas conducts a program featuring music by Ives, Copland and Bernstein — all of them composers who were crucial to the center’s history.tanglewood.orgProbably even Stockhausen, who in 1959 wrote “Zyklus,” the first major composition for solo percussion, wouldn’t have predicted that entire festivals would one day be devoted to the genre. That’s in no small part because of the efforts of Steven Schick — who has commissioned many works, some of which he will perform this summer at Ojai. The lineup includes the American premiere of Roland Auzet’s staging of Kurt Schwitter’s Dadaist sound poem “Ursonate” and soloists including the pipa player Wu Man and the cellist Maya Beiser performing works by Lou Harrison, Osvaldo Golijov, Michael Harrison and Chinary Ung. There will also be a celebration of the 90th birthday of Pierre Boulez, with his works paired with the six string quartets of Bartok, whose Sonata for Two Pianos and Percussion, fittingly, concludes the festival.ojaifestival.orgWhere might one experience the unlikely juxtaposition of the English suffragist Dame Ethel Smyth and the 20th-century Mexican composer Carlos Chávez? At Bard, of course — where programming is invariably thought provoking. The festival presents what is billed as the first fully staged American production of “The Wreckers,” a one-act opera by Smyth, whose music was criticized in her lifetime as unfeminine. Leon Botstein and the American Symphony Orchestra also highlight the music and cultural contributions of Chávez, whose scores reference indigenous traditions, placing his life in the context of other prominent Latin American, American and European artists of his generation.fishercenter.bard.eduSince the death of Lorin Maazel last year, Dietlinde Turban Maazel, his wife, has taken on the role of artistic director of this festival, which showcases rising stars and takes place mainly on the couple’s 600-acre property. Ruth Bader Ginsburg is to attend the premiere of “Scalia/Ginsburg,” a comic opera by Derrick Wang about the two opera-loving Supreme Court justices, programmed on a double bill with Ravel’s “L’Heure Espagnole.” Also on the lineup is a production of Gounod’s “Roméo et Juliette,” a symphonic concert conducted by Fabio Luisi, bluegrass music, a performance by Wynton Marsalis and Beethoven’s Symphony No. 9.castletonfestival.comRobert Spano has put together a wide-ranging season called “Dreams of Travel,” featuring works — from Verdi’s “Aida” to Ligeti’s “Romanian Concerto” — inspired by other cultures. There will also be recent and brand-new pieces by Sebastian Currier and Jennifer Higdon, as well as a staged production of Steven Stucky and Jeremy Denk’s comic operetta “The Classical Style.” Rising stars will perform in staged productions of Gounod’s “Roméo et Juliette” and Mozart’s Così Fan Tutte, conducted by Jane Glover. Jennifer Koh and Shai Wosner partner for Beethoven’s 10 Sonatas for Violin and Piano, each paired with a new work, including one by the jazz composer Vijay Iyer.http://aspenmusicfestival.comHomemade instruments, a Japanese Noh play, dancers and a deaf hobo? That would be the weird and wonderful “Delusion of the Fury,” a rarely-staged 90-minute musical theater piece by the experimental American composer Harry Partch, presented here in a production by Heiner Goebbels. Messiaen’s glittering canvases seem a colorfully apt complement: The Cleveland Orchestra, conducted by Franz Welser-Möst, offers the composer’s “Chronochromie” and “Hymne.” Mr. Welser-Möst also leads a concert performance of Strauss’s opera “Daphne,” Dvorak’s Symphony No. 5, Strauss’s “Symphonia Domestica” and Beethoven’s “Pastorale” symphony.lincolncenterfestival.orgWhat better way to celebrate the 40th anniversary of Glimmerglass than with the charismatic bass-baritone Eric Owens as artist in residence. Mr. Owens — who has impressed in multiple roles recently with his booming, rich voice and theatrical insights — will make his role debut here as the title character in Verdi’s Macbeth, and perform in concert with the excellent tenor Lawrence Brownlee. The lineup also includes the vocal fireworks of Vivaldi’s “Catone in Utica,” a story of passion and politics in the Roman empire, directed by Tazewell Thompson, plus Bernstein’s “Candide” and a new production (based on Native American folklore) of Mozart’s “The Magic Flute.”glimmerglass.orgWriting in The New York Times, Corinna da Fonseca-Wollheim described George Benjamin’s “Written on Skin” as “a psychologically gripping, emotionally heart-pounding and viscerally satisfying drama that throws up moral questions that linger long after its 90-minute run.” The opera will receive its first American staged performance here, with Alan Gilbert conducting the Mahler Chamber Orchestra and singers including Barbara Hannigan. The International Contemporary Ensemble will perform Mr. Benjamin’s chamber opera “Into the Little Hill”; the pianist Pierre-Laurent Aimard also offers works by Mr. Benjamin in one of the delightful, candlelit “Little Night Music” concerts. And of course, there’s plenty of Mozart, too.mostlymozart.orgMarin Alsop, the music director of the Baltimore Symphony Orchestra, is a tireless champion of the new at this contemporary music celebration. The 12 composers in residence include Sebastian Currier, Missy Mazzoli, Mason Bates, Nico Muhly, Sean Shepherd and David T. Little, whose “Haunted Topography” — inspired by the story of a woman whose son died in the Vietnam War — will be performed opening night alongside the American premiere of James MacMillan’s Percussion Concerto No. 2. Other highlights include Huang Ruo’s “Color Yellow” for sheng, an ancient Chinese reed instrument.cabrillomusic.orgYou’ve seen the film, perhaps read the book. Now’s your chance to see the premiere of Jennifer Higdon’s operatic take on “Cold Mountain,” conducted by Miguel Harth-Bedoya. Nathan Gunn stars as the Confederate Army soldier Inman and Isabel Leonard as Ada, his love. The soldiers are cheerier in Donizetti’s comic “Fille du Regiment,” starring the soprano Anna Christy. Other treats include David Robertson conducting Strauss’s “Salome” (with the Bulgarian soprano Alex Penda in the title role); the baritone Quinn Kelsey singing the title role in Verdi’s “Rigoletto;” and Harry Bicket leading Mozart’s comic “La Finta Giardiniera.” santafeopera.orgThis popular destination is celebrating its 80th season, but it’s no stodgy old-timer. In fact, Ashland recently announced three new play commissions, part of its ambitious series “American Revolutions: The United States History Cycle,” devoted to new works focusing on significant periods of change in American history. Shakespeare still has pride of place here, and “Pericles,” “Much Ado About Nothing” and “Antony and Cleopatra” will be presented this season alongside several other productions. If you can’t get your fill in the busy, long season, there’s a Shakespeare-theme cruise to look forward to in December.osfashland.orgWith titles as non-Shavian as “Peter and the Starcatcher,” “Sweet Charity” and “The Intelligent Homosexual’s Guide to Capitalism and Socialism With a Key to the Scriptures” on the to-do list in the coming months, this Ontario institution might seem to have strayed from its mission. But in fact, the writings of George Bernard Shaw have long been a jumping-off point, offering the artistic director Jackie Maxwell the opportunity to be inventive as she programs work both by and reflective of Shaw. Fear not, purists, the namesake writer will be represented by “Pygmalion” and “You Never Can Tell.”shawfest.comHenry VIII had many wives, but only one outlived him, and Katherine Parr’s life was hardly humdrum — she was married four times herself. “The Last Wife,” a new play about Parr by Kate Hennig is one of more than a dozen shows in the current season at this venerable Canada festival. “Pericles,” “Hamlet” and “The Taming of the Shrew” are some of the Shakespearean offerings, but there’s plenty of range — “The Sound of Music” is on the calendar, too. Although you’ll be busy, save time for visits to Chocolate Barr’s and Revel Caffe. You’re welcome. stratfordfestival.caWe tend to associate this time of year with lightness — vacation season is coming! But meaningful theater is always an option, and an important centerpiece to this Bay Area festival is “Armine, Sister.” This American premiere from the Polish company Teatr ZAR reflects — with the help of Anatolian monadic chants — on the annihilation of nearly 1.5 million Armenians by Ottoman Turks in 1915. The show comes 100 years after the initial atrocity (which the Turkish government has refused to call genocide). This festival focuses on international artists, and Teatr ZAR is one of many en route to San Francisco.sfiaf.orgWestern Massachusetts explodes with the arts every summer, and these two institutions are vital to that scene. At Shakespeare & Company, John Douglas Thompson, who has played the title roles in “Othello” and “Richard III” there, will star in Lolita Chakrabarti’s “Red Velvet” as Ira Aldridge, the first African-American actor to play Othello. The full season includes several other productions, some by Shakespeare. Berkshire Theater also has an impressive summer lineup, on three stages — two in Stockbridge and one in Pittsfield.shakespeare.org, berkshiretheatregroup.orgI don’t know about you, but I’ll be at the Dock Street Theater in Charleston soon to catch the first United States performance of “Romeo and Juliet” by Shakespeare’s Globe of London. The show is one of several theater offerings in Charleston’s annual multi-arts feast. The Canadian company 2b will present its live-action graphic novel “When It Rains,” too, and remember to also look into Piccolo Spoleto, the accompanying smorgasbord of theater, dance, comedy and more that runs during Spoleto. There, productions of “A Steady Rain” and “The Last Five Years” can round out your Charleston visit, along with, naturally, a Charleston Ghost Tour.spoletousa.org, piccolospoleto.comYou cannot start listing names (Audra McDonald! Cynthia Nixon!) of performers appearing in the next summer season at this place (Kyra Sedgwick! Estelle Parsons!) without leaving important actors out. (Don’t forget Blair Underwood, Jessica Hecht, Eric Bogosian and David Greenspan!). The impressive roster extends to directors and designers, too, and this summer looks to be especially rich, with “Off the Main Road,” a never-before-produced play by William Inge; several world premieres; and Eugene O’Neill’s “A Moon for the Misbegotten,” directed by Gordon Edelstein and starring Ms. McDonald and Will Swenson. wtfestival.orgThis Wisconsin mainstay is one of many theater events around the country that does not have the word “festival” in its name, but it bursts to life with a flurry of shows for several months, then hibernates during the winter; so it’s certainly festive. Productions of “A Streetcar Named Desire,” Athol Fugard’s “The Island” and Noël Coward’s “Private Lives” are on the calendar, alongside Shakespeare’s “Othello” and “The Merry Wives of Windsor,” and other productions staged indoors and outside. Don’t forget to visit to Frank Lloyd Wright’s Taliesin estate a few miles away.americanplayers.orgFor serious theatergoers, outdoor Shakespeare is a must in the warm weather, and where better to take it in than this spot by the edge of the Hudson River? The natural backdrop is breathtaking and the work consistently strong. “The Winter’s Tale” and “A Midsummer Night’s Dream” are the contributions this year in a season to also include “The Arabian Nights” and “An Iliad,” the adaptation by Lisa Peterson and Denis O’Hare that has been performed in many theaters — including in Manhattan at New York Theater Workshop — over the past few years. hvshakespeare.orgSince the first one in Edinburgh in 1947, fringe festivals have become increasingly ubiquitous. It might make for an interesting (if rather zigzag and possibly insane) road trip, actually, to hit the Hollywood Fringe Festival (June 11-28), then head to the St. Lou Fringe (June 17-27), over to Maine for the PortFringe (June 20-28), down to the Capital Fringe in Washington (July 9-26) and finally to the New York International Fringe Festival (Aug. 14-30). An optional extension could include Boulder (Sept. 16-27) and Houston (Sept. 23-27). There are many of these; surely one is close to you.“Rain,” with a book by Sybille Pearson and music and lyrics by Michael John LaChiusa, is one of several workshops coming up at this annual collaborative new-works festival, a joint effort of New York Stage and Film and Vassar College. A lot looks intriguing on the schedule, including another new musical from Duncan Sheik and a workshop of “Desire,” an evening of six short plays based on stories by Tennessee Williams, by the writers Elizabeth Egloff, Marcus Gardley, Rebecca Gilman, David Grimm, John Guare and Beth Henley.powerhouse.vassar.eduTheater is just one element in this arts festival, where each week has a theme — “Redefining Europe” and “Creating Livable Communities” are among the topics this summer — and a series of lectures and other entertainments allow for an immersive experience. On Chautauqua’s stages, catch “Our Town,” “Henry V” and Lynn Nottage’s “Intimate Apparel,” and staged readings of new works by Jason Wells and David West Read (“The Dream of the Burning Boy”). The director Andrew Borba will lead a joint effort of the theater company and the Chautauqua Symphony Orchestra for one special performance (July 16) of “Ellis Island,” by Peter Boyer.theater.ciweb.orgIt’s far away, expensive and it rains a lot, but plenty of theater artists care not and head to the Scottish capital each summer to participate in the Edinburgh Festival Fringe, the biggest and oldest Fringe festival of all. Once again, 59E59 Theaters will allow New Yorkers who are not en route to Scotland in August to catch some homegrown works before the productions head over. About a dozen American shows, including “Bette Davis Ain’t for Sissies” and “Gary Busey’s One-Man Hamlet,” will be presented during the eclectic three-week event.59e59.orgThe activist performance art of the punk group Pussy Riot will overtake Shepherd University in West Virginia soon, or at least its story will. “We Are Pussy Riot,” by Barbara Hammond, is one of five plays in the 25th season at this pioneering festival. Shepherdstown might not immediately spring to mind as a breeding ground for new work, but since Ed Herendeen started this festival in 1991, more than 100 new plays, many of them world premieres, have been staged. Works by Michael Weller, Johnna Adams, Sheila Callaghan and Steven Dietz are also planned.catf.orgThis new collaboration has several arts organizations in southern Vermont joining forces and convincing some of us that you could do far worse than spend the entire summer there. Theater-wise, the Dorset Theater Festival season includes John Patrick Shanley’s “Outside Mullingar” (July 30-Aug. 15) among its many offerings; at Weston Playhouse, “Peter and the Starcatcher” (July 16-25) and “The Glass Menagerie” (Aug. 27-Sept. 5) are a couple of the options, and down in Bennington, “Cabaret” (July 10-Aug. 2) will be one of several productions staged at Oldcastle Theater.hillsalive.orgThe choreographer Shen Wei created “Untitled #12” as part of a museum exhibition last December. For this balmy festival, he adapts the dance from its gallery setting to a proscenium stage, pairing it with his gorgeously sweeping “Map.” (The same program travels to American Dance Festival, June 11-13.) Spoleto will also present the Trisha Brown Dance Company in Ms. Brown’s seminal “Set and Reset,” among other works, and the Scottish Ballet’s rendition of “A Streetcar Named Desire.” The Memphis jookin’ star Lil Buck, who went viral dancing alongside Yo-Yo Ma, collaborates with another cellist, Ashley Bathgate, in the premiere of “What Moves You.”spoletousa.orgMore than 30 companies and choreographers will pass through Durham for the 82nd edition of this festival. Among the more colorful offerings are Cuban folkloric dance from Ballet Folklórico Cutumba and “Awkward Magic,” an eclectic evening of dance comedy. There will be festival veterans — Pilobolus, the Paul Taylor Dance Company — and newcomers, like the Los Angeles troupe Bodytraffic and Company Wang Ramirez, from France. Bill T. Jones presents the first part of his new “Analogy: A Trilogy,” and the estimable Eiko Otake continues her site-responsive solo project, “A Body in Places,” inviting audiences to slow down and look closely.americandancefestival.orgShould you find yourself on Martha’s Vineyard, stop by the Yard and see what the director David R. White has done with the place. Since his arrival in 2011, the festival’s programming has blossomed. On deck this year are Ronald K. Brown, Kimberly Bartosik, Faye Driscoll and Cuba’s Malpaso Dance Company, to name a few. Mr. White has also instituted Dancehalls: informal gatherings with the slogan “Public Dancing Allowed!!!” dancetheyard.orgIt’s a good year for dance — and several varieties of circus — at this multigenre festival. The Mark Morris Dance Group offers Mr. Morris’s ebullient staging of Handel’s “Acis and Galatea,” joined by the Yale Collegium orchestra and Yale Choral Artists. Ragamala Dance Company, from Minneapolis, performs its sumptuous “Song of the Jasmine,” setting classical Indian dance to Rudresh Mahanthappa’s jazz-inflected score. The Swedish circus duo Magmanus and Quebec’s Machine de Cirque will take to the streets and the stage. Other highlights include a screening of the documentary “Capturing Grace,” about a transformative dance program for people with Parkinson’s disease.artidea.orgA winding road in the Berkshire Hills leads to Jacob’s Pillow, which transforms into a kind of international dance village each summer. This season, 19 companies from Canada, Cuba, France, Germany, the Netherlands and the United States appear on the two main stages, with many more at the free, outdoor Inside/Out series. First up is “Three Acts, Two Dancers, One Radio Host,” a witty, vaudevillian show from Ira Glass, the host of “This American Life,” and the choreographer Monica Bill Barnes. Big Dance Theater’s “Alan Smithee Directed This Play” and Liz Gerring’s “Glacier” are not to be missed.jacobspillow.orgNew York City Ballet heads north for its annual romp at this open-air amphitheater, bringing some of its newest, brightest repertory — Justin Peck’s “Rodeo: Four Dance Episodes,” Alexei Ratmansky’s “Pictures at an Exhibition” — along with classic works by the company’s founding choreographers (July 7-18). Two shorter engagements bookend the center’s dance calendar: Lar Lubovitch Dance Company on June 17 and National Ballet of China, July 21-22.spac.orgFrom Victorian houses on Governors Island to public parks and piers, all the city’s a stage at this roving festival, or at least all of Lower Manhattan. Some heavy hitters are on board this year, including Twyla Tharp — who will stage her 1970 classic, “The One Hundreds,” in Rockefeller Park — and the Trisha Brown Dance Company with “Trisha Brown: In Plain Site,” a reimagining of Ms. Brown’s work for Wagner Park on the Hudson River. Also keep an eye out for Michelle Boulé, Sarah Michelson and Yanira Castro, who transplants “Court/Garden,” her modern-day court spectacle, to Federal Hall.rivertorivernyc.comJuly 25 is National Dance Day, and this festival honors it appropriately, with a full day of dance in (and under) Lincoln Center Plaza. The family-friendly lineup features Lil Buck, leading exponent of the Memphis street dance style jookin; Heidi Latsky’s Wheelchair Athletes; and Bridgman/Packer Dance, whose “Truck” takes place underground on a vehicular stage. Also in store is Michelle Dorrance’s “Blues Project Revisited” (July 24), in which she continues forging new frontiers in tap, and a tribute to Geoffrey Holder (Aug. 1), with appearances by Carmen de Lavallade and Garth Fagan Dance.lcoutofdoors.orgDamian Woetzel, the New York City Ballet principal turned impresario, masterminds this yearly extravaganza. The lineup, dazzling as always, includes stars from ballet, hip-hop, ballroom, tap and modern dance, mixed and matched. The brilliant Carla Körbes, soon to retire from Pacific Northwest Ballet, is this year’s artist in residence. While honoring the past (a Balanchine celebration), Mr. Woetzel also supports adventurous new voices, with an evening of premieres by John Heginbotham, Pam Tanowitz, and Rashaun Mitchell & Silas Riener, among others.vaildance.orgFor five days in August, the Windy City is a dancegoer’s paradise. This free festival returns with a mix of local luminaries — the Joffrey Ballet, Chicago Human Rhythm Project, Hubbard Street Dance Chicago — and out-of-town guests. New this year are Miami City Ballet, Pittsburgh Ballet Theater, Kate Weare Dance Company and the Isadora Duncan Dance Company. For the first time, the festival presents “Modern Women,” a program of female choreographers with works by Ms. Weare, Pam Tanowitz, Crystal Pite and two modern dance matriarchs, Isadora Duncan and Martha Graham.chicagodancingfestival.comAdvertisement