By JAMES R. OESTREICHOCT. 20, 2015
Norman Carrell’s classic 1967 study, “Bach the Borrower,” which charted Bach’s reuse of music — his own and others’ — had a field day with the so-called Lutheran Masses. These missae breves, or short Masses, as Protestant churches used them in Bach’s time, retained only the Kyrie and Gloria of the Roman Catholic Mass, stopping short of the Credo for obvious reasons.Bach’s four surviving Lutheran Masses, mostly patched together from movements of his cantatas, with the German texts replaced by the Latin, are generally lost in the shadow of the mighty Mass in B minor (also full of borrowings), which uses the whole of the Catholic Mass. The Bach specialist Masaaki Suzuki conducted Juilliard415 and the Yale Schola Cantorum in two of them, the Masses in A and G minor (BWV 234 and 235), on Sunday evening in the Peter Jay Sharp Theater at the Juilliard School.Each work is in six movements: two choruses, three arias and another chorus. The Schola Cantorum sang the choruses with fine clarity and diction, though they were mostly held in reserve by Mr. Suzuki; you might have wished for a little greater impact from two dozen voices. Members of the chorus sang the arias, and they proved adequate to good. Nola Richardson was especially impressive in the soprano parts, singing with beautiful tone and a security that belied the fact that she was a late substitute.Juilliard415, the student orchestra of the school’s historical performance program, opened the first half with the Sinfonia from Cantata No. 42 (“Am Abend Aber Desselbigen Sabbats”), and the second half with the “Brandenburg” Concerto No. 3. The concerto was especially fine: You could see the joy in the performers’ faces and movements as much as you could hear it in the playing. The puzzle of the second movement, which in the score consists merely of two chords, was solved by importing and arranging the slow movement from Bach’s Concerto in C for three harpsichords (BWV 1064).It all made for a pleasant evening without major revelations.A version of this review appears in print on October 21, 2015, on Page C5 of the New York edition with the headline: Under a Specialist’s Baton, Two Ensembles Join Forces for Bach’s Masses.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.