 CANNES – In July 2014, Pierre Lescure took over as the president of the  Cannes Film Festival, a position that had been held for more than a dozen years by Gilles Jacob. A formidable man of cinema, Mr. Jacob had served as the festival’s long-reigning director (officially, general delegate, and practically speaking, the head of film selection) from 1978 to 2000, a position that Thierry Frémaux assumed in 2007 Mr. Lescure, 69, a journalist turned media executive – he helped found the French pay-television giant Canal Plus – has taken over the entire Cannes organization at an interesting time. Because, while Cannes has maintained its supremacy as the world’s destination film festival – the place you go to see visual entertainment rather than demanding it stream to you – nothing is certain in our rapidly shifting media-entertainment landscape.This week I chatted with Mr. Lescure, who spoke in English, in his office in the festival headquarters. Through an open window, the sounds of the Mediterranean drifted in along with construction banging, as workers readied the Palais for the opening of the 68th Cannes Film Festival. Here are edited excerpts from our conversation:Was this a job that you were interested in?At the end of the festival in 2013 Gilles Jacob asked me the question. “Pierre, if you’re interested to be in charge after me – because I will leave at the end of the festival in 2014 – I will support your run.” I said yes, I’m really interested. I know the prestigious symbolism and the reality and limits of the job.Thierry, I think, especially since seven, eight years, is a very, very good and premium delegate general. I love the way he opened the section while maintaining the principle. He did it very well. So I know my role is to be the chairman, the “gardien du temple,” if you know the French expression. He has the final cut on the selection and we are talking about everything else.In the United States, everything is VOD, streaming. Everything has to be pushed in and out of movie theaters rapidly. I think people still like going to the movies, but it’s changing. So, it’s interesting that you have a television background – do you feel that informs how you look at this festival in any way?It’s very interesting because when you are looking to China — Thierry, me and Jérôme [Paillard] – the guy in charge of the market – we had talks with the Wanda Group. Wanda made a fortune in construction, buildings, hotels and multiplexes. They are building, in China, a multiplex a month for the last 18 months, 5,000 seats each. They’re bought AMC, the second American circuit of movie theaters. It just means that those guys in China are big believers in movie theaters.Of course, the movie theater is not the only place that the young generation sees movies, but I’m confident we are just “in between.” It’s confusing, as with every in-between period. But I’m confident in the near future, in five years from now it will be absolutely in our daily habit to look at something through VOD, through streaming, through everything and it will be absolutely natural to go to the movie again.Can you speak to the role that Cannes plays given this “in-between” period?Our first aim is to be focused on the movies – the noncompetition ones like “The Little Prince,” “Mad Max,” the new Pixar – first. We have to be focused on competition, big names, Todd Haynes, Gus Van Sant – newcomers, the birth of new talent. And to be focused on movies dedicated to the theaters because that’s more than a symbol. A lot of people look to the movies we focus on. If, perhaps, 51 percent of viewers consume our movies through VOD, it doesn’t matter. Fifty percent of the people and perhaps 51 percent are thinking about Cannes, talking about Cannes, looking on the Net to have some news from Cannes, and are just linked more than ever with the movie world and the movie theaters.When I was young, a museum was an old thing. Now, more and more in France and not only France – the same thing in London, in New York – more and more young people are going to the museum. So we are just “in between” with the movie because, in movie theaters we are together. It will be impossible to forget that and to replace that. Between Canal and my presidency at the festival I worked in one of the biggest stage theaters in Paris. I was so pleased every night to see people coming to the play together. I was so pleased when they went out with a smile. That’s eternity, the pleasure of looking an event, an emotional event, together.I think so, too, but there’s panic in the American movie industry, to a certain extent.I’m not sure the answer to the panic is always the right one. I think that the development of licenses, of Marvel characters, is one answer. Not enough. I really think that guys like the Coen brothers, the young [Xavier] Dolan and men and women between those two generations will deliver the second answer. It’s a good answer to have 3D, big event, another Superman, another heroic character – that’s a kind of answer. My daughter is in love with “Avengers,” but she’s also in love with Dolan. That’s life.I know that you’re not going to talk about the particulars, but can you address the security issues at the festival, given what happened in January in Paris?We had a lot of meetings with every administration, every technical and political and police unit. But when you are looking at the main selection, when you are looking at the other selections, you have no movie this year which could be a problem for any terrorist. We are not a better target than any other event all around the world during May 2015. I just noticed that this year we are talking about youth, we are talking about love, we are talking about many things. We are not talking about religion. It’s just that the movie creators did not offer those kinds of items.