The National September 11 Memorial Museum marked its first year of operations on Friday, saying that it hosted about 2.7 million visitors during that period and slightly exceeded attendance projections.In an interview, Joe Daniels, the president and chief executive of the museum, said that largely based on online tickets sales, the museum was able to determine that the visitors came from all 50 states and from more than 150 countries since its dedicated opening on May 15 of last year.Mr. Daniels said that the attendance projections for the first year were 2.5 million visitors, and that for this calendar year the museum expects to draw about 2.8 million people.“9/11 did not start that day and it has not ended in its aftermath,” Mr. Daniels said, referring to the larger issue of terrorism. He described the museum as an “incredible educational tool to show the broader context of this event.”To signify the one-year anniversary, the National 9/11 flag, a frayed flag that was recovered from ground zero and restored in so-called “stitching ceremonies” around the country, will be displayed on May 21, the date that the museum opened to the public in 2014.The $24 adult admission price has significantly helped fund the $70 million operating budget for the museum and the memorial, along with retail sales of items at its store, donations and fundraising. This is critical given that the museum does not receive any government money.But, Mr. Daniels said: “We are working to secure some federal contributions. We have relationships with Congress folks who want to help out.” He added, “We are optimistic about the museum’s financial health, and health is attractive to donors.”Mr. Daniels said that “the next frontier” for the museum is its programs, such as one that deals with current events in the Middle East and the violent spread of Islamic radicalism.Since the 10-year anniversary of the 9/11 attacks, an estimated 19 million people have visited the memorial outside of the museum. The memorial, comprising two large waterfalls where the towers of the World Trade Center once stood, is free.