CANNES, France — The sun was shining, his latest film, “Irrational Man,” had been well received at its press premiere here, and Woody Allen was in a cheerful mood — musing on death, meaninglessness, Kant’s categorical imperative and how he fears that the series he is developing for Amazon promises to be “a cosmic embarrassment.”“It was a catastrophic mistake for me,” Mr. Allen said of the series at a news conference here at the Cannes Film Festival on Friday, adding that he doesn’t watch television series and worries that he’s “floundering” on the Amazon project, of which there were few details when it was announced in January. The as-yet-untitled series is due in 2016. “I never should have gotten into it,” he said. “You do a movie, it’s a big long thing, but to do six half-hours, I thought it would be a cinch,” he said. Instead, “It’s very, very hard. I hope I don’t disappoint Amazon.”It wasn’t entirely clear if he was being serious. Throughout the news conference, the 79-year-old filmmaker struck his customary tone of ebullient pessimism. He was flanked by Emma Stone and Parker Posey, who star in “Irrational Man” with Joaquin Phoenix. That actor put on weight to play a self-destructive philosophy professor who decides to commit a murder out of the belief that it would ultimately be a good deed.Mr. Allen said that his idol had always been Ingmar Bergman and that his new film was a comedy about morality. “There are times when there are turning points in your life when you suddenly realize that something momentous can possibly happen if you make a choice,” he said. “In this case, the choice that Joaquin makes is irrational, but it’s not so irrational given the comparison with the choices that we all make in our lives.”“Irrational Man” is the 11th film  Mr. Allen has brought to Cannes. All have been shown out of competition, as the director doesn’t believe in submitting his films for the contest. “I just don’t feel you can say one film is better than another. Who’s to say some arbitrarily appointed group of judges can decide one is better?” he said in an interview with Deadline Hollywood this week.Asked at the news conference what he’d learned from making films over the years, Mr. Allen said, “You learn stuff after the first two or three movies. You learn all you’re really gonna learn. Most of the stuff is instinctive.” He said he wished he could be like Charlie Chaplin, who could cheaply reshoot entire films. “When I make a film, I never ever look at it again, because if you look at it again, you can always see what you did wrong and how you can improve it.”Ms. Stone, who also starred in Mr. Allen’s 2014 “Magic in the Moonlight,” said working with the director was pretty straightforward, without too many takes. “There’s really no overthinking,” she said.Ms. Posey, who worked with Mr. Allen for the first time, said she had always loved “his women and his characterization of women” and that it had been an honor “to play someone deep and thoughtful and self aware and funny.” She also drew some chuckles when she said, “No one doesn’t like him.” Dylan Farrow, Mr. Allen’s adoptive daughter, has accused the director of abuse. Mr. Allen has denied wrongdoing.In the news conference, Mr. Allen also talked about moral complexity and the limitations of Kant’s categorical imperative, which essentially says that we should only take actions that could be universalized. “The problem with the categorical imperative is that you always try to use it in these trivial life decisions,” Mr. Allen said. “The truth is there are decisions you make in life where you can’t go by it, it’s not a reliable thing.”The director said he made films as a great “distraction” from the human condition. “There is no possible answer to the grim reality of life,” Mr. Allen said. “No matter how much the philosophers talk to you or the priests or the psychiatrists, the bottom line is that life has its own agenda and it runs all over you,” he continued. “We’re all going to end up in a very bad way sooner or later.”