After Utopia: Revisiting the Ideal in Asian Contemporary Art
Singapore Art Museum.
Through Oct. 18.Work by artists from Singapore and the region are on view in this exhibition, which focuses on Asian art with big, political ideas. Pieces showing include “Summit,” by Shen Shaomin, which features life-size mannequins of world leaders, laid out as if they had died; and “Television Commercial for Communism” for which a Vietnamese-American art collective, the Propeller Group, videotaped an advertising firm brainstorming about how to pitch Communism as a brand.Havana Biennial
Various venues.
May 22-June 22.In past years, participating artists have made spectacular use of the city’s ocean vistas and fading architectural heritage, incorporating Havana into installations created for the biennial. Local and international artists will take part in this year’s installment. Artists include prominent figures like the sculptor Anish Kapoor as well as lesser-known figures from countries like Afghanistan. Conspicuously absent from the list is the performance artist Tania Bruguera, whose passport was revoked by the Cuban government after she planned a political artwork for a public square in Havana late last year; some artists have floated the idea of boycotting the biennial in defiance of the government. Les Clefs d’une Passion
Fondation Louis Vuitton.
Through July 6.This sleek new museum’s first two exhibitions focused on contemporary art world superstars (Olafur Eliasson and the building’s architect, Frank Gehry). This show, a larger undertaking and a coming out party of sorts for the museum, is a survey of the early 20th century’s luminaries, with one work more famous than the next. Picasso’s “Trois Femmes (Le Grand Déjeuner),” Matisse’s “Dance,” Munch’s “Scream,” and works by Francis Bacon are on display. The exhibition aims to provide visitors an introduction to the key artistic works of the 20th century, with the help of substantial loans from abroad. Tracey Emin: Where I Want To Go
Leopold Museum.
Through Sept. 14.Two cutting-edge artists go head to head in this exhibition. The British artist Tracey Emin (born 1963) — best known for her Turner Prize-nominated artwork “My Bed,” which depicts an unmade bed covered in condoms, alcohol bottles and stained underwear — chose a number of artworks by the Viennese artist Egon Schiele (1890-1918) to display alongside her own artwork here. The exhibition compares and contrasts the artists’ countercultural legacies. Schiele’s nudes in particular threatened Viennese social standards of the day, and he had run-ins with the police because of his work.A selection of arts events taking place across the world in the coming week.International Modern Dance Festival (Modafe )
Arko Arts Theater.
May 19-31.Dancers and dance companies from Japan, France and the Czech Republic will visit Seoul for this festival. A number of South Korean companies will also perform, like Dance Company the Body, which will perform slow-paced works clad in white masks; and Dance Theater Chang Nam-jin Kim, which incorporates puppets and videos into its work. Visiting companies from abroad include Spellbound Contemporary Ballet, the Prague Chamber Ballet, and Compagnie 111, which will perform “Plan B.” Choreographed by Aurélien Bory, the piece features dancers tumbling on and across a slowly rotating wall. CO2
Teatro Alla Scala.
May 16-29.The Italian composer Giorgio Battistelli created this world premiere work to run alongside Expo Milano, a universal exposition taking place in the city now. This year’s event focuses on the environment, and Mr. Battistelli’s new work is similarly an excavation of the politics of climate change (long in the works, the opera was originally conceived as an adaptation of “An Inconvenient Truth,” the global warming documentary by Al Gore). The Canadian opera director Robert Carsen led the production, which is running at the same time as a popular version of Puccini’s unfinished opera “Turandot,” featuring an ending written by the Italian composer Luciano Berio (1925-2003) in 2001. Vivid Sydney
Various venues.
May 22-June 8.Sydney’s skyline will light up for Vivid, a huge festival that includes a conference on big ideas, a series of public light installations and a string of major concerts. Pop acts from the United States like Sufjan Stevens and TV on the Radio will appear at the city’s opera house for performances, as will Daniel Johns of Australia. On May 31 and June 1, the model and performer Grace Jones will play at the cavernous venue Carriageworks. Fez Festival of World Sacred Music 2015
Various venues.
May 22-30.Worship music from North Africa and beyond will play venues across Fez during this festival, which features ticketed concerts alongside a stream of large-scale events in public spaces. Artists performing in the event — which takes place across public squares, museums, and concert arenas — include the Malian singer Oumou Sangaré; the singer and composer Eduardo Ramos, who blends traditional Arabic and Sephardic Jewish music; and the Payiz Ensemble, which specializes in Kurdish music. On May 28, Dennis Edwards, previously a lead singer of the Temptations, the Motown group, will lead a concert of works by the band. Pirates of Penzance
English National Opera.
Through July 4.The film director Mike Leigh, whose hyperrealist movies include a 1999 film about the operetta composers Gilbert and Sullivan, makes his opera directing debut with one of their works. The opera, first staged in London in 1880, has proved a popular ticket for the company, which added performances to accommodate audience demand. Read Michael White’s full review here. 