By KATHRYN SHATTUCKMAY 15, 2015
11:45 P.M. (Starz Cinema) FOR NO GOOD REASON (2014) “I really thought what I would do, if I ever learned to draw properly, was I would try to change the world,” the British artist Ralph Steadman explains in Charlie Paul’s documentary about him. So in 1970, Mr. Steadman jetted to New York, where he planned to take a thousand photographs that would inspire the illustrations he couldn’t seem to get quite right. “There was an arrogance missing, there was a wildness missing, there was a rawness missing,” he says of that early work. “It lacked that bite I needed, that real ferocious bite, the thing that would make it noticeable.” Then he received instructions to meet Hunter S. Thompson, not long after his infiltration of the Hells Angels. The weekend became a vicious, drunken nightmare, and he and Thompson went to pieces. Thus, gonzo journalism — in which the writer (and in this decadent collaboration, the illustrator) becomes the story — was born. What would Thompson’s “Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas” be without Mr. Steadman’s ink-speckled and splotched drawings, Mr. Steadman argues. “There is a formal discipline and thematic coherence to Mr. Steadman’s images that his friend’s writing sometimes lacked,” A. O. Scott wrote in The New York Times. “Mr. Steadman has frequently aimed to shock, and almost always with good reason.”8 P.M. (Nat Geo Wild) BARKFEST WEEKEND A surfing therapy dog, a bionic dog, a dog that holds the world record for riding a scooter: There’s a pooch for just about every predilection over the three days of canine programming, beginning with “World’s Greatest Dogs.” The lineup continues at 9 with the season finale of “Cesar 911” and at 10 with the premiere of “Is Your Dog a Genius?,” in which Brian Hare of the Duke Canine Cognition Center, combines science and games to reveal dogs’ personalities and unleash their potential. Guests include Wallis Brozman and her dog, Caspin.9 P.M. (13) AMERICAN BALLET THEATER: A HISTORY With performance footage of Antony Tudor’s “Pillar of Fire” and Jerome Robbins’s “Fancy Free,” and interviews with Julie Kent, Susan Jaffe, Lucia Chase, Kevin McKenzie, Alexei Ratmansky and Mikhail Baryshnikov, the filmmaker Ric Burns pays tribute to American Ballet Theater, currently celebrating its 75th anniversary. And while Hee Seo, a principal, describes dancing as losing herself in a transcendent experience, this “American Masters” presentation has a “bizarre fixation on slow motion” that is “more sluggish than transcendent,” Gia Kourlas wrote in The Times, calling it “more of a love letter to ballet than a thorough portrait of Ballet Theater.”9 P.M. (CBS) ACM PRESENTS: SUPERSTAR DUETS! Country singers partner with their idols at the Academy of Country Music’s third annual Party for a Cause charity concert, held in Arlington, Tex. The roster includes John Anderson and Keith Urban; Dierks Bentley, Ashley Monroe and Kip Moore; Miranda Lambert and Patty Loveless; Reba and Brooks & Dunn; and Sara Evans and Darius Rucker.Advertisement10:15 P.M. (TCM) OTHELLO (1952) Orson Welles plays the title role in Shakespeare’s tragedy, which he also adapted, produced and directed. “There are flashes of brilliant suggestion in this tumbled, slurred and helter-skelter film,” Bosley Crowther wrote in The Times. “But they add up to nothing substantial — just a little Shakespeare and a lot of Welles.” At midnight, Welles takes on “Macbeth” (1948), which Mr. Crowther said “may not possess the searching insight and the dramatic clarity that one might desire, but it has a great deal in its favor in the way of feudal spectacle and nightmare mood.”1 A.M. (13) THEATER TALK Bill Nighy and Carey Mulligan discuss their Tony-nominated portrayals of former lovers brought together for one night in David Hare’s “Skylight,” at the Golden Theater.AdvertisementWhat’s Streaming NowFEAR AND LOATHING IN LAS VEGAS (1998) Based on the roman à clef by Hunter S. Thompson, this film follows Thompson’s alter-ego, Raoul Duke (Johnny Depp), and Dr. Gonzo (Benicio Del Toro), the lawyer who advises him, down a drug-induced rabbit hole fit only for those, as Thompson wrote in the book, “with true grit.” “Here it is in all its splendiferous funhouse terror,” Stephen Holden wrote in The Times about Terry Gilliam’s adaptation, “the closest sensory approximation of an acid trip ever achieved by a mainstream movie.” (netflix.com)A version of this schedule appears in print on May 15, 2015, on Page C17 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Friday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.