
Friday File By                     
 MARY JO MURPHY
 
MAY 14, 2015
45 YEARS AGOSo this is it. After Sunday’s “Mad Men” finale, Don, Peggy, Roger, Joan, Pete, Betty and Sally and the rest of the gang might have some time on their hands (and we ours, but that’s another story). When we left them last week, it was the summer of 1970. What to do?They kind of missed Woodstock the previous summer — the series jumped ahead a few months this season — but a ShortLine bus ad in The Times in June 1970 tried to lure New Yorkers to the Mountaindale Music Festival, also known as Bach to Rock, on July 11. “Ride to Mountaindale on the bus you rode to Woodstock,” the ad said. (Did Peggy come up with that line?)It was not to be. “A borscht circuit” of rock music festivals that “seemed to be developing in the Catskills after last August’s Woodstock Festival suffered a new setback yesterday,” The Times reported a few days later. The “local citizens” fought the event, which they believed would “convulse the town of about 250 persons and bring drugs and immorality in the manner of the Woodstock Festival in Bethel, about 30 miles from Mountaindale.” The citizens succeeded, and a court blocked the festival. Sorry, Sally. You’ll have to make other plans.For her part, Joan might try a screening of Russ Meyer’s “Beyond the Valley of the Dolls,” which opened that June. It is not a good movie, according to the Times critic Vincent Canby, but it would give her something to do since she quit the agency, and make her think of California, where her boyfriend lives. “There is so much lovemaking in the film (very soft-core, very ersatz) that, to squeeze it all in, Meyer must often cut between seductions non-stop,” Mr. Canby wrote in his review. “There is a funny, fast, typically Meyer montage of Los Angeles sights (bare breasts, shacks, bare breasts, freeways, bare breasts), and never a moment of silence.”Maybe “Dolls” is more Don’s movie, but there was also Franklin J. Schaffner’s “Patton,” which opened that February and was still in theaters (we are pre-video-on-demand, remember). Mr. Canby didn’t much like that movie either, being “the story of a man about whom only the Establishment could become genuinely sentimental.” His review included this line, which might have spoken to the Beatles-literate Don: “Schaffner and his script writers, Francis Ford Coppola and Edmund H. North, were obviously aware of the problems they faced in trying to transform Patton into a figure who would be as comprehensible today, if not quite as sympathetic, as Ringo Starr.”A version of this article appears in print on May 15, 2015, on Page C31 of the New York edition.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »