AdvertisementSupported byBy Neil Genzlinger“Bessie” is about a blues singer, but what the movie could really use is more soul.The film, which has its premiere Saturday night on HBO, stars Queen Latifah as Bessie Smith, a woman who is said to have lived quite a colorful, provocative life. “Bessie” shows us an assortment of moments from that life but doesn’t really make us feel it, despite Queen Latifah’s best efforts. Blame a choppy presentation that checks off points in the Bessie Smith timeline but doesn’t probe them or knit them together.Smith, who was born in Tennessee, became a star in the early days of recorded music. A sweet scene in the movie shows recording engineers trying to get her to contain her delivery, which was honed on vaudeville stages, so that her voice could be picked up by their primitive equipment. She sometimes favored bawdy lyrics and lived a personal life that also flouted the conventions of polite society — affairs, bisexuality, drinking, all shown somewhat reservedly here, considering that we’re talking about HBO. The film, directed by Dee Rees (“Pariah”), seems to be in a hurry as it zips through biographical vignettes. There’s an incident in which Smith is said to have chased Klansmen away from one of her concerts. There’s her decision to adopt a child. There’s a moment when men with rifles shoot at her train as it’s entering Mississippi. There are also flashbacks to some kind of childhood trauma — young Bessie is seen running around screaming — that is never really defined or connected to anything driving the adult. Real-life figures (and the actors who play them) make cameos that feel included merely to drop the name rather than to develop historical context. You barely register Langston Hughes (Jeremie Harris) or Benny Goodman (Levi Erik) or John Hammond (Bryan Greenberg) before the character disappears. It’s the kind of fitful presentation that suggests too many cooks, an impression reinforced by the credit list. The film has been in the works for decades. The screenplay is attributed to Ms. Rees, Christopher Cleveland and Bettina Gilois. The story is credited to Ms. Rees and Horton Foote, who has been dead for six years. Only two characters besides Smith make much of an impression. One is Jack Gee, her husband, played by Michael Kenneth Williams of “Boardwalk Empire” and “The Wire.” Smith and Gee seem to have a good marriage until they don’t; their relationship, the actors’ good work notwithstanding, turns into another example of underdevelopment. The other character of note is Ma Rainey, who is thought to have helped Smith’s career get started. Mo’Nique plays the role with verve, and the early scenes she shares with Queen Latifah leave you wanting more, just as audiences must have felt when Rainey and Smith shared a stage back in the 1920s. Their strong performances aren’t matched by the script, which too often sounds like a collection of aphorisms rather than the gritty language that seems more likely for such fascinating figures.“The blues is not about people knowing you, it’s about you knowing people,” Rainey tells Smith. There might be truth in that, but the line sounds as if it were written by a press agent. It’s telling that one of the film’s more powerful moments consists of Smith sitting nude in front of a mirror, staring at herself, wondering what has become of her life. She halfheartedly sings a lyric or two, then lapses into a silence that lasts a full 40 seconds.That scene is also one of the few times the movie doesn’t feel too glossy for the life it’s portraying. It retains that gloss till the end; curiously, there’s nothing about Smith’s death in 1937 from injuries sustained in a car wreck. Advertisement