AdvertisementSupported byBy Laurel Graeber‘The Big Family Quiz Thing’Noah Tarnow might not seem a likely candidate for a quiz show host: He lost on “Jeopardy!”“I knew Final Jeopardy, but I bet wrong,” said Mr. Tarnow, who came in second. But rather than abandon his love of games, he invented his own in 2002: “The Big Quiz Thing,” a live competition requiring neither auditions nor wagers. It has since spread from New York to other cities and to local cable TV, and on Sunday, the Highline Ballroom will host its latest offshoot: “The Big Family Quiz Thing,” a multigenerational contest.Mr. Tarnow, 39, has succeeded with this formula — families playing against other families — since 2013. But his first attempt to work with children, at a bar mitzvah, bordered on disastrous. “They weren’t listening,” he said. “A couple of kids were trying to grab the microphone from me and throwing lime wedges at each other.”He has since learned a secret — ask quirky questions — and has done many children’s events. “But I prefer parents and kids together,” he said. “I can get more creative.” Sunday’s categories will include “The Great Book Title Mix-Up” (words and letters scrambled) and Mr. Tarnow’s favorite film exercise: “We show the first 10 seconds and last 10 seconds, and you have to identify the movie.” He also uses rebuses and asks teams to name songs played at half their normal speed.The contest itself is mostly low-tech: Participating families get printed answer pads and souvenir pens. (Above, a previous event.) Teams first play five rounds of five questions. The sixth round introduces time pressure: 10 seconds for each of 10 questions.The show also rewards a sense of humor. “If you don’t know the answer, you write a funny answer,” Mr. Tarnow said. “We read those aloud, and if the answer gets a laugh, it counts as correct.” A recent example: “Dogs, rats, snakes: A lot of Americans are scared of them, but not as many who are scared of what other animal?” One competitor suggested lawyers.The game concludes with the Buzzertastic Finale, in which a child from each of the three top-scoring families competes alone. Prizes include tours, theater and film festival tickets, and passes to amusement parks, museums and summer camp.Children — the recommended ages are 7 and older — will probably leave with sharper deductive skills, too. “I like the game to be more of a puzzle than a test,” Mr. Tarnow said.Even Alex Trebek would have to approve.(At 1 p.m., Highline Ballroom, 431 West 16th Street, Chelsea, highlineballroom.com, bigquizthing.com.) LAUREL GRAEBER‘Archaeology Zone: Discovering Treasures From Playgrounds to Palaces’ (Friday, Sunday through Tuesday, and Thursday) Children will step into the shoes of an explorer like Indiana Jones in this permanent exhibition at the Jewish Museum, but the adventures will be purely scholarly. Still, there is plenty of excitement in analyzing artifacts like a jar handle, a clay jug and a bangle and figuring out the purpose behind ancient pieces like a Greek helmet and a bull-shaped vessel. This interactive show, for ages 3 to 10, also includes a recreated room from the Ottoman period (about 1900), where young archaeologists can dress in costume. From 11 a.m. to 5:45 p.m.; until 8 p.m. on Thursdays; 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92nd Street, 212-423-3200, thejewishmuseum.org.‘A Band of Angels’ (Friday through Sunday) New York City Children’s Theater used to be called Making Books Sing, and 10 years ago, it first produced this musical, based on a book whose subject was also singing: “A Band of Angels,” by Deborah Hopkinson. The book relates the history of the Fisk Jubilee Singers, established in 1871 at Fisk University in Nashville, one of the first educational institutions for freed slaves. Written by Myla Churchill and recommended for ages 8 and older, this adaptation, which closes this weekend, follows Ella, a contemporary teenager, as she goes back in time and meets the Fisk singers. Friday at 11 a.m. (sold out); Saturday and Sunday at 2 and 4 p.m.; Theater 3, 311 West 43rd Street, third floor, Clinton, 646-250-1178, nycchildrenstheater.org.Blue Balloon Spring Songwriting Showcase (Sunday) Paul McCartney, Carole King and Stephen Sondheim all had to start somewhere. Rachel Lipson, a songwriter, music teacher and performer, tries to catch budding composers at a very young age. This concert celebrating her music school, Blue Balloon Songwriting for Small People, features the pupils, ages 3 and older, all performing their own work. From 11 a.m. to 3 p.m., the Knitting Factory, 361 Metropolitan Avenue, at Havemeyer Street, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, 347-529-6696, ticketweb.com, bk.knittingfactory.com.Carnegie Kids: ‘Songs for Unusual Creatures’ (Sunday) At this free program, recommended for ages 3 through 6, the composer and musician Michael Hearst will celebrate animals you may never have heard of on instruments you may never have heard. Drawn from his album “Songs for Unusual Creatures,” this presentation, part of the series Carnegie Kids, will playfully investigate species like the blobfish, the elephant shrew and the blue-footed booby, using instruments like the stylophone, the claviola and the theremin. Video imagery will allow young audience members to see these wild things, too. At 2 p.m., New York Hall of Science, 47-01 111th Street, Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, Queens, 718-699-0005, nysci.org. (Admission to the museum is free with online registration for the concert.)‘Chuggington Live! The Great Rescue Adventure’ (Saturday and Sunday) First came Thomas the Tank Engine and all his friends. Now we have Wilson, Brewster and Koko, the more modern trains in “Chuggington,” a preschool series on the Disney and Disney Jr. channels. These young locomotives are chugging onto the stage in this live musical adaptation of the television show, in which Wilson and Brewster have to use teamwork and skills to aid Koko, who’s run into trouble at Rocky Ridge Mine. At 11 a.m. and 2 p.m., with an additional 5 p.m. show on Saturday, Beacon Theater, 2124 Broadway, at 74th Street, 866-858-0008, beacontheatre.com.‘The Gazillion Bubble Show: The Next Generation’  (Friday through Sunday, and Thursday) Children love bubbles, and this interactive show promises not just a gazillion but also some of the largest ever blown, along with light effects and lasers. The stars are the members of the Yang family: Fan and Ana Yang and their son Deni and others, who rotate as M.C.s for the production. Audience members may even find themselves in bubbles of their own. (The run is open-ended.) Friday at 7 p.m.; Saturday at 11 a.m. and 2 and 4:30 p.m.; Sunday at noon and 3 p.m.; Thursday at 11 a.m. and 2 p.m.; 340 West 50th Street, Clinton, 212-239-6200, gazillionbubbleshow.com.‘Hello From Japan!’ (Friday through Sunday) Japanese culture comprises both unbridled whimsy and serene seriousness. Young visitors can get acquainted with these two sides at the Children’s Museum of Manhattan, which recreates different aspects of Tokyo in this exhibition, closing this weekend. One-half of the show, Kawaii Central, captures the fun of the city’s Harajuku district with the opportunity to sing karaoke, serve a Japanese meal and create cute, cartoonlike family mascots. The exhibition’s other half includes a Shinto shrine park, where young visitors can build a bridge, meet kami (spirits) and express their desires at a wishing tree. Programs, free with museum admission, accompany the show. Museum hours: 10 a.m. to 5 p.m.; to 7 p.m. on Saturdays; also open free from 5 to 8 p.m. on the first Friday of every month. Tisch Building, 212 West 83rd Street, 212-721-1223, cmom.org.‘Jack and the Beanstalk’ (Friday through Sunday, and Tuesday through Thursday) Many plants grow in Central Park, so why not a beanstalk? This one sprouts indoors at the Swedish Cottage Marionette Theater, which has revived Michael Alogna’s adaptation of the classic fairy tale about Jack, the Giant (here named Milford), Dolly the Cow and the famous Golden Goose. Bruce Cannon, the theater’s artistic director, has revised the script, and a human actor now stars in the show along with the company’s hand-built marionettes. Weekdays at 10:30 a.m. and noon, with an additional performance on Wednesdays at 2:30 p.m.; Saturday and Sunday at 1 p.m. (Some performances are sold out.) Reservations required. 79th Street and the West Drive, Central Park; 212-988-9093, cityparksfoundation.org/arts.Kids’N Comedy ‘Standardized Jesting’ Show (Sunday) The class clown gets applause, not detention, at this monthly series, in which tween and teenage comics perform stand-up. Here, they find humor in what is often hell for high school students: the world of the SAT, the ACT, the Advanced Placement tests and other standardized exams. The material is recommended for children 9 and older, but there’s no need to worry about appropriateness (profanity is banned). Reservations required. At 1 p.m., Gotham Comedy Club, 208 West 23rd Street, Chelsea, 212-877-6115, kidsncomedy.com.La MaMa Kids: Sound and Movement Workshop (Saturday) La MaMa, the downtown theater famous for cultivating cutting-edge adults, has in recent years been turning its attention to cutting-edge kids, too. This series for families continues its season with a sound and movement workshop conducted by the dancer Maura Donohue and the composer Adam Cuthbert. Their exploration will deal with a crisis of oceanic proportions: the North Pacific Gyre, a region largely devoid of currents and winds that has become a repository of global plastic trash. Children, who will investigate marine phenomena in the workshop, are asked to help contribute to solving this ecological problem by bringing in plastic bags for recycling. At 11 a.m., 74 East Fourth Street, East Village, 212-475-7710, lamama.org.‘The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe’  (Saturday) If the children of the Pevensie family could travel to the magical land of Narnia through something as simple as a wardrobe, why shouldn’t two hard-working actors be able to play them and all the characters found there? That’s what Chris Boerner and Erin Layton, who recently stepped into the roles, are attempting in the Off Broadway Family Theater’s first production, le Clanché du Rand’s adaptation of C. S. Lewis’s classic novel. (The run is open-ended and continues on Saturdays.) At 11 a.m., St. Luke’s Theater, 308 West 46th Street, Clinton; 212-239-6200, narniaoffbroadway.com.Loco-Motion Dance Theater for Children (Saturday) When a troupe has a name like this, you know you can expect plenty of movement. But the young dancers and choreographers involved, ages 4 to 18, also have lots of ideas, which they’ll display in this annual spring recital. This year’s showcase will include a retrospective of favorite pieces — including a comical dance about puberty that uses audio from 1950s educational films — as well as new work that takes on subjects like racial profiling and standardized testing. At 7 p.m., Miller Theater, Broadway at 116th Street, Morningside Heights, 212-979-6124, loco-motiondancetheatre.org, millertheatre.com.MoMA Art Lab: Places and Spaces (Friday through Thursday) What’s an art lab? These interactive spaces for children at the Museum of Modern Art, free with museum admission, help introduce the institution’s collection through activities related to a theme: this time it’s Places and Spaces. Young visitors can design, draw and build as they explore spaces both real and imagined — landscapes, cityscapes, seascapes — as they appear in Modern art. (Through Aug. 31.) Daily, from 10:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.; to 6:30 p.m. on Fridays; Lewis B. and Dorothy Cullman Education and Research Building, 4 West 54th Street, Manhattan; 212-708-9805, moma.org/momaartlab.‘The Musical Adventures of Flat Stanley’ (Sunday) The earth may not be flat, but Stanley is. The boy hero of the book “Flat Stanley,” by Jeff Brown, Stanley loses his three-dimensionality when a bulletin board falls on him. But he just merrily mails himself around the world, having exotic adventures while searching for a way to regain his normal shape. He arrives in Brooklyn on Saturday in this musical adaptation from Dallas Children’s Theater. At 2 p.m., Brooklyn Center for the Performing Arts, Brooklyn College, Flatbush and Nostrand Avenues, Flatbush, 718-951-4500, brooklyncenter.org.Muslim Arts Festival: ‘Design in the Community’ (Saturday and Sunday) Many American children are exposed to only negative images of Islam. At this celebration, they can experience the rich cultural heritage of the Muslim world through activities like a virtual tour of mosque architecture (10 a.m.) and a reading of Hena Khan’s book ”Golden Domes and Silver Lanterns” (12:30 p.m.) The museum will also offer two sign-up workshops for ages 5 and older: On Saturday at 3 and 4 p.m., children can experiment with traditional Moroccan rug weaving with the designer Alia Kate, and on Sunday at 2 and 3:30 p.m., they can create costumes with the help of the designer Basil El Halwagy. The Tisch Building, 212 West 83rd Street, 212-721-1223, cmom.org.New York Children’s Theater Festival: ‘The Meanest Birthday Girl’ (Friday through Sunday) You’ve heard of Bridezilla; you might think of Dana as Birthdayzilla. She’s the central character in “The Meanest Birthday Girl,” a musical by Lauren Marcus and Leah Okimoto, based on the book by Josh Schneider. Dana’s determined to have her own way, but she has to reconsider her actions in this production, the last in this year’s New York Children’s Theater Festival, whose works are chosen from submissions sent to a large group of theater professionals. Friday at 5 p.m.; Saturday at 11 a.m. and 2 p.m.; Sunday at 2 p.m.; the Players Theater, 115 Macdougal Street, at Minetta Lane, Greenwich Village, 866-811-4111, nyctfest.org.New York City Ballet Family Saturday: ‘Musical Medley’ (Saturday) Children who know New York City Ballet mainly for its “Nutcracker” performances can see other sides of the repertory in this hourlong workshop, which introduces those 5 and older to classical dance. This program, to be hosted by the principal dancer Daniel Ulbricht, will be an exploration of the importance of music in the company’s work, with particular emphasis on unconventional melodies. At 11 a.m., David H. Koch Theater, Lincoln Center, 212-496-0600, nycballet.com/publicprograms.Preservation Detectives: ‘Old-Time Street Games’ (Sunday) The Museum at Eldridge Street, the 1887 landmark synagogue where many Jewish immigrants worshiped, offers “Preservation Detectives” tours in which children 4 to 10 can view artifacts, investigate neighborhood lore and sleuth their way into the past. This month they’ll pursue history outside rather than in: “Old-Time Street Games” celebrates activities like stickball, stoop ball, hit the penny and potsy. Participants can try these and other old pastimes in Seward Park, followed by a traditional conclusion: a trip to the candy store. From 11 a.m. to 12:30 p.m., meeting at the museum, 12 Eldridge Street, between Canal and Division Streets, Lower East Side, 212-219-0302, eldridgestreet.org/visit/family. Reservations required; the rain date is June 21.‘Rapunzarella White: A Fairly Fractured Tale’ (Saturday and Sunday) Yes, it’s fractured, but it’s also blended: In this creative musical retelling, by June Rachelson-Ospa and Daniel Neiden, Rapunzel, Cinderella and Snow White are infant triplets abducted by an ill-tempered witch. These heroines aren’t like their traditional selves — Snow White, for instance, is allergic to apples — and neither are their princes, who may be more clumsy than charming. (Through June 14.) Saturday at 1 p.m., Sunday at noon, 13th Street Repertory Theater, 50 West 13th Street, Greenwich Village, 212-352-3101, rapunzarellawhite.bpt.me.‘Revolution of the Eye’ Family Day (Sunday) In the 20th century, art and television were young upstarts, and one profoundly influenced the other: That’s the message behind “Revolution of the Eye: Modern Art and the Birth of American Television,” a new exhibition at the Jewish Museum. In this Family Day, children can tour the show and do activities based on its exhibits, including sketching superheroes and creating wearable art inspired by Andy Warhol. A special highlight will be drawing exercises based on the 1950s series “Winky Dink and You,” a pioneer in interactive children’s television. Gustafer Yellowgold, himself a multimedia performer, will also play concerts at 12:30 and 2:30 p.m. Noon to 4 p.m., 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92nd Street, 212-423-3337, thejewishmuseum.org.A Taste of Magic (Saturday) Would you like a side of sleight of hand with that burger? This show, developed by Magnets, a collective of local magicians, brings wizardry to the dinner table. Taking place at various restaurants, the presentation includes acts like mind reading and card tricks, which professionals perform close-up for guests; there’s also a cabaret-style show. And the admission price includes a full meal. At 8 p.m., Gossip Bar and Restaurant, 733 Ninth Avenue, between 49th and 50th Streets, Clinton, atasteofmagicnyc.com.‘Teens on Broadway’ (Monday) Many young actors can only dream of appearing on Broadway. But Circle in the Square Theater School allows a lucky — and talented — group of adolescents to do that every year. Its Teens on Broadway program, which gives mentoring advice and career preparation to students in local performing arts high schools, presents a showcase of the participants’ best work from their schools each spring. Hosted by Christian Dante White, from the cast of “The Book of Mormon,” this year’s production will include students from four boroughs. At 7 p.m., Circle in the Square Theater, 1633 Broadway, at 50th Street, 212-307-0388, circlesquare.org. Reservations are requested.‘Tiny Giants’ (Friday through Thursday) The heroes of this film may be small, but they’re mighty in their will to survive. Inspired by the BBC television series “Hidden Kingdoms,” this new Imax movie at the American Museum of Natural History uses 3-D cameras to peer into the universes of two diminutive creatures: a forest chipmunk and a grasshopper mouse from the Arizona desert, noted for its ability to prey on scorpions. Narrated by Stephen Fry, the film allows viewers to see the world from their perspectives. (Through July 5.) Hourly from 10:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., with 2-D screenings at 11:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m.; all other screenings are 3-D. Central Park West and 79th Street, 212-769-5200, amnh.org.‘Totally Terrific Turtle Weekend’ (Saturday and Sunday) Anyone who has read Aesop’s fables knows that you should never underestimate a tortoise — or a turtle. Wave Hill, the public garden in the Bronx, will be celebrating those creatures all weekend. On both Saturday and Sunday, from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m., the family art project, “Shield Me With a Turtle Shell,” will allow young visitors to transform themselves by creating wearable stuffed shells out of fabric and leather scraps. These little “turtles” can then take part in a slow parade through the grounds. They can also meet real turtles on Sunday only, at 1 p.m., when the Hudson Highlands Nature Museum presents “Let’s Talk Turtles,” a program about these animals and their fascinating lives. At West 249th Street and Independence Avenue, Riverdale, 718-549-3200, wavehill.org.‘The Trials of Alice in Wonderland’ (Friday through Sunday) Imagine that Lewis Carroll had traded Britain for Brooklyn. In this new musical adaptation from Tada! Youth Theater, by William Brooke, Eric Rockwell and Joanne Bogart, Alice, a contemporary girl, doesn’t feel that she belongs with the crowd of kids on the Coney Island boardwalk. Her adventures begin when she runs off to a fun house there, and her peers, who follow her, become the rest of the Wonderland cast. Alice also finds herself on trial in the show, which closes this weekend. The charge? Growing and changing. Friday at 7 p.m.; Saturday and Sunday at 2 and 4 p.m.; Tada! Youth Theater, 15 West 28th Street, Manhattan, 212-252-1619, Ext. 5, tadatheater.com; sold out.‘Tunes With Tina’ (Sunday) That’s Tina deVaron, a jazz musician and singer, whose musical brunch for young people at the Measure Lounge at Langham Place, Fifth Avenue, a hotel in Midtown Manhattan, has returned. Ms. deVaron, who often sings show tunes for children, also improvises and gears her performances to the audience. On selected Sundays throughout the season, she has been accompanied by Broadway performers; this Sunday, her final “Broadway Sunday,” she will be joined by Kenita Miller, a show veteran and “Sesame Street” alumna. Singing along is encouraged. (Through May 31.) At noon, 400 Fifth Avenue, at 36th Street, 212-695-4005, measurenyc.com.‘¡Viva Pinocho!’/’A Mexican Pinocchio!’ (Saturday) This Pinocchio is more than a wooden boy who longs to be human; he’s also a Mexican immigrant in search of his identity in a new land, the United States. Presented by Teatro Sea, which specializes in Latino theater for children, this show is the work of Manuel Antonio Morán, the company’s founder and director. Incorporating music, masks and several types of puppetry, it runs on Saturdays through May 23. At 3 p.m., Teatro Sea, Clemente Soto Vélez Cultural Center, 107 Suffolk Street, at Rivington Street, Lower East Side, 212-529-1545, teatrosea.org.‘A Voyage Through Jewish History’  (Sunday through Thursday) This journey involves not just miles, but years. In this permanent interactive exhibition at the Jewish Children’s Museum, young visitors can travel from Abraham and Sarah’s tent to the Western Wall in contemporary Jerusalem and beyond. Activities along the way include giving water to Rebecca’s camels, playing the strings on David’s harp (a high-tech version with beams of light that emit sounds when struck) and taking part in the exodus from Egypt. On Sunday, the museum is also holding its “Torah Unwrapped” workshop, in which children can learn about Torah, mix ink, scrape hides for parchment and watch a scribe do his work. Museum hours: 10 a.m. to 4 p.m.; to 5:30 p.m. on Sundays; 792 Eastern Parkway, at Kingston Avenue, Crown Heights, Brooklyn; 718-907-8833, jcm.museum.‘A Year With Children 2015’  (through June 17) Most of the artists whose work is displayed at the Guggenheim Museum are well known. But now the museum is showing pieces by young — very young — aspiring artists. These are the projects created by students in grades 2 through 6 who have taken part in the museum’s Learning Through Art program, which sends artists into public schools to teach skills and techniques. More than 100 works from 10 schools are in the show, including drawings, paintings, collages and sculptures. Daily, except Thursdays, from 10 a.m. to 5:45 p.m.; until 7:45 p.m. on Saturdays; 1071 Fifth Avenue, at 89th Street, 212-423-3500, guggenheim.org.LAUREL GRAEBERAdvertisement