MAY 14, 2015
Full reviews of recent dance performances: nytimes.com/dance. A searchable guide to these and other performances is at nytimes.com/events.★ American Ballet Theater (through July 4) At Monday night’s anniversary gala, American Ballet Theater proudly looks back at its remarkable 75-year history. Excerpts from nearly two dozen ballets will be performed, representing a Who’s Who of 20th-century dance luminaries, from Fokine and DeMille to Tharp and MacMillan, and more. Tuesday brings the first of four performances of Lar Lubovitch’s sumptuous “Othello” (through Thursday). This weekend, the company concludes its “Classic ABT” mixed-bill program, which includes Robbins’s “Fancy Free,” Balanchine’s “Theme and Variation” and two by Tudor. Monday’s gala is at 6:30 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000. Complete schedule: abt.org. (Brian Schaefer)Kimberly Bartosik and Dylan Crossman  (Wednesday through May 23) In 2008, Kimberly Bartosik introduced the first and second chapters of her “Ecsteriority” project, a meditation on decay. “Ecsteriority3” appeared in 2011 — a six-hour marathon — and now she completes the cycle with “Ecsteriority4 (Part 2),” for an all-star trio of Dylan Crossman, Marc Mann and Melissa Toogood. Mr. Crossman contributes a solo to the second part of the evening, part of the Abrons Arts Center’s Travelogues series. His work, “Bound,” considers that emotional seesaw of freedom and constraint. At 8 p.m., 466 Grand Street, at Pitt Street, Lower East Side, 866-811-4111, abronsartscenter.org. (Schaefer)BC Beat  (Monday) Even on their night off, Broadway gypsies are drawn to the stage. Cast members from Broadway’s biggest shows — “An American in Paris,” “Aladdin,” “On the Town” — perform and share their own choreography in this biannual showcase of innovative musical theater dance. With the help of 40 professional dancers, nine choreographers push the genre into new territory. Imagine all of the rollicking showstoppers, with none of the stagnant ballads. At 7 p.m., Cielo, 18 Little West 12th Street, West Village, 646-543-8556, bcbeat.net. (Schaefer)AdvertisementBodystories: Teresa Fellion Dance  (Thursday through May 23) In the title of Teresa Fellion’s new work, “The Mantises Are Flipping W.3,” the “W” stands for “world,” and this is the third one she’s created in her Mantises series. The project started as a solo, but this world is populated by seven dancers who are charged with expressing a variety of unrelated but interconnected themes: the nature of opposites, sanity and insanity, how sound moves through and around the body, and the mental effects of isolation. At 8 p.m., Danspace Project, St. Mark’s Church, 131 East 10th Street, East Village, 866-811-4111, danspaceproject.org. (Schaefer)Advertisement★ Flamenco Vivo Carlota Santana  (Tuesday through May 24) This New York-based company, which has been championing flamenco for more than 30 years, presents three new works by Spanish choreographers. Ángel Muñoz’s “Angeles,” with a cast of 10 dancers and musicians, finds angels in myths and music; Enrique Vicent and Antonio López unleash the beautiful agony of flamenco’s dark side in “Martinete-Seguiriya”; and Guadalupe Torres offers a moving solo called “Ausencia.” Additional company repertory rounds out two separate programs. Tuesday through Friday at 7:30 p.m., Saturday at 2 and 7:30 p.m., Sunday at 2 p.m., Fishman Space, Fisher Building, Brooklyn Academy of Music, 321 Ashland Place, near Lafayette Avenue, Fort Greene, 718-636-4100, bam.org. (Schaefer)★ Fridays at Noon  (Friday) Writing about Merce Cunningham’s 1984 work “Doubles,” which juxtaposes solos, duets and trios, the dance critic Arlene Croce said that at first glance, its action “looks as lazy and unplotted as that of a summer afternoon.” But its cumulative effect, she added, is to create what Cunningham said he intended dance to be: “a spiritual exercise in physical form.” Alastair Macaulay, chief dance critic for The New York Times, is a serious Cunningham-phile, and at this program, part of the Fridays at Noon series at the 92nd Street Y, he hosts a conversation with original “Doubles” cast members, paired with a performance of the work. At noon, Harkness Dance Center, 1395 Lexington Avenue, 212-415-5500, 92y.org. (Schaefer)Gibney Dance Company  (through Saturday) In its 24 years, this ensemble has performed only the work of its founder and artistic director, Gina Gibney. Departing from that model, the troupe now presents “Work by Women,” an evening of choreography by Amy Miller — the company’s associate artistic director and one of its finest dancers — and Hilary Easton. Ms. Miller offers “Still and Still Moving,” created with the composer Peter Swendsen, and Ms. Easton reprises excerpts from “The Short-Cut,” a 2005 work inspired by the progressive-era management guru Frederick Winslow Taylor. At 7:30 p.m., Gibney Dance Performing Arts Center, 280 Broadway, near Chambers Street, Lower Manhattan, 646-837-6809, gibneydance.org. (Siobhan Burke)Rennie Harris (through Sunday) Mr. Harris and his Philadelphia-based company, RHAW (Rennie Harris Awe-Inspiring Works), return to the New Victory Theater with their latest foray into narrative, youth-empowering hip-hop. “LUV: American-Style,” featuring about a dozen young performers, tells the story of a daydreaming teenager who unjustly lands in prison. A classic-rock soundtrack sets the unconventional backdrop for styles like popping, locking and boogaloo. Friday at 7 p.m.; Saturday at 2 and 7 p.m.; Sunday at noon and 5 p.m.; 209 West 42nd Street, Manhattan, 646-223-3010, newvictory.org. (Burke)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Hubbard Street Dance Chicago  (through May 24) If the Midwest has a hub for European choreographers, Hubbard Street is it. This troupe of exceptional dancers, who thrive in many modes of contemporary ballet, travels east with two programs of works created at home and abroad. These include Jiri Kylian’s stark and percussive “Falling Angels,” Nacho Duato’s Mediterranean-tinged “Gnawa,” a Crystal Pite solo and a tribute to George Balanchine by the Spanish choreographer Gustavo Ramírez Sansano. The resident artist Alejandro Cerrudo contributes two pieces, one on each program. Tuesday and Wednesday at 7:30 p.m.; Thursdays and Fridays at 8 p.m.; Saturdays at 2 and 8 p.m.; Sundays at 2 p.m.; Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-242-0800, joyce.org. (Burke)Cherylyn Lavagnino Dance (through Saturday) In recent years, Ms. Lavagnino has turned to themes of political oppression in her ballet-based work. Her company’s quadruple bill at St. Mark’s Church includes the premiere of “Nadeje,” which draws inspiration from Czech artists and writers to reflect on freedom of expression. Also on the program are last year’s “RU,” about a young Vietnamese political refugee, along with “Snapshots” (2010) and “Will” (2009), examining various facets of interpersonal relationships. At 8 p.m., Danspace Project, St. Mark’s Church, 131 East 10th Street, East Village, 866-811-4111, danspaceproject.org. (Burke)★ New York City Ballet  (through June 7) The spring season continues with an all-Balanchine program inspired by French composers (Friday and Tuesday), Peter Martins’s new staging of “La Sylphide” (Saturday and Sunday), a Jerome Robbins double bill (“The Goldberg Variations” and “West Side Story Suite,” on Wednesday) and a program of “21st Century Choreographers,” featuring works by Mr. Martins, Christopher Wheeldon and the welcome return of Justin Peck’s “Rodeo: Four Dance Episodes” (Thursday). Fridays at 8 p.m., Saturdays at 2 and 8 p.m., Sundays at 3 p.m., Tuesdays through Thursdays at 7:30 p.m., David H. Koch Theater, Lincoln Center, 212-496-0600, nycballet.com. (Burke and Schaefer)Rebecca Patek (Wednesday through May 23) The full title of Rebecca Patek’s new work is “The Future Was Looking Better in the Past: My Family Herstory: Or from religious persecution to American greed to murderous infamy to denial, repression and the slow dissolution into moral confusion, financial ruin and karmic retribution,” which tells you plenty. Expect to be uncomfortable: Ms. Patek’s gripping and disturbing brand of dance theater doesn’t hold back. At 8 p.m., Chocolate Factory, 5-49 49th Avenue, Long Island City, Queens, 718-482-7069, chocolatefactorytheater.org. (Schaefer)AdvertisementPurchase Dance Company  (Wednesday through May 23) Purchase College, part of the State University of New York and about 35 miles north of the city, is home to one of the best higher-education dance conservatories in the country. The Purchase Dance Company, made of its most promising students, presents two programs combining classical and contemporary styles, including works by the popular modern-dance choreographers Doug Varone and Aszure Barton and the former New York City Ballet dancer Bettijane Sills. At 7:30 p.m., New York Live Arts, 219 West 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-924-0077, newyorklivearts.org. (Schaefer)Rioult Dance NY  (Friday and Saturday) The French-born choreographer Pascal Rioult understandably has a soft spot for that country’s most famous voice. His company’s latest full-length work, “Street Singer — Celebrating the Life of Édith Piaf,” pays tribute to that complicated diva a century after her birth. The performance is smartly staged at 42West, an intimate nightclub where clinking glasses evoke the cabarets where Piaf first made her mark. La Môme Piaf will be portrayed by the Tony-nominated Broadway veteran Christine Andreas. At 8 p.m., 42West, 514 West 42nd Street, Clinton, 212-279-4200, rioult.org. (Schaefer)Ann Liv Young  (Wednesday) The irreverent Ms. Young presents “Elektra Cabaret” at Joe’s Pub, casting a character often portrayed as wicked in a compassionate light. In this reimagined version of her full-length “Elektra,” she is joined by Marissa Mickelberg (chorus), Bailey Nolan (Klytemnestra), Charley Parden (Orestes) and Vanessa Soudan (Chrysothemis). At 9:30 p.m., Joe’s Pub, at the Public Theater, 425 Lafayette Street, at Astor Place, East Village, 212-967-7555, joespub.com. (Burke)A version of this schedule appears in print on May 15, 2015, on Page C16 of the New York edition with the headline: The Listings: Dance.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.