AdvertisementSupported byFull reviews of recent dance performances: nytimes.com/dance. A searchable guide to these and other performances is at nytimes.com/events.A.O. Movement Collective  (through Oct. 10) For the past three years, Sarah A.O. Rosner has created a kind of gay feminist sci-fi utopia with the help of more than 60 collaborators. Together they have produced a graphic novel, a concept album, a fashion show and more. This week adds another dimension (the 10th) to their universe. In “Etle and the Anders,” a cast of 10 conjures a future based on Ms. Rosner’s “Infinite Theory of the Plural History of Everything,” which she recites. Don’t expect to be passive observers. At 7:30 p.m., with an additional performance at 10 p.m. on Fridays, Loft 172, 172 Classon Avenue, between Park and Myrtle Avenues, Clinton Hill, Brooklyn, 347-915-4790, etle.info. (Brian Schaefer)★ Batsheva Ensemble  (through Sunday) The work of the Israeli choreographer Ohad Naharin, one of today’s great dance makers, is eerie and unsettling and often achingly beautiful. But he doesn’t get enough credit for being funny, too. In “Decadance,” performed by the junior wing of his Batsheva Dance Company (don’t lower expectations: they’re spectacular), Mr. Naharin stitches a quilt of excerpts from two decades of work. It captures his light and dark sides, as well as his humor. Friday at 8 p.m., Saturday at 2 and 8 p.m., Sunday at 2 and 7:30 p.m., Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-242-0800, joyce.org. (Schaefer)Monica Bill Barnes  (Wednesdays through Dec. 16) Karaoke night meets office party in “Happy Hour,” the latest concoction from Ms. Barnes and Anna Bass, best known these days as the dancers — alongside the radio personality Ira Glass — in the touring revue “Three Acts, Two Dancers, One Radio Host.” Their new weekly gig, in a Lower Manhattan dance studio, features the cheeky duo playing two guys playing their everyday selves, as Ms. Barnes continues her love affair with awkwardness, failure and physical comedy. The audience gets drinks, prizes and the chance to sing. At 6:30 p.m., Studio G, Gibney Dance: Agnes Varis Performing Arts Center, 280 Broadway, near Chambers Street, 646-837-6809, monicabillbarnes.com. (Siobhan Burke)Jonah Bokaer  (Thursday) The Onassis Cultural Center NY celebrates its newly renovated home with Narcissus Now: The Myth Reimagined, a four-day, multigenre festival inspired by the Greek myth of Narcissus and its contemporary relevance. Mr. Bokaer, a thoughtful choreographer fluent in many media, joins forces with the Greek composer Stavros Gasparatos for the opening event. Their “Triple Echo” reflects on the story’s female character through three solos, danced by Hristoula Harakas, Sara Procopio and Mata Sakka. (Festival continues through Oct. 11.) At 7 p.m., Olympic Tower, Onassis Cultural Center, 645 Fifth Avenue, at 51st Street, 917-732-7352, onassisfestivalny.org. (Burke)★ Company XIV  (through Nov. 15) This flirtatious company, which combines ballet and contemporary dance with elements of baroque and burlesque, specializes in sexy, spicy, opulent interpretations of fairy-tale classics. This fall, the director and choreographer Austin McCormick introduces his take on “Cinderella,” which comes with a dash of opera and vaudeville. Because of titillating costumes and scenarios, and free-flowing libations, performances are adult only. Tuesdays through Saturdays at 8 p.m., Sundays at 5 p.m., Minetta Lane Theater, 18 Minetta Lane, Greenwich Village, 800-745-3000, companyxiv.com. (Schaefer)Seán Curran Company and Ustatshakirt Plus  (Wednesday through Oct. 10) As part of the cultural exchange program DanceMotion USA, led by the United States Department of State and the Brooklyn Academy of Music, Mr. Curran and his New York-based modern dance company recently toured Central Asia. While in Kyrgyzstan, they met the traditional Kyrgyz music ensemble Ustatshakirt Plus. “Dream’d in a Dream,” which has its premiere at BAM’s Harvey Theater, is a collaboration between that group (playing live) and nine dancers, inspired by Kyrgyz culture and the Walt Whitman poem of the title. At 7:30 p.m., Harvey Theater, BAM, 651 Fulton Street, Fort Greene, 718-636-4100, bam.org. (Burke)★ Fall for Dance  (through Oct. 11) This popular, packed-to-the-gills festival rolls out three more programs this week, with four companies on each. Program 2 (Friday and Saturday) includes the United States debut of France’s Compagnie Hervé Koubi, the British ballet dancer Steven McRae, a premiere by Pam Tanowitz and Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater in Ronald K. Brown’s “Four Corners.” Program 3 (Tuesday and Wednesday) features Companhia Urbana de Danca, Houston Ballet, the Paul Taylor Dance Company and the modern dance and ballet superstars Fang-Yi Sheu and Herman Cornejo. Program 4 (Thursday and next Friday) ushers in Stephen Petronio’s “Locomotor,” San Francisco Ballet, the classical Indian elegance of Nrityagram and the tap artists of Dorrance Dance, led by the recently anointed “MacArthur genius” Michelle Dorrance. At 8 p.m., Oct. 11 at 7 p.m., 131 West 55th Street, Manhattan, 212-581-1212, nycitycenter.org (Burke)★ Jack Ferver and Mark Swanson  (through Sunday) In “Chambre,” a performance and installation in the New Museum’s underground theater, this performer-designer team reimagines Jean Genet’s play “The Maids,” producing a modern critique of class disparity and celebrity culture. Mr. Ferver, his wry humor in full force, contributes the text and choreography; Mr. Swanson designed the many-roomed set, which is on display during museum hours. The presentation is part of the Crossing the Line Festival. Friday at 7 p.m., Saturday at 3 and 7 p.m., Sunday at 3 p.m., 235 Bowery, at Prince Street, Lower East Side, 212-219-1222, newmuseum.org. (Burke)From the Horse’s Mouth  (Friday) A lesser-known part of Alvin Ailey’s legacy is the Clark Center, an organization he helped create in 1959 that provided visibility and resources to minority dancers and choreographers. The center shuttered in 1989 but a new entity is now focused on sharing its legacy. In collaboration with the dance/narrative series From the Horse’s Mouth, veterans of the Clark Center, including Carmen de Lavallade and Meredith Monk, are coming together to celebrate the center’s contribution through dance, words and images. At 7 p.m., Aaron Davis Hall, City College, West 135th Street and Convent Avenue, Hamilton Heights, 212-650-6900, clarkcenternyc.org. (Schaefer)Patricia Hoffbauer (through Saturday) In “Dances for Intimate Spaces and Friendly People,” Ms. Hoffbauer makes the creative process the subject of her final product. Moving between various studios at the Gibney Dance space downtown, Ms. Hoffbauer presents duos, trios and quartets alongside videos by Peter Richards and writings by George Emilio Sanchez that shed light on the work’s creation. She does so with the help of a robust cast of multigenerational performers. At 7:30 p.m., Gibney Dance: Agnes Varis Performing Arts Center, 280 Broadway, near Chambers Street, Lower Manhattan, 646-837-6809, gibneydance.org. (Schaefer)Sin Cha Hong  (Friday and Saturday) This Korean choreographer offers two programs at the 92nd Street Y: one as part of the conversational Fridays at Noon series, where she will be joined by her colleagues Jin Han and Eun Mi, and another on Friday and Saturday (at 8 p.m.) featuring her 34-year-old company, Laughing Stone. 1395 Lexington Avenue, 212-415-5500, 92y.org. (Burke)★ Raja Feather Kelly  (through Saturday) In the spring, the choreographer Raja Feather Kelly reimagined “A Chorus Line” as reinterpreted by Andy Warhol to marvelous and moving effect — largely because Mr. Kelly maintains a skilled balance between cheekiness and sincerity. In his new work, “Another 37 Reasons to Cry (a Warholian production),” Mr. Kelly sharply applies Warhol’s Pop Art sensibilities and 15-minutes-of-fame worldview to the genre of film noir and the idea of the American dream. At 8 p.m., Jack, 505 1/2 Waverly Avenue, near Fulton Street, Clinton Hill, Brooklyn, jackny.org. (Schaefer)★ New York City Ballet  (through Oct. 18) The company’s fall season continues with “Americana x Five,” a medley of ballets to the music of American composers (this weekend and Wednesday). These run the gamut from George Balanchine’s “Slaughter on Tenth Avenue,” with music by Richard Rodgers, to Justin Peck’s recent “Rodeo: Four Dance Episodes,” set to classic Aaron Copeland. This week also brings a Balanchine double bill (Saturday night and Tuesday) and a world premiere by the Danish choreographer Kim Brandstrup on Thursday, alongside the season’s other new works by a bevy of young choreographers. Friday at 8 p.m., Saturday at 2 and 8 p.m., Sunday at 3 p.m., Tuesday through Thursday at 7:30 p.m., David H. Koch Theater, Lincoln Center, 212-496-0600, nycballet.com. (Burke)New York Theater Ballet  (through Saturday) Few companies of this size attempt the ambitious and eclectic programming that New York Theater Ballet does. For the next iteration of its regular “Legends & Visionaries” series, this appealing chamber troupe shows off various sides of its personality through works like Merce Cunningham’s 1964 “Cross Currents,” the late New York City Ballet dancer-cum-choreographer Lois Bewley’s “PiR2,” David Parker’s playful and rhythmic “Two Timing” and a suite of Agnes de Mille’s Broadway choreography. At 8 p.m., St. Mark’s Church, 131 East 10th Street, East Village, 866-811-4111, nytb.org, danspaceproject.org. (Schaefer)Ponydance  (Wednesday through Oct. 10) This boisterous Irish dance-theater troupe returns to New York as part of Travelogues, a series assembled by Laurie Uprichard, who brings the best of what she’s seen in her curatorial travels to Abrons Arts Center. The characters of “Anybody Waitin’?” find themselves at loose ends; as the news release puts it, “Leonie is waiting for Paula, Paula is waiting for a man and Bryan is waiting to be included.” Together they wrest humor from prolonged anticipation. Wednesday through next Friday at 7:30 p.m., Oct. 10 at 6 and 9 p.m., 466 Grand Street, at Pitt Street, Lower East Side, 866-811-4111, abronsartscenter.org. (Burke)★ Aparna Ramaswamy  (Tuesday through Thursday) Ms. Ramaswamy, an artistic director of Ragamala Dance Company in Minneapolis, strikes out on her own for an evening of solo classical Indian dance at the Joyce Theater. In “They Rose at Dawn,” she reflects on women as a source of creation, with live music lending immediacy to her already vibrant dancing. Tuesday and Wednesday at 7:30 p.m., Thursday at 8 p.m., 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-242-0800, joyce.org. (Burke)James Thiérrée  (through Sunday) In “Tabac Rouge,” a mischievous dance-theater work that is part of the Brooklyn Academy of Music’s Next Wave Festival, the unpredictable artist James Thiérrée meditates on power by creating a derelict kingdom, which he presides over with a smirk. Dancers and acrobats inhabit this strange, dreamlike court, swinging and tumbling from an elaborate set. They may be slaves to their master or plotting his overthrow, or they may be figments of his imagination. Friday and Saturday at 7:30 p.m., Sunday at 3 p.m., Howard Gilman Opera House, BAM, 30 Lafayette Avenue, at Ashland Place, Fort Greene, 718-636-4100, bam.org. (Schaefer)‘Where Sculpture and Dance Meet: Minimalism from 1961 to 1979’  (through Oct. 31) This exhibition at Loretta Howard Gallery examines the interchange of ideas among choreographers and sculptors in the 1960s and ’70s. Sculptures by Ronald Bladen, Donald Judd, Robert Morris, Andy Warhol and Sol LeWitt share the space with videos of performances by Trisha Brown, Lucinda Childs, Merce Cunningham, Simone Forti and Yvonne Rainer. Tuesdays through Fridays from 10 a.m. to 6 p.m. and Saturdays from 11 a.m. to 6 p.m., 525-531 West 26th Street, Chelsea, 212-695-0164, lorettahoward.com. (Burke)Advertisement