By JOSHUA BARONEMAY 14, 2015
A listing of discussions, film screenings, cultural activities and walking tours in New York City.Museums and SitesAmerican Museum of Natural History: ‘Countdown to Zero’ (through July 12) Smallpox is the only human disease to have been eradicated, but what about Guinea worm, polio, malaria and others? This exhibition, presented in collaboration with the Carter Center, examines international efforts to control and wipe out infection. Daily from 10 a.m. to 5:45 p.m., Central Park West and 79th Street, 212-769-5200, amnh.org.Brooklyn Historical Society: ‘Mapping Brooklyn’ (through Sept. 6) This exhibition, copresented by BRIC House, features artworks that incorporate themes of mapping and cartography from historical maps. The artists here are exploring the ways maps represent the practical and metaphorical aspects of life. Wednesdays through Sundays from noon to 5 p.m., Brooklyn Historical Society, 128 Pierrepont Street, near Clinton Street, Brooklyn Heights, 718-222-4111, brooklynhistory.org.Brooklyn Historical Society: ‘Personal Correspondents: Photography and Letter Writing in Civil War Brooklyn’ (through spring 2016) The historical society’s new exhibition tells the personal stories of Brooklyn soldiers and their families during the Civil War. Some of the tales, revealed through photos and letters, are funny; others are tragic. The show’s opening on April 9 coincided with the 150th anniversary of Robert E. Lee’s surrender. Brooklyn Historical Society, 128 Pierrepont Street, near Clinton Street, Brooklyn Heights, 718-222-4111, brooklynhistory.org.AdvertisementMorgan Library & Museum: ‘Lincoln Speaks: Words That Transformed a Nation’ (through June 7) This exhibition, presented thematically and chronologically, homes in on Abraham Lincoln’s leadership and its relationship to language. In his exhibition review for The New York Times, Neil Genzlinger wrote: “For Lincoln admirers, simply being in the same room with so many artifacts he touched will be a delight. And if they give the exhibition the time it requires, they will certainly come away with a fuller appreciation of the man.” 225 Madison Avenue, at 36th Street, 212-685-0008, themorgan.org.Morgan Library & Museum: ‘In the Margins’ (through Sunday) The Morgan is holding a pop-up exhibition to celebrate some of its latest acquisitions of books by authors who have won the Man Booker Prize. Examples include Hilary Mantel’s “Wolf Hall,” Ian McEwan’s “Amsterdam” and Julian Barnes’s “Metroland.” Each book comes with annotations, letters and other material from the author. 225 Madison Avenue, at 36th Street, 212-685-0008, themorgan.org.Museum of the Moving Image: ‘Matthew Weiner’s “Mad Men” ’ (through June 14) As one of the most critically acclaimed TV shows in recent years nears its finale, “Mad Men” gets the exhibition treatment in this look at the series’s creative process. On display are large-scale sets, such as Don Draper’s office, as well as costumes, art and research material used by the show’s staff. Viewers should expect not only a look behind the scenes of the show, but also, as in “Mad Men” itself, a peek into the era it depicts. 35th Avenue at 37th Street, Astoria, Queens, 718-784-0077, movingimage.us.AdvertisementNew York Transit Museum Grand Central Terminal Gallery Annex: ‘New York’s Transportation Landmarks’ (through Nov. 1) It’s been 50 years since New York passed its Landmarks Law, which covers over 30,000 buildings and structures around the city. To celebrate the anniversary, the New York Transit Museum has created an exhibition that explores the history of development, use and even rescue of these landmarks. More information: 212-878-0106, web.mta.info/mta/museum.New York Transit Museum: ‘Spanning the Narrows: The Verrazano Bridge at 50’ (through fall) Photographs, maps, drawings, models and other archival materials related to the construction of the bridge (including correspondence from Robert Moses, who oversaw the project) are part of this exhibition commemorating its 50th anniversary. Boerum Place and Schermerhorn Street, Brooklyn Heights, 718-694-1600, mta.info/mta/museum.Wikipedia Edit-a-thon (Tuesday) The Guggenheim is donating 100 images of its works to Wikipedia (artists include Degas, Klee and van Gogh). The museum will need to add information about them to the public encyclopedia, so it is holding an edit-a-thon in which people can come and help out, regardless of their experience. Registration is required, and participants must provide their own laptops. From 3 to 7 p.m., Guggenheim Museum, 1071 Fifth Avenue, at 89th Street, 212-423-3500, guggenheim.org.Gardens‘Night Lights at Wave Hill’  (Friday, Sunday and Thursday) Wave Hill, the public garden in the Bronx, is celebrating its 50th anniversary with a month of after-hours events. “The Lightening: a Project for Wave Hill’s Aquatic Garden,” an installation by the artist Chris Doyle, will be on display, and the Mark Twain Room will host piano performances that cover a range of classical and jazz standards. More information is at wavehill.org/events/categories/nightlights. (Through May 24.) At 6:30 p.m., West 249th Street and Independence Avenue, Riverdale, the Bronx, 718-549-3200.Events Neighborhood Movies Nights at St. Paul’s  (Friday) St. Paul’s Chapel hosts its monthly movie night, this time with the 1933 version of “King Kong.” The story, which at this point may need no introduction, follows a film crew that travels to an exotic island only to discover a gigantic gorilla that falls in love with the movie’s beautiful female star. At 7 p.m., St. Paul’s Chapel, Broadway at Fulton Street, Lower Manhattan, 212-602-0800, trinitywallstreet.org; free.‘Bascove/Bridges: Transporting the Metropolis’ (through July 12) This exhibition features more than 30 paintings and drawings of city bridges by the artist Anne Bascove, including the Brooklyn Bridge, the Outerbridge Crossing and the George Washington Bridge. Thursdays through Sundays from 1 to 5 p.m.; also by appointment; Noble Maritime Collection, Snug Harbor Cultural Center and Botanical Garden, 1000 Richmond Terrace, Livingston, Staten Island, 718-447-6490, noblemaritime.org.Bronx Week (through Sunday) The Bronx celebrates its best restaurants, activities and residents in the 44th annual Bronx Week. Events include the Bronx Parade (Sunday at noon), as well as the Bronx Food and Arts Festival (Sunday from noon to 6 p.m.) The full schedule is at ilovethebronx.com.1:54 Contemporary African Art Fair (Friday through Sunday) 1:54, the European art fair dedicated to Contemporary African works, makes its New York debut. (The name, 1:54, is a reference to the 54 countries that make up Africa.) Accompanying the fair is a program of events, called Forum, that includes lectures, film screenings and panel discussions. The schedule is at 1-54.com/new-york/forum. At various times, Pioneer Works, 159 Pioneer Street, near Bowne Street, Red Hook, Brooklyn.AdvertisementThe Fabulous Fifth Avenue Fair (Sunday) This street fair, stretching nearly 20 blocks, features local Park Slope merchants, including places on Fifth Avenue that will set up tables and racks outside their storefronts. A new addition this year is an art walk between First and Second Streets with works from local artists. Brooklyn Music Factory, along with the Urban Children’s Choir, will also provide entertainment at a stage in front of NY Kids Club. From noon to 6 p.m., Fifth Avenue, between Sterling Place and 12th Street, Park Slope, Brooklyn, parkslopefifthavenuebid.com.Fête de la Bretagne (Friday and Sunday) BZH New York, a group for people in the city from Brittany, France, hosts its annual celebration of the region. Highlights include a live album recording by the Celtic Social Club at Beethoven Piano’s Concert Space, as well as various events at M1-5 Lounge, including live musical performances. More information is at bzh-ny.org. The recording is at 6:30 p.m. Friday, Beethoven Piano, 211 West 58th Street, near Seventh Avenue, Manhattan. The party is at 4 p.m. Sunday, M1-5 Lounge, 52 Walker Street, between Church Street at Broadway, TriBeCa.Flux Art Fair (Friday through Sunday) Set to coincide with the Frieze Art Fair, the Flux brings together contemporary art that reflects Harlem’s culture. Curators work with artists they select to present art based on a theme — in this case, “The 21st Century Artist is a Nomad.” More information is at fluxfair.nyc. Friday and Saturday from 11 a.m. to 8 p.m., Sunday from 11 a.m. to 6 p.m., the Corn Exchange Building, 81 East 125th Street, East Harlem, 646-340-3479.‘Hamro Nepal’ (Saturday) Nepali and international artists will share a stage to celebrate the country’s culture and raise money for earthquake relief in this benefit concert organized by the Gurung Society of New York, a Nepali cultural nonprofit. (“Hamro Nepal” means “our Nepal.”) The performers include musicians, dancers, writers and more who are helping to raise money for the rural villages near the epicenter of the earthquake that hit on April 25. At 8:30 p.m., Tishman Auditorium of the New School, 63 Fifth Avenue, at 13th Street, Greenwich Village, gurungs.org/hamro-nepal. (Joshua Barone)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Harlem EatUp! (through Sunday) This festival, in its inaugural year, celebrates more than just Harlem’s food scene; throw in music and art to cover the neighborhood’s cultural spectrum. There are a variety of events — some free and some requiring tickets. More information is at harlemeatup.com. At various times and venues, 888-926-9674.New Music in Bryant Park (Monday) Bryant Park’s series that features new musical works commissioned by Chamber Music America will showcase Chris Dingman and Waking Dreams, as well as New Morse Code, a cello and percussion duo. Mr. Dingman, a vibraphonist, will present his “The Subliminal and the Sublime”; New Morse Code will perform Christopher Stark’s “The Language of Landscapes.” At 5:30 p.m., Avenue of the Americas, at 40th Street, 212-768-4242, bryantpark.org; free.Union Settlement Ethnic Festival (Saturday) Union Settlement Association, a community group in East Harlem, will celebrate the neighborhood’s cultural heritage with its 23rd annual Ethnic Festival. The daylong event features music, dance, art, food, children’s activities and more. More information is at unionsettlement.org/ethnicfest. From 11 a.m. to 5 p.m., East 104th Street, between Second and Third Avenues, East Harlem, 212-828-6029; free.Videology Presents Movie Trivia (Tuesdays) Videology, the Brooklyn bar and cinema, hosts a free film-themed trivia contest every week. The game varies; you will want to know theme songs, facts, quotations (especially ones from Nicolas Cage) and more. The winning team receives a free round of drinks, and there are chances to win drinks each round. At 8:30 p.m., 308 Bedford Avenue, at South First Street, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, 718-782-3468, videology.info.Spoken WordChinaFile Presents (Thursday) Decades have passed since Chinese political reform seemingly began to undo Mao Zedong’s revolutionary ideology. In his new book, “China Under Mao: A Revolution Derailed,” Andrew G. Walder makes an argument for why that isn’t necessarily the case, and how Mao’s ideology still influences China’s worldview today. He will be joined by other panelists in discussing whether China’s current leader, Xi Jinping, represents a return to Mao-era politics. At 6:30 p.m., Asia Society and Museum, 725 Park Avenue, at 70th Street, 212-517-2742, asiasociety.org.Advertisement‘Fire and Ice: A Conversation with Conan O’Brien and Anderson Cooper’ (Friday) The late-night TV host Conan O’Brien recently filmed a special episode of his show in Cuba in light of that country’s changing relationship with the United States. Mr. O’Brien will discuss that foray into international relations with Anderson Cooper, the CNN journalist who has made a career of reporting on crises around the world. At 6 p.m., Paley Center for Media, 25 West 52nd Street, Manhattan, 212-621-6800, paleycenter.org.Jan Gaye (Wednesday) Ms. Gaye, an ex-wife of Marvin Gaye’s, discusses her memoir, “After the Dance: My Life with Marvin Gaye.” The book is billed as a cautionary tale about loving a legendary artist — especially one so representative of the old-school days of R&B. At 7 p.m., LeRoy Neiman Art Center, 2785 Frederick Douglass Boulevard, at 148th Street, Hamilton Heights, 212-862-2787, artshorizons.org.Richard Goldstein and Anthony DeCurtis (Wednesday) Richard Goldstein, who became the Village Voice’s first rock columnist in 1966, discusses his memoir, “Another Little Piece of My Heart: My Life of Rock and Revolution in the ’60s.” He will be joined by Rolling Stone’s Anthony DeCurtis in talking about revolutionary musicians and adventures he documented as they happened. At 7 p.m., Strand Book Store, 828 Broadway, at 12th Street, East Village, 212-473-1452, strandbooks.com.An Evening with Aleksandar Hemon (Wednesday) Mr. Hemon, author of the despair-ridden but comical “The Lazarus Project,” has returned with his second novel: “The Making of Zombie Wars,” which has been described as “a roller coaster ride of violence and sex.” Mr. Hemon will discuss and sign his new book, and wine will be served. At 7 p.m., McNally Jackson, 52 Prince Street, between Lafayette and Mulberry Streets, SoHo, 212-274-1160, mcnallyjackson.com; free.Live From the NYPL: Bitcoin (Tuesday) Bitcoin, still a hot though often misunderstood technological innovation, takes the center stage as part of this discussion series by the New York Public Library. Panelists include Nathaniel Popper, a reporter for The New York Times and author of the book “Digital Gold”; Gavin Andresen, chief scientist at the Bitcoin Foundation; Fred Wilson, a venture capitalist; and Andrew Ross Sorkin, a columnist for The Times and anchor on CNBC. At 7 p.m., Stephen A. Schwarzman Building, 917-275-6975, nypl.org/locations/schwarzman. Nell Zink and Jeffrey Eugenides (Tuesday) Ms. Zink, author of the novella “The Wallcreepers,” discusses her novel “Mislaid,” about a woman’s encounters with harsh truths in the reality of contemporary America. She will be joined by Mr. Eugenides, a Pulitzer Prize-winning novelist and most recently the author of “The Marriage Plot.” At 7 p.m., Community Bookstore, 143 Seventh Avenue, between Carroll Street and Garfield Place, Park Slope, Brooklyn, 718-783-3075, communitybookstore.net.Walking ToursBryant Park Public Tours (Wednesdays) Bryant Park hasn’t always been the clean, open space it is today. This tour provides some insights on its history, including its darker days as a “needle park” in the 1970s, as well as its award-winning design and maintenance efforts. The tour meets at the fountain at 41st Street at Sixth Avenue. Registration is required. At 11 a.m., Bryant Park, 212-768-4242, bryantpark.org.Dumbo and Vinegar Hill (Thursday) These two neighborhoods, once an industrial center in Brooklyn, are now a hub of artistic activity. This walking tour brings participants from the past to the present, including stops associated with historical figures such as George Washington, Walt Whitman and John Roebling. The tour meets at Jay and York Streets. At 1 p.m., 888-606-9255, bigonion.com.AdvertisementFlatiron District Walking Tour (Sundays) This free tour meets at 11 a.m. on the southwest corner of Madison Square Park, at 23rd Street and Broadway, in front of the William Seward statue. Sponsored by the Flatiron/23rd Street Partnership; discoverflatiron.org.History of Wall Street Tour (weekdays) Stops on this tour, led by Wall Street Walks, include the New York Stock Exchange, Trinity Church, the Wall Street Bull, and ground zero and the Sept. 11 memorial. The tours last 90 minutes and begin at 11 a.m. and 1:30 p.m. (Also at 3 p.m. on Tuesdays and Fridays.) More details: wallstreetwalks.com.A Taste of Jewish New York (Sundays) Participants in this tour will get an insider’s look at Borough Park, Brooklyn, by learning about the customs of its Hasidic residents. There will also be the chance to try a range of food. This tour includes a stop at a lively shopping area, as well as at a matzo bakery — with free samples, of course. The tour meets at 9:45 a.m. at Fort Hamilton Parkway and 44th Street; 718-339-2302, timelinetouring.com.Union Square: Crossroads of New York (Saturdays) Sponsored by the Union Square Partnership, this free year-round tour focuses on the area’s political and social histories. The walk, led by guides from Big Onion Walking Tours, meets at 2 p.m. by the statue of Lincoln in Union Square Park, near the 16th Street transverse. 212-517-1826, unionsquarenyc.org. Information on events for possible inclusion in Spare Times should be sent to weekend@nytimes.com by Monday at 5 p.m. for publication that week. Longer versions of Around Town and For Children listings are in a searchable guide at nytimes.com/events. A version of this schedule appears in print on May 15, 2015, on Page C32 of the New York edition with the headline: Spare Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.