MAY 14, 2015
Deep undertow and dazzling technique share a home in the bass playing of John Patitucci, whose prominence as a sideman goes back 30 years. But they aren’t always peaceable cohabitants, or the easiest to bend toward a common cause. Mr. Patitucci proved that point in an otherwise rousing first set at the Iridium on Wednesday night.He was presenting his new Electric Guitar Quartet, with Steve Cardenas and Adam Rogers on guitars and Brian Blade on drums. A natural draw at the Iridium, where the wall décor features autographed electric guitars in glass display cases, the band has a personal dimension for Mr. Patitucci, as a celebration of the music he grew up absorbing in the East Flatbush section of Brooklyn: blues, funk and soul as well as jazz.“Brooklyn,” an engagingly earthy new album on his Three Faces label, covers that mix of styles, but with a consistent sonic palette. Mr. Patitucci, who has earned distinction as a virtuoso acoustic bassist, plays electric exclusively on the recording, favoring a semi-hollow six-string bass guitar recently made for him by Yamaha. He did the same on Wednesday, the kickoff to both a four-night run and a cross-country tour.The set opened as the album does, with the chiming overture “IN9-1881,” which fades into a swinging set piece called “The Search.” And at once, Mr. Patitucci’s designs as a composer-arranger snapped into focus, with bass and guitars forming a braided strand of melodic counterpoint, intricate and buoyant.AdvertisementA similar strategy took hold in an arrangement of the Malian singer Oumou Sangare’s “Dugu Kamalemba,” but Mr. Rogers and Mr. Cardenas phrased more in tandem, with a latticework of notes that leaned behind and then ahead of the beat. (The Brazilian percussionist Rogério Boccato joined them for the song, thickening the groove.)Both guitarists had ample room to stretch in the set, and each delivered one definitive knockout solo. For Mr. Rogers, it was his flinty accumulation of ideas on “JLR,” a prowling blues patterned after B. B. King’s “The Thrill Is Gone.” For Mr. Cardenas it was an eloquent, inventive essay on “Trinkle Tinkle,” the Thelonious Monk tune.AdvertisementMr. Patitucci has a rare chemistry with Mr. Blade, his partner in the Wayne Shorter Quartet and other bands, including Children of the Light, which made its debut last year. But they didn’t often lock into a higher gear, maybe because of Mr. Patitucci’s starring role in the band: His springy effervescence on the six-string was a gift that sometimes gave too much. There was precision and polish in his style, but not enough indication of the formal tensions stirring beneath the music’s surface.The John Patitucci Electric Guitar Quartet performs through Saturday at the Iridium, 1650 Broadway, at 51st Street, 212-582-2121, theiridium.com. We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.