AdvertisementSupported by For full reviews of recent concerts: nytimes.com/music. A searchable guide to these and other shows is at nytimes.com/events.★ Courtney Barnett  (Tuesday through Thursday) This supremely assured yet easygoing Australian singer-songwriter’s debut studio album, “Sometimes I Sit and Think, and Sometimes I Just Sit” noses into the minutia of everyday lives, from waiting for elevators to house shopping, with wit and profundity. (The odd Winnie-the-Pooh reference rears its head as well.) The simple, scrappy shrieks of guitar behind her deadpan, reedy voice suggest the rough-hewed garage punk of Sleater-Kinney or Pavement. With Chastity Belt and Darren Hanlon. At 9 p.m., Bowery Ballroom, 6 Delancey Street, near the Bowery, Lower East Side, 800-745-3000, boweryballroom.com. (Stacey Anderson)★ ‘Celebrate Brooklyn! Electro-Soul Dance Party with Jamie Lidell’  (Thursday) Almost three weeks before Chaka Khan kicks off another season of the terrific Celebrate Brooklyn! festival at Prospect Park, the British techno-pop provocateur Mr. Lidell leads a free dance evening down the road. This rare area appearance precedes one of the most intriguing festival sets of the summer, at the Bonnaroo Festival in Tennessee: a reprisal of the brilliant London and New York tribute series “Atomic Bomb! Who Is William Onyeabor?,” by Mr. Liddell, Luke Jenner of the Rapture and other marquee-name fans of the Nigerian funk pioneer Mr. Onyeabor. With JDH & Dave P and the Brooklyn United Marching Band. At 7 p.m., Pier 1 at Brooklyn Bridge Park, 2 Old Fulton Street, at Furman Street, Dumbo, bricartsmedia.org/performing-arts/celebrate-brooklyn. (Anderson)Crosby, Stills & Nash  (Friday and Saturday) It’s not yet clear whether Stephen Colbert is pinch-hitting for Neil Young’s harmonies (as he did when Crosby, Stills & Nash visited “The Colbert Report” in 2008), but this folk supergroup should be in jovial spirits, regardless: Last summer, the band released “CSNY 1974,” a boxed set of live takes from its 1974 reunion tour. It includes a version of the band’s “Suite: Judy Blue Eyes,” the classically inspired set of songs that the group performed at Woodstock. At 8 p.m., Kings Theater, 1027 Flatbush Avenue, near Tilden Avenue, Flatbush, Brooklyn, kingstheatre.com. (Anderson)‘Dog Daze,’ With Frankie Cosmos (Sunday) A former poetry student at New York University and daughter of the actors Phoebe Cates and Kevin Kline, the young Greta Kline constructs preternaturally poised lo-fi folk-pop with thoughtful verses and echoing vocals. She leads the group Frankie Cosmos, which released its debut, “Zentropy,” last spring; the art set has already sought to claim her, as evidenced by a high-profile set at the Museum of Modern Art last summer. The band performs for a furrier set at this pet-themed show, which is a benefit for Brooklyn Animal Resource Coalition and will feature pooches and humans alike. With Gingerlys and Lost Boy? At 6 p.m., Brooklyn Bow Wow, 1581 DeKalb Avenue, near Wyckoff Avenue, Bushwick, facebook.com/BarcShelter. (Anderson)Elizabeth & the Catapult  (Monday) This Brooklyn baroque-pop group cited Leonard Cohen as the inspiration for its album “The Other Side of Zero,” the expanded product of a song cycle commissioned by the WNYC D.J. John Schaefer. Indeed, there are many glimpses of Mr. Cohen in the group’s baleful guitar sweeps and the singer Elizabeth Ziman’s mewled devastation; at her best, she also sounds as delicately resolute as a bird on the wire. The band released the poppier effort “Like It Never Happened” last year. With the Spring Standards and Dear Georgiana. At 6:30 p.m., Mercury Lounge, 217 East Houston Street, Lower East Side, 800-745-3000, mercuryloungenyc.com. (Anderson)★ ‘FKA Twigs Presents Congregata’  (Sunday through Tuesday) Pulling from sweetly cooed R&B and astral synth tones that seem to have come from a spaceship’s console, this British singer-producer and It Girl’s debut album, “LP1,” pours itself out smoothly, creating a chilly and impermeable fog. Her falsetto remains wedged in the ether throughout, giving the more fluctuating electro-pop beats due attention. She recently performed a stirring set at the Coachella Festival; this residency, called “Congregata,” promises to be more experimental, with eight dancers, costumes by Alexander McQueen and new music. At 8 p.m., Brooklyn Hangar, 2 52nd Street, Sunset Park, Brooklyn, redbullmusicacademy.com. (Anderson)Jane’s Addiction  (Monday) These hard-nosed “Been Caught Stealing” rockers have maintained a bizarre revolving door of breakups and reunions since 1991: The original bassist, Eric Avery, flitted in and out and was replaced by the former Guns N’ Roses member Duff McKagan, and then by TV on the Radio’s multi-instrumentalist Dave Sitek; at the Paramount, the group performs its 1988 album, “Nothing’s Shocking,” in full. The band’s fourth disc, “The Great Escape Artist,” was released in 2011. At 8:30 p.m., the Paramount, 370 New York Avenue, near Main Street, Huntington, N.Y., 631-673-7300, paramountny.com. (Anderson)Mastodon  (Tuesday) These calculating, garrulous metalists from Atlanta stripped away the concept-heavy pattern of their previous albums for “The Hunter,” released in 2011. Its comparatively clean vocals and terse riffs exasperated some longtime fans, but even they were hard pressed to argue with the title track, a fierce yet contemplative assault of rock authority. They pull from that record and its unofficial sequel, the album “Once More ‘Round the Sun,” as part of Central Park SummerStage; with Clutch and Graveyard. At 6 p.m., Rumsey Playfield, Central Park, midpark at 70th Street, summerstage.org, 212-360-2777. (Anderson)Matuto  (Saturday) These engaging international rockers, known for their lively sets, blend traditional Brazilian music, like forró, with American jazz and funk. They took that alchemy through West Africa as participants in the State Department’s American Music Abroad diplomacy program and recently released the album “Africa Suite.” Their free performance is part of the Carnegie Hall Neighborhood Concert series. At 2:30 p.m., Bronx Library Center, 310 East Kingsbridge Road, at Briggs Avenue, Fordham, 718-579-4244, carnegiehall.org/education/neighborhood-concerts. (Anderson)The Month in Cabaret (through May 30) Judy Collins, the enduring wild angel of pop, has visited more musical planets than any other singer of her generation. A short list would include Stephen Sondheim, Joni Mitchell, Bob Dylan and Leonard Cohen. And there is also her own considerable body of sturdy original songs. Her return to Café Carlyle for an engagement that runs through Saturday is this month’s cabaret high point. Also at the Carlyle, that brash blond bombshell Megan Hilty returns from Tuesday through 30. Tuesdays through Fridays at 8:45 p.m.; Saturdays at 8:45 and 10:45 p.m.; 35 East 76th Street, Manhattan, 212-744-1600, thecarlyle.com. The pop-jazz belter Diane Schuur makes her debut at Birdland, from Tuesday through May 23, to celebrate her 60th birthday and a new album. At 8:30 and 11 p.m., 315 West 44th Street, Clinton, 212-581-3080, birdlandjazz.com. Leading the list of several rising talents at the Metropolitan Room this month is the young baritone Arlo Hill, who is in the midst of a four-performance engagement, singing the work of Frank Loesser. Thursday at 9:30 p.m.; May 28 at 7 p.m.; 34 West 22nd Street, Flatiron district, 212-206-0440, metropolitanroom.com. (Stephen Holden)★ Palma Violets  (Monday and Wednesday) A British garage-rock band with a remarkable sheen of earnestness, Palma Violets managed to turn the line “I want to be your best friend” into a scrappy, lo-fi post-punk anthem (“Best of Friends”). The group’s debut album, “180,” released in 2013, surfed a similar guilelessness, nodding to the Velvet Underground and the Libertines; the band released its stellar and more mercurial post-punk follow-up, “Danger in the Club,” this month. With Public Access T.V. Monday at 9 p.m., Bowery Ballroom, 6 Delancey Street, near the Bowery, Lower East Side, boweryballroom.com. Wednesday at 9 p.m., Music Hall of Williamsburg, 66 North Sixth Street, Brooklyn, musichallofwilliamsburg.com; 800-745-3000. (Anderson)Primal Scream  (Wednesday and Thursday) Pop-rock and electronic music may be a commonplace union now, but such was not the case in 1991, when the British indie-rockers Primal Scream released their seminal album, “Screamadelica.” That brave, engrossing work married psychedelic, dubby techno and deep house elements to the classic rock the band had long played; the result redefined the possibilities of mainstream pop. The Chemical Brothers, you’re welcome. Wednesday at 7 p.m., Irving Plaza, 17 Irving Place, at 15th Street, Manhattan, 212-777-6800, irvingplaza.com; Thursday at 8 p.m., Warsaw, 261 Driggs Avenue, at Eckford Street, Greenpoint, Brooklyn, warsawconcerts.com. (Anderson)Psychedelic Furs  (Friday and Saturday) Cult heroes of the early-1980s British rock scene — with a hauteur that nodded to the previous decade’s glam rock and sulky guitars that were progenitors of post-rock — the Psychedelic Furs cut a stern impression onstage. The band, however, still elicits squeals from American audiences during the opening chords of “Pretty in Pink,” the song that inspired the John Hughes coming-of-age comedy of the same title. Friday at 8 p.m., the Paramount, 370 New York Avenue, near Main Street, Huntington, N.Y., 631-673-7300, paramountny.com. Saturday at 8 p.m., Wellmont Theater, 5 Seymour Street, at Bloomfield Avenue, Montclair, N.J., 973-783-9500, thewellmonttheater.com. (Anderson)Buffy Sainte-Marie  (Wednesday) The leading chanteuse of Native American activism packs one of the most warbling, deliberately halting voices in all of folk. Yet the informed protestations behind that instrument are steadfast, especially the heart-rending refrain of the Academy Award-winning “Up Where We Belong,” which she wrote with Jack Nitzsche and Will Jennings. Ms. Sainte-Marie, 74, released “Power in the Blood,” her first solo album since 2008, on Tuesday. With Samantha Crain. At 7:30 p.m., Highline Ballroom, 431 West 16th Street, Chelsea, 212-414-5994, highlineballroom.com. (Anderson)★ Tedeschi Trucks Band  (Monday) The 30th-anniversary season of SummerStage, the City Parks Foundation’s delightful free series of al fresco concerts, debuts with a set by these Grammy-winning blues-rockers. This Florida-based band, led by the married musicians Susan Tedeschi and Derek Trucks, should deliver sweltering jams to match the swiftly rising temperatures; its second album, “Made Up Mind,” was a true Southern barnburner. At 7 p.m., Rumsey Playfield, Central Park, midpark at 70th Street, 212-360-2777, summerstage.org. (Anderson)Tennis  (Saturday) Patrick Riley and Alaina Moore, a husband-and-wife duo, created their first disc, the twee “Cape Dory,” as they sailed down the East Coast; their latest album, “Ritual in Repeat,” which adopts a more succinct rock edge, was recorded on dry land. With Kuroma. At 10:30 p.m., Mercury Lounge, 217 East Houston Street, Lower East Side, 800-745-3000, mercuryloungenyc.com. (Anderson)TV on the Radio  (Wednesday and Thursday) Over the course of more than 10 years and five studio albums, one of Brooklyn’s most celebrated bands has hopscotched across genres and emotions, from roughly hewed funk on “Desperate Youth, Blood Thirsty Babes” (2004) to polemic agit-dance on “Dear Science” (2008) and heart-rending romantic rock on “Nine Types of Light” (2011). Its latest album, “Seeds,” pulls from acid-jazz and electro-punk alike, yet feels quieter in its ambition and directed more toward smaller passageways of elegance. With Bo Ningen. Wednesday at 8 p.m., Kings Theater, 1027 Flatbush Avenue, near Tilden Avenue, Brooklyn, kingstheatre.com. Thursday at 8 p.m., Terminal 5, 610 West 56th Street, Clinton, 800-745-3000, terminal5nyc.com. (Anderson)Violent Femmes  (Tuesday) After much hemming and hawing, the triumphant 1980s alt-rockers behind “Gone Daddy Gone” and “Blister in the Sun” are staging a full-fledged reunion — sans the founding drummer and multi-instrumentalist Victor DeLorenzo, who was replaced by the younger Brian Viglione of the theatrical cabaret rockers Dresden Dolls. At 7 and 8:30 p.m., Rough Trade NYC, 64 North Ninth Street, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, roughtradenyc.com. (Anderson)Advertisement