AdvertisementSupported byFull reviews of recent classical performances: nytimes.com/classical. A searchable guide to these and other performances is at nytimes.com/events.Opera ‘Don Giovanni’ (Friday through Sunday, and Wednesday and Thursday) Douglas Martin conducts Amore Opera’s fresh-faced cast in Mozart’s ever-popular tragic comedy in a fully staged production that’s directed by Nathan Hull. (Through May 24.) At 7:30 p.m., except for Sunday, which has an additional performance at 2 p.m., Connelly Theater, 220 East Fourth Street, East Village, 866-811-4111, amoreopera.org. (Corinna da Fonseca-Wollheim)Classical Music★ Stephanie Blythe  (Friday) Just off a powerhouse run as the bearded Baba the Turk in “The Rake’s Progress” at the Metropolitan Opera, this magisterial mezzo-soprano and the pianist Warren Jones present a concert of lighter melodies by Poulenc, Ferré, Brel, Britten and Coward. But as she showed not long ago in a Kate Smith program, Ms. Blythe takes even standards seriously. At 8 p.m., Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Zachary Woolfe)Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center (Friday, Sunday and Tuesday) For its final two New York programs of the season, the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center first presents on Friday “Spanish Dances,” a diverse selection of works from Boccherini to Aaron Jay Kernis, featuring the guitar, as well as pieces by Ravel and others with elements of Spanish dance, but no guitar. The guitarist Jason Vieaux is the guest artist. The season ends on Sunday and Tuesday with two performances of a final program featuring the Emerson String Quartet and artist members in the New York premiere of Lowell Liebermann’s Fifth String Quartet; Mozart’s String Quintet in E flat (K. 614); and a major Tchaikovsky work, the vibrant String Sextet “Souvenir de Florence.” Friday at 7:30 p.m., Sunday at 5 p.m., Tuesday at 7:30 p.m., Alice Tully Hall, 212-875-5788, chambermusicsociety.org. (Anthony Tommasini)Counter)Induction  (Saturday) This superb new-music ensemble presents four new works, all under the title “Epitaphs: Music in Memoriam.” Lewis Nielson’s “zwischen Landwehr Kanal und Friedrichsfelde” receives its world premiere, along with pieces by Kyle Bartlett, Douglas Boyce and Eric Moe. At 7:30 p.m., Church of the Intercession, 550 West 155th Street, Washington Heights, counterinduction.com (Allen)Ensemble ACJW  (Friday) Carnegie Hall’s venturesome ensemble of young professionals closes its New York season with Ligeti’s Six Bagatelles for Wind Quintet; Poulenc’s Trio for Oboe, Bassoon and Piano; and Stravinsky’s “L’Histoire du Soldat.” At 7:30 p.m., Weill Recital Hall, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Woolfe)Clemens Gadenstätter (Thursday) The Austrian composer Clemens Gadenstätter joins the JACK Quartet, an ensemble dedicated to new music, and members of the Talea Ensemble for a program of his works at the Austrian Cultural Forum, part of its American Immersion series. Mr. Gadenstätter has spoken of his fascination with not only the sounds of contemporary music, but also with those of everyday life, including advertising, movies and noise. At 7:30 p.m., Austrian Cultural Forum New York, 11 East 52nd Street, Manhattan, 212-319-5300, acfny.org. (Tommasini)Gilbert & Sullivan Players  (Friday through Sunday) Exuberant silliness and catchy tunes collide in this production of Gilbert & Sullivan’s “The Gondoliers,” under the enthusiastic guidance of the company’s artistic director, Albert Bergeret. Friday at 8 p.m.; Saturday at 2 and 8 p.m.; Sunday at 3 p.m.; Skirball Center for the Performing Arts, 566 La Guardia Place, at Washington Square South, Greenwich Village, 212-998-4941, nygasp.org. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)International Contemporary Ensemble  (Monday) This excellent ensemble has been championing the works of the composer, philosopher and poet Pauline Oliveros, a longtime mentor to the group. The free program here includes Ms. Oliveros’s “Breaking Boundaries,” “The Witness,” “Ear Rings” and “The Well and the Gentle.” At 8 p.m., Jack, 505 1/2 Waverly Avenue, near Fulton Street, Clinton Hill, Brooklyn, jackny.org. (Vivien Schweitzer)★ Evgeny Kissin  (Saturday) This magician of the keyboard returns to Carnegie Hall with a program anchored by Beethoven’s “Waldstein” Sonata and a rainbow of Nocturnes and Mazurkas by Chopin. Works by Prokofiev and Liszt also offer a chance to sample Mr. Kissin’s dazzling technique. At 8 p.m., Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)Heidi Melton  (Sunday) This rising Wagnerian soprano, who sang Sieglinde to Christine Goerke’s Brünnhilde in the Canadian Opera Company’s recent “Die Walküre,” makes her New York recital debut, as part of the Voce series at Pace University. At 3 p.m., Schimmel Center for the Arts, 3 Spruce Street, between Park Row and Gold Street, Lower Manhattan, 212-346-1715, schimmel.pace.edu. (David Allen)Met Orchestra  (Sunday) Rounding out its season of Carnegie Hall matinees, the orchestra of the Metropolitan Opera House plays Brahms’s titanic Piano Concerto No. 1, with Yefim Bronfman, and Berlioz’s sparky, ghoulish “Symphonie Fantastique.” At 3 p.m., 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org (Allen)New York New Music Ensemble  (Monday) This adventurous group celebrates the music of Mathew Rosenblum and Lee Hyla, an American composer who died last year and whose scores mesh elements of classical, rock and jazz. The program includes the New York premiere of Mr. Hyla’s “Mother Popcorn Revisited” for piano trio, as well as his “Polish Folk Songs” for clarinet, bass clarinet, violin, viola, cello, piano and percussion. At 8 p.m., Merkin Concert Hall, 129 West 67th Street, Manhattan, 212-501-3330, kaufmanmusiccenter.org/mch. (Schweitzer)New York Philharmonic  (Friday, Saturday, Tuesday and Thursday) After completing a run of “Bugs Bunny at the Symphony,” a collaboration with Warner Bros., on Saturday, the orchestra celebrates the 50th anniversary of its parks concerts at its spring gala on Tuesday. Thursday brings the much-anticipated debut of the conductor Susanna Malkki, with a program that includes Jonathan Harvey’s tidal tone poem “Tranquil Abiding” (1998), Brahms’s “Variations on a Theme by Haydn” and his galvanic Piano Concerto No. 1, with Kirill Gerstein a late replacement for an injured Jonathan Biss. At 7:30 p.m., except for Saturday, when performances are at 2 and 7:30 p.m., Avery Fisher Hall, Lincoln Center, 212-875-5656, nyphil.org. (Woolfe)Queens New Music Festival  (Friday through Sunday) Now in its fourth year, this ambitious new-music festival places a heavy emphasis on percussion, with performances by Iktus Percussion on Friday, and pieces for harp and percussion featuring this borough’s own Percussia ensemble on Saturday. Other highlights include a program dedicated to new music from Asia on Sunday, and a new-music tour de force for electric guitar, featuring video, with Giacomo Baldelli on Saturday. Full schedule is online. Big Secret Theater, 4402 23rd Street, Long Island City, Queens, 718-392-0722, queensnewmusicfestival.org. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)Rebel (Thursday) In an especially enticing program, the essential Gotham Early Music Scene presents Rebel, the dynamic early-music ensemble, in “The Intimate Mozart,” a concert featuring works for fortepiano, violin, viola and cello. This event is part of the free Midtown Concerts series at St. Bartholomew’s Church, with programs lasting about 45 minutes. The program juxtaposes a rarity, the Adagio and Fugue for String Trio, with a staple, the Piano Quartet in G minor (K. 478). At 1:15 p.m., Park Avenue at 51st Street, 212-866-0468, midtownconcerts.org. (Tommasini)St. Luke’s Chamber Ensemble  (Friday) Members of the Orchestra of St. Luke’s bring cosmopolitan chamber music to the Morgan Library this weekend, offering pieces by Baroque and contemporary composers, inspired by cities. At 7:30 p.m., Morgan Library & Museum, 225 Madison Avenue, at 36th Street, 212-594-6100, oslmusic.org. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)SEM Ensemble  (Wednesday) As part of a project called New Synchronisms, inspired by Mario Davidovsky’s compositions, the SEM Ensemble performs Mr. Davidovsky’s Synchronism No. 12, as well as premieres by Elizabeth Adams, André Brégégère, Nicholas R. Nelson, Inés Thiebaut and Red Wierenga; performers include the pianist Steve Beck. At 8 p.m., Willow Place Auditorium, 26 Willow Place, Brooklyn Heights, drfaustus.org. (Schweitzer)Advertisement