By MELENA RYZIKMAY 14, 2015
In Mark Hogancamp’s other life, he is a World War II fighter pilot and the owner of a clubby bar in Belgium, where all manner of international adventurers and baddies congregate. He has an adoring and courageous wife, Anna, and the flirtations of a minx in fishnets, Deja. With the chiseled visage of a Hollywood star, Captain Mark is epically cool.In real life, Mr. Hogancamp lives alone in an overstuffed trailer near Kingston, N.Y., where he busies himself with carpentry and photography, building and documenting a meticulous fantasy world of his own invention.A vicious assault 15 years ago, by five men outside a Kingston bar, left Mr. Hogancamp with brain injuries and post-traumatic stress disorder, which he combats in an unparalleled and cinematic way. He is the creator of Marwencol, a small universe that sits next to his trailer, filled with World War II narratives in one-sixth scale miniature and populated by Barbies and other dolls. The alternate Mark Hogancamp, an action figure in a bomber jacket, exists here. Fight scenes, dramatic rescues and love triangles are painstakingly arranged to play out before Mr. Hogancamp’s camera. The resulting images are startlingly lifelike, poignant and, for him, therapeutic.“I needed a way to work things out, for me,” he said. “I didn’t plan on sharing it.”But after a chance encounter with a photographer, David Naugle, a few years ago, Mr. Hogancamp’s project was introduced to the outside world. It was featured in Esopus, an art journal, and the subject of a celebrated 2010 documentary, “Marwencol.”AdvertisementNow the surreal glamour of Mr. Hogancamp’s fantasy life is flooding into his real life: A feature film version of “Marwencol,” directed by Robert Zemeckis (“Forrest Gump”) and starring Steve Carell as Mr. Hogancamp, is in the works. A book of his photography is due from Princeton Architectural Press next winter. And on Saturday, Mr. Hogancamp’s largest solo exhibition will open at the Allouche Gallery in SoHo.Advertisement“It was love at first sight,” Eric Allouche, the gallery’s owner, said of seeing Mr. Hogancamp’s photos. “I didn’t even know the story before I saw the pictures.” More than 40 images, many on display for the first time, are in the show. “It’s as if you’re watching a movie,” Mr. Allouche said of their storytelling depth.For Mr. Hogancamp, 53, a lot has changed since Marwencol transformed him into an outsider artist, though he would never use that term — he thinks of himself more as a director, and his cast of dolls as actors. Once shy and scarred, especially about revealing what got him beaten up — his fondness for wearing women’s shoes and stockings — he is now more comfortable cross-dressing. He turned up at the gallery with a camera and a pair of pointy black slingbacks, rhinestones sparkling over the toes. (His own toes were painted purplish-red.)He has collectors and an art dealer, Janet Hicks, at One Mile Gallery in Kingston, where he has shown several times; he’s a regular at other gallery openings there, too. And after the fortuitous discovery of some life-size mannequin parts in a trailer — Mr. Hogancamp reassembled them and considered it a rescue — he began using human-scale figures in his work for the first time last year. “They’re the giant women of Marwencol,” he said. At the time of the documentary, he had 87 or so characters in his fictional town; now he has nearly 200, many of them female.“I feel as though men kicked me out of this world,” he said, “so I made women my catalyst for revenge.” He wore a vintage wool military cap and slung Deja, his flirtatious doll, like a protective talisman around his neck.Some things in Mr. Hogancamp’s life remain the same: He spends most days alone, working on Marwencol. The assault left him in a coma for nine days and wiped out his memory. When he awoke, he had to relearn how to walk, eat and behave. Details of his past — his marriage and a stint in the Navy — are hazy, and where once he drank vodka by the half-gallon, he has lost the taste for it. “I remember what it took from me,” he said.With effort, he regained some physical abilities; he can ride a bike and paint, though he’s not as accomplished a draftsman as before. (All of his assailants were convicted.) Jeff Malmberg, the director of the documentary, and his wife, Chris Shellen, a co-writer of the Marwencol book, made sure that Mr. Hogancamp’s art sales did not interfere with his disability checks; his injuries preclude regular employment.“Things have gotten better, they have gotten as good as they’re going to get,” he said. “Except my imagination. That keeps expanding.”AdvertisementOn a tour of the show on Wednesday afternoon, Mr. Hogancamp sipped espresso and lit up as he recounted the exploits of his alter ego, whom he calls Little Hogie, and his lady gang. Lately, he has also begun using dolls that resemble celebrities. “That’s Bruce Willis in the passenger seat, Vin Diesel and Matt Damon,” he said, looking at a photo of a mud-splattered Jeep that could have been from “Saving Private Ryan.” Though he’s never met Mr. Zemeckis, he made a doll of him, and paid homage to a moment from “Forrest Gump” in one of his stills. Mr. Hogancamp dreams of making his own movie. “I hope Steve Carell has nice legs,” he said, as he slipped on his heels for a photo, showing off shapely calves.Recently, when Mr. Hogancamp suffered artist’s block — “I didn’t feel like killing Nazis anymore” — he took inspiration from the 2014 games in Sochi, Russia, and created the Marwencol Olympics. It turned out to be an ambush for Hitler, Himmler and Mussolini; a doll version of Quentin Tarantino dropped by to watch the action. Little Hogie retired after that, and Mr. Hogancamp reported that his anger and resentment toward men had subsided. “It’s still therapy,” he said.The prospect of a Hollywood film of his life is “scary,” Mr. Hogancamp said, and he still feels overwhelmed at the attention from the art world. But over all, he is pleased with this unexpected chapter. After the documentary, fan messages and gratitude from people suffering from P.T.S.D. filled its Facebook page. “I didn’t know that my fight to get my mind back would benefit other brain-injured people,” Mr. Hogancamp said. “Now they know they can create their own world that only they understand.”“Hogancamp’s World” runs from Saturday to May 31 at Allouche Gallery, 115 Spring Street, at Greene Street, SoHo; 212-966-6675, allouchegallery.com. A version of this article appears in print on May 15, 2015, on Page C19 of the New York edition with the headline: The Outsider Artist as (Imagined) War Hero .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.