By JON PARELESMAY 14, 2015
Single-minded sincerity isn’t for everyone. Faith No More, which is about to release “Sol Invictus” (Ipecac), its first new studio album since 1997, has always trafficked in more contradictory impulses, and they were all on display when the reunited band played the first of two sold-out shows at Webster Hall on Wednesday night. The band members (and most of their equipment) were dressed in white and surrounded by bouquets of flowers, while the music was decidedly less angelic.Earnestness and mockery, sympathy and malevolence, doom and glee all ricochet through Faith No More’s songs, both in the lyrics and in music that slams styles and attitudes against one another. The band’s lead singer and lyricist, Mike Patton, is a vocal chameleon who can sustain a full-throated ballad, unleash the screams of punk and hardcore, yowl like a funk singer or come on loungey and unctuous. He’s so virtuosic that he never has to commit to a single stance. In a way, Faith No More anticipated the Internet era of innumerable choices and peculiar juxtapositions: the shuffled playlist, the heartfelt screed interrupted by a pop-up ad.Faith No More’s commercial peak was its Top 10 single in 1990, “Epic,” a chanted, cackling verse followed by a monumental hard-rock chorus that proclaims, “You want it all but you can’t have it.” It was rap-metal, a combination that would pay off repeatedly for other bands in the 1990s, but Faith No More chose to experiment instead on its next albums. “Where’s the rap-metal, dude?” Mr. Patton jibed from the stage.Actually, it was there, not only in “Epic,” which appeared early in the set, but also in the band’s opening song on Wednesday night, a track on the new album with a title that’s not publishable here. The reunited band, with the same lineup as the one that recorded “Album of the Year” in 1997, flexes old muscles in its new material. The churning, triplet-driven hard rock of “Separation Anxiety,” from the new album, follows through on “Land of Sunshine” from 1992; both were in the set, and both set off moshing near the stage. “Superhero,” another new song, seesawed between punk and melody along the lines of “The Gentle Art of Making Enemies” from 1995.A reunited band has to reclaim its mantle (although Faith No More has been touring internationally since 2009), and that’s what it was doing at Webster Hall. In new songs and old ones, the band had its longtime brawn and precision. It also reiterated its old ploy of contrasting its own tumultuous songs with easy-listening standards like the Herb Alpert hit “This Guy’s In Love With You,” which reassured the audience, “We know each other very well.”But maybe — only maybe — Faith No More is less cynical now. Its last encore, which Mr. Patton introduced as “West Coast hippie” stuff, was “From the Dead, “ a late-1960s-flavored, guitar-strumming ballad. It’s a song about resurrection: “Back from the dead,” Mr. Patton sang, with three-part backup harmonies. “Welcome home, my friend.”Faith No More is to perform on Aug. 5 at Madison Square Garden; thegarden.com. A version of this review appears in print on May 15, 2015, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline: Reclaiming Its Mantle of Doom and Mirth.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.