AdvertisementSupported byBy James R. OestreichIf mere mischief can stir boys’ souls and imaginations, what effect might something on the scale of biblical plagues have? You didn’t have to wonder on Wednesday evening, when the St. Thomas Choir of Men and Boys and the period band Concert Royal gave a rousing performance of Handel’s great oratorio “Israel in Egypt” at St. Thomas Church in Manhattan. The choir, meticulously prepared as always by John Scott, the organist and music director at the church, seemed unusually energized. The boys especially, looking typically angelic in their red cassocks, sang with animated, almost bloodthirsty commitment.As well they might, responding to Handel’s cheerleading and his incomparably vivid tone-painting. His music playfully taunts the suddenly hapless Egyptians even as the biblical text describes their mounting agonies: “There came all manner of flies and lice in all their quarters”; “He gave them hailstones for rain” “He smote all the firstborn of Egypt.”In many encounters with the work, I’ve never heard the final words — “the horse and his rider hath he thrown into the sea” — sound so savage, so definitive and so satisfying.Handel wrote the piece in three parts, reusing his funeral anthem “The Ways of Zion Do Mourn” as the first, renamed “Lamentation of the Israelites for the Death of Joseph.” Although he soon scrapped that section, some performers today use an edition that tries to recreate the original in those three parts.Mr. Scott followed the more common practice of retaining the overture, then going directly into the remaining two sections, “Exodus” and “Moses’ Song.” What results is a relatively short work consisting almost entirely of choruses.With the vocal soloists therefore underemployed, Mr. Scott declined to hire guest male soloists, drawing instead from the choir: Patrick Fennig, countertenor; Martin Coyle, tenor; and Kelvin Chan and Daniel Moore, baritones. Mr. Chan and Mr. Moore were excellent in the powerful bass duet, “The Lord is a man of war.”Mr. Coyle was also strong, Mr. Fennig a little less secure in body and pitch. Both added ornamentation that was mostly smooth and to the point, although Mr. Fennig’s elaborate flourish at the end of “Their land brought forth frogs” may have been unwise.For the soprano parts, Mr. Scott brought in Jolle Greenleaf and Molly Quinn, stalwarts of the American early-music scene. The two have long worked beautifully as a duet, and did so again in “The Lord is my strength.” Each sang another brief number, but Ms. Quinn got the big payoff at the end, with her soaring “Sing ye to the Lord.”Advertisement