By BRIAN SEIBERTMAY 14, 2015
The founder and director of an organization called Cats Paying Dues, Andrew Nemr says he encounters a lot of confusion about that name. No, his group isn’t some feline labor union or animal act. It’s a troupe of young tap dancers — “cats” is old jazz slang for hip musicians — and the dues are a kind of apprenticeship. Mr. Nemr wants to pass on some of the knowledge and opportunities he received from mentors like Jimmy Slyde, Gregory Hines and Savion Glover. Cats Paying Dues is a company of hoofers in that jazz tradition.And so it was surprising on Wednesday at the TriBeCa Performing Arts Center, where the troupe is celebrating its 10th anniversary, when some of these hoofers burst into song. This was during “Remembrances,” the second of three suites having their premiere and the evening’s most intriguing experiment.Here, Mr. Nemr attempted a hybrid of a cappella singing and tap. The vocals — on songs like “Nature Boy,” “Come Ye” and “For What It’s Worth”— were basic, but the arrangements of tap around them were engaging and musically sophisticated. In one blues number, led by the multitalented Alex MacDonald, a tap figure passed around in quick relay punctuated the song brilliantly, and an initially dubious concept of the hybrid suddenly seemed worthy of further development.The first suite, by contrast, exemplified what might better be left behind. “Ever for Love” was a retread of Mr. Nemr’s 2005 “All for Love,” both set to a collection of pop love songs. Lots of milling around exposed Mr. Nemr’s deficits as a choreographer of ensemble patterns, leaving his eager-to-please dancers to rely on charisma they don’t have. Brief solos showed that all 10 members have skills, but their intricate tap phrases were often muddied in unison and buried in the sound of poorly chosen recordings.That was less of a problem in the third part, “Entering the Waters,” largely because the music was live, provided by House of Waters, a trio playing jazz-fusion with a Middle Eastern tinge. The highlight here was Mr. Nemr’s solo, his eyes closed in reverie, matching rapid runs by the hammered-dulcimer player Max ZT. Mr. Nemr is a masterly tapper, yet much of his mastery was wasted on baggy talking-while-tapping speeches, recounting the company’s origins and why some of the proceeds would be going to an orphanage in Lebanon. His endings consistently fizzled, but this anniversary also contained promising beginnings.Cats Paying Dues’ “Three Suites” continues through Sunday at the TriBeCa Performing Arts Center, 199 Chambers Street, near Greenwich Street; 212-220-1460, tribecapac.org. A version of this review appears in print on May 15, 2015, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline: They Tap, They Sing, They Don’t Meow .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.