AdvertisementSupported byBy Martha Schwendener“Zanele Muholi: Isibonelo/Evidence,” an exhibition of 87 works at the Brooklyn Museum by a South African artist, ends with a celebration. But it begins on a much darker note. Describing herself as a “visual activist,” Zanele Muholi, who was born in 1972 in Umlazi township in Durban, South Africa, and studied at the Market Photo Workshop in Johannesburg, founded by the photographer David Goldblatt, has dedicated herself to increasing the visibility of black lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex people with notable success. Her stark, powerful photographs have been included in multiple biennials and international exhibitions. But her work remains rooted in local struggles, often responding to the violence inflicted on her community. Isibonelo in the title is a Zulu word for “example,” and Ms. Muholi treats each photograph as an example and part of a growing historical record. If you approach the exhibition at the Elizabeth A. Sackler Center for Feminist Art, the first image you encounter is a giant color photograph attached to a free-standing wall. The image depicts two hands cradling a South African passport opened to a page stamped “deceased.” It is the passport of Disebo Gift Makau, a South African lesbian who was raped and murdered last year, her body found half-naked with a pipe shoved down her throat. On the other side of the same wall is a timeline of other hate crimes against gays and lesbians in South Africa since 2009. Some of them are as horrendous as Ms. Makau’s murder. Facing the timeline at the other end of the gallery is another free-standing wall with mostly anonymous testimonies handwritten in chalk. “ ‘Demonic people, satanic people we are going to kill you,’ ” one of the texts reads, recounting a homophobic tirade. It continues: “Guys will follow us if we are going to get a taxi. They try to grab my girlfriend. They say they will stab us because we are taking their girlfriends. People passing by in a taxi yell at me and even strangers make comments regularly when I’m dressed more butch and enter a shop. It happens all the time.” This is one of the milder remembrances. In the same gallery is a grid of 60 black-and-white photographs, part of the continuing “Faces and Phases” project that Ms. Muholi started in 2006 and exhibited at Documenta 13 in Kassel, Germany, in 2012. Ms. Muholi’s affecting photographs, which rely on realist narrative, may be familiar in format. The uniformly sized images here are reminiscent of other projects cataloging subcultures: Catherine Opie’s photographs of lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender people in Los Angeles, as well as August Sander’s classic survey of German citizens or Gerhard Richter’s “48 Portraits” of men of letters that he painted for the German pavilion at the 1972 Venice Biennale. The images also overlap with the works of African photographers like Mr. Goldblatt, Santu Mofokeng and Pieter Hugo. Despite the familiarity of approach, Ms. Muholi’s photos are significant for the population they depict. South Africa became one of the first countries to abolish discrimination based on sexual orientation in its constitution and legalized same-sex marriage after apartheid ended in 1994, yet hate crimes persist. Sitting for such a portrait becomes a collaborative form of activism, a gesture of defiance and self-acceptance.The urgency of her project is echoed in a poem by Sindiwe Magona included in a recent book of “Faces and Phases” (2014). The poem is titled “Please, Take Photographs!” and includes the lines, “Please, hurry! Take photographs of all the children, now!/Take photos, for tomorrow they will be gone.” Around the corner from “Faces and Phases” is a blurry video of Ms. Muholi and her partner having sex. What’s more visually striking than the fuzzy bodies coupling is their contrasting skin tones, which also would have been transgressive during apartheid under anti-miscegenation laws. Here is also where you will encounter the celebratory part of the show, with colorful photographs of same-sex weddings.The images in this section are less formal than the black-and-white portraits in “Faces and Phases.” In many ways, they resemble snapshots or candid wedding photos. But they are radiant, both with African sunshine and irrepressible joy. A room-size installation includes the video “Ayanda and Nhlanhla Moremi’s Wedding” (2013) in which you witness snippets of the ritual from start to finish, with poignant wedding speeches and dancing. Sitting near the projection is a coffin with a lavish display of flowers and a black-and-white self-portrait of Ms. Muholi resting on the pillow. The contrast in the photograph — her animal-patterned shirt against a different background — nods to great African photographers like Seydou Keita and Malick Sidibé, who explored the rich history of West African textiles in their work. But with her affecting photographs and videos, documenting the lives and deaths of black lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex people, Ms. Muholi is claiming her own place in history. “Zanele Muholi: Isibonelo/Evidence” continues through Nov. 1 at the Elizabeth A. Sackler Center for Feminist Art, Brooklyn Museum, 200 Eastern Parkway, at Prospect Park; 718-638-5000, brooklynmuseum.org. Advertisement