AdvertisementSupported byAntiquesBy Eve M. KahnWooden mangle boards, rarefied objects that servants and peasants traditionally used to smooth fabrics, have been the preoccupation of the art historian Jay Raymond for six years. William C. Carson, a mangle board collector in northern New Jersey, commissioned Mr. Raymond to research these utilitarian items for a new book, “Mangle Boards of Northern Europe” (Streamline Press).Mr. Raymond analyzed about 1,500 boards, some from the 16th century. Mr. Carson owns 120 of them; others are in museums and private collections all over Europe and North America. The handles and knobs are shaped like animals, and the planks are carved and painted with foliage, animals, cherubs and biblical scenes, among other motifs. Inscriptions reveal the names of original owners, offer prayers for domestic happiness and celebrate clean laundry with phrases like “washed white and neatly folded.”The book critiques the mangles’ designs; for Mr. Raymond, some are “bloated and nondescript” while others exude “joyfulness, whimsy, simplicity, and idiosyncrasy.” He also evaluates their user-friendliness: “Mangling with these boards would pain the hands that pressed down upon them,” he writes of ornately carved German ones from the 1630s.Mr. Raymond previously collected Art Deco irons; he wrote a book about them in 2008 and sold his own to Mr. Carson. When he was first asked to explore mangle boards, Mr. Raymond said, “I wasn’t naturally drawn to them, but the more I looked at them, the more I came to love them.” At some European museums he visited, no one else had ever asked to examine these humble tools, which had been left behind by farmers emigrating to America.Mr. Raymond was long a student and teacher at the Barnes Foundation before its move from the outskirts of Philadelphia to the city center. The institution’s founder, Albert C. Barnes, displayed andirons, trivets, horseshoes and hinges alongside his valuable Impressionist paintings. Scrutinizing mangle boards is in keeping with the open-minded Barnes spirit, Mr. Raymond said, adding, “It’s a rigorous application of his ideas.”In an email message, Mr. Carson estimated the cost of the research project in the “upper six figures,” including fees for travel, photography and translations. He may auction the collection someday (mangles typically sell for a few hundred dollars each), he said, in the hope that they will be available for viewing by the public.A SWIMSUIT EMPRESSThe beachwear designer Lea Gottlieb and her two daughters survived World War II by hiding from the Nazis; her husband was sent to a labor camp but survived. Ms. Gottlieb rarely discussed those wartime ordeals after she and her Hungarian Jewish family resettled in Israel. “She always saw the future, never the past,” her daughter Miriam Ruzow said. And the future entailed setting up the Gottex bathing suit factory, which eventually employed thousands.The family donated its archive of clothing and documents to the Design Museum Holon in Israel, which has now lent a few dozen pieces to the JCC Manhattan for an exhibition running through Aug. 2. The JCC show contains scarves in floral, seashell and starfish patterns; bathing suits studded with gold, turquoise beads and amulets; and photographs of Mrs. Gottlieb with models and clients, including Diana, Princess of Wales.Mrs. Gottlieb, who died in 2012 at 94, worked into her last decade, and the drawers in her home in Tel Aviv were filled with outfits and paperwork. She helped to develop Gottex prints that looked embroidered, mirrored and sequined. She traveled widely in search of inspiration; the JCC is displaying patterns based on Monet and Chagall paintings, Egyptian jewelry, Pakistani tunics and Hungarian aprons.“She took her life experiences and put them into her work,” Galit Gaon, chief curator of the Design Museum Holon, said during a tour of the exhibition at the JCC.Mrs. Ruzow said of her mother, “For her there was no ‘no’; nothing was impossible.”The Design Museum Holon is still sorting through Gottex swimsuits, sketches, reference books and sales catalogs, which Mrs. Gottlieb wanted kept together and made available to scholars and fashion students.Mrs. Ruzow, a retired Gottex executive, has gradually pieced together stories of her parents’ wartime experiences. To avoid being spotted by the Nazis in Hungary, her mother would conceal her face with bouquets of daisies when venturing out to find food for the family, she said; in later years she sometimes worked daisy patterns into her beachwear.BALKAN SONGS PRESERVEDTucked away in a Harvard University office are thousands of aluminum discs from the 1930s that preserve folk tales chanted by singers in the former Yugoslavia. But many of the records have warped, oxidized or both over the years, and all are vulnerable to deterioration each time a stylus runs through their shallow grooves and plays the music. Part of this collection, recorded in villages by the Harvard classicist Milman Parry, is being scanned at the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory in California to create enduring digital images of the sound waves. Researchers there have retrieved sound even from damaged surfaces on various early recording formats like tinfoil and wax cylinders.Carl Haber, a physicist at the lab, said he admired Mr. Parry’s methodical documentation of South Slavic traditions. “He’s approaching it scientifically,” Mr. Haber said. “It’s grounded in data, it’s almost mathematical.”During a recent tour of the collection in Cambridge, Mass., David F. Elmer, a classics professor, unsheathed silvery discs from the ’30s and explained how they were made. Mr. Parry, whose expeditions were financed by Harvard, traveled around Yugoslavia in a Ford and used its battery to power his recording equipment. He learned local languages, socialized at coffeehouses and took careful notes during singsong recitations of epic poems with over 10,000 lines apiece.In what was described as a freak accident a few weeks after he returned from a research trip in 1935, Mr. Parry died at 33 after a loaded gun in his luggage discharged while he was unpacking at a Los Angeles hotel.As for the apparatus used to make the discs, Mr. Elmer said, “no one knows what happened to it.”COMMUNAL BROWSINGAntiques buyers and sellers are forming a variety of virtual and real-life consortiums that they cast as saviors of the trade. Auction houses are collaborating with aggregators like bidsquare.com and barnebys.com, and dealers and auctioneers are posting wares and networking through new communal sites including 1stnline.com, marketplaceforcollectors.com and antiquesyounggunsusa.com.At a recent news conference in Manhattan for the Antiques Young Guns USA site, Dan Darby, general manager of U.S. Antique Shows, said that attracting young buyers and sellers was crucial. “It literally is getting down to the continuation of our industry,” he said.The owners of gemr.com, a new site for discussing and ranking antiques and such collectibles as sneakers and airsickness bags, have acquired the dealer hub site goantiques.com to expand into e-commerce. Comments on gemr.com are moderated. “Every comment has to be in the spirit of the site, in the spirit of respect and sharing information,” said Gary Sullivan, an antiques dealer and a founder of the site.Gemr.com has developed the video series “You Collect What!?” and posts the holdings of various institutions, sometimes causing collectors to long for what is not yet on the market. “I would love to have something like this someday,” one commenter wrote of a Winslow Homer painting of crashing surf that belongs to the Portland Museum of Art in Maine.Advertisement