By TED LOOSMAY 14, 2015
In its fourth edition, the art fair Frieze New York will be making a few subtle tweaks to its highly successful formula.Frieze New York, a sibling event to the Frieze London fair that happens in October, will gather some 190 galleries from 33 territories in Randall’s Island Park from May 14 to May 17.The fair has quickly gained elite status among the world’s art fairs not only by corralling the top galleries, but also by focusing on creating a more enjoyable visitor experience.Food service from local restaurants with a cult following has been one part of the Frieze New York lineup. This year, Morgenstern’s Finest Ice Cream and the California-style cafe Dimes are two new names joining stalwarts like Roberta’s, the extremely popular Brooklyn restaurant and pizzeria.“We started with this idea of the fair as a meeting place,” said Amanda Sharp, who co-founded both editions of Frieze with Matthew Slotover. “One of the great things is to break bread with people.”AdvertisementPerhaps most distinct is the venue itself — a serpentine white tent with a translucent vinyl roof — and its location far off the beaten path.Advertisement“The light is so amazing in the tent,” said the New York dealer Alexander Gray, who has participated since the beginning. “There’s something uplifting about it. It’s the only fair where you know what time of day it is.”A large portion of visitors take a ferry from Manhattan to Randall’s Island, adding to the unique quality. “Because it requires a journey to get there, people stay,” said Mr. Gray, who this year will be showing paintings by the New Mexico–based painter Harmony Hammond.A new section, “Spotlight,” includes 16 galleries. “It looks at great, overlooked works from the 20th century,” Ms. Sharp said. As part of Spotlight, London’s Vigo Gallery will show work by the Sudanese artist and diplomat Ibrahim El-Salahi.In the fair’s main section, some big-name dealers will be participating for the first time: Acquavella, Matthew Marks and Pace Gallery.The well-known newcomers “will be bringing more blue-chip material than we’ve seen in the past, more historical material than we’ve had in the past,” Ms. Sharp said.Those additions are good not only for buyers of brand-name art, but also for the way they bring balance to the fair in ways that are not obvious to visitors, Ms. Sharp said. Essentially the more established galleries help subsidize two of the fair’s sections, Focus and Frame, both devoted to younger, smaller galleries that pay half the regular price to participate.Each section has a gallery from Asia, a region not heavily represented at the fair. Frame, for galleries less than eight years old that are presenting solo shows, includes a booth for Shanghai’s Antenna Space. Focus, for galleries founded in or after 2003, features Chi-Wen Gallery of Taipei, Taiwan.AdvertisementFrieze New York will again have noncommercial components, too. Cecilia Alemani, the curator of Frieze Projects and Frieze Sounds, said the artists she chose “have been realizing projects that interrupt regular fair rhythm.”“They are trying to think of ways to break that pace, to help people relax or have an immersive experience,” she said.One of the Frieze Sounds entries, “Grosses C” by Alicja Kwade, is an audio collage of moments on film when characters react to seeing a diamond for the first time.The trend at all art fairs has been moving away from showing a smorgasbord of unrelated works by different artists to presenting more streamlined booths, and that continues for the local galleries showing their wares in this edition. About a third of the galleries are from New York.“Frieze is in our home city,” said Greg Lulay, a director of David Zwirner Gallery in New York. “We approach it like an additional exhibition here. And it’s worked very well when we’ve done a very focused presentation.”This year the Zwirner booth will be a compare-and-contrast affair featuring sculptures by the late Minimalist John McCracken of California and the late Austrian artist Franz West, known for his work in papier-mâché.“They both made their own sculptures, so I think that’s quite interesting,” Mr. Lulay said. “A lot of the Minimalist artists used fabricators because they wanted to really remove themselves from the practice. But it was a very studio-heavy practice for John, and for Franz it was as well, though his work is very different.”And living artists relish the chance to get their hands on a whole booth. “Frankly it’s all sort of new to me that we consider art fair booths an exhibition space,” said T.J. Wilcox, who is taking over the Barbara Gladstone Gallery space. “But I think it’s fantastic we can take the form more seriously.”AdvertisementMr. Wilcox is combining two bodies of work he has shown previously. He has created wallpaper derived from his video “In the Air,” which depicts panoramic views of New York as seen from his terrace. The video was featured at the Whitney Museum of American Art last year.The images will be pulled into three dimensions with what he calls “Manhattan-henge” light boxes. A monitor will show an animated video Mr. Wilcox made to accompany the opera “The Tales of Hoffman,” one of his favorite narratives, which was created for a Metropolitan Opera series of short films.Although they were not conceived together, Mr. Wilcox said the works were strongly linked. “These are stories that keep coming back to me repeatedly, both just things that I love,” he said. “We are all collectors of stories, whether we intend to be or not.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.