By DANIEL McDERMONMAY 14, 2015
Looking for something to do this weekend?The Times’s arts team has you covered.We asked our colleagues: What’s one thing they would recommend?The finale of “Mad Men” is on Sunday. So the choice is either go big or go off the grid. You could climb into the bunker with “Witnesses,” a French crime series on Netflix and other streaming platforms, or “American Odyssey,” an NBC thriller that is excellent but hasn’t yet found an audience. You won’t be missing out on the conversation — that one hasn’t started yet. (See Neil Genzlinger’s review of “Witnesses.”)Now that the Tony nominations have arrived, and the burden of constant theatergoing has eased, I’m going to take a break and celebrate the great mystery novelist Ruth Rendell, who wrote more than 60 books before her  death on May 2. I recently picked up one she wrote under the name Barbara Vine, “The House of Stairs.” Just a few pages in, and I was hooked. (See this Times profile of Ms. Rendell or find “The House of Stairs” at a library.)You know the inspirational-teacher film? Think of “Whiplash” as the opposite. The great character actor J. K. Simmons won an Oscar after stepping into the spotlight as a music instructor who isn’t satisfied with the (literal) blood, sweat and tears of a student. This also works as a great New York City film. (Available for digital rental. Read the full review by A. O. Scott.)AdvertisementOnce upon a time, history books taught that Modern Art started in Europe, traveled to the United States, and that was basically that. Wrong. Modernism was always global, and the globally minded Queens Museum is telling the South Asian side of the story in “After Midnight: Indian Modernism to Contemporary India, 1947/1997.” The show starts with paintings done just after independence, then leaps into the present with videos, sculptures and installations. The look is sometimes familiar enough, in an internationalist way, but the ideas are not. (More about the exhibition here.)A preview of the restoration of Satyajit Ray’s Apu Trilogy.I can think of no greater work of humanism on film than Satyajit Ray’s Apu Trilogy. A coming-of-age story grounded in vivid social realities, with a majestic score by Ravi Shankar, it recently received a painstaking restoration, showing at Film Forum through May 28. Mostly, there’s one film featured per day — I reacquainted myself with “Pather Panchali,” the first installment, on Wednesday — but several marathon screenings are scheduled, including one on Sunday. (Read more about the films.)Check ’em out and report back; we want to know how we’re doing. Is there something else we could do to help you sort out your cultural diet? Let us know at thearts@nytimes.com, or tweet @nytimesarts.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.