AdvertisementSupported byBy Margalit FoxRachel Rosenthal, a performance artist whose work — fierce, funny, earthy and cantankerous — bemoaned the political and ecological fate of the planet, died on Sunday at her home in Los Angeles. She was 88.Her death was announced by the Rachel Rosenthal Company, the Los Angeles-based arts and educational organization she founded in 1989.Ms. Rosenthal’s work melded dance, theater, dramatic monologues, improvisation and visual art to illuminate her abiding concerns: feminism, environmentalism and animal rights. Internationally renowned — she performed at Lincoln Center and the Whitney Museum of American Art in New York, the Museum of Contemporary Art in Los Angeles, the Institute of Contemporary Arts in London and elsewhere — she was for decades part of the cadre of Los Angeles conceptual artists that included Paul McCarthy and Chris Burden. Mr. Burden, known for his literally self-lacerating body art, also died on Sunday.With her shaved head, resonant voice, teeming jewelry and take-no-prisoners approach to a great many things, Ms. Rosenthal cut a captivating figure. “The doyenne of performance art,” the news media often called her, an appellation she deplored. “They just mean I’m very old,” she told Newsday in 1991. “Guess it’s better than calling me the grandmother, though they’ve called me that, too.”She won an Obie Award, given by The Village Voice to honor Off and Off Off Broadway shows, in 1989 for “Rachel’s Brain.” In that piece, presented the year before at the Dance Theater Workshop in Manhattan, Ms. Rosenthal explored the history of the earth, human evolution and, via characters including Marie Antoinette, the human propensity for doing evil.Her other notable shows include “Pangaean Dreams,” a darkly comic geopolitical lament performed at Lincoln Center’s Serious Fun festival in 1991; “filename: FUTURFAX,” a dystopian vision staged at the Whitney in 1992; and “Was Black,” a 1986 response to the Chernobyl nuclear disaster that year. Ms. Rosenthal’s art divided the critics. In perhaps the surest testament to her work’s complexity and scope, some reviewers taxed it for being too message-heavy, others for being too diffuse.“Unlike so many others of the present-day genre, this philosopher, polemicist, clown, actor, poet, dancer, comic, mime has tried to embrace the whole universe — and often succeeded — with one big galactic laugh,” Dance magazine wrote of Ms. Rosenthal in 2000. Ms. Rosenthal lived what she preached. A vegetarian, she “has no air-conditioning or heat in her home, showers only every two or three days, recycles water and doesn’t kill animals ‘unless they want to kill me,’ ” The Los Angeles Times reported in 1992. Her home was a Noah’s Ark of stray creatures, many of which she incorporated into her performances. The most accomplished of these was a rat named Tatti Wattles.“Wattles was with me all the time,” Ms. Rosenthal said in the Newsday interview. “He went to all the parties and the workshops and became a very famous art rat.”What united Ms. Rosenthal’s diverse output was its anguish over what she called “humanity’s debacles,” an aspect of history she had experienced firsthand.The daughter of a prosperous Russian Jewish family, Ms. Rosenthal was born in Paris on Nov. 9, 1926. Her father, Léonard, was a dealer in gems. With the outbreak of World War II, the family fled France, living in Rio de Janeiro before making their way, penniless, to New York in 1941. Many of their European relatives perished in the Holocaust, and Ms. Rosenthal’s bald head, shaved in performance in 1981 and kept that way for decades, inevitably recalled images from Nazi concentration camps. The young Ms. Rosenthal graduated from the High School of Music and Art in Manhattan and after the war returned to France. In Paris, and later back in New York, she studied theater, movement and visual art with eminences including the stage director Erwin Piscator, the actor and mime Jean-Louis Barrault and the Abstract Expressionist Hans Hofmann. Afterward, she moved in a heady artistic circle that encompassed Merce Cunningham, in whose junior company she danced; Jasper Johns; Robert Rauschenberg; and John Cage, whose aleatory approach to composition — he often let an emerging work be dictated by chance, as through the casting of the I Ching — influenced her deeply.In the mid-1950s, Ms. Rosenthal settled in Los Angeles. There, she and her husband, King Moody, founded the Instant Theater, an underground improvisational troupe, with which she remained involved for the next decade.Ms. Rosenthal’s marriage to Mr. Moody, an actor who portrayed Ronald McDonald in television commercials of the 1970s and ’80s, ended in divorce. No immediate family members survive. After retiring from the stage in 2000, Ms. Rosenthal announced, with obvious subversive glee, that she planned to give her life over to “tea and crumpets” and “ ‘ER’ reruns.”She did no such thing, turning instead to painting and sculpture and continuing to lecture and teach worldwide. The Rachel Rosenthal Company still presents stage work in her tradition through its performing arm, TOHUBOHU! Extreme Theatre Ensemble. (The name comes from the Hebrew phrase for the state of cosmic chaos that the King James Version of Genesis translates as “without form, and void.”)Ms. Rosenthal’s books include “The DbD Experience: Chance Knows What It’s Doing!,” a memoir-cum-manual whose title invokes her pedagogical mantra, “Doing by doing.”Somewhat counterintuitively, she had guest roles on a few mainstream television shows, among them the sitcoms “Frasier” and “Ellen” and the spy drama “It Takes a Thief,” embodying casting directors’ visions of an avant-garde artist, a tarot-card reader and the like.If Ms. Rosenthal’s stage performances were suffused with a twilight melancholy, they were also shot through with immense tenderness. “That is how it is, my dears ,” she tells the audience at the close of “Pangaean Dreams.” “That is how it is.”Advertisement