AdvertisementSupported byBy Anthony TommasiniIn 2012, the great Philadelphia Orchestra emerged from bankruptcy protection and re-energized itself under the leadership of an exciting new music director: Yannick Nézet-Séguin. That this relationship continues splendidly was clear on Thursday at Carnegie Hall when the Montreal-born Mr. Nézet-Séguin, a boyish 40, led the orchestra in an impressive concert.The program offered a commissioned work, Nico Muhly’s crackling, mysterious “Mixed Messages,” the day after its world premiere in Philadelphia; Beethoven’s Third Piano Concerto with Emanuel Ax, at his best, as soloist; and a ravishing, spirited account of Rachmaninoff’s Third Symphony.Earlier this month, Mr. Nézet-Séguin said he would give up his directorship of the Rotterdam Philharmonic in 2018, after 10 years. This should allow him to focus more on Philadelphia, where his recently renewed contract runs through 2022. The one disappointment of his fruitful Philadelphia tenure so far has been his limited involvement with new music. Next season looks fairly unadventurous, over all.So it was encouraging to see Mr. Nézet-Séguin palpably swept up in Mr. Muhly’s new piece. The composer, best known for his opera “Two Boys,” writes that “mixed messages” is a phrase “you hear applied to any number of interpersonal encounters from the strictly business to the romantic.” In this work he tries to evoke in music the divergent messages a person can convey simultaneously.The piece opens with fractured brassy fanfares countered by tremulous string ostinatos that slip into bursts of subdued, frenetic arpeggio-like figures. Contradictions keep happening: low rumbling strings bump against snarling brass; fitful phrases in one bastion of the orchestra blithely overlap cosmic sonorities in another. Mr. Muhly’s ear for dense, layered, post-tonal harmonies, a trademark of his style, served him well here. The urgency of the piece carries you along, even when unexpected things happen, like a curious episode for pleading, lyrical cellos.Mr. Nézet-Séguin drew shimmering, incisive playing from the orchestra. Next season he will conduct a few new works, which is encouraging. And “Mixed Messages” is one of the pieces he is taking with the orchestra on their first European tour, starting next week. Mr. Muhly seemed thrilled by the warm ovation on this night.The orchestra played perfectly well, but not exceptionally, for Mr. Ax in Beethoven’s Concerto No. 3 in C minor. Mr. Ax, fresh from a Carnegie Hall recital, was afire in the piece. At times his playing was crisp and brawny. Then, in an instant, he would search out delicacy and milky textures from episodes of fleet passagework. Mr. Ax will also be going to Europe for the tour.Rachmaninoff wrote his Third Symphony for the Philadelphia Orchestra, which gave the premiere in 1936 conducted by Leopold Stokowski. (The composer revised the score in 1938.) This 40-minute, three-movement work has never been as popular as Rachmaninoff’s much earlier, unabashedly Romantic Second Symphony. Mr. Nézet-Séguin and his players had it sounding engaging and continually inventive. Rachmaninoff keeps setting listeners up only to upend expectations with some surprise melodic twist or by flipping around a recurring riff.Rachmaninoff wrote the piece with the sound of the Philadelphia Orchestra in mind, especially its famously warm strings. Mr. Nézet-Séguin proved himself a good custodian of that sound on Thursday.Advertisement