Season 1, Episode 15: “Wentworth Prison”It’s an uncommon episode of television that halfway through leaves you realizing that the protagonist probably would have been better off had he been killed in the opening scene. “Wentworth Prison” was precisely that type of episode.We open with Jamie in prison awaiting execution with his newly made friend from the Watch, Taran MacQuarrie. The two banter as they await the hangman’s noose. Jamie is still trying to find a way to free himself and get back to Claire. MacQuarrie is more accepting of his fate, yet does not die easily. The matter is brutal and coarse, but it’s  nothing compared with what’s to come. When Jamie’s turn at the gallows arrives, he attempts to break his bonds, fighting to the end, only to be “saved” at the last minute by a late arriving Captain Randall, who dumps Jamie out of the frying pan and into the fire, freeing him from the gallows only to imprison him in a secret dungeon.Claire, however, has not given up on finding her presumably doomed husband, posing as a family friend of Mr. Fraser in an attempt to gain access to him, passing off the concept as an act of Christian charity. Denied the opportunity and, instead, given Jamie’s effects, Claire is understandably distraught but manages to make it out of the prison before she vomits and dissolves into tears. Although Claire’s plan did not work out the way she had hoped, good news awaits her. Rupert and Angus have managed to get vital information from the guards while gambling and have determined that lunch hour is the best time to break into the prison, and so a new plan is hatched.It’s here that things get significantly more complicated. In general, the line between serious depiction of criminal brutality and straight-up torture porn is a difficult one to determine, with the difference often lying entirely in intent. Is the work making a larger point by detailing the horrors a victim is subjected to, or is it just exploiting the cheap thrills of particularly gruesome violence? In “Wentworth Prison” the answer is a resounding “Maybe.”The torture that Jamie suffers at the hands of Randall is unlike anything television has ever ventured into before, graphic and brutal and strangely languorous. Though at times it feels excessive, it’s also effective at transferring the innate discomfort of the moment to viewers, forcing them to bear witness to the abuse, the better to understand the full extent of its savagery. The question then is why? What is the audience to learn from Randall’s single-minded obsession with Jamie, from his sadistic, all-encompassing lust? If the reason is just to demonstrate that evil exists in the world and that no one is immune to it, surely there are  more effective and less exploitative ways to show it.Jamie’s torture is curious. It would be one thing if it were merely physical violence, but the sexual element is an avenue not often explored in the realm of television. What makes the interactions all the more strange is the suspicion that, were Jamie a woman, there would be less luxuriating in extensive and detailed abuse and violation. While violence against women is a universal TV plot device it’s rarely as meticulously comprehensive as what we’re shown of Jamie’s experience. It’s nothing if not an interesting shift in the traditional narrative.As it stands, it’s impossible yet to judge precisely where “Outlander” is going with the episode’s developments between Randall and Jamie. It’s clear that this is a destination the show has been headed toward for quite some time, not merely because it played out in such a fashion in the books, but based on the numerous contextual clues sprinkled throughout the season. The episode is a marvel in just how graphic television can get and still have the audience stay engaged with the material, a testament to the strength of the bond between viewer and character.This is never clearer than during Claire’s  rescue attempt within the prison walls, an attempt that nearly succeeded but for the ill-timed return of Randall to Jamie’s prison cell. Claire is threatened, yet again, with violence, but nothing is as frightening or as torturous as watching her breakdown when she is forced to leave Jamie behind to whatever Randall has planned for him. Caitriona Balfe is absolutely heartbreaking in the moment, her emotion made even more potent by Sam Heughan’s sadly numb eyes. Their performances, along with that of Tobias Menzies as Captain Randall, are nothing short of tremendous, finding humanity in the most inhumane of situations.Claire is deposited outside the prison, but not before she lashes out at Randall with the only weapon she has left, her knowledge of the future. To his horror, Claire tells him the precise date of his death but her words are toothless against Randall’s supreme power and she soon finds herself back with her men, holed up in the home of Sir Marcus MacRannoch, a friend to the clan. Though she begs for assistance in freeing Jamie, she is refused, as a pointed attack on the prison would be akin to treason, an unreasonable risk to ask of anyone, particularly a stranger. But by the end, upon learning of MacRannoch’s herd of cattle, Murtagh has come up with a plan to save Jamie. One can only wait and see what that might entail and precisely how a few head of cattle could possibly help.Other gossip• I will say that, as a book reader, I was a little disappointed that Claire was discovered immediately after her expulsion from the prison and her subadventure with the wolves goes wholly unrealized.• As pleased as I am that Murtagh has developed a plan  to save Jamie, the announcement of it seems to leave the episode on a note of wacky high jinks that rings false given the tenor of the rest.• As an inducement, Claire offers MacRannoch her wedding pearls, which just so happen to be the pearls he gave Jamie’s mother as a wedding gift. Now, I’m not saying Jamie’s mother was a gold-digger, but I will note that she apparently walked down the aisle wearing the jewelry of two men that she did not happen to be marrying that day. It’s a slightly strange issue to pop up in two consecutive episodes.