By KATHRYN SHATTUCKMAY 16, 2015
8 P.M. (TCM) THE ESSENTIALS Robert Osborne and Sally Field explain why “The Red Shoes” (1948) — starring Moira Shearer, above, as a famous ballerina torn between art and love in Michael Powell and Emeric Pressburger’s take on the Hans Christian Andersen fable about a girl bewitched by her red dancing shoes — is required viewing. After going wildly over budget and fizzling at the box office in Britain, Universal Pictures paid for the American release in 1951, where it played an exclusive engagement at the Bijou Theater in New York for 110 weeks. The film was then rereleased back at home, becoming one of the highest-grossing films in the history of British cinema and was heralded as among the most beautiful movies ever made. “This unrestricted romance,” Bosley Crowther wrote in The New York Times, “is a visual and emotional comprehension of all the grace and rhythm and power of the ballet.”NOON (13) THE OPEN MIND Alexander Heffner interviews Eric P. Liu, the founder and chief executive of Citizen University, about his new Aspen Institute initiative to cultivate effective citizenship in the United States.8 P.M. (HBO) BESSIE (2015) Queen Latifah, below, stars as Bessie Smith in Dee Rees’s biopic, which traverses the seminal points in the life of the singer known as the Empress of the Blues: her affairs, bisexuality and drinking; her decision to adopt a child; and her interaction with historical figures including Langston Hughes, Benny Goodman, John Hammond and Ma Rainey. “ ‘Bessie’ is about a blues singer, but what the movie could really use is more soul,” Neil Genzlinger wrote in The Times.9 P.M. (CUNY) BEAUFORT (2008) An Israeli Army unit at a heavily fortified mountain outpost in southern Lebanon is ordered out after holding the position for 18 years, forcing a young commander (Oshri Cohen) to keep his men safe from intensified shelling by Hezbollah, which wants the long-planned evacuation to appear to be an Israeli retreat under fire. “Even if it does not entirely rise above cliché, ‘Beaufort’ has an earnest, sober intelligence that makes it hard to shake,” A. O. Scott wrote in The Times about this movie, directed by Joseph Cedar, which earned an Oscar nomination for best foreign-language film. “It suggests that, for those who fight, the futility of war is inseparable from its nobility.”Advertisement10 P.M. (CBS) 48 HOURS Three decades after Janet Walsh was found dead in the bedroom of her Pennsylvania home, an assistant district attorney and a veteran detective use new forensic technology to solve a case with five suspects. Peter Van Sant reports.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.11 P.M. (HBO Signature) THE TALENTED MR. RIPLEY (1999) Starting with the loan of a jacket with a Princeton insignia, Tom Ripley, a men’s room attendant played by Matt Damon, begins his ascent of the social ladder — then murders his way up the rest of the rungs — in Anthony Minghella’s adaptation of this Patricia Highsmith thriller. Jude Law is Dickie Greenleaf, the scion of a rich American family, whose father has hired Tom to bring him back to the United States from Italy; Gwyneth Paltrow is Marge, who must share Dickie’s affections with his new friend. And Philip Seymour Hoffman is Freddie, who isn’t buying Tom’s act. Writing in The Times, Janet Maslin said the film “offers diabolically smart surprises wherever you care to look.”11:30 P.M. (NBC) SATURDAY NIGHT LIVE The 40th season ends with Louis C.K. as the host and Rihanna as the musical guest.AdvertisementWhat’s Streaming NowEVERY SECRET THING (2015) A detective (Elizabeth Banks), haunted by her failure to save a baby kidnapped and killed by two girls, Ronnie (Dakota Fanning) and Alice (Danielle Macdonald), eight years earlier, frantically tries to save another child who has gone missing just days after the pair were released from juvenile detention. Finding the suspects is the easy part. Diane Lane plays Alice’s protective mother; Frances McDormand is an executive producer of this thriller, based on the book by Laura Lippman. The director Amy Berg’s “instincts about how to pace a true story serve her well with this imaginary one, and so do the performances by Ms. Fanning and especially Ms. Macdonald,” Neil Genzlinger wrote in The Times. “As Alice, she plays the plain, overweight half of the pair, resentful of never fitting in yet seemingly the more harmless of the two. For the movie to work she has to make both versions of Alice convincing, and she does.” (iTunes) KATHRYN SHATTUCKA version of this schedule appears in print on May 16, 2015, on Page C5 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Saturday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.