AdvertisementSupported byBy Claudia BarbieriPARIS — For five generations, since 1875, the Kraemers have run what is now the oldest family-owned antiques business in Paris. The elegant facade of their 20-room mansion at 43 rue Monceau in the Eighth Arrondissement on the Right Bank of the Seine offers no hint of the gallery within, beyond a one-word nameplate by the front door. Discretion is the default setting of a firm that has counted the likes of Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis, Henry Ford Jr., J. Paul Getty and Karl Lagerfeld on its client list, along with the White House, the Louvre and the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York.Still, times change. This fall, to mark the 140th anniversary of the business, the family is opening the house for its first public exhibition, running Tuesday through Oct. 31 to coincide with FIAC, the city’s contemporary art fair. In a further break with tradition, the family is teaming up for the show with the Left-Bank art dealer Kamel Mennour to match contemporary sculptures and paintings with the classic 18th-century French furniture that is the Kraemers’s stock in trade.In all, 14 contemporary works by four artists have been paired with an equal number of 18th-century pieces. Most of the works are for sale, though neither the Kraemers nor Mr. Mennour would divulge any prices.Beside chests and commodes by André-Charles Boulle, Charles Cressent, Jean-Henri Riesener and Martin Carlin — cabinet makers to the courts and chateaux of the ancien régime — Mr. Mennour is showing pieces by Anish Kapoor, Lee Ufan, Daniel Buren and Claude Lévèque. In addition, the interior designer Patrick Hourcade has devised a scenography consisting of a series of stage sets, in each of which one piece of furniture is paired with one artwork, a minimalist mise-en-scene heightened by special lighting.“Each piece of furniture will be extremely rare — furniture of royal quality,” Laurent Kraemer, a fourth-generation director of the gallery, said in an interview at the mansion before the show opened.Mr. Mennour, in an interview at his gallery across the river in the Sixth Arrondissement, said, “I liked the idea of a pas de deux between different epochs. I think it’s very important to link our time to where it came from.”He added, “Artists always break with past kinds of art, close the door, destroy to go forward. So, for us gallerists, we need to position things for the audience to make the links.”To organize the show the Kraemers and Mr. Mennour turned to Jean Jacques Aillagon, a former culture minister and president of the Château de Versailles from 2007 to 2011. It was Mr. Aillagon who brought contemporary art into Versailles, starting with a solo show by Jeff Koons in 2008, the first of an annual series that has showcased, among others, Takashi Murakami, Joana Vasconcelos and, most recently, Mr. Kapoor.When Mr. Aillagon started the Versailles shows they were controversial to the point of being scandalous. For some they still are, as witnessed by the repeated vandalization of Mr. Kapoor’s “Dirty Corner” installation in Versailles’s gardens this year.Yet, for all the fuss, mix-and-match now seems to be taking off as an art-market trend. An early exponent was the antiques dealer Jean Gismondi, based in Paris and Antibes, who, before his death last year, developed a niche counterposing the work of street and graffiti artists like JonOne and Quik against finely inlayed Italian renaissance and baroque cabinetry. Another notable practitioner is Axel Vervoordt, whose art, antiques and interior-design firm in Antwerp, Belgium, interweaves archaeological artifacts, oriental sculptures and 18th-century furniture with modern and contemporary art ranging from the Zero and Gutai groups to Richard Serra.“All objects, regardless of their origin and value, are infused with a timeless, universal meaning,” Mr. Vervoordt said in an email.For Mr. Aillagon too, the art world’s standard categories — classical, old master, modern, contemporary— are irrelevant. “We don’t look at art works in the same way that they would have been looked at when they were made,” he said. “We don’t look at Versailles in the same way as a 17th-century courtesan. We look at these works with a contemporary eye.”That mindset was one of the things that made Mr. Aillagon the curator of choice for the Kraemer show, along with his Versailles connection.Mr. Mennour also was thinking along royal palatial lines: “I knew that Kraemer was one of the most important 18th-century galleries, so I chose four artists who had some sort of relationship with the patrimony, either at Versailles or the Louvre,” he said. “Claude Lévèque is just opening a one-man show at the Louvre; Versailles is currently showing Anish Kapoor. Lee Ufan was in Versailles last year. Buren has done many exhibitions working with heritage sites — the Palais Royale in Paris, Versailles — he has an incredible commitment to speaking with history.”For the Kraemer gallery the show is part of both an internal makeover — a family transition from the fourth to the fifth generation — and a strategic shift aimed at attracting a younger generation of wealthy clients, weaned on collecting the likes of Rothko and Warhol.“Young people buy social status when they buy contemporary art,” Mr. Kraemer said. “They are not used to 18th-century objects. We are showing how well the two go together.”Advertisement