AdvertisementSupported byBy Margalit FoxFranz Wright, a Pulitzer Prize-winning poet whose work illuminated his passage from abiding despair to religious transcendence, died on Thursday at his home in Waltham, Mass. He was 62.The cause was lung cancer, said Nicholas Latimer, a spokesman for Mr. Wright’s publisher Alfred A. Knopf.Mr. Wright won the Pulitzer in 2004 for “Walking to Martha’s Vineyard.” In that collection, as in much of his work, he explores the competing imperatives of self-annihilation and self-preservation; his yearning for his father, who abandoned the family early; his labyrinthine struggles with alcoholism, drug addiction and manic depression; and his eventual, cautiously hopeful passage out.His style is characterized by hushed, spare, often fragmented language, as if bespeaking the fragility and atomization of the human condition. In “Fathers,” collected in “Walking to Martha’s Vineyard,” he writes:Homeless in Manhattanthe winter of your dyingI didn’t have a lot of timeto think about it, trying to stay aliveTo meit was just the next interesting thing you would do— that ishow cold it wasand how often I walked to the edge of the actual river to joinyouMr. Wright’s anguished themes were second-generation concerns: His father, James Wright, also a Pulitzer Prize-winning poet, had endured many of the same torments.Franz Paul Wright was born on March 18, 1953, in Vienna, where his father was studying on a Fulbright fellowship. The elder Mr. Wright later joined the faculty of the University of Minnesota, and Franz spent his early childhood amid the heady, hard-drinking circle of poets there, among them John Berryman.“I thought that all adults were insane drunks and chain smokers,” the younger Mr. Wright told The New York Times in 2004.The day he turned 5, he recalled afterward, he confronted his parents with an unassailable demand. “Excuse me,” he said. “Do you think, because it’s my birthday, we could not talk about poetry today?”James Wright, who won the Pulitzer in 1972 for his “Collected Poems,” suffered from alcoholism and manic depression. Franz Wright said his father sometimes beat him.“He was a very fragile, scared person,” Mr. Wright told The Times in the same interview. “I’m just like him. If not worse.” (James Wright died of cancer in 1980; Franz Wright’s Pulitzer made them one of the rare father-and-son pairs to win the prize.)When Franz was 8, his father left the family. Though they remained in touch and were sporadically close, the rupture ran through his work like a glittering dark thread.His mother later married a man who, Mr. Wright said, was even more violent. In a poem, “Primogeniture,” he wrote:My dad beat me with his beltfor my edification and furtherimprovement and later that otherstranger took oversomewhat more expertlywhich both learned from their fatherssome heavily armedmonkeys, from Plato’s caveto Darwin’s— ...So that’s how it is donehereIn a telephone interview on Friday, Mr. Wright’s mother, Liberty Kovacs, said: “He was never hurt when I was around, so if it happened, it happened when I wasn’t there. I wouldn’t allow that.” Mr. Wright’s stepfather, whom she later divorced, died some years ago, she said.At Oberlin College, from which Mr. Wright received a bachelor’s degree in 1977, he “very rapidly became a full-blown alcoholic,” he told The Boston Globe in 2004. He also became deeply involved with drugs.“It didn’t matter what it was — every drug that exists, any form of alcohol,” he said in the same interview. “All of a sudden I could talk to people, I was happy, I didn’t feel terrified, I was confident. For a couple of years, it worked.”Over time, though, he was hospitalized on several occasions for substance abuse and depression.“Every symphony is a suicide postponed, true or false?,” Mr. Wright would write in “Intake Interview,” a poem rooted in those events. “Should each individual snowflake be held accountable for the avalanche?/Name five rivers./What do you see yourself doing in ten minutes?”Yet in the interstices, he became a recognized poet. In 1976, when Mr. Wright was still an undergraduate, his first volume of poetry, “Tapping the White Cane of Solitude,” was published by a small house, Triskelion Press. His next, “The Earth Without You,” was published by the Cleveland State University Poetry Center in 1980.Throughout the ’80s and ’90s Mr. Wright had nearly a dozen volumes issued by respected small publishers. He won a Whiting Award, a writing honor that then carried a $30,000 prize, in 1991, and a Guggenheim fellowship in 1989.That year, however, Mr. Wright was fired by Emerson College in Boston, where he had taught since 1984, for “drinking-related activities,” as he told The Globe. In 1996, he was swamped by a profound depression that lasted for two years.“The drinking and drugs had caught up with me,” he told The Globe. “I couldn’t write, couldn’t dress myself, couldn’t talk.” He added: “I was done for. It was all over.”He attempted suicide, The Globe reported, and spent much of the next year unable to get out of bed.In 1998, Mr. Wright renewed his acquaintance with Elizabeth Oehlkers, a translator who had been his student at Emerson. They married in 1999. That year, he had what he described as a religious awakening, converting to Roman Catholicism and attaining sobriety.“From that point on,” Mr. Wright told The Times, “I began to be able to write again.”His first collection for a major house, “The Beforelife,” which included poems describing the searing pain of addiction, was published by Knopf in 2001.Besides his wife, Elizabeth Oehlkers Wright, and his mother, Mr. Wright’s survivors include a brother, Marshall John Wright, and a half brother, André Michael Kovacs.His other books include the collections “God’s Silence” (2006), “Wheeling Motel” (2009), “Kindertotenwald: Prose Poems” (2011) and “F” (2013), along with translations of Rilke and the French poet René Char.Though the young Mr. Wright witnessed firsthand the ravages of the poet’s life, his professional course was set by the time he was a teenager. When he was 14 or 15, as he later recounted in interviews, he wrote his first poem and mailed it to his father.“I’ll be damned,” James Wright wrote back. “You’re a poet. Welcome to hell.”Advertisement