By GINIA BELLAFANTEMAY 15, 2015
Eight years ago — before the divorces, remarriages, suicides, mangled feet, mergers, acquisitions, restructurings, bastard children and rough sex that have characterized AMC’s “Mad Men” — the Sterling Cooper advertising agency was angling for Richard Nixon’s business.It was 1960 on the show and Nixon was seeking the presidency. Bert Cooper, the agency’s quixotic co-founder, dispatches his most valuable creative mind, Don Draper, a Kennedy man in appetite if not obvious ideological affinity, to devise potential strategies to sell the candidate to the American people. Don reacts skeptically partly because he doesn’t see why the Nixon camp would change handlers but, more pointedly, because politics seem only to elicit his indifference.“You have a problem with Dick Nixon?” Bert asks.“I don’t vote,” Don replies bluntly.Over seven seasons, “Mad Men,” which concludes its run on Sunday night, documented a politically uproarious period in American history while in many regards remaining only obliquely political and rarely if ever overtly partisan.It is possible to watch very little of “The Wire,” another golden-age TV series absent of didactics, and still know precisely where its sensibilities lie: When governments and bureaucracies fail people, people fail. It is a much trickier proposition to ascribe a distinctly left or right mind-set to “Mad Men.” The show’s implicit excoriation of the racism and sexism that distinguished much of the 1960s has always been wedded to its belief in the primacy of corporate interest. Bert Cooper doesn’t care about Nixon in any meaningful sense; he cares that a Nixon administration is more likely to take kindly to United Fruit, and other potential Sterling Cooper clients, than any other. Governments exist to make you richer.AdvertisementAmong the show’s central characters, liberalism is often expressed as a default position or convenience — the hiring of the agency’s first black secretary happens as a result of a prank against a competitor. When a copywriter heads to Mississippi to help register black voters, you get the sense that he is doing so solely to experience “adventure.”AdvertisementConviction, in the rare instances in which it is possessed, is rarely of the progressive cast. In one scene, early on, Bert gives Don a $2,500 bonus, instructing him to spend $1.99 of it on a copy of Ayn Rand’s “Atlas Shrugged,” to whose tenets Cooper is intensely devoted. You’re supposed to believe that Don isn’t morally compromised enough to buy into Objectivist nonsense; at the same time a man who has stolen another man’s identity, lied about it, propelled his brother to suicide to protect his deceit, cheated repeatedly on his wife and ascended to Madison Avenue stardom as a function of his duplicitous reinvention, hardly needs lessons in Randian self-realization.In the series’ depiction of things, the left is the counterculture and the counterculture is consistently easy to mock. From the very first episode, when Don’s initial mistress, a Greenwich Village bohemian, allows him into her world, we see that world through Don’s eyes and it is a subculture of stoned losers. When Roger Sterling’s daughter runs away to a commune, years later, in an act of clichéd rebellion, our sympathies are guided to Roger’s distaste and urbanity over the batik lifestyle of shared responsibility to which she is drawn. You just want her to come home to Bergdorf’s.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Ultimately, “Mad Men” has been more interested in the divisions that fractured the right in the 1960s than in what separated adherents at opposite ends of the political spectrum.The account executive Pete Campbell is the consummate East Coast Republican — open-minded enough to want to reach out to black media audiences but a man who also complains about high taxes. In the penultimate episode of the series, he lands a job in Wichita, Kan., working for Lear Jet. The employer wants “a real Knickerbocker,” a patrician with breeding and connections.The same episode finds Don, who has been on a road trip, starting in Kansas before holing up in a motel room in Oklahoma where the locals — God-loving patriots on the surface — turn out to be malicious hicks. The tension between the kind of conservatism that Pete Campbell represents and the moralistic (in this case, hypocritically so) leanings of the rural men who eventually beat Don up is what defined Republican politics in the 1960s. And it is precisely the conflict between urban elites and culture-war conservatives that would become emblematic of the political climate in subsequent decades.Like so many references on “Mad Men” the dual ones to Kansas hardly seemed arbitrary. It was the tension between “Mods” and “Cons” — moderate and conservative Republicans — that Thomas Frank argued in his best-selling book, “What’s the Matter With Kansas?,” was central to an understanding of the state’s politics, and by extension our national politics as well.To the degree that “Mad Men” has championed anything, it has been cities and the social values that even in repressive times metropolitan life is fluid enough to accommodate. It was a series in active dialogue with what the historian Richard Hofstadter called the “agrarian myth”: the notion that innocence and decency and hard work belonged to the hinterlands. On “Mad Men,” the rural world, particularly as it is conveyed through Don’s childhood, is full of false pieties and misery. The show told us that there are two Americas and that one, despite its imperfections, is clearly better.A version of this article appears in print on May 16, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: The Wild Times of 1960s Republicans on ‘Mad Men’.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.