By VIVIEN SCHWEITZERMAY 15, 2015
Type “Brooklyn-based composer” into Google, and some 12,000 results pop up; a search for “Queens-based composer” yields around 300. But while living in Brooklyn has become a rite of passage for many artists, there is also a thriving arts scene in eclectic (and mostly affordable) Queens, often said to be the most diverse urban area in the world.The Queens New Music Festival, which began Wednesday and runs through Sunday at the Secret Theater in Long Island City, aims to promote local composers and performers. On Thursday, the Astoria-based Lost Dog New Music Ensemble played several works by the composer John Luther Adams, who now lives in New York — Manhattan, it must be said — after decades in Alaska. Mr. Adams’s imaginative catalog of hypnotic, entrancing musical panoramas, often influenced by the Alaskan landscape, includes “Inuksuit” (2009), an outdoor work for up to 99 percussionists, and “Become Ocean,” which reflects his concerns about environmental degradation and was awarded the 2014 Pulitzer Prize for music.In the program notes for “Four Thousand Holes” for piano and percussion (2010), performed on Thursday, Mr. Adams, who has a background in rock, writes that he has “never really felt completely at home in the classical music world.” He composed the work as a means of re-examining his past, superimposing major and minor triads against a ghostly cloud of electronic sound.As the electronic aura increased in intensity, high notes in the piano (played by Jacob Rhodebeck) and percussion (Russell Greenberg) penetrated through the hazy sound world like celestial interjections, creating a beautiful Messiaen-like kaleidoscope. Like the music of Steve Reich, this score by Mr. Adams has a trancelike effect, ebbing and flowing gorgeously (albeit, in this case, for a little too long), with the dramatic chords glistening like shards of glass.“Make Prayers to the Raven” (1998), scored for piano (Mr. Rhodebeck), violin (Sarah Zun) cello (Caleb van der Swaagh), flute (Christine Perea) and percussion (Mr. Greenberg), made less of an impact, partly because of a tentative performance. But “The Light Within” (2007) ended the night on a blissful note. After the group’s conductor, Garth Edwin Sunderland, attached a wire to the hair of Ms. Perea, waves of colorful sonic patterns unfolded with mesmerizing intensity, a soundscape inspired by the Quaker saying “Greet the light within.”The festival runs through Sunday at the Secret Theater, 44-02 23rd Street, Long Island City, Queens; queensnewmusicfestival.org. A version of this review appears in print on May 16, 2015, on Page C2 of the New York edition with the headline: Trancelike Sounds Reverberate in Queens.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.