By BRIAN SEIBERTMAY 15, 2015
Don Quixote, viewing the world through the lens of his fantasies, mistakes a windmill for a giant and has visions of what isn’t actually there. But during the vision scene of “Don Quixote,” which Gelsey Kirkland Ballet presented at the Schimmel Center for the Arts at Pace University on Thursday, the ranks of classically trained dancers that crowded onto the stage were real. Mounting a full-length 19th-century story ballet with a cast of 100 might have seemed a quixotic goal for a troupe only two years old, but this one already has a “Nutcracker” and a “Sleeping Beauty” under its belt. “Don Quixote” is less a leap than a sensible next step.This three-act production, based on Alexander Gorsky’s version of Marius Petipa’s choreography, staged by Ms. Kirkland with a large team of experts, is packed. Toreadors, Gypsies, dryads, kids pretending to be puppets, reams of classical dance and a standard story of two lovers outwitting the girl’s father — all in under three hours. On Thursday, because of a “technical difficulty,” the show ended more than three hours after it began.That interruption between the second and third acts could take some of the blame for a dearth of momentum, but the performance had been a little staid and by-the-numbers all along. Anastasia Barsukova was a pert Kitri who compensated for a low jump with a lot of finesse; after a rocky start, she gained in force and fire. As her lover, Basilio, Johnny Almeida played to the audience with some Latin flair. His pirouettes, remarkably controlled, seemed to corkscrew upward.Anderson Souza brought cape-whipping speed to the matador, Espada, and Sabina Alvarez matched him with attitude as the Street Dancer. Nagi Wakisaka was a strong and taut Queen of the Dryads. Alina Gavrilov and Natalia Sheptalova were pretty and crisp Flower Girls.Despite occasional sloppiness in the corps, which is supplemented by students, this cast (the Kirkland Ballet is fielding more than one) exuded competence. Only Erez Ben-Zion Milatin, as the rich fop whom Kitri’s father wants her to marry, approached comedy. And only Satoki Habuchi, playing Sancho Panza as some kind of strange, fat baby, was terrible. Yet Panza’s pragmatic spirit was present nevertheless, suffusing the rest of the production. This “Don Quixote” had its feet on the ground.“Don Quixote” continues through Saturday at the Schimmel Center for the Arts at Pace University, 3 Spruce Street, between Park Row and Gold Street, Lower Manhattan; 866-811-4111, schimmel.pace.edu. A version of this review appears in print on May 16, 2015, on Page C6 of the New York edition with the headline: Pirouetting at Windmills.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.