AdvertisementSupported byThe TV WatchBy Alessandra StanleyFirst Brian Williams and now George Stephanopoulos. Credibility, or in this case, incredibility, is the Dutch elm disease of network anchors — once it spreads, it’s ferociously damaging and hard to stop.For baffling reasons, Mr. Williams fibbed about his war zone derring-do. Mr. Stephanopoulos, a top strategist in Bill Clinton’s first presidential campaign and administration before he joined ABC News, failed to let his viewers know that he had donated $75,000 to the Clinton Foundation. On “Good Morning America” on Friday, he called it a mistake. The admission has resulted in some Republicans claiming bias for Hillary Clinton.It’s the kind of dumb, inexplicable blunder that is enabled by the very job that makes it toxic.There is a fundamental incongruity between being a celebrity and a trusted news anchor. Stars of that magnitude live in a bubble where ordinary rules don’t apply; big-name journalists who sometimes have to confront politicians on camera can’t afford to exist in that same space.But they do. And one obvious reason is that anchors don’t report, they represent: As Mr. Stephanopoulos has proved on the unbearably peppy yet top-rated “Good Morning America,” every broadcast, overseas assignment and special report is a red-carpet opportunity with lights so blinding it’s hard to see the sidewalk, let alone the fine type of the office ethics code.But because of that blurred line between news and entertainment, once an anchor steps out of character or misses his mark, both reputation and job are on the line. The pedestal is especially shaky now because the business model of broadcast news is increasingly imperiled.And there are usually personal, unconscious reasons for unforced errors.Mr. Williams had no reason to inflate his war zone experience, except perhaps in his own mind. He became NBC’s top anchor without as much gritty field experience as many of his less polished, less chiseled colleagues; he partly got the job because he completely looked the part. As he grew into a major star, he may well have wanted to fit it so badly that he started fudging the truth.The slip by Mr. Stephanopoulos is especially mystifying. He was the ultimate political caretaker-courtier and had to work particularly hard to mold a new persona for himself after leaving the Clinton White House. Like a religious convert, he was more invested in his journalistic bona fides than most because he acquired them so late in life.He obviously wasn’t trying to curry favor with the Clintons — giving $75,000 over several years to charities in their foundation would be about as effective as trying to get a child into Harvard by giving $100 to the Radcliffe Institute.But it’s possible he was hoping to expiate some guilt. Mr. Stephanopoulos ruptured his friendship with the Clintons in 1999 when he published a tell-most memoir, “All Too Human.” The chill was all too evident in the 2008 campaign, when Hillary Clinton treated Mr. Stephanopoulos with withering superiority.He couldn’t buy the Clintons’ forgiveness with that kind of money, but it is possible that he sought to assuage some of his own remorse over putting his credibility and fortune above their political ambitions. Mr. Stephanopoulos projects choir-boy decency and probity on camera, so he might have wanted to feel better about himself off the set. For someone of his wealth, $75,000 is a small price to pay.Moving fast to stem the fire, he chose his own penance and said he would not moderate the next presidential debate. That’s confusing: If he can’t be trusted to be impartial in a debate, it’s hard to see how he will do any other political reporting in 2016.His on-air apology on Friday was more politic than persuasive. He explained that he gives to all sorts of charities and saw this contribution as a way to help fight AIDS and other causes. He apologized to viewers for not, as he put it, “going the extra mile” to make it known.Avoiding the appearance of a Clinton conflict should have been his first step.Advertisement