By NEIL GENZLINGERMAY 15, 2015
Everybody has a go-to restaurant. It’s probably not the best one around or the trendiest, but it’s the place you can count on to give you a decent meal cordially served.Everybody has a television show like that, too — reliably good, visit after visit. Whether Bob’s Burgers the restaurant is a go-to-caliber establishment is open to question, but “Bob’s Burgers” the animated TV show certainly is.It concludes an enjoyable fifth season Sunday night on Fox with not one but two finales. “Bob’s Burgers” might sometimes get lost in the shadow of “The Simpsons” and “Family Guy,” Fox’s animated institutions. But its final two episodes demonstrate this show’s ability to find fodder in practically anything: One is about old Japanese samurai movies, the other about a rent strike that becomes an epic water-balloon fight.The philosophical/grammatical question of whether a season can in fact have two finales is the kind of thing that would be debated in quick, droll asides by the family at the center of “Bob’s Burgers”: Bob and Linda Belcher and their children, Tina, Gene and Louise. But nevermind; if they’re both called finales, they must both be finales.AdvertisementThe first, “Hawk & Chick,” in which Bob and Louise realize that the father-daughter stars of the old samurai movies they love live in their own town, comes on before the finales of “The Simpsons” and “Family Guy.” The second, “The Oeder Games,” airs afterward and features Kevin Kline voicing the recurring character of Calvin Fischoeder, landlord for a number of businesses, including Bob’s Burgers.AdvertisementA season that ends in water-balloon carnage began with a war as well. It was over dueling student-written high school musicals. One was Gene’s musical interpretation of “Die Hard,” the other a rival student’s take on “Working Girl.” The episode title: “Work Hard or Die Trying, Girl.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Among the season’s other high points was an episode that mashed up the TV series “Project Runway” with the 1985 movie “The Breakfast Club.” A teacher overseeing the Belcher children and a bunch of other miscreants in detention organized them into an outlandish fashion competition. The important takeaway, though, was that we learned from Tina what the Belcher family slogan is: “Maybe we’ll get lucky this time.” But that was news to Gene.“I thought it was, ‘Stop touching that; you’re getting it all greasy,’ ” he said.The episode “Adventures in Chinchilla-Sitting” featured a babysitting calamity and an effort by Bob and Linda to cheat their way to a bar-trivia title. In “Itty Bitty Ditty Committee,” poor Gene started a band, only to be kicked out of it by the other members.By the way, if you were thinking of making Bob’s Burgers your go-to restaurant, that episode might make you think again. In one scene, Linda was on the restaurant phone talking loudly to her doctor about a skin rash.“I did everything you said — no shaving, no deodorant — but now it’s in both armpits,” she said. “It’s red, flaky, itchy, bumpy. Sometimes it’s oozy. I look like Jeff Goldblum in ‘The Fly.’ ”Check, please.A version of this article appears in print on May 16, 2015, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline: Second Helpings From a Reliable, Go-To Spot (Just Don’t Eat There).  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.