By GIA KOURLASOCT. 16, 2015
Silas Riener, now free from the constraints of a conventional group — he was a member of the Merce Cunningham Dance Company from 2007 until it disbanded in 2011 — is a rare sort of dancer, one whose body emits force, whether the results are satiny, vigorously unyielding or somewhere in between.In his new work, “Blue Name,” Mr. Riener strips his exacting strength down to its essence in the intimate setting of the Chocolate Factory, where he performed on Oct. 14. Who, or what, is in charge? As his shoulders contract and then billow out and he takes off in different directions, it seems as if he is driving a car without a steering wheel.Mr. Riener explores the power of unearthly movement, but with such proximity to the audience that there’s an added touch of confinement. “Blue Name” is an uneven piece for which Mr. Riener has compiled dances created over 18 months; wearing fitted earpieces as he did in a previous solo performed as part of “Platform 2015: Dancers, Buildings and People in the Streets” at Danspace Project, he exudes a sense of solitude as he covers the length of the theater with stiff, straight-legged brushes or, later, crosses to the back of the stage in consecutive splits.He wears a T-shirt over a unitard that initially appears threadbare around the knees and crotch. Later he removes his shirt to display chest hair, nipples, star tattoos. This costume — cleverly designed by the choreographer with George Venson, Reid Bartleme and Julia Donaldson — is his second skin, a version of Mr. Riener’s body painted onto the unitard in a fabric he couldn’t escape while in the Cunningham company.The mood changes from serene to prickly as Mr. Riener plays records — instrumental and jazz vocals, somewhat warped — on a portable player; they skip on cue and soon his body follows suit, stuttering and bending forward. All the while, Davison Scandrett’s lighting creates a checkerboard design on the floor and Mr. Riener, pulling a long piece of blue fabric across the floor, fashions it into a turban covering not just his hair, but his face. As one passage follows the next, “Blue Name” becomes a patchy series of excerpts assembled into a dance. “That’s the end,” he announces from the back of the stage. It would be better if we just knew it. While Mr. Riener’s gifts are prodigious, as a choreographer he has some convincing to do.­Silas Riener continues performances through next Wednesday at the Chocolate Factory, 5-49 49th Avenue, Long Island City, Queens; 718-482-7069, chocolatefactorytheater­.org.A version of this review appears in print on October 21, 2015, on Page C2 of the New York edition with the headline: A Force Stripped Down to Its Essence.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.