By SAM ROBERTSMAY 14, 2015
Stan Cornyn, an offbeat recording industry executive known both for his unusual promotions and for his album notes, two of which won Grammy Awards, died on Monday at his home in Carpinteria, Calif. He was 81.The cause was cancer, said his longtime companion, Meg Barbour.Mr. Cornyn joined Warner Bros. Records when it was founded in 1958 by the movie studio of the same name, primarily to market film soundtracks and vocal records by the studio’s stars. The label eventually emerged as a major player, especially after acquiring Frank Sinatra’s Reprise Records in 1963.Mr. Cornyn played a vital role in the company’s growth. His advertising and promotion campaigns in the 1960s and ’70s helped raise the profiles of many artists, including Alice Cooper, Black Sabbath, Fleetwood Mac, James Taylor, Joni Mitchell and Van Morrison.Bob Merlis, a former colleague at Warner Bros., recalled that most “record men” at the time were “horn players who couldn’t get a gig,” while Mr. Cornyn, by contrast, was a “Martian in the music business.”Advertisement“He looked at these strange creatures running around, and he was intrigued by them,” Mr. Merlis added. “And in his work, he said the business didn’t have to take itself all that seriously.”AdvertisementMr. Cornyn solicited mail-in orders from fans for piles of dirt from the Laurel Canyon area of Los Angeles when it was a counterculture haven. He staged a look-alike contest for Ron McKernan of the Grateful Dead, better known as Pigpen and definitely not known for his looks. For the singer-songwriter Randy Newman, then a virtual unknown, he wrote an advertisement with the headline “Once you get used to it, his voice is really something.”He was also an acknowledged master of liner-note writing. In “Stay Tuned,” his blog for the Rhino Records website, he wrote that liner notes had originally been seen as unimportant; that changed, he said, when “the recording sessions got showbizzy with fun stars” and “their albums appealed to people who were old enough to read.” He wrote liner notes for albums by Count Basie, Bill Cosby, Sammy Davis Jr., Jimmy Durante, Duke Ellington, Dean Martin, Mr. Newman and others. But his best-known notes were the many he wrote for Sinatra.Mr. Cornyn was nominated for five Grammy Awards for writing about Sinatra, and won twice: for “September of My Years” (1965) and “Sinatra at the Sands” (1966). In notes for Sinatra’s “Strangers in the Night” (1966), he wrote:“He isn’t with the times. More than any other singer, he is the times. If the guitar were dis-invented tonight, a few thousand singers would be out on the amps. But not Sinatra. He defies fad.”“Sinatra, when he sings at you, doesn’t look at you,” Mr. Cornyn continued. “He looks about six inches behind your eyes. His eyes a little far away. A little closer to where truth lives. If you want to pick a word for it, pick one in seven easy letters. Honesty.”After serving as director of creative services and then executive vice president, Mr. Cornyn was named senior vice president of all of Warner Music’s labels in 1982. He later ran Warner New Media as the company stormed into the compact disc market. He left in 1991.Carl Stanley Cornyn was born in Oxnard, Calif., on July 8, 1933. His father, Thomas, was a lawyer. His mother, the former Marjory Stanley, was a secretary and homemaker.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He graduated from Pomona College, attended Yale and received a master’s degree in theater from the University of California, Los Angeles.He was married and divorced twice. In addition to Ms. Barbour, he is survived by two sons, Christopher and Thomas Cornyn, and two grandchildren.AdvertisementMr. Cornyn was the author (with Paul Scanlon) of a boisterous book, “Exploding: The Highs, Hits, Hype, Heroes, and Hustlers of the Warner Music Group” (2002).In that book, he recalled that Warner Bros. Records was still struggling in the late 1960s when it bet its future on underground rock groups like the Grateful Dead. Preposterously overdressed in dark-blue company-issued blazers, he and a fellow executive, Joe Smith, were dispatched to a party in San Francisco to present the band with a copy of its first Warner release.“I just want to tell you all,” Mr. Smith said, “Warner Bros. feels privileged to take the Grateful Dead out to the world.”To which the band’s tie-dyed manager, Rock Scully, warily replied, “The Grateful Dead feel privileged to introduce Warner Bros. Records to the world.”“ ’Twas the last night I wore my blue blazer,” Mr. Cornyn wrote, “other than to bed.”A version of this article appears in print on May 16, 2015, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: Stan Cornyn, 81, Music Executive With a Gift for Promotion.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.