Season 4, Episode 6: “Storms and Pancakes”“Love you, too, I mean, obviously within acceptable proprietary and so on,” says Senator Tom James, offering his version of President Obama’s “Love you back” to a star-struck voter.And so begins this episode, in which it becomes clear that “Tom James” — he of two first names — will continue to outshine the top of the ticket, much to Selina’s chagrin. Back on her campaign bus and hoping to take a bit of Tom’s luster, Selina turns to her spokesman, Mike, and asks him to push more news stories highlighting her genius in choosing Tom as her running mate.“People love Tom, but I want to get credit for choosing him,” she says. “Headline thought: I. Want. More. Headlines.” And in those four words rests another motivating force of “Veep” — headlines for headlines’ sake, power for power’s sake, and if the country happens to run smoothly in the process, well, that’s just a glacé cherry on top. Throughout the episode, we see Tom continue to shine in ways that Selina can’t quite muster — namely, as a pure retail politician who seems to genuinely enjoy people, or at least make a good show of it. At a biking event, Tom demurs that he, like the president, is a horrible biker, before adding with more than whiff of humblebrag, “I did do the Tour of Italy 2008, but my mountain times were embarrassing.” Later, at a pancake brunch, Tom connects with voter after voter — including a man with stomach problems, for whom Tom whips up some pancakes made with soy milk — while Selina is left helplessly shouting out corny lines dreamed up by Mike. “Who’s aching for some bacon?” she asks, to no one in particular. Riding in the back of a limo, Tom inadvertently adds insult to injury when he doesn’t seem to remember “The Moment.” As in the night, oh, exactly 12 years ago, when Selina thinks they almost slept together. In a fleeting sign of hopefulness, Tom does remember her “green shoes,” though in the next breath he reveals that’s only because they gave Selina corns. Here, we see a rare moment of vulnerability from the president, who clearly cared about this evening — and the possibility it seemed to hold, and might still hold, now that Tom is again at her side — far more than Tom did. Later, as she bemoans the pancake brunch disaster (“He’s this pancake genius and I got lost in some sort of a B-anecdote,” she says, with some unexpected self-awareness) her body man Gary tries to buck her up.“Listen, you are Beyoncé, and his is backup booty,” Gary says. Meanwhile, Jonah finds himself frustrated working in Vice President Doyle’s lame duck administration. (“I’m like Picasso, and I’m stuck painting fences,” he says.). He shows up for what he thinks is a job interview with a senator, only to find four female Hill staffers — who, with their lanky frames and short brown “mom hair,” look disconcertingly like Jonah’s middle-aged female doppelgängers — that want him to join them in a class-action lawsuit against Teddy, the vice president’s chief of staff. (You’ll recall from previous episodes that Teddy has also been sexually harassing Jonah.)“There’s no shame here, Jonah,” says one of the women. “Let it out.”But Jonah can’t get out the room fast enough. Back on the street, he turns to his sidekick and assistant, Richard, for confirmation that he does not look like Teddy’s apparent type, i.e., a 40-something woman. “Well, you do have that one purple shirt that looks a bit blousy,” Richard offers, helpfully. Amy also spends the episode trying to adjust to life outside the White House. She is aided by Dan who, spinning her through Washington’s age-old revolving door, encourages her to leverage her Rolodex at his lobbying firm.Amy, not quite over the sting of losing her West Wing perch, tries to embrace the opportunity: “If people want access to that backstabbing madhouse then I think we’re the ones to get it for them,” she says. “Maybe you can refer to it as the White House, since some of our clients still actually like and respect that place,” replies Dan’s boss, Sidney. But she ultimately proves adept at the job, so much so that Sidney assigns her Dan’s top three clients. And here we see early signs that the Dan-Amy rivalry, and its fleeting moments of tenderness, will replicate itself inside the glossy white walls of the lobbying firm. Though if previous story lines are any indication, neither is done with the White House just yet.  The final plot involves a storm bearing down on North Carolina. “Six hours until flying cow time,” says Ben, updating the president on the hurricane. “This is a potential tragedy that could be great for you.”Ben’s cynical quip echoes the real life aphorism of Chicago Mayor Rahm Emanuel, who was previously Mr. Obama’s chief of staff: “You never want a serious crisis to go to waste.” And, indeed, Selina’s team immediately springs to action, heading to North Carolina so they can be there in the state’s time of need.The governor of North Carolina pleads, via video conference, for Selina to wait before declaring a state of emergency. But Tom quietly points out the political advantage of grounding all flights and announcing a state of emergency: Their rivals will be stuck in Florida, while Selina and team can heroically swoop into North Carolina, keeping all the headlines for themselves. (Just ask Mitt Romney how a hurricane — especially days before the election — can help a sitting president seem, well, presidential). They even throw in “light dusting of federal funds” to sweeten the deal for North Carolina’s begrudging governor. When they touchdown in the state, however, Team Selina finds mere gray skies and a light breeze; the storm has headed south instead, to Florida.“So O’Brien and Montez are going to get the storm photos?” moans Selina, referring to her rivals. “Is that what you’re saying?”When Tom responds that it was “definitely a good idea” when he first pitched it, Selina can’t hide her frustration: “Well, I grounded flights and I diverted federal funds to the wrong state. I don’t remember you pitching that as a possibility, Tom.”Tom admits he gambled, and “unfortunately our horse did not win.”“No it certainly didn’t,” Selina says. “It fell at the first fence and it got shot.”And, scene. The campaign trail is filled with indignities, both small and big. But here’s guessing that Selina and Tom James, still shiny in his defeat, will live to fight another day.Best Lines• Amy, at Dan’s urging, heads to a spa with a friend to stave off a meltdown. But relaxing proves more difficult that she imagined.“This is it, you just lay here?” asks Amy, removing a cucumber from her eye to peer at her iPhone. “Did I tell you I slept in? Well, actually, I got up early, but then I just stayed in bed, looking at Politico,” she adds, before noting the news website is not what it used to be. (Take heart, Politico competitors!)Finally, after Amy declares the soothing spa music to be irritating, her friend explodes: “Only you can be irritated by gamma waves and a whale,” she says.• Mike, trying to salvage Selina’s trip to non-storm-ravaged North Carolina: “Ma’am, we’ve also set up a tour of an egg plant. I mean a plant that packs eggs, not the big vegetable.”