Season 2, Episode 6: “Homicide”There were a few moments this week when “Silicon Valley” seemed on the verge of getting to one of the more interesting issues in the tech industry: how socially awkward tech guys shed their insecurities to become leaders. Richard, Pied Piper’s timid founder, is given a chance to act like the boss that his investors and employees want him to become. Meanwhile Dinesh and Gilfoyle, two stunted programmers, are shown up by a rude daredevil bro, and like every nerdy high-school kid ever, they spin out elaborate revenge fantasies that play on the central awkwardness of their lives — that they’re way smarter than the bullies who are after them.  These story lines had the potential to go somewhere interesting. But the resolution to each felt like a whiff; Richard, Dinesh and Gilfoyle seem to learn little from their experiences. The Dinesh and Gilfoyle plot at least led to a funny gag, with their tormentor, Blaine, coming over to apologize for his earlier rudeness just as the programmers are gaming out their fantasies on a huge pinboard titled “Let Blaine Die.” But the Richard story line devolved, as has happened too often this season, into an examination not of Richard but instead the show’s emptiest character: loud, boorish Erlich, whom we are reminded, once again, isn’t liked by anyone, a comedic mine that has long since run dry.  Not that this episode was all bad. It was worth it just to see Gavin Belson, Hooli’s chief, become awkwardly violent in his promo before the Ultimate Fighting Championship livestream powered by his technology, Nucleus. And then it’s fun to see him go ape when the stream breaks down, when he begins to suspect that Hooli is a dysfunctional company whose every employee is a sycophant bent on pleasing the boss. There are couple of delicious touches here: I loved Gavin sitting in on a focus group of people who hate the Hooli phone. As his minions assure him that things are O.K., the focus group leader asks, “And who else thought this product was messed up?” Also, there’s a fun bit of calling back to other tech flops.“Don’t tell me this is Zune bad,” he says to an assistant. She breaks the news to him: “I’m sorry, Gavin. It’s Apple Maps bad.”But let’s get back to Richard. One of the reasons that the tech business is unpredictable is because it’s never quite clear how the young, smart and usually socially insecure men who start up new tech companies will respond to the challenges of finding early success. Many buckle under the pressure: They allow outside interests to take hold of their companies; they find managing others a hassle rather than a skill to work on; and they fail to establish a core mission for the larger organizations they’re attempting to build. Look at some of the big failures in the tech business — Apple in the late 1980s and 1990s, Yahoo last decade or Groupon more recently — and you can usually lay the blame at the feet of a founder or two who didn’t quite get his act together.What’s equally true is that the grand tech successes also depend on unusual founders, particularly the unshakable way they respond to, and even thrive under, the pressures of business stardom. Consider Bill Gates, Steve Jobs, Mark Zuckerberg, or the Google guys. They all used to be awkward in the world, but with every new milestone of success and the challenges that came with it, they somehow got better — at making decisions, speaking in public, inspiring and pushing others to do their best. In short, they became leaders.I’d hoped to see a similar kind of growth from Richard. In this episode he manages to break it to Erlich that people don’t like him, but when given the tougher assignment of negotiating with a jerk named Double A, the founder of an energy drink company called Homicide, Richard blows it. Losing his cool when Double A rejects his idea, Richard goes for the cheap insult rather than attempting to make a persuasive case for his tech. The insult turns out to be surprisingly odious, and Richard and his guys have to skedaddle. But the last scene suggests that had Richard only been a better, cooler negotiator, Double A would have been amenable to another arrangement. A new Pied Piper rival, it turns out, has gotten to sponsor Homicide’s stunt livestream, just as Pied Piper had been expecting to do.Now would be a good time for “Silicon Valley” to show us that founders sometimes need lessons on becoming leaders. Richard screwed this up, and someone should pull him aside and fix it — give him lessons on negotiating, on speaking, on managing. In order to get Pied Piper anywhere, Richard needs to become something more than a coding savant. Otherwise, these guys are toast. 