LOS ANGELES — Sorry, Max. You just got “Pitch” slapped.In perhaps the most striking example yet of the growing power of female ticket buyers at the North American box office, the girl-powered PG-13 musical “Pitch Perfect 2” took in a hefty $70.3 million over the weekend, streaking past “Mad Max: Fury Road,” which was aimed primarily at men. The R-rated “Fury Road” took in about $44.4 million. Going into the weekend, box-office analysts predicted the films would finish neck and neck. But women — historically overlooked by studios in the summer movie season — proved to be the more reliable audience. Crowds for “Pitch Perfect 2” (Universal Pictures) were 75 percent female; “Fury Road” (Warner Bros.) played to audiences that were 70 percent male.Universal scheduled “Pitch Perfect 2” in the competitive May corridor — the first movie was released in sleepy October — with some trepidation. “Pitch Perfect” was only a modest box-office performer in 2012, collecting $65 million over its entire domestic run. But Universal was encouraged by huge “Pitch Perfect” viewing on video-on-demand services and DVD; consumers eventually found it. A hit soundtrack also helped.Hollywood saw a similar scenario play out in 1999 with the sequel “Austin Powers: The Spy Who Shagged Me.” The first “Austin Powers” movie took in $54 million domestically over its entire 1997 run. Following huge DVD sales, the sequel collected $55 million over its opening weekend alone, for an eventual domestic total of $206 million.“Pitch Perfect 2,” directed by Elizabeth Banks and written by Kay Cannon, and “Fury Road,” directed and co-written by George Miller, had vastly different budgets. “Pitch Perfect 2” had a net production cost of $29 million. “Fury Road,” produced by Village Roadshow Pictures and released by Warner, cost at least $150 million to make.“Pitch Perfect 2,” starring Anna Kendrick and Rebel Wilson, extended a hot streak for Universal, which has recently hit pay dirt with “Fifty Shades of Grey” and “Furious 7.” The good news for Warner: “Fury Road,” which extends the series started by Mr. Miller in 1979, this time with Tom Hardy as the rebel Max Rockatansky, received stellar reviews, which bodes well for word of mouth leading into Memorial Day weekend.For the weekend, “Avengers: Age of Ultron” (Disney) was hot on the heels of “Fury Road,” taking in about $38.8 million, for a three-week domestic total of $372 million, according to Rentrak, which compiles box office data.A version of this article appears in print on 05/18/2015, on page C3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: u2018Pitch Perfect 2u2019 Cruises Past u2018Mad Max: Fury Roadu2019.