CANNES — Her face is everywhere at Cannes — in photos from the red carpet, on the cover of The Hollywood Reporter — but Natalie Portman is  at the Cannes Film Festival for her work behind the camera, as the director of her first feature film, “A Tale of Love and Darkness,” based on the memoir by the Israeli novelist Amos Oz.“I had wanted to direct for as long as I can remember, since I was on film sets,” Ms. Portman said in an interview here on Sunday afternoon. While acting is “a service to the director’s vision,” she said, directing was a way of asserting herself. “It was exciting to have the position where people were asking me for my vision,” she said. “I feel that they should have all girls do it in school,” she continued. “It’s sort of surprising, as a woman, when you’re asked your opinion and your direction and your lead hundreds of times a day. It’s good training for your voice and for the development of your own voice.”“A Tale of Love and Darkness,” filmed in Hebrew in Jerusalem last year based on a screenplay adapted by Ms. Portman, tells the story of the creation of the state of Israel through the lens of Mr. Oz’s family — his scholar father, Arieh, and elegant, suicidal mother, Fania, played by Ms. Portman. Both  were immigrants from Eastern Europe, as were Ms. Portman’s paternal grandparents. The actress was born in Israel and emigrated to the United States at age 3.The film met with a standing ovation at its gala screening here on Saturday evening and has received respectful but not terribly glowing reviews. The Guardian called it “an assured, heartfelt debut,” a film “with something serious and interesting to say about Israel,” while Variety was less enthusiastic, calling it “a drearily empathetic film” that “will rely on Portman’s name to attract interest beyond Israel.” In an interview this week in The Hollywood Reporter, Ms. Portman discussed her disappointment with Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, as well as her concerns about being Jewish and living in Paris after the attacks on the Charlie Hebdo satirical magazine and a Kosher supermarket — an interview that prompted The Tablet, a Jewish culture website, to call her “the Queen Esther of our times.”Told about that monicker at the opening-night dinner for the festival, Ms. Portman seemed pleasantly taken aback. She moved to Paris last year after her husband, Benjamin Millepied, became the director of dance the National Opera of Paris. The couple met on the set of Darren Aronofsky’s 2010 ballet thriller “Black Swan.”(The actress will play Jacqueline Kennedy in a forthcoming biopic produced by Mr. Aronofsky and directed by Pablo Larrain.)Ms. Portman said she was also surprised that critics saw “A Tale of Love and Darkness” as a celebration of Israel. “It’s been kind of bizarre to me to hear ‘love letter’ or ‘patriotic’ as reactions to it, because I find my own feelings so conflicted, and I feel like I put it in my film,” she said. “You criticize it and love it like your family,” she continued. “It’s something you care about deeply but also see every flaw, more than anyone probably.”A version of this article appears in print on 05/18/2015, on page C3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Natalie Portman on Israel and Directing at Cannes.