

      By KEN JOHNSON

OCT. 22, 2015

This art fair at the Park Avenue Armory includes all kinds of surprising and amazing objects among presentations by 67 art and antiquities dealers.
People complain that contemporary art fairs have become numbingly predictable. But they can’t say that about The International Show, through next Thursday, Oct. 29, at the Park Avenue Armory, where they’re bound to discover all kinds of surprising and amazing objects among presentations by 67 art and antiquities dealers. Here are 11 noteworthy examples. In this gallery’s show of paintings, drawings and sculptures about New York City, “Tunnel of Love” (1943), by the Ash Can School painter Reginald Marsh, depicts a comically mismatched couple taking a nightmarish amusement park ride at Coney Island.Created by Louis Comfort Tiffany around 1890, a small stained-glass window has a swirling, nearly abstract image of a gourd and colorful blossoms within an intricately patterned frame, punctuated by frosty, translucent quartz beach pebbles picked up by the artist on the North Shore of Long Island.This New York tribal arts gallery presents an extraordinarily elegant, delicately featured wooden mask created by an unknown artisan in Gabon in the late 19th or early 20th century.Long before he became known for his super-realistic sculptures of ordinary people, Duane Hanson tried his hand at painting. Made in 1950, “Uncle Sam and the American Eagle” is a boldly graphic, possibly satirical allegory of patriotism.Of the exhibition’s many antique clocks, few are more captivating than one probably made in England in the 19th century. The fully exposed clockworks rise above a model of a palatial English country house fashioned in gilded brass. When the wooden music box is  set on play, tiny figures visible through windows in the building move about. In an upper corner, a shutter can be raised to reveal a diminutive couple rhythmically making love.Made in western Iran sometime during the 1st millennium B.C., a small, formally exquisite bronze mask has a narrow, elongated face that calls to mind the stylized physiognomies painted and sculpted by modern artists like Modigliani and Giacometti.Painted with a generously sensuous touch, “Hop Pickers Returning” (circa 1919) by Alfred J. Munnings has a vivid, late-day atmosphere and an unusual sense of stately motion in its procession of farm workers moving from right to left.With its gracefully rounded front and refined decorative detailing, a  rosewood cabinet by Osvaldo Borsani from 1946 stands out among the show’s myriad works of furniture. Its craggy bronze handles in the form of submarine mermaids and dolphins are by Lucio Fontana.Art Deco eroticism doesn’t get much sweeter than an octagonal work on paper by Jean Dupas. With its pink, doll-like nudes and flock of white birds in a paradisiacal setting, “Etude pour Les Pigeons Blanc” (“Study for the White Pigeons”), circa 1920,  delightfully beguiles.Models of knights in armor were once a way for metalworkers to show off their skills. Just 17 inches high, a meticulously detailed, diminutive warrior on horseback, made in Paris around 1850 by Edward Granger, is a marvel of miniaturist craftsmanship.Created between 300 B.C. and 300 A.D. in western Mexico, a Smurf-like ceramic soldier in a conical hat and tubular armor stands 16½ inches high. Crouching and wielding his spear with impressive animation, he may have been made to guard a tomb, but he seems too cute to scare anyone off.Advertisement