By KATHRYN SHATTUCKMAY 17, 2015
8 P.M. (ABC) 2015 BILLBOARD MUSIC AWARDS Ludacris and Chrissy Teigen host this ceremony, broadcast live from the MGM Grand Garden Arena in Las Vegas and honoring Billboard chart toppers from March 10, 2014, through March 8 in genres including R&B, rap, pop, country, rock, Latin and alternative. The music video for “Bad Blood,” from Taylor Swift, above, will open the show. Molly Ringwald and Simple Minds will pay a 30th-anniversary tribute to “The Breakfast Club.” Other performers include Mariah Carey; Van Halen; Britney Spears and her new single, “Pretty Girls,” with Iggy Azalea; Jussie Smollett and Bryshere Gray of Fox’s “Empire” in a medley of the show’s songs, with Estelle. E! begins reporting from the red carpet at 6.10 A.M. (Fox) FOX NEWS SUNDAY Senator Marco Rubio, Republican of Florida, discusses his presidential campaign.6 P.M. (Al Jazeera America) THIRD RAIL Imran Garda hosts this new debate program, which opens with the Harvard law professor Alan M. Dershowitz and the PBS host Tavis Smiley discussing the role of religion in violent world conflicts.8 P.M. (CBS) I LOVE LUCY SUPERSTAR SPECIAL Two newly colorized episodes, “L.A. at Last!,” guest-starring William Holden and featuring material not broadcast in 60 years, and “Lucy and Superman,” with George Reeves, are shown back to back.Advertisement8 P.M. (TCM) CABARET (1972) Life is a you-know-what in this dazzler starring Liza Minnelli, left, as an American singer and dancer adrift in decadent Weimar-era Berlin, where Joel Grey’s master of ceremonies oversees the antics at the Kit Kat Klub. Ms. Minnelli and Mr. Grey won Oscars, as did the director, Bob Fosse, who choreographed the bump and grind in this adaptation of the Kander and Ebb musical. “Everybody in ‘Cabaret’ is very fine, and meticulously chosen for type, down to the last weary transvestite and to the least of the bland, blond open-faced Nazis in the background,” Roger Greenspun wrote in The New York Times. “As for Miss Minnelli, she is sometimes wrong in the details of her role, but so magnificently right for the film as a whole that I should prefer not to imagine it without her.” Josef von Sternberg’s “The Blue Angel” (1930), in which a stodgy professor (Emil Jannings) falls from grace when he is seduced by a nightclub singer (Marlene Dietrich) in Weimar Germany, follows at 10:15.Advertisement8 P.M. (Ovation) GREEN PORNO LIVE! For six years and counting, Isabella Rossellini, the actress and filmmaker, has quite literally been explaining the birds and the bees, transforming herself into a multitude of species — snails, deer, ducks, spiders, whales — to help audiences better understand how they reproduce. This documentary follows Ms. Rossellini as she dons anatomically correct costumes to demonstrate the variety of sexual behavior in the animal kingdom. Her antics are based in science. (She is pursuing a master’s degree in animal behavior at Hunter College.) But in the end, “Green Porno” is mostly about putting on a show. “I am an entertainer,” she said in a phone interview. “I find that animals make me laugh.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.9:30 P.M. (Showtime) HAPPYISH Thom (Steve Coogan) and Lee (Kathryn Hahn) wait for the imaginary mother ship that abandoned them on Earth to return. Julius (Sawyer Shipman) is suspended from school for hitting a smug overachiever. And Jonathan (Bradley Whitford) introduces the official Nazi handbook during a Coca-Cola pitch.10 P.M. (AMC) MAD MEN The journey of Don Draper (Jon Hamm) — and with it, the series — comes to an end.What’s Streaming NowTOP OF THE LAKE In this mystery mini-series, written by Jane Campion and Gerard Lee and directed by Garth Davis, Elisabeth Moss plays Robin Griffin, a detective with experience in child-abuse cases who is brought to rural New Zealand to oversee a case involving a missing, pregnant 12-year-old (Jacqueline Joe). (netflix.com)MAD MEN For those already mourning the end of an era, all seven seasons of the show (starring Mr. Hamm, left) are available for a trip down memory lane. (iTunes)KATHRYN SHATTUCKA version of this schedule appears in print on May 17, 2015, on Page SP13 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Sunday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.