AdvertisementSupported byBy Roslyn SulcasAmar Ramasar was 11 when he first saw ballet. It was a video of the New York City Ballet dancers Heather Watts and Mel Tomlinson, in Balanchine’s radical 1957 ballet “Agon,” the dancers clad in minimal leotards and tights, performing spiky, extraordinary movements to Stravinsky’s astringent score. Mr. Ramasar, an outgoing, talkative boy from the Bronx, knew right away what he thought. “That’s the ballet I want to dance, and that’s the company I’m going to get into,” he said.Mr. Ramasar, 33, danced that role in “Agon” twice this season, a part he has performed since 2011. He has been a principal at City Ballet since 2009, dancing a remarkably wide range of roles, and has long been a favorite for the creation of new ballets. But it is relatively recently that Mr. Ramasar has entirely come into his own, showing a new technical refinement and polish that have embellished the dynamism and muscular attack of his dancing.Reviewing Justin Peck’s new “Rodeo” in The New York Times in February, Alastair Macaulay wrote, “Mr. Ramasar, who in the last two years has become an endearing and central artist at City Ballet, seems to carry whole sections on the tide of his immense good humor and large-scaled prowess.”The path from the Bronx to Lincoln Center was not an obvious one. Mr. Ramasar’s father, a former Marine who worked as a computer technician, is of Trinidadian-Indian ancestry; his mother, who was a nurse, is from Puerto Rico. “No one knew anything about ballet in my family,” Mr. Ramasar said in an interview backstage at the David H. Koch Theater, where City Ballet performs. “My father didn’t prevent me from doing it, but he didn’t make it easy.”Mr. Ramasar is tall with an athletic build and a ready smile. He retains his boyish eagerness and enthusiasm, and it’s easy to imagine him as an active, engaging child who was the storytelling champion of his elementary school and a prizewinning debater. When he was 10, a music teacher suggested he audition for TADA! Youth Theater, which selected children from schools in the five boroughs to perform in original musicals. Two out of 300 children auditioning in the Bronx were picked; Mr. Ramasar was one. His mother, working full time, couldn’t take him to the rehearsals at the Henry Street Settlement on the Lower East Side, so Mr. Ramasar learned how to use the subway by himself, commuting daily to rehearsals after school.At Henry Street, he met Daniel Catanach, the choreographer working with TADA, who had danced with the Kansas City Ballet under Todd Bolender, a former City Ballet principal. It was Mr. Catanach who showed him the video of “Agon” and who encouraged him to audition for the School of American Ballet, the feeder school for City Ballet.“It was 1993; I was 12 and had no ballet training at all,” Mr. Ramasar recalled. “I borrowed Danny’s shoes to audition.” He was accepted into the school as part of a boys’ program, started by Peter Martins, the director of both the School of American Ballet and City Ballet, which offered scholarships in an effort to recruit more male dancers to the school. “My family didn’t even have the smallest amount of extra money,” Mr. Ramasar said. “I could never have done it otherwise.”Mr. Martins said that initially the program was aimed at developing male dancers, and not focused on diversity. “It turned out that a lot of the kids were minorities, which was a good thing,” he said. (There are six other boys’ program graduates at City Ballet and many in other professional dance companies.) Mr. Ramasar commuted every day from his school in the Bronx to ballet classes in Manhattan, taking his place at the barre among boys as young as 6. “I had a lot of catch-up to do, because I started so late,” he said. “I would look around and see all these boys who were turned-out and beautiful, and I was just a clumsy Bronx boy. It took a lot of willpower.”Doubting himself, Mr. Ramasar told his teacher, Olga Kostritzky, that he should perhaps become an actor. “You want to play a robber, be in movies,” he said she told him. “You want to be a prince, stay in the ballet.”But racial typecasting still abounds in the ballet world, and even though the African-American Mr. Tomlinson had been his first glimpse of classical dance, Mr. Ramasar said it was often hard to believe in his future as a ballet prince. “I would look around and think, there are no other dark-skinned Puerto Rican-Indian guys around. Is it really possible?”Encouraged by his teachers, Mr. Ramasar persevered, won rave reviews for his performances in the school’s end-of-year workshops and became a full company member in 2001. Soon after, Mr. Martins gave him the principal role of the Cavalier in “The Nutcracker.” He was a prince, and his father came to watch him dance for the first time. “I think then he understood,” Mr. Ramasar said.Even before his promotion to soloist in 2006, Mr. Ramasar was a regular presence in the core Balanchine and Jerome Robbins works in City Ballet’s repertory, and in new ballets by choreographers as diverse as Christopher Wheeldon, Jorma Elo, Mr. Martins, Mauro Bigonzetti, Alexei Ratmansky and Mr. Peck. (“I keep asking Justin, ‘Can I be your muse?’ ” Mr. Ramasar joked.)“He is game to try anything, which is so important for a choreographer,” said Mr. Peck, who has used him in three pieces. “And he has an amazing ability to replicate movement almost instantaneously. In that way he is the perfect City Ballet model.” Mr. Ramasar is hard to categorize, Mr. Martins said: “He can do contemporary work like no one else in this company. He is as good as it gets in the Balanchine black and white ballets” — that is the choreographer’s spare, modernist pieces, usually performed in simple practice dress. “He can do it all,” Mr. Martins concluded.He hasn’t, however, done many of the princely roles of the Balanchine repertory; Mr. Ramasar said he would love to dance in ballets like “Apollo” and “Diamonds” and that he is still focused on refining his academic classical technique. Asked whether he felt typecast, he said no. “I have never really thought about race, just what I could do as an artist,” he said. “But I would like to be looked at as a role model for young dancers of color. I hope that I’m looked at in that way in terms of breaking boundaries and showing this is possible.”Advertisement