By DAVE ITZKOFFMAY 15, 2015
Hey, hockey puck: You may know Don Rickles best as that venerated stand-up comic with the tongue of a tiger and the heart of a pussycat, and a career of some 60 years that includes roles in films like “Casino” and the “Toy Story” series.There was a time when Mr. Rickles’s prickly stage persona fit onto network television, too: From 1976 to 1978, this insult comedian, now 89, starred in his own NBC series, “CPO Sharkey,” which cast him as an acerbic United States Navy officer in charge of a band of misfit recruits.Though it ran for only two seasons, “CPO Sharkey” has earned cult status, as much for Mr. Rickles’s involvement as for a famous incident in which Johnny Carson crashed the show in midtaping, while he was shooting the “Tonight” show at his nearby studio. On Tuesday, Time Life will release the complete “CPO Sharkey” on DVD, with a bonus feature that includes footage from Carson’s unannounced visit.Mr. Rickles spoke recently by telephone to discuss the show and his real-life naval career, and to hurl friendly barbs at a reporter. These are excerpts from the conversation.AdvertisementQ. Hello, Mr. Rickles? A. What is it, Dave? What are you bothering me with? Who cares?Tell me about how you first became involved with “CPO Sharkey.”Advertisement That’s quite a long time ago. I’ve done other things since then, but I’m delighted that it’s coming out now. Well, Aaron Ruben, bless his soul, he was a hell of a writer. [Mr. Ruben, who created “CPO Sharkey,” also worked on comedies including “The Andy Griffith Show,” “Gomer Pyle, U.S.M.C.” and “Sanford and Son.”] I was a Navy man in real life, and the script was something that I found funny and something that suited my personality.So you didn’t mind playing off your naval service? Sure. I spent two and a half years in the Philippines, in World War II. Maybe you’ve heard about it? How old a gentleman are you?I’m 39. Oh, my God. The only thing you’ve heard is your father saying, “Listen, this is what they call gunfire.” He might have had a little cap pistol in the house. I’m a New Yorker, originally. I was raised in Jackson Heights. I went to P.S. 148, and then Newtown High School. If World War II didn’t come, I’d still be there in school. World War II saved me.How so? I was a big shot in high school — big into social events and at the dramatic society, and I always had trouble in school. Not because I was a dummy, but I was always busy being the Jackson Heights clown. Then I went down and enlisted. Being in the Navy, when I came home, it changed your whole life. You’re 18, you go away for two and a half years, you come home — boy, you’re a different person.So humor wasn’t out of place in combat? Oh, not at all. As a matter of fact, on the ship that I went over to the Philippines, out of 300 men I was the class comedian. The only thing they had to do on the ship was to oil their guns. I knew that kind of life.Do you think your military service helped shape your comic style, which is, let’s say, confrontational? Oh, yes. Certainly. A lot of that is the way Don Rickles is when I do comedy. I’m married now 50 years. I don’t do that at home.AdvertisementThere’s a warning on my “CPO Sharkey” DVD that says “some of the jokes and ethnic references” in the show “would most likely not be allowed on network TV today and reflect the tenor of the times.” How do you feel about that? Well, I think they’re just being cautious. But even today, in my performance, I never do anything that’s hurtful or not accepted. And by the way, it’s never been dirty. That’s for sure. The way times are today, they’re just being protective.So there’s nothing wrong with updating your sensibilities to reflect changing attitudes? Not at all. Especially if it makes money.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.When Johnny Carson came to find you on the “CPO Sharkey” set, it was because you accidentally broke his cigarette box on the “Tonight” show the previous evening. Did you realize you had damaged it at the time? That happened to be a genuine accident. But we made it dramatic. It wasn’t the jewel case of the queen. It was just a box that he had on his desk. Of course, knowing Johnny, he milked it a little bit. And I added to it.Did you have any idea he was coming to the set that day? Oh, no idea. Look at the film, you’ll see. I was really taken. In those days, those were bigger cameras than they are today. To schlep all that stuff into the other studio was quite an event. I love when I said to the audience, “Johnny Carson!” He said, “They know who I am.” I miss Johnny. He was great.Why did it take so long for “CPO Sharkey” to get a DVD release? From what I understand, it was buried by one of the aides at William Morris or somebody, buried in the vaults. Nobody ever thought of pulling it out. But I watch a lot of DVD stuff. There’s not many comedians of my world that are still around. It’s good to see. I enjoy watching me.It’s been a pleasure to speak with you. When we do this, what happens is, sometimes I do a nice interview with a guy like you, and then I open up The New York Times, and I find out it’s three lines. “I spoke to Don Rickles. What a nice guy. Goodbye.”A version of this article appears in print on May 17, 2015, on Page AR32 of the New York edition with the headline: Just Kidding About That Cigarette Box.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.