“Mad Men” came to its much anticipated end Sunday night, as Don Draper embraced his inner huckster and taught the world to sing. Or did he?That was one of the aspects of the finale that New York Times readers have been debating since the episode concluded more than 12 hours ago. (Read Alessandra Stanley’s review here and Logan Hill’s episode recap here.)Below we highlight some of our readers’ takes. Comments have been lightly edited for clarity.About that Coke Ad… It took me a few minutes to get Don’s role in the Coke ad. I had so wanted him to have his Big Breakthrough at the retreat (and I suppose in a way he did, even if it was just crying out some of the pain) that at first I thought Stan and Peggy came up with it, perhaps because I wanted them to. But yes, the braids. Don’s little smile at the end wasn’t the smile of a man reborn into a more honest person, it was the smile of a born ad-man who had just come up with something he knows will be iconic. A sour ending, but a great one, and one accurate to the character. — JC, N.J. Don does not do the Coke ad. Clearly it is Joan who gets the good news from Coke. — BillOReits, N.J.Please. Don did not create the Coke ad. The Coke ad, which McCann did, indeed, produce, was used in the finale as an ironic counterpoint to Don’s actual experiences in California. Whether Don was truly buying all the Esalen-speak (and some of the group dialogue was laughable, but probably taken from life), I don’t believe he went back. McCann merely co-opted the popular culture of the time and turned it into something commercial. I remember that ad. We loved it; we were too young to catch the irony. — Stephanie, WashingtonDon absolutely DID create that Coke ad, or at least had the main conceptual idea for it. We know that Don was never stable in any stage of life he arrived at, so why would finding himself spiritually be any different? He connected with the office sap in the meeting, got in touch with his spiritual side on the cliff (temporarily most likely), and was struck with a great idea for an advertisement.   He probably hurried back to New York in his finest suit, was met with skepticism and probably fired on the spot, but said “wait, listen to this.” He then went into a typical Don Draper presentation of a new, groundbreaking Coke spot. He was greeted as a genius.   Don Draper went on to work many more years, smoking, drinking and womanizing the whole time. His work results kept him in the game.   I like to think this is how it ended. I will miss the show. — Jeff L, N.J.Don Draper did not think up the Coke campaign. Don Draper is a fictional character! Get a life, people. —
RJ, New YorkThe Coke ad: whether or not Don created it (I vote yes), it’s also an overt hat tip to the industry the series portrayed. The purpose of TV programming is to deliver the viewer to the commercial. Weiner did his job – on us. — Nathan James, San FranciscoNice Job, Matthew Weiner!I loved the finale. At times, I got frustrated with the extended therapy sessions at Esalen (we get it, we get it, we get it, no need to drum it in), but the commercial at the end made it all work.   Masterfully executed. Goodbye Mad Men. I’ll miss you. — nerdgirl5000, NYC Did the finale work? I smiled a lot and I would say that would be indicative of the end working. Proud of Joan, happy for Roger and Pete, sad for Betty but proud of Sally, elated for Peggy – she found love. And Don – we know that Don is not done – he will live on. The wheels will keep spinning, not come to a screeching halt that we might have feared.   Much more creative than violently killing people off, throwing them in jail, or preposterous ridiculous stuff. For that we are so grateful to Mr. Weiner.  He really did spare us of disappointment and gave us calming closure. — MIMA, heartsnyThe final episode was indeed very satisfying and brought us to a disturbing truth about the American dream and the fake values Madison Ave. provided to us on a silver platter.The hippie mantra of make love not war and acceptance was not lost on Madison Ave. and they were brilliant at incorporating it into their messaging — hence the uplifting Coke ad. But, that era of peace and love was just a fad and everyone went back to being the typical American consumer. It is what it is and we are who we are — for all the good and bad. Don Draper is all of us. Not perfect and full of disappointment — but continuing for the search for happiness. Doing some good and doing some harm along the way, Thanks Matt Weiner for a fabulous ride. I loved every minute of it. — marian, PhiladelphiaBad Job, Matthew Weiner!I am clearly in the minority, but I thought the last season and the finale were letdowns. I loved the final beat where Don comes up with the idea of the Coke commercial, but his multi-episode road trip was tedious and anti-climactic. At the end of a long, engaging series you want to spend time with the characters who made the show not cardboard stick figures (the hokie motel owner, the thieving prostitutes, the new age hippies). Where is the great Don/Roger scene at some bar at noon? Is an expositional phone conversation between Don and Sally the best we can do? Phone conversations are inherently less dramatic, yet MW has all the major conversations on them. He didn’t pull it off. And because so much screen time was spent with new characters, the other major story lines were tied up quickly and neatly in bows as if writers from ABC hacked into Weiner’s computer. With Don’s three children about to become motherless, it’s not like there isn’t ripe material for drama. — Brad, NYCNot happening.  Considering Don was 90% dead hours before the meditation, ending did not do it. — zmcc, R.I.Highly disappointed by the schmaltzy ending. Peggy’s sudden awakening to another office love affair? Roger and Megan’s mom? Don in meditation bliss?  Coke! — THE 26TH FLR., Surf City, N.J.On balance, I didn’t buy it. I think the Joan and Pete endings were believable (whatever that means in the context of a TV drama). But Peggy and Stan seemed false and contrived. Sally’s strength of character was believable, and all the more remarkable considering what awful parents she has. Roger will be divorced from Megan’s Mom by 1973 at the latest, assuming he doesn’t have a final, fatal heart attack before then.   Don should go home and take care of his kids. But, given his utter narcissism, that’s not likely to happen. Money will replace commitment until Don’s truly old and realizes what he’s missed — and by then it’ll be too late. His boys I think will turn out badly, through no fault of their own.   The tragedy of Don is that he has enough intelligence to see his own flaws, but not enough character to truly overcome them. Inside he’s as empty as the conformist corporate cogs he outshines in both the boardroom and the bedroom. As a side note, it’s hard to believe he could smoke like a chimney and drink like a fish (or rather, a school of fishes) and remain as unaffected physically as he seems to be. In real life he’d be lined, paunchy and hoarse, with a tumor or heart attack right around the corner. — Jon Harrison, Poultney, Vt.Psychoanalyzing DonIs Don’s ending really a spiritual awakening and a start to a new and positive chapter (as so many reviewers and viewers are writing), or is he just returning to his old ways? I feel this is the same Don of every season finale. He entices us with the possibilities of a poetic redemption, and he spoils that redemption by resuming his work as a corporate shill. A masterful (and cynical) finale. Coke is not the “real thing,” and neither is Don. —  Human #5616513, AtlantaWhat about the hug at Esalan? That is where the “transformation” happened. Don got that it is about giving, not getting (there was some dialogue that foreshadowed this which I can’t remember). This is entirely consistent with the Coke ad (“I’d like give the world a Coke”). So I do think he goes back to New York. His kids are there. He hasn’t changed completely, but has some new insight. That’s about the best most of us can hope for. The whole show was about the hard wired patterns that get created when we are young and the inevitable battles that result between our ego, public self and shadow. Don’s a bit more integrated now — but still human. — Tracey Tapp, Destin, Fla.If the point of this was to have Don go on a spiritual journey, admit his humanity and then be reborn only to head back to New York to brainstorm “the greatest commercial ever” to make us fully committed to buying more crap we don’t need and that’s bad for us to boot (they’re toasted!), then I reject the “greatness” of the finale.   Instead, I think he started the recovery process and went on to live in peace, perhaps returning to gather his kids and be the good, loving dad that he never had. I see the very ending as a contrast between the spiritual life that was genuinely in store for Don Draper, free from the lies of Madison Avenue, and how the Ad world would (and did) manipulate the post-hippie “would be” world of the spirit to sell junk.   Please don’t tell me he went back to McCann! What a tragedy that would be. — Robert G, Ellicott City, Md.More Fan FictionI’m upset about the deliberate ambiguity about Don’s future. It was gimmicky. Would it be too much to ask for this:  When the ad concludes in the McCann conference room, we see Don, from the back, standing tall, receiving the adulation of his peers and the Coke executives (maybe even Peggy and Stan smiling, too), and then the camera pans across his office, his desk in particular, and we see a few picture frames with him and his children, from a vacation in Madrid (following Betty’s funeral), and individual frames of him with Betty, with Megan, and with Anna. We will never if he ever conquered all of his bad habits, but at least we know he didn’t abandon his only real family. Am I asking for too much? — Bobby Draper, MiamiDon may have created the “I’d Like to teach the world to sing…” Coke commercial, but I know in my heart that it’s Peggy who writes the Mean Joe Green commercial in 1980-81.   But Don one-upped her by doing the Lifesaver’s commercial too, with the dad offering his boy a Lifesaver after losing a hockey game (late 1970s)  . Then Peggy comes back with a vengeance and creates Apple’s 1984 commercial and wins a bunch of Clios. — Amy, DenverI think one has to connect the cocaine use with the Coca-Cola business.   Joan tries cocaine and feels empowered. We know how popular cocaine becomes with the high-powered creative set later in the decade and into the ’80s. Perhaps it didn’t altogether replace the institutionalized alcoholism depicted in the series, but represented a freshening, a “new possibility”, some kind of epiphany for jaded seekers.   ”Come back, Don. Wouldn’t you like to work on Coke?” Peggy asks, and indeed that’s where the episodes in my mind will take me. — Andrew Larson, ChicagoFile Under ‘Other’Speaking of the ’70s, Jon Hamm IS the new Fonzie, and no way he’ll transcend this role. There’s worse things in life. He should win some sort of special award for this role, because he hit almost no false notes in eight years. I mean there were some, but…   And incidental of nothing, I miss Sal.   R.I.P. Mad Men. — Andrew, Sleepy Hollow, N.Y.Having worn men’s plaid shirts over the years, I recall that the mark of a carefully made shirt was, for decades, that the pattern on the pockets was perfectly aligned with the pattern on the body of the shirt. A few short years ago someone said “the heck with that” and suddenly all plaid shirt manufacturers made sure the pockets’ plaid not only did not align with the plaid in the body of the shirt but deliberately clashed with it. At Esalen (or driving there) Dick-Don was wearing a plaid shirt with the 2015 style — pocket plaid not matching the body plaid — in, supposedly, the early 1970s, in a program that went to great lengths to reproduce meticulously contemporary neck-wear widths, sideburn lengths and other minutia! This blatant error so upset me that I have down-graded the entire series from A+ to B-. — acule, Lexington, Va.The ending would have been far better if Don was hitchhiking and got into a car driven by Charles Manson. They could have still wrapped with the Coke ad. — Ruben Kincaid, BrooklynAbsolute genius the way it ended! The greatest ad man, the greatest ad, sitting like Buddha, and the way the sun was introduced as mother at the end. Don finally found the mother he had lost so long ago. The Real Thing, “Mad Men” gave us seven glorious seasons, thank you Matt Weiner and the amazing cast. We will ponder this for years to come à la Shakespeare. “Mad Men” is a show for the ages. — Howie, Chicago