LOS ANGELES — Matthew Weiner seemed giddy on Sunday night as he walked the stage of the  Theater at Ace Hotel here. He had already experienced two standing ovations and was about to screen the “Mad Men” series finale for an audience of 1,600 fans. But even he was not without his concerns, “I’ll be in the audience afterward,” he said. “Leave me alone if you don’t like it.” He tossed the comment off like a joke, though he was certainly aware of the import that TV finales have these days.Despite Mr. Weiner’s comment, this was not a night to bury “Mad Men,” but rather to praise it. Before the screening, there was a live reading of the Season 1 finale “The Wheel.” The endeavor, directed by the Oscar-nominated director Jason Reitman, was part of the continuing monthly Live Read series that Mr. Reitman leads in connection with Film Independent. The live readings feature prominent actors and actresses in an unrehearsed performance of a notable script.Most of the “Mad Men” cast members were in attendance at this restored 1920s movie palace, save for January Jones and Christina Hendricks, and it was easy to distinguish the show’s cast and crew from the rest of the public, as they were nearly the only attendees not in 1970s period dress.The cast for the “Wheel” reading was scattershot. Fred Savage, who came to prominence on television as the child star of “The Wonder Years,” a show also about the 1960s, voiced the character of Pete Campbell in a performance that felt like a playful homage to Vincent Kartheiser’s portrayal. Kevin Pollak did much the same with his take on the ever-eccentric Bert Cooper, even walking onstage carrying his shoes, a nod to Cooper’s Japanophilia. The “Mad Men” veteran Colin Hanks, who played Father Gill in earlier seasons, tackled the impossible role of Don Draper, but the true star of the show was the 18-year-old Kaitlyn Dever, who channeled Season 1 Peggy with equal parts innocence and cynicism. As entertaining as the live reading was, though, it wasn’t what the audience was there to see. For the entire first part of the night, there was a persistent buzz in the room, a nervous energy, the blend of anticipation and concern, of excitement and alcohol. Before the reading, Mr. Reitman joked about locking the theater doors and keeping Mr. Weiner there until he produced several more seasons of his show.When the episode finally began, the tension broke and the audience was transformed, as if a room full of close friends were watching an episode of their favorite show together. The laughs were loud, so much so that they drowned out the lines that followed. There were squeals at the suggestion of one potential partnership and happy sighs at declarations of love. Mr. Weiner didn’t want to know if people enjoyed the final episode of his show, but if one theater full of fans was any indication, he didn’t have much to worry about.