CANNES, France – This year’s cinematic menagerie at the 68th Cannes Film Festival includes a monstrously large flea in “Tale of Tales,” bloody bunnies in “The Lobster” and flocks of sheep in “Rams.” No animal, though, has held the screen as proudly as the Himalayan sheepdog  Tommy in “The Fourth Direction” (“Chauthi Koot”), a movie about ordinary people whose lives are shaped by violence in Punjab, the predominantly Sikh state in northern India. Directed by Gurvinder Singh, the movie takes place in 1984, the year  Prime Minister Indira Gandhi was assassinated by two Sikh bodyguards. “The Fourth Direction” doesn’t directly address the political crises surrounding that assassination, including, before  Gandhi’s death, the Indian military’s assault on Sikh separatists who had taken over the Golden Temple of Amritsar (Sikhism’s holiest shrine), or the anti-Sikh riots after her death that led to the slaughter of thousands. Instead, Mr. Singh tells a fictional tale that opens with two Hindu men running and closes with them walking together with several newfound Sikh confederates in a quietly moving assertion of Indian unity. In between, the country’s political and religious agonies largely shudder right below the surface, creating intense, palpable unease. This, Mr. Singh suggests, is what it feels like to live in fear.   “I remember the day that Indira Gandhi was assassinated,” Mr. Singh said in an interview here Saturday afternoon. “I was in school, I was 10 years old, and it was announced at 10 in the morning that Indira Gandhi had been killed and school has to shut down and we all have to be sent back home.” Seated on a terrace overlooking the Mediterranean, Mr. Singh told his story quickly in a soft, insistent voice: “We were packed into our school bus and I’m sitting there, a Sikh boy, you know, and being told that she had been killed by Sikhs. And then a schoolteacher sitting right next to me said, ‘These Sikhs, they should be taught a lesson.’” Mr. Singh laughed a little. “I can’t forget that.”That memory seems to shape “The Fourth Direction,” informing the movie’s deep sense of unease. Shortly after the story opens, the two running Hindus board a train to Amritsar, settling down in a small compartment with several Sikh travelers. The story then shifts, somewhat obliquely, to a flashback of one of the running men wandering a dark country road with his wife and child. Soon after, the story shifts a third time to a Sikh family tragically caught between a group of armed Sikh militants and the military that’s trying to oust the rebels. And then there’s Tommy, the Sikh family’s beloved and regrettably barky dog, a heartrending emblem of innocence.     This is Mr. Singh’s second feature and his first at Cannes, and is the kind of work that helps make this festival excitingly varied. It’s part of this year’s Un Certain Regard, a section of the official selection that’s generally reserved for younger filmmakers or somewhat more formally adventurous work than appears in the main competition. Mr. Singh’s directorial feature debut, “Alms for a Blind Horse,” had its premiere at the 2011 Venice Film Festival, a high-profile starting point for a successful festival tour. (It opened in New York for a short run.)  His new movie was partly paid for by the National Film Development Corporation in India as well as sources like the Hubert Bals Fund of the International Film Festival Rotterdam and the Cinema du Monde in France, which are vital for international work that goes against the grain. Mr. Singh has been pushing against the mainstream for a while, including at film school, a place he found frustrating. “I never read any book on filmmaking, never. All I read was what filmmakers wrote,” he said, rattling off the titles of two cineaste bibles – Robert Bresson’s “Notes on the Cinematographer” and Andrei Tarkovsky’s “Sculpting in Time” – and namedropping the likes of Federico Fellini and Ingmar Bergman. “I would never touch a book about how to make a film or how to write a script,” Mr. Singh added. But while he clearly isn’t interested in being cinematically pigeonholed – during our conversation, he also mentioned Robert Frank, Vincent van Gogh, Luis Buñuel and John Cage – Mr. Singh’s work in “The Fourth Direction” is very much within a distinct art-film idiom. His  mentor was the Indian filmmaker Mani Kaul, whose films are, in the United States, unfortunately, best known in the academic, festival and museum worlds. It was through Mr. Kaul, Mr. Singh said, “that I kind of discovered Bresson.” You can see Bresson’s influence in the restrained performances that Mr. Singh draws from his actors, both the professionals and nonprofessionals, as well as in how bodies move in space. And then there’s Tommy, who has a precursor of a kind in the title character of one of Bresson’s masterpieces, “Au Hasard Balthazar,” his 1966 tale of a blessed donkey who achieves a state of grace after a great deal of suffering. So, is Tommy Mr. Singh’s Balthazar? Mr. Singh laughed. “I never thought of it, actually, but in a way, yes.”