Season 5, Episode 6, “Unbowed, Unbent, Unbroken”Here be spoilers and a whole bunch of creepy faces.Q: What’s worse than being engaged to Ramsay Bolton?A: Being married to Ramsay Bolton.On Sunday yet another miserable couple walked down the aisle in Westeros, as Sansa and Ramsay Bolton tied the knot in Winterfell. This was bad enough, if you happen to be a fan of Sansa and/or human decency. But of course, then it got worse.Sansa’s ghastly wedding night was but one in a string of inevitabilities in the episode, as we also saw Jaime and Bronn and the Sand Snakes finally meet up, with not entirely satisfying results. Elsewhere, Lady Olenna arrived in King’s Landing to rebuke Cersei’s power play, she thought, and Tyrion stumbled upon yet another unwitting escort to Meereen. (And it’s Mr. Eko!)Arya, meanwhile, moved up from washing the corpses to hanging out with Jaqen in the face locker, which George R. R. Martin tells me is called the Hall of Faces.The fantasy epic on HBO.But we’ll start where the episode ended, which sent us all over to “Mad Men,” or other places, on a high note. Or no — the opposite of that.Things were brutal in Winterfell this week, all the more so for unfolding pretty much as we expected them to. There was a brief moment during Myranda’s spite-bath when Sansa’s grit came out along with her natural hair (“this is my home and you can’t frighten me”) and it almost seemed like maybe things wouldn’t be as bad as we thought … but no. They were.This show has a mixed record when it comes to sexual violence, to be sure. Technically, at least, Ramsay’s rape of Sansa was handled with care — the camera panning away to Reek’s convulsions as he witnessed the act — and was more chilling as a result. (Hat tip to Alfie Allen, who gave a gut-wrenching performance.)A fair question: Did we need more evidence that Ramsay is terrible? We did not. But once the producers opted to bring Sansa into his orbit, as part of some broader plan for what’s going down in the North, it seemed inevitable that she would become another one of his victims.The question is, how will it affect her? How will she respond? Does it become a pivotal moment in the ongoing hardening of Sansa into a formidable figure in this story? Does she even acknowledge it? Or is it another case in which sexual brutality is used as a sort of shorthand for “wow, this is a dark and violent world, huh”? We wondered last week about how Sansa’s arrival would affect Reek, who had more or less embraced his debasement by Ramsay and accepted his new lot in the kennel of life.After the show cleaned him up, had him use his actual name, Theon, in the wedding and then forced him to witness Ramsay attack Sansa, it seems pretty clear that he will shed the shackles of Reekhood at some point. Hopefully whatever comes after that will also bring an end to Ramsay, whose two-dimensional sadism makes him the least interesting major character on the show. (Although, it should be noted, his current role as part of House Bolton is more intriguing than when he was just torturing Theon for weeks on end.)Over on the Road to Sunspear, Jaime and Bronn kept their date with Sand Snake destiny, though it didn’t really lead anywhere. The big guy with the ax broke things up before anything could be decided.A few commenters complained about a perceived woodenness in the initial appearance by the Sand Snakes a couple weeks ago. I was mostly fine with the Snakes but felt a bit let down by the fight in the Water Garden. Let’s grade it on a curve: it was a technically complex piece of action, what with the five people wielding bullwhips and swords in tight spaces and all. But the end result felt more rigidly choreographed than fluid and organic.Bronn and the Sand Snakes went one way — into some sort of dungeon, I’m guessing — while Jaime was taken presumably into some sort of white-collar captivity. Perhaps an audience awaits with Prince Doran, who seems like a reasonable fellow. I’m sure they’ll work everything out.The nobles in King’s Landing can’t count on such generous treatment from their fellow elites, however, mostly because they’re no longer in charge, even if they don’t quite realize it. This week the whirlwind of sanctimony and recrimination Cersei unleashed in elevating the High Sparrow sucked none other than Queen Margaery into its vortex. You’d think this would be a delightful turn of events for Cersei, but she seemed shocked by the outcome — I think she’s starting to sense that things are getting out of hand.We discussed the flaws of Cersei’s plan to arm the Faith Militant a couple weeks ago. Those sanctimonious chickens are coming home to roost now, and it will get worse for Cersei & Co. before it gets better. What seems less clear is what, in siccing the Sparrows on Loras, her endgame was supposed to be in the first place. Was she just trying to embarrass the Tyrells? Or fire a warning shot across Margaery’s bow? Or buy enough time to hatch her plan with Littlefinger? None of the above?Perhaps more clarity will come next week. At the very least, I can’t wait to see what Lady Olenna calls her the next time they sit down for a chat.A few thoughts while we thank our guidance counselor• It was fun to see Adewale Akinnuoye-Agbaje (Mr. Eko on “Lost”) show up as Tyrion’s latest escort to Meereen. Fun for us, anyway — Tyrion and Jorah didn’t seem to be enjoying themselves. There were lots of funny lines surrounding the slavers’ plans for the imp, but this being a family publication, I can’t really mention any of them. How many things have to go wrong in your life for you to end up as a merchant of the thing of Tyrion’s that the slavers hope to sell? I’m going with “all of them.”• So Jaqen didn’t believe Arya when she said she hated the Hound, huh? Neither did I. In an interview earlier this season, Maisie Williams said more would come out about why Arya left him for dead last year. Not sure if this was the extent of it, but I appreciate that they called back to that subplot, since it was such a huge part of Arya’s life.• One subtle but consistent signal of the Lannisters’ fading power, post-Tywin, is the way people keep throwing the twin-cest stuff in their faces. “One’s choice of a companion is a curious thing,” Littlefinger told Cersei on Sunday. That said, she had it coming, making him travel 1,000 miles for what, like three minutes of conversation?• By the way, we agree that Littlefinger is blowing smoke at Cersei, right? That his plan to back Stannis, which he laid out to Sansa, is the genuine one and not whatever he was saying to Cersei? But then why reveal Sansa’s whereabouts? You never can tell with that guy.• What do you think? Have you ever seen a better blank-starer than King Tommen I? Were you surprised by the resonant, Bowie-esque quality of Bronn’s singing voice? (Update: Commenters note that Jerome Flynn had a pop career in the 1990s. I had no idea. Ladies and gentlemen, Robson & Jerome!) Are you as distracted by the High Sparrow’s chest hair as I am? Please fire away in the comments.