AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn Shattuck4:15 P.M. (Starz Cinema) LOVE IS STRANGE (2014) Alfred Molina and John Lithgow (above right, with Mr. Molina) portray Ben and George, a couple for 39 years who are forced to live apart after their marriage results in the loss of George’s job at a Roman Catholic school and a mortgage they can no longer afford. So Ben moves into the Brooklyn apartment of his nephew (Darren Burrows), his nephew’s wife (Marisa Tomei) and their son (Charlie Tahan). And George takes a spot on the living room couch of his former neighbors (Cheyenne Jackson and Manny Perez), two New York City police officers. Awkwardness ensues. The film’s director, Ira Sachs, “is an especially careful student of the odd rhythms and quiet intensities of couplehood, both gay and straight,” A. O. Scott wrote in The New York Times. “Mr. Lithgow and Mr. Molina, seasoned and subtle actors, beautifully capture the small pleasures and petty irritations Ben and George live through, and also their pride at having survived, together, for so long.” Mr. Sachs, he added, “casts an occasional discreet glance backward at the post-Stonewall history of gay men in New York, a complicated chronicle of tragedy, resilience, struggle and fun. But that history nonetheless feels implicit in every frame, infusing what might otherwise be a touching anecdote about real estate troubles and houseguest etiquette with gravity and grace.”3 P.M. (World) STANDING ON SACRED GROUND Eight indigenous cultures fight to protect their sacred places, starting with shamans from the Altai Republic of Russia and members of the Winnemem Wintu tribe of California, who find common ground as they rally against government projects that could damage their mountain habitats.8 P.M. (CW) CELESTE AND JESSE FOREVER (2012) Celeste (Rashida Jones) is a hard-driving trend forecaster who lives in the house she once shared with Jesse (Andy Samberg, below with Ms. Jones), a laid-back artist who now flops in the backyard studio. Though they are best friends bound by the same adolescent humor, Jesse’s lack of ambition doesn’t allow the focused Celeste to stay with him. But she can’t quit him, either — until suddenly she must. “While ‘Celeste and Jesse’ is decidedly conventional in most respects, it’s pretty swell as an exploration of a relationship between a man and a woman that’s no longer predicated by mutual desire,” Manohla Dargis wrote in The Times.9 P.M. (E!) KEEPING UP WITH THE KARDASHIANS: ABOUT BRUCE The Kardashian clan discusses Bruce Jenner’s transition to female from male. Part 1 of the episode, which was originally broadcast Sunday, leads in at 8.9 P.M. (ABC) THE BACHELORETTE For the first time, two bachelorettes — Britt Nilsson and Kaitlyn Bristowe — will try to find love among 25 men. But only one woman will make it past the first episode, as they each try to attract suitors.9 P.M. (Fox News) THE KELLY FILE Megyn Kelly interviews Gov. Chris Christie, Republican of New Jersey, about the 2016 election.11:35 P.M. (CBS) LATE SHOW WITH DAVID LETTERMAN Tom Hanks will make his 60th appearance with Mr. Letterman. 1 A.M. (FX Movie Channel) RUBY SPARKS (2012) Zoe Kazan (below) wrote and stars in this variation on the Pygmalion myth as Ruby, a smart, saucy, redheaded young woman from Dayton, Ohio, who magically appears in Los Angeles, seemingly without much control over her emotions. Paul Dano, Ms. Kazan’s real-life partner, is Calvin, a literary whiz kid turned blocked writer who breathes life into this figment of his imagination, and then directs her every move. “The screenplay, by Ms. Kazan, is so polished and witty that it immediately puts her in the same league as Diablo Cody,” Stephen Holden wrote in The Times. “And Ms. Kazan’s lovely, tart performance is the equal of Ellen Page’s portrayal of the title character in ‘Juno.’ Both are impetuous screwball heroines who could have been created only by women.”What’s Streaming NowLUTHER Idris Elba plays John Luther, a brilliant detective tormented by his own dark side — he has let a child-killer fall nearly to his death — never mind those of the psychopaths he tracks down in London. Ruth Wilson is Alice Morgan, a brainy physicist and a key witness in Luther’s first case: the killing of her parents. The first three seasons are available for streaming, with a fourth to be broadcast on BBC America later this year. (iTunes, netflix.com, vudu.com) KATHRYN SHATTUCKAdvertisement