The A+E Networks and iHeartMedia, the radio conglomerate, are aiming to address the fraught subject of race in the United States with an all-star benefit concert and special next month, they announced Thursday. “Shining a Light: A Concert for Progress on Race in America” will feature a roster of stars from across musical genres, including Bruce Springsteen, Sting, Pharrell Williams, Zac Brown Band, John Legend, Miguel, Pink, Ed Sheeran, Sia and others. They’ll perform at the Shrine Auditorium in Los Angeles on Nov. 18, and the showcase, featuring a lineup of solos and duets, will be broadcast as a two-hour show on Nov. 20.The event is a response to the massacre at the Emanuel A.M.E. Church in Charleston, S.C., last summer, where a white gunman killed nine black people; surviving members of the church later said they forgave the killer. The concert will be followed by a one-hour special, with the working title “Shining a Light: Conversations on Race in America,” in which artists, residents and leaders of cities like Charleston, Baltimore and Ferguson, Mo., discuss the causes of racial unrest and solutions for inequality.“The narrative of racial difference has not gone away, it has simply morphed over the years,” Mr. Legend, who won an Oscar for his song for the movie “Selma,” said in a statement. “The various manifestations, each egregious in their own right, from lynchings to mass incarceration, won’t disappear on their own. They require honest conversations, they require uncomfortable discussions, they require us to commit to truth and reconciliation. As an artist, I hope to use my music and my platform to wake people up to these truths so we can begin to heal.”Nancy Dubuc, the president and chief executive of A+E Networks, said, “By shining a light on the uncomfortable truth that racial inequity and bias still impact our society, we are looking to inspire people to go beyond short-lived, symbolic gestures.” The company plans to produce more round-table discussions on the topic, as well as a series of public service announcements.The concert and special will be broadcast across all the A+E channels, including History, Lifetime, H2, LMN and FYI, as well as on IHeartMedia. Proceeds from ticket sales for the concert and related programming will benefit the Fund for Progress on Race in America, in association with United Way Worldwide.