By KATHRYN SHATTUCKMAY 17, 2015
The final strains of AMC’s “Mad Men” have scarcely faded and already panic has set in: after seven seasons of being held rapt by the machinations of Sterling Cooper & Partners, how will you fill the void? Whatever your reason for watching — the allure of the 1960s, the art of the pitch, the prickly gender relations, the boozy bad behavior or simply the panache of a man in a bespoke suit — we’ve got some ideas for feeding your fix.For 1960s erotic intrigue, try Showtime’s “Masters of Sex,” starring Michael Sheen and Lizzy Caplan as Dr. William Masters and his collaborator, Virginia Johnson, who sought to demystify arousal during the dark ages before the sexual revolution. He was a brilliant, obsessed and often imperious surgeon determined to make his name by decoding the physiology of pleasure. She was a former nightclub singer and sexually liberated woman with a desire for a career and a deft touch with people. Together they spent thousands of hours researching the arousal stages of subjects wired to monitors during intercourse, masturbation and other sexual activity. They also had lots of sex with each other. Seasons 1 and 2 are on Showtime Anytime and iTunes. Season 3 begins on July 12.For stoic ’60s housewives sidelined by their husbands, tune in to “The Astronaut Wives Club,” a new ABC drama. Based on the novel by Lily Koppel, the series ventures inside the kitchens and boudoirs of seven women with iconic last names — Carpenter, Cooper, Glenn, Grissom, Schirra, Shepard and Slayton — who kept their families grounded while their men shot for the stars. Premieres June 18.For stories of midcentury women trapped under glass ceilings, “The Hour” harks back to the smoke-filled, whiskey-soaked offices of the British Broadcast Corporation circa 1956, where sex, ambition and espionage run rampant against the backdrop of the Suez Crisis. Romola Garai plays the producer of a television magazine; Anna Chancellor is the former war correspondent in charge of foreign news. Both bask in the respect of their male peers, until they don’t. Abi Morgan, who wrote “The Iron Lady,” about Margaret Thatcher, the only female prime minister of Britain, created this BBC series, no longer in production but available on Acorn, iTunes, Vudu, Amazon and Google Play.And to see one woman who managed to crash through, “The Mary Tyler Moore Show” begins where “Mad Men” ends — in 1970 — when all things felt possible to a single gal in her 30s producing a television show in Minneapolis. On iTunes and Vudu.AdvertisementIf Megan Draper’s cool California vibe was your pleasure, try “Aquarius,” starring David Duchovny as a Los Angeles homicide detective on the trail of a 16-year-old who has joined the entourage of a career criminal with rock-star dreams, Charles Manson. All 13 episodes, with their drug-haze soundtrack, will be available to watch on NBC.com and other on-demand platforms for four weeks after the show’s two-hour premiere on May 28.For pitch-perfect workplace drama, turn to “The West Wing,” Aaron Sorkin’s dazzling dissertation on idealism in the White House. Added bonus: Elisabeth Moss as Zoey Bartlet, the president’s youngest daughter. All seven seasons are on iTunes, Netflix and Vudu.AdvertisementFor more of Ms. Moss, stream “Top of the Lake,” a mystery mini-series, created by Jane Campion and Gerard Lee, about a detective specializing in child abuse cases who oversees the investigation of a pregnant 12-year-old in rural New Zealand. Holly Hunter plays the spiritual leader of a commune where the girl was last seen. On iTunes, Netflix and Vudu.And if it’s a notable ensemble, knotty story lines and historical references you seek, substitute Wild Bill Hickok, Calamity Jane and Wyatt Earp for Richard Nixon, Robert F. Kennedy and Martin Luther King Jr. and tune in to HBO’s “Deadwood. Set in a lawless mining town in 1870s Dakota Territory, it’s got it all: sex, violence and capitalistic urges. The complete series is on HBO Go, iTunes and Vudu.And if you can’t let go of Don Draper’s simmering existential panic, there’s “The Twilight Zone.” In episode 5 of the first season an advertising executive sets out on a quest for his own sanity. (“One more board meeting, phone call, report, problem, I would have jumped right out the window.”) He stops at a gas station not far from the hometown he hasn’t visited in 25 years and walks into the past. All 156 original “Twilight Zone” episodes are on Hulu and iTunes.But for times when nothing but the real deal will suffice, all seven seasons of “Mad Men” are available for streaming on iTunes; some episodes are also available on Netflix and AMCtv.com.A version of this article appears in print on May 18, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: Life After Don Draper.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.