By MICHAEL COOPERMAY 17, 2015
HAVANA — It was after midnight here Sunday morning at the Habana Café, and the Orquesta Aragón, a charanga group that was founded in 1939 and which helped popularize the cha-cha, was taking a break when the club’s master of ceremonies announced in English and Spanish that a few of their members would return with some special guests.Some Minnesota Orchestra musicians, who were drinking mojitos at the club after finishing the last concert of their groundbreaking tour of Cuba, joined them onstage and began playing “Dos Gardenias,” the bolero that Ibrahim Ferrer sang with the Buena Vista Social Club.“There’s a very iconic trumpet solo at the beginning,” Charles Lazarus, a trumpeter in the orchestra, told the crowd, before explaining that one of his sidemen would play it on the clarinet. “So I thought it would be a great idea to have Osmo play the trumpet solo.”Osmo was Osmo Vanska, the Minnesota Orchestra’s music director, who has helped make the ensemble famous for Nordic repertoire and Sibelius, which can conjure images of bleak, icy landscapes. But early Sunday morning he was playing clarinet in a decidedly more tropical vein as members of his orchestra and the Orquesta Aragón — think of them as El Conjunto de Minneapolis, perhaps — played a mixture of jazz and Cuban music. For this set some of the conducting duties fell to Orlando Pérez, Orquesta Aragón’s pianist, who would hold up a finger to signal when the players should let a vamp continue, or when they should wrap things up.AdvertisementIt was the kind of back and forth that members of the orchestra were particularly keen to experience on their tour here, which ended Sunday when they flew back to Minneapolis.AdvertisementSome parts of the exchange were political. The Minnesota Orchestra’s tour was inspired by the improving relations between the United States and Cuba, and the ensemble moved fast to become the first major American symphony orchestra to play here in more than 15 years.It was also a cultural exchange within the orchestra, which only resumed playing together last year after a bitter 16-month lockout. On this trip musicians, board members, and members of the administration — groups that were bitterly divided — ate together, drank together ,danced together and listened to music together.After the orchestra took to the stage for its Saturday night concert at the Teatro Nacional, Mr. Vanska strode out to the podium turned and faced the audience and, with a gesture, urged the somewhat confused concertgoers to stand. Then he turned to the orchestra and urged them to stand. Then, to audible gasps, the Minnesota Orchestra played the Cuban national anthem, which the audience sang along to lustily. When it was over they cheered loudly.The orchestra kept standing and Mr. Vanska signaled the percussion section. A drumroll began. Then the orchestra began playing “The Star-Spangled Banner,” drawing more surprise in the theater, which sits on the Plaza de la Revolución, which for many years was the scene of some of Fidel Castro’s most fiery anti-American speeches. Fewer Cubans seemed to know the lyrics, which were mostly sung by the Americans in the orchestra’s entourage. But when it was over the Cuban members of the audience cheered as well.But most of the exchanges on this trip were musical, not political. In addition to performing, the Minnesota Orchestra musicians listened — hearing traditional Cuban songs played by Septeto Habanero at an outdoor dinner in the square in front of the cathedral in Old Havana, being serenaded at the Hotel Nacional by Coro Entrevoces, a Cuban choir that will perform with the orchestra in Minnesota in July, and working with students in several settings.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Several players said that one of the most memorable parts of the trip was a side-by-side rehearsal they had on Friday at the Teatro Nacional with teenage musicians in the Amadeo Roldán Youth Orchestra. The Minnesotans were hugely impressed with their musicianship, and the sounds they are able to produce on poor instruments, since spare parts can be hard to find here.At the rehearsal the students — in uniforms of brown pants and skirts and short-sleeved white shirts — sat beside their counterparts in the Minnesota Orchestra. In the first half Mr. Vanska led them in Tchaikovsky’s overture-fantasy “Romeo and Juliet” and Borodin’s “Polovtsian Dances.” Despite the language barrier, the professionals gave the students tips by example.After the break, Guido López-Gavilán, the conductor of the Youth Orchestra, took to the podium to lead the two orchestras in one of his own compositions, “Guaguancó,” a symphonic rumba. This time it was the students who taught the Minnesotans a thing or two.AdvertisementAt first the rhythmic foundation of the piece — the five-beat repeated pattern called the clave, the basic building block of Cuban music — confounded some of the American players. They had all played clave rhythms before, explained Sam Bergman, a viola player in the orchestra, but the Cubans played it a little differently — delaying the third beat a bit.Mr. Bergman said that at first the Minnesotans were off. “The kids were looking at us like, what’s the problem here?” he recalled. But the Minnesotans were able to follow the youth players and soon got it.Wendy Williams, a flute player in the orchestra, said that she loved the piece so much that she hoped the orchestra would play it at some point when it returns to Minneapolis. “I just want to share it with our audiences back home,” she said.Because of an editing error, a picture caption on Monday with the continuation of an article about the Minnesota Orchestra’s visit to Cuba misstated where the orchestra’s music director, Osmo Vanska, appears in the picture playing the clarinet. He is on the right, not the left.A version of this article appears in print on May 18, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: Fire and Ice: Minnesota Meets Charanga .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.