By ALASTAIR MACAULAYMAY 17, 2015
LONDON —  Energy, movement and impetus within stillness; line, harmony and proportion: These things, so vital in the art of dance, also pervade “Defining Beauty: The Body in Ancient Greek Art,” now at the British Museum. What this exhibition shows is that the body in movement, both realistic and transcendent, was at the center of Greek art and thought.The British Museum has always been a place for dance people; Isadora Duncan famously derived inspiration from its Elgin marbles (taken, controversially, in the 19th century from the Parthenon in Athens). When the Merce Cunningham company first visited London in 1964, Cunningham took his dancers to the museum every day. This exhibition features some of the Elgin marbles and other items from its collection and from around the world.The classically ideal body, as established in sculpture in Greece in the fifth century B.C., has been the most constantly copied style in all the arts. Multiple facets of that complex perfection are indeed present here — and all followers of ballet, which has continually drawn from the ideal, may feel that here they are drinking from the source. Many of the works here are replicas; so many of the Greek originals were lost long ago. The first room contains a 1920s German bronze reconstruction (by Georg Römer) of Polykleitos’s Doryphoros (Spear-bearer) and a second-century A.D. Roman copy of Myron’s great Diskobolos (Discus-thrower).Even in relatively static positions, the implication of movement is the transfiguring achievement of these classical figures. The Polykleitos Doryphoros simply stands with spear in hand. Yet the distribution of weight on one supporting leg, the counterbalance of weight throughout the torso, and the way the head is slightly inclined toward one shoulder are what make it, paradoxically, both realistic and sublime at the same time.AdvertisementThe Myron Diskobolos remains a breathtaking feat: It catches an athlete bent over in preparation to hurl, and yet, at this very instant of effort, it presents an image of geometric perfection. From one angle, you see the balance of different lines in the torso, arms and legs; other angles reveal the twist of the torso that emphasizes how the chest grows out of a slender waist and the marvelous arc of the free lower arm. It’s easy not to notice how all the athlete’s weight is on one foot. Motion is implicit throughout the body; the beautiful face is cool, blank, objective.Though chronology is only intermittently an issue, there’s a nice row that demonstrates the evolutionary process whereby the classic Greek kouros image (the unclothed free-standing youth) evolved from an Egyptian prototype. It’s like watching a chrysalis become a butterfly: The prototypes are impressive, but the kouros is timeless; he might be about to breathe, move, speak. This is one of many works here that you can imagine the sculptor, like Pygmalion, falling in love with.AdvertisementYet the overall project here is something far messier, more complicated and more stimulating than showing the ideal alone. The exhibition shows the body naked and draped, male and female, in white marble and with colored paint; it includes vases and terra-cotta as well as marble sculpture. Some items are colossal; others could fit in a pocket. You see heroes, athletes, warriors, hermaphrodites and male beauty feminized and/or languid; but here, too, are satyrs and Socrates (both traditionally depicted as unlovely). You see not only the goddess of beauty, Aphrodite, but also other deities — Athena (wisdom and heroic endeavor), Iris (the rainbow messenger), Nereids — as well as mortal women, some of them bathing or at play.Without making an issue of what influenced what, this exhibition places ancient Greek art in the contexts of Assyrian, Egyptian and Cycladic antecedents and of Indian and Roman sequels. It also shows depictions of people other than Greeks. (Two Greek images of Africans are especially arresting.)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.It’s the athletic warrior who so often became godlike in Greek culture. The exhibition has plenty of images of the virile Herakles (Hercules in Latin), the hero of epic labors, eventually made a god. Several of these are sixth century B.C., suggesting that he was the chief precursor of the various godlike men whom the fifth century rendered more classically harmonious.Not, however, less dynamic. And two of the most fabulously energized figures here are female, from the fifth century B.C., together at the center of one room, both loosely draped but striding headless and armless deities, caught in marble: Iris from the Elgin marbles and a Nereid from a Greek building in Turkey. The flow of fabric that both reveals the body beneath and implies physical impetus through space, the wide-parted thighs, the bend of both knees, and the calm openness of the torsos: These are all thrilling.You’re given both the naked and the nude here: the unclothed body in some cases guarded and defensive, in others gloriously free of shame. Many of these sculptures carry an erotic charge — a reclining and open-legged Dionysus from the Parthenon, in the final room, is striking in this way — while being so satisfying and expressive in other ways that it’s impossible to balance our reactions.But around these and other astounding achievements are small-scale depictions of children, domestic behavior and sex. Here (a tiny cartoonlike eighth-century B.C. sculpture) is the hero Ajax at the point of stabbing himself (he has an erection); here (painted at the bottom of a pot) is a master having sex with a female slave. Here (in stone) is an athlete daringly upended on a crocodile; and here (in terra-cotta) are two young women playing a game of knucklebones — their crouching positions and suspended arm positions wonderfully capturing a fleeting moment forever.“Defining Beauty: The Body in Ancient Greek Art” continues through July 5 at the British Museum in London, britishmuseum.org. A version of this article appears in print on May 18, 2015, on Page C4 of the New York edition with the headline: The Body Beautiful: The Classical Ideal in Ancient Greek Art.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.