By MICHAEL WHITEMAY 17, 2015
BRIGHTON, England —  As the saying goes, boys will be boys — except in opera, where they sometimes turn out to be girls in trousers. Opera has a long tradition of cross-dressing. Certain singers — usually mezzo-sopranos with good low notes — have made it a specialty, in so-called trouser roles. One of the most eminent these days is Alice Coote, the British mezzo who has spent half her onstage life playing assorted men and who brought a curious, dramatized recital to the Brighton Festival on Thursday that amounted to a sort of apologia, self-exposing and confessional, for what she does.Accompanied by the English Concert under Harry Bicket, the recital took place in Brighton Dome — a chic Art Deco concert space converted from what used to be the stables of the Royal Pavilion next door — and was effectively a seamless flow of arias that explored how loose a concept gender can become in lyric theater.Ms. Coote could have called on a great sweep of gender-bending repertoire from Monteverdi (in which young men are sung by women) through Mozart (whose hermaphroditic Cherubino is a classic case) and Richard Strauss (where the business of cross-dressing enters post-Freudian, psychosexual territory).But sharing the stage with a Baroque band, Ms. Coote confined herself to Handel, who provides more than enough gender-bending examples of his own. In Handel it’s a different game from that of Strauss — arising from what seems to be the strange preference of 18th-century audiences for heroes with high-pitched voices. Their warriors, kings and men of consequence were almost always sung by a castrato or a woman. When the supply of castrati dried up, women took over. They continued to command these roles until quite recently, when modern countertenors moved in and began reclaiming them.AdvertisementClearly the 18th-century audience was (for the most part) comfortable with cross-dressing on the stage, accepting it as we today accept the pantomime convention of the “principal boy” (always played by a girl dressed as a young man). But it may not have been so easy for the singers who did it regularly. From the testimony of singers like Ms. Coote who do it now, it’s still not easy. Hence this concert program, which was titled “Being Both” and was indebted to a book on transgender issues called “How to Be Both” by the novelist Ali Smith — who happens also to be the guest director of this year’s Brighton Festival, running through Sunday.AdvertisementPointedly, the program began with Ms. Coote in heroic mode, posing in armor on a plinth for one of Handel’s more macho castrato arias, “Sta nell’ircana” from “Alcina”: an assertive, upfront statement of how credible and comfortable a woman can be in this sort of role.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But then came a cleverly chosen number from the oratorio “Hercules” whose words — “Resign thy club and lion’s spoils, and fly from war to female toils” — suggest the abandonment of masculinity, at least when taken out of context (they’re actually the reproach of an abandoned wife to her philandering husband). From then on, as Ms. Coote switched between male and female characters, what we heard related to the uncertainty of gender, or the ability to rise above it: sometimes with anguish, sometimes simple curiosity, but settling into acceptance with “Myself I shall adore” from “Semele,” and emerging triumphantly from darkness to light with “Dopo notte” from “Ariodante.”In many ways the singing was more persuasive than the staging, which took its tone from the more fatuous kind of raw and radical director’s theater that rules opera these days (the director here being a former singer, Susannah Waters). At one point Ms. Coote was soaking in a bathtub as she sang “He was despised” from “Messiah.” What that was about is anybody’s guess.But broadly, the idea of someone struggling with a crisis of identity came over loud and clear — conveyed by the intense power of Ms. Coote’s compelling artistry. Few singers of her voice type have such presence or personality onstage. Her voice is handsome, with a weight that doesn’t compromise its definition and refinement. In Brighton, whether it was with the tenderness of “Scherza infida” from “Ariodante” or the convulsive excitement of “Dopo notte” — a showstopping performance — she held the audience spellbound.Writing recently in The Guardian about her life as a cross-dresser onstage, Ms. Coote admitted that she has sometimes — with considerable embarrassment — stepped out of a rehearsal room straight into the men’s restroom. It’s unlikely that this concert will have left her less confused. But it just may have exorcised some demons.A version of this article appears in print on May 18, 2015, on Page C6 of the New York edition with the headline: Putting on Her Armor, and Showing Comfort, in a Cross-Dressing Role.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.