AdvertisementSupported byBy Corinna da Fonseca-WollheimChurch of the IntercessionMost of the time the new-music ensemble Counter)induction looks resolutely to the future. But on Saturday evening it turned its gaze inward and back with a program titled “Epitaphs: Music in Memoriam.” Inside the solemnly graceful crypt of the Church of the Intercession in Washington Heights the ensemble’s performances of works by Douglas Boyce, Kyle Bartlett, Eric Moe and Lewis Nielson became a meditation in which thoughts of death intertwined with the promise of consolation. For Mr. Boyce’s beautiful “La Déploration,” written in memory of his teacher Robert Suderburg, the violinist Miranda Cuckson, the cellist Karen Ouzounian and clarinetist Benjamin Fingland spread out throughout the crypt. Against vaporous harmonics and ghostly fragments of Renaissance music played by the strings, Mr. Fingland’s warm, clear clarinet announced itself as very much alive as it sashayed in and out of blues territory and laughed in the face of their mournful keening. Mr. Moe’s lyrical “What Instruments We Have Agree” pays tribute to the composer Lee Hyla, who died last year. There is a late Romantic lusciousness to this piece, scored for violin, viola (Jessica Meyer), bass clarinet and piano (Ning Yu), which is gradually threatened by dark, angry and obsessive utterances. Ms. Bartlett’s “The Weight of a Reflection” for violin, viola, cello, clarinet and piano begins with a musical evocation of absence with sounds resembling wind and branches tapping on a windowpane. An extended cello solo puts up a fight to fill the void but eventually succumbs to the silence. With his “Zwischen Landwehrkanal und Friedrichsfelde,” Mr. Nielson eulogizes the Communist leader Rosa Luxemburg, who was assassinated in 1919, as well as the two corpses that were identified as hers by rival autopsies. Creepily atmospheric with hushed agitation punctuated by gunshot-like accents it’s an effective piece, though it lacks the personal emotional investment of the three others. Advertisement