AdvertisementSupported by8 PhotosView Slide Show ›Andrew Renneisen for The New York TimesBy Jon ParelesSeismic drumbeats, blast-furnace rumbles, gale-force whooshes, chasm-deep reverberations, atonal electronic tones and swarms of chopped-up voices were a major part of Friday night’s Red Bull Music Academy Festival show, a fifth birthday celebration for the Tri Angle Records label. So were all-encompassing drones, hip-hop tracks that had been sped up or melted down, thoroughly warped glimmers of pop and the sounds of barking dogs and breaking glass. They’re all part of the label’s amorphous but somehow coherent sensibility, which finds that deterioration and entropy can make pop elements seem more precious or reveal a murky beauty of their own.The showcase gathered 10 acts, nearly all of them laptop-equipped lone D. J.s, in an apt environment: subterranean and desolate yet high tech. It was the rough concrete basement of 23 Wall Street, the former headquarters of J. P. Morgan. Smoke billowed and strobes flashed around the larger of two stages, and strings of LEDs sent streaks across a low ceiling in a smaller room; both had surround-sound systems. Lucien Smith’s nine-minute video with scenes of 1980s New York City, “A Clean Sweep,” was showing in the vault.There was some dance music and some decidedly un-dance music, more throb than beat. The Haxan Cloak played the night’s most abstractly absorbing set, moving between beat-driven washes of noise to noise that was unmoored to rhythm but felt like an impending cataclysm. Voices floated through Holy Other’s set, offering what might have been hooks in some prior existence, but were now enveloped in tracks that were unsteady and viscous, pulling against forward motion; words of affirmation became isolated plaints or prayers. Forest Swords played trudging, Minimalistic dirges, adding a reggae undertow with guitar and bass. Vessel, who had the night’s closing set at 3 a.m., used his electronics to deliver pounding, bristling, instrumental drone-rock, updating the Velvet Underground with the latter-day firepower of computers and industrial rock. Behind him, flickering split-screen images hinting at fear and submission compounded the menacing power of the music.Others on the Tri Angle roster embrace dance music and hip-hop as long as they can stretch parameters. Evian Christ (one of the producers on the Kanye West song “I’m in It”) played a brilliant whirlwind set. He often used blustery rap snippets for vocals, but hip-hop (particularly the skittery snare drums of trap) was only one source. His music drew on, among many other things, the fanfaring keyboard chords of trance, the blips of electro and a classical choir, none of them in predictable doses. MssingNo put big, swaggering beats under a dense assemblage of looped instruments, chattering electronics, barely unintelligible voices and distorted sounds and kept them all in motion; Hanz offered a slower, gloomier variant of that approach, with new loops gradually, impassively submerging earlier ones. Lotic — flanked by dancing fans onstage — was sparser and crisply kinetic, using programmed variants on carnival and hip-hop beats under a quick-changing assortment of vocal and instrumental samples.A scattershot set by Rabit riffled among Tri Angle’s impulses: sustained amorphous noise, crashing cacophony, off-center pop remixes and, every so often, teasing bits of dance music. And who was that masked D. J.? The woman in the sequined mask, jumping up and down behind her gizmos, was Björk, the night’s unannounced guest. (She has Tri Angle connections: The Haxan Cloak was a co-producer on Björk’s current album, “Vulnicura.”) Her set was a euphoric culture crunch: unveiling fervent voices, like the Pakistani singer Abida Parveen or the queen of Portuguese fado, Amália Rodrigues, then piling on beats, electronics and noise. It was all over the place in the best way.Advertisement