

      By DANIEL MCDERMON

MAY 19, 2015

The Brooklyn Museum announced on Tuesday that Anne Pasternak would become its new director. 

Ms. Pasternak, the president and artistic director of the public arts group Creative Time, has led a number of notable artistic productions in New York City and beyond. Among the highlights are the "Tribute in Light" to commemorate the Sept. 11 attacks, first seen in 2002, and the current exhibition, "Drifting in Daylight," on view in Central Park through June 20.

Here are some highlights.
Related Article
The Brooklyn Museum announced on Tuesday that Anne Pasternak would become its new director. Ms. Pasternak, the president and artistic director of the public arts group Creative Time, has led a number of notable artistic productions in New York City and beyond. Among the highlights are the "Tribute in Light" to commemorate the Sept. 11 attacks, first seen in 2002, and the current exhibition, "Drifting in Daylight," on view in Central Park through June 20.Here are some highlights.More than 100,000 visitors came to the former Domino Sugar compound to see this installation by Ms. Walker, which incorporated polystyrene foam, plastic and about 30 tons of sugar. Writing in The Times, Roberta Smith called it "beautiful, brazen and disturbing, and above all a densely layered statement that both indicts and pays tribute."The artist collaborated with performers from the Ailey School for this work, bringing 30 dancing horses to Vanderbilt Hall in Grand Central Terminal.Mr. Sachs filled the Park Avenue Armory with his sculpted versions of equipment for an imagined trip to Mars. In a review for The Times, Ken Johnson wrote that the installation "might be taken as Warholian social satire, a spoof of the modern corporate culture and its gung-ho work ethic, so at odds with artistic romanticism."For this installation at Art Basel Miami Beach, the artist created a cityscape of blocks, where visitors could socialize among colored lights or in shadow.Creative Time's first art commission on the High Line, Mr. Finch's installation was based on a journey along the Hudson River. Each of the 700 window panes in the piece bears a color from a photograph of the river's surface taken during the journey.  With wires and cables connecting an old pump organ to girders, columns and other parts of the Battery Maritime Building, Mr. Byrne's installation turned a work of architecture into a musical instrument. (See it in action in this video.) After a visit to New Orleans in 2006, a year after Hurricane Katrina, the artist conceived outdoor performances of Samuel Beckett's play. In a statement, Mr. Chan said the play "expresses in stark eloquence the cruel and funny things people do while they wait for help, for food, for tomorrow."
Holland Cotter wrote in The Times:
Using salvaged and recovered materials, Mr. Nelson built out a labyrinthine series of rooms within a disused portion of the Essex Street Market. Roberta Smith wrote in The Times that the result was "a broken narrative, a downward spiral of lost souls and faceless transients that also destroys all sense of real direction."Mr. Stingel covered the floor of the Vanderbilt Hall at Grand Central Terminal with a custom carpet. Writing in The Times, Roberta Smith said the installation "goes through the motions of his ideas without achieving the usual Stingelian degree of transformation and displacement."These twin beams, powered by 88 searchlights, were first seen on March 11, 2002, and have become an annual part of the commemoration of the Sept. 11 attacks. The project was conceived by multiple artists and designers, and first produced in a collaboration between Creative Time and the Municipal Arts Society. The beams are now produced by the National September 11 Memorial and Museum.Creative Time produced a series  of art installations inside the Brooklyn Bridge anchorage in Dumbo from 1984 until 2001. Access was withdrawn over security concerns after Sept. 11. Advertisement