By CORINNA da FONSECA-WOLLHEIMMAY 19, 2015
TriBeCa may have become one of New York’s most desirable neighborhoods to live and shop in, but one thing that’s in short supply there is music. Outside of upscale children’s birthday parties and the annual Tribeca Film Festival carnival, live performances are rare.But on Monday evening, the handsome Granite Room, underneath City Hall Restaurant on Duane Street, played host to a concert that is part of a new chamber-music series, Music and More, which seeks to fill the neighborhood’s classical void.The pianist Tatjana Rankovich, who runs the series in the style of a salon with food, drinks and conversation, organized Monday’s concert — the third — around the theme “Husbands and Wives.” Taking inspiration from the pianist-composer marriage of Clara and Robert Schumann, Ms. Rankovich, who is married to the composer Ionel Petroi, invited three other female pianists with composer-husbands to join her in exploring the intertwining of artistic and personal relationships. The result was a warm and lighthearted evening of stylistically diverse and technically assured music-making.There was diversity, too, in the way musical relationships mapped onto the personal within each of the four couples. In the case of Ms. Rankovich and Mr. Petroi, the music came before marriage: It was through the score of his “Music of Marrying and Burying,” a collection of ragtime-inflected pieces evoking the often frenzied rituals of the Balkans, that she first got to know him. Lisa Moore and Martin Bresnick were already dating when he wrote “The Dream of the Lost Traveller” for her in 1997, a piece which he said was especially tailored to her strengths. Kathleen Supové and Randall Woolf, meanwhile, were the only couple to share in a joint performance, he activating the recorded soundtrack from a laptop alongside her live piano in his “New York Because I Said So.”AdvertisementIn her introduction, Ms. Rankovich said that as a young pianist she had idealized Clara Schumann, thinking how great it would be to marry a composer and have “my own Schumann.” Allison Brewster Franzetti called Carlos Franzetti her soul mate. But Ms. Moore, in an endearingly prickly introduction that caused giggles in the audience, said marrying a composer had never been a dream of hers and suggested that the four couples convene for group therapy after the performance to explore the gendered role distribution they all seemed to have subscribed to.Still, Ms. Moore offered a beautiful performance of Mr. Bresnick’s piece, with the meditative lucidity that is the hallmark of her playing. Perhaps coincidentally, the work illuminates seemly irreconcilable opposites, with alternating major and minor versions of the same chord. Repetitive fragments build up tension until the music abruptly gives way to conciliation. It’s the major mode that wins in the end, but quietly, without triumph.AdvertisementThere was a wistful tenderness to Ms. Brewster Franzetti’s rendition of Mr. Franzetti’s “Alma” and crisp articulation in her reading of his “Capriccio,” both colorful but only superficially engaging works.By contrast, the five selections from “Music of Marrying and Burying” that Ms. Rankovich played were bursting with invention and a madcap vitality that often seemed to race headlong into hysteria. She imbued each with a sharply drawn personality and powerful sound.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“New York Because I Said So” uses a recording of a performance by the activist-poet Tongo Eisen-Martin. The piano initially offers bluesy accompaniment before muscling in with crashing chords and rumbling arpeggios that reduce the spoken word to pure texture. Ms. Supové gave a high-energy performance that matched the text’s seething impatience and glints of outrage.Performers, composers and audience members mingled over a buffet dinner — included in the price of admission — after the performance. Asked about the challenge of performing music written by a composer who is also her husband, Ms. Rankovich smiled. “It can be like this,” she said, pushing two fists against each other.Ms. Supové said the feedback she gets from Mr. Woolf can seem unvarnished compared to that offered by other composers she works with. “He can be quite tough on me,” she said cheerfully. But helpful, too, she conceded, especially in comparison to a dead composer like Debussy, whose music she performed recently. Debussy, she said, “can be awfully quiet.”An earlier version of this review, using information from the series organizer, referred incorrectly to the relationship between Martin Bresnick and Lisa Moore when Mr. Bresnick wrote “The Dream of the Lost Traveller” for her. While they were a couple, they were not yet married.The Music and More series returns on June 15 with music by Brahms and Piazzolla; City Hall Restaurant, 131 Duane Street, TriBeCa;musicandmorenyc.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.