The Minnesota Orchestra, which just finished a tour of Cuba, announced on Tuesday that it had taken more steps to put its recent labor battles behind it, reaching a new contract agreement with its musicians that will give them raises and adds positions, and also extending the contract of the orchestra’s music director, Osmo Vanska, through the 2019-20 season.In stark contrast to the orchestra’s last labor deal, which was reached only after bitter negotiations and a 16-month lockout that hobbled the organization and cost it an entire season, the new agreement was reached early — 21 months before the current contract expires. And it will ease some of the concessions that the players reluctantly accepted last year when they agreed to a 15 percent cut in their base salary in order to end the grueling lockout.The new contract will raise the players’ minimum weekly salary by more than 8 percent, from $1,967 in the 2016-17 season to $2,127 in 2019-20. (That will still be $50 a week less than before the lockout, orchestra officials said.) And the deal calls for adding four more players to the orchestra, which had been allowed to dwindle through attrition, giving it 88 players by the end of the deal. A $1.5 million gift from a donor, Betty Jayne Dahlberg, will help pay for the agreement.Tim Zavadil, a clarinetist and the chairman of the musicians’ negotiating committee, called the deal “a real vote of confidence in the future direction of this orchestra.”And the players will get to extend their relationship with Mr. Vanska, who supported them during the lockout. His contract had been set to expire at the end of the 2015-16 season, and was extended for four more years.“Last week, we shared great music with the people of Cuba and it was a very unifying and humbling experience for us,” Mr. Vanska said in a statement. “I feel now more than ever, Minnesota is my musical home.”Two supporters of the orchestra, Douglas W. Leatherdale, who is on its board, and his wife, Louise, agreed to donate $5 million to the organization over the next five years to create the Douglas and Louise Leatherdale Music Director Chair in honor of Mr. Vanska, the orchestra said. The money will also support international touring and recording, it said.The announcement came as the orchestra’s new president, Kevin Smith, has been working to heal the wounds caused by the lockout, and strike a more cooperative tone than the one adopted by his predecessor, Michael Henson.The orchestra is still working to recover financially from the lockout — attendance this season is below what it was before the lockout. But Mr. Smith said he was grateful that donors had come forward to make the two new agreements possible.“Osmo Vanska and Minnesota Orchestra musicians enjoy a remarkable partnership, and these agreements, negotiated simultaneously, will allow that partnership to flourish over the next four seasons,” he said in a statement.A version of this article appears in print on 05/21/2015, on page C4 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Minnesota Orchestra In New Labor Pact.