The Whitney Museum of American Art, which just moved into a new home, will soon have a new chief curator, the museum’s director, Adam D. Weinberg, announced Tuesday.Scott Rothkopf, who organized the Whitney’s sprawling Jeff Koons retrospective, the final show in its Breuer building before its move downtown to the meatpacking district this spring, will succeed Donna De Salvo as the head of the curatorial department. Ms. De Salvo, who has served for almost a decade as the museum’s first chief curator, will move into a newly created position as a deputy director, charged with finding new international partnerships and programs for the Whitney, which is seeking to build audiences for its programs in South America and Asia, as well as in Europe.“Now that the institution has grown, we need more firepower at the top,” Mr. Weinberg said, adding: “I wouldn’t say so much that it’s a generational change but it is about bringing that next generation into the curatorial and programmatic leadership.” Since coming to the Whitney in 2009 from a senior editing position at Artforum International, Mr. Rothkopf, 38, has organized exhibitions of the work of Wade Guyton, Glenn Ligon and Mary Heilmann. The Koons retrospective was one of the museum’s most popular, drawing about 320,000 visitors. Ms. De Salvo, 60, previously served as a senior curator at the Tate Modern in London and before that as a curator at the Dia Art Foundation. She led the curatorial team for “America Is Hard to See,” the Whitney’s critically lauded collection exhibition, which is on view through Sept. 27 and inaugurates its new building, designed by Renzo Piano. Ms. De Salvo is now at work organizing a thematic retrospective of the work of Andy Warhol, to open in 2018.Mr. Weinberg said that Ms. De Salvo’s new role as international ambassador “is not about – and I can’t emphasize this enough – a mission change of the institution” away from American art. “The idea is there’s more demand for American art internationally,” he said, “and so the thinking was, ‘How do we get someone to do this thoughtfully?’ ”He called the museum’s new leadership structure a “triumvirate situation” and said he believed it would work well as the museum grows into its new home and role as  a more prominent institution. “It’s a different day, it’s a different setting, it’s a different way of thinking.”A version of this article appears in print on 05/20/2015, on page C3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Whitney Museum Names New Chief Curator.