An evening of short plays about censorship that lost its original venue because of concerns about a play by Neil LaBute making an off-color reference to a character named Mohammed has found a new performance space, but Mr. LaBute’s play will not be on the bill.The Planet Connections Theater Festivity, a monthlong arts festival, announced Tuesday that its opening-night event on June 14 has been moved to New York Theater Workshop, minus Mr. LaBute’s play. Last week the Sheen Center for Thought and Culture, a performance space in Greenwich Village financed by the archdiocese of New York, which was set to host the event, canceled its contract with Planet Connections, saying that it had not been made aware of the substance of Mr. LaBute’s play or its title, which refers to “Mohammed” as having an erection. The play, the Center contended, gave “clear offense to Muslims” and contradicted the Center’s mission “to highlight the good, the true and the beautiful.”Mr. LaBute, in a statement, said that he had voluntarily pulled his one-act play from the event, which will benefit the National Coalition Against Censorship, in order to avoid taking attention away from the other playwrights on the bill.“Unfortunately the event was starting to become all about my play and its title and not about the fine work that Erik Ehn, Halley Feiffer and Israel Horovitz were also presenting that evening, along with the accompanying speeches and the cause of the evening itself,” Mr. LaBute said.“I am honestly not interested in stirring hatred or merely being offensive,” he added. “I wanted my play to provoke real thought and debate and I now feel like that opportunity has been lost.”In a description of it that has since been removed, the Planet Connections website said it is about an actor asked to perform in an offensive satire in which “the prophet ‘Mohammed’” reminisced about “the first time he made love to a white woman.” In an email last week, Mr. LaBute declined to give many specifics but noted that the play did not depict “the actual prophet” of Islam, whose name is more commonly rendered “Muhammad.”  Asked to sum up the play, Glory Kadigan, the founder of Planet Connections, described it as “a discussion of whether or not it’s all right to poke fun at religion or religious figures.”A version of this article appears in print on 05/20/2015, on page C3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: LaBute Pulls Play From Censorship Event.