Water as a motif flows through much of “The Whale,” Samuel D. Hunter’s 2012 play about Charlie, a morbidly obese man, and his troubled relationship with his daughter, Ellie. The title itself refers to a creature that lives in water. Charlie, who teaches writing over the Internet, refers to “Moby Dick” throughout the play. A sense of drowning — emotionally and spiritually — builds inside his cluttered home.In artwork for a new production of the show at Actor’s Express in Atlanta, the designer Ashley Howard Goltz turned to watercolor for a dreamlike image that depicts Ellie’s face afloat inside a delicately amorphous representation of her father’s oversized body. The result is an elegantly opaque abstraction, in melancholy layers of purple and gray, that echoes the questions of loss and longing that Mr. Hunter asks in his play.Ms. Howard Goltz, a freelance designer based in San Francisco, recently spoke about the elements that inspired her work. Following are excerpts from the conversation.  Why did you decide to depict a face inside the character’s belly? I was touched by the relationship that he had with his daughter, and his hopes. For me their relationship was a huge burden for him. I wanted to create not an image about his size but about the burden of carrying her with him. It’s clear what the image is, yet it has a very abstract quality that makes you look twice.  A lot of other people went with him on a couch, or more toward the whale as an animal. I didn’t want that. The parts of the play I liked the most is when I felt for him the most. I wanted his feeling of loss. He didn’t want to get to that size.  I didn’t want him to be judged by that. I wanted it to have that human aspect, but yet he also wasn’t the most beautiful human form left anymore. Initially you could see through him to see her. But then we darkened it up so that it looked like she was inside of him, like he kept her inside of him.  There’s also a real sense of movement in the image, a sweeping sense. The swirling portion picks up the idea of the water, the movement of the waves and how he hears them in his head. For me she was standing at the end of an ocean. What would that look like? Your hair gets swept across your face.  That’s when a watercolor style appeals.  The work was done in watercolor? In Photoshop I have a huge collection of watercolor brushes. I used that as a basis to play around with layering. I had drawn it out first and done it in watercolor. When I scanned it in I didn’t like the way that it rendered. Parts of it looked muddy.  Why purple? I don’t know why.  Purple is one of those deep and serious and yet emotional color choices.  It ended up being lighter so you could see through it.  Did you learn something new about the play after you finished the poster? The biggest takeaway I got from the play was that the title was so misleading. You think the show’s going to lead you down this path but the story was so beautiful. There was so much love and desire to make everyone else happy in his life. That’s what was huge for me in the story, not his size.  The amount of love that he had for what he wanted to do in his life — the heartbreak when you realize that’s not going to happen anymore. Realizing that burden is where I felt the show title came from, not his physical appearance. “The Whale” continues through June 14 at Actor’s Express Theater Company in Atlanta.