A rape scene in Sunday’s episode of “Game of Thrones” has brought renewed criticism to this popular HBO fantasy series, which has previously drawn fire for what some viewers believe is its frequent and callous depiction of sexual violence.The audience members who have expressed their disapproval since Sunday’s broadcast include United States Senator Claire McCaskill, Democrat of Missouri, who said in a Twitter post on Tuesday that she was “done” with the show. This episode of “Game of Thrones,” which is adapted from a series of novels written by George R. R. Martin, concluded on Sunday with a wedding between the characters Ramsay Bolton (Iwan Rheon) and Sansa Stark (Sophie Turner). In a scene that follows, Ramsay sexually assaults Sansa while he forces a third character, Theon (Alfie Allen) to watch. The rape is primarily portrayed through sound and through Theon’s pained reactions.This scene, which is presented differently on the television series than in Mr. Martin’s novels (where Ramsay brutalizes a different character), was condemned by viewers who found it unnecessary, and who are concerned that “Game of Thrones” is trivializing rape through constant depiction.“OK, I’m done Game of Thrones,” Ms. McCaskill wrote on Twitter. After describing another scene in the episode as “stupid,” she added: “Gratuitous rape scene disgusting and unacceptable. It was a rocky ride that just ended.”The feminist culture website Mary Sue said that it would no longer publish what it considered promotional posts about “Game of Thrones” following this episode. Jill Pantozzi, the editor in chief of Mary Sue, wrote in a post that “from this point forth there will no longer be recaps, photo galleries, trailers or otherwise promotional items.” “There’s only so many times you can be disgusted with something you love before you literally can’t bring yourself to look at it anymore,” Ms. Pantozzi wrote. “That is where I currently find myself in relation to ‘Game of Thrones.’”Deadspin, a website that covers sports and popular culture, declared in a headline: “‘Game of Thrones’ Is Gross, Exploitative, and Totally Out of Ideas.”The show, which draws an audience of nearly 20 million viewers an episode, was similarly criticized last year. This criticism coalesced around another scene that was altered from the novels (depicting an incestuous but consensual encounter between two characters) to the television series (where many viewers believed it was a rape).  At that time, HBO said that it gave wide latitude to the “Game of Thrones” creators, David Benioff and D. B. Weiss, to fulfill their vision of the show.Michael Lombardo, HBO’s president of programming, said then, “We fully support the vision and artistry of Dan and David’s exceptional work and we feel this work speaks for itself.”HBO did not immediately respond to a request for comment on Tuesday morning. A version of this article appears in print on 05/20/2015, on page C3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: ‘Thrones’ Rape Scene Prompts Harsh Response.