AdvertisementSupported byFull reviews of recent classical performances: nytimes.com/classical. A searchable guide to these and other performances is at nytimes.com/events.Opera★ ‘Il Trovatore’  (Saturday and Wednesday) The return of David McVicar’s 2009 production of Verdi’s “Il Trovatore” to Metropolitan Opera turned out to be a deeply moving occasion for the great baritone Dmitri Hvorostovsky and the adoring audience. Mr. Hvorostovsky, who has been receiving treatments for a brain tumor, arranged to be at the Met to sing Count di Luna, one of his signature roles, for the first three performances. On opening night he was magnificent, and inspired the whole cast to give their best, including the sumptuous soprano Anna Netrebko as Leonora, the excellent tenor Yonghoon Lee as Manrico and the powerhouse mezzo-soprano Dolora Zajick as Azucena. Marco Armiliato drew a supple, sensitive performance from the orchestra. Mr. Hvorostovsky sings the role once more this month, at Saturday’s matinee. (Vitaliy Bilyy takes over the role on Wednesday.) Saturday at 1 p.m. and Wednesday at 7:30 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Anthony Tommasini)★ ‘Anna Bolena’  (Monday) The formidable American soprano Sondra Radvanovsky triumphs in the arduous title role of Donizetti’s “Anna Bolena,” returning to the Metropolitan Opera in David McVicar’s 2011 production. With flawless coloratura technique, earthy sound and uncanny control of colorings and vibrato, she gives an intense yet vulnerable portrayal of Anna (Anne Boleyn), King Henry’s ambitious, doomed queen. The whole cast is strong, especially the rising-star mezzo-soprano Jaime Barton as Giovanna (Jane Seymour), the bass Ildar Abdrazakov as the king, and the tenor Stephen Costello as Lord Percy. Marco Armiliato conducts. At 7:30 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Tommasini)Hibla Gerzmava  (Thursday) A fine Liù in the current Metropolitan Opera production of “Turandot,” this soprano makes her North American solo recital debut in a program heavy on songs by Rachmaninoff and Tchaikovsky, plus arias from operas by Handel, Verdi and Bellini. At 8 p.m., Stern Auditorium, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (David Allen)★ ‘Otello’ (Friday and Tuesday) There were tentative stretches during the new Bartlett Sher staging of Verdi’s “Otello,” which opened the Metropolitan Opera’s season on Sept. 21. Still, this is a bold, atmospheric and intriguing production that should gain its footing. Otello is presented as a leader and a husband trapped in the quagmire of his own perceptions, wondering whom and what to believe. The set is an eerie matrix of translucent walls that move and intersect, suggesting outdoor squares one moment, an intimate bedroom the next. The tenor Aleksandrs Antonenko brings a virile voice and impressive stamina to the punishing title role, but sometimes seems dramatically uncertain. The luxurious baritone Zeljko Lucic makes a suave, sly Iago. The production could not have a better Desdemona than the luminous young soprano Sonya Yoncheva. The brilliant conductor Yannick Nézet-Séguin leads a close-to-great performance. Give him, and the whole production, a little more time. Friday at 8 p.m. and Tuesday at 7:30 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Tommasini)★ ‘Tannhäuser’  (Thursday) James Levine conducts this revival of Otto Schenk’s traditionally-minded production featuring a promising cast of strong Wagnerians, including the tenor Johan Botha as the titular hero torn between carnal and pure love, the soprano Eva-Maria Westbroek as Elisabeth, the baritone Peter Mattei as the poet-knight Wolfram and Michelle DeYoung as Venus. At 7 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Corinna da Fonseca-Wollheim)‘Turandot’  (Saturday) Here’s a last chance to hear the soprano Christine Goerke’s intelligent Turandot, the highlight of the Metropolitan Opera’s revival of Franco Zeffirelli’s spectacular and problematic production from 1987. Marcelo Álvarez is a firm Calàf, Hibla Gerzmava a firmer Liù; James Morris takes a turn as Timur. Paolo Carignani leads the orchestra and massed chorus with impeccable taste. At 8 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Allen)Classical Music★ John Luther Adams  (Wednesday, next Friday and Oct. 10) The composer John Luther Adams’s shimmering sonic landscapes are inspired by nature, including the beautiful panoramas of Alaska, where he lived for decades before moving to New York. Mr. Adams recently received Columbia University’s $50,000 William Schuman Award; a three-concert retrospective begins on Wednesday with Steven Schick conducting the International Contemporary Ensemble in Mr. Adams’s “Clouds of Forgetting, Clouds of Unknowing” — a contemplative piece punctuated by enigmatic clusters of bells and named after a 14th century mystical Christian text. At 8 p.m., Miller Theater, Broadway at 116th Street, Morningside Heights, 212-854-7799, millertheatre.com. (Vivien Schweitzer)Ariel String Quartet and Alon Goldstein  (Sunday) The invaluable People’s Symphony Concerts series presents this energetic quartet in an all-Mozart program including the String Quartet in E-flat (K. 428) and two piano concertos performed as intimate chamber music. Alon Goldstein is the soloist in the Concerto No. 20 in D minor and the Concerto No. 21 in C “Elvira Madigan.” At 2 p.m., Town Hall, 123 West 43rd Street, Manhattan, 800-982-2787, pscny.org. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)Carnegie Hall Opening Night Gala  (Wednesday) Not content with performing one major gala at the start of this season, the New York Philharmonic moves down Broadway to open the Carnegie Hall. Evgeny Kissin plays Tchaikovsky’s omnipresent Piano Concerto No. 1, the core of an evening that also includes Ravel and “Vivo,” a new piece from an Alan Gilbert favorite, Magnus Lindberg. At 7 p.m., Stern Auditorium, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Allen)Chamber Music Society  (Thursday) The intimate Rose Studio is an ideal place to hear chamber music. The young Amphion String Quartet offers a program dedicated to Czech composers, with Josef Suk’s “Meditation on an Old Czech Hymn ‘St Wenceslas’” for String Quartet and Janacek’s “The Kreutzer Sonata” Quartet. They will be joined by Tommaso Lonquich for Anton Reicha’s Quintet in B-flat for Clarinet, Two Violins, Viola and Cello. At 6 p.m., Rose Studio, Lincoln Center, 212-875-5788, chambermusicsociety.org. (Schweitzer)★ Claire Chase  (Friday) The International Contemporary Ensemble’s star flutist has reached Part 3 of her Density 2036 project, devoted to new compositions for an instrument that needs more of them. This latest installment includes works by Nathan Davis, Jason Eckardt, Dai Fujikura, Francesca Verunelli and the inimitable Pauline Oliveros. At 8 p.m., the Kitchen, 512 West 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-255-5793, thekitchen.org. (Allen)Chiara String Quartet  (Friday) This quartet has built its reputation by playing from memory, adding a frisson of risk to all their concerts. Keeping with that tradition, the musicians will do away with their scores for all three of Brahms’s string quartets. At 7 p.m., Grace Rainey Rogers Auditorium, Metropolitan Museum of Art, 212-570-3949, metmuseum.org/tickets. (Allen)Decoda  (Saturday) Presented alongside the Metropolitan Museum’s exhibition of portraits by John Singer Sargent, this ensemble offers a concert of musical character studies by composers including Britten, Ravel, David Lang, Lou Harrison and Paul Moravec. At 7 p.m., Vélez Blanco Patio, Metropolitan Museum of Art, 212-570-3949, metmuseum.org/tickets; sold out. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)★ David Fray  (Tuesday) This elegant young French pianist has attracted attention in recent years for his insightful performances and recordings of Schubert. Here, in the Park Avenue Armory’s intimate, luxurious Board of Officers room, he offers the Sonata in E minor (D 566), the Sonata in A minor (D 784, Op. 143) and the Sonata in G (D 894, Op. 78). At 7:30 p.m. (also next Friday at 8 p.m.), 643 Park Avenue, at 67th Street, 212-933-5812, armoryonpark.org. (Schweitzer)Italian Academy  (Wednesday and Thursday) On Wednesday, Emanuele Arciuli, an Italian pianist known for his thoughtful juxtapositions of repertory, offers a program called “Five Versions of Darkness,” featuring music by George Crumb, Busoni, Liszt, Fauré and Schumann. On Thursday, Ensemble Origo performs selections from the entertainment that the composer Orlando di Lasso planned for the 1568 wedding reception of Duke Wilhelm V of Bavaria, including Neapolitan dance-songs inspired by the language of African slaves in Naples. Wednesday at 7 p.m. and Thursday at 8 p.m. (preconcert lecture at 7 p.m.), the Italian Academy at Columbia University, 1161 Amsterdam Avenue, between 116th and 118th Streets, Morningside Heights, 212-854-1623, italianacademy.columbia.edu; free. (Schweitzer)★ Momenta Quartet  (Saturday and Sunday) This forward-thinking string quartet continues its intriguing festival of new music with a program on Saturday titled “Memory Palace,” which presents music from five centuries spanning works by Boccherini and Debussy, Tomas Luis de Victoria and George Crumb. Saturday’s concert, “All Blade,” offers a slew of premieres by composers from diverse musical backgrounds, including Yusef Lateef, Wilfrido Terrazas and Gordon Beeferman. At 8 p.m., Tenri Cultural Institute, 43 West 13th Street, momentafestival.brownpapertickets.com. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)★ National Sawdust  (through Thursday) Brooklyn has been a hotbed of musical creativity for some time. With the Oct. 1 opening of this swanky new artist-led performance hall, Williamsburg asserts itself as a cultural destination well worth the trip across borough borders. Designed to nurture especially those forms of new music that defy genre categorization, the old sawdust factory throws open its doors to an assortment of concerts that include a program of globally influenced works presented by the pianist Leo Genovese, an ambitious festival dedicated to Terry Riley and the Brooklyn Youth Chorus headlining an evening of vocal music by Richard Reed Parry, Caroline Shaw and Paola Prestini, among others. Full are details online. 80 North Sixth Street, at Wythe Avenue, 646-779-8455, nationalsawdust.org. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)★ New York Philharmonic  (Saturday) The Philharmonic’s sole Lincoln Center performance this week blends the routine with the far from ordinary. Alan Gilbert conducts the “Tragic Overture” and the Piano Concerto No. 2 of Brahms, with Emanuel Ax at the keyboard. Mr. Gilbert also leads the premiere of Marc Niekrug’s “Canta-Concerto,” a showpiece for the outstanding mezzo-soprano Sasha Cooke. At 8 p.m., David Geffen Hall, Lincoln Center, 212-875-5656, nyphil.org. (Allen)Advertisement