It’s not only the late-night television career of David Letterman that will come to an end on Wednesday night, when he hosts his final episode of CBS’s “Late Show.” That broadcast will also bring to a close Mr. Letterman’s memorable partnership with Paul Shaffer, the bespectacled, fashion-forward keyboardist who has been the host’s quip-firing bandleader and sidekick throughout his 22-year CBS run, and for  11 years before that on NBC’s “Late Night.”Mr. Shaffer, 65, stepped away from the microphone to speak to The New York Times for an article about the veteran members of Mr. Letterman’s staff who are parting ways with him after decades in his employment. In these further excerpts from that conversation, Mr. Shaffer talks about his introduction to his longtime comedy collaborator, the secret to their partnership’s longevity and how he is preparing for post-Letterman life. How were you and David Letterman first connected for “Late Night”?  I got a call from his manager’s office. Would you come in and have a meeting with him, regarding his upcoming show? He told me that he had seen some of the stuff that I had done on “Saturday Night Live,” where I was mainly a behind-the-scenes guy, writing special musical material, but also in the band and would appear sometimes on camera. Most notably, Dave mentioned the sketches that Bill Murray would do, where he played the sleazy lounge performer and I would appear as the pianist. We hit it off. It was Dave and his producer at the time, Barry Sand, and they really only had one question: What kind of a band would you have? And by the way, you can only have four pieces. But that was perfect for me, because that’s exactly what I grew up doing. I said I would play R&B and Motown stuff. Dave said: “That sounds perfect. I’ve always thought of myself as the Wayne Cochran of comedy anyway.” Wayne Cochran being mostly regionally known, in Miami, as the white James Brown. And that killed me. I said, boy, I really hope I get to work with this guy.  Had you seen the short-lived morning show he did for NBC? Were you concerned about his longevity in late night? I had seen the morning show. And there was a period of time, after they got canceled, where they still did shows, maybe for about a month. And that’s when I really started watching it, because they got loose. They didn’t give a damn anymore. I saw some amazing things in the morning that I didn’t believe were actually on television. I saw the level of his nuttiness, and that appealed to me. I didn’t think too much about the run. I had been involved in what I thought were long runs already. Five years on “Saturday Night Live,” I thought, that’s long. Before that, a year in the pit in a Broadway show. When you’re that young, these are long times for you. I kind of expected a long run, and by a long run, I thought, maybe another three years would be amazing.  What kept you doing the job for 33 years? I realized, ultimately, that this was the best job I was ever going to have. The main reason being Dave himself. How encouraging he was. My job is so wonderfully multifaceted. I might as well start talking in the past tense – has been. And I got to do all the different things I got to do all at once. I had my own band play the songs that I loved, going back to “Louie, Louie.” When I added that to the repertoire, I knew that I was home. That was important to you? Yeah, because that really signified that I hadn’t changed my repertoire since I was 15 years old, and that’s the way I liked it. And Dave liked it, too. He encouraged me to be perhaps a little bit more contemporary in my choices. He encouraged me to be an on-camera part of the show, by saying, time and time again: “If you have anything, jump in. I don’t care if I’m in the middle of the monologue, if I’m interviewing a guest, it doesn’t matter.” Who else would say that? I started by just having a lot of fun quoting the show-business icons I revered and kidded, simultaneously, when I was a kid. And I would regurgitate a saying that I heard on the Jerry Lewis telethon or Sammy Davis’s talk show, and Dave got a kick out of that. But ultimately, he said, “Let’s just us have a conversation.” That seemed daunting to me. I didn’t see how it could ever happen. But it did, just because of his perseverance with me.  Did you get any advance notice, before other “Late Show” colleagues, that Dave was planning to announce his retirement? On the Monday of that week, we were just about to go onstage for the short warm-up that he does. He said, “Can I just talk to you for a second?” And we walked into a little alcove while the band continued to play. That’s when he told me. And then we went onstage and there I am [singing], “Well, East Coast girls are hip, I really…” But I’m thinking, wow, what did I just hear? And we went on with the show. And then about three, four days later, we were just about to go on. He said: “I’ve got to announce it today. Otherwise, it’s just going to get out, before I can announce it.” There was a one-two aspect to it all.  In those moments, were you thinking only how great this is for Dave and what an accomplishment? Or is there some part of you that also thinks, wait – what happens to me now?  Well, of course. I don’t mean to say I only think of Dave and never myself. And obviously I’ve gone through a few phases since then. I thought initially, what am I going to do with myself every day? I haven’t had to answer that question for 33 years. At 4 o’clock, where am I going to be? It’s been so regular that it keeps one out of trouble and centered. And then came the mixed-feelings phase. It’s a great accomplishment for all of us. We’ve done it the longest that anybody has, so far. But wow, am I ever going to miss it! I’m so sad about it. I went through that phase. And now I have arrived at a more Zenlike state. The only appropriate emotion is gratitude. And I am so grateful. And that is where I have stood for quite a while on it.  What do you think you’ll do next? I want to keep playing the piano and do all the different things that I’ve gotten to do on the show — comedy, acting, improvising. I won’t get to do them all at once, like I did. But I’m not going anywhere, because this is a lovely time and I love to be around here in the summertime. Nothing better. Also, I’ve already got a few commitments that I’m going to take on, drop in here and do a favor over there. After the summer’s over, we’ll see what happens. If the phone were not to ring, that’s fine, too.