AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn Shattuck10 P.M. (Starz Cinema) IN THE BEDROOM (2001) Sissy Spacek, above, and Tom Wilkinson earned Oscar nominations for their portrayals of Ruth and Matt Fowler, a small-town New England couple who deal with the murder of their college-age son, Frank (Nick Stahl), in an unexpected way in this best-picture contender from Todd Field. Marisa Tomei, also nominated, plays the older, married girlfriend who unwittingly leads Frank to his demise. This adaptation of the short story “Killings,” by Andre Dubus, is a “perfectly observed, wrenchingly acted drama” that “cuts to the quick,” Stephen Holden wrote in The New York Times. “It reminds us that, like it or not, the capacity to commit a crime of passion is part of being human.” 8 P.M. (ABC) THE BACHELORETTE In Part 2 of this season premiere Britt Nilsson and Kaitlyn Bristowe learn whom their 25 suitors have chosen to pursue, and who will go home. In “Dancing With the Stars,” at 9, the final three couples — Noah Galloway and Sharna Burgess, Riker Lynch and Allison Holker, and Rumer Willis and Valentin Chmerkovskiy — compete one last time for the mirror-ball trophy. 8 P.M. (TCM) WHAT’S ON TONIGHT: ROBERT BENTON Turner Classic Movies pays tribute to Mr. Benton, the Oscar-winning screenwriter and director, with five films he either wrote or wrote and directed: “Bonnie and Clyde” (1967), Arthur Penn’s romanticized take on those 1930s outlaws, portrayed by Warren Beatty and Faye Dunaway, left, at 8; “Kramer vs. Kramer” (1979), about an advertising executive (Dustin Hoffman) who gets a crash course in parenting when his wife (Meryl Streep) leaves him, at 10; “The Late Show” (1977), in which an aging private eye (Art Carney) hooks up with a Hollywood ditz (Lily Tomlin) to investigate his partner’s murder, at midnight; “Still of the Night” (1982), with Roy Scheider as a psychiatrist who falls for the primary suspect (Ms. Streep) in a patient’s murder, at 1:50 a.m.; and “Nadine” (1987), starring Kim Basinger as a divorcing woman on a mission to retrieve some provocative photographs who ends up in the middle of a murder plot, at 4.9 P.M. (TV Land) YOUNGER Liza (Sutton Foster) tries to get some traction for an unpublished manuscript she discovered by promoting it at her former book club.10 P.M. (13); 11 P.M. (49) SECRETS, POLITICS AND TORTURE “Frontline” investigates the C.I.A.’s so-called enhanced interrogation program.10:30 P.M. (Comedy Central) INSIDE AMY SCHUMER Ms. Schumer defends Bill Cosby.11:35 P.M. (CBS) LATE SHOW WITH DAVID LETTERMAN Bob Dylan performs on the show for the first time in 22 years. 2 A.M. (Encore) BEFORE MIDNIGHT (2013) Nine years after rekindling a romance in Paris (“Before Sunset”) that began nine years before that in Vienna (“Before Sunrise”), Celine (Julie Delpy, right) and Jesse (Ethan Hawke) are in Greece, at the end of a vacation with their twin daughters (Jennifer and Charlotte Prior) and Hank (Seamus Davey-Fitzpatrick), the son Jesse left behind in Chicago. Jesse wonders if they could move from Paris to the United States to spend more time with Hank. Celine sees his question as a demand. And so they will fight about this — and the meaning of love, the nature of time and the difference between men and women — throughout the course of a day. This final installment in the Richard Linklater trilogy “is a wonderful paradox: a movie passionately committed to the ideal of imperfection that is itself very close to perfect,” A. O. Scott wrote in The Times. What’s Streaming NowI AM LOVE (2010) Emma (Tilda Swinton), the wife of a wealthy Milanese textile manufacturer (Pippo Delbono), awakens to life’s possibilities when she begins an affair with a young chef (Edoardo Gabbriellini) in what Manohla Dargis, writing in The Times, called Luca Guadagnino’s “soaringly beautiful melodrama.” Amid all the luxuries on display, “nothing holds your gaze as forcefully as Tilda Swinton’s alabaster face,” she added. By the end, “Emma’s face will have crumpled into a ruin,” she wrote. “But it will also be fully alive, having been granted, like Pygmalion’s statue, the breath of life.” (iTunes, netflix.com) KATHRYN SHATTUCKAdvertisement