The immediacy of visual imagery and the rise of social media have created an environment in which cartoonists are particularly vulnerable to “censorship, punitive lawsuits, physical assault, imprisonment, disappearance and murder,” according to a report to be issued on Tuesday by the Committee to Protect Journalists.The report, commissioned after the attack on the French satirical weekly Charlie Hebdo in January, is the organization’s first report to focus specifically on threats to cartoonists. Elana Beiser, the group’s editorial director, said that while it was unknown whether dangers to cartoonists were rising, the Charlie Hebdo attack, which left 12 people dead, highlighted the sometimes deadly perils they face.“Cartoons generate a really emotional response that can transcend languages or borders,” Ms. Beiser said in an interview. “The Internet and social media also make it so much easier to share.”Some threats come directly from governments. The report begins with the case of the Malaysian cartoonist Zulkiflee Anwar Alhaque, known as Zunar, who faces as many as 43 years in prison on sedition charges stemming from cartoons that depicted a legal case against the country’s top opposition politician as “a thinly veiled political power play,” as the report summed it up. (Hearings in Mr. Alhaque’s case begin on Wednesday.)The report also notes cases in Ecuador, South Africa, Syria, Venezuela, India, Iran and elsewhere involving overt or possible covert government suppression. In Sri Lanka, for example, the cartoonist Prageeth Eknelygoda went missing in 2010, during a government military campaign to subdue an ethnic Tamil insurgency. While it remains unclear who kidnapped him, Mr. Eknelygoda’s wife told the committee’s investigators that she believes his cartoons depicting human rights abuses “triggered a response.”The report, written by Shawn W. Crispin, also surveys the impact of threats from extremists like the Muslim radicals who attacked the offices of Charlie Hebdo, presumably because of its cartoons depicting the prophet Muhammad. That attack, along with previous ones elsewhere, have led to widespread self-censorship, the report says.“Cartoonists everywhere are gripped by fear of copycat events,” Jonathan Shapiro, a South African cartoonist who was criticized in 2010 for a cartoon featuring Muhammad, told investigators.That fear has also had an impact in the United States. The report cites the case of Molly Norris, a cartoonist for alternative newspapers in Seattle who went into hiding in 2010 after she posted online a satirical poster for an “Everybody Draw Muhammad Day!” showing everyday objects like a teacup and a spool of thread with generic faces, each declaring themselves to be the “true likeness” of the prophet.“I don’t think very many Americans understand that a cartoonist in our midst has had to enter what is effectively a version of the F.B.I.’s witness protection program,” Robert Russell, the executive director of Cartoonists Rights Network International, said in the report.The report comes a few weeks after some 200 writers protested PEN American Center’s decision to give an award to Charlie Hebdo on the grounds that the publication promoted racist stereotypes. Some critics also expressed concern that the award amounted to tacit support for United States policy in the war on terror.The new report said that while the Charlie Hebdo case may have prompted an outpouring of solidarity in support of free speech, it may in fact have led to greater legal threats to speech, such as the sweeping new surveillance laws proposed recently in France.Journalists around the world “are caught between terrorism and governments who are purporting to fight terrorism, but are curbing free speech more generally,” Ms. Beiser said. “Obviously there is a security threat, but so much legislation is written in such a vague manner that it is open to political abuse.”A version of this article appears in print on 05/19/2015, on page C3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Cartoonists Vulnerable, Journalists Group Says.