AdvertisementSupported byNew MusicBy Jon CaramanicaJAMIE FOXX“Hollywood: A Story of a Dozen Roses”(JB/RCA)Jamie Foxx doesn’t need this — at this point, his music career is mainly a vanity project, a lie he’s trying to keep up, and not even an interesting one. He’s an often excellent actor, from his Oscar-winning turn in “Ray” to “Django Unchained” to “Collateral,” and yet despite those gifts, he hasn’t been able to nail the role of essential R&B singer.It’s been almost five years since Mr. Foxx released an album — his best album, as it happens — which suggests either low supply (Mr. Foxx has been busy!) or low demand. Whatever the case, his spotty fifth album, “Hollywood: A Story of a Dozen Roses” comes with low expectations. But that freedom from consequences affords Mr. Foxx a looseness that his more career-minded peers can lack. That was clear on his biggest hit, “Blame It,” his goofy 2008 T-Pain collaboration, and it’s clear in places here, too.“Like a Drum” is, titular simile notwithstanding, a seduction song that’s frank and literal and just this side of profane. Mr. Foxx likes mischief, and often his lyrics seem intended to test just what a man with an Oscar can get away with singing. Take “Text Message,” on which he takes a flirtation from the phone to the bed: “LOL, smiley face, the emoji with the tongue out/Now I’m kissing you, touching you, freaking you over at your house.” O.K., then.Much of the production on “Hollywood” is swampy, but it’s a digital swamp. Mr. Foxx’s voice is slathered with so many effects that he veers toward anonymity. That’s not because he’s a poor singer but rather his natural tone is maybe a tad too whiny — and too signature — for the slinky radio R&B he’s aiming to make.But that voice isn’t something he should run from. Mr. Foxx sings in lovely unvarnished fashion on two songs near the end of the album, “In Love By Now” and “Jumping Out the Window,” both written in part by the great R&B moralizer Tank, and both featuring Mr. Foxx on piano. Here, he sounds engaged and vulnerable, and totally vital. “Tell me one thing: if another man said your name, would it still sound poetic?” he sings, and the part is his.Advertisement