By ANTHONY TOMMASINIMAY 18, 2015
Two years, almost to the day, after leading the Met Orchestra at Carnegie Hall in a triumphant return to performing, James Levine conducted the ensemble on the same stage on Sunday afternoon. Before that 2013 concert there had been real doubts about whether he would ever conduct again. Grappling with serious illnesses compounded by injuries, he had been absent from any podium for two years.But on that day in May 2013, trying out his motorized wheelchair for the first time in performance, Mr. Levine led inspired accounts of Wagner’s Prelude to “Lohengrin,” Beethoven’s Fourth Piano Concerto, with Evgeny Kissin as soloist, and Schubert’s Ninth Symphony.On Sunday, in the final Met Orchestra concert of the season, he seemed comparably confident, leading the orchestra in a richly textured, forceful performance of Brahms’s First Piano Concerto featuring the brilliant pianist Yefim Bronfman, and a wild-eyed, fervid account of Berlioz’s “Symphonie Fantastique.”If it seems hard to believe that it has been only two years since Mr. Levine’s return, that’s because he has been working steadily, slowly taking on more and fulfilling almost all of his commitments. Of 36 scheduled performances at the Metropolitan Opera this past season he missed only one. His work has been somewhat inconsistent. Still, at his best — in Mozart’s “Le Nozze di Figaro,” to start the season, and the revival of Wagner’s formidable “Die Meistersinger” — Mr. Levine again proved a major maestro. He even ended the season with a Saturday doubleheader, conducting Stravinsky’s “The Rake’s Progress” in the afternoon and Verdi’s “Un Ballo in Maschera” in the evening.AdvertisementLooking at what Mr. Levine has accomplished at the Met over the last four decades and what he contributed this season, it would be hard to demand more of him personally. Yet it is entirely fair to expect more from a music director at America’s most prominent opera house. Mr. Levine continues to cede too much artistic authority to Peter Gelb, the general manager, who has readily claimed it.AdvertisementThat the Met Orchestra has an annual series at Carnegie Hall is due to Mr. Levine. This was just one of several important initiatives he put in place during the 1990s, including the Met Chamber Ensemble. He founded the prestigious Lindemann Young Artist Development Program in 1980 and continues to work closely with emerging singers. He has long been an extraordinary mentor.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Still, as I have argued before, nothing matters more to the legacy of an opera company than its record at fostering new works. Mr. Levine has essentially left this crucial responsibility to Mr. Gelb. The last commissioned opera that truly seemed a Levine project was John Harbison’s “The Great Gatsby” back in 1999. Also it would appear that Mr. Levine had little direct involvement with several of the most ambitious projects of the past season, including the company premiere of John Adams’s “The Death of Klinghoffer” and the bold new production, a double bill, of Tchaikovsky’s “Iolanta” and Bartok’s “Bluebeard’s Castle.”The way forward would seem obvious: Give Mr. Levine an emeritus-type title and help him to conduct as many performances as often as he can; then bring in a dynamic music director with real authority to cultivate relationships with living composers.Sunday’s concert, though, was a day to marvel at Mr. Levine’s greatness. Mr. Bronfman brought commanding pianism and acute insight to his vigorous, lucid account of the Brahms concerto. And under Mr. Levine the orchestra, which plays a lot of Wagner and Mozart in the opera house, infused Brahms’s symphonic sound with both Wagnerian richness and Mozartean clarity.The “Symphonie Fantastique” had the requisite reverie and wildness. This was crunchy, rather than creamy, Berlioz. Still, I was especially swept away by sensual sounds and myriad colorings Mr. Levine drew from the players, even during frenzied episodes of the “March to the Scaffold” and the “Dream of a Witches’ Sabbath.”Toward the end, in a burst of loose-limbed enthusiasm, Mr. Levine let his baton go flying into the first violin section. A player soon returned it to him, but nothing could have stopped the inexorable drive of this performance.A version of this review appears in print on May 19, 2015, on Page C5 of the New York edition with the headline: A Forceful Finish to Brahms and Berlioz .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.