AdvertisementSupported byBy James R. OestreichBecause the Metropolitan Museum of Art has largely redirected its concerts to tie in to its exhibitions, the notion of a recital by the crowd-pleasing Chinese pianist Lang Lang to usher in “China: Through the Looking Glass” made sense, perhaps, on the surface.But in the Met Museum Presents event, on Thursday evening, Mr. Lang played only four modest pieces of Westernized Chinese music, filling 15 minutes of the hourlong program, alongside works by Tchaikovsky and Chopin. Set in the cavernous Great Hall near the front entrance, the concert was clearly designed less to add context to the exhibition than to generate interest in it.And in that it may well have succeeded. Fifteen minutes before the scheduled start time, the line outside the museum extended down the entrance steps and a block or so up Fifth Avenue.A half-hour later, Mr. Lang took the makeshift stage before more than 500 loudly welcoming visitors and announced, “I’m your pianist for tonight.” Perhaps wishfully, he also praised the acoustics of the room, calling them “very spiritual.”My experience from about 40 feet from the stage was the opposite. With megaton amplification, the loud playing in the outer sections of two Chopin scherzos and in two pieces from Tchaikovsky’s “The Seasons” was deafening and soul-deadening.The four Chinese items, by composers little known in the West, and the six numbers from “The Seasons” (out of 12 in all, one for each month) were character pieces, designed to set scenes and moods (“Autumn Moon Over a Calm Lake”). Excellent playing and even some poetry came through in the quieter music. But the merciless pummeling in Tchaikovsky’s “Reaper’s Song” and “The Hunt,” and in the Chopin, pretty much obliterated everything around it.Mr. Lang declined an encore at first, instead introducing Derek Wang, a young protégé developed through the Lang Lang International Music Foundation. Mr. Wang said he would play two Chopin études but was hustled off after one.He gave an attractive, shapely account of the “Revolutionary” Étude. He actually seemed to judge the amplification better than Mr. Lang had, though he may also simply have lacked some of Mr. Lang’s power.Finally, Mr. Lang played a pleasant encore, the “Turkish March” from Mozart’s Piano Sonata in A (K. 331), and audience members roared their approval, seemingly unanimous.Still, I heard what I heard. How could I not?Advertisement