AdvertisementSupported byBy David AllenWagnerians look high and low for the Sieglindes, the Brünnhildes, the Isoldes of the future. Wagner’s most prominent roles make awesome demands of stamina, power and subtlety, demands rarely fulfilled. We elevate those who can cope: To any pretender, an Astrid Varnay, a Birgit Nilsson, a Nina Stemme hovers in the ear as an invidious, imposing, inescapable comparison.Who knows whether Heidi Melton, a young American soprano with a robust voice and an ebullient stage presence, will join them in the pantheon? She’s made early running in various minor Wagnerian roles as far afield as Berlin and Toronto, and sang the Third Norn in the Metropolitan Opera’s “Götterdämmerung” in 2012 and 2013. Next January brings more Wagner with the New York Philharmonic and Alan Gilbert, before she joins the Vienna Philharmonic at Carnegie Hall in February. On Sunday afternoon, she made her promising New York recital debut with the pianist John Parr, in the more forgiving environment of Pace University’s Schimmel Center.A daunting program of Beethoven, Debussy, Berg, Weill and, yes, Wagner, gave Ms. Melton, 33, plenty of opportunities to play to her considerable strengths. Power aplenty came through in Beethoven’s concert aria, “Ah! Perfido,” a strength that hid a beguiling fragility when shouts of vengeance turned to inward grief. In Debussy’s “Chansons de Bilitis,” there was a hushed, withdrawn quality that stayed nimble and poetically aware. Best of all were four numbers by Weill, with a smoky, knowing mystery in “Je ne t’aime pas” and a bubbly amiability in “September Song” and “My Ship.” Ms. Melton’s voice hasn’t quite settled down yet. The Debussy and Weill worked well because they sat toward the lower end of the register, where Ms. Melton is unfailingly secure. But in the range where Wagnerian heroines are made — above the stave — her tone could turn pinched and strained, her intonation a little wayward.Surprisingly, it was in the two sets of German songs that text and melody seemed most often to escape one another. Spacious tempos and unprepossessing pianism suited some of Wagner’s “Wesendonck Lieder,” particularly “Stehe still!” and “Schmerzen,” but “Im Treibhaus” would have benefited from more confident breath control. And Berg’s thorny “Seven Early Songs,” each a miracle of concision and allusion, might have been more precisely characterized.When she was 24, Ms. Melton said from the stage, Mr. Parr asked her if she had considered singing Wagner. “I thought that you weren’t supposed to think about that until you’re 60,” she joked. Good thing she did.Advertisement