AdvertisementSupported byThe TV WatchBy Alessandra Stanley“Mad Men” ended with a joke, and it was on us. Coca-Cola actually was the real thing.This AMC series closed down on Sunday with a 1971 ad that featured blissed-out young people of all races in a sun-dappled field singing “I’d Like to Buy the World a Coke.” And the ad was Don Draper’s idea. His “om” moment on a sun-dappled cliff had brought him enlightenment: one of the most totemic television spots of all time.“Mad Men” provided a rich and captivating look at the ’60s, but it was never supposed to be taken so seriously.For seven seasons, Matthew Weiner, the show’s creator, slyly played the past against the present, so it was fitting that he did so one last time. So many anti-establishment anthems — including songs by the Rolling Stones, the Beatles and the Doors — have been co-opted to sell cars, sneakers and computers. Flower Power protest, experimentation and consciousness-raising didn’t amount to much: In the end, all they wrought was a new way to sell products.And all of Don’s affairs, lies and roaming escapes amounted to little more than a new way to make ads. The opening sequence of a man in a suit tumbling out of a window and then bouncing back into his armchair held up. Don fell for a self-actualization group, then recovered. He ended pretty much where we first saw him in the series, eliciting ideas for a Lucky Strike pitch from a waiter and scribbling thoughts on a cocktail napkin.Don is not the only flawed protagonist on television to fade out by looping back to the start. Heroes may learn from their mistakes, but antiheroes turn out to be inadvertently right all along.The abrupt finale of “The Sopranos” was inconclusive, though one thing that was clear was that Tony Soprano, the mobster who was given to inexplicable panic attacks, ended his run with good reason to be afraid.After learning he has incurable cancer in Season 1 of “Breaking Bad,” Walter White becomes a meth dealer to provide for his family after his death; in the last episode, Walter dies, but not before cleaning up the chaos and leaving some money for his wife and children.And like “The Sopranos” and “Breaking Bad,” this series led viewers on a tantalizing scavenger hunt for clues. Every color, design detail and camera movement was carefully chosen; the smallest objects (a miniature Statue of Liberty) and the loftiest shots (a jet streaking across the Manhattan skyline) had hidden meaning.Music mattered maybe most of all. “The Sopranos” cut to black with the Journey song “Don’t Stop Believin’,” and “Breaking Bad” left off to “Baby Blue,” by the British rock band Badfinger. “Mad Men” could be expected to choose something as arch or achingly apt. The finale pulled a fast one and did both: a commercial jingle.The enduring mystery of “Mad Men” wasn’t whether Don would live or find happiness, but would he ever have another spark of creativity like the one he had for Kodak in the Season 1 finale, when he melted the room by showing his own family snapshots to pitch an ad for a circling slide projector that he named the Carousel?In the final episode, he did. Moments after a guru prayed for “new ideas,” a meditation chime tinkled and a flicker of a smile broke through Don’s trance.Don came back to earth, but he didn’t appear to have the will to go home and reclaim his three children even after learning that their mother, Betty, was dying of lung cancer. On the phone, Betty ordered him to stay away, saying that above all the children needed things to remain as normal as possible, “and your not being here is part of that.”It was hard to feel much sympathy for Don after he gave up and fell apart, but that moral failure made it all the easier to accept his nervy grasp for success.The finale was unevenly paced — some scenes were as drawn out as a Douglas Sirk melodrama, others like a Doris Day romantic comedy. There were some gratifying couplings — Roger and Marie in a cafe, Peggy and Stan in an office phone clinch. Even Pete, reunited with Trudy in a chic fur hat, had a dash of Don Draper’s early glamour as the couple boarded a Learjet, with their daughter, Tammy.But the more satisfying endings let the women fall in love with their work. “Mad Men” wittily chronicled the last days of WASP ascendancy, but the women’s struggle to get out of the steno pool was the series’ essence.As the final season came to a close, it seemed as if progress, like happiness, was illusory. After being belittled and sexually harassed by male chauvinist boors, Joan didn’t go through with her threat to sue. Peggy was deemed so insignificant she wasn’t even assigned an office. Even Betty, who was fulfilling her dream of going back to college (homework assignments included reading Freud on hysteria), was knocked back by cancer.Betty’s fate was irreversible. But in the end, Peggy got to have her man and her job — her farewell shot put her at a typewriter while Stan massaged her shoulders. Joan had to choose between a rich, loving boyfriend and starting her own business, and she chose her career.A new era is at hand, and fittingly, “Mad Men” ends with the dawn of the strong women who get to work and the sensitive men who get in touch with their feelings.Advertisement