At a luncheon Tuesday to discuss coming exhibitions at the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, Malcolm Rogers, who will step down as the museum’s director at the end of July, said in conversation that he had been considered for a position at a leading British museum but decided not to pursue the opportunity.Mr. Rogers said that he was concerned, among other things, that he would not be able to pay enough to attract the staff he wanted. He also said that the pace and style of working with governments, as is done overseas, would be quite different (and slower) than what he has been used to. He noted that overseas museum directors are increasingly under pressure to fund raise from private sources and foundations, but in the backs of their minds is the concern that if they are successful, their own governments will cut back funding.Mr. Rogers, who has been the director of the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, for 20 years, is planning to consult with collectors in helping to build their collections. He is inclined toward art that was once fashionable and is now undervalued: 20th century British art (including the work of Graham Sutherland, Ben Nicholson and British pop artists),  Japanese art and 19th century French academic painting, for example. One thing that particularly interests him is looking at which artists who were highly prized 50 years ago have survived and remained in demand to this day. “I bet there would not be many,’’ he said. Though Mr. Rogers will be largely based in his native England, his hope is to work with collectors on both sides of the Atlantic.The Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, announced last month that Matthew Teitelbaum will succeed Mr. Rogers. Mr. Teitelbaum is currently the director and chief executive of the Art Gallery of Ontario in Toronto. The landmark exhibition at the Museum of Fine Arts, beginning October 11 through January 18, 2016, will be “Class Distinctions: Dutch Painting in the Age of Rembrandt and Vermeer,” which will feature 75 portraits, genre scenes and landscapes by Jan Steen and Frans Hals, among other Dutch masters.A version of this article appears in print on 05/22/2015, on page C2 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Malcolm Rogers  Plans Consulting Work.