David Letterman brings his 33-year career in late night to a close on Wednesday, and the tributes have been flowing in for weeks.On Tuesday Bill Murray emerged from a cake to make his final appearance, which culminated in a singalong in the street. Mr. Letterman’s late-night peers Jimmy Kimmel, Jimmy Fallon, Jon Stewart, Seth Meyers and Conan O’Brien have paid their respects. President Obama did, too. Senator Al Franken reflected the sentiments of many fans, famous and otherwise, in an article in The Boston Globe,  titled “David Letterman Changed Everything.”“Someone had to strap a camera to a monkey,” he wrote. “But David Letterman was the one who did it.”We asked readers to share their own favorite memories from Mr. Letterman’s career and they did not disappoint, citing fittingly random bits as well as the usual Stupid Pet Tricks, five-story towers, novelty suits and squirmy interviews. (Hot dogs anyone?)We compiled some of them below, with clips when possible. Some comments have been edited for clarity.Larry (Bud) Melman. One day, he was dispatched to the Port Authority Bus Terminal to welcome people who were departing buses. He would offer a warm wet towel and give them a carton of Doral cigarettes.  — David Chowes, New York Dave’s first night at the Ed Sullivan Theater was my first night in the hospital recovering from a life-saving emergency surgery. I was scared and in terrible pain. The nurse came in and turned on Dave’s show for me, and for one hour I was transported… it was a welcome escape and the first real laughs I had had in weeks. I am forever grateful for that and have been a loyal Letterman watcher ever since. Thank you, Dave. — Caro, New YorkOh, that’s easy: The July 1982 episode where my mother, Esther Pollock, was chosen to have a dream date with Peter Tork of the Monkees. She had such a good time. Our family never got a chance to see this until it came up at her shiva, 30 years later. Someone immediately found it on YouTube. Priceless. Thank you, David. — olypeninah, Olympia, Wash.Best moment? Drew Barrymore’s birthday gift! — lrlrc, MiamiViewer mail on Thursday nights. He’d turn a simple blue index card into magic. After that, I recall a hilarious swirling mass of Chris Elliot, Larry (Bud) Melman, Biff Henderson. No one who saw Lawler/Kaufman live will forget that. — j mats, New York The Paris Hilton interview. It was hilarious and a display of Letterman’s ability to make guests as uncomfortable as possible, and his disdain for arbitrary celebrity. — Greg M., New YorkDave was a true friend of music — of all kinds. But it’s the Warren Zevon appearances that I cherish. The respect and love that Letterman had for Zevon and his music was so apparent — and lovely. Warren’s last show with Letterman was heartbreaking and uplifting at the same time. — ArgentBelle, the celluloid darknessI don’t know why, but “Camping With Barry White” remains one of my favorite late-night comedy skits of all time. I caught it at least a decade after it originally aired and I loved how game Barry White was and the sheer randomness of the skit. — E, Atlanta Without question, the post 9/11 “monologue” was his finest moment. There were thousands of times when he made us laugh, gasp, cringe or whatever. But when he spoke to us after 9/11, he was able to put into words what every New Yorker — no, what every American — was feeling but had been unable to articulate until then. From that moment on it became clear that David Letterman was not just an entertainer, but he was the vocalizer for all the things, whether absurd or serious, that we could not or dared not say or do. — Kenneth S., New YorkComing out of college in 1982, and leaving that world of close, smart, hip friends, into the world of work and drudgery, “Late Night” was a lifeline. I used to watch the show religiously…even insanely…every night I lived in Philadelphia. What Letterman provided was that great optimism and sense of looking at the world, no matter how gritty, and being able to laugh at it. Whether it was high and mighty artists, or New York streets, he was saying, yes, it’s all ridiculous. And, yes, don’t worry. It’s all silly. — John Bailo, Kent, Wash.Dog poetry: “My empty water dish mocks me.” — Patricia Klein, Largo, Fla.Loved seeing Dave driving around L.A. with Zsa Zsa Gabor in a convertible. I enjoy the memory of seeing them at the McDonald’s drive-through — and Zsa Zsa happily eating French fries out of the box in the front seat. Beautiful. — AG, New York So many but what stands out is when he was interviewing Joaquin Phoenix when Joaquin was posing as a rapper (“what can you tell us about your time with the Unabomber….” and “well Joaquin, we’re sorry you couldn’t be here tonight…”) His ironic asides that went over a lot of heads, his honesty and intelligence is what I’ll miss. He did not suffer fools gladly — appealed to intelligent TV viewers, but was always hilarious. Love you Dave, Thanks!! — dc, New YorkThe segment with Rena Smaha and her monkeys — one of whom had serious issues with Dave. I LOVE the line he improvises as he ducks behind Rena for protection: “She’s gonna leap and me, pull a vein out of my neck, and kill me!” — Scott Mumford, CaliforniaLetterman might have secretly been a frustrated English professor. So the best moments, as other critics in this publication have noticed throughout the decades, involve his pushing the limits of the language and its meaning by simply making the familiar strange. My favorite, from the early ’80s, was the Just Bulbs/Just Shades segment. — ecb200, Ann Arbor, Mich. I loved when Sonny and Cher were on and he talked them into singing “I’ve Got You Babe.” Cher didn’t want to do it, but I think in the end she was happy she went along with it. — Dee, East Lansing. Mich.In 1982, I placed a classified ad in Rolling Stone magazine offering the David Letterman Fan Club and the “jumbo” club package. Members sent in their checks from around the nation and each got a membership package of miscellaneous items including a membership card, a mini fly swatter, a sponge, balloons, a glow in the dark key chain and a button. Among the members were the late Andrew Breitbart and Paul Rudd. In fact, Paul Rudd was on the show a few weeks back and discussed the club with Dave. I thought it was great that Paul got the randomness of the items I sent out. They seemed to fit the sensibility of Dave in the early years of “Late Night.” I never did see the show live and Dave did try to stop the club from happening via NBC’s legal department, but they backed off and let us be. From time-to-time I see a package from the club for sale on eBay. It brings a smile to my face. Thanks Dave. — Steve Rosen, Beachwood, OhioThe show where Carson came out, sat behind the desk, and left without saying a word. The show after Carson died. The show after 9/11. — Nancy Klein, Ellicott City, Md. Must’ve been sometime in the ’80s, when I could still stay up so late. Nastassja Kinski came on with her long hair standing straight up, defying gravity. Letterman played it straight, but barely, as he was obviously struggling to NOT laugh or say something funny about her hair. After a commercial break, his next guest came out: John Candy, with his (short) hair standing straight up from his head! And still, Dave and John played it straight. Everyone in the audience and at home was dying with laughter, but Dave only cracked that wry smile of his. — Koyote, the Great PlainsI will never forget Biff Henderson walking up behind people in Central Park for the “It’s a Tuba!” sketch! Dave’s simple delight in pure nonsense and public embarrassment, matched with Biff’s sweet, Everyman demeanor, left every victim glad for the tuba blast that startled sleep or spilled coffee. That simplicity also belied the deeper necessity: we need goofballs like Dave in our lives to make the real nonsense bearable. I haven’t always loved what you’ve done, Dave, but I’ve watched you since I was in college in ’83 — thanks for the laughs! — Jeff Wescott, Traverse City, Mich.