CANNES, France — Paolo Sorrentino’s “Youth,” having its premiere at the Cannes Film Festival on Wednesday night, stars Michael Caine as Fred Ballinger, an aging composer on vacation at a Swiss resort. Asked at a news conference Wednesday how it felt to be getting older and asked to play aging characters, Mr. Caine cut to the point. “The only alternative to playing elderly people is playing dead people,” the 82-year-old actor said. “So I picked elderly people.”“Youth” is in competition for the Palme d’Or here. At its press preview on Wednesday, it received a mixed reception of loud applause and some boos.This is Mr. Caine’s first appearance at Cannes since 1966, when he starred in “Alfie.”“‘Alfie’ won a prize and I didn’t, so I never came back,” he said at the news conference, to applause. In “Youth,” the queen of England asks Fred to conduct a concert of his most famous work. Mr. Caine, who was knighted by Queen Elizabeth II in real life, said he had once been seated next to her at a dinner, where she asked him if he knew any jokes. “I said, ‘None that I could tell you,’” Mr. Caine recalled in his Cockney deadpan.The film also stars Harvey Keitel as Mick Boyle, an aging film producer, and features a vivid cameo appearance by Jane Fonda. Ms. Fonda,  77, agreed with Mr. Caine on the need to keep working. “For me this movie called ‘Youth’ says something that I very much agree with: that age is a question of attitude,” she said. “You remain young and vital in your spirit when you have passion in your life and I do and the film does.”“Youth” is Mr. Sorrentino’s first film since “The Great Beauty,” which won the Oscar for  foreign language film last year, and his second English-language film (after “This Must Be the Place” in 2011). Critics have given the new movie mixed reviews. In The Guardian, Peter Bradshaw called it “a diverting minor work” with moments of brilliance, noting that Mr. Caine brings “a distant, fatherly charm.” In Indiewire, Eric Kohn wrote that in casting Mr. Caine and Mr. Keitel as “a pair of strained artists approaching 80 and moaning about their dwindling prospects,” the film gave the actors “their best material in years.”In a plot twist reminiscent of “Birdman,” Paul Dano  plays Jimmy Tree, an actor trying to live down a role in an action film. That resonated with the stars of “Youth.” At the news conference, Mr. Caine said he had been stopped on the street by 12-year-olds who know him only as “Batman’s butler.” Ms. Fonda said she had wrestled with the same issue. “‘Barbarella,’” she said, referring to the 1968 science-fiction cult classic. “It stuck to me and I have been conflicted; that’s all I have to say.”