The producers of “Fun Home,” a much-praised new musical with an emotional punch and, now, packed houses, said Wednesday that they would take the production on tour next year.And the producers of “Something Rotten!,” an exuberant musical spoof that is emerging as one of the season’s box office successes, said that their show, too, would go on tour, confirming statements they had made while meeting with executives from theaters around the country last week.The two Tony-nominated shows, one powered by tears and the other by laughter, join a packed crowd of Broadway productions vowing to tour during the 2016-2017 season, posing a challenge for theater bookers but an opportunity for theatergoers. Another Tony-nominated new musical, the balletic “An American in Paris,” has previously announced that it will tour, as have two Tony-nominated musical revivals, “The King and I” and “On the Town,” and one Tony-nominated play, “The Curious Incident of the Dog in the Night-Time.”And this year’s Tony nominees are not the only new entrants on the road: “Finding Neverland,” the new musical about the Peter Pan author J.M. Barrie, is planning to tour, as are “If/Then” and “Bridges of Madison County,” which opened last season and have since closed on Broadway, and “Hedwig and the Angry Inch,” which opened last season and is still running on Broadway. A touring production of “Matilda the Musical” is just getting underway. And two musicals from London, “The Bodyguard” and “Love Never Dies,” are expected to bypass Broadway and go straight to the road.“Something Rotten!,” which imagines the invention of musical theater by two 16th-century brother-playwrights frustrated by an inability to compete with Shakespeare, plans to begin touring in January 2017. The show, with a book by Karey Kirkpatrick and John O’Farrell, and music and lyrics by Mr. Kirkpatrick and his brother, Wayne Kirkpatrick, has been nominated for 10 Tony Awards.“Fun Home,” which is a musical adaptation of a graphic memoir by the cartoonist Alison Bechdel, chronicles Ms. Bechdel’s effort to better understand her coming-of-age as a lesbian and her father’s suicide. The musical, with a score by Jeanine Tesori and book and lyrics by Lisa Kron, has been nominated for 12 Tony awards.The “Fun Home” tour is more surprising news because of the show’s serious subject matter. In an interview Wednesday, the show’s producers said they had made the decision after a number of road presenters saw the production while in New York for a conference last week, and said they would be interested in seeing the show tour.The producers said the tour would be modest in length and would be priced lower than some other shows. But they also noted that numerous other serious and small-scale shows have toured successfully in the past, and that the operators of theaters around the country actively seek a diverse mix of productions to present to their subscribers.“There are places the tour won’t go, but there are so many where it will go — people are responding to the show because of its universal themes,” said Barbara Whitman, who is one of the lead producers, along with Kristin Caskey and Mike Isaacson. “It’s about a specific family, but it’s a story for everyone, and presenters are getting that.”A version of this article appears in print on 05/21/2015, on page C4 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Tours for ‘Fun Home’ And ‘Something Rotten!’.