OSLO — After a construction site opened next door to the Nobel Peace Center, the museum for the Nobel Peace Prize here, the museum directors decided their side of the fence should send a message.They ultimately settled on a mural that is 60 meters long (about 65 yards) depicting images from the Mediterranean migrant crisis, painted directly onto the plywood construction fence along one of Oslo’s central pedestrian areas by the artists Vigdis Fjellheim and Torunn Skjelland. Up to 80,000 people pass by each day.“It was clear to us early on that we wanted to do something that corresponded with our values,” said Liv Astrid Sverdrup, deputy director of the Nobel Peace Center, about the artwork, titled “Mare Nostrum – Our Ocean.” The topic was suggested by the artists, who had been following the stories of Mediterranean migrants in the news media.Wearing paint-splattered overalls and dodging rain showers, Ms. Fjellheim and Ms. Skjelland are working up to 12 hours a day to complete the mural by June 10, which is the Nobel Peace Center´s 10th anniversary. The artwork will be temporary; next March, another mural, yet to be selected, will be painted onto the fence.Many migrants are so desperate to reach Europe that they drown trying to cross the Mediterranean in vessels that are not seaworthy, and their numbers have reached crisis proportions in recent months. The artists, who were given the commission in April, made a collage of dozens of press photos about the crisis and of painted ocean imagery, which they are transferring onto the fence.One  picture they have chosen to copy is from The Associated Press, of the 6-year-old boy Elyud Dawit after he drowned off the coast of Greece along with his mother this month. According to Adresseavisen, the regional Norwegian newspaper that identified the family, the boy’s uncle is a refugee from Eritrea living in Norway. The photo, which briefly became a symbol of the migrant crisis, showed the boy still wearing a typical Norwegian woolen hat as his body was lifted by a Greek fisherman.In Ms. Fjellheim and Ms. Skjelland’s artwork the fisherman and the rest of the background have been rendered in contrasting colors. Early this week the red of the boy’s hat was still a blank spot on the fence, waiting to be filled in.“As Norwegians, we’re so protected from most things,” Ms. Skjelland said, explaining why she believes that the artwork should be seen in the Oslo harbor. But both artists are adamant that their work, while political, gives no prescription for what is to be done about the crisis.But Ms. Fjellheim added, “We do have the moral responsibility to care.”