Updated, 1:20 p.m. |  CANNES, France — “My Mother,” the latest film by the Italian director Nanni Moretti, tells the story of a film director trying to hold things together on the set while her mother, a retired high school teacher, is dying in a hospital in Rome. The film springs from reality. Mr. Moretti’s mother was a beloved teacher of Latin and Greek at one of Rome’s leading public high schools, and she died in 2010, when he was making “We Have a Pope.”“The idea started to grow a little bit after the real death of my mother,” Mr. Moretti said in an interview here on Sunday. After finishing “Pope,” he said, “I thought that I wanted to recount this loss, this mourning, but from the start — I don’t know why — I thought that the protagonist of this story should be a woman.”She is played by Margherita Buy, who brings a depth of feeling that is sometimes absent in films where Mr. Moretti plays himself. “I wanted to entrust this female protagonist with characteristics that I sometimes have,” Mr. Moretti said. “I never thought of putting myself at the center of the film.”Ms. Buy also appeared in “We Have a Pope” and “The Cayman,” Mr. Moretti’s 2006 meditation on the era of the former prime minister, Silvio Berlusconi. “I wanted her from the start,” Mr. Moretti said of having Ms. Buy in the new film. “I knew that she’d be able to take on the film and carry it herself.”“My Mother” has met with positive if not overly effusive reviews. Indiewire called it “intimate but unfulfilling,” while Variety said it was “unquestionably affecting,” but that its powerful moments were “not always well integrated with the broadly pitched moviemaking scenes.” These feature John Turturro, speaking in intentionally broken Italian, as an American actor in the film within a film.Mr. Moretti, a Cannes regular since he won the best director prize for “Dear Diary” in 1994 and the Palme d’Or for “The Son’s Room” in 2001, said he met Mr. Turturro at Cannes years ago and had wanted to work with him for a long time. “There’s always a vein of madness in his characters,” Mr. Moretti said.The film also talks about the intergenerational bond between the dying Ada (Giulia Lazzarini)   and her teenage granddaughter, and the confidences they share. “The rapport between a grandmother and a grandchild is much more direct, without mediation,” Mr. Moretti said.Adding a level of intimacy to the film, the books in Ada’s apartment are from the library of Mr. Moretti’s parents (his father was a university professor of Greek epigraphy), as are some household objects. And Ms. Lazzarini occasionally wears cardigans of that belonged to Mr. Moretti’s mother.Like the character Ada, Mr. Moretti’s mother continued to stay in touch with former students. After her death, he said, “They told me things that I didn’t know about my own mother, important and substantial things.”“This is pretty tough,” he added.This year there are three Italian films in competition: Mr. Moretti’s; Matteo Garrone’s “Tale of Tales,” a fantasy that received lukewarm reviews; and “Youth” by Paolo Sorrentino, which was shown on Wednesday. Mr. Moretti said the films were “a sign of the vitality” of Italian cinema, but were more the product of “individual initiative” by the directors than the product of a thriving filmmaking system of the kind France has.Mr. Moretti said he was always excited to return to the festival. “I get emotional as if it were the first time,” he said.