Times critics share what they’ve been listening to lately.RAMEAU: The Sound of Light 
Nadine Koutcher, soprano; Alexei Svetov, bass; Teodor Currentzis, conductor; MusicAeterna
(Sony) 
The Greek conductor Teodor Currentzis and MusicAeterna, the orchestra and chamber choir he founded in the remote Siberian city of Perm, burst onto the scene last year with a sharply idiosyncratic recording of Mozart’s “Le Nozze di Figaro.” Here he brings the same electrifying energy to instrumental selections and vocal scenes from Rameau’s operas. If there is a hint of narcissism in the way Mr. Currentzis bends tempos to his will and ratchets up extreme dynamics there’s also no doubt as to the exhilarating, shock-and-awe vitality of these performances. (Corinna da Fonseca-Wollheim)‘TIME PRESENT AND TIME PAST’
Mahan Esfahani, harpsichord; Concerto Köln
(Arkhiv/Deutsche Grammophon) 
A model recording for any instrument, not just the harpsichord. Concertos? Three, one by Gorecki, one by Geminiani, another by J.S. Bach, all weightily played by the Concerto Köln. Florid, stylish solo works? Two, both — like the Geminiani — based on the ancient “La Folia” theme, by Alessandro Scarlatti and C.P.E. Bach. Mesmerizing novelties? Of course: Steve Reich’s “Piano Phase,” rearranged and overdubbed for single harpsichord. Exhaustingly brilliant. (David Allen)HINDEMITH: Piano Sonatas Nos. 1 to 3, Suite “1922” 
David Korevaar, piano
(MSR Classics)
Paul Hindemith came to attention in Germany during the 1920s as the composer of some wildly experimental operas and film scores. In the 1930s, he adopted a more Neo-Classical style, composing essentially in a tonal language enriched with contemporary sonorities and demonstrating utter mastery of counterpoint. Today, his Neo-Classical instrumental pieces can seem a little square, though not when this excellent American pianist, a Hindemith champion, plays them. His welcome new recording offers the Piano Sonatas No. 1 to 3, all written in 1936. In these vibrant performances these works come across as abounding in character and craft. The Second Sonata is a beguiling gem and the brawny First and elaborate Third, with its bold final fugue, deserve to be heard more. Mr. Korevaar also includes Hindemith’s brash, impish Suite for Piano “1922” (written that year), with movements inspired by a shimmy and ragtime. Hindemith disavowed the piece after arriving in American in 1940. He was wrong: Just listen to Mr. Korevaar’s compelling performance. (Anthony Tommasini)‘CHAMBER INDUSTRIAL': Per Bloland
Jeffrey Means, conductor; Ecce Ensemble
(Tzadik)
Bloland’s lushly caustic music is at its most original and satisfying when it involves electronics, as in this disc’s thumping, crunchy opening track, “Solis-EA.” Solemn and ecstatic, the piece twice seems to have exhausted itself before heaving back into action with the slouchy power of a wave. In “Wood Machine Music,” a string quartet, clarinet, percussion and electronics create a ripping, roaring soundscape, like the middle of an earthquake; more reticent is the moody, even noir-ish “Of Dust and Sand,” for alto saxophone and a piano whose strings are vibrated by electromagnets. Two acoustic pieces, “A Drift of Swine” and “…walk now and then into the breath that blows coldly past…,” are twitchily detailed but feel less unique than Bloland’s electronic grandeur. (Zachary Woolfe)SPOTIFY PLAYLIST
Tracks from the recordings discussed this week. (Spotify users can also find it here.)