AdvertisementSupported byBy Zachary WoolfeGood morning, music fans!The crazy, kaleidoscopic world that’s usually (if inadequately) called “classical music” can be overwhelming, even for people who love it. So once a week, we’re going to point you to some news, reviews, coming events, sounds and videos that are exciting us — and hopefully will excite you, too. Let us know if there are things you’d like to see in this space, and what you’re reading and hearing. Use the comments section, or tweet at @zwoolfe.SUSANNA MALKKI: “ONE OF THE MOST GIFTED CONDUCTORS”In this weekend’s Arts & Leisure section, I profiled Susanna Malkki, who makes her New York Philharmonic debut on Thursday; Deborah Borda, the president of the Los Angeles Philharmonic and a sharp observer of the classical music scene, calls her “one of the most gifted conductors of her generation.” (The Los Angeles Times just did a fascinating piece on Borda.)The meat of her program at Avery Fisher Hall is Brahms’s Piano Concerto No. 1; the soloist is Kirill Gerstein, who has both jazz and classical chops.Ms. Malkki is probably best known for conducting new music, though, and she’s going to lead the Philharmonic in its first performance of a work by Jonathan Harvey, who died in 2012. The piece is called “Tranquil Abiding”; it’s both muscular and spiritual. (Don’t worry, your headphones are working: It takes about 20 seconds to start building.)MUSIC AT THE WHITNEYMusical offerings from the new incarnation of the Whitney Museum start Friday, with four programs over three days featuring the experimental composer and performer David Rosenboom.And player-piano aficionados, get excited: A festival of music by Conlon Nancarrow, who specialized in the instrument, is coming to the Whitney next month.There’s another museum-music pairing this week: a work-in-progress presentation on Friday and Saturday at Roulette of George Lewis’s opera “Afterword” tied to an exhibition opening in July  at the Museum of Contemporary Art Chicago about the Association for the Advancement of Creative Musicians. (Nate Chinen wrote memorably about the association, a 50-year-old new-music and jazz collective that he called “one of this country’s great engines of experimental art,” in March.)THE BERLIN PHILHARMONIC’S NONELECTIONIf you haven’t yet, read Alex Ross’s thoughtful consideration at The New Yorker’s website of the Berlin Philharmonic’s (non)election of a new conductor. His piece is an indictment of our obsession with messianic maestros. (An essential book on a similar theme is “Understanding Toscanini,” by Joseph Horowitz. It’s out of print but easily available online.) I agree with Alex’s basic point, that we should care more about orchestras’ visions than about their leaders. However, in this case, it appears that the debate was over several very different candidates — and what is that if not a fundamental disagreement (worth all the fuss) about the ensemble’s direction?HAPPY BIRTHDAY!On Friday, celebrate Richard Wagner’s birthday with this video of the peerless Waltraud Meier as Isolde:Advertisement