AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn Shattuck1 A.M. (FX Movie Channel) THE TREE OF LIFE (2011) Jack O’Brien (Sean Penn), a middle-aged architect haunted by the death of his younger brother years earlier in the 1960s, tries to reconcile his complicated relationship with his father (Brad Pitt) while contemplating human existence — the origin of the universe, the development of life on earth, the end of time — in this drama from Terrence Malick. Jessica Chastain plays Jack’s mother, whose grief, with that of her husband, cast a shadow of tragedy over everything that will follow in this nonlinear film. Hunter McCracken, a first-time actor, is Jack as a boy growing up in Texas. “The sheer beauty of this film is almost overwhelming,” A. O. Scott wrote in The New York Times, “but as with other works of religiously minded art, its aesthetic glories are tethered to a humble and exalted purpose, which is to shine the light of the sacred on secular reality.” The movie, which won the top prize at the Cannes Film Festival, received Oscar nominations for best picture, best director and best cinematography, for Emmanuel Lubezki.5 P.M. (Fox Business) THE WILLIS REPORT Gerri Willis investigates new hiring practices by the Federal Aviation Administration that may be putting fliers at risk.5:15 P.M. (HBO) CLEAR HISTORY (2013) Larry David stars as Nathan Flomm, a West Coast marketing director who loses his 10 percent stake in an electric-car company when he has a disagreement with his boss, Will Haney (Jon Hamm), on the eve of a breakthrough: a car with twice the battery life of its competitors. While Will goes on to become an environmental hero and billionaire, Nathan becomes a laughingstock and seeks to cool his blistering shame by changing his name to Rolly and starting over in Martha’s Vineyard. Then Will arrives by seaplane with his glamorous new wife (Kate Hudson), moves into a monstrosity of a summer house — and fails to recognize his former colleague. That’s when Rolly plots revenge. “Clear History,” Alessandra Stanley wrote in The Times, is “a reminder of how rare it is to find this kind of sophisticated farce in movie theaters.” Mr. David “makes glancing allusions to books and movies and relies on his own amusing, unexpected flights of fancy,” she added, calling the result “a memorable comedy about a man trying to be forgotten.”7:30 P.M. (CUNY) BRIANLEHRER.TV Starting with the Amtrak derailment in Philadelphia, Mr. Lehrer looks at the challenges of making places safer. In “Independent Sources,” at 8:30, Sarah Pizon reports on Military Accessions Vital to the National Interest, a program that offers immigrants with coveted language and medical skills a fast track to American citizenship by enlisting in the military.8 P.M. (ABC) 500 QUESTIONS Brainiac contestants, starting with a lawyer and a neuroscientist, try to answer 500 questions for cash without getting three in a row wrong — or they’re out. (Richard Quest of CNN hosts.)8 P.M. (Fox) MASTERCHEF Season 6 begins as 40 amateur cooks present their signature dishes to the chefs Gordon Ramsay, Graham Elliot and the newest judge, Christina Tosi of Momofuku Milk Bar.8 P.M. (13, 49) THE SAGEBRUSH SEA “Nature” explores the fragile, little-known sagebrush ecosystem that stretches across 11 states in the American West and supports more than 170 scrappy species of birds and mammals, perhaps most notably the greater sage-grouse.8 P.M. (NBC) THE MYSTERIES OF LAURA Jake (Josh Lucas) lies in critical condition while Laura (Debra Messing) tracks down his shooter. In “Law & Order: Special Victims Unit,” at 9, Benson (Mariska Hargitay) fears for the future of her foster son when his adoption is brought into the case again the sex trafficker Johnny D (Charles Halford).9 P.M. (ABC) MODERN FAMILY Phil (Ty Burrell) attends the graduation of Alex (Ariel Winter) by robot proxy. In “black-ish,” at 9:30, the Johnsons take a trip down memory lane to 1920s Harlem. Sean Combs and Mary J. Blige guest star.What’s Streaming NowTHE TWILIGHT ZONE For those mourning the end of Don Draper and his existential panic, check out Episode 5 of the first season, in which an advertising executive sets out on a quest for his own sanity. He stops at a gas station not far from the hometown he hasn’t visited in 25 years and walks into the past. (hulu.com, iTunes).Advertisement