By ROBERTA SMITHMAY 19, 2015
The Brooklyn Museum announced on Tuesday that its next director would be Anne Pasternak, who has spent the last two decades as president and artistic director of Creative Time, a prominent arts organization that stages free projects, exhibitions and events at public sites throughout New York. Ms. Pasternak will succeed Arnold L. Lehman, who is retiring in June as director after nearly 18 years. He reshaped the museum in significant ways, seeking foremost to reach a larger, more diverse audience.The announcement came after a vote by its board of trustees. In an interview, Elizabeth A. Sackler, its chairwoman, said she was “over the moon” about the appointment. “I think this is going to be a fabulous partnership,” she said. Ms. Pasternak “has created a very worthy cultural establishment,” Ms. Sackler added. “Now she is ready to lead an institution.”Ms. Pasternak, 50, who takes over the post on Sept. 1, will be the first woman to lead one of New York City’s two big, encyclopedic art museums. (The other is the Metropolitan Museum of Art.) She will oversee the second largest art museum in the city, with a collection of more than a million works and a full-time staff of 308, including 20 curators and departments from ancient Egyptian to contemporary and feminist art.The choice of Ms. Pasternak is unusual because she has never held a job in a museum. After a brief period working for a commercial art gallery, her career has unfolded entirely within the nonprofit world of up-by-your-bootstraps alternative spaces and nomadic arts groups. But at Creative Time, where she assumed the directorship in 1994, she had become well known for both her socially engaged programming and her skills in negotiating the shoals of New York City government, real estate and fund-raising, where she made artistic events accessible partly by removing them from museums.Advertisement“Anne and Arnold share interests in art that engages contemporary public issues and new audiences,” said Tom Finkelpearl, commissioner of cultural affairs for New York City, citing Creative Time’s “Funk, God, Jazz and Medicine: Black Radical Brooklyn” last year as a show “that brought diverse audiences through a community into contact with some topical, edgy art.” He added: “The impulse to cross borders and confront issues is certainly shared by the two of them. They are fearless, happy to mix it up.”AdvertisementMr. Finkelpearl, whose wife, Eugenie Tsai, is a curator at the Brooklyn Museum, said Ms. Pasternak’s lack of museum experience would not be a hindrance, citing her experience in board and staff development. “You can’t have expertise in every area in an encyclopedic museum,” he said. “Mainly you have to be a good evaluator and a good attractor of talent, and Anne is both those things.”In a telephone interview, Ms. Pasternak said, “If there was one job I fantasized about, it was being director of the Brooklyn Museum.” She added: “My mother is from Flatbush, and I grew up hearing stories about her weekend visits to the museum. I also know many contemporary artists who had their first art classes at the Brooklyn Museum. So this connection feels both personal and historical.”In 1994, when Ms. Pasternak became Creative Time’s third president, it had an operating budget of $350,000 and she was its only full-time employee. It currently has a staff of 25 full-time employees and a budget of $5 million, largely from foundations and private donors. The Brooklyn Museum’s budget for fiscal year 2014 was $35 million.One of Creative Time’s most popular and symbolically rich events recently was “A Subtlety, or the Marvelous Sugar Baby,” conceived by the artist Kara Walker for a former Domino Sugar warehouse on the Brooklyn edge of the East River. The work was dominated by an enormous sugar-covered sphinx with the head of a black woman, on a site where sugar cane harvested by slave labor once arrived by boat from the Caribbean. People lined up around the block to see it.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Creative Time also organized “Tribute in Light,” a ghostly evocation of the twin towers created by three architects, two artists and a lighting designer that has been staged annually in Lower Manhattan to commemorate the anniversary of the Sept. 11 attacks. Sites for other projects have included city stoops, parks and heavily trafficked landmarks like Grand Central Terminal, whose Vanderbilt Hall was used as a stage for dancers fantastically costumed as horses in Nick Cave’s “Heard NY” in 2013.In a sense, Ms. Pasternak and Creative Time have grown up together. After majoring in museum management at the University of Massachusetts, Amherst, she worked as a curator for Real Art Ways, an alternative space in Hartford, and was director and co-founder of BRAT, a small nonprofit organization in SoHo that focused on emerging artists. She has an M.A. in art history from Hunter College and is married to the artist Mike Starn; they have a college-age daughter.Ms. Pasternak inherits a museum that is in some ways a work in progress. Her predecessor, Mr. Lehman, mounted trendy shows devoted to hip-hop culture, “Star Wars” and graffiti art that rankled the art world. But during his last years the museum became very nimble at organizing impressive shows of contemporary artists — including Mickalene Thomas, Swoon and Ai Weiwei — that also reflected Brooklyn’s diversity.The biggest challenge may lie with the permanent collection, whose departments Mr. Lehman substantially reorganized, causing a significant turnover in curators. Ms. Pasternak said one of her long-term tasks will be trying to open unused space within the museum’s Eastern Parkway building. But she returned to Mr. Lehman’s transformation of the museum, including physical improvements and expansions but especially “his extraordinary and hard-won advances in terms of inclusion and diversity.”“I am excited to build on that ethos of welcome,” she said.An article on Wednesday about the selection of Anne Pasternak as the next director of the Brooklyn Museum quoted incorrectly from comments she made about hearing of her mother’s visits to the museum when she was growing up. She said her mother is from Flatbush, not Bushwick.An article on Wednesday about the selection of Anne Pasternak as the next director of the Brooklyn Museum erroneously included one show of works among those organized by the museum in recent years. A show of works by Wangechi Mutu was organized by the Nasher Museum of Art at Duke University and then traveled to the Brooklyn Museum; it was not organized there.An article on May 20 about the selection of Anne Pasternak as the next director of the Brooklyn Museum referred incorrectly to her major at the University of Massachusetts, Amherst. While Ms. Pasternak created her own major and has called it arts administration, the university says the major’s official name is museum management.A version of this article appears in print on May 20, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: Brooklyn Museum Selects Director .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.