
Empire By                     
CRAIG JENKINS

OCT. 22, 2015
Season two of “Empire” is all about extremely awkward Lyon family gatherings, and episode five doesn’t disappoint. Andre is set to get baptized and he wants to have the entire family present, so he spends a good portion of the episode in tough private conversations arranged to get everyone over their anxiety about both church and each other.It pays off gloriously: Cookie and Lucious’s church pew whisper fight nearly bests Hakeem and Jamal’s dining room spat for the best back-and-forth of the season so far. For all Rhonda’s stress about the man’s motives, Andre’s pastor seems good intentioned but bumbling. His suggestion that Andre prepare by confessing old sins to the family is extreme, though, considering all you’re expected to bring to a baptism is an open heart and a change of clothes.Andre’s confessions brings back some juicy back story. We are reminded that he convinced Cookie to use Jamal as leverage against Lucious last season and that he arranged the stick up at the studio where Jamal nearly got shot by friends of Hakeem. It’s great closure to hear Andre apologize to Hakeem and Jamal for coldly using their strife for his personal gain, although the begrudging forgiveness he gets for staging his brother’s robbery is flatly ridiculous, considering how little it took for his brothers to resort to fisticuffs last week. On the eve of Andre’s baptism, these revelations raise the stakes on his choice. He’s capable of so much murder and betrayal and is so adept at concealing it behind a mask of loyalty, it would do everyone well for him to keep his head in a holy book.It appears Andre isn’t the only Lyon hiring people to rob family members. Thieves infiltrate Lyon Dynasty headquarters looking to make off with Cookie’s masters, and after pulling a gun on the pair (alongside her new man), she finds out Thirsty Rawlings sent them. It’s tacky of Lucious to send goons after Cookie, but Cookie keeping her prized earthly possessions in a dilapidated warehouse in a terrible neighborhood is shockingly amateurish. As mistakes like these pile up this season, you begin to see what Cookie and Lucious got out of each other while they were together. He got her tenacity and her ear; she got his ruthlessness and muscle.AdvertisementLucious became the show’s Teflon Don this week as all charges in the season one murder of his associate Bunkie appear to have been dropped. Vernon’s body turning up in the passenger seat of Roxanne Ford’s car was enough to kill the case. As promised, Lucious made Andre president of Empire, fulfilling the kid’s lifelong quest for his father’s approval. What’s more, Vernon’s death has been ruled a suicide. Are we to believe Ford buys this ridiculous explanation for the sudden death of her star witness in a case about Empire associates dying suddenly? Or is she backing down because she fears for her life? “Empire” is the only universe where more death leads to fewer legal consequences.AdvertisementThis week’s other absurd plotline belongs to Jamal, Michael and the artist Chase One. Chase has been openly flirting with Jamal from the moment he was first introduced, and in episode five, he finally makes a pass, offering to perform a sex act on Jamal in Leviticus’s hallway. Jamal refuses, but Michael arrives to the sight of his boyfriend and the artist alone together and looking mighty suspicious. Michael responds by having a roll in the hay with Chase, for whatever reason, perhaps crushing Jamal’s plans to bring him out on a planned tour with Ne-Yo. While it’s refreshing to have a sane gay couple of color like Jamal and Michael representing a very real demographic historically underserved in television, they seem rudderless together this season, like they’re sticking together just to spite the trope of the artist who breaks big and dumps his significant other. That seems destined to change soon, though.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.● Thirsty is not long for this earth. Everyone who has worked for Lucious in the capacity that he does is dead. He knows too much and he’s brash, and that is a recipe for disaster. He made formidable enemies of Andre, Hakeem and Cookie in arranging the Lyon Dynasty heist for Lucious. He’s crafty, but with enemies inside and outside Empire, how long can he last?● Kelly Rowland’s character is alive. I feel it in my bones. These flashbacks are going to keep getting more and more vivid until we find out that Lucious has her stashed away at some wretched care facility he never visits. (Hair and makeup will have the devil’s work making Rowland look old enough to be Terrence Howard’s mother.)● Hakeem’s new singer Laura and his old flame Tiana sure got along quickly didn’t they? Laura spurned Hakeem’s advance this week, informing him that she’s not like other girls, but what if she didn’t quite mean what we think she did?● Is Rhonda really pregnant? Something about the way it was first announced — right at the moment Vernon was killed — and her expression when Andre turned down her offer for an office quickie seemed troubling. She’s been manipulating Andre to do her bidding since last season. How deep does it go?We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »