By DAVID ALLENMAY 19, 2015
“A 29-year-old stewardess fell 1,500 feet to her death tonight,” reported The New York Times on Oct. 20, 1962, “when she was swept through an emergency door that suddenly sprang open on an Allegheny Airlines plane.” What might Françoise de Moriere, who was found outside the town of Farmington, Conn., have felt on the way down? What might her fall mean? That’s the subject of James Dickey’s intense 1967 poem “Falling,” now the basis of Mathew Rosenblum’s effective chamber piece, also called “Falling” (2013).Mr. Rosenblum’s work for electronics, soprano and small ensemble had its New York premiere on Monday at Merkin Concert Hall as part of a New York New Music Ensemble tribute concert to a friend, the composer Lee Hyla. Mr. Hyla, a popular figure whose efforts to meld rock and jazz with classical idioms had a structural exactitude, died last year in Chicago at 61.Three of Mr. Hyla’s relatively recent, relatively brief pieces for small forces gave a sense of his musical personality, but not quite enough. “Mother Popcorn Revisited” (2009), for piano trio, builds themes from two James Brown songs, “Mother Popcorn” and “Give It Up or Turnit a Loose,” and pushes them through a meandering, gestural modernism that owes much to Elliott Carter. Any funk left over was sapped out in a tepid performance by Linda Quan, Christopher Finckel and Stephen Gosling.More effective was “Field Guide” (2006), in which flute, bass clarinet, violin, viola, cello, piano and percussion each stand in for different birds, swapping species as solitude turns to harmony and then to cacophony. Even if Messiaen cornered the ornithological market long ago, this alluring score boasts propulsive percussion (Daniel Druckman) and watery, almost Copland-esque spells of fresh air.There was also more fragmentation in “Polish Folk Songs” (2007), which swaps a clarinet for the flute of “Field Guide.” Here Mr. Hyla ably balances past and present, his dissonant, protesting outbursts rubbing against hints of tunes from the Tatra Mountains of Eastern Europe and even snatches of church chorales, played on keyboard.All that was overshadowed by Mr. Rosenblum’s piece. It lasts about 25 minutes, and at its core is a recorded reading of “Falling” by the poet that flickers in and out of focus. A vocal line (Jamie Jordan) only fully emerges toward the end. Eschewing the relentless downward force of another gravitational song, John Adams’s “Aria of the Falling Body” from “The Death of Klinghoffer,” it seems instead to break slowly apart, its pitches bending, its moods changing — rapt, fretful, eerily suspended — with the dive. If it’s not as capacious as Dickey’s poem, the view from the air is beautiful all the same.A version of this review appears in print on May 20, 2015, on Page C2 of the New York edition with the headline: Elevated Moods Carrying Great Gravitational Force .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.