AdvertisementSupported byCritic’s NotebookBy Jon CaramanicaFew songs move with the easy saunter of Alessia Cara’s debut single, “Here.” Shimmery and springlike, it’s elegant lounge soul, but its glow masks a tension at the core.Ms. Cara begins her first verse defiantly: “I’m sorry if I seem uninterested/ or I’m not listening/or I’m indifferent.”She’s young, she’s at a party, and she hates everyone there: the guy blowing weed smoke, the gossiping girl, the kid throwing up “‘cause he can’t take what’s in his cup no more.” A roomful of teenage abandon is her misery: “Really I would rather be/At home all by myself.”Ms. Cara sings deeply in the pocket, landing heavy on syllables as if she were shifting her weight from one hip to the other, and delivering the hook — “I’ll be over here” — with sass and cool, emphasizing that final word in a manner both rebellious and cocksure.That “here” is a flag planted for the outsiders, the shy kids, the loners. And it makes the stunning “Here” (Def Jam) part of a proud and stubborn lineage of outcast pop by young women. In recent years, songs like Lorde’s “Royals” or Taylor Swift’s “You Belong With Me” have argued their case for outsiderness so stylishly that they helped catapult their singers from the margins to pop’s center.“Here,” which in the three or so weeks since its release has become a genuine viral smash, could place Ms. Cara, an 18-year-old unknown, in that company.Last week, Ms. Cara was in New York for a label showcase and a performance at the TEDxTeen conference. In her first extensive interview, she was opinionated, warm and also a little shy. The party in “Here” was real, she said, as was her discomfort: “I called my mom to come pick me up. It was awful.”But Ms. Cara, who was 16 at the time, had an outlet for that anxiety. She’d recently begun recording demos in a Toronto studio; feeling left out gave her something to write about.“What about me?” Ms. Cara said. “What about the people who are in the corners? There’s not enough light shed on these people.”Ms. Cara, Alessia Caracciolo by birth, grew up in Brampton, a northwestern suburb of Toronto, but far enough away that going to the city was a trek. In school she gravitated toward choir and theater, but at home she would sit in front of her computer and record herself singing. She began posting her cover versions to YouTube, but to little effect.Eventually, one clip was seen by the daughter of the founder of EP Entertainment, a production company with a joint venture with Universal Music Group. The company introduced her to the brother team of Kuya Productions, and a songwriter, Sebastian Kole, and set her up in a studio to write songs.Not much in those reverent YouTube covers indicated the direction Ms. Cara’s music would take, though her puckishness comes through in one clip in which she does a string of celebrity impressions, nailing Ariana Grande’s chipmunk theatrics and Lorde’s husky purr.Modern pop is something of a playfield for Ms. Cara, full of templates to borrow from — she’s partial to Lauryn Hill and Amy Winehouse as stylistic guides — as well as pitfalls to avoid. “Especially with being a teen girl,” she said, “they’re gonna be, like, ‘You’re like this person,’ and it’s so annoying to have to be like: ‘No, I’m not like this person. Give me a chance, and I’ll show you why.’ ”Though she had written poetry and short stories, she didn’t write songs until her first studio sessions with Mr. Kole in 2013. As part of the collaboration, he asked her to write down her feelings as if she were committing them to her journal but email them to him.Those exercises led to savvy, sleek lyrics about the power of being a teenage lone wolf, a recurring theme of her debut album, which will be released this year and which will include production by the pop-R&B savants Pop & Oak and the Frank Ocean collaborator Malay. Take the urgent “Wild Things,” which begins with a valiant call to arms:Find table spaces, say your social graces, bow your headThey’re pious here, but you and I, we’re pioneersWe make our own rules, our own room, no bias hereLet ’em sell what they are selling, there’re no buyers here.The love songs have bite, too, like “I’m Yours,” which paints Ms. Cara’s suitor as an enemy to her self-possession: “How rude of you/to ruin my miserable/and tell me I’m beautiful.” Even the casual wordplay crackles: “Oh I used to be so used to boys just using me/For you to be you to me/Feels new to me.”Ms. Cara’s voice is sweet but deceptive and bristles with nervy energy. She’s not a power singer, but she’s flexible, comfortable with gleaming pop-rock and acoustic Lilith Fair soul. Compared with the cybernetic pop of the day, Ms. Cara is practically rustic, but her producers have built a sound for her that’s sufficiently modern while still allowing her voice room to roam.Some songs on her debut album will be updated versions of her demos; “Here” is one of them. (The single version is produced by Pop & Oak.) The more time she spent in the studio, Ms. Cara said, the better she understood the way pop songs worked, and the more insistent she became about using the form for good. “You don’t have to say the same things everyone else is saying,” she said. “Make the formula. Then say cool things.”It’s important to note, though, that things almost didn’t turn out this way. Initially, Ms. Cara said, her label wanted to release a different, less oppositional song as her introduction. Quietly, she entertained it — “They want to make sure you do well, and a good radio song will do well,” she conceded — but still, she pressed for “Here.”“The other song that we had, I feel like it wouldn’t separate me from the crowd as much,” she said. “As a new artist and as a teen girl, I didn’t want to be compared. I wanted people to be, like, ‘Who is this girl?’ They might have said, ‘Beautiful song,’ but not, ‘Who is the girl?’ ”Eventually she prevailed. The result: “Here” has been a mainstay on Spotify’s viral chart and streamed over a million times.And she’s getting to tell her story in other ways, too. In the video for “Here,” which will be released this month, Ms. Cara recreates the party that inspired the lyrics, recruiting many of the people actually there to reprise their roles. The twist: All those people are frozen, and Ms. Cara moves freely about them.“The attention,” she said, “is finally on the person who’s in the corner.”Advertisement