AdvertisementSupported byBy Gia KourlasFor its big birthday year at the Metropolitan Opera House, American Ballet Theater, at 75, changed its approach: Instead of the traditional opening-night gala, the company got its feet wet last week with a wince-free run of classic repertory, or heritage works, by some of its early choreographers: George Balanchine, Agnes de Mille, Jerome Robbins, Antony Tudor. A gala was inevitable, though, and on Monday the company presented nearly two dozen excerpts and seven speakers, many of whom tried mightily to explain what makes Ballet Theater so American. By Hour 2, it was like being trapped at an increasingly desperate pitch meeting. The company showed its roots in Americana with the first episode of Eugene Loring’s “Billy the Kid,” which entered Ballet Theater’s repertory in 1940. Set to Aaron Copland’s stirring score, the work opens with a scene of pioneers headed west, but it was only mildly potent; the ensemble needed more crispness. The through line continued with Robbins’s “Fancy Free,” about sailors on leave, exuberantly danced by Herman Cornejo, Cory Stearns and Marcelo Gomes. And Xiomara Reyes’s impish Cowgirl in de Mille’s “Rodeo” struck a witty balance between devilish humor and innocence. In Paul Taylor’s Depression-themed “Black Tuesday,” the final section needed more gravity from Daniil Simkin, a dancer happiest in the air; that quality came through later in Alexei Ratmansky’s “The Bright Stream” and in “Le Corsaire.” De Mille’s “Fall River Legend,” featuring Gillian Murphy as Lizzie Borden, had a degree of unintended humor — between the ax and the glares, it was all a little too Charles Addams — but Tudor’s “Pillar of Fire” held its grip. As Hagar, Devon Teuscher showed lust overcoming loneliness as she was drawn into the arms of a virile Mr. Stearns. Even if you love this early repertory, you couldn’t shake the sense that you were clicking through the ballet channel. Scenes from Robbins’s “Les Noces” (either do the whole thing or not) and Jiri Kylian’s “Sinfonietta” (why bother?) were filler, along with an Act IV excerpt from “Swan Lake” for Misty Copeland and James Whiteside. It wasn’t enough to measure Ms. Copeland’s potential in this ballet; her New York debut in the full work comes later this season. Also underwhelming was an excerpt from Tudor’s “The Leaves Are Fading,” in which the romantic duet, danced by Mr. Stearns and Hee Seo, lacked seamlessness.“Études,” by Harald Lander, showed the scrupulous brio of Joseph Gorak, who later returned, fresh and polished, for Balanchine’s “Theme and Variations” with Sarah Lane. Still, “Études” was part of the evening’s strangest invention: a series of quick hits, starting with a “Giselle” snippet featuring Maria Kochetkova. The perimeter of the stage was filled with notables from previous ballets who watched Paloma Herrera gliding effervescently through a section of Balanchine’s “Tchaikovsky Pas de Deux,” and Mr. Stearns and Isabella Boylston, who faltered uncharacteristically in her fouetté turns, in “Don Quixote.” Bows brought former company members to the stage, but two of the gala’s most enduring moments were in the dancing, notably the fourth movement of Twyla Tharp’s “Push Comes to Shove” with Mr. Cornejo in Mikhail Baryshnikov’s role. Along with a section from Mr. Ratmansky’s “Piano Concerto #1,” this transported the company to a place where it could revel in movement. As bowler hats flew in “Push,” Mr. Cornejo, both virtuosic and loose, was an auspicious ringleader. The painful part? Getting only a glimpse of this rarely performed 1976 work.The other high point was Julie Kent, opposite Mr. Gomes, in the Act I pas de deux of Kenneth MacMillan’s “Manon.” For Ms. Kent, who retires from the company in June, it was a last crack at a cherished role, and she took it on with more brazenness than ever — arching deeper, spinning faster and skimming across the floor on point with extraordinary speed. It’s not as if she hasn’t done this sort of thing before — turned a role inside out with unself-conscious exquisiteness — but knowing that it was the last time gave way to a realization: American or not, a real ballerina is born, not made. American Ballet Theater performs through July 4 at the Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center; 212-362-6000, abt.org. Advertisement