By NEIL GENZLINGERMAY 19, 2015
The people who most love Ellis Island are used to nearly impossible tasks. In 1982, when they took up the challenge of making something out of the site, its long-abandoned historic buildings were in a state of dereliction hard to imagine today. In 2012, after Hurricane Sandy left the island almost completely underwater, another formidable rebuilding job presented itself.Physical challenges, though, are one thing, fixable with the application of enough money and muscle. Intellectual ones are another matter and in some ways more difficult. New exhibitions opening at the Ellis Island National Museum of Immigration on Wednesday complete a demanding assignment: to tell the entire story of immigration to the United States, a subject as old as prehistory and as current and contentious as tomorrow’s headlines.The museum is unveiling “The Journey: New Eras of Immigration,” a section that covers immigration since 1954, when Ellis Island’s processing center in New York Harbor closed. Together with the main museum, which naturally deals with Ellis Island’s years as the input point for millions of arrivals (from 1890 to 1954), and a gallery opened in 2011 that examines pre-Ellis immigration, the offerings now encompass the entire immigration story, or try to.The subject is, of course, too vast and polarized to be captured in a way that will please everyone. Those who despise immigration of any kind (well, except for whichever incoming wave brought their ancestors to American shores) will scoff at the presentation here; there are no in-depth treatments of immigrants who came to conduct criminal enterprises or milk the government. That is not to say, though, that anti-immigration sentiment is ignored; rather, it is one element among many in an approach that looks for recurrent themes and influences instead of hot-button talking points.AdvertisementThe post-Ellis gallery mirrors the pre-Ellis one organizationally: It is broken down into the same five sections, on “Leaving,” “Making the Trip,” “Arrival,” “Struggle and Survival” and “Building a Nation.” Those provide a nice framework and some interesting lines of comparison, beginning with the design: an airport-looking motif in the post-Ellis section, a wooden-ship one in the pre-Ellis gallery.One inspired touch is a comparative display that tells how long it would have taken to make the journey from several different places in different centuries. Those grueling boat passages of yore might be a memory now, but recent immigrants still have stories of hardship, especially those coming in surreptitiously across the southern border. The new wing has a number of kiosks where visitors can listen to the recorded stories of recent immigrants: a teenager from Guatemala, a woman escaping strife in Bosnia and Herzegovina. There’s a democratization here. A meatpacker from Guatemala shares a kiosk with Ang Lee, the Oscar-winning film director from Taiwan.AdvertisementThe individual stories, though they might have harrowing moments, are collectively positive. Yet log enough time in the pre- and post-Ellis galleries, and you’ll also be struck by a couple of dismaying constants in the immigration story across the centuries.One is the endless parade of strife that causes people to flee their homelands. There is so much of it that you’ll perhaps be surprised by the disasters, natural and otherwise, that are relatively recent but that you’ve forgotten about already — Biafra, Haitian boat people, El Salvador in 1979.Just as disheartening is the realization that there is no immigrant nationality or race that someone else hasn’t been eager to hate. One placard features a notation about a group called the Native American Association, identified as “American-born whites who consider themselves ‘real’ Americans.” What immigrants were they riled up about? Mexicans? Somalis? Jews? No, Roman Catholics, especially Irish. The item is in the pre-Ellis gallery; the group was formed in 1837.Stephen A. Briganti, president and chief executive of the Statue of Liberty-Ellis Island Foundation, which was instrumental in bringing Ellis Island back to life and continues to underwrite projects there, has his own favorite example of this phenomenon. Back in 1882, he noted while giving a tour of the new galleries, the Chinese were so reviled that the Chinese Exclusion Act shut off immigration from that country. In 2013, he said, China topped the immigration list.The museum was already a lot to digest before the latest offerings, especially given that so many of its 2.2 million visitors a year also want to drop by the Statue of Liberty. Now, the casual visitor is unlikely to be able to take it all in before whiny children or aching feet end the trip. But resist the temptation to race through: Even though much of the immigration story is familiar in a general sort of way, there are still revelations to be gleaned.I found my own in another new section, the Citizenship Gallery, a sort of coda to the rest, devoted to the process of citizenship. An interactive map there shows the distribution of people in the United States by background. So here in the age of endless debate over immigrants from Mexico and Cuba and so on, the country appears to be a nation of — Germans? Yes. The map reveals a veritable Germanic saturation, a tiny bit of which results from my great-grandparents on my father’s side, who met aboard a ship in 1889 when both were making their migratory journey.One other thing is new at Ellis, and it puts everything else here in a whole different context. It’s a stunning illuminated globe in the main hall, onto which is projected a narrative of human migration since the species first appeared. The movement of people from one place to another, it turns out, isn’t an Ellis Island thing or even an American thing; it’s a human thing, driven by need and hope and oppression and opportunity.AdvertisementYou might be tempted to stop at this eye-catching attraction when you first arrive. Instead, absorb as much of the exhibitions on the American immigration story as you can, then visit it on your way out to grab a little of the most valuable thing any museum can provide: perspective.More information on the Ellis Island National Museum of Immigration, a national park, is at nps.gov/elis. A version of this review appears in print on May 20, 2015, on Page C4 of the New York edition with the headline: Your Tired, Your Poor and Even Your Xenophobes at a Rebuilt Ellis Island .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.