CANNES, France — “The Assassin,” the thrillingly beautiful martial arts film from the Taiwanese master Hou Hsiao-Hsien, traces the adventures – as well as the poses, gestures and silences – of a ninth-century Chinese female warrior. Years before when she was a child, Nie Yinniang (Shu Qi, a favorite of the director’s) had been delivered into the care of a powerful, magical nun-princess, Jiaxin, who instructed her in the deadliest of martial arts. Now, the nun has ordered Yinniang to return home and kill Tian Ji’an, to whom she had once been betrothed and who now runs a district roiling from its uneasy relations with the throne.“The Assassin” largely tracks Yinniang as she circles Tian and his compound, where intrigue swirls along with hectoring advisers and flirting concubines dressed in luscious poppy red, royal purple and peony pink. Dressed in all black, a small curved knife tucked in her top knot, Yinniang is, in pointed contrast to the concubines, both a fearsome screen presence and as elusive as the shadows she slips through. As with other Hou characters, she scarcely talks, yet her actions, gestures and steady long looks speak eloquent volumes, as does every detail on screen. In one heart-leaping shot, Mr. Hou shows Yinniang in profile as she spies on Tian Ji’an from behind some curtains in his home, an image that’s beautiful in and of itself yet also expresses her wavering resolve to kill him.Now 69, Mr. Hou arrived on the international cinema stage in the 1980s as part of the Taiwanese new wave, alongside the likes of Edward Yang and Tsai Ming-liang. Mr. Hou has never been especially well-known in the United States, where foreign language cinema viewership, at least in theaters, has long been in lamentable decline. Elsewhere in the world, including here at Cannes, it is, happily, a different story. “The Assassin” is Mr. Hou’s 10th movie to play in this festival, and his first full-length feature since “The Flight of the Red Balloon,” which had its premiere at Cannes in 2007. “The Assassin” was rapturously received at its first press screening, on Wednesday night, and will have its official red-carpet debut Thursday evening. That afternoon,  Hou Hsiao-Hsien (pronounced HO shao shen) spoke — briefly and primarily in Chinese through a translator — about his latest masterwork on a terrace at festival headquarters.“The Assassin” reunites Mr. Hou with his frequent collaborator, Hwarng Wern-Ying, who served as both the costume and production designer. Mr. Hou said that he kept his own research to a reasonable level, but that Mr. Hwarng had studied ancient Chinese costumes and Mr. Hou added with a laugh, “spent quite a lot of money sourcing all the materials,” including traveling to India because that’s where silk came from back then. Mr. Hou said that he didn’t like shooting on soundstages and that when he worked with Mr. Hwarng it was about putting the costumes in “this natural environment, with the natural light.” They worked on colors for the main characters, deciding on black for Yinniang because it was the perfect color “to showcase this woman who hides in the shadows.”Color plays an instrumental role in the movie, which Mr. Hou shot on film.  Like another director in competition this year, Jia Zhang-ke (here from mainland China with “Mountains May Depart”), Mr. Hou also plays with the aspect ratio in “The Assassin,” using the classic square Academy format for an introductory flashback scene of Yinniang swooping down to cut the throat of a man on horseback. Mr. Hou said that the film’s astonishing palette was largely achieved in situ with natural lighting instead of filters or post-production tweaking. Of course you can play around with color, he said, but the reason he wanted to shoot in these places was to capture the light and beauty.It took about a year to make the movie, including three or so months of shooting. They spent a month in Japan, Mr. Hou said, and the gorgeous exterior shots were shot in central China and Inner Mongolia, the site of a silver birch forest in which Yinniang has one of her fiercest battles. Mr. Hou said that he didn’t rehearse the film, which is fairly astonishing given the precision of the camerawork and how bodies move through his space in it. Instead, Mr. Hou sets up the two (Arri) cameras and lets the performs work it out.  If it succeeds, then that’s the shot that they use. “But if it doesn’t,” Mr. Hou explained, he “will shift the image based on what they’re working with.” He doesn’t pressure them to be “so technical” when they’re shooting, and that’s the “way he’s always worked.”A genius of the long take, Mr. Hou hasn’t yet counted the number of shots in “The Assassin,” but he laughed when he said there weren’t many. (An earlier film, “Flowers of Shanghai,” has 38.) He has some thoughts on the rapidly edited movies that now dominate cinema, saying that “younger people have been watching these types of movies for so long that their minds are only about edits.” In the United States, he continued, the filmmaking thought process is that it’s all “going to be done in the editing suite” at the end. “It’s not about the performance, it’s about the edit.” For him, this changes the very nature of the film. “There’s something in a long shot, an essence,” Mr. Hou said, that he can’t really describe. I suggested that it was life itself, and then it was time for us to say goodbye.   