CANNES, France — The director Abel Ferrara made headlines in March when he publicly objected to a revised edit of  “Welcome to New York,” his fictional take  on the sexual assault case involving Dominique Strauss-Kahn and a Manhattan hotel maid.Mr. Ferrara had accused Vincent Maraval, one of the film’s producers, of “arbitrary censorship” in editing the film to secure an R rating (it had initially been rated NC-17) as called for by his contract with IFC, which distributed it in the United States. “The real crime is, where does this guy come off trying to change my film? I’m a final-cut director. It’s a freedom-of-speech issue,” the director said at the time, referring to Mr. Maraval.Mr. Maraval did not comment then, but asked Thursday about the controversy at the Cannes Film Festival, where he was presenting Gaspar Noé’s pornographic 3-D film “Love,” Mr. Maraval smiled and said that Mr. Ferrara loved to get media attention.“I’ve made five films with him, and every time he has a film coming out in the United States, he always does a kind of show for promotion, and it works,” said Mr. Maraval, a founder of the powerful  French production and distribution company Wild Bunch.He said he had to edit several scenes to get an R rating and that Mr. Ferrara hadn’t disagreed. “He didn’t see it,” Mr. Maraval said of the new version. “He said, ‘I don’t care.’ ”“Welcome to New York” stars Gérard Depardieu as Mr. Strauss-Kahn and Pamela Afesi as a  maid who accuses him of rape. The edited version cut 15 minutes from the film and portrayed the rape as a flashback, changes that Mr. Ferrara said had altered the political dimensions of the film.(Mr. Strauss-Kahn, a former head of the International Monetary Fund, settled a civil case with his accuser in 2012.)In March, Mr. Ferrara’s lawyer acknowledged that the director’s contract had required him to produce an R-rated film but said that Wild Bunch had “waived this right” when it accepted the director’s cut from Mr. Ferrara.So all the controversy about the edited version? “It worked well,” Mr. Maraval said.Mr. Ferrara has also been at Cannes this year. He announced that he was starting a Kickstarter campaign to finance his next film, “Siberia,” which he described as “a subjective and objective journey into the subconscious” starring Willem Dafoe. The actor also starred in Mr. Ferrara’s 2014 biopic “Pasolini,” about the Italian poet Pier Paolo Pasolini. 