CANNES, France — “Son of Saul,” a first feature by the Hungarian director Laszlo Nemes set at Auschwitz in 1944, has generated some of the strongest reviews of any film shown in competition at this year’s Cannes Film Festival — but also some of the most intense controversy.The camera barely leaves the face of Saul (first-time actor Geza Rohrig), a member of the Sonderkommando, the Jewish prisoners ordered to clear the corpses from the gas chambers. He tries to bury his son in the chaos of the death camp. Variety called the film “a terrifyingly accomplished first feature” and it is widely seen as a top candidate to win a prize.But the film, which has been picked up for distribution by Sony Pictures Classics, has started a debate about whether the Sonderkommando were victims or perpetrators, and what it means to focus on one man’s life. In The Times, Manohla Dargis called the film “a radically dehistoricized, intellectually repellent movie,” in which the focus on Saul comes at the expense of broader context.In an interview here on Tuesday, Mr. Nemes, 38, said he welcomed the debate and intended the film to start a conversation. “Since the end of the Second World War I’ve seen very clearly that many people more or less consider the Holocaust as a mythical story and approached it probably from a defensive mechanism, as a way to get away from it through survival stories,” he said.He continued, “I don’t think Auschwitz and the extermination of the European Jews was about survival. It was about death. And how Europe killed itself, committed suicide.”Mr. Nemes said he had always been frustrated by a more conventional approach to the Holocaust — one best exemplified by Steven Spielberg’s “Schindler’s List,” that focuses on the victims.In “Son of Saul,” Mr. Nemes said he wanted to “reduce the distance” between the viewer and Saul to show the character’s moral complexity.“This generation, the next generations need to be presented with the visual experience that brings them back to the here and now of the concentration camp and have the point of view in the story applied to one human being,” Mr. Nemes said.At a news conference here last week, Mr. Rohrig, a Hungarian poet who lives in New York, tapped into a longstanding debate about whether the Sonderkommando were victims or perpetrators. “They were 100 percent victims,” he said. “They had no control of their destinies.”Mr. Nemes, son of the Hungarian director Andras Jeles, was born in Budapest, where he now lives, and raised partly in Paris. He said he grew up with stories about how his grandparents’ families were decimated.  More than 400,000 Hungarian Jews were deported to Auschwitz in 1944. “It was a constant thought in the family,” he said, “this feeling that something is missing.”Mr. Nemes studied film at New York University, then got his start working as an assistant to the Hungarian director Bela Tarr. “It was my real film school,” he said.The director added that he had grown up watching “Shoah,” Claude Lanzmann’s 1985 documentary. The two directors met this week in Cannes, and Mr. Lanzmann said of the new film, “C’est bon,” Mr. Nemes reported.Mr. Nemes said he failed to find financing in France or Israel for “Son of Saul” because of its riskiness. “Film funds in Europe, for example, think that it’s a subject, it’s not a film, the Holocaust,” he said. “Everyone is scared to talk about it in an unconventional way, because a conventional way is somehow reassuring for the audience. They know where the guilt lies, they know where the violence is, they know because these paths have been cleared for them,” he said.“I did not want to go with this path. I take the audience in an entirely different path,” he added. “It’s scary, but I hope that it also somehow gives them something new.”