AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn Shattuck8 P.M. (NBC) RED NOSE DAY This British Comic Relief fund-raising campaign — created by the charity worker Jane Tewson and the director Richard Curtis (“Love Actually,” “Notting Hill”), and first broadcast on Christmas Day 1985 from a refugee camp in Sudan — crosses the ocean. In this three-hour event Will Ferrell, Jennifer Hudson, Jack Black, John Krasinski, Emily Blunt, Gwyneth Paltrow, Christina Aguilera, John Legend and Sam Smith, present comedy, music and videos produced by Funny or Die on behalf of 12 nonprofit organizations aiding poor children in the United States and abroad.2:45 P.M. BAD WORDS (2014) Guy Trilby (Jason Bateman, who also directed), a 40-year-old bully who has wormed his way onto the spelling-bee circuit, mows down the competition with one expletive after another until he reaches the nationals. And then he encounters Chaitanya Chopra (Rohan Chand), a socially awkward 10-year-old in need of a friend. “It would be something to see Mr. Bateman go authentically dark (perhaps not that dark), but it’s also enough just to watch him as he widens his eyes, furrows his brow and shows off his excellent timing,” Manohla Dargis wrote in The New York Times. “It’s a fluid feature-directing debut, and he pulls the ensemble together smoothly,” she added. “The performances are funny, appealing and, in the case of Allison Janney, as a spelling bee official, wonderful. A dowdied-down Kathryn Hahn has it tougher as Jenny, a reporter who’s chasing Guy for his story and occasional sex. It’s a pathetic role, largely because she’s a sad piñata made for the whacking simply because, it seems, the only thing worse than making kids cry is being a journalist.”5 P.M. (Starz Cinema) AT MIDDLETON (2014) Vera Farmiga and Andy Garcia play parents who meet angry on a college tour and then abandon their children (Ms. Farmiga’s sister, Taissa Farmiga, and Spencer Lofranco) for an adventure of their own in this first feature directed by Adam Rodgers. “Some advance publicity is describing ‘At Middleton’ as a romantic comedy, but that is too simplistic a label for this delicate, restrained movie,” Neil Genzlinger wrote in The Times. “Yes, it’s full of droll humor, but it’s also a bittersweet portrait of two people, who, in the process of helping their children choose a college, confront the emptiness of their respective marriages.”8 P.M. (Velocity) WHAT’S MY CAR WORTH? Keith Martin and Josh Nasar begin a sixth season of helping owners determine the value of collectible cars. First up: Steve McQueen’s 1967 Ferrari 275 GTB/4, which was delivered to him on the set of “Bullitt.”8:30 P.M. (13) METROFOCUS Justin Davidson, the New York magazine architecture critic, ponders the possibility of a mile-high building and what it means for people on the streets below. Chelsea Clinton and Juju Chang discuss women’s rights at a Council on Foreign Relations event. And Harold Holzer talks about his latest book, “Lincoln and the Power of the Press.”8:30 P.M. (TV5Monde) L’ADVERSAIRE (2002) Daniel Auteuil portrays a supposed cardiologist for the World Health Organization whose web of lies unravels after he murders his wife, children and parents — leading investigators to discover that he was never a doctor at all. Nicole Garcia directed this drama based on real-life events.9 P.M. (FYI) WHAT THE FUNG?! Andrew and David Fung, comedians and brothers, scour the United States for the best in regional food while sticking to a daily budget of $50 each.10 P.M. (WE) CUTTING IT: IN THE ATL Four salon owners do whatever it takes, and then some, to dominate the hair scene in Atlanta in this new reality series. The latest round of “Braxton Family Values” leads in at 9.10 P.M. (FX) THE COMEDIANS Josh (Josh Gad) takes Billy (Billy Crystal) out for his birthday. In “Louie,” at 10:30, Louie (Louis C. K.) hits the road.What’s Streaming NowEL REY NETWORK PRESENTS: THE DIRECTOR’S CHAIR In a series of one-on-one interviews the director and El Rey network founder Robert Rodriguez chats with Quentin Tarantino, John Carpenter, Guillermo del Toro, Luis Valdez, Francis Ford Coppola and Robert Zemeckis about their careers and what inspires them. (iTunes)Advertisement