By ALASTAIR MACAULAYMAY 20, 2015
At the climax of Tuesday’s curtain calls for the three-act ballet “Othello,” Marcelo Gomes, who had danced the title role, came running onto the stage in a triumphant arc from the rear wings to greet the audience, pausing only — fleetingly, courteously — to greet his Desdemona, Julie Kent. Many in American Ballet Theater’s audience at the Metropolitan Opera House rose and cheered; the warm and generous ardor with which he ran, arms outstretched, made this a great moment.He was showing the authority that makes Othello a leader of men. Principal men in ballet often play princes and nobles, but seldom generals who have commanded in battle; Mr. Gomes, a rare artist, exudes the largeness of spirit and physical power that would make many feel they could follow him unto the breach.Nothing in the preceding choreography, however, was remotely as interesting. Made by Lar Lubovitch in 1997, it might be subtitled “The Cultivation of Cliché.” The artistry of nobody onstage is seriously extended. Why, after an absence of eight years, is this now being revived?It’s almost shocking to observe how painstakingly unoriginal Mr. Lubovitch’s dances are, how few facets of Shakespeare’s tragedy they address in some 125 minutes, and how coarse their quality of dramatic expression is. Part of the play’s fascination lies in how Iago is the more loquacious of the two leading men. Thought, whether honest or duplicitous, seems to tumble from his lips. If Othello, the Moor of Venice, is to dominate — not so easy, since the play deliberately shows how easily he (tricked by a mere handkerchief) is Iago’s dupe — he must do so with the qualities Iago lacks: magnanimity, authority, openhearted passion.AdvertisementMr. Gomes has all that, without question. But although he makes the choreography seem desperately sincere, he cannot make it seem important. Everything here is earnest, big, unsubtle.AdvertisementWhen it came to the crucial tragic expression of how this protagonist is undone by sexual jealousy, my mind flew to many other Othellos in dance, theater and opera. In Doug Elkins’s “Mo(or)town Redux,” (2012) as the Marvin Gaye version of “I Heard It Through the Grapevine” was played, Kyle Marshall crumpled in a series of tiny spasms within the choreography’s governing break-dance style. I saw Jon Vickers as Verdi’s opera Otello twice; I can never forget how in 1977, he played the great monologue “Dio mi potevi” (“Had it pleased Heaven to try me with affliction”) in complete stillness, as if too traumatized to move, whereas in 1980 he very slowly trod his way in a diagonal across the stage as if sleepwalking in misery.I cannot forget what those Othellos did. I cannot remember what Mr. Gomes did on Tuesday because it identical to what happens in too many other bad ballets: strenuous, expressionistic, full-bodied gestures — a high side-kicking extension here, a violent lurch of the torso here, a jerky clutching of the head.The commissioned score, by Elliot Goldenthal, often sounds undistinguished and derivative; you hear echoes of Britten, Prokofiev and many other composers. It nonetheless achieves sonorities, harmonies and melodies that are sometimes individual and unusually atmospheric. The same should not be said for the dances.The four leading characters — Othello, Desdemona, Iago, Emilia — are put through the usual routines of mutual manipulation; the women and Othello are shown as victims in suffering, while Iago, whose malevolence starts the trouble, is as afflicted as any of them. In dance terms, the freest characters onstage here are Cassio and Bianca. On Tuesday the admirable Joseph Gorak had a few opportunities to display his classical distinction as Cassio; and Misty Copeland, as Bianca, had extended sequences to work up a tarantella frenzy.Unfortunately, Mr. Lubovitch’s idea of a tarantella is as coarse as his notion of anguish. He determinedly tells us that the common people here are indeed common: They seldom straighten their legs, they often flex their feet, they’re emphatically vulgar, and that’s about it. Ms. Copeland does more of this than anyone else, and she does it with force.James Whiteside applies all his natural theatrical vitality to Iago; I wish the role were better and fresher. The worst parts, however, are Desdemona and Emilia. Ms. Kent and Stella Abrera were correctly passive and wronged and unhappy: a waste of these artists. Shakespeare’s women have more piercing eloquence than this — and far more feistiness.“Othello” will be in repertory at the Metropolitan Opera House to May 21. metopera.org A version of this review appears in print on May 21, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: A General and His Troupe Enter Battle With Grim Expression .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.