By BEN RATLIFFMAY 20, 2015
Ufomammut is a slow and sure Italian band, a power trio playing a loud, cumbersome and fairly well-trod kind of metal. Hardly any solos here: low-frequency doom riffs and psychedelic oscillations, bass and guitar traveling along more or less the same simple lines, the short drum fills positioned behind the beat in more or less the same way, over and over and over, until each song heaves into a new section.At Saint Vitus in Greenpoint, Brooklyn, on Tuesday, the band played its first New York City show, on its first North American tour, 15 years after the release of its first album. People have been waiting a long time for this. The music made them wait longer. Ufomammut’s set took a while to warm up and solidify. What was that about? Were the musicians relaxing into intuition, or were some gradual adjustments made by the club’s sound engineer? Was it the tube amplifiers, which sound warmer the longer they’re on? Or was it the listener adjusting expectations?The musicians, who go by the single names Poia, Urlo and Vita, are not charismatic with detail and gesture. They’re all contributing equally, almost dutifully. After 10 minutes or so, if you haven’t acclimated yourself to Ufomammut’s sense of time and development, you might start to worry. The band’s lines of influence are clear; no doubt it has listened hard to Sleep and the Melvins. (And Pink Floyd, for the atmospherics and large-scale structure.) But it plays with an occult self-possession. The music moves as if it knows something. What makes it special? What will it reveal under its crust? What does it know?The set had its own organic life: one long response. After about an hour, plodding turned to gliding. The band’s steady repetition of riffs, in patterns of four, five, six or 10 beats, started to gather its own energy. Ufomammut’s name conjoins the acronym for unidentified flying object and the Italian word for mammoth — the animal, the proto-elephant. Extinction and futurism, expiration and ascent, doom and space. This group knows what it’s about.Like any artist working with large canvases, the band divides its work into sections. The songs are repetitive enough for the listener not to register their structure easily. But the set list, down by Poia and Urlo’s feet, turned out to be quite beautiful: a visual chart. (Poia and Urlo both design posters and album covers as part of the collective Malleus.) The chart segmented the flow of each song, identifying the sequence of verses and bridge sections and effects, with notations for dynamics that read like mixtures of private band language and the Latin vulgate bible: “monolith,” “simil theremin,” “mater eius.”The set was for longtime fans: not a concentration on the band’s new album, “Ecate,” but songs from early days and through “Oro,” a two-album work from 2012 divided into 10 movements. Live and on record, it’s hard to make out the words sung by Urlo, the bassist and singer. At Saint Vitus, many of the lyrics were fed through a vibrating tremolo effect, and all were stretched into long syllables. But Ufomammut has explained the themes of the records. “Ecate” is about Hecate, the Greek goddess of witchcraft and necromancy. “Eve,” from 2010, was about Eve. And so forth. The band is singing of myth and building its own. Its concerns are not for the short game.A version of this review appears in print on May 21, 2015, on Page C6 of the New York edition with the headline: Gliding From Riff to Riff.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.