By ZACHARY WOOLFEMAY 20, 2015
I’d never seen a cellist play with two bows simultaneously until Tuesday evening. But John Zorn’s music, always jam-packed, has seemingly grown so teeming that a single one just doesn’t suffice.In Mr. Zorn’s “Autumn Rhythm,” a solo given its premiere at Roulette in Brooklyn, the intense yet uninhibited young cellist Jay Campbell swashes one bow repeatedly through the air as he grazes the strings lightly with the other. Then he puts both bows to the strings, pulling them in opposite directions to create a scratching, ripping sound over an ominous tremor.Anarchic yet pristine, Mr. Zorn’s music is like a firecracker explosion in which the arc of each of hundreds of sparks is precisely mapped. His “Autumn Rhythm” and “Necronomicon” (2003), given a ferocious, focused performance by the JACK Quartet, flanked the intermission on Tuesday. They shared the bill — the final installment, after six seasons, of the performance series Ear Heart Music — with three pieces by Jason Eckardt from his coming album, “Subject,” on Mr. Zorn’s Tzadik label.Tuesday’s concert, and another on Monday evening at Jack, also in Brooklyn (and unrelated to the quartet), together offered a compelling overview of three composers of three successive generations: Pauline Oliveros (born in 1932), Mr. Zorn (1953) and Mr. Eckardt (1971). Their differences belie a shared taste for juxtaposed extremes of volume and pitch; jittery, unsettled melodies; and flirtations with noise that never entirely forestall the possibility of what might be called old-fashioned lyrical beauty.AdvertisementThe element connecting the two concerts — besides uniformly dazzling playing — was the International Contemporary Ensemble, generally globe-trotting but this week content to travel just a mile up Atlantic Avenue from Jack, in Clinton Hill, to Roulette, in Boerum Hill.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The ensemble’s tribute to Ms. Oliveros, a longtime collaborator, on Monday was part of its growing OpenICE series of free concerts and education programs. She was present, participating as an accordionist in two improvisations: a genial, sighing solo and a flickering duet with the violinist Jennifer Curtis.Advertisement“The Witness” (1980) explored the echoes of sounds, “Ear Rings” (1995) the textures of a harshly plucked guitar and the high-pitched ringing drawn from bowing the edge of a tiny cymbal. In “The Well and the Gentle” (1983), a masterpiece, chords formed, dissolved and formed again among the small ensemble, finally collecting in a delicate, ambiguously lilting section with an open-prairie feel that faintly recalled Copland.Mr. Eckardt’s work has a more political edge. Brilliantly played by the JACK Quartet, “Subject” (2011) featured a thrilling passage of shimmering murmurs. But the performance was marred by the idea of matching the opening’s aggressive attacks with blinding flashes of light, a naïve attempt to evoke torture techniques.Like Mr. Zorn, Mr. Eckardt gives ample opportunities for virtuosic display. The guitarist Jordan Dodson captured the quiet meditations, disorienting bursts and spidery passagework of the 1997 solo “Paths of Resistance.” Joined by the ever-alert International Contemporary Ensemble, Tony Arnold, a distinguished new-music soprano, made poetry of the wordless babble — complete with shrieks, whispers, hisses and shushes — in “Tongues” (2001).The next OpenICE concert will be on May 27 at Abrons Arts Center, 466 Grand Street, Lower East Side; iceorg.org.A version of this review appears in print on May 21, 2015, on Page C5 of the New York edition with the headline: Concerts With a Shared Taste for Jittery Melodies and Flirtations With Noise.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.