By MICHAEL COOPERMAY 20, 2015
HAVANA —  A tenor sang the role of Fidel Castro. Che Guevara was a baritone. As the outdoor opera rehearsal got underway here, they were playing a round of golf, wielding comically outsize clubs and singing about Eisenhower, Kennedy and their swings.“In the Country Club we have to build the most beautiful city of the arts,” sang Roger Quintana, the young tenor playing Fidel Castro — hatching the idea of turning the golf course, a loaded symbol of pre-revolution wealth and excess, into a complex of free arts schools.It may sound like a librettist’s fantasy, but in this case it happens to be more or less true. In 1961 the two revolutionaries, clad in fatigues, boots and berets, mischievously took to the links to play what Mr. Castro had once called a “game of the idle rich.” And Mr. Castro did turn Havana’s most exclusive country club into an art school complex, if not quite as he had planned. Some buildings were never finished, and left to crumble as vegetation encroached. Others opened, and the new opera, “Cubanacán: A Revolution of Forms,” by an American librettist and a Cuban composer, will have its premiere at the complex on Thursday during the Havana Biennial.Portraying Mr. Castro as an operatic character is daring in a nation where freedom of expression is limited, and debates over artistic freedoms and their limits are as old as the revolution. Just over half a century ago Mr. Castro summed up his views on the rights of artists by saying, “Within the revolution, everything; against the revolution, no rights at all.”AdvertisementThe new opera is not agitprop. It was not initially written to be performed here. The story it tells — of the founding of the complex; the decision to hire daring architects to build fantastical, almost surreal buildings for it; the failure to complete the work; and finally the decision of some of its architects to leave Cuba — is ambiguous. Is it about the utopian idealism of the early days of the revolution? Or its failure to live up to its goals? Or some mixture of the two — given that even as some of the buildings lie in ruins, others have produced generations of artists, including many working on this production?Advertisement“I hope there’s a variety of reactions, and a variety of interpretations; then we’ve done our job,” said Charles Koppelman, a filmmaker from Berkeley, Calif., who has been working on the opera for more than a decade as its librettist and producer. “If everyone comes away thinking the same thing, then blah, I really fell short. Because I intentionally kept it open-ended, kept it a little mysterious. I know that it’s not a documentary opera — it is taking liberties, with real people, some of whom are still alive.”Mr. Koppelman said that he was never asked to show his libretto to government officials. The composer he engaged, Roberto Valera, 76, a distinguished figure in Cuban music, said that the idea of depicting Fidel Castro and Che in an opera may have made some officials uneasy — “No Cuban would have come up with that idea,” he said — but that he had advocated for it, seeing the opera as capturing a founding moment after the revolution.“This opera must reflect that moment of enthusiasm, creative enthusiasm, that we had in the early ’60s,” he said, noting that it was a period that included the establishment of the National Ballet of Cuba and the National Symphony Orchestra of Cuba as well as a sweeping literacy campaign.The opera is being performed on a temporary stage in front of the arches of the school of visual arts, whose voluptuous domes and central fountain were designed to evoke the female anatomy and sexuality by the architect Ricardo Porro, who died late last year. Inside the school, studios hummed with activity as painters and printmakers readied their works for the Biennial. Across the lawn, music students could be heard practicing arpeggios in the former clubhouse of the golf course. But a short walk away, other buildings in the complex, part of the Instituto Superior de Arte, an arts university, were in various stages of incompleteness and disrepair, never having quite recovered after construction was halted in the mid-1960s. At the time, the United States embargo of Cuba played a role in making it harder to obtain building materials, scant resources were devoted to other pressing needs, and Cuba was aligning itself more closely with the Soviet Union, which favored decidedly less fanciful forms of architecture.A medieval-looking walled theater complex that the students call Elsinor, after the Elsinore of “Hamlet,” stood empty, with vegetation creeping in. Nearby, goats grazed outside the unfinished music school, a serpentine structure sometimes known as “the Worm.” And a collection of domed brick structures and open-air pavilions that resembled the set of a George Lucas film — intended to be a ballet school and used for a time as a circus school — stood empty.Mr. Koppelman was drawn to the subject after he saw an exhibition about the schools in San Francisco by John A. Loomis, a professor of interior design at San Jose State University, and found himself intrigued by Mr. Loomis’s book, “Revolution of Forms: Cuba’s Forgotten Art Schools.”“The more I read, the better the story got,” Mr. Koppelman recalled. “A golf course, and Fidel and Che, I was just overwhelmed. So normally I think, ‘Well, what’s the film?’ I get moved that way. One chapter, it just popped: It’s an opera. It’s an opera: the schools — music, dance, theater, fine art. Big, historic time. Iconic figures.”AdvertisementHe contacted Mr. Loomis and asked about turning the book into an opera. “I thought it was one of these kooks from Berkeley,” Mr. Loomis recalled. “I humored Charles. I thought it was just a ridiculous idea — he’d never done an opera before. But he was incredibly persistent.”Now his persistence is paying off. An orchestra of 54, a small chorus and a cast of young Cuban singers is preparing to stage the work under the direction of Charles Chemin, a French-American who was recommended for the job by the director Robert Wilson.Its score combines Cuban rhythms and lyric, operatic passages with modern edges. In the end, Mr. Valera, the composer, said that he thought that the story would highlight the importance and perseverance of the schools, where he has taught since 1968.“In spite of all the difficulties, in this school we trained more than 90 percent of the most important artists in Cuba in every art — music, fine arts, drama, dance,” he said. “In one way or another, 90 percent of them were here.”Because of an editing error, a picture caption on Thursday with an article about a new opera, “Cubanacán: A Revolution of Forms,” that had its premiere in Havana this week and includes a scene, based on an actual event, of Fidel Castro and Che Guevara playing golf misidentified the site where they are shown playing, and misstated Guevara’s position in the picture. They played at the Colinas de Villareal golf course, not at a country club that became the site of the arts university Instituto Superior de Arte. And Guevara is at the far left of the picture, not the left foreground.A version of this article appears in print on May 21, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: When Che and Fidel Compared Golf Swings .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.