By DAVID ALLENMAY 20, 2015
Records! According to the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center’s co-artistic director Wu Han, who gave a characteristically effusive welcome before the society’s season-ending performance by the Emerson String Quartet at Alice Tully Hall on Tuesday, this has been a banner year for the society. Attendance? Record! Number of concerts? Record! Number of weeks with a radio broadcast? Record!Statistics are one thing — artistic achievement is another. The society is thankfully making its repertoire ever more diverse. Next season, there’s a predictable Beethoven string quartet cycle, but various ensembles will also play the complete quartets of Zemlinsky, Bartok, Nielsen, Ginastera and Leon Kirchner. Let’s hope more contemporary works make it on to subscription programs. And let’s also hope that the society’s concerts become a bit more cohesive.That was one issue on Tuesday, an unexpectedly inconsistent evening from a quartet usually so reliable.On the bill was the New York premiere of Lowell Liebermann’s String Quartet No. 5 (2014); Mozart’s String Quintet in E flat (K. 614), for which the ensemble was joined by the violist Paul Neubauer; and Tchaikovsky’s string sextet “Souvenir de Florence,” which also added the cellist Colin Carr. Each is a fine work in its own right, but none had much to say to the others.AdvertisementIn a program note, Mr. Liebermann wrote that his new composition was “at least partly influenced by any number of depressing/terrifying events of the kind with which we are all bombarded daily, in what seems more and more like a world gone mad.” His response, which was written for the Emerson ensemble and lasts about 20 minutes, is conceived as a mirror, a single symmetrical movement of two slow, lyrical laments that surround a heart of anger.Those laments recall early Schoenberg, with long, glossy lines that move in a disturbed, uncertain chromaticism punctuated and adorned by scratches and other irritants. In the middle, perhaps a scherzo and trio, come in quick scurries and frank aggression, like Shostakovich but without the bitterness. The quartet’s sorrowful air at times felt strikingly morose, but it took a more seraphic turn with time, and ultimately beguiled.AdvertisementThe Mozart and Tchaikovsky works aren’t so sullen. Ordinarily suffused with geniality, the Mozart quartet was marred by tuning problems surprising from a group as competent as this, and which likely explained a rather dutiful, inelegant feel. Tchaikovsky’s sextet fared considerably better, with a genteel breadth of tone, an amiability in the slow movement and a frantic, at times feral intensity to its closing Cossack charge.A version of this review appears in print on May 21, 2015, on Page C4 of the New York edition with the headline: Mixed Emotions Cap a Banner Season.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.