By MATT WOLFMAY 20, 2015
LONDON — “I think I have a soul,” the title character remarks several times over in the National Theater’s, well, soul-stirring production of “Everyman,” the medieval morality play that has been refashioned to reflect the life and times in which we live.So how right it feels that the National’s new artistic director, Rufus Norris, doubling as this play’s director, should have as his modern-day Everyman Chiwetel Ejiofor, that rare actor who gives off a palpable inner life (or, yes, soul). An Oscar nominee for his performance as Solomon Northup in “12 Years A Slave,” Mr. Ejiofor began his career onstage and retains one of the best vocal instruments in the business. His interiority, meanwhile, exists a breed apart: Let’s just say that it isn’t something you learn at drama school.A canonical work of unknown authorship, “Everyman” is more often dissected by scholars than performed, not least because one has to figure out how to present human embodiments of God, Death, and Knowledge to a contemporary public. The play’s eponymous hero imparts a life lesson — “seize the moment while it lasts,” or so Carol Ann Duffy, Britain’s poet laureate and the author of this very free adaptation, phrases it on this occasion — that risks sidelining the depth of character on which so much drama depends.All the better, then, to have in Mr. Ejiofor an actor who brings with him an ongoing sense of discovery. You can pretty well assume that the slick-suited, hard-partying hedonist one sees at the start will deepen into someone who ends the play facing down the questions about mortality that confront us all. (Mr. Norris addressed matters of life and death from a more immediate perspective in his 2011 hit production of “London Road,” which has been made into a soon-to-be-released film.)AdvertisementIn outline the production might seem cut from the same visual cloth as the recent London musical “American Psycho” — licentiousness run rampant has an apparently ceaseless appeal — but “Everyman” shifts gears to accommodate a depth of feeling borne out by the reckoning with life that the play describes. Indeed, the closing passages of the play, which grant the final words to the “God’s heavy” that is Death (a dryly insistent Dermot Crowley), are as moving as anything I have seen this year. (Disturbing, too, when Death turns on the audience to pose the question, “Who’s next?”) The production runs through Aug. 30 and will be shown in cinemas on July 16 as part of National Theater Live. Wherever you can find it, go — and bring a handkerchief.AdvertisementA screen name of a previous vintage, John Goodman in his British stage debut is the compelling reason to catch the otherwise lopsided revival of “American Buffalo,” the David Mamet play from 1975 that crops up in London at regular intervals — rarely to altogether satisfying results. This latest production, at Wyndham’s Theater through June 27, is certainly the starriest, coupling Mr. Goodman with the English actors Damian Lewis and Tom Sturridge under the supervision of the actor-turned-director Daniel Evans.Among them, only a sad-eyed Mr. Goodman fully inhabits Mr. Mamet’s singular landscape of cock-of-the-walk bravado and brooding silence: a world of inbuilt hucksterism where every conversation comes embedded with some kind of deal and where friendship and business aren’t easily separated.The plot finds three Chicago no-hopers enmeshed in the theft of the buffalo-head nickel that gives the play its title. The shop owner, Donny (Mr. Goodman), matches wits with the preening, fast-talking Teach (Mr. Lewis), while the younger, presumably drug-rattled Bobby (Mr. Sturridge) does what he can to keep pace. A shaven-headed Mr. Sturridge, effecting a variation on the role that brought him a 2013 Tony nomination for his Broadway debut in the play “Orphans,” sports a facial scar as a reminder of the (unspoken) hard knocks that Bobby has suffered along the way.There’s no questioning the commitment of Mr. Sturridge and Mr. Lewis to the sort of take-no-prisoners American roles that have long been catnip to British actors. Mr. Lewis, of “Homeland” renown and marking his first London stage appearance in more than five years, raises a smile from his first appearance. This Teach might well have stepped off the set of the film “American Hustle,” complete with sideburns and a mustache on which you could hang a pair of trousers.And yet only a slimmed-down Mr. Goodman mines this detritus-laden milieu from the inside, so to speak, as if he had become one with the panoply of discarded items that in Paul Wills’s arresting design seems to reach to the skies. His face alive to the cumulative sense of defeat in the text, the actor makes the pauses count alongside Mr. Mamet’s signature punchiness. When he stares down his colleagues with a silence at once baleful and pleading, you find yourself staring admiringly back.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The British actor Jonathan Pryce has his own history with David Mamet, having performed the author’s Pulitzer Prize-winning “Glengarry Glen Ross” onscreen and then onstage (in different roles each time). But the director Jonathan Munby’s fine production of “The Merchant of Venice,” at Shakespeare’s Globe through June 7, returns Mr. Pryce to what some might consider his natural habitat — the actor having played an era-defining Hamlet some 35 years ago.The most physically imposing Shylock in my experience, Mr. Pryce here marks his first appearance at the all-weather Globe in a staging that finds his own daughter, Phoebe, making a strong-voiced impression as Shylock’s traitorous daughter, Jessica. Though the production might appear at the outset to be conventional, especially in contrast with the recent decision taken by north London’s Almeida Theater to set the same play in Las Vegas, don’t be misled. Mike Britton’s richly brocaded costumes may be period-sumptuous, but this ever-problematic play forsakes sartorial pageantry to land with a telling sting in its tail. (To give away the unscripted coda would spoil the final directorial coup.)Suffice it to say that Mr. Munby and his largely expert company understand the difficulty in classifying as comic a play that is so dominated by the vilification of the Jewish moneylender Shylock, even if the final act does unite multiple couples — Jessica and her Christian suitor Lorenzo (Ben Lamb) among them — as is required of all Shakespearean comedies.AdvertisementMr. Pryce, for his part, brings to Shylock a very real urgency: His “hath not a Jew eyes” is delivered not as the premeditated plaint of a societal outsider but as the direct response to hostilities that only escalate from there. Among the rest, David Sturzaker is a commendably loathsome Gratiano, a drink-happy layabout destined to make the least reliable of husbands, and Rachel Pickup’s Portia offers an intriguing amalgam of bite and beauty: an heiress given over to love who has yet to learn what it is to have a heart.Everyman.  Directed by Rufus Norris. National Theater/Olivier. Through Aug. 30; shown in cinemas via National Theater Live on July 16.American Buffalo. Directed by Daniel Evans. Wyndham’s Theater. Through June 27.The Merchant of Venice. Directed by Jonathan Munby. Shakespeare’s Globe. Through June 7.A version of this review appears in print on May 21, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.