
JUNE 12, 2015

Related Article
Galleries seeking to exhibit at Art Basel encounter an intense, juried competition. For at least the past six years established dealers have occupied prime selling space on the ground floor. Hall 2Ground Floor2010Galleries that...Appeared in the same booth in the previous yearAppeared in a differentbooth in the previous yearDid not have a boothin the previous yearIndicates gallery did not returnto the fair the following yearOften galleries new to the fair,or ones that lost space the prioryear, do not make it back the next year.2011The GROUND FLOOR of Hall 2 is viewed by many as the most sought- after real estate in the art fair world. On average, about 90% of the 100 or so galleries had been in the fair the year before.The FEATURE SECTION, at the periphery of the ground and second floors, is typically home to less established galleries. Dealers here exhibit the work of a single artist or theme, and turnover among galleries is high.2012FERGUS McCAFFREY, a New York dealer, is one of the few newcomers who has made the leap into the main gallery section. He first entered on the periphery in 2012 and has since moved to a more central location.20132014Last year, the ground floor featured 12 galleries that were new or had not been in the fair the prior year. Of those, eight will not return to the fair in 2015. (Organizers never say if a gallery was rejected or if it did not reapply.)MATTHEWMARKSAt least 7 years in same boothGAGOSIAN At least 7 years in same boothANNEMARIEVERNAAt least 7 years in same booth2015Galleries seeking to exhibit at Art Basel encounter an intense, juried competition. While the fair says it works to find new faces, for at least the past six years prime selling space on the ground floor has been dominated by a roster of established dealers. Galleries new to the fair, or ones that lost space from a prior year, typically are placed on the periphery. Most do not make it back the next year. Galleries that...Appeared in the same booth in the previous yearSame boothfor entire periodGALERIETSCHUDIAppeared in a differentbooth in the previous yearDid not have a boothin the previous yearArt Basel Hall 2Ground Floor2010-2015Same boothfor entire periodANNEMARIEVERNA2010EDWARD TYLERNAHEMThe GROUND FLOOR of Hall 2 is viewed by many as the most sought-after real estate in the art fair world. On average, about 90% of the 100 or so galleries had been in the fair the year before.Indicates gallery did not return to the fair the following yearSame boothfor entire periodGAGOSIAN2011The FEATURE SECTION, at the periphery of the ground and second floors, is typically home to less established galleries. Dealers here exhibit the work of a single artist or theme, and turnover among galleries is high.Same boothfor entire periodKONRADFISCHERSame boothfor entire periodMATTHEW MARKS2012FERGUSMcCAFFREYNAHEMEDWARD TYLER NAHEM was one of the few newcomers who made the leap into the main gallery section. FERGUS McCAFFREY, a New York dealer, first entered on the periphery in 2012 and has since moved to a more central location.Same boothfor entire periodGALERIE GMURZYNSKA2013FERGUSMcCAFFREY2014NAHEMLast year, the ground floor featured 12 galleries that were new or had not been in the fair the prior year. Of those, eight will not be returning to the fair in 2015. (Organizers never say if a gallery was rejected or if it did not reapply.) Nahem said it was surprised to not be readmitted this year, but will reapply.FERGUSMcCAFFREY2015Source: Art BaselBy The New York TimesAdvertisement