Primavera Sound
Various venues.
May 28-30; June 4-6.In the decade and a half since it was founded, Primavera has become one of the top pop festivals in Europe, and a lively kick-off to the Continental festival season. This year’s installment includes big names with a hipster edge, such as the recently reunited female rock band Sleater-Kinney and Patti Smith, who will perform her breakthrough album ‘‘Horses.’’ A slightly smaller lineup will appear at the festival’s satellite locale in Porto.A selection of arts events taking place across the world in the coming week.Tracing Shadows
PLATEAU.
Through June 7.Artwork by 12 contemporary painters who draw from traditional techniques and contemporary trends is on view in this show. Artists include Lynette Yiadom-Boakye, a London-based painter who completes her oil on canvas works in a single sitting; and Li Songsong, a Beijing-based artist whose oils draw from mid-century Chinese political iconography. Most of the artists on view work with traditional materials like oils and acrylics, though some incorporate mixed media into their artwork.Pompei E L’Europa 1748-1943
Museo Archeologico Nazionale.
ay 27-Nov. 2.Since its discovery in the mid-18th century, the ancient city of Pompeii, which was buried under lava and volcanic ash in the first century A.D., has incited fear, curiosity and artistic inspiration. This two-pronged exhibition, which takes place in a Naples museum and at the archeological site of Pompeii, explores the doomed city as depicted in art from the 1700s to the 20th century. Artists on view include a number of lesser-known 19th-century figures alongside some major names like Picasso.Istanbul Music Festival
Various venues.
May 31-June 29.The prodigy pianist Can Cakmur (born 1997) will headline this festival’s opening concert, playing Shostakovich’s piano concerto in F minor in a concert featuring the Borusan Istanbul Philharmonic Orchestra. The rest of the festival lineup includes classical music from across Europe. This year’s guest resident orchestra, the Deutsche Kammerphilharmonie Bremen, will perform two concerts, both featuring music by Brahms. Other offerings include a Mozart Marathon, for which the pianist Fazil Say will perform a string of Mozart sonatas on several different dates.Stars of the White Nights Festival
Various venues.
May 27-Aug. 2.A new production of Tchaikovsky’s ‘‘The Queen of Spades,’’ about a ghost who gives gambling advice, will open this festival. The Mariinsky’s artistic director, Valery Gergiev, will conduct that opera and a number of other performances between now and August. The festival, which Mr. Gergiev founded in 1993 to coincide with summer celebrations that take place across St. Petersburg, brings together a collection of highlights from the Mariinsky’s repertoire — including opera, ballet and orchestral works. It closes in August with showings of ‘‘Eugene Onegin’’ and ‘‘The Nutcracker,’’ part of the theater’s ongoing celebrations of the 175th anniversary of Tchaikovsky’s birth.From the Forest to the Sea: Emily Carr in British Columbia
Art Gallery of Ontario. 
Through Aug. 9.In the last years of her life, the Canadian artist Emily Carr (1871- 1945) lived in a shanty on wheels, which she dragged through the Canadian forests as she searched for new subjects for her paintings. This exhibition includes some of Carr’s early, more buttoned-up paintings, but focuses primarily on the lush depictions of Canada’s west coast that formed the bulk of her output. Canada’s native people particularly inspired Carr, and a number of indigenous cultural artifacts are on display here.Bruges Triennial
Various venues.
Through Oct. 18.Organizers of this year’s triennial asked artists to curate works based on a single theme — the prospect of what would happen if all of Bruges’s 5 million annual tourists hunkered down in the city and stayed for good. Artworks on display blur the boundaries between art and architecture. They include a series of small tree houses designed by Tadashi Kawamata, and a large tower installation by the artist Song Dong made from discarded windows.Sayoko Yamaguchi: The Wearist, Clothed in the Future
Museum of Contemporary Art Tokyo.
Through June 28.Sayoko Yamaguchi (1949-2007) began her career as a model and rose to international stardom before turning her attention to performance and fashion design. This exhibition brings together works that she created and inspired through the course of her career. It includes scrapbooks and designs by the companies for which she modeled, as well as videos of her late-in-life fashion shows, which blended tropes from the worlds of high fashion and performance art. It also includes a new video-based art installation created by some of the artists and designers with whom she collaborated during her lifetime.