By KATHRYN SHATTUCKMAY 22, 2015
4:15 P.M. (Cinemax) AN OFFICER AND A GENTLEMAN (1982) Just in time for Fleet Week, Richard Gere stars as Zack Mayo, a hardened loser who becomes a much better man through basic training in the Navy and the love of a good woman in Taylor Hackford’s compelling drama. Louis Gossett Jr. won an Oscar for his performance as the drill instructor determined to beat self-respect into his charge; Debra Winger was nominated for her role as a local girl just waiting for the right guy in uniform to come along. And “Up Where We Belong,” the No. 1 hit written by Jack Nitzsche, Buffy Sainte-Marie and Will Jennings, and performed by Joe Cocker and Jennifer Warnes, won for best original song. “Undeniably, there’s an element of corniness to this,” Janet Maslin wrote in The New York Times. “But that doesn’t keep ‘An Officer and a Gentleman’ from being a first-rate movie — a beautifully acted, thoroughly involving romance. If this summer hasn’t previously had a wonderful Hollywood love story to call its own, it has one now.”6 P.M. (TCM) A LITTLE ROMANCE (1979) Lauren (Diane Lane), a 13-year-old American living in Paris with her stepfather (Arthur Hill) and mother (Sally Kellerman) — who is enamored of a pretentious filmmaker (David Dukes) — falls in love with Daniel (Thelonious Bernard). He is a French film buff, and together they arrange a rendezvous under the Bridge of Sighs in Venice with the help of an aging pickpocket (Laurence Olivier). “Lauren and Daniel are, I think, meant to be comic and appealing in their mixture of innocence and worldliness,” Vincent Canby wrote in The Times. Yet the film, directed by George Roy Hill, “recalls most vividly the arch manner in which the Our Gang comedies worked — by having their child actors ape not the behavior of children but of grown-ups.” Georges Delerue won an Oscar for best original score.9 P.M. (13) THE LINCOLN AWARDS: A CONCERT FOR VETERANS & THE MILITARY FAMILY The Friars Club Foundation honors those who have supported the nation’s veterans and their families at this ceremony at the Kennedy Center in Washington and featuring appearances by Aloe Blacc, Arturo Sandoval, Nick Jonas, Gavin DeGraw, Harvey Keitel, Whitney Cummings and the American Military Spouses Choir. Brian Williams hosts this event, taped in January, before he was suspended as NBC News anchor after acknowledging he had exaggerated his account of a helicopter journey in Iraq. “Treasures of New York: Friars Club,” at 10, traverses the club’s history through rare footage of its bawdy celebrity roasts and interviews with members including Larry King, Joy Behar, Lisa Lampanelli, Susie Essman and Jerry Lewis.9 P.M. (TruTV) THE HUSTLERS Jennifer Barretta, Jarrod Clowery, Mike Dechaine, Emily Duddy and other pool sharks circle the tables at New York City halls.Advertisement10:30 P.M. (Food Network) AMERICAN DINER REVIVAL Ty Pennington and the chef Amanda Freitag resuscitate flailing small-town diners with the help of some energetic residents. Mr. Pennington remodels interiors and exteriors, and Ms. Freitag injects new life into menus — in just 36 hours. They begin by sprucing up the Diner in Norman, Okla., famous for the championship chili featured on “Diners, Drive-Ins and Dives.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.1 A.M. (13) THEATER TALK The creative team behind “Fun Home” — the composer Jeanine Tesori, the playwright and lyricist Lisa Kron, and Alison Bechdel, on whose graphic memoir the show is based — talk about the musical, at Circle in the Square Theater. Ms. Tesori and Ms. Kron also perform songs from the show, including “Ring of Keys,” Ms. Bechdel’s favorite.What’s Streaming NowVALERY GERGIEV CONDUCTS TCHAIKOVSKY Denis Matsuev, the 1998 winner of the International Tchaikovsky Competition, performs the composer’s three piano concertos with the Mariinsky Orchestra, under the baton of Mr. Gergiev, right, at the XIV Moscow Easter Festival. The concert was taped May 7 at Tchaikovsky Hall in Moscow as part of the composer’s 175th-birthday celebration. (medici.com)AdvertisementRICHIE RICH In this retooling of a comic-book character, Richie Rich (Jake Brennan) becomes the world’s wealthiest kid after inventing a technology to turn his uneaten vegetables into green energy, and selling it for $1 trillion. He moves his family into a mansion that covers 16 acres, which he traverses in a mini-Lamborghini. In Season 2, Richie hosts a summer camp in his home and time travels to meet his future self. (netflix.com)A version of this schedule appears in print on May 22, 2015, on Page C17 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Friday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.