AdvertisementSupported byBy Joshua BaroneMemorial Day Weekend Events in New York CityBrooklyn War Memorial Honors (Sunday) Brooklyn’s World War II veterans will be honored in a ceremony that will formally begin a GoFundMe campaign to raise money for reopening the Brooklyn War Memorial. (It has been closed to the public for 25 years.) The morning will begin with a three-mile race around Cadman Plaza Park, followed by an Air Force honor guard presentation and musical performances by the American Bombshells. At 10:30 a.m., Cadman Plaza Park, cadmanpark.org; free.Fleet Week (through Tuesday) With “On the Town” on Broadway, “Fancy Free” at American Ballet Theater and Fleet Week, New York is getting its fill of sailors docking and playing in the city. Fleet Week — the annual celebration of Navy, Marines and Coast Guard — provides a series of free events every day until the ships depart. The full schedule is at fleetweeknewyork.com.‘Top Gun’ (Friday) The docked U.S.S. Intrepid aircraft carrier opens its flight deck for free film screenings, beginning with an aerial classic, “Top Gun.” It will be introduced by Scott Altman, a former NASA astronaut and Navy pilot, who was Tom Cruise’s flight double in the film. Attendees are encouraged to bring their own lawn chairs and picnic supplies. Doors open at 7:30 p.m.; screening begins at sunset. Intrepid Sea, Air & Space Museum, Pier 86, 46th Street and 12th Avenue, Clinton, 877-957-7447, intrepidmuseum.org; free.Kings County Memorial Day Parade (Monday) Brooklyn’s Memorial Day Parade returns for its 148th — yes, 148th — year. (The parade predates the creation of the federal holiday by one year.) It begins at 11 a.m., at 78th Street and Third Avenue in Bay Ridge, and works its way to John Paul Jones Park (at Fourth Avenue and 101st Street). More information is at brooklynmemorialdayparade.com.Little Neck-Douglaston Memorial Day Parade (Monday) Since 1927, this parade has celebrated the people who died while serving the United States. The theme this year is “Service, Valor, Sacrifice,” a tribute to the 50th anniversary of the Vietnam War, and features the West Point Marching Band. The parade follows Northern Boulevard from Great Neck Road to 245th Street in Queens. At 2 p.m., 718-279-3200, lndmemorialday.org; free.Loisaida Festival (Friday through Sunday) Loisaida Inc. hosts its 28th annual festival on Sunday, with two days of programs leading up to the main event. Friday and Saturday feature events, such as a cabaret performance, that celebrate gay Latin American influence on the Lower East Side’s cultural scene. Sunday’s festival will be hosted by the actor Luis Guzman. More information is at loisaidafest.org; free.Lower East Side Festival of the Arts (Friday through Sunday) Theater for the New City makes its case for staying in New York over the holiday with its weekend of free performances that celebrate the East Village and Lower East Side’s cultural identity. The festival’s offerings cover the artistic spectrum, including theater, music, dance, comedy and more. More information is at theaterforthenewcity.net. At various times and locations, including Theater for the New City, 155 First Avenue, between Ninth and 10th Streets, 212-254-1109; free.Memorial Day Weekend at Green-Wood (Saturday and Monday) At 6 p.m. on Saturday, Green-Wood Cemetery will host a Civil War-era festival featuring a procession across the grounds, which will be aglow with about 5,000 honorary candles. The evening will also include a brass band, a chorus and re-enactors in uniform. On Monday, the cemetery will celebrate the holiday with two free events: an honor march at 11 a.m., and the annual Memorial Day concert at 2:30 p.m. The concert’s program includes compositions by some of Green-Wood’s permanent residents, like Fred Ebb and Leonard Bernstein. At various times, Fifth Avenue and 25th Street, Greenwood Heights, Brooklyn, 718-768-7300, green-wood.com/toursevents.Washington Square Outdoor Art Exhibit (Saturday through Monday) This show, which occurs twice annually, features work by artists from around the world. Don’t expect a street fair. This is on the sidewalk, and the artworks will be your typical New York sidewalk fare: oil paintings, watercolors, crafts and jewelry, for example. (The event returns next weekend.) From noon to 6 p.m., University Place, from East 13th Street to West Third Street, Greenwich Village, 212-982-6255, wsoae.org.Out of Town Memorial Day Weekend EventsSalute to Summer (Saturday and Sunday) This 19th-century-style weekend festival, comprising vintage lawn games, old-fashioned baseball and other activities, welcomes the summer season. On Saturday, dressed-up dogs will be paraded and compete for prizes like best nautical and most patriotic costumes. The schedule is at mysticseaport.org/event/salute-to-summer. Mystic Seaport, 75 Greenmanville Avenue, Mystic, Conn., 860-572-0711.Heritage Weekend (Saturday and Sunday) Wethersfield, Conn., takes a step back in time — to the 18th century — in this annual celebration of the town’s history and culture. It begins Saturday with a Memorial Day parade through Old Wethersfield, ending at the village cemetery’s war memorial. Other events include Revolutionary War re-enactments, vintage baseball and period-specific arts and crafts. More information is at wethersfieldhistory.org. 150 Main Street, Wethersfield, Conn., 860-529-7656; free. Legends of World War II Airpower (through Monday) The American Airpower Museum is exhibiting over two dozen World War II planes this holiday weekend. Of the bombers on display, about 10 will be available for flight demonstrations and rides. American Airpower Museum, 1230 New Highway, Farmingdale, N.Y., 631-293-6398, americanairpowermuseum.com; free for World War II veterans. Horton Point Lighthouse Opening Day (Saturday and Sunday) This lighthouse, on an eight-acre park with a view of the Long Island Sound, opens over the holiday weekend with a new exhibition, “Tale of the Whale.” Lighthouse Road, Southold, N.Y., 631-765-5500, southoldhistoricalsociety.org. Memorial Day Parade (Monday) The village of Montgomery’s parade starts at Wallkill Avenue and Clinton Street, and works its way to Veterans Memorial Park. It starts at 11 a.m. and will be followed by a patriotic ceremony and refreshments. Montgomery, N.Y., 845-457-9661, villageofmontgomery.org; free. Franklin D. Roosevelt Presidential Library and Museum (through Monday) Memorial Day weekend begins at 7 p.m. Friday with an evening of World War II-era entertainment, including a U.S.O. concert. On Saturday and Sunday, the lawn in front of the library will resemble a World War II encampment (10 a.m. to 4 p.m.). On the holiday, the National Park Service will host a graveside memorial service in the Rose Garden at the home of Franklin D. Roosevelt National Historic Site. 4079 Albany Post Road, Hyde Park, N.Y., 845-486-7745, fdrlibrary.marist.edu. Memorial Day Ceremony (Monday) The New Jersey Vietnam Veterans’ Memorial Foundation’s annual event includes a ceremony and the induction of five veterans into the In Memory program. At 11 a.m., 1 Memorial Lane, Holmdel, N.J., 732-335-0033, njvvmf.org; free. Blues, Wine and BBQ Festival (Saturday and Sunday) The name of this festival pretty much says it all. Barbecue, bands and hundreds of wines will be in the spotlight, with a focus on New Jersey wineries. Craft vendors will also be in attendance. From noon to 5 p.m., Schooley’s Mountain Park, Long Valley, N.J., 609-588-0085, newjerseywines.com. MuseumsAmerican Museum of Natural History: ‘Countdown to Zero’ (through July 12) Smallpox is the only human disease to have been eradicated, but what about Guinea worm, polio, malaria and others? This exhibition, presented in collaboration with the Carter Center, examines international efforts to control and wipe out infection. Daily from 10 a.m. to 5:45 p.m., Central Park West and 79th Street, 212-769-5200, amnh.org.Brooklyn Historical Society: ‘Mapping Brooklyn’ (through Sept. 6) This exhibition, copresented by BRIC House, features artworks that incorporate themes of mapping and cartography from historical maps. The artists here are exploring the ways maps represent the practical and metaphorical aspects of life. Wednesdays through Sundays from noon to 5 p.m., Brooklyn Historical Society, 128 Pierrepont Street, near Clinton Street, Brooklyn Heights, 718-222-4111, brooklynhistory.org.Brooklyn Historical Society: ‘Personal Correspondents: Photography and Letter Writing in Civil War Brooklyn’ (through spring 2016) The historical society’s new exhibition tells the personal stories of Brooklyn soldiers and their families during the Civil War. Some of the tales, revealed through photos and letters, are funny; others are tragic. The show’s opening on April 9 coincided with the 150th anniversary of Robert E. Lee’s surrender. Brooklyn Historical Society, 128 Pierrepont Street, near Clinton Street, Brooklyn Heights, 718-222-4111, brooklynhistory.org.Morgan Library & Museum: ‘Lincoln Speaks: Words That Transformed a Nation’ (through June 7) This exhibition, presented thematically and chronologically, homes in on Abraham Lincoln’s leadership and its relationship to language. In his exhibition review for The New York Times, Neil Genzlinger wrote: “For Lincoln admirers, simply being in the same room with so many artifacts he touched will be a delight. And if they give the exhibition the time it requires, they will certainly come away with a fuller appreciation of the man.” 225 Madison Avenue, at 36th Street, 212-685-0008, themorgan.org.Museum of the Moving Image: ‘Matthew Weiner’s “Mad Men” ’ (through June 14) The recently ended “Mad Men” gets the exhibition treatment in this look at the series’s creative process. On display are large-scale sets, such as Don Draper’s office, as well as costumes, art and research material used by the show’s staff. Viewers should expect not only a look behind the scenes of the show, but also, as in “Mad Men” itself, a peek into the era it depicts. 35th Avenue at 37th Street, Astoria, Queens, 718-784-0077, movingimage.us.New York Transit Museum Grand Central Terminal Gallery Annex: ‘New York’s Transportation Landmarks’ (through Nov. 1) It’s been 50 years since New York passed its Landmarks Law, which covers over 30,000 buildings and structures around the city. To celebrate the anniversary, the New York Transit Museum has created an exhibition that explores the history of development, use and even rescue of these landmarks. More information: 212-878-0106, web.mta.info/mta/museum.New York Transit Museum: ‘Spanning the Narrows: The Verrazano Bridge at 50’ (through fall) Photographs, maps, drawings, models and other archival materials related to the construction of the bridge (including correspondence from Robert Moses, who oversaw the project) are part of this exhibition commemorating its 50th anniversary. Boerum Place and Schermerhorn Street, Brooklyn Heights, 718-694-1600, mta.info/mta/museum.Gardens‘Night Lights at Wave Hill’  (Friday and Sunday) Wave Hill, the public garden in the Bronx, is celebrating its 50th anniversary with a month of after-hours events. “The Lightening: a Project for Wave Hill’s Aquatic Garden,” an installation by the artist Chris Doyle, will be on display, and the Mark Twain Room will host piano performances that cover a range of classical and jazz standards. More information is at wavehill.org/events/categories/nightlights. At 6:30 p.m., West 249th Street and Independence Avenue, Riverdale, the Bronx, 718-549-3200.Other Events‘Bascove/Bridges: Transporting the Metropolis’ (through July 12) This exhibition features more than 30 paintings and drawings of city bridges by the artist Anne Bascove, including the Brooklyn Bridge, the Outerbridge Crossing and the George Washington Bridge. Thursdays through Sundays from 1 to 5 p.m.; also by appointment; Noble Maritime Collection, Snug Harbor Cultural Center and Botanical Garden, 1000 Richmond Terrace, Livingston, Staten Island, 718-447-6490, noblemaritime.org.Polyphony Quartet (Thursday) The Polyphony Foundation, which aims to join Arab and Jewish communities in Israel through classical music, presents a concert performed by a quartet of two Arab and two Jewish musicians. The program includes Dvorak’s String Quartet No. 12 in F “American” and Mozart’s Quartet No. 14 in G “Spring.” A discussion will follow. At 7 p.m., All Souls Unitarian Church, 1157 Lexington Avenue, at East 80th Street, Manhattan, 203-979-8566, polyphonyfoundation.org.Stars in the Alley (Wednesday) Darren Criss, currently the star of Broadway’s “Hedwig and the Angry Inch,” hosts this free outdoor concert that showcases numbers from new and long-running musicals. Tony nominees, like “Something Rotten!” and “Fun Home,” will be included. At 10:30 a.m., Schubert Alley, between West 44th and West 45th Streets, Manhattan, broadway.org/info/stars-in-the-alley; free.Videology Presents Movie Trivia (Tuesdays) Videology, the Brooklyn bar and cinema, hosts a free film-themed trivia contest every week. The game varies; you will want to know theme songs, facts, quotations (especially ones from Nicolas Cage) and more. The winning team receives a free round of drinks, and there are chances to win drinks each round. At 8:30 p.m., 308 Bedford Avenue, at South First Street, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, 718-782-3468, videology.info. World Science Festival (Wednesday through May 31) This festival, with more than 50 events, is spread over five days and the city’s five boroughs. Highlights include programs to celebrate the 100th anniversary of Einstein’s theory of relativity, such as the premiere of “Light Falls,” a production by the scientist Brian Greene (who co-founded the festival) with music by Jeff Beal, featuring a cast of Broadway performers. The schedule is at worldsciencefestival.com.Spoken WordRand and Kelley Paul (Tuesday) Rand Paul, the Kentucky senator seeking the Republican nomination for the 2016 presidential election, discusses his new book, “Taking a Stand: Moving Beyond Partisan Politics to Unite America.” He will be joined by his wife, Kelley Paul, who recently published her own book, “True and Constant Friends: Love and Inspiration From Our Grandmothers, Mothers and Friends.” At 7:30 p.m., Strand Book Store, 828 Broadway, at 12th Street, 212-473-1452, strandbooks.com.Word for Word: John Waters (Wednesday) John Waters, the proudly trashy polymath behind cult films like “Hairspray” and “Pink Flamingos,” discusses his book “Carsick” as part of Bryant Park’s Word for Word series. “Carsick,” a blend of fiction and hitchhiking memoir, was recently released in paperback. The talk will be hosted by the writer and performer Matthew Love. At 12:30 p.m., Bryant Park, Avenue of the Americas, at 40th Street, Manhattan, 212-768-4242, bryantpark.org; free.Walking Tours Long Island City Tours: Queens Cool Uncovered (Sundays) The idea behind this tour is that Queens is due for more attention, starting with Long Island City. The tour includes highlights of the neighborhood’s history and arts scene, with stops at galleries and local crafts and food vendors. The exact meeting location is available upon registration. 212-209-3370, bqetours.com.Bryant Park Public Tours (Wednesdays) Bryant Park hasn’t always been the clean, open space it is today. This tour provides some insights on its history, including its darker days as a “needle park” in the 1970s, as well as its award-winning design and maintenance efforts. The tour meets at the fountain at 41st Street at Sixth Avenue. Registration is required. At 11 a.m., Bryant Park, 212-768-4242, bryantpark.org.Flatiron District Walking Tour (Sundays) This free tour meets at 11 a.m. on the southwest corner of Madison Square Park, at 23rd Street and Broadway, in front of the William Seward statue. Sponsored by the Flatiron/23rd Street Partnership; discoverflatiron.org.History of Wall Street Tour (weekdays) Stops on this tour, led by Wall Street Walks, include the New York Stock Exchange, Trinity Church, the Wall Street Bull, and ground zero and the Sept. 11 memorial. The tours last 90 minutes and begin at 11 a.m. and 1:30 p.m. (Also at 3 p.m. on Tuesdays and Fridays.) More details: wallstreetwalks.com. Revolutionary New York (Monday) New York isn’t as well known for its Revolutionary War-era history as cities like Philadelphia or Boston, but this tour takes participants to locations where, for example, the Declaration of Independence was first read to a New York audience. Other stops include the grave of Alexander Hamilton and Fraunces Tavern, which has a rich history from even earlier than the war. The tour meets at 1 p.m. at Broadway and Murray Street, at the gated entrance to City Hall Park in Lower Manhattan. 888-606-9255, bigonion.com.Union Square: Crossroads of New York (Saturdays) Sponsored by the Union Square Partnership, this free year-round tour focuses on the area’s political and social histories. The walk, led by guides from Big Onion Walking Tours, meets at 2 p.m. by the statue of Lincoln in Union Square Park, near the 16th Street transverse. 212-517-1826, unionsquarenyc.org.Information on events for possible inclusion in Spare Times should be sent to weekend@nytimes.com by Monday at 5 p.m. for publication that week. Longer versions of Around Town and For Children listings are in a searchable guide at nytimes.com/events.Advertisement