AdvertisementSupported byBy Laurel Graeber‘Rapunzarella White’You expect certain phrases in fairy tales: “Once upon a time,” “true love’s kiss,” “happily ever after.” But “oy vey”?Nay.Yet — oy vey, indeed — that expression comes up often in “Rapunzarella White: A Fairly Fractured Tale,” a musical mash-up that seems to be set in Chelm, Jewish folklore’s renowned city of fools, rather than in any Grimm kingdom. But you don’t have to know Yiddish to enjoy the action, narrated by Herschel (Mark Singer), a haimish tailor. Playing at the 13th Street Repertory Theater, the production combines “Rapunzel,” “Cinderella” and “Snow White” into an hour of silliness that celebrates its source material at the same time that it spoofs it.Written by June Rachelson-Ospa and Daniel Neiden, and directed by Mr. Neiden, “Rapunzarella White” relates the story of Millicent (Breena Beck), a queen who gives birth to triplets. Her witchy twin, Winifred (Marlain Angelides), who’s never forgiven her for stealing and marrying Winifred’s boyfriend, makes the girls disappear. (They’re played in infancy by three bright balloons nestled in a basket; the balloons that comically burst in sequence as Winifred recites her evil spells.) Winifred tells the queen that she won’t see her daughters again until their true loves say “Rapunzarella White” to them simultaneously.The girls — Rapunzel, Cinderella and Snow White — grow up to suffer in the same ways as those original heroines. But here, Rapunzel (Alia Munsch) has a bratty nature; Cinderella (Ms. Beck) is a klutz; and Snow White (Schuyler Midgett) develops a disturbingly voracious appetite.Their potential husbands, the Rosenbutter brothers — Brandon Duncan, Derek Bado and Brent Hildreth — possess even less charm than brains. Instead of a fairy godmother, Cinderella acquires a fairy godbrother — Mr. Bado again, dressed like Liberace, with a personality to match — and a prospective mother-in-law, Rhoda (a hilarious Mr. Duncan in drag), who resembles Phyllis Diller more than she does a Disney queen.These characters’ adventures unfold briskly, aided by actors who adeptly switch roles and by a score that gallops merrily through musical genres. The high points include jazzy ballads like Rhoda’s “Free Yesserie” and Snow White’s “Please Don’t Feed Me Apples,” both belted with a backup chorus.Although much of the broad humor seems directed toward adults, “Rapunzarella White” has enough interactive moments and physical comedy to delight little ones. They’ll get a happy ending, too, as long as they don’t mind young royals whose love — oy vey — isn’t quite like a fairy tale.(Saturdays at 1 p.m. and Sundays at noon, through June 14, at 50 West 13th Street, Greenwich Village, 212-352-3101, librarytheatre9.org.) LAUREL GRAEBER‘African Story Circle’ (Saturday) It’s a long way from West Africa to Staten Island, but this free gathering will bridge that distance with tales that illuminate the relationship between ancient folklore and the modern immigrant family experience. Naomi Sturm, a folklorist from Staten Island Arts, will moderate the event, which will include storytellers from Ghana, Liberia and Sierra Leone. From 1 to 2 p.m., Culture Lounge, St. George Ferry Terminal, 10 Ferry Terminal Drive, St. George, Staten Island, 718-447-3329, statenislandarts.org.‘Archaeology Zone: Discovering Treasures From Playgrounds to Palaces’ (Friday, Tuesday and Thursday) Children will step into the shoes of an explorer like Indiana Jones in this permanent exhibition at the Jewish Museum, but the adventures will be purely scholarly. Still, there is plenty of excitement in analyzing artifacts like a jar handle, a clay jug and a bangle and figuring out the purpose behind ancient pieces like a Greek helmet and a bull-shaped vessel. This interactive show, for ages 3 to 10, also includes a recreated room from the Ottoman period (about 1900), where young archaeologists can dress in costume. From 11 a.m. to 5:45 p.m.; until 8 p.m. on Thursdays; 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92nd Street, 212-423-3200, thejewishmuseum.org. (The museum is closed on Sunday and Monday for the Jewish holiday of Shavout.)‘Birds in Flight’ (Saturday and Sunday) The Bronx Zoo has plenty of birds, but this event focuses as much on the species that just pass through the zoo as on those that are its permanent residents. At 11:30 a.m. and 2 p.m., Animal Behavior & Conservation Connections will show examples of different species, local and global, that it has rescued and rehabilitated. Flight demonstrations will include a red-shouldered hawk, sun conures, a turkey vulture, a Eurasian eagle owl and scarlet- and green-winged macaws. At Bronx River Parkway and Fordham Road, Fordham, 718-367-1010, bronxzoo.com/events.‘The Gazillion Bubble Show: The Next Generation’  (Friday through Sunday, and Thursday) Children love bubbles, and this interactive show promises not just a gazillion but also some of the largest ever blown, along with light effects and lasers. The stars are the members of the Yang family: Fan and Ana Yang and their son Deni and others, who rotate as M.C.s for the production. Audience members may even find themselves in bubbles of their own. (The run is open-ended.) Friday at 7 p.m.; Saturday at 11 a.m. and 2 and 4:30 p.m.; Sunday at noon and 3 p.m.; Thursday at 11 a.m. and 2 p.m.; 340 West 50th Street, Clinton, 212-239-6200, gazillionbubbleshow.com.‘Jack and the Beanstalk’ (Friday through Sunday, and Tuesday through Thursday) Many plants grow in Central Park, so why not a beanstalk? This one sprouts indoors at the Swedish Cottage Marionette Theater, which has revived Michael Alogna’s adaptation of the classic fairy tale about Jack, the Giant (here named Milford), Dolly the Cow and the famous Golden Goose. Bruce Cannon, the theater’s artistic director, has revised the script, and a human actor now stars in the show along with the company’s hand-built marionettes. Weekdays at 10:30 a.m. and noon, with an additional performance on Wednesdays at 2:30 p.m.; Saturdays and Sundays at 1 p.m., with additional performances this weekend at 11 a.m. (Some performances are sold out.) Reservations required. 79th Street and the West Drive, Central Park; 212-988-9093, cityparksfoundation.org/arts.‘The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe’  (Saturday) If the children of the Pevensie family could travel to the magical land of Narnia through something as simple as a wardrobe, why shouldn’t two hard-working actors be able to play them and all the characters found there? That’s what Chris Boerner and Erin Layton, who recently stepped into the roles, are attempting in the Off Broadway Family Theater’s first production, le Clanché du Rand’s adaptation of C. S. Lewis’s classic novel. (The run is open-ended and continues on Saturdays.) At 11 a.m., St. Luke’s Theater, 308 West 46th Street, Clinton; 212-239-6200, narniaoffbroadway.com.Memorial Day Weekend at the Children’s Museum of Manhattan (Saturday through Monday) This museum is usually closed on Mondays, but it makes an exception for Memorial Day, when children are invited to join the national celebration. On both Sunday and Monday, they can honor the holiday in drop-in workshops to make poppies in the colors of the American flag. On Monday only, those 4 and younger will make art installations inspired by fireworks. On Sunday, the weekend will also offer a program for ages 5 and older (sign-up is required) in creating three-dimensional felt designs with the accessories designer Kate Cusack. There’s less sedentary fun, too: On Saturday, the Super Sprowtz, vegetable characters that try to dance their way into children’s hearts (and stomachs), will give performances about nutritious eating, and on Sunday, EXPG Boys, a hip-hop group from Japan, will demonstrate some sizzling moves. (Both events require tickets.) Full schedule and details are on the website. Tisch Building, 212 West 83rd Street, 212-721-1223, cmom.org.MoMA Art Lab: Places and Spaces (Friday through Thursday) What’s an art lab? These interactive spaces for children at the Museum of Modern Art, free with museum admission, help introduce the institution’s collection through activities related to a theme: this time it’s Places and Spaces. Young visitors can design, draw and build as they explore spaces both real and imagined — landscapes, cityscapes, seascapes — as they appear in Modern art. (Through Aug. 31.) Daily, from 10:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.; to 6:30 p.m. on Fridays; Lewis B. and Dorothy Cullman Education and Research Building, 4 West 54th Street, Manhattan; 212-708-9805, moma.org/momaartlab.‘Shonibare Summer’ Workshops (Saturday) Yinka Shonibare, an artist with roots in England and Nigeria, has brought his work — which questions national, racial and class identity — to the Morris-Jumel Mansion. In conjunction with that site-specific exhibition, this historic house is holding workshops in which visitors can make investigative and artistic journeys of their own. On Saturday, it will offer two programs for families: The first, from 10 a.m. to noon, is for children with autism and will engage them in making soft sculpture. The second, from 1 to 3 p.m. and open to all, will deal with fashion plates, the illustrations that portrayed the height of style in the years before photography. Children will learn about these designs and create versions of them. At 65 Jumel Terrace, between 160th and 162nd Streets, Washington Heights, 212-923-8008, morrisjumel.org. (Registration is required.)‘Spotlight Asia: Big Cats’ (Saturday) Don’t expect to see Persians and Angoras at this celebration. These activities honor the really big cats of Asia: tigers, lions, jaguars and leopards. The American Museum of Natural History will explore their roles in both nature and culture with tours, talks, art workshops and performances. The highlights include conservationists discussing what they learn by tracking tigers with cameras and studying their scat; traditional stories about tigers in Korea; cat-themed shows by Chinese Theater Works and the Saung Budaya Dance Group; and a concluding feline-inspired dance party. From noon to 5 p.m., Milstein Hall of Ocean Life, Central Park West and 79th Street, 212-769-5200, amnh.org.A Taste of Magic (Saturday) Would you like a side of sleight of hand with that burger? This show, developed by Magnets, a collective of local magicians, brings wizardry to the dinner table. Taking place at various restaurants, the presentation includes acts like mind reading and card tricks, which professionals perform close-up for guests; there’s also a cabaret-style show. And the admission price includes a full meal. At 8 p.m., Gossip Bar and Restaurant, 733 Ninth Avenue, between 49th and 50th Streets, Clinton, atasteofmagicnyc.com.Teen Art Workshop: ‘Natalie Frank: The Brothers Grimm’ (Saturday) The Drawing Center’s series of free Teen Art Workshops welcomes visitors ages 13 through 17 to explore exhibitions and respond to them creatively. This Saturday the focus is “Natalie Frank: The Brothers Grimm,” a show in which Ms. Frank uses gouache, pastels and decoration to interpret Grimm fairy tales with a feminist slant and in all their original brutality. After lively investigation and discussion, the young visitors will illustrate these stories with their own drawings. At 10:30 a.m., 35 Wooster Street, between Broome and Grand Streets, SoHo, 212-219-2166, Ext. 205, drawingcenter.org. Reservations by the end of the day on Friday are advised via phone or an email to agood@drawingcenter.org.‘Tiny Giants’ (Friday through Thursday) The heroes of this film may be small, but they’re mighty in their will to survive. Inspired by the BBC television series “Hidden Kingdoms,” this new Imax movie at the American Museum of Natural History uses 3-D cameras to peer into the universes of two diminutive creatures: a forest chipmunk and a grasshopper mouse from the Arizona desert, noted for its ability to prey on scorpions. Narrated by Stephen Fry, the film allows viewers to see the world from their perspectives. (Through July 5.) Hourly from 10:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., with 2-D screenings at 11:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m.; all other screenings are 3-D. Central Park West and 79th Street, 212-769-5200, amnh.org.‘Tunes With Tina’ (Sunday) That’s Tina deVaron, a jazz musician and singer, whose musical Sunday brunch for young people at the Measure Lounge at Langham Place, Fifth Avenue, a hotel in Midtown Manhattan, continues through the end of this month. Ms. deVaron, who often sings show tunes for children, also improvises and gears her performances to the audience. Singing along is encouraged. At noon, 400 Fifth Avenue, at 36th Street, 212-695-4005, measurenyc.com.‘¡Viva Pinocho!’/ ‘A Mexican Pinocchio!’ (Saturday) This Pinocchio is more than a wooden boy who longs to be human; he’s also a Mexican immigrant in search of his identity in a new land, the United States. Presented by Teatro Sea, which specializes in Latino theater for children, this show is the work of Manuel Antonio Morán, the company’s founder and director. Incorporating music, masks and several types of puppetry, it closes on Saturday. At 3 p.m., Teatro Sea, Clemente Soto Vélez Cultural Center, 107 Suffolk Street, at Rivington Street, Lower East Side, 212-529-1545, teatrosea.org.‘A Voyage Through Jewish History’  (Tuesday through Thursday) This journey involves not just miles, but years. In this permanent interactive exhibition at the Jewish Children’s Museum, young visitors can travel from Abraham and Sarah’s tent to the Western Wall in contemporary Jerusalem and beyond. Activities along the way include giving water to Rebecca’s camels, playing the strings on David’s harp (a high-tech version with beams of light that emit sounds when struck) and taking part in the exodus from Egypt. Museum hours: 10 a.m. to 4 p.m.; to 5:30 p.m. on Sundays; closed every Friday and Saturday and this Sunday and Monday for the Jewish holiday of Shavuot; 792 Eastern Parkway, at Kingston Avenue, Crown Heights, Brooklyn; 718-907-8833, jcm.museum.Wave Hill Celebration Parade (Saturday and Sunday) Many parades will take place this holiday weekend, but this will be different from most: Children will create the floats and decorations, and they will not honor past sacrifices but two anniversaries: the 50th of Wave Hill, the public garden in the Bronx, and the 25th of the garden’s family art project, a weekend activity. On Saturday and Sunday, that project will entail making flower shakers and leafy costumes, and working with the visiting artist Virva Hinnemo to design nature-inspired wagon floats for a blossoming march through the grounds. From 10 a.m. to 1 p.m., West 249th Street and Independence Avenue, Riverdale, 718-549-3200, wavehill.org.‘A Year With Children 2015’  (through June 17) Most of the artists whose work is displayed at the Guggenheim Museum are well known. But now the museum is showing pieces by young — very young — aspiring artists. These are the projects created by students in grades 2 through 6 who have taken part in the museum’s Learning Through Art program, which sends artists into public schools to teach skills and techniques. More than 100 works from 10 schools are in the show, including drawings, paintings, collages and sculptures. Daily, except Thursdays, from 10 a.m. to 5:45 p.m.; until 7:45 p.m. on Saturdays; 1071 Fifth Avenue, at 89th Street, 212-423-3500, guggenheim.org. (The museum is open on Memorial Day.)Advertisement