AdvertisementSupported byMuseums and galleries are in Manhattan unless otherwise noted. Full reviews of recent art shows: nytimes.com/art. A searchable guide to these and many other art shows is at nytimes.com/events.Museums★ American Folk Art Museum: ‘When the Curtain Never Comes Down’  (through July 5) A sprawling cacophony of objects, audiotapes, photographs and films is here orchestrated into a curatorial marvel. Strange and wonderful in numerous ways, the show sheds new light on the performance aspects of much outsider art while reminding us how eccentricity is not only basic to creativity but also to personal liberty and democracy itself. 2 Lincoln Square, Columbus Avenue at 66th Street, 212-595-9533, folkartmuseum.org. (Roberta Smith)★ Brooklyn Historical Society: ‘Personal Correspondence: Photography and Letter Writing in Civil War Brooklyn’ (through next spring) Symbolically, the Civil War ended when Robert E. Lee surrendered to Ulysses S. Grant in the spring of 1865. For many people who lived through it, though, the war never ended at all, and it lives on in letters sent to and from the battlefield. Thousands of these ended up half-forgotten in attics and bureau drawers; a small stash comes to light in this exhibition that consists of just one little room with a lot in it — including letters, Civil War souvenirs and explanatory texts — with everything as readily accessible as if in a well-packed suitcase. 128 Pierrepont Street, near Clinton Street, Brooklyn Heights, 718-222-4111, brooklynhistory.org. (Holland Cotter)★ Brooklyn Museum: ‘Jean-Michel Basquiat: The Unknown Notebooks’ (through Aug. 23) In this sparkling if sometimes arcane exhibition, the contents of eight notebooks, supplemented by several paintings and large drawings, trace the evolution of Basquiat’s loquacious pictorial style. Time spent with the catalog enhances the experience. 200 Eastern Parkway, at Prospect Park, Brooklyn, 718-638-5000, brooklynmuseum.org. (Smith)Brooklyn Museum: ‘Zanele Muholi: Isibonelo/Evidence’ (through Nov. 1) Describing herself as a “visual activist,” the South African photographer Zanele Muholi is dedicated to increasing the visibility of black lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex people with notable international success. Her stark black-and-white photographs often respond to the violence inflicted on her community. But the exhibition also includes colorful photographs of same-sex weddings that are radiant, both with African sunshine and irrepressible joy. 200 Eastern Parkway, at Prospect Park, Brooklyn, 718-638-5000, brooklynmuseum.org. (Martha Schwendener)★ Cooper Hewitt Smithsonian Design Museum (continuing) The stately doors of the 1902 Andrew Carnegie mansion, home to the Cooper Hewitt, are open again after an overhaul and expansion of the premises. Historic house and modern museum have always made an awkward fit, a standoff between preservation and innovation, and the problem remains, but the renovation has brought a wide-open new gallery space, a cafe and a raft of be-your-own-designer digital enhancements. Best of all, more of the museum’s vast permanent collection is now on view, including an Op Art weaving, miniature spiral staircases, ballistic face masks and a dainty enameled 18th-century version of a Swiss knife. Like design itself, this institution is built on tumult and friction, and you feel it. 2 East 91st Street, at Fifth Avenue, 212-849-8400, cooperhewitt.org. (Cotter)Institute for the Study of the Ancient World: ‘From Ancient to Modern: Archaeology and Aesthetics’ (through June 7) Small but bursting with ideas, this show tells a fascinating tale about the 20th-century excavation and interpretation of some ancient Sumerian artifacts. It focuses on about 50 objects that were unearthed in the 1920s and ’30s in Mesopotamia, including sumptuous jewelry and wide-eyed, bearded men carved from stone. Along with these are profuse archaeological documentation; paintings and sculptures by 20th-century artists like Willem de Kooning and Henry Moore who were inspired by Sumerian art; and politically fraught works by two contemporary artists, Jananne al-Ani and Michael Rakowitz. Institute for the Study of the Ancient World, 15 East 84th Street, Manhattan, 212-992-7800, isaw.nyu.edu. (Ken Johnson)Japan Society: ‘Life of Cats: Selections From the Hiraki Ukiyo-e Collection’ (through June 7) Cats were taken to Japan from China in the mid-sixth century. Adopted as pets and valued for their rat-killing skills, they naturally infiltrated Japanese art, literature and folklore. This excellent show should be catnip for cat lovers; all the better if they’re into art, too. Its 86 drawings, paintings, woodblock prints and decorative objects dating from the 17th to the early 20th centuries represent cats behaving in typical, ridiculous and supernatural ways. 333 East 47th Street, Manhattan, 212-832-1155, japansociety.org. (Johnson)Jewish Museum: ‘Revolution of the Eye: Modern Art and the Birth of American Television’ (through Sept. 27) This small but revealing and entertaining exhibition traces the connections between the high art of the 1950s, ’60s and ’70s and the developing medium of television. The connections aren’t always deep, but the material is always absorbing — from the “Twilight Zone” credits, to CBS promotional materials designed by Ben Shahn, to Andy Warhol’s Schrafft’s commercial. (Closed Memorial Day.) 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92nd Street, 212-423-3200, thejewishmuseum.org. (Mike Hale)★ Metropolitan Museum of Art: ‘Fatal Attraction: Piotr Uklanski Photographs’ (through Aug. 16) A small but succinct survey of the multimedia bad-boy artist’s polymorphous relationship to photography shows him constantly changing scale, film and printing methods while exploring the medium’s ability to startle, seduce and become generic. He appropriates, imitates and pays homage as he goes, regularly invoking his Polish roots. Don’t miss the large photo-banners in the museum’s Great Hall or the massive fiber-sculpture monument to the eye and to insatiable looking. 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org. (Smith)★ Metropolitan Museum of Art: ‘Fatal Attraction: Piotr Uklanski Selects From The Met Collection’ (through June 14) Complementing the survey of his photographs, the artist has orchestrated 80 works from the museum’s holdings — along with a few of his own — into a mesmerizing display meditating on sex and death. Consisting mostly of photographs, it is bolstered by paintings by Dali and Cranach sculptures from several cultures and several surprises. Scratch any artist of note, even a postmodern one, and you often find a connoisseur. 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org. (Smith)Metropolitan Museum of Art: ‘The Roof Garden Commission: Pierre Huyghe’ (through Nov. 1) This outdoor, rooftop exhibition is about time. The main attraction is a massive fish tank containing a curious assortment of objects, animate and inanimate. As if by magic, a boulder of lava floats in the water, its top rising a bit above the surface. A couple of inches below is a mound of sand around which are swimming little, brown eel-like lampreys and bright orange Triops cancriformis, or tadpole shrimp, two species thought not to have evolved in millions of years. Elsewhere on the roof, a boulder of Manhattan schist, the material that forms the bedrock for many New York City skyscrapers, represents geological duration. 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org. (Johnson)Metropolitan Museum of Art: ‘China: Through the Looking Glass’ (through Aug. 16) Designed to illustrate the influence of Chinese culture on Western fashion, this visually extravagant exhibition fills both the basement-level Anna Wintour Costume Center and the Chinese galleries on the second floor, and claims a repurposed Egyptian space in between. In terms of real estate, it’s one of the museum’s largest shows ever. And it feels that way, exhaustingly so, with acres of objects, photographs, film clips and apparel punched up by sound-and-light special effects. In a way, it’s all just fashion business as usual, the product of a culture that speaks a language of overkill. In this case, though, a smaller, better show is all but buried: a nuanced historical essay on cultural hybridity, the mixing of styles and ideas over space and time that leaves every culture equal to every other culture in its creative impurity. 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org. (Cotter)★ Metropolitan Museum of Art: ‘Discovering Japanese Art: American Collectors and the Met’ (through Sept. 27) Highlighting contributions to the Met’s Japanese art holdings by American collectors from the 1880s to the present, this gorgeous show presents more than 200 superb paintings, drawings, prints, scrolls, folding screens, ceramics, lacquer ware and works in other mediums and genres, mostly dating from the fourth century to the late 19th. 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org. (Johnson)★ Metropolitan Museum of Art: ‘Reimagining Modernism: 1900-1950’ (continuing) One of the greatest encyclopedic museums in the world fulfills its mission a little more with an ambitious reinstallation of works of early European modernism with their American counterparts for the first time in nearly 30 years. Objects of design and paintings by a few self-taught artists further the integration. It is quite a sight, with interesting rotations and fine-tunings to come. 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org. (Smith)★ Metropolitan Museum of Art: ‘Sultans of Deccan India, 1500-1700: Opulence and Fantasy’ (through July 26) This beautiful, evocative exhibition sheds new light on the miniature paintings, calligraphies, luxurious metalwork and breathtaking jewels that remain from the succession of cosmopolitan Muslim kingdoms and their turbulent 200-year golden age on the Deccan Plateau of south-central India. It also presents the paintings in new ways, most strikingly relieved of the white mats favored by Western museums and collections. Their decorative borders and patterned album pages are a revelation. 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org. (Smith)★ Metropolitan Museum of Art: ‘Warriors and Mothers: Epic Mbembe Art’ (through Sept. 16) If a dozen masterpiece Renaissance sculptures, done in an unknown and wildly unorthodox style, suddenly turned up in the Italian countryside, the find would make the news. You’ll encounter the equivalent of such a discovery in this show of spectacular weatherworn, wood-carved figures, some dating to before the 17th century, that were made by the Mbembe in southeastern Nigeria and taken to Paris by an African dealer in the early 1970s. They caused a sensation among collectors and scholars at the time, and you can see why. But the effort to find more of them proved fruitless. The examples at the Met, which include the original dozen, represent all the fully intact stand-alone Mbembe figures known to exist. 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org. (Cotter)MoMA PS1: ‘Samara Golden: The Flat Side of the Knife’ (through Sept. 7) Standing at a railing where you look into the museum’s two-story-tall Duplex Gallery, you behold a confoundingly complicated interior architecture with furniture, stairways, musical instruments, wheelchairs and many other domestic items rendered in silvery, foil-clad foam board. The gallery’s floor is covered by a grid of large mirrors so that everything is doubled. What you think is up may really be down and what you take to be real might be a virtual reflection of the real. 22-25 Jackson Avenue, at 46th Avenue, Long Island City, Queens, 718-784-2084, ps1.org. (Johnson)★ El Museo del Barrio: ‘Under the Mexican Sky: Gabriel Figueroa, Art and Film’  (through June 27) Painting with light is one way to define the cinematographer’s task, and it describes the art of Gabriel Figueroa (1907-1997), who worked with some of the leading international film directors of his time and was a national hero in his native Mexico, the supreme painter-in-light of Mexicanidad. How do you put this particular kind of art across in a museum — art that is as much about time as it is about material, as much about flux as it is about fixity? This show, which mixes Figueroa film clips with paintings and prints by some of Mexico’s greatest artists and in the process utterly transforms El Museo’s interior spaces, gives an enthralling answer. 1230 Fifth Avenue, at 104th Street, East Harlem, 212-831-7272, elmuseo.org. (Cotter)Museum of Arts and Design: ‘Richard Estes: Painting New York City’  (through Sept. 20) The core of this show is a selection of vivid, Photorealist paintings of urban subjects like glass and chrome storefronts, movie theater marquees, cars and trucks, subways, the Brooklyn Bridge, views from the Staten Island Ferry and idyllic images of Central Park made between 1965 and 2015. The exhibition also includes didactic sections about the craft and technique that go into Mr. Estes’s painting and prints, but that aspect doesn’t fully deliver what it promises. 2 Columbus Circle, Manhattan, 212-299-7777, madmuseum.org. (Johnson)★ Museum of Biblical Art: ‘Sculpture in the Age of Donatello: Renaissance Masterpieces From Florence Cathedral’ (through June 14) This terrific 23-piece show features three major works by the early Renaissance sculptor Donatello (1386-1466), including the life-size statue of a bald prophet known as “lo Zuccone,” or “Pumpkin Head,” widely considered his greatest work. Along with a half-dozen other works by, or attributed to, Donatello are sculptures by Nanni di Banco (circa 1386-1421), his main competitor, including Nanni’s monumental marble representation of St. Luke. With the addition of a series of octagonal marble reliefs by Luca della Robbia and wooden models of the Florence Cathedral’s enormous dome attributed to its designer, Filippo Brunelleschi, the exhibition amounts to a tightly cropped snapshot of the birth of the Renaissance. 1865 Broadway, at 61st Street, 212-408-1500, mobia.org. (Johnson)★ Museum of Modern Art: ‘One-Way Ticket: Jacob Lawrence’s Migration Series and Other Visions of the Great Movement North’ (through Sept. 7) In the early 20th century, tens of thousands of African-Americans left the rural South for the industrial North in search of jobs, homes and respect. Officially, this MoMA show is meant to mark the centennial of that immense population shift, though it also marks another anniversary: the first time in two decades that all 60 paintings in Jacob Lawrence’s great “Migration Series,” now divided between New York and Washington, D.C., have been shown together at the museum. Here they are surrounded by period photographs, books and fabulous music in a display as stimulating to the mind and the ear as it is to the eye. 212-708-9400, moma.org. (Cotter)Museum of Modern Art: ‘Scenes for a New Heritage: Contemporary Art from the Collection’ (through March 2016) MoMA’s latest installation of works from its permanent collection fills the second-floor contemporary galleries with videos, installations, sculptures, drawings, prints and photographs produced by more than 30 artists during the past three decades. It’s an uneven, haphazard selection, but leaving artistic quality aside, its unusually optimistic-sounding title inadvertently raises a large and intriguing question: At a time when contemporary art seems to be spinning its wheels, what could a new heritage be? 212-708-9400, moma.org. (Johnson)Museum of Modern Art: ‘Björk’ (through June 7) More than most, an exhibition devoted to the Iceland phenomenon — the most avant-garde popular singer of her time — needs to justify its place in a major museum. But MoMA was clearly unable to commit in terms of space, curatorial imagination or a serious catalog. The result is something of a shambles, but at least the music videos — projected on a large screen with surround sound — confirm the visual side of Björk’s complex sensibility and achievement. 212-708-9400, moma.org. (Smith)★ Museum of Modern Art: ‘Latin America in Construction: Architecture 1955-1980’ (through July 19) This show recalls a not-so-distant time when architects and governments together dreamed big about changing the world for the better. What got built through the 1970s in places like Havana and Buenos Aires, Mexico City and Lima included some of the most inspired architecture of the modern age. The show is an eye-opener, rectifying a long-skewed, Eurocentric worldview, shedding light on a period neglected for generations outside the region. It’s the sort of exhibition MoMA still does best. You can come away shaking your head at the variety of remarkable projects missing from the 20th-century canon. 212-708-9400, moma.org. (Michael Kimmelman)Museum of the City of New York: ‘Everything Is Design: The Work of Paul Rand’  (through Sept. 7) You may not know the name Paul Rand (1914-96), the immensely influential advertising art director, illustrator and graphic designer, but it’s a safe bet you’re familiar with some of his works. After shaking up American advertising and book cover design in the 1940s and ’50s, he created logos for UPS, IBM, Westinghouse and other American corporations. His admirers called him “the Picasso of graphic design.” This show tracks his six-decade career with 150 examples of vintage magazines, book covers, three-dimensional containers, children’s books and books by Mr. Rand about principles of design. Fifth Avenue at 103rd Street, 212-534-1672, mcny.org. (Johnson)Neue Galerie: ‘Gustav Klimt and Adele Bloch-Bauer: The Woman in Gold’ (through Sept. 7) With the release of the movie “Woman in Gold,” which is about the restitution of some Nazi-looted paintings by Gustav Klimt to their rightful heir, the most celebrated of those works, the predominantly golden “Adele Bloch-Bauer I” (1907), is back in the media spotlight after its 2006 purchase by Ronald S. Lauder for $135 million, a record price at the time. This small show features the portrait along with eight other Klimts and an assortment of jewelry and decorative objects typifying the luxurious lifestyle of Adele and Ferdinand Bloch-Bauer, the art collectors who commissioned it. 1048 Fifth Avenue, at 86th Street, 212-628-6200, neuegalerie.org. (Johnson)★ New-York Historical Society: ‘Freedom Journey 1965: Photographs of the Selma to Montgomery March by Stephen Somerstein’ (through Oct. 25) Almost 50 years ago, the picture editor of a campus newspaper at City College of New York assigned himself a breaking story: covering what promised to be a massive march in Alabama, led by the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., to demand free and clear voting rights for African-Americans. On short notice the editor, Stephen Somerstein, grabbed his cameras, climbed on a bus and headed south. The 55 pictures of black leaders and everyday people in this show, installed in a hallway and small gallery, are some that he shot that day. The image of Dr. King’s head seen in monumental silhouette that has become a virtual logo of the film “Selma” is based on a Somerstein original. 170 Central Park West, at 77th Street, 212-873-3400, nyhistory.org. (Cotter)★ Whitney Museum of American Art: ‘America Is Hard to See’ (through Sept. 27) With high ceilings, soft pine-plank floors and light-flooded windows and terraces, the galleries of the new Renzo Piano-designed Whitney Museum in the meatpacking district are as airy as 19th-century sailmakers’ lofts. Art feels at home in them, and the work in the museum’s top-to-bottom inaugural exhibition is homegrown. Culled from the permanent collection, it mixes bookmarked favorites by Edward Hopper, Georgia O’Keeffe and Jasper Johns with objects and artists that the Whitney had all but forgotten or just brought in. As a vision of a larger America, the show is far from comprehensive; as a musing on the history of a particular New York institution over nearly a century, it is very fine, smartly detailed and superbly presented. 99 Gansevoort Street, at Washington Street, 212-570-3600, whitney.org. (Cotter)Galleries: Uptown★ ‘A Curious Blindness’ (through June 13) If, as it is sometimes said, we live in a postracial era, why are reports about race and racial conflict in the news every day? This is more or less the question asked by three students in the Critical and Curatorial Studies program at Columbia University — Vivian Chui, Tara Kuruvilla and Doris Zhao — in a cogent group exhibition that brings together 18 young artists focusing on the functional fantasies that revolve around race and the intended colorblindness it engenders. Elia Alba, SunTek Chung, Amir H. Fallah and Ahmed Mater are artists to look for here. Wallach Art Gallery, Columbia University, 1190 Amsterdam Avenue, near 119th Street, Morningside Heights, 212-854-7288, columbia.edu/cu/wallach. (Cotter)Galleries: Chelsea★ Andrew Lord: ‘at sunset, with snow falling, by starlight’ (through May 30) At once bracingly ugly and sensuously beautiful, the recent ceramic sculptures by the British artist Andrew Lord look as if they’d been made by a clumsy giant. Displayed on three white tables are pitchers in the form of vases, human heads with handles and constructions populated by little, nude female figures. Glazed in brushed, poured and drizzled colors, they are lively marriages of sculptural form and painterly surface. Gladstone Gallery, 530 West 21st Street, 212-206-7606, gladstonegallery.com. (Johnson)★ Santu Mofokeng: ‘A Metaphorical Biography’ (through June 27) Born in Johannesburg in 1956, Mr. Mofokeng produced some of the great pictures of the apartheid years, but his images were different from many others of the time. His interest was less in a photojournalistic documenting of battles between South African blacks and repressive government, than in recording the dynamics of another front line: daily life in black communities. This small but comprehensive career survey ranges from his mid-1980s “Townships” series, for which he traveled to various black settlements created far from cities by a white separatist government, to 2004 pictures of the Motouleng Cave, a spiritual pilgrimage site to which the artist took a brother sick with AIDS. The Walther Collection Project Space, 526 West 26th Street, Suite 718, Chelsea, 212-352-0683, walthercollection.com. (Cotter)★ Lisa Yuskavage  (through June 13) The artist’s paintings of sexy young female things continue to score points about the male gaze and women’s sexual autonomy, but they need to unsettle their medium. Flirting with kitsch and bad taste isn’t enough, nor is beginning to depict men. There are too many artists tackling representation and painting both for her not to join the fray. David Zwirner, 533 West 19th Street, 212-727-2070, davidzwirner.com. (Smith)Galleries: Other★ Allan deSouza: ‘Notes From Afar’ (through June 6) This two-project show updates canonical pieces of cultural history. In a 2011 photographic response to Jacob Lawrence’s “Migration Series,” Mr. deSouza, born in Kenya and of South Asian descent, brings the story of the 20th-century African-American diaspora from the South to the North into a global present of surveillance-saturated international airports. In a 2014 piece, “Ark of Martyrs,” he brilliantly rewrites the fevered, racist delirium of Joseph Conrad’s “Heart of Darkness” into contemporary political terms of war, Wall Street and religion. Talwar Gallery, 108 East 16th Street, Flatiron district, 212-673-3096, talwargallery.com. (Cotter)★ Alex Katz (through June 13) As confirmed by this extraordinary show, few art experiences are more moving than seeing a seasoned painter excel late in life, especially by apparently modulating a familiar style. Mr. Katz’s landscapes in particular have always entailed a certain torque of scale, surface and space — in short, of reality — but never has it been more perceptually strange or emotionally gripping. Gavin Brown’s Enterprise, 620 Greenwich Street, at Leroy Street, West Village, 212-627-5258, gavinbrown.biz. (Smith)★ Rosy Keyser: ‘The Hell Bitch’ (through June 6) In this show the best works combine delicate and heavy, even ham-handed, creating feisty assemblage paintings with exposed stretches, airy fringes of much unraveled, chaotic brushwork that gives new meaning to the Action Painting ethos. They declare a fullness of promise at which her previous shows have only hinted. Maccarone, 630 Greenwich Street, at Morton Street, West Village, 212-431-4977, maccarone.net. (Smith)Pam Lins: ‘model model model’ (through May 31) Pam Lins’s current show includes two projects that explore the connection between photography and sculpture, one relating to a grainy black-and-white image depicting a workshop at Vkhutemas, the state art academy founded in Moscow in 1920. Ms. Lins has beautifully approximated in clay and wood the abstract forms and supporting platforms visible in the photograph. It is a project that is both generous in its visual approach and corresponds with changing notions of photography, treating it more as an analogy than as an index, reproduction, or copy. Rachel Uffner Gallery, 170 Suffolk Street, near Houston Street, Lower East Side, 212-274-0064, racheluffnergallery.com. (Schwendener)‘The Story of O(OO)’ (through June 28) The title of this puzzling exhibition refers to the erotic French novel “The Story of O” and to a recent trend in philosophy called Object Oriented Ontology, or OOO for short. Works by six artists, including Paul Laffoley and Lucy Dodd, are arranged on and around a diagram on the floor resembling a hopscotch court. It’s from a chart about how we know reality devised by Graham Harman, one of OOO’s leading exponents. David Lewis Gallery, 88 Eldridge Street, near Grand Street, Lower East Side, 212-966-7990, davidlewisgallery.com. (Johnson)★ ‘Tseng Kwong Chi: Performing for the Camera’ (through July 11) In 1979, Mr. Tseng (1950-90) began to create his most memorable works: photographic self-portraits in which he appeared wearing dark glasses and a Zhongshan suit — the type of drab uniform favored by Mao Zedong of China. Thus outfitted, he posed before famous monuments like Mount Rushmore and the Eiffel Tower and natural wonders like Niagara Falls and the Canadian Rockies. This entertaining survey presents about 80 works from a short but prolific career. Grey Art Gallery, New York University, 100 Washington Square East, Greenwich Village, 212-998-6780, nyu.edu/greyart. (Johnson)Out Of Town★ National Museum of African Art: ‘Conversations: African and African American Artists in Dialogue’  (through early 2016) For its 50th anniversary, this museum has brilliantly thread together work from two sources: its own holdings in African material and the Camille O. and William H. Cosby Jr. collection of African-American art. The Cosby collection, weighted toward canonical figures like Romare Bearden and Charles White, will bring in the crowds, but it is the curators and museum itself, which is in a period of renaissance, that have made the show rise well above predictability. Smithsonian Institution, 950 Independence Avenue SW, Washington, 202-633-4600, africa.si.edu. (Cotter)Last Chance★ Brooklyn Museum: ‘Kehinde Wiley: A New Republic’ (closes on Sunday) You can love or hate this artist’s bright, brash, history-laden, kitsch-tinged portraits of confident, even imperious young black men and women usurping heroic roles from the generally lily-white history of Western painting. No matter, the two-decade survey of his extravagant, mind-teasing canvases rewards. His career seems to be one of ceaseless ambition, socially conscious generosity and an uncanny skill that he is still harnessing. 200 Eastern Parkway, at Prospect Park, 718-638-5000, brooklynmuseum.org. (Smith)★ Morgan Library & Museum: ‘Embracing Modernism: Ten Years of Drawings Acquisitions’ (closes on Monday) Too many of the drawings in this exhibition hang inertly on the wall, especially the more contemporary (and numerous) ones, which are in a majority. The ones that are visually active create enough striking contrasts to turn the show into a valuable lesson in looking and quality that everyone, the library included, benefits from. 225 Madison Avenue, at 36th Street, 212-685-0008, themorgan.org. (Smith)★ New Museum: ‘Surround Audience: 2015 Triennial’ (closes on Sunday) If you’re fed up with big joke-shop sculpture, diva spectacle and brain-dead abstraction, this museum’s 2015 Triennial will come as a break in the clouds — not a full flood of new light, but a pull in a different direction. It’s a glimpse of terrain composed almost entirely of border crossings in media, art disciplines, ethnicities, genders and species. The in-between as an aesthetic is no surprise given the curators: Lauren Cornell of the New Museum, who has been paying astute attention to digital art and the Internet for years, and the artist Trecartin, whose laptop-generated, YouTube-distributed, hourslong pop-epic videos add up to some of the most thoroughly genre-collapsing art of the past decade. If nothing by the 51 artists from 25 countries is as genius as his work, there is still a lot to ponder in a show that represents a welcome shift to microgravity flux within a gross-objects industry. 235 Bowery, at Prince Street, Lower East Side, 212-219-1222, newmuseum.org. (Cotter)Arthur Ou (closes on Sunday) Arthur Ou’s current exhibition features 14 black-and-white images of contemporary photographers reading passages from Ludwig Wittgenstein’s “Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus,” from 1921. A landmark of 20th-century Western philosophy, the book proposed a picture theory of language in which statements or propositions allow us to visualize things, helping to form the basis of our reality. Mr. Ou’s sitters — James Welling, Moyra Davey, Joachim Schmid, Anne Collier and other noted artists of the Conceptual clan — are reading specific passages from the “Tractatus,” mostly relating to images, objects, thought and the world, but also, presumably, to their own work. Brennan & Griffin, 55 Delancey Street, at Eldridge Street, Lower East Side, 212-227-0115, brennangriffin.com. (Schwendener)Advertisement