AdvertisementSupported by Full reviews of recent dance performances: nytimes.com/dance. A searchable guide to these and other performances is at nytimes.com/events.★ American Ballet Theater (through July 4) The company’s 75th anniversary is in full swing, with eight performances of “Giselle” up next. Three principal dancers are retiring this season, and two of them, Paloma Herrera and Xiomara Reyes, bid farewell on Wednesday, Ms. Herrera in the afternoon and Ms. Reyes at night. (The third, Julie Kent, gives her last performance on June 20.) The role of Giselle, a peasant girl who dies of heartbreak and, resurrected, saves her lover from a tribe of ghost women, should lend itself to dramatic and bittersweet goodbyes. Mondays through Fridays at 7:30 p.m.; Saturdays at 8 p.m.; matinees on Wednesdays and Saturdays at 2 p.m.; Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000. Complete schedule: abt.org. (Siobhan Burke)Kimberly Bartosik and Dylan Crossman  (through Saturday) In 2008, Kimberly Bartosik introduced the first and second chapters of her “Ecsteriority” project, a meditation on decay. “Ecsteriority3” appeared in 2011 — a six-hour marathon — and now she completes the cycle with “Ecsteriority4 (Part 2),” for an all-star trio of Dylan Crossman, Marc Mann and Melissa Toogood. Mr. Crossman contributes a solo to the second part of the evening, part of the Abrons Arts Center’s Travelogues series. His work, “Bound,” considers that emotional seesaw of freedom and constraint. At 8 p.m., 466 Grand Street, at Pitt Street, Lower East Side, 866-811-4111, abronsartscenter.org. (Brian Schaefer)Bodystories: Teresa Fellion Dance  (through Saturday) In the title of Teresa Fellion’s new work, “The Mantises Are Flipping W.3,” the “W” stands for “world,” and this is the third one she’s created in her Mantises series. The project started as a solo, but this world is populated by seven dancers who are charged with expressing a variety of unrelated but interconnected themes: the nature of opposites, sanity and insanity, how sound moves through and around the body, and the mental effects of isolation. At 8 p.m., Danspace Project, St. Mark’s Church, 131 East 10th Street, East Village, 866-811-4111, danspaceproject.org. (Schaefer)★ DanceAfrica (Friday through Monday) The founder of this festival, Chuck Davis, will soon be stepping down, after almost four decades of inspired leadership. He and the incoming artistic director, Abdel R. Salaam, have organized this year’s edition with a focus on Afro-Brazilian traditions. Featured groups include Balé Folclórico da Bahia, from Brazil; Bambara Drum and Dance Ensemble, from the Bronx; and, well known to DanceAfrica regulars, Brooklyn’s own BAM/Restoration DanceAfrica Ensemble. A street fair outside the Brooklyn Academy of Music accompanies the action onstage. Friday at 7:30 p.m.; Saturday at 2 and 7:30 p.m.; Sunday and Monday at 3 p.m.; Howard Gilman Opera House, Brooklyn Academy of Music, 30 Lafayette Avenue, at Ashland Place, Fort Greene, 718-636-4100, bam.org. (Burke)Eifman Ballet (Friday through Sunday) This company from St. Petersburg, Russia, visits City Center every few years with a juggernaut of a story ballet. This time, it’s Boris Eifman’s “Up and Down,” a tumultuous love story set in the 1920s and inspired by Freud. Friday at 8 p.m.; Saturday at 2 and 8 p.m.; Sunday at 2 p.m.; 131 West 55th Street, Manhattan, 212-581-1212, nycitycenter.org. (Burke)★ Flamenco Vivo Carlota Santana  (through Sunday) This New York-based company, which has been championing flamenco for more than 30 years, presents three new works by Spanish choreographers. Ángel Muñoz’s “Angeles,” with a cast of 10 dancers and musicians, finds angels in myths and music; Enrique Vicent and Antonio López unleash the beautiful agony of flamenco’s dark side in “Martinete-Seguiriya”; and Guadalupe Torres offers a moving solo called “Ausencia.” Additional company repertory rounds out two separate programs. Tuesday through Friday at 7:30 p.m.; Saturday at 2 and 7:30 p.m.; Sunday at 2 p.m.; Fishman Space, Fisher Building, Brooklyn Academy of Music, 321 Ashland Place, near Lafayette Avenue, Fort Greene, 718-636-4100, bam.org. (Schaefer)Fridays at Noon  (Friday) In a program for this eclectic, low-tech series, the choreographer and costume designer Walter Dundervill uses chaos as an organizing principle. “Construction and Action,” as the afternoon is titled, includes his own new work and that of two colleagues, Stacy Grossfield and Rebecca Davis, who create and disrupt order in very different ways. At noon, 92nd Street Y, 1395 Lexington Avenue, 212-415-5500, 92y.org (Burke)Graham 2 (Thursday through May 31) The junior ranks of the Martha Graham Dance Company operate much like their parent troupe, preserving Graham’s classics while bringing in contemporary works that challenge the dancers in new ways. In a program at the company’s West Village studio, they offer a premiere by the Spanish choreographer Blanca Li, alongside well-known Graham repertory like the jubilant “Diversion of Angels” and the defiant “Steps in the Street.” Thursday at 7:30 p.m.; next Friday, May 30 and 31 at 8 p.m.; Martha Graham Studio Theater, 55 Bethune Street, at Washington Street, 212-229-9200, Ext. 30, marthagraham.org. (Burke)Hubbard Street Dance Chicago  (through Sunday) If the Midwest has a hub for European choreographers, Hubbard Street is it. This troupe of exceptional dancers, who thrive in many modes of contemporary ballet, travels east with two programs of works created at home and abroad. These include Jiri Kylian’s stark and percussive “Falling Angels,” Nacho Duato’s Mediterranean-tinged “Gnawa,” a Crystal Pite solo and a tribute to George Balanchine by the Spanish choreographer Gustavo Ramírez Sansano. The resident artist Alejandro Cerrudo contributes two pieces, one on each program. Friday at 8 p.m.; Saturday at 2 and 8 p.m.; Sunday at 2 p.m.; Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-242-0800, joyce.org. (Burke)La MaMa Moves! Dance Festival  (Through June 21) This East Village festival is entering its 10th year of supporting adventurous dance, with a busy lineup of local and international artists. The opening weekend includes an American premiere by Junk Ensemble, from Ireland; a shared evening of choreography by Gwen Welliver, Brandon Collwes and Eric Geiger and Anya Cloud; and Stanley Love’s joyful, unapologetically jazzy “Persephone Pomegranate seeds, huny.” Beginning on Thursday, John Scott’s Irish Modern Dance Theater presents “Hyperactive,” which has been described as a “high-energy human dance installation,” and Jane Comfort offers the premiere of “Altiplano,” departing from her generally text-based work with a movement-driven exploration of social behavior. At various times, La MaMa, 74A East Fourth Street, 212-475-7710. The full schedule is at lamama.org. (Burke)Paloma McGregor  (Friday through Sunday) In “Building a Better Fish Trap/Part 1,” Ms. McGregor, a Caribbean-born choreographer, explores the nature of leaving a cultural home: “What do you take with you? Leave behind? Return to reclaim?” she asks. Inspired by the fishing tradition of her octogenarian father and other memories, the work has grown out of intergenerational collaboration all over New York City, leading up to this iteration at the Bronx Academy of Arts and Dance. Friday and Saturday at 8 p.m., Sunday at 3 p.m., 2474 Westchester Avenue, at St. Peters Avenue, 718-918-2110, baadbronx.org. (Burke)★ New York City Ballet  (through June 7) There are three more chances this season to see City Ballet’s new “La Sylphide,” choreographed in 1836 by August Bournonville and recently restaged by Peter Martins. It shares a program with “Bournonville Divertissements” on Saturday and Sunday; Lauren Lovette makes her debut as the title fairy of “La Sylphide” on Saturday afternoon. This is also a good week for fans of Jerome Robbins, whose “N.Y. Export: Opus Jazz” appears on a “Classic NYCB” bill, alongside Mr. Martins’s “Morgen” and George Balanchine’s “Raymonda Variations” (Friday, Wednesday and Thursday). Tuesday’s “All Robbins” evening includes “The Goldberg Variations” and “West Side Story Suite.” Fridays at 8 p.m.; Saturdays at 2 and 8 p.m.; Sundays at 3 p.m.; Tuesdays through Thursdays at 7:30 p.m.; David H. Koch Theater, Lincoln Center, 212-496-0600, nycballet.com. (Burke)Rebecca Patek (through Saturday) The full title of Rebecca Patek’s new work is “The Future Was Looking Better in the Past: My Family Herstory: Or from religious persecution to American greed to murderous infamy to denial, repression and the slow dissolution into moral confusion, financial ruin and karmic retribution,” which tells you plenty. Expect to be uncomfortable: Ms. Patek’s gripping and disturbing brand of dance theater doesn’t hold back. At 8 p.m., Chocolate Factory, 5-49 49th Avenue, Long Island City, Queens, 718-482-7069, chocolatefactorytheater.org. (Schaefer)Purchase Dance Company  (through Saturday) Purchase College, part of the State University of New York and about 35 miles north of the city, is home to one of the best higher-education dance conservatories in the country. The Purchase Dance Company, made of its most promising students, presents two programs combining classical and contemporary styles, including works by the popular modern-dance choreographers Doug Varone and Aszure Barton and the former New York City Ballet dancer Bettijane Sills. At 7:30 p.m., New York Live Arts, 219 West 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-924-0077, newyorklivearts.org. (Schaefer)★ Wendy Whelan: ‘Restless Creature’ (Tuesday through May 31) Toward the end of her 30-year tenure at New York City Ballet, the eminent ballerina Wendy Whelan branched out on her own, commissioning four contemporary choreographers to create new works for her. The resulting suite of duets — by Kyle Abraham, Joshua Beamish, Brian Brooks and Alejandro Cerrudo, who double as her dance partners — has been touring the country and, at long last, makes its New York City debut. In “Restless Creature,” Ms. Whelan appears at once transformed and like the avidly curious artist her admirers know and love. Tuesday and Wednesday at 7:30 p.m.; Thursday and next Friday at 8 p.m.; May 30 at 2 and 8 p.m.; May 31 at 2 p.m.; Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-242-0800, joyce.org. (Burke)Advertisement