By DAVID BELCHEROCT. 22, 2015
LUGANO, Switzerland — In a country known for scenery, a celebration of Swiss art wouldn’t feel complete without a view.The views from the new Lugano Arte e Cultura center do not disappoint: a platinum glacial lake, the Alps all around, seen through soaring windows that, far from eclipsing the art, place it in context.The arts center, which was inaugurated on Sept. 12, was designed by a local architect, Ivano Gianola. Adjacent to the city’s old Palace Hotel, which has been turned into luxury apartments, the new glass-and-stone center with breathtaking views across Lake Lugano melds the collections of two museums: the Museo d’Arte, which featured a range of European masterworks, and the Museo Cantonale d’Arte, devoted primarily to regional artists.Marco Franciolli,  director of the combined museum, now known as the Museo d’Arte della Svizzera Italiana, or MASI, said it “seemed logical to put the two museums together to make a stronger museum.”AdvertisementThe idea of merging the art history of Lugano is also reflected in the center’s inaugural art exhibition. “Orizzonte Nord-Sud: Leading Figures of European Art North and South of the Alps 1840–1960,” on display through Jan. 10, is a testament to a region that has nurtured some of Europe’s most enduring artists, including Paul Klee and Alberto Giacometti.AdvertisementThe $300 million center, funded by the city of Lugano and the canton of Ticino, along with private and corporate donations, also includes a 1,000-seat theater and a smaller studio theater.The “Orizzonte” exhibition, which combines works from the museum’s permanent collection with loans from museums and private collections around the world, reflects a strong notion of local identity, said Mr. Franciolli, who curated the exhibition and was director of both museums for the last four years.“We belong as a culture to Italy but as a nation to Switzerland, and we are this bridge between the two,” Mr. Franciolli said during a recent tour of the museum. “If we want to compose our identity, we have to work out our relation with both countries.”The exhibition, two years in planning, celebrates some of the region’s most famous artists — Klee and Giacometti among them — but also the lesser-known ones who helped define Ticino’s art diaspora.“Orizzonte” draws an early connection between north and south with Giorgio de Chirico and Arnold Böcklin, both early interpreters of art outside Ticino, a region tucked beneath the cloud-draped Alps but inspired by the sun-nurtured antiquity of Italy.“There’s a link with the Mediterranean with both of them, but also a link because they were inspired by other regions,” Mr. Franciolli said. “Our region was very poor, so we have a history of return, of people who emigrated and went to study not just in the Accademia in Italy, but also to France, England and Germany. There is this fusion of different styles.”Those influences from outside are a common thread through several artists that Mr. Franciolli decided to compare and contrast.AdvertisementOne of the less obvious comparisons is between Ferdinand Hodler,  a Swiss artist, and Adolfo Wildt, an Italian sculptor. Four women in Hodler’s “The Holy Hour” are juxtaposed with Wildt’s “Vir Temporis Acti,” a Roman bronze bust. The twisted bodies of the Hodler and the pained expression of the Wildt create a link.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Here you can feel our role as a bridge, since Hodler is not so well known in Italy and Wildt is not so well known in Switzerland,” Mr. Franciolli said. The Musée d’Orsay in Paris is planning a major retrospective of Wildt’s work in 2016.The exhibition also draws connections between locally celebrated artists: Giovanni Segantini and Medardo Rosso, Félix Vallotton and Felice Casorati.The lower floor of the exhibition is reserved for more influential artists of the region. Giacomo Balla and Fortunato  Depero, though not celebrity names, were hugely influential in Modernism.Nine paintings by Klee, who came from near Bern but spent his last years in the Ticino, anchor a central exhibition space. Mr. Franciolli and his staff selected the works to reflect Klee’s influences both in the region and in the wider art world. One work is related to the dramatic landscape of Sicily, and one to a Byzantine mosaic.“Klee discovered the color and the light in Tunisia and Egypt,” Mr. Franciolli said, referring, in part, to Klee’s 1914 visit to Tunisia, of which the artist once said: “Color has taken possession of me; no longer do I have to chase after it.”“He’s an artist of the north inspired by the light of the south,” Mr. Franciolli said.The region’s rock-star artist, Giacometti, rounds out the exhibition with his famous “L’Homme Qui Marche II” (“Walking Man II”) from 1960 in a room of its own. A few of his lesser-known works are also on display, contrasted with those by a contemporary, Lucio Fontana, whose images of slashes and seemingly random vertical slits create the same reedy forms.“The concept of space was very important for Giacometti,” Mr. Franciolli said. “When I saw the plan for the museum, I immediately thought about the relationship between this sculpture and the outside.” It was important, he added, for the sculpture to stand on its own and “not to have any other element to establish its relationship with the outside world.”The landscapes out the window — across Lake Lugano to the soaring Alpine peaks — form a stark backdrop to the skinny, slanted and lonely figure that seems to be straining to be part of the physical beauty outside. He is alone, but seems content in a room with a view.A version of this special report appears in print on October 22, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.