MAY 21, 2015
Full reviews of recent classical performances: nytimes.com/classical. A searchable guide to these and other performances is at nytimes.com/events.Opera‘Don Giovanni’ (Friday through Sunday) Douglas Martin conducts Amore Opera’s fresh-faced cast in Mozart’s ever-popular tragic comedy in a fully staged production of the work’s sleeker Prague version, directed by Nathan Hull. Friday and Saturday at 7:30 p.m.; Sunday at 2:30 p.m. (sold out); Connelly Theater, 220 East Fourth Street, East Village, 866-811-4111, amoreopera.org. (Corinna da Fonseca-Wollheim)★ ‘L’Épreuve Villageoise’ (Wednesday and Thursday) For 20 years, Opera Lafayette, based in Washington, has presented winning productions of early French operas in historically informed productions offering stylish singing and elaborate dance. The company ends its season with “L’Épreuve Villageoise” (“The Village Trial”), by Grétry, a composer born in Liege in 1741. In his day, Grétry’s warm comic operas were popular not just in Europe but also in French enclaves of American cities, including New Orleans. This reimagined production is set in a Cajun village. The story of this 1784 work involves a young country woman and her mother, who jointly settle scores with unfaithful lovers. Ryan Brown conducts the Opera Lafayette Chorus and Orchestra. Wednesday at 7:30 p.m., Thursday at 7 p.m., Gould Hall, French Institute Alliance Française, 55 East 59th Street, Manhattan, 800-982-2787, fiaf.org. (Anthony Tommasini)Classical MusicBargemusic  (Friday through Sunday) This intimate floating concert hall offers a typically eclectic range of music: On Friday, the two pianists Timo Andres and David Kaplan will try to make waves with the four-hand arrangement of Stravinsky’s explosive “Rite of Spring,” alongside works by Ravel, Barber and Christopher Cerrone. There’s more four-hands piano music on Saturday and Sunday with the husband-and-wife duo of Misha and Cipa Dichter, performing works by Mozart, Schubert and Bizet. Their program also offers Brahms’s soaring Piano Quartet in G minor, with the violinist Mark Peskanov, the violist Lawrence Dutton and the cellist Julian Schwarz. Friday and Saturday at 8 p.m.; Sunday at 4 p.m.; Bargemusic, Fulton Ferry Landing, next to the Brooklyn Bridge, Brooklyn, 800-838-3006, bargemusic.org. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)AdvertisementClemens Gadenstätter (Thursday) For the third and final program of his residency with the Austrian Cultural Forum, the Austrian composer Clemens Gadenstätter joins the noted Talea Ensemble for a program of his works, part of the institution’s American Immersion series. Mr. Gadenstätter has spoken of his fascination not only with the sounds of contemporary music, but also with those of everyday life, including advertising, movies and noise. The program includes the world premiere of a work commissioned by the forum for this occasion. At 8 p.m., Bohemian National Hall, 321 East 73rd Street, Manhattan, 212-319-5300, acfny.org. (Tommasini)International Contemporary Ensemble  (Wednesday) Members of this intrepid ensemble — the guitarist Dan Lippel, the percussionist Nathan Davis, the harpist Nuiko Wadden and the saxophonist Ryan Muncy — offer a free program called “Untempered,” featuring music with alternative tunings by Larry Polansky, Peter Adriaansz, Ben Johnston, James Tenney and Lou Harrison. At 8 p.m., Abrons Arts Center, 466 Grand Street, at Pitt Street, Lower East Side, 212-352-3101, abronsartscenter.org. (Vivien Schweitzer)Evgeny Kissin  (Tuesday) As part of “With You, Armenia,” a concert given by the Yerevan Perspectives International Music Festival to commemorate the centenary of the Armenian genocide, this brilliant pianist plays various works by Chopin. Also on the program are several choral works by Armenian composers and the world premiere of a new piece by Krzysztof Penderecki; all are to be sung by the Hover Chamber Choir, led by Sona Hovahnnisyan. At 8 p.m., Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (David Allen)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mimesis Ensemble  (Tuesday) In a program titled “All Roads Do Not Lead Forward,” this interesting group gives the New York premiere of “Sadat,” a ballet for chamber ensemble by the ubiquitous Mohammed Fairouz, as well as performances of Osvaldo Golijov’s “Last Round,” with concertos by Bach and Stravinsky. At 7:30 p.m., Weill Recital Hall, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Allen)Advertisement★ New York Philharmonic  (Friday and Saturday) A rising star in the conducting world, the Finnish maestra Susanna Malkki makes her much-anticipated Philharmonic debut conducting Brahms’s ebullient “Variations on a Theme by Haydn” and his seething Piano Concerto No. 1, with Kirill Gerstein replacing an injured Jonathan Biss as soloist. Jonathan Harvey’s Buddhist-tinged “Tranquil Abiding” rounds out the program. Saturday’s matinee pairs the Brahms concerto with Dvorak’s String Quintet in E flat, with Alan Gilbert taking up the viola alongside the Philharmonic players. Friday at 11 a.m., Saturday at 2 and 8 p.m. Avery Fisher Hall, Lincoln Center, 212-875-5656, nyphil.org. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)New York Youth Symphony  (Sunday) This energetic ensemble of musicians, ages 12 through 22, performs with polish and conviction. It will tackle one of the pinnacles of the repertory on this occasion, with Joshua Gersen conducting Beethoven’s Symphony No. 9. The program also features the Overture to Rossini’s “La Gazza Ladra.” At 2 p.m., Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Schweitzer)Prism Quartet  (Saturday) This virtuosic ensemble is a saxophone quartet, but prepare to hear sounds that transcend the traditional palette of that instrument in new works by Michael Daugherty, David Hertzberg, Emma O’Halloran, Viet Cuong, Jonathan Russell, Kyle Bartlett, Solon Snider, Mark Macaluso, Prism’s own Matthew Levy and the newly minted Pulitzer Prize-winner in composition, Julia Wolfe. At 7:30 p.m., Leonard Nimoy Thalia Theater, Symphony Space, 2537 Broadway, at 95th Street, 212-864-5400, symphonyspace.org. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)★ David Rosenboom  (Friday through Sunday) The music programming at the Whitney Museum of American Art’s new building downtown begins, in a collaboration with Issue Project Room, with four concerts over three days. They’re devoted to this searching composer and performer, known for connecting his music to technology, mathematics and neuroscience. At 8 p.m., except for Saturday, which has performances at 1 and 8 p.m., 99 Gansevoort Street, at Washington Street, meatpacking district, 212-570-3600, whitney.org. (Zachary Woolfe)A version of this schedule appears in print on May 22, 2015, on Page C15 of the New York edition with the headline: The Listings: Classical.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.