AdvertisementSupported byBy Jon ParelesUNIONDALE, N.Y. — Watching Pete Townshend’s hands as the Who played Nassau Coliseum here on Wednesday night was a reminder of what made the band great. His hands made bold windmill arcs, scrabbled at trills, picked off single notes and scampered through bluesy squiggles. They were masterly and strategic, defining the sound and structure of each song, yet still reckless. They were exploring, even now, the way his songs are awash in clashing impulses: rebellion, isolation, anger, uncertainty, yearning, fear, lust, frustration, brawling, searching. Three of Mr. Townshend’s many self-questioning manifestos — “I Can’t Explain,” “The Seeker” and “Who Are You” — started a set full of the Who’s surefire material. “Sorry if this seems like history lessons,” a jovial Mr. Townshend said between songs, as he recalled the band’s first forays into the United States. Well, sometimes the concert did: the history of a songwriter and a band pushing against limitations. Mr. Townshend’s songs probed unexpected harmonies (like the chorus of “I Can See for Miles”), grew into rock operas like “Tommy” and “Quadrophenia,” experimented with electronics in “Baba O’Riley” and sought at times to speak for a generation. They weren’t simple blasts of defiance, like the enjoyable set by Joan Jett and the Blackhearts that opened the concert; they strove to innovate, to surprise. At times they still did; the end of “My Generation” veered toward psychedelia, by turns meditative and fiercely aggressive.But there was no escaping that the Who “hits 50” this year, as the tour title proclaims; its debut album came out in 1965. Mr. Townshend’s 70th birthday was Tuesday, the day before the concert; Roger Daltrey, the Who’s lead singer, is 71. They cheerfully moved through their old stage poses, with Mr. Daltrey twirling his microphone on its cord alongside a limber Mr. Townshend wringing sounds from his guitar. But the music they made as young men was physically demanding, and it’s increasingly difficult for them to perform it. “This type of show for us will be coming to an end very shortly. We do know that,” Mr. Daltrey said after “Won’t Get Fooled Again,” the last song. “Maybe do something different in the future. Who knows?”The volume of the music, pioneering power chords and all, was comparatively low for an arena concert; Mr. Townshend has coped for decades with ear damage. In a recent Rolling Stone interview, he said he didn’t enjoy performing, although he looked cheerful enough. Zak Starkey, who reliably recreates the rumbles and crashes of Keith Moon’s drumming, played behind a clear plastic barrier. Mr. Daltrey complained, early in the two-hour set, that pot smoke from somewhere in the front rows was threatening to shut down his voice because he is allergic to it. (“Eat it,” Mr. Townshend urged the smoker; Mr. Daltrey noted that it would take only a few more minutes to kick in.) Mr. Daltrey’s voice faltered, perhaps from the smoke, then regained its gusto, if not always its accuracy. The expanded band — with Simon Townshend, Mr. Townshend’s brother, on rhythm guitar; Pino Palladino on bass; and additional keyboardists — also brings backup vocal harmonies. The extra voices allowed the Who to revive “A Quick One, While He’s Away,” the “mini-opera” that preceded “Tommy,” and they bolstered Mr. Daltrey at times. But they also revealed when his pitch strayed. Even so, Mr. Daltrey had screams left in him for “Love, Reign O’er Me.” The set’s peaks were its instrumental passages: in the bell-toned surges of “Amazing Journey” and “Sparks” from “Tommy,” in the vehement funk of “Eminence Front,” in the jittery buildup of “Baba O’Riley.” On this tour, Mr. Townshend’s fingers are the Who’s salvation. The Who performs on Friday at Boardwalk Hall, Atlantic City; Sunday at Mohegan Sun Arena, Uncasville, Conn.; Tuesday at Barclays Center, Brooklyn; and May 30 at Forest Hills Stadium, Queens. Advertisement