MAY 21, 2015
 For full reviews of recent concerts: nytimes.com/music. A searchable guide to these and other shows is at nytimes.com/events.Bonobo (D.J. Set)  (Thursday) This British downtempo electronic D.J.-producer (whose less simian real name is Simon Green) takes a boyish glee in his evocations of the primal world; his first two knotty, trip-hop-influenced albums were called “Animal Magic” and “Dial ‘M’ for Monkey.” Mr. Green often performs with a full band, placing his own bass work at center stage; he pares down the ensemble show for this spinning set. At 10 p.m., Output, 74 Wythe Avenue, at North 12th Street, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, outputclub.com. (Stacey Anderson)Ben Browning  (Saturday) Mindless in all the best ways, a concert by Cut Copy — Mr. Browning is the band’s bassist — falls into a transfixing, synth-happy pop groove immediately and doesn’t yield its hypnosis for hours. “Hearts on Fire,” this group’s breakthrough single in 2008 and still its most ecstatic track, instigates a dance floor catharsis unlike any other. “Free Your Mind,” from its album of the same title (released in 2013), ranks a moderately close second. Mr. Browning, who is also an electronic solo artist, is the D.J. for this set. With D.J. sets by Pat Mahoney and Justin Strauss. At 11:59 p.m., Cameo Gallery, 93 North Sixth Street, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, 718-302-1180, cameony.net. (Anderson)★ Chastity Belt  (Friday) A post-punk quartet with gravitas underneath its singsong vocals and calamity barely contained in its taut guitar riffs, Chastity Belt pulls no punches on its second album, “Time to Go Home.” This all-female group hails from Seattle, and coastal influences can be heard in its surf-inflected strings, but its elegantly expressed agitation defies ZIP codes. With Mega Bog and Nail Polish. At 11 p.m., Rough Trade NYC, 64 North Ninth Street, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, roughtradenyc.com. (Anderson)AdvertisementDan Deacon  (Friday) This hyperactive electro-pop figure from Baltimore can take a haughty attitude during his live shows or be a beaming, inspired conduit of live noise loops. His 2012 album, “America,” is an ambitious and anarchic study of these fruited plains; the follow-up, “Gliss Riffer,” was released in February to general electropop fan rapture. At 9 p.m., Warsaw, 261 Driggs Avenue, at Eckford Street, Greenpoint, Brooklyn, 866-777-8932, warsawconcerts.com. (Anderson)AdvertisementFrankie Cosmos  (Tuesday) A former poetry student at New York University and daughter of the actors Phoebe Cates and Kevin Kline, the young Greta Kline constructs preternaturally poised lo-fi folk-pop with thoughtful verses and echoing vocals. She leads this group, which released its debut, “Zentropy,” last spring. The art set has already sought to claim her, as evidenced by the band’s high-profile set at the Museum of Modern Art in August. With Porches. At 9 p.m., Elvis Guesthouse, 85 Avenue A, at Sixth Street, East Village, ticketfly.com. (Anderson)★ Future Brown  (Wednesday) As farsighted as their moniker suggests, this production quartet melds glitchy neo-soul beats with syrupy R&B vocals and sharp, swaggering raps. The group’s self-titled debut, released this year on the vaunted Warp Records, pivots from purring reggaeton (“Vernáculo,” featuring Maluca) to the best libertine club anthem in years (“Wanna Party,” featuring Tink). With 3D Na’Tee, Maluca and more. At 10 p.m., Output, 74 Wythe Avenue, at North 12th Street, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, outputclub.com. (Anderson)Laura Jane Grace  (Monday) Laura Jane Grace bared her heart on “Transgender Dysphoria Blues,” her most recent album with the punk-rockers Against Me! On it, the singer offered frank autobiographical accounts of her experiences with gender reassignment, veering from acoustic ruminations to ripping, profane screeds. This solo show also features Globelamp. At 10 p.m., City Winery, 155 Varick Street, near Spring Street, South Village, 212-608-0555, citywinery.com. (Anderson)Billy Joel  (Thursday) The piano man has achieved what the Knicks can only fantasize about: a yearlong winning streak at Madison Square Garden. His open-ended monthly residency, which began in January 2014, has been billed by the arena as its fourth franchise. So far, it has included hearty appearances by Sting, John Mellencamp and Brian Johnson of AC/DC, as well as many euphoric singalongs to “New York State of Mind.” At 8 p.m., Madison Square Garden, 866-858-0008, thegarden.com. (Anderson)Matuto  (Friday) These engaging international rockers, known for their lively sets, blend traditional Brazilian music, like forró, with American jazz and funk. They took that alchemy through West Africa as participants in the State Department’s American Music Abroad diplomacy program and recently released the album “Africa Suite.” At 10 p.m., Barbès, 376 Ninth Street, Park Slope, Brooklyn, 347-422-0248, barbesbrooklyn.com. (Anderson)★ Hudson Mohawke  (Thursday) After becoming a founder of LuckyMe, a label and artist collective, the D.J. and producer Hudson Mohawke became the unofficial dance don of his native Glasgow. His own genre-toying electro-hop work on Warp Records and Kanye West’s imprint, G.O.O.D. Music, elevated his profile internationally and created a ready audience for his excellent recent bangers; the brassy, bawdy “Chimes” skates on distorted treble squiggles of chirped, childlike vocals, while “Ryderz” opens in scratchy retro soul before dropping into a joyous U.K. Garage-infused beat. His next album, “Lantern,” arrives in June. At 8 p.m., Irving Plaza, 17 Irving Place, at 15th Street, Manhattan, irvingplaza.com. (Anderson)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Month in Cabaret (through May 30) At the Carlyle, the brash blond bombshell Megan Hilty is performing through May 30. Tuesdays through Fridays at 8:45 p.m.; Saturdays at 8:45 and 10:45 p.m.; 35 East 76th Street, Manhattan, 212-744-1600, thecarlyle.com. The pop-jazz belter Diane Schuur is making her debut at Birdland, through Saturday, to celebrate her 60th birthday and a new album. At 8:30 and 11 p.m., 315 West 44th Street, Clinton, 212-581-3080, birdlandjazz.com. Leading the list of several rising talents at the Metropolitan Room this month is the young baritone Arlo Hill, who is in the midst of an engagement, singing the work of Frank Loesser. Thursday at 7 p.m., 34 West 22nd Street, Flatiron district, 212-206-0440, metropolitanroom.com. (Stephen Holden)Oh Land  (Monday) This Danish singer-songwriter, whose real name is Nanna Oland Fabricius, employs her jazz-inflected quaver to make even her harshest dismissals, like the wry near-expletive “Sun of a Gun,” register with vulnerability. Her third electro-pop album, “Wish Bone,” shares the smart, club-ready charisma of Robyn and Lykke Li, with additional flourishes; her fourth album, “Earth Sick,” was released in November. With Cookies and Parlour Tricks. At 8 p.m., Bowery Ballroom, 6 Delancey Street, near the Bowery, Lower East Side, 800-745-3000, boweryballroom.com. (Anderson)AdvertisementParquet Courts  (Saturday) This ramshackle garage-punk clan from Brooklyn with geeky roots — including, for some in the band, past membership in the record-listening club Knights of the Round Turntable — delivers succinct hooks in a purely ’90s vein. Its newest album, “Content Nausea,” released under a quasi pseudonym, Parkay Quarts, speeds along with surf-rock guitar rolls and gonzo spoken lyrics that are sure to please fans of Pavement. With Radioactivity, Pill and the Blackouts. At 8 p.m., House of Vans, 25 Franklin Street, at Meserole Avenue, Greenpoint, Brooklyn, vans.com/almostsummer; free. (Anderson)Pixies  (Tuesday through Thursday) Their once incendiary reunion had softened into staid nostalgia, thanks to a noticeable lack of new material until only recently. Tellingly, the founding bassist-singer Kim Deal finally left the group almost two years ago. She was replaced by Kim Shattuck of the Muffs, who was also summarily fired and replaced on tour by Paz Lenchantin of A Perfect Circle. Last year, the band released the less bristling “Indie Cindy,” its first record since “Trompe le Monde” of 1991. Tuesday and Wednesday at 8 p.m., Beacon Theater, 2124 Broadway, at 74th Street, 800-745-3000, beacontheatrenyc.com. Thursday at 8 p.m., Kings Theater, 1027 Flatbush Avenue, near Tilden Avenue, Brooklyn, kingstheatre.com. (Anderson)★ The Rentals  (Friday) It took 15 years for Matt Sharp, Weezer’s former bassist and wry secret weapon, to reconvene his power-pop outfit the Rentals in the studio for a full-length album. Hearing those husky vocals, bubble gum backing harmonies and animated synths again on “Lost in Alphaville,” released in August, surely prompts a Pavlovian response from fans of ’90s indie radio. Mr. Sharp’s ponderous words — delivered as sighs as much as singing — take a reflective tone over bouncy backings. With Rey Pila and Radiation City. At 9 p.m., Music Hall of Williamsburg, 66 North Sixth Street, Brooklyn, 800-745-3000, musichallofwilliamsburg.com. (Anderson)Jon Spencer Blues Explosion  (Thursday) This cheekily named group of alternative-rock aggressors mostly alludes to the blues. After breaking through in 1993 with the 1970s-style riffing on the album “Extra Width,” the band took an extended hiatus for much of the last decade. “Meat & Bone,” released in 2012, showed no waning of its sweaty enthusiasm. The group recently embarked on a tour of the five boroughs of New York City to support its 10th album, “Freedom Tower — No Wave Dance Party 2015.” With Naomi Shelton and the Gospel Queens. At 9 p.m., Bowery Ballroom, 6 Delancey Street, near the Bowery, Lower East Side, 800-745-3000, boweryballroom.com. (Anderson)Jozef Van Wissem  (Sunday) As both an avant-garde composer and a lutenist playing Baroque music, this Dutch artist is no stranger to dichotomy. He worked with his frequent collaborator, the filmmaker and guitarist Jim Jarmusch, to score Mr. Jarmusch’s film “Only Lovers Left Alive” in 2013. Last year, Mr. Van Wissem released the experimental record “It Is Time for You to Return.” With Alexander Turnquist. At 7:30 p.m., Littlefield, 622 Degraw Street, between Third and Fourth Avenues, Gowanus, Brooklyn, littlefieldnyc.com. (Anderson)★ Patrick Watson  (Thursday) When their spectacular 2006 album, “Close to Paradise,” won the prestigious Polaris Music Prize in Canada, Mr. Watson and his band, also called Patrick Watson, found themselves victors over Arcade Fire and Feist. These chamber-pop specters bested that effort with the keening, dissonant experimentations of “Adventures in Your Own Backyard” and explore bucolic acoustic- and electro-folk pathways on their lovely new album, “Love Songs for Robots.” With the Low Anthem. At 8:30 p.m., Music Hall of Williamsburg, 66 North Sixth Street, Brooklyn, 718-486-5400, musichallofwilliamsburg.com. (Anderson)‘Gene Ween Does Billy Joel’  (Thursday) The ecstatic, eccentric Aaron Freeman — better known to his cult of fans as Gene Ween, one-half of the absurdist rock duo Ween, which is now defunct — has horsed around inside myriad musical genres, including rock, honky-tonk and flamenco. This tribute set to Billy Joel will surely be a bizarre, outlandish affair — and, coincidentally, occurs on the same night that Mr. Joel holds court uptown at Madison Square Garden. “Piano Man” fans have quite a Sophie’s choice on this night. With Youth Posse. At 9 p.m., Brooklyn Bowl, 61 Wythe Avenue, between 11th and 12th Streets, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, 718-963-3369, brooklynbowl.com. (Anderson)★ The Who  (Tuesday) Roger Daltrey and Pete Townshend soldier on in honor of their band’s 50th anniversary, during which they’ll perform cuts from their classic 1973 rock opera, “Quadrophenia,” and other hits. Mr. Daltrey has proved that he can still reach the highest notes of “Love Reign O’er Me,” and the pair’s proffered nostalgia is a more passionate brand than most ’70s stars can deliver nowadays. With Joan Jett and the Blackhearts. At 7:30 p.m., Barclays Center, 620 Atlantic Avenue, at Flatbush Avenue, Brooklyn, 800-745-3000, barclayscenter.com. (Anderson)A version of this schedule appears in print on May 22, 2015, on Page C14 of the New York edition with the headline: The Listings: Pop.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.