AdvertisementSupported byInside ArtBy Robin Pogrebin and Randy KennedyThough known primarily as an architect, Michael Graves was also an avid painter who, starting in the early 1970s, included his murals in his architecture projects.Now, two months after Mr. Graves died at age 80, the Brooklyn Academy of Music has acquired a set of five of his murals, which will become part of the institution’s permanent visual art collection. With a total estimated value of $250,000, the five untitled acrylic-on-canvas paintings — completed in 1974 — were a gift from Ronald P. Stanton, a longtime supporter of the academy and the chairman emeritus of Trammo, an international merchandising and trading firm.The murals, installed this month in the academy’s Peter Jay Sharp Building, were commissioned by Charles Gwathmey — who, along with Mr. Graves, was a member of the New York Five group of architects who redefined modernism in the 1970s. Mr. Gwathmey died in 2009. His firm designed the original Trammo (formerly Transammonia) offices on Park Avenue in the early ’70s.Comprising eight panels in all — each about 90 inches by 50 inches — the murals’ heightened use of color and ornamentation, as well as their large scale, reflect a general shift away from minimalism.“We’re very glad they found a home at BAM,” said Fred M. Lowenfels, the director and general counsel emeritus at Trammo. “They’ve been in our offices since 1974. Now the wider public is going to be able to see them.” ROBIN POGREBINJUDD RETROSPECTIVE SETThe best artists, the sculptor Donald Judd wrote, are “original and obdurate; they’re the gravel in the pea soup.” During a career of almost four decades, Judd was never shy about relegating other artists to the soup and positioning himself as the gravel, in more ways than one. In addition to being one of the most important sculptors of the postwar period and a pioneer of the Minimalist movement, he was combative, doctrinaire and wholly uncompromising about his work.Showing it has always been tricky for museums, because Judd, who died in 1994, believed it was best situated in spare, permanent arrangements of his own making — his home and studio at 101 Spring Street in SoHo, which has been preserved as a kind of museum by his family; and his outposts in remote Marfa, Tex., where he went beginning in the 1970s and eventually established a complex to show his pieces and those of artists he admired.But in the fall of 2017, the Museum of Modern Art will take on the thorny task of a Judd retrospective. It will be the first American survey of his work since 1988 and will occupy not only the large second-floor contemporary galleries but also the museum’s atrium. Ann Temkin, the museum’s chief curator of painting and sculpture, will organize the show, which she described as overdue partly because Judd’s work has become so iconic that its power and influence have been obscured.“Over the last 20 years or so, we’ve really come to take him for granted because in a way — whether or not we’re conscious of it — his aesthetic so shaped the look of so much that followed,” she said, adding, “This is a case where it’s just time to re-examine a figure we think we know, even if we don’t really know him.”The show, which will be organized in collaboration with the Judd Foundation, will feature more than 100 works, including examples from the early 1960s when Judd, who started out as a painter, began to find the pared-down formal language that became his own. Besides his signature boxlike sculptures, the exhibition will include paintings, prints, architectural interventions, furniture designs and examples of Judd’s influential art criticism and other writings.For a Judd retrospective, Ms. Temkin said, the challenge was in showing just enough and showing it in just the right way, a task made much more difficult by Judd’s absence. “The idea isn’t quantity,” she said, but to “create a number of distinct spaces that offer you Judd-ian experiences.” (Of his work in public institutions, Judd once wrote, witheringly, “The brief time of gallery and museum exhibitions would be ultimately fatal if it were not for the permanence of my own installations.”)“There’s a lot of truth in the positions that he took and the observations he made,” Ms. Temkin said. “So the question for a museum person is, ‘How can you hear Judd and respect the work at the same time as saying, yes, but we do want his work to be shown to a broad public?’ For me that’s attractive. What’s difficult becomes more interesting.” RANDY KENNEDYTHE SANGERS AS PAINTERSMargaret Sanger and her family members are best known as birth-control pioneers. Yet three of them were also artists. Now their watercolors are on display at the Planned Parenthood of Northern New England’s gallery in Portland, Me.The work includes pieces by Sanger, the founder of Planned Parenthood Federation of America, who took up painting after moving to Tucson in the late 1930s for her health, making mostly desert scenes. Her husband, William Sanger, was a painter and an architect, who began displaying his work in the 1910s; much of it featured stormy landscapes of Maine, where he was a frequent visitor.Their grandson Alexander took up drawing and watercolors after his retirement as president and chief executive of New York City’s Planned Parenthood in 2000. He, too, paints on the Maine coast as well as in New York, where he is chairman of the International Planned Parenthood Council.“I’m proud to be following in my grandparents’ footsteps in multiple ways,” Mr. Sanger said in a telephone interview. Particularly “haunting,” Mr. Sanger said, is his grandmother’s painting of a woman with three children walking away from an adobe church in the desert — which is something of a self-portrait, he said. Margaret Sanger had three children, and was indicted on charges of violating the Comstock law, which made it a crime to offer contraceptive information through the mail. “My grandmother’s holding a little girl’s arm and that’s my aunt, who died at age 5 of pneumonia,” he said. “The death was closely connected to circumstances — that my grandmother was in exile out of the country for a year. This is the one painting that she kept till the end of her life.”The show, “The Sangers — Artists and Rebels,” which runs through May 29, coincides with the 50th anniversary of Planned Parenthood of Northern New England. Information: 207-232-4123. ROBIN POGREBINAdvertisement