AdvertisementSupported byBy Roberta SmithArt is long, but color can be brief. That’s the message conveyed by “Van Gogh: Irises and Roses,” a small bouquet of paintings by the beloved Dutch artist at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.The show is inspiring in several ways, foremost for reuniting four biggish floral still lifes the artist made almost exactly 125 years ago that have not all been together since. (Two are from the Met’s collection; one is from the National Gallery in Washington, and the last is from the Van Gogh Museum in Amsterdam.)Hung on a single wall, they affirm van Gogh’s ability to give flowers the presence of portraits and form one of those small, juicy, less-is-more exhibitions where you look more slowly and deeply because there is less to look at. But the show’s juiciness is also a matter of science, spurred by the latest technology. The reunion occasioned research into van Gogh’s use of color, specifically his choice of a bright but unstable orange-scarlet version of red lake.Not surprisingly digital technology is also used by the organizers, Susan Alyson Stein, a curator in the Met’s European painting department, and Charlotte Hale, one of the museum’s painting conservators, to present their findings via two short sleek slide shows. Appearing on monitors facing the paintings, the digital images take us beneath the works’ surfaces, magnifying molecules of color, and into their pasts. Moving back and forth between the images and the real thing helps us see more deeply still.In May 1890 van Gogh was preparing to leave the asylum in St.-Rémy where he had spent a year recovering from a bout of mental illness that his doctors believed was set off by epilepsy. In less than a week, before setting out for Auvers, he completed the four pictures here, working on generously rectangular canvases nearly identical in size (29 by 36 inches). As he wrote his brother, Theo, there were two paintings of irises and two of roses, a horizontal and an upright orientation for each. They were left in St.-Rémy to dry and shipped to Auvers at the end of June.With their assurance and physicality, van Gogh’s paintings are like promontories that offer especially clear views of the medium’s past and future. They emphasize that much of painting’s history is propelled by crucial changes in paint handling and brush work and that this development can be traced forward from Titian toward van Gogh along a string of glorious painters (make your own list, but consider Velásquez, Goya, Turner, Manet, Cezanne, Monet and Cassatt). After van Gogh, it’s hard to think of Fauvism and German Expressionism without the example of his quick, loaded brush, saturated colors and psychological charge.The force of these elements is amply evident here, in images whose construction you can almost follow stroke by stroke, in different colors applied with brushes of varying widths. The strokes tend to be wider for backgrounds, foregrounds and containers and narrower for flowers, which emerge in small angular vortices of brush strokes that have an almost fractal energy.But the paintings we see today are not entirely as van Gogh painted them. He used one of the red lake pigments derived from synthetic dye, drawn to its brilliance while knowing it might fade. He blended it with blue to make his violet irises and used it fairly straight to add shards of red to the otherwise white roses. He mixed it with white for the pink background of the horizontal iris still life and the pink tabletop of the upright roses.Van Gogh lost his bet with chemistry. The red lake faded over the years, mostly disappearing when mixed with anything else and, when used undiluted, washing out to a color not unlike raw liver. Consequently the irises are now more blue than violet. The roses are now almost completely white, as are the once-pink background and tabletop.The slide show alerts us to the little bits of pinkish-brown among the painted blooms, and magically restores the missing colors to the canvases. It even includes postcards, reproduced over several decades, of the upright rose still life, which offer further proof of how the bright red bits of the roses once contrasted with its mint-green background and that of its sibling.It may be melodramatic to ascribe a somewhat suicidal quality to the synthetic red lakes, but they did self-destruct, which reverberates with van Gogh’s death by his own hand barely three months later, and it’s worth noting that he could have chosen more lasting reds. More central is the impact of seeing the difference between what van Gogh made and what we now see.On canvas, violet irises would probably have been more vibrant than blue against their green leaves and bright yellow setting, but it is not a huge change. The reconstituted pink plane behind the Met’s irises, and beneath its jar of roses, looks overly sweet, even Impressionist, at least by today’s standards. Along with the roses, these planes now conform more to modernist white-cube tastes (nice benefit: the way the pinkish cast of the wall in the horizontal irises contrasts with the greenish tone of the white pitcher holding them).And when the slide show restores the touches of red to the white roses, they look too realistic, even bourgeois, like a still life by the academic painter Henri Fantin-Latour (1836-1904). Of course some of this is guesswork based only on reproductions of reconstructed paintings. Who really knows how they looked in 1890 and what has been lost? And who can blame anyone for saying — as more than one person did when I saw the show — that the pure white roses are preferable? They’re the ones we know.As you leave the exhibition, which is at the back of the Lehman Wing, you might want to take in paintings by French artists like Vuillard, Bonnard and Derain, who benefited greatly from van Gogh’s innovations. Most telling are two small Fauve landscapes, painted barely 15 years after van Gogh’s flowers, by Matisse and Braque. They chose not to gamble, and consequently their bright reds and pinks are undimmed by time.“Van Gogh: Irises and Roses” runs through Aug. 16 at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org. Advertisement