By HOLLAND COTTERMAY 21, 2015
The most vivid depictions of a war in the Middle East aren’t on television news these days. They’re in an exhibition by the Egyptian artist Wael Shawky at MoMA PS1 in Queens. The show, “Cabaret Crusades,” Mr. Shawky’s local museum solo debut, is made up of three sequential films, each about an hour and set in the distant past, beginning in the 11th century when European armies marched eastward to claim the Holy Land. The story is one of almost unremitting violence, and the scenes of battle, torture and execution are appalling to witness, which is a surprise considering that all the actors are marionettes.Drawing on work by the Lebanese historian Amin Maalouf, Mr. Shawky tells the story of the Crusades through Arab eyes. Puppets may have been the only viable way to produce such an epic on a budget. The strategy works; they’re astonishingly expressive. In the first film, from 2010, he used antique Italian marionettes; for the second (2012), he designed the painted ceramic puppets himself, creating a menagerie of half-human, half-animal beings. For the most recent and final film, which takes the saga beyond the Crusades and into the origins of religious conflicts within Islam, he commissioned hand-blown glass puppets modeled on African sculptures.The films have distinctive casts — each one looks utterly, wonderfully different — but are bound together by shared features: The dialogue is spoken in Arabic, and villains, not heroes, abound. Whether the focus is on Christians or Muslims, political treachery and physical cruelty are the order of the day. The full, brutal story may only be palatable as a doll-like fantasy, and with figures as charismatic as these. As if to acknowledge their allure, the exhibition’s organizers — Klaus Biesenbach, director of MoMA PS1, and Margaret Aldredge, a curatorial assistant — have placed all of the glass and ceramic puppets in two long glass cases. The result is a sculpture show that could easily stand on its own. But it’s the complete package that’s truly brilliant. Don’t miss it, and make time to see it all.MoMA PS1 22-25 Jackson Avenue, at 46th Avenue, Long Island City, Queens Through Aug. 31 A version of this review appears in print on May 22, 2015, on Page C22 of the New York edition with the headline: Wael Shawky.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.