By DANIEL McDERMONMAY 21, 2015
Looking for something to do right now?The Times’s arts team is here to help.We asked our colleagues: What’s one thing they would recommend?There may be a “Mad Men”-shaped hole in your Sunday-night viewing, but instead of plugging it with another fancy-dress drama, inhale the marijuana dreams of the scrappy young couple in CNN’s “High Profits.” Candid and surprisingly clearheaded, this riveting look at frontier entrepreneurship — and millennial creativity — proves that opening a recreational pot dispensary isn’t the doddle you would think. (Fire it up here.)Festivals promise a communal, moderately out-of-control experience — all those people, all that music, all those decibels. So there’s a perverse charm to the increasing number of music festivals that provide live streams, which turn a festival into its opposite: a private, casual, controlled, perhaps even quiet experience. Mysteryland — a smartly booked electronic dance music festival this weekend on the grounds of the 1969 Woodstock festival — will be live-streaming on Saturday and Sunday from 6 p.m. to 2 a.m. for those who want to party at home. Online, no one has to see you dance. (Drop in here.)Even as the mercury rises, I’m clinging to winter with the British series “Fortitude,” a supremely cold and creepy new drama that you can see on Amazon Instant Video or via Netflix DVDs. Set in a fictional town near the Arctic circle, it has a spectacular international cast — Michael Gambon, Sofie Grabol, Stanley Tucci and a very hungry polar bear. (Warm up with Mike Hale’s review.)“Please Touch the Art” in Brooklyn Bridge Park is a nice way to inaugurate the summer preseason. Indulge your inner child with a water installation that gives the illusion of rooms appearing and disappearing, and another with a maze of mirrors. And you can pop over to Grimaldi’s afterward for a pie. Win. (Dip a toe in with Ken Johnson’s review of the exhibition.)Grégoire Chamayou’s “A Theory of the Drone” looks at drones from a philosophical standpoint, considering technology, history, epistemology, ethics and the problems of waging asymmetrical war. From the standpoint of those involved in visual culture, like me, it also considers ideas like the “god’s eye” view, automation and what it’s like to experience vision divorced, as it were, from the body. The drone is a new way of looking and hence being in the world — and you can often see its effects on art in New York. (Find a copy here or in a library.)Check ‘em out and report back; we want to know how we’re doing. Is there something else we could do to help you sort out your cultural diet? Let us know at thearts@nytimes.com, or tweet @nytimesarts.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.