By JON CARAMANICAMAY 21, 2015
BOSSIER CITY, La. —  Toward the end of Taylor Swift’s concert at the CenturyLink Center here on Wednesday night, she strapped on an electric guitar for the first time of the night and began playing some tart riffs while singing hungry little fillips. She was setting the stage for “We Are Never Ever Getting Back Together,” the 2012 song that became her first No. 1 on the Billboard Hot 100 and helped turn her inexorably away from country and toward pop megastardom.In the song, she’s lashing out at a dunderheaded ex: “You would hide away and find your peace of mind/ With some indie record that’s much cooler than mine.”On the album, she delivers that self-referential line with an eye roll, but when she sang it here, she turned it into a defiant shout. Suddenly, the song wasn’t about fretting over someone’s opinion; it was about knowing you’ve been the cool one all along, and finally owning it.Whatever underdog anxieties Ms. Swift might have had earlier in her career are mostly gone. With the release in the fall of “1989” (Big Machine), her fifth album, Ms. Swift neatly ascended to the top of the pop hierarchy, largely by bypassing and ignoring most of her peers. She used the same blend of guilelessness and savvy that made her a radical figure in country music, and applied it to 1980s-influenced sounds that made her one of the most conservative figures in pop.So she’s still a kind of underdog, but a big dog, too. The “1989” album has gone platinum four times over, and this show was the first stand-alone date of the American leg of her “1989” world tour, which will mainly play stadiums. (This arena was far smaller, holding about 13,000 people.)AdvertisementThe album “1989” is what got her here, and “1989” is what she largely stuck to — newly grown-up songs about letdown, regret and letting go. “Out of the Woods” was booming and “Shake It Off” was cheeky and breezy. Even songs that felt like outliers on “1989” were here both integral and enrapturing, like “Clean,” which lost its spaciness; and “I Know Places,” notionally about hiding from prying eyes in a new relationship, which sounded like an action-movie soundtrack. For that song, her dancers wore drapey, futuristic jackets and shimmering full head masks similar to the ones Kanye West wore on his “Yeezus” tour — spies from the future sent to swarm Ms. Swift, who dodged them easily.AdvertisementShe largely didn’t meddle with the songs from “1989,” but when it came to older material, she bent the music in unexpected ways. She performed “Love Story” in the style of “1989.” On the catty, ecstatic “I Knew You Were Trouble,” she spent part of the song singing in a dusky, Lorde-like tone. And for “Enchanted,” one of her most starry-eyed and least convincing songs, she sat at a Thunderdome-esque piano and sang in a knowing manner, yanking the big notes hard and giving the song new depth.Ms. Swift has always been comfortable onstage, but as she gets older (she’s 25), she is more willing to make herself awkward when it serves the moment. During “Blank Space,” she acted out that song’s angst, contorting her body and face and, at one point, wielding a golf club with casual menace.Though her lyrics have gradually begun to acknowledge the sensual, she remains effectively chaste onstage, even when flanked by shirtless dancers on “I Knew You Were Trouble.” But her between-song chatter, always inspirational, now carries the weight of experience. “You are not damaged goods just because you’ve made mistakes,” she said. “You are not someone else’s opinion of you.”This pep talk was for herself and for the crowd, which consisted mostly of girls, who might have been seeing Ms. Swift for the first time, and young women, who might have been seeing Ms. Swift since they were girls. At various intervals, Ms. Swift disappeared offstage and the huge screen showed clips of some of her well-known friends — Selena Gomez, Karlie Kloss, Lena Dunham, the sisters of the band Haim, and more — singing her praises. It was a public service announcement for the healing powers of female friendship.Ms. Swift has been actively cultivating these friendships as part of her retreat from the tabloids in recent years. Rather than be known as a serial dater, she’d prefer to be thought of as a serial befriender. Even in “Bad Blood,” a song from “1989” about an intense rivalry with another female performer (most likely Katy Perry), Ms. Swift has found a way to turn it positive. The video is a feminist superhero fantasy, with oodles of famous guests — proof of the power and depth of Ms. Swift’s Rolodex and her desire to form alliances more than cast aspersions.In an interview in the June issue of Elle magazine, Ms. Swift briefly alluded to the pop landscape she’s arrived at: “I don’t really have much of a queen complex,” she said. “There’s this feeling in music right now where you have to just stand on this castle turret and not come down and talk to anyone and not be approachable and not be excitable, and you should be sexy and edgy and all these things.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.No names were named — Beyoncé and Rihanna come to mind, though — but the comment highlights just how little Ms. Swift has in common with her new peers: almost as little as she had in common with her old peers. “I stalk you on a daily basis,” she told the crowd; it’s hard to imagine any other multiplatinum star doing that, much less admitting it.Notably, there wasn’t even a hint of country here, unless you count the very young fans who still wore sundresses and cowboy boots, as Ms. Swift did a decade ago. She played acoustic guitar briefly, on “Wonderland,” a lesser-known song that wasn’t quite ready to be so exposed, but otherwise she’d fully decorated this new home, covering up all the traces of the old. (There were also some opening-night sound issues.)If she can remake herself so thoroughly in just a couple of years, what changes are yet to come? Will she collaborate with Mr. West, her former adversary, as he has said he’d like to do? Will she go full Joni Mitchell? Could she become a romantic-comedy staple, a millennial Meg Ryan? Or will she stick with her current path, letting the arbiters of cool look at her with a side eye while she trounces them all?Taylor Swift will perform at MetLife Stadium in East Rutherford, N.J., on July 10 and 11; taylorswift.com/events.A version of this article appears in print on May 22, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: The Cool One All Along .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.