AdvertisementSupported byBy Roslyn SulcasFRANSCHHOEK, South Africa — “There are a lot of white faces here,” said the writer Bongani Madondo, looking out at the audience attending a panel at the Franschhoek Literary Festival this past weekend. The audience laughed. Uneasily.Franschhoek, about an hour’s drive from Cape Town, means “French corner” in Dutch; its name derives from the 200-odd Huguenot settlers who, fleeing religious persecution in their home country, came to South Africa in 1688 and began to produce wine in this lush valley ringed by mountains. Today, the town’s startling natural beauty, well-preserved Cape Dutch architecture, and many vineyards and restaurants have turned it into a major tourist destination.In 2007, a small group of enthusiasts started a literary festival as a way to raise money for a local library. Today it is a major event on the South African cultural calendar. Audiences, some 5,000 this year, many from other parts of the country, crowd into the tiny town to attend three days of tightly packed discussions, book releases and concerts.But as Mr. Madondo, who is black and is the author of a book on the singer Brenda Fassie, pointed out, the festivalgoers are mostly white — a curious and pertinent index to the difficulties and ambiguities around race, class and culture that still permeate South African society, where whites make up just 8.4 percent of the country’s population, estimated at 54 million last year.The festival doesn’t shy away from exploring these difficulties. The program, while containing a fair share of literary topics, is far more oriented toward socio-cultural or socio-political topics than most events of this kind. Subjects like “Fear and Loathing in South Africa”; “What Makes One an African?”; “Can the A.N.C. be Mended?” and “We Won’t Get No Education” make up about half of the events, and the panels are generally models of racial diversity.“The topics about politics and social issues are our biggest events and always sold out,” said Ann Donald, the director of the festival, who is white. “I think South Africans are trying to understand their situation, whatever capacity they are coming from.”Ms. Donald’s comment was born out by an event that was held in the festival’s biggest venue and seemed to be its most oversubscribed session: “Just Julius,” a discussion about Julius Malema, the firebrand former head of the African National Congress’s youth league, and now the head of the Economic Freedom Fighters party. There, Mr. Malema’s former political colleague, Kenny Kunene, who has since broken with him, promised the audience that a tell-all book was forthcoming, and said: “If Malema is in power, he is not going to suspend people, he is going to kill them.”There were plenty of other comments over the weekend that made the audiences squirm, notably during a session entitled (appropriately, as it turned out) “Is Anger Underrated?,” during which the black novelist Thando Mgqolozana told the public that he felt like an anthropological subject at such events, and would not return to what he called a white colonial festival. He added that white people should stop doing charitable work and think about their role in a racist society. A female doctor who works in the townships reacted vehemently, saying she was tired of feeling guilty for being white.“I think what happened in that session was good for many reasons,” said Eusebius McKaiser, a political analyst and columnist for the Independent media group who had moderated the session, and subsequently wrote about the event, as did others in the South African press. “If people are to build relationships and live in each other’s worlds in this country, they have to listen to each other’s pain and anger. It has to be taken seriously.”Joel Baepi, a lawyer who has attended the festival with his wife since 2012, and who is black, agreed, citing a panel discussion that featured Malaika wa Azania, the 23-year-old black author of “Memoirs of a Born Free,” in which she expresses her dissatisfaction with the idea of a rainbow nation.“You have to celebrate her achievement and see that anger for what it represents,” Mr. Baepi said. “It comes from a history and a life of being ignored to the core. My feeling during that talk was that there was an underlying narrative of reshaping the conversation in a particular image, otherwise it was improper.” The organizers, he added, are attempting to introduce controversial subjects, but “should know more about trying to create a space where ideas can be contested.” Ms. Donald, who was directing the festival for the first time this year, said that the intention was to aim the festival — which has a $135,000 budget (mostly from sponsorship) and a number of international participants — at anyone who loved books. “We work as hard as we can to make the program as diverse as possible,” she said, “but I am very aware of the perceptions.” She added that there were practical issues affecting attendance, including the lack of public transportation to Franschhoek, and the expense of staying in an international tourist destination. “Is cost the major issue, or is it a content problem?” she asked. “I think the big thing is to listen to the points being raised, then trying to address them.”Others at the festival took a tougher line. “Where are the black bourgeoisie?” asked Dennis Davis, a high court judge who is white and who moderated the “Just Julius” panel. “I think the problem is our inability to construct events that more accurately represent our country. I am seriously doubting Mandela’s narrative of a journey towards reconciliation.”Shaun Johnson, the director of the Mandela Rhodes Foundation, and a judge for this year’s Sunday Times Literary Prize (which announced its shortlist during the festival), said that although it was disappointing that the audience was not more representative, he thought the literary landscape in South Africa was a vibrant one.“We have always punched above our weight in literary terms, with Nobel Prize and Booker Prize winners, and now we have a lot of young writers coming through, many of them black,” he said. “There is a lot to read, and hopefully this generation will become a powerful voice against abuse of power and corruption in the same way a previous generation was a voice against apartheid.”Whatever the criticism leveled at the festival, Ms. Donald said, it had considerable public impact. “We were the topic of the national conversation this morning,” she wrote in an email after the festival had ended. “Which is an indication that the discussions are important to the national discourse, not just to those who attend.” Advertisement