AdvertisementSupported byThe Art of CollectingBy Nina SiegalWhen the artist Gerhard Richter exhibited his first series of “Color Chart” paintings at the Galerie Friedrich & Dahlem in Munich in 1966, his critics and his admirers failed to understand them. Not a single one of the works was sold. Mr. Richter had already begun to establish himself in the art world with gray figurative paintings known as Photo Paintings — abstracted, evocative versions of black-and-white photographs, some based on family photos. These new paintings were just the opposite: emotionless blocks of bright color laid across a white canvas in mimicry of industrial paint samples. Today, Mr. Richter, at 83, is respected as an artist who has moved through different styles of painting, and in retrospect the Color Charts look like part of a logical progression, said Dietmar Elger, head of the Gerhard Richter Archive in Dresden. “His photographic paintings were like a signature style for his first paintings, and they made you think: ‘He’ll have a normal career with this signature style, and it will probably go on like this forever,”’ Mr. Elger said. “Then the Color Charts came and they changed his work radically; they opened up his practice and gave him the opportunity to do something completely different.”Now, says Dominique Lévy, a New York-based art dealer with galleries in Manhattan and London, it is time for a reassessment of this phase of Mr. Richter’s work.From Oct. 13 to Jan. 16, 2016, for the first time since the inaugural Friedrich & Dahlem show, Ms. Lévy will exhibit about a dozen of the original 19 Color Chart works at the Dominique Lévy gallery in London. The works are borrowed from a range of sources, including the Richter Archive, the Hamburger Kunsthalle, the Museum Frieder Burda in Baden-Baden and private collections.“Upon standing in front of some of these works, I was struck by how contemporary they felt to me and at the same time how historical,” Ms. Lévy said. “When I realized that the first one was done in the ’60s, I couldn’t figure out if I was standing in front of a pop work, a conceptual work or a minimalist work, and I think that what I realized is that it was all three.”The paintings will be presented along with never-before-exhibited documentation provided by the Richter Archive, which explores the development of the early works, including sketches and mathematical notations that the artist made in preparation for the Color Chart works. Mr. Richter, who was born in Dresden, apparently got his idea for the Color Chart paintings after a visit to a hardware store in Düsseldorf, where he saw paint sample cards in an array of colors. He decided to reproduce them artlessly, exactly as they were presented in the store, as industrial pigments in uniformly sized glossy rectangles or squares.His first attempt went astray, apparently, when he used oil paint on canvas, as he had with his previous works. He was not happy with the results. “He saw that oil paint was too painterly, too classical, too bound by the tradition of painting,” Mr. Elger said. “So he changed to lacquer paint and that was more industrial, it was more modern, not linked to art history, more contemporary and more distant from the artist.”Establishing a distance was critical to these works, Mr. Elger explained, because they were meant to be conceptual — works that remove the artist from the creative process, to make it less about the artist and more about the work itself. Of course, Mr. Richter couldn’t completely remove himself from the process. Though the idea was that the colors be selected at random, the archival documents indicate that Mr. Richter was often conscious of his aesthetic choices. Appreciation of the Color Chart series started to change in the late 1970s and early ’80s, more than a decade after they were created, Mr. Elger said, and then some of them started to sell. Though these works rarely come up for sale at auction or at galleries, they do not command the kind of prices that Richter works tend to see. In February, Sotheby’s London set a record price for his 1986 abstract oil painting “Abstraktes Bild,” which sold for 30.4 million pounds, or $46.2 million, the highest price paid for any living European artist. Of the works in the London show, only “Fifteen Colors” is available for sale. For Mr. Elger, it’s a rare opportunity to revisit a turning point in Mr. Richter’s artistic career.“Sometimes it takes a while for people to understand and to really follow the artist in his ideas,” he said. “Sometimes they only understand it 10 years or many decades later.”Advertisement