By KATHRYN SHATTUCKMAY 23, 2015
8 P.M. (HBO) DAWN OF THE PLANET OF THE APES (2014) A decade has passed on screen since “Rise of the Planet of the Apes,” and millions of people have fallen prey to a lethal virus, leaving survivors to cobble together a society in the ruins of San Francisco, where Dreyfus (Gary Oldman), the former police chief, is in charge. But across the Golden Gate Bridge in Marin County, the upright-walking chimpanzee Caesar (Andy Serkis) and his team have built their own civilization, complete with distinctive wooden architecture, domesticated horses, a sophisticated sign language and an education system overseen by the orangutan Maurice (Karin Konoval). But when the humans ask to encroach on their territory to build a hydroelectric station, the alarms are sounded — and schisms formed. “It’s a satisfying movie and an example — a dispiritingly rare one these days — of what mainstream Hollywood filmmaking can still achieve,” A. O. Scott wrote in The New York Times about Matt Reeves’s Oscar nominee for best achievement in visual effects. “That we have progressed from ‘Rise’ only as far as ‘Dawn’ suggests many future sequels, which may, in this case, be a source of hope as well as dread, provided that civilization doesn’t collapse in the meantime.”10:30 A.M. (13) RELIGION & ETHICS NEWSWEEKLY Kim Lawton interviews Kent Hill, the senior vice president for international programs for World Vision, about the challenges of delivering aid immediately while working toward long-term recovery after earthquakes in Nepal. Bob Faw looks at efforts in Alexandria, Va., to reduce homelessness for female veterans.NOON (13) THE OPEN MIND Alexander Heffner interviews Mo Rocca, the host of the Henry Ford Innovation Nation, about American inventors.2 P.M. (Starz) OUTLANDER MARATHON Retrace the time travels of Claire (Caitriona Balfe), Jamie (Sam Heughan) and Frank (Tobias Menzies) as Season 1 is shown on Saturday and Sunday before the finale May 30.Advertisement3 P.M. (FX Movie Channel) RED TAILS (2012) David Oyelowo, Nate Parker, Leslie Odom Jr., Michael B. Jordan, Kevin Phillips and Elijah Kelley portray the Tuskegee Airmen, the much decorated — and woefully underrecognized — black pilots who flew for the United States Army Air Forces in World War II, many in planes, including P-51 Mustangs, painted with red tails. Cuba Gooding Jr. plays the unit’s commander, and Terrence Howard is the superior who lobbies for the men to be given newer planes and more important missions. “The movie’s most exciting moments are its heavily computer-generated aerial battle sequences,” Stephen Holden wrote in The Times about this film, directed by Anthony Hemingway and financed by George Lucas. “If the scenes of P-51’s weaving in and out of a fleet of Flying Fortresses are not especially realistic, they still provide sensations of Olympian loftiness and roller coaster dips.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.9 P.M. (CUNY) AJAMI (2010) In this Oscar nominee for best foreign-language film, the Israeli directors Scandar Copti and Yaron Shani weave five stories, set in a multicultural neighborhood in Jaffa, rife with political context and communal mistrust. “There is no finger-pointing here, and no group hugging either,” A. O. Scott wrote in The Times. “Instead there is a sharp sense of just how deep and wide the schisms are, not just between Jews and Arabs but also between Christians and Muslims, rich and poor, farmers and city dwellers, men and women, young and old and so on.”Advertisement9 P.M. (Oxygen) PRIDE & PREJUDICE (2005) Keira Knightley, in an Oscar-nominated role, portrays Elizabeth Bennet in this adaptation of Jane Austen’s novel about five sisters whose mother (Brenda Blethyn) is desperate to marry them off to men of means. Joe Wright directed the film, which features Rosamund Pike as Jane, Elizabeth’s older sister and the belle of the ball. “But because Ms. Knightley is, in a word, a knockout, the balance has shifted,” Stephen Holden wrote in The Times. “Her radiance so suffuses the film that it’s foolish to imagine Elizabeth would be anyone’s second choice.”10 P.M. (CBS) 48 HOURS Erin Moriarty examines the case of Cal Harris, a car dealer in Owego, N.Y., who has been tried three times on a charge of killing his estranged wife.What’s Streaming NowTHE OTHER ONE: THE LONG STRANGE TRIP OF BOB WEIR (2015) Mike Fleiss chronicles the journey of Mr. Weir from his adolescence in Palo Alto, Calif., to his stardom as a member of the Grateful Dead. (netflix.com)A version of this schedule appears in print on May 23, 2015, on Page C5 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Saturday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.