AdvertisementSupported byBy Neil GenzlingerA lot of the heroes of the Texas Revolution died at the Alamo, including, apparently, most of the interesting ones. “Texas Rising,” a mini-series that begins Monday night on the History channel, is inspired by events after Gen. Antonio López de Santa Anna wiped out Davy Crockett, James Bowie and practically everyone else at the Alamo in 1836. The series has a cast full of recognizable names, including Bill Paxton as Sam Houston, but a story that seems as if it should be characterized by adventure and derring-do instead is often as flat and drab as a Western plain.The series takes the collage approach, focusing on a handful (though a rather large handful) of characters and vignettes that presumably will converge to form a history-making conclusion by the time the 10 hours wrap up on June 15. There is Deaf Smith (Jeffrey Dean Morgan), a legendary Texas Ranger who stoically hides a serious disease. There is Emily West (Cynthia Addai-Robinson), the Yellow Rose of Texas, who in this telling hops from the bed of one military leader to that of another and provides crucial intelligence. There is wild-eyed Lorca (Ray Liotta), who rises from a mass grave at the Alamo and embarks on a one-man guerrilla campaign.And so on. This technique can work, and you’d think that Roland Joffé, who has made some pretty good films (“The Killing Fields,” “The Mission”) and directs here, would be able to pull it off, especially with this cast. Yet the result is just a disjointed collection of clichés, often staged with the clumsiness of bad community theater. Mr. Paxton’s Houston, who leads the Texians, and Olivier Martinez’s Santa Anna are jockeying for strategic advantage in the aftermath of the Alamo, Houston wanting to avoid engagement with the far larger Mexican force until he can meet them when and where he wants. That has his followers in near mutiny; they want to fight, and instead Houston has them retreating. There should be an easily exploited antipathy between the two leaders; instead the Houston character has no magnetism and the Santa Anna one is something of a repellent caricature. That, in fact, is a taint that hangs over the whole series. Native American warriors gallop and whoop; Mexican soldiers and generals enjoy cockfights, executions and all things vile. The series looks and sounds like a western from the 1940s, and that’s not a compliment. The good guys — the Texians — are good, and the bad guys are reductive figures who exist to be hated.The whole enterprise is encumbered by truly awful dialogue. No character, historically real or imagined, is immune from spouting a trite phrase. When men talk pithily to one another, it’s in sound bites rather than convincing conversation — e.g.: “We gotta die. We prefer to go down fighting.” When military strategy is discussed, it’s only a matter of time before someone says, “Cut the head off the snake, the body dies.” And pity poor Emily. While being groped by Santa Anna, who in the process laments that he never had a chance to study music, she has to listen to him say this: “I guess if you ask me what instrument I play best, my answer is the human instrument.” If you’re willing to choke down about two hours’ worth of this gunk, some moderately watchable characters begin to emerge who might get you to the Battle of San Jacinto, a turning point in Texas history. One is Mr. Liotta’s Lorca, who at least has original ways of killing people — love the baskets of rattlesnakes. Another is Billy Anderson (Brendan Fraser), a Ranger who was raised by Indians and occasionally tosses off a humorous line that is as relieving as a cool breeze on a hot Texas afternoon. Jeremy Davies also provides some spunk as Ephraim Knowles, a deserter who is sentenced to die but then given a second opportunity. The female characters here don’t have much of a chance to be anything but embarrassing. In addition to Ms. Addai-Robinson, who is made to work the slutty spy conceit, there’s a doctor’s daughter, a homesteader’s wife and, well, that’s about it. Sure, this is a manly man’s world, but still. By the way, the guy who wrote “Me and Bobby McGee” is now president. Yes, that’s Kris Kristofferson as Andrew Jackson. And the best thing about this series may be a music video he recorded in conjunction with it, a cover of Tom Petty’s “I Won’t Back Down.” Well worth the trip to YouTube, the video is fresh and counterintuitive, two things the series itself is not. Advertisement