By BRIAN SEIBERTMAY 22, 2015
At first glance, the single false eyelash, conspicuously white, worn by each member of BodyStories: Teresa Fellion Dance is what distinguishes them as a tribe or species in “The Mantises Are Flipping W.3.” Soon, other commonalities become apparent: a contorted physicality, buckling in spasms, and highly animated faces that react to other dancers or to the dancer’s own limbs with astonishment and aggression.At Danspace Project, where the work had its premiere on Thursday, Ms. Fellion encourages close study of these features by having audience members mingle among the seven dancers, examining them as if they were exhibits in a museum or inhabitants of a walk-in vivarium. Initially, the performers are active but stationary, yet shortly they explode outward, kicking and spinning, herding viewers around the space to focus on a solo here, a trio there, before ushering them to their seats for the rest of the show.The “W” in the title stands for “world,” and Ms. Fellion and her colleagues do succeed in creating one. (The number indicates a stage of development; there have been earlier versions.) John Yannelli and members of the SLC Experimental Music Ensemble contribute a richly textured, partly live score of drones, strings plucked and strummed, swelling distortion, and high hums. The choreography is action-packed with a strong flow, a current that is sometimes tidal, washing the dancers back and forth across St. Mark’s Church, turning the terrarium into an aquarium.But the work’s most distinctive feature is its most problematic. The dancers’ attitudes, like the singular eyelashes they wear, are attention-grabbing and false. The strangeness is strained. The performers give it their all, but their animation is overacting — amateurish, with a comedy that is only sometimes intentional — and it keeps spoiling the more kinetically convincing sections of choreography. The mantises are flipping out, and it would better if they were just flipping.“The Mantises Are Flipping W.3” continues through Saturday at Danspace Project, 131 East 10th Street, East Village; 866-811-4111, danspaceproject.org. A version of this review appears in print on May 23, 2015, on Page C2 of the New York edition with the headline: A Strange World of Its Own.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.