By BRIAN SEIBERTMAY 22, 2015
In Chicago in 1924, two affluent and intellectually precocious teenagers named Nathan Leopold and Richard Loeb coldly murdered a 14-year-old boy named Bobby Franks. The crime and the trial spawned a media circus, novels, plays and films. On Wednesday at the Chocolate Factory in Queens, the performance artist Rebecca Patek added another work to the pile. The Leopold and Loeb case, though, is not the only subject of Ms. Patek’s jumbled, hourlong “The Future Was Looking Better in the Past.” (The subtitle runs on for 28 more words.) The murderers and their victim are played by dancer-actors, who recite segments of actual and imagined courtroom testimony and who appear in video re-enactments and fantasies. But the same performers also portray Ms. Patek and an interviewer discussing the process and motivations behind this show. (Here, and in the program bio, Ms. Patek claims to be related to Loeb.) Threaded in alternation with these two strands is a third, given in audio with subtitles, as if from a wiretap recording. This is a scene presented as another crime, one from last year, in which Ms. Patek engages in sex acts with anonymous men.Ms. Patek likes to unsettle her audience, and the tone of the piece is purposely unstable. Chris Tyler plays Loeb with smirking, eye-rolling flamboyance. Sam Roeck’s preppy Leopold is effectively affectless. John Hoobyar, mute in a bowl-cut hairdo, brings an odd innocence to little Bobby Franks. The sexual encouter scene is realistically creepy, but the interview is awkward self-parody and the artificiality of the re-enacted sections, especially the video segments, is exaggerated to satirical effect. To a modern ear, there is something foreign enough to feel silly about the poetry-quoting perorations of the defense attorney Clarence Darrow and about the boogeyman influence of Friedrich Nietzsche, whose idea of supermen beyond conventional morality influenced the murderers. Here, Nietzsche appears in voice-overs murmured in the style of “Deep Thoughts by Jack Handey” and absurd cameos, at one point joining the killers in a steamy sex scene.Ms. Patek scores some sardonic points with eyeglasses, converting them from crime scene evidence into a symbol of what can and cannot be medically corrected. But her ideas about normality are lost in the heap of modes and moods. The various elements, which include jogging and ritualistic posing, don’t rub together and make sparks so much as they cancel one another out, the cuteness and self-reflexivity trivializing the deeper themes. The relation between Ms. Patek and Richard Loeb remains distant.A dance review on Saturday about the performance artist Rebecca Patek’s “The Future Was Looking Better in the Past,” at the Chocolate Factory in Long Island City, referred incorrectly to a scene presented in audio with subtitles. While Ms. Patek has noted that it is ambiguous, it involves sex acts with anonymous men, not prostitution.“The Future Was Looking Better in the Past” runs through Saturday at the Chocolate Factory, 5-49 49th Avenue, Long Island City, Queens; 866-811-4111, chocolatefactorytheater.org. A version of this review appears in print on May 23, 2015, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline: An Old Crime Reappears, but It’s Not the Only Misdeed .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.