AdvertisementSupported byMusic ReviewBy Zachary Woolfe“I hope no one has to understand the sensation of having his skin ripped off,” the composer Clemens Gadenstätter said in an onstage interview on Thursday at the Austrian Cultural Forum. He was introducing his 2012 string quartet “häuten (Paramyth 1),” which is designed to evoke that very feeling.Based on representations of the mortification of flesh — Titian’s “Flaying of Marsyas” and Grünewald’s Isenheim altarpiece — the piece, played by the JACK Quartet with its usual assurance, contains passages that are plainly evocative of skinning and piercing: dueling, strident instrumental screams; manic sections of high-pitched sawing; plucks so pungent they made me wince. Rarely have I felt so badly for strings.But to what end? What makes Mr. Gadenstätter’s voice special? The answers to those questions were hard to come by at the concert, the first of two in “American Immersion: Clemens Gadenstätter,” a small retrospective for this unpredictable 48-year-old Austrian composer, presented by the forum and the Talea Ensemble. While the aim of “häuten” (“flaying”) is to revel in the sometimes uncomfortable tactility of sound, that is hardly unique in contemporary music. Indeed, much of the post-Ligeti composing landscape could be summed up in the words that Mr. Gadenstätter uses to describe his quartet: “a music that floats between explosions and introspection, between strict construction and an expressiveness that I search for.”In both “häuten” and “bersten/platzen (Paramyth 4)” for cello and piano, also from 2012 — Max Ernst used the neologism “paramyth” to refer to his Surrealist collages — it was unclear what fresh insights Mr. Gadenstätter brings. The percussive, unstable environment of “bersten/platzen” (“bursting/splitting”), with the pianist instructed to frequently tap the inside and outside of the instrument, felt predictable, somehow repetitive in its changeability. So did the general rhythm of the piece, with passages of pounding aggression yielding like clockwork to slower, more somber and austere ones, then flipping yet again to acidic bustling.It’s not that these works are badly written. There is indeed impressive acuteness to the violence in “häuten,” and in one memorably gauzy passage in “bersten/platzen,” spare, wandering twinkles in the piano punctuate faint slides in the cello, like stars dotting the midnight sky.But both works grow tedious, even in these fine performances, both heated and cool, by the pianist Stephen Gosling and the cellist Chris Gross of the Talea Ensemble and the JACK Quartet, always precise and yet always spontaneous. The most idiosyncratic, compelling piece was the first and briefest: “Tal Para Qual” (2006), one in a series of collaborations between Mr. Gadenstätter and the writer Lisa Spalt in response to Goya’s “Los Caprichos.” A single performer, here the agile Nico Couck, plays a twangy, boozy guitar part while speak-singing a poem.Text and music chase each other charmingly. It’s “Pierrot Lunaire” sings the blues, and it’s irresistible.The next concert in “American Immersion: Clemens Gadenstätter” is on Thursday at the Czech Center New York, Bohemian National Hall, 321 East 73rd Street, Manhattan; 212-319-5300, acfny.org. Advertisement