Emory University has acquired a collection of material relating to Jack Kerouac, including correspondence with Neal Cassady and Allen Ginsberg, and rare photographs showing Kerouac from childhood through the years shortly before his death in 1969.The collection, purchased from John Sampas, Kerouac’s brother-in-law and literary executor, is to be announced today at Emory’s renamed Stuart A. Rose Manuscript, Archives and Rare Book Library, which already has substantial Kerouac holdings, including objects like his Army rucksack, a painting box and a scroll of paper similar to the one on which he typed “On the Road.”In addition to written material, the new cache includes artifacts like an early passport misspelling Kerouac’s last name and a number of personal and family photographs labeled in his own hand. “Just looking through it, you can see right away how intimate the material is, how much of his life it covers, from childhood portraits to his early writing, when he’s still ‘John Kerouac,’ ” Kevin Young, the library’s curator of literary collections, said in a telephone interview. “You can really see both his beauty, and the beauty of his writing.”The material, which has not been processed, contains a typescript for the play “Beat Generation,” which Kerouac wrote after the success of “On the Road” in 1957. (It went unproduced, and largely forgotten, though parts were integrated into the 1959 film “Pull My Daisy.”)It also contains manuscripts and correspondence dating from the 1940s to the 1960s, including a letter in which Kerouac teased Ginsberg about his promiscuous epistolary habits. “Cher Allen, Pourquoi tu n’ecrit pas?” Kerouac wrote in a typed letter dated Aug. 11, 1954. “You seem to be writing to every Tom Dick N Harry except me. You betray your ambition — but please remember, Sage, a useless tree is never cut up into a coffin. Enuf nonsense, I’m just ‘pulling your leg’ like Neal, uck, uck, uck.”A version of this article appears in print on 10/02/2015, on page C2 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Kerouac Collection Goes to Emory.