By CHRISTOPHER F. SCHUETZEOCT. 22, 2015
AMSTERDAM — In a large room on the top floor of the bathtub-like addition to the Stedelijk Museum Amsterdam, about 30 women are demonstrating their ability to sing.The women — active or retired teachers, bureaucrats, hoteliers, art professors and opera singers — sit in a loosely arranged circle waiting for their turn before standing up, introducing themselves to the group and singing: “This is propaganda, this is propaganda!”Though the scene could easily have been mistaken for an intricate performance art piece, it was actually an audition for “This is propaganda,” a “constructed situation” from 2002 by the German-British artist Tino Sehgal, part of an extensive survey of his work being held at the Stedelijk throughout 2015.Mr. Sehgal, who is perhaps best known for his elaborate “experiences” at the Tate Modern in London and the Guggenheim Museum in New York — where he was the youngest artist ever to exhibit in the rotunda — is working with the Dutch museum to show a number of his previous works. Given the nature of Mr. Sehgal’s art — all pieces involve human interpreters, and most are highly interactive — this survey requires an unusual level of collaboration between artist, interpreters and the museum.Advertisement“This one-year project will challenge our concepts of how live situations, in the context of a collection display, define presence,” said Beatrix Ruf, the new director at the Stedelijk and one of the curators of the show.AdvertisementThe full-year program includes up to 17 of the artist’s works in chapters. Each piece was or will be on display for at least a month, with some pieces repeating and others overlapping.Unlike performance art — which, according to both the artist and the museum, Mr. Sehgal’s works most explicitly are not — the experiences do not happen at set times but are on constant view during the museum’s opening hours.When the survey opened on New Year’s Day 2015, bleary-eyed visitors were treated to “Instead of allowing some thing to rise up to your face dancing bruce and dan and other things,” a situation from 2000 that involves an elaborate dance-like routine executed by the artist himself. This piece, like the others, takes place on the familiar circuit of the museum’s permanent collection.This is not the first time that several pieces of Mr. Sehgal’s work are being shown in parallel, but it is definitely the largest collection of his works in one place — a staging that, Mr. Sehgal said, “occupies me.”“I don’t really want to show a progression of individual pieces that take away from each other,” he said by telephone recently from his home in Berlin. Instead, Mr. Sehgal said, he and the curators worked closely to create meaningful combinations.Martijn van Nieuwenhuyzen, one of the survey’s curators, said he took the artist’s concerns into consideration. “We’re used to talking with artists about what is the most optimal way of showing their work — and we are really prepared to go to great length to create that,” he said.Such conversations include where to place the art within the museum, which temporarily emptied several rooms of its permanent collection.Starting in the 1960s, when the Stedelijk was known for the push to get art off the walls, much of the institution’s focus has been on interactive and live art. In 2006, well before Mr. Sehgal became an international recognized name, the museum framed and staged “Instead of allowing …” in a show titled “A Choice from the Collection by Tino Sehgal.”AdvertisementIn March, visitors were treated to “This is good” (2001), involving a fake museum guard and featuring works by Jeff Koons, Felix Gonzalez-Torres  and Marcel Duchamp; “This is exchange” (2002), in which economists engaged visitors in discussion; “This is propaganda”; and “Instead of allowing some thing to rise up to your face dancing bruce and dan and other things.”“This is new” (2003), one of the pieces on view in February, involved ticket takers repeating a headline from the day’s news in English or Dutch. Visitors who inquired were treated to the same headline again. If they asked a third time, the ticket taker would engage the visitors in the meaning of what they had just said, the reason they said it and anything else they wished to talk about.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.If the art itself is unconventional, with its emphasis on interaction, improvisation and audience participation, so is how Mr. Sehgal conducts the business of exhibiting art. He insists on oral contracts only and prohibits museums, the media and even the visiting audience from reproducing any of his artwork with camera or other recording equipment.Since most of the art is performance-based, Mr. Sehgal or his assistants must approve interpreters, who, once selected, are paid an hourly wage that increases with inflation (in a former life Mr. Sehgal was an economist).Kirsten Schötteldreier,  a classical singer who passed the audition to become one of the show’s interpreters, described her experience during her six-hour shifts as fascinating.“Everyone has such a different reaction,” she said.A version of this special report appears in print on October 22, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »