AdvertisementSupported byRichard Quest, left, is the host of ABC’s game show "500 Questions," in which contestants like Dan McCarthy are challenged to answer general-information questions.By Neil GenzlingerI have an idea for a new game show: “500 Things That Are More Interesting Than ABC’s ‘500 Questions.’ ”It wouldn’t be a very taxing game. All you’d have to do would be to name 500 things. Any 500 things. Waiting for a bus. Rewatching a season of “Survivor.” Even reading this review.“500 Questions,” which began Wednesday night with the annoying Richard Quest as host, assuring us that it’s “the toughest game ever devised,” is in the midst of assaulting the viewing public for nine straight nights. Publicity for the show explains that “the smartest people in the country try to achieve the seemingly impossible task of answering 500 of the most difficult general-knowledge questions ever devised.”When the phrase “ever devised” gets that big a workout, you expect to be seeing one of the most entertaining game shows ever devised, but instead “500 Questions” is just another trivia show mired in a format too convoluted to bother mastering.The show, created by Mike Darnell and the prolific Mark Burnett (you know, the “Survivor” guy), promises us contestants who are “certified geniuses,” though a few questions into Night 1 it was apparent that our genius-certification process, whatever it is, may need revising. These supposed geniuses are no smarter than the average “Jeopardy!” contestant.There’s a featured player — on Night 1, it was a lawyer named Dan — and a challenger, who stands by waiting for that player to falter. And quite a bit of faltering is allowed. If you thought you’d be seeing super-brains trying to answer 500 questions without a miss, which might have been moderately diverting, you soon realize that these players get all sorts of do-overs, and that on most questions they don’t even have to answer correctly the first time, just eventually. Try it. Not sure who Adam and Eve’s third child was? Just start tossing out names randomly; maybe you’ll get lucky.The questions come in categories, just like on “Jeopardy!” Once in a while, there’s a special question that shakes up the format, just like the ones on “Jeopardy!” Sometimes there’s — oh, never mind. Just watch “Jeopardy!”Advertisement