Season 4, Episode 7, “Mommy Meyer”
In this episode, “Veep” opens with a celebration gone negative: Mike is at a supposed birthday lunch for his wife, Wendy, but he spends it bemoaning the vagaries and indignities of his job as White House press secretary.“Take this fork,” he tells her, “stab me right here in the carotid.”Wendy points out that he is “the most influential Mike person in the world”; he helped President Selina Meyer win her first debate. But Mike sees only more pain on the horizon. “Guess what? There’s two more,” he says. “And the next one is foreign policy. That’s basically a quiz on the entire world!” (Indeed it is. And in a case of real-world presidential politics imitating “Veep” — or is it vice versa? — many presidential hopefuls are using the next few months to bone up on foreign policy so they can, they hope, answer a question about Uzbekistan).What Mike doesn’t know is that the bad vibe is about to get a lot worse, after a Marine kills three people in Pittsburgh, and an intruder breaches the White House — setting off a chain reaction of ugly. Selina is delightedly watching her first debate performance in the Oval Office with her aides when the Secret Service races in, guns drawn, shouting at the president to remain where she is. They surround her, facing outward, while the rest of the West Wing staff members are left to fend for themselves.Gary runs around looking for a “panic room” — “Gary, every room you’re in is a panic room,” Sue informs him, in her usual nonplussed way — before he finally picks up a clock, brandishing it as a potential weapon.“What are you going to do with the clock?” Sue asks. “Tell him he’s late?”
The intruder is quickly tackled, but Selina wants to know what he was shouting. After dismissing the guy as “Nutso-Bismol,” Ben finally tells Selina that the man was yelling that he wanted to kill the vice president, Tom James, and added an explicative directed at the president.“He comes here to kill me and he doesn’t even know my name?” Selina asks, wounded, underscoring another operative principle of the show. All of the characters simply want to be the star (the veep strives to be Potus; Jonah so badly wants to be Dan, etc.), even if that means you are the target of a possible assassination. After all, you get all the attention.Mike must also handle another problem: when Tom James is asked about the Pittsburgh shooting at a town hall, he commits a cardinal political sin, and answers the question honestly.“Reaction is easy, understanding is hard. Wasn’t the shooter also a victim here,” he says, to gasps of shock and horror. “Well, we’re talking about an ex-Marine here, someone whose mind was maimed in the service of his country.”Tom may very well be right, but the political backlash, Ben knows, will be swift. He outlines the likely headlines in the next day’s tabloids: “Oh my God, Calamity James — and that’s just off the top of my head.”Tom ultimately apologizes, but not before Mike, unprepared at a news conference, finds himself flailing when asked if the White House supports Tom James’s comments. Mike’s deliciously awkward response, as he scans the back of the room for a lifeline: “Words don’t kill people. Like guns. Which can. And did. Which is bad. So bad. I could go on?”Meanwhile, Selina, in an attempt to relax, has organized a girls’ night at the White House with the lawyers from her old firm, who “owned” Annapolis back in the 1990s. Selina has hoped to recreate the magic of their youth, instructing Gary — despite his suggestions otherwise — to simply order pizza and serve ice cream for dessert. But Selina’s friends, it becomes clear, are expecting some of the luster of the White House, and are sorely disappointed at Selina’s casual evening.In a painfully poignant scene, we witness just how much Selina has drifted from her friends. She offers one friend a drink, only to find that she is now five years sober.  And she finds out another friend remarried several years ago, in a ceremony she clearly missed.  Selina is such an outsider — in her own home, with her former group of friends — that at one point, Gary whispers a prompt in her ear: “Remember the dude ranch!?” Gary says, Cyrano-like. Selina shrieks out the same phrase, finally generating some titters from her friends. The evening devolves even further when Selina’s friends admit that they hate her Families First bill, but love her running mate, who is always threatening to overshadow her. “Now if he was selling Families First, I’d buy it for sure,” enthuses one friend.The party doesn’t get any better: an intruder breaches the White House yet again. (“Another one?” Gary asks. “No, Gary, it’s the same one, he’s doing a victory lap!” Selina’s daughter responds.) When the Secret Service come barreling in, again enveloping Selina in a protective huddle, a friend begins hyperventilating. Another friend asks for help, but Selina is literally and figuratively removed from her old friends. Her disembodied voice can be heard from inside her Secret Service detail — “These people are only here to protect me, I’m afraid,” she says, meekly if honestly. Best Lines*Selina’s communications director informs her team that her rival has just attacked her Families First bill, saying that if the legislation passes, the whole concept of the family will come to an end.“Well, that’s the dream, certainly, but I’m not sure we’ll achieve it in this generation,” Ben says, slouched on a couch.*The episode’s other best lines come from Amy and Dan’s trip down the lobbying wormhole at the American Concrete Federation convention. The narrative opens with Dan addressing what he calls his “sale bait” — a group of young, attractive women all clad in various shades of black. By sale bait, Amy interjects, trying to save the situation, Dan means, “independent, well-educated young women like you, who also happen to be very hot to lure congressmen into the room … in a way that is deeply feminist.”“We then introduce our client, who makes a sale in a way that’s deeply capitalist,” Dan finishes. Later, we see Dan instructing a woman with a political science degree: “Congressman Reese is practically blind,” he says, “so you have to flirt close, and flirt big. Do some kind of Braille thing.”At another point, Amy finds herself talking to a client who runs a pharmaceutical company. “So what is a big pharma guy like you doing at a concrete event like this?” Amy says, by way of opening line.“Well, construction brings builders, builders bring sex workers and sex workers bring S.T.D.s,” the client replies.“Virtuous circle,” Amy concludes.  