Season 2, Episode 7: “Adult Content”

Business isn’t easy, and it doesn’t pay to be nice. You’ve got to do whatever you can to win, sometimes even play dirty. If that means hacking into a competitor’s server to undercut his deal with one of the world’s largest online pornography companies, well, then — to quote a memorable line from this week’s “Silicon Valley” — “Welcome to the left-hand path, my friend.”The plot moved forward nicely in this episode. After weeks of treading water, the path forward for Pied Piper, and the stakes, are now clear. It will compete against Endframe, a start-up run by an oily sales guy with a faulty ethical compass. Either Pied Piper will win the battle, get the porn contract, and live to see another day—or it won’t, and it will die. A nice, simple set-up, and just the sort of make-or-break moment that many such early-stage companies have faced.  It’s an interesting story line, too, because it plays on the ethical squishiness that often lies at the heart of start-up land. One of the myths about Silicon Valley is that ideas matter a great deal. In fact, they rarely do. Creative breakthroughs, the act of thinking up some new thing, is only the first, easiest step in building a successful tech company. Many of the world’s biggest tech products — from the iPod to the  iPhone to Google search to Facebook — weren’t new ideas; they were better takes on old ideas, built by better, more able teams. Because ideas matter less than execution, we often see that once someone has one good idea in the Valley, several start-ups will move in to try to take that idea big.And because the spoils are so large, it is not unusual to see them play dirty. Witness the recent war between car-sharing companies Uber and Lyft, whose apps and service are virtually indistinguishable. According to some reports, as part of Uber’s effort to recruit Lyft’s drivers to Uber’s service, Uber’s staffers often called up Lyfts and then canceled the rides — disrupting the reliability of the company’s service.  So the ethics in “Silicon Valley” mirror the ethics in Silicon Valley. Earlier this season, Endframe tricked Richard, Pied Piper’s founder and hapless chief executive, into divulging his technical breakthrough. Under the guise of a funding meeting at the offices of a venture capital firm, the Endframe group peppered Richard and his coders with questions about their tech — and Richard obliged, providing detailed schematics on a whiteboard. The Endframe group apparently took notes, and they quickly came up with their own copy of Pied Piper’s breakthrough compression algorithm.This week, in a showdown at Endframe’s offices, Richard spots a flaw in the company’s copy. “Your tech is always going to be worse than ours,” he tells them, thinking he’s wielding the trump card. But it’s no trump. Business isn’t a meritocracy, and inferior tech doesn’t necessarily fail. Endframe has a battalion of salespeople to go out and push its poor code, and Pied Piper has no one. “Hear that, buddy?” Endframe’s chief tells Richard amid the din of the sales office. “That’s the sound of us leaving you in the dust.”Naturally, then, one ethical lapse merits another. When Gilfoyle, one of Pied Piper’s coders, reveals that he’s obtained Endframe’s contract with an adult streaming company, allowing Pied Piper to undercut Endframe’s deal, Richard has to think about acting on the information for a couple of seconds. But he quickly realizes that he’s got no choice. The left-hand path is Pied Piper’s only choice. This is Silicon Valley. If Pied Piper uses the inside information and wins, all will be forgiven.