Anne Meara, a comedian, actress and playwright who teamed up with her husband, Jerry Stiller, to form a formidable decades-long comedy duo, died on Saturday in Manhattan. She was 85.Despite her constant collaboration with her husband, and her son, the actor and director, Ben Stiller, Ms. Meara was a star in her own right. Here’s how The New York Times covered of some of her performances over the years — as well as Tweets from fellow artists remembering her legacy.• She starred in the 1988 Richard Greenberg play, “Eastern Standard,” as a homeless woman on the beach. In his review for The Times, Frank Rich wrote, “In an extremely tough assignment, Ms. Meara is scrupulous in refusing to conform to the sentimentalized role that her bleeding-heart benefactors wish her to play.”• She was nominated for a Tony for her role in the 1993 revival of Eugene O’Neill’s “Anna Christie,” which was directed by David Leveaux for the Roundabout Theater Company.  Mr. Rich praised her “finely shaded cameo of the doomed yet self-aware old mistress.”• Ms. Meara’s first produced work as a playwright, “After-Play,” opened at the Manhattan Theater Club in 1995 — about little more than the banter of two showbiz couples who had just been to the theater. In his review, Vincent Canby called her a “subversively gifted send-up artist.” • Her success as a playwright continued in 2000 with “Down the Garden Paths,” an absurdist play inspired in part by the writing of Jorge Luis Borges. “Ms. Meara is one up on Borges,” wrote Alvin Klein. “She has the smarts to know just what to do with her inspiration and her musings if they are to be accessible to mainstream audiences.”Following Ms. Meara’s death, artists took to Twitter to pay their respects: Stiller and Meara have been a wonderful presence in comedy my whole life. Now Anne Meara is gone, and I salute her.— Steve Martin (@SteveMartinToGo) 24 May 15with a heavy heart – she was so real  //t.co/nvpL3j1plW //t.co/FkT7t7wKjA— Rosie (@Rosie) 24 May 15Aww man….RIP to a national treasure Anne Meara. She was timelessly funny.— josh groban (@joshgroban) 24 May 15RIP Anne Meara…had the pleasure of meeting her once, she had me doubled over laughing. A comedy LEGEND. So many condolences @RedHourBen— Chris Hardwick (@nerdist) 24 May 15I always loved Anne Meara: funny forever, a terrific actress, & a really fine human being. RIP— Michael McKean (@MJMcKean) 24 May 15I was lucky enough to know Anne Meara personally, and I’m very saddened by her passing. She was wonderful. Love to her family. #RIPAnne— Andy Richter (@AndyRichter) 24 May 15Sad news. Ann Meara, fabulous comedienne
has died. What a legacy. Ann was funny, smart and above all a great lady.— Fred Willard (@Fred_Willard) 24 May 15I adored #annemeara saw #stiller@meara open for diahann Carroll at the Sands Hotel in Vegas funny cutting edge ahead… //t.co/S7HOmG9RoA— Sandra Bernhard (@SandraBernhard) 24 May 15Very sad to hear of the passing of Anne Meara. Such an incredibly funny person, an amazing woman & a groundbreaker. A huge loss for comedy.— Paul Feig (@paulfeig) 24 May 15