By KATHRYN SHATTUCKMAY 24, 2015
8 P.M. (13, 49); 9:30 P.M. (21) NATIONAL MEMORIAL DAY CONCERT For the 10th year, Gary Sinise and Joe Mantegna will host this annual broadcast from the West Lawn of the Capitol; this year’s event will honor disabled veterans and Gold Star Children, an organization for those who have lost a parent to war, and observe the 70th anniversary of the end of World War II. The “American Idol” winner Nick Fradiani will sing the national anthem. Gloria Estefan (above), Laura Benanti, Tessanne Chin, Katherine Jenkins, Jason Dolley and Russell Watson will perform with the National Symphony Orchestra, conducted by Jack Everly.10 A.M. (Fox) FOX NEWS SUNDAY Mike Huckabee, the Arkansas Republican and former governor, talks about his presidential bid. 10:30 A.M. (CBS) FACE THE NATION The guests include Senator John McCain, Republican of Arizona, and Representative Adam B. Schiff, Democrat of California.NOON (FX) AVATAR (2009) This “trippy joy ride about the end of life — our moviegoing life included,” Manohla Dargis wrote in The Times, took decades of dreaming and four years of production by the director James Cameron. Sam Worthington plays a paraplegic former Marine who is transported into a 10-foot blue-skinned part-alien and part-human body, the better to infiltrate a distant moon that harbors a valuable substance. Alas, he falls in love with this lush dreamscape and one of its slinky inhabitants, above, voiced by Zoë Saldana. “If the story of a paradise found and potentially lost feels resonant, it’s because ‘Avatar’ is as much about our Earth as the universe that Mr. Cameron has invented,” Ms. Dargis said. “But the movie’s truer meaning is in the audacity of its filmmaking.”Advertisement5:30 P.M. (FX Movie Channel) ZERO DARK THIRTY (2012) Jessica Chastain, left, in an Oscar-nominated role, is Maya, a C.I.A. officer obsessed with finding Osama bin Laden, in Kathryn Bigelow’s intelligence procedural. Tushaar Mehra is Abu Ahmed al-Kuwaiti, the lead that Maya and her colleagues, including Dan (Jason Clarke) and Jessica (Jennifer Ehle), chase for years, using controversial interrogation techniques. “The abuse scenes are crucial to ‘Zero Dark Thirty’ because they serve as a claim — one made cinematically rather than with speeches — that these interrogation methods are unreliable when it comes to producing actionable information,” Manohla Dargis wrote in The Times.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.6 P.M. (Al Jazeera America) THIRD RAIL Tricia Rose, director of the Center for the Study of Race and Ethnicity in America at Brown University; Larry Elder, the author of “What’s Race Got to Do With It?”; and Brittney Cooper, an assistant professor of Africana studies at Rutgers University, debate the question “Is America a Racist Country?”Advertisement9 P.M. (World) STANDING ON SACRED GROUND This second episode travels from Papua New Guinea to the tar sands of Alberta in examining indigenous cultures that work to protect their land, water and health from mining and oil corporations.10 P.M. (TCM) M*A*S*H (1970) In his black comedy, Robert Altman follows the antics in a Mobile Army Surgical Hospital during the Korean War, where a couple of wisecracking hotshot surgeons — Hawkeye Pierce (Donald Sutherland) and Trapper John McIntyre (Elliott Gould) — keep things irreverent, and outrage some comrades in the process. Tom Skerritt is their fellow hedonist, Duke Forrest; Robert Duvall plays the Bible-thumping Maj. Frank Burns; Sally Kellerman is the company woman Maj. Hot Lips Houlihan; and Gary Burghoff is the sardonic Radar O’Reilly. While he took exception to its lack of “profoundly radical criticism either of war or of the Army,” Roger Greenspun, writing in The New York Times, called the film “impudent, bold, and often very funny.” Ring Lardner Jr. won an Oscar for best adapted screenplay.What’s Streaming NowM*A*S*H Alan Alda is Hawkeye Pierce and Wayne Rogers is Trapper John McIntyre in Larry Gelbart’s television adaptation of the Robert Altman satire, all 11 seasons of which are available for streaming. (netflix.com) KATHRYN SHATTUCKA version of this schedule appears in print on May 24, 2015, on Page SP11 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Sunday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.