AdvertisementSupported byBy Gia KourlasThis season, three principal dancers will bid American Ballet Theater farewell: Paloma Herrera and Xiomara Reyes dance their final performances, both in “Giselle” on Wednesday (Ms. Herrera in the afternoon and Ms. Reyes in the evening), while Julie Kent follows suit in “Romeo and Juliet” on June 20. Each recognizes that it’s time. But that doesn’t make it easy. As Ms. Reyes pointed out, “It’s a heartbreak, don’t get me wrong.” Born in Cuba, where she studied at the National Ballet School, the fleet-footed Ms. Reyes, 42, was a dancer with the Royal Ballet of Flanders before joining Ballet Theater in 2001. Ms. Herrera, a prodigy who joined the company in 1991 and was promoted to principal in 1995 at the age of 19, hails from Buenos Aires. And Ms. Kent, 45, revered as the company’s reigning dramatic ballerina, joined in 1986. Married to Ballet Theater’s associate artistic director, Victor Barbee, with whom she has two children, Ms. Kent said, “This company and my life are completely intertwined in every single way.” As for the future, Ms. Herrera, 39, will spend more time in Argentina and start a business focusing on ballet wear. Ms. Reyes will continue directing a summer program for dancers in Barcelona. And Ms. Kent plans to write a book and hopes to develop programming that highlights American artists, among other projects. They spoke of the transition at the company’s Lower Broadway headquarters. Here are edited excerpts from the conversation.Q. Why are you leaving now? A. Kent To be honest, I would dance forever if I could. It’s been clear that the longer I dance, the harder it is for me to let it go. You celebrate your 20th anniversary and then your 25th anniversary, and you’re like, when is this going to stop? So many of my colleagues were like, “Oh, you’ll know.” I talked to Kevin [McKenzie, Ballet Theater’s artistic director,] and said: “This is giving me a lot of anxiety. I’m just going to have to trust that you’re going to help me with this.” I can still dance wonderful things, but it’s also time to give those rare performances to somebody else. Herrera I announced it last year, a long time ago. I had a dream to leave young and happy. I wanted to announce it so I had time to digest it. The minute I knew, I wanted to let it out. I couldn’t have it inside and not share it. Last year was very intense. After my “Don Q,” I cried for a week. Reyes When I was in Cuba growing up, people were dancing into their 50s, their 60s, their 70s. I grew up on that culture. So for me, I never saw an ending. I thought it would end when my body would tell me. My body hasn’t told me yet. I find somehow with age, it has become easier. Herrera It’s true. I wish I knew then what I do now. Reyes Completely. I cannot tell you I’m ready to retire. I cannot tell you this is an easy decision for me. I cannot tell you that because the truth is, as Julie says, I would have danced until my body told me to stop. There is the truth of the whole institution, and this is a very different thing, because where I am as a dancer is not necessarily where the company is as an institution. Q. How so? Reyes There’s a time of change coming for the company. There is the need for people to develop into dancers. You cannot develop unless you are onstage performing these roles. The kids here need these shows. Obviously, with so many guests, it’s hard to find space for everybody. I would have enjoyed three or four more years, and I know I could have done it, but it’s something I have become completely at peace with. I’m not a dancer that fits where the company is now. So it’s my turn to go. Q. How has the company changed? Herrera It’s different. I was part of a generation, and we started at A.B.T. from the very beginning. I was doing the Nurse in “Sleeping Beauty.” We all grew up in the company. We were here every day watching each other work. Reyes I think the world is changing, and there is all this input from the Internet and the media. When you had to experience it the other way, it felt so in the moment. Now, everybody’s on their phones — sometimes I am on my phone, too! Herrera That is exactly my point and why I am retiring. I feel like I’m a dinosaur in this era. I know the world is changing, and I cannot do anything about it. But one thing I can stop is my career. I don’t have Facebook or Twitter. People tell me, “In the middle of a performance, you can know what the person backstage is saying.” I don’t want to know. I go to the theater because it’s magic. Q. Julie, how has A.B.T. changed for you? Kent When Kevin became artistic director, we were scrambling to create something. That’s a whole different thing than maintaining something 25 years later. We had so much more touring. Touring is what gives a company that glue and all of those experiences of performing. Reyes In a safer environment than the Metropolitan Opera House. Kent Yes. Over the years, those opportunities have decreased because of economics, and that’s really affected the dynamic of the company and the fact that every performance is a great big deal, to the point where they have to sell out every house in order to raise enough money to keep this machine going. It’s not this great big artistic decision to change things. It’s the reality of the economic environment that dictates a situation that has changed everything. Reyes We don’t give money to the arts; we give money to sports. Art is always the last thing. But there is the reality that what we do is elitist, and not everybody has the sensibility to come and enjoy this kind of entertainment. For me, it is not entertainment. I believe we are doctors of the soul. Q. Are any of you ruling out dancing again?Reyes Always a dancer. Kent I think Paloma’s ready to hang up her shoes.Herrera Alicia Alonso danced forever and ever. I think she’s incredible, but that’s not what I wanted. Kent I have performances scheduled, but it’s not like there’s something unsaid in my work, that I don’t feel fulfilled. I’m also a working parent. Besides the fact, I love to dance. So if I can, I will. I hold on to things I love, but once it’s time to move on, you don’t want to be just like ... [She grips the edge of the table.]Reyes I guess the point is this: We have danced enough that we don’t have regrets. But if I get another opportunity to dance, I will completely take it. Advertisement