AdvertisementSupported byBy David AllenBOSTON — In a classical music world grappling for cultural traction, anniversaries have come to substitute for genuine invention. Sometimes they prove productive, like this season’s festivities for Pierre Boulez’s 90th birthday, or New York’s explorations of Meredith Monk’s 50 years onstage. But too often, they just provide an excuse for yet another performance of a Sibelius or a Mahler symphony, another heavily marketed Beethoven cycle.Here’s an anniversary genuinely worth toasting: The Handel and Haydn Society, which claims to be America’s oldest continuously performing arts organization, turns 200 this year. Once an amateur oratorio society dedicated to performing new music — the American premieres of Verdi’s Requiem (in 1878) and Bach’s “St. Matthew Passion” (1879), among much else — alongside the old, its orchestra and chorus have been among the country’s most prominent early-music ensembles since 1986, when it moved to playing with period instruments.The celebrations span this season and next. Earlier this month, I heard a solid performance of Haydn’s “The Creation” at Symphony Hall, led by the society’s current artistic director, Harry Christophers. A charming, insightful exhibition at the Boston Public Library runs through September; a lavish new institutional history has already been published; and July brings an open-air performance of Beethoven’s Ninth Symphony.The society was born from the peace festivities after news reached Boston of the end of the War of 1812, when musicians presented highlights from “The Creation” and Handel’s “Messiah.” After newspaper correspondents wrote of a need to hear more European works, a group of 44 amateur choristers and instrumentalists formed the Handel and Haydn Society, on April 13, 1815.In its constitution, the group expressed a fear that “the admirers of music find their beloved science far from exciting the feelings or exercising the powers to which it is accustomed in the Old World.” These merchant-class musicians dedicated themselves to introducing “the works of Handel and Haydn and other eminent composers.” This was a new endeavor, but the society also emerged from longstanding attempts to improve the quality of singing in local churches, not least at the Park Street Church, which still stands at the top of Boston Common.The society announced itself with a concert at the King’s Chapel on Christmas Day 1815, when 100 singers — 90 men and 10 women, with the tenors singing the soprano parts — and 13 instrumentalists performed the first part of “The Creation” and arias and choruses from various Handel works. Rehearsals were infrequent and formal training was rare, so the society waited three years before it offered complete performances of “Messiah” and “The Creation,” the Handel in December 1818 and the Haydn in February 1819 — both American premieres.Those early performances were intended more for the edification of the musicians than for public enjoyment, and after strong initial reviews and attendance, critics recognized that standards were low. Debts grew and were assuaged only by the society’s decision, in 1820, to begin printing hymn anthologies. One important volume, “The Boston Handel and Haydn Society Collection of Church Music,” was put together by Lowell Mason, a bank teller living in Savannah, Ga., who moved to Boston to become the society’s president in 1827. It caused a revolution in Protestant church singing, moving hymns away from the folk tradition of domestic composers like William Billings, and toward European harmony, through arrangements of Handel, Haydn and Mozart.Interest in music boomed before the Civil War, not least because of the efforts of Mason, who founded the Boston Academy of Music in 1833 and introduced music education to public schools. But the society was left behind. Its canon, centered on “Messiah” and “The Creation” — with the additions of Sigismund Neukomm’s “David,” Handel’s “Samson,” Mendelssohn’s “Elijah” and “St. Paul,” and Rossini’s “Moses in Egypt” (a converted opera) — could not compete with the novelty of symphonic and chamber music played by a stream of better-trained newcomers from Europe. When the huge Boston Music Hall was completed in 1852, a statue of Beethoven, not Handel, adorned the stage.A group of young immigrants, the Germania Musical Society, saved the older, financially strained society. A sensation for their accuracy and vigor when touring the East Coast after their arrival in 1848, the German instrumentalists settled in Boston. They joined the society for Handel’s “Judas Maccabaeus” in 1852 and the local premiere of Beethoven’s Ninth Symphony in 1853. Carl Zerrahn, one of their cellists and a conductor, took the reins of the Handel and Haydn Society in 1854 and stayed in charge for more than four decades. Gradually the society moved away from its religious roots. Borrowing the model of Birmingham, England, it began a series of Triennial Festivals, first in 1857 and then from 1865 into the 1880s, crowning a wave of oratorio performances that spread beyond Boston. (Leopold Damrosch founded the Oratorio Society of New York in 1873.) These events featured gigantic performances of the great oratorios in the evenings — each with choirs of about 700 — and more varied symphonic concerts during the days.With time, the society began to experiment more. Along with its young Brahmin cousin, the Boston Symphony Orchestra, it moved into the new Symphony Hall in 1900. The artistic leadership remained German, but the repertoire widened to include works by New England composers, including Horatio Parker, John Knowles Paine and Amy Beach, whose “Mass” was given its world premiere in 1892. Rather than only repeat “The Creation,” the society also programmed a new work to celebrate its centenary in April 1915, but Mr. Parker’s “Morven and the Grail” — unlike his “Hora novissima,” heard frequently between 1894 and 1955 — was a flop.New music proved no panacea, and for half a century, the society stagnated, its Sunday evening concerts growing ever less popular even as classical music in general took off through radio and recordings. Calls for a more varied repertoire went largely unheard.A single, catastrophic review of a 1965 “Messiah” by the new music critic of The Boston Globe, Michael Steinberg, proved a catalyst for change. Mr. Steinberg used the then-developing principles of historically informed performance to assail the society’s use of thick, anachronistic orchestrations and choruses far larger than those Handel had imagined.The result was the hiring, in 1967, of the conductor Thomas Dunn, whom Time magazine once labeled the “hero of the baroqueniks.” Working with slimmed textures and a tiny choir that became professional in 1980, Mr. Dunn transformed performances of the classics and took on music from Monteverdi to Stravinsky, even contemporary compositions by Conrad Susa, Dominick Argento and Daniel Pinkham. By the 1980s, though, even Mr. Dunn was too conservative for some. Boston was by then a hotbed for Baroque experimentation, with the Boston Camerata, Banchetto Musicale (now Boston Baroque) and the Boston Early Music Festival leading the way, but Mr. Dunn refused to move from modern to period instruments.In 1986, the society embraced the new fashion and hired Christopher Hogwood, the British scholar, keyboardist and conductor. Converting permanently to period instruments in 1989, it hasn’t looked back. In addition to rediscovering instrumental music from the distant past, he staged operas by Handel, Mozart, Purcell and Gluck (the latter with the Mark Morris Dance Group), and even paired Bach with Dave Brubeck’s jazz. Following brief spells of leadership from Grant Llewellyn and Roger Norrington, Mr. Christophers, a British choral conductor, took over in 2008. In the society’s performance of “The Creation” on May 1, his superb choir had a rounded, plush tone and a spontaneity with the text that infused every line with joy. The soloists Sarah Tynan, Jeremy Ovenden and Matthew Brook each found an ideal balance between humor and profundity. And if the orchestra didn’t have the detail or flamboyance of the world’s best period bands, its spirit and accuracy were undeniable.The society, with an annual budget of around $5 million, is now in safe financial shape. Last year it ran a small surplus, and its endowment has grown to $7.6 million, though it remains reliant on donations.Its repertory is once again hardly adventurous. In these bicentennial seasons, it is focusing almost exclusively on the titans. Next season it barely steps beyond Bach, Handel, Haydn, Mozart and Beethoven. For a society that committed itself in 1815 to both the old (Handel) and the new (Haydn), and even dared ask Beethoven for a commission in 1823, that is too limited. Playing on period instruments need not seal off the contemporary, and in the absence of more new work there’s plenty in the society’s own history that ought to be heard again, beginning with Amy Beach’s grand “Mass.”Perhaps change can take a more civic-minded form, too. On May 14, seven members of the society’s choir joined the countertenor Reginald Mobley for a sensational concert of spirituals, gospel and contemporary works by Bobby McFerrin and Sydney Guillaume at the African Meeting House, the oldest black church still standing in the United States and now part of Boston’s Museum of African American History. In an intimate space, and with insightful introductions from Mr. Mobley, the singing seemed to burst the hall’s bounds, to express a deeper, intangible truth. It was a more modest performance than “The Creation,” but it suggested a fresh connection to the society’s hometown — and it was an especially apt birthday celebration for that.Advertisement