By CELESTINE BOHLENOCT. 22, 2015
PARIS — For its 42nd edition, France’s venerable Foire Internationale d’Art Contemporain is banking on an asset that is right under its nose: the river Seine.Jennifer Flay, general director since 2010 of the event known as FIAC, said she thought “long and hard” about how to top the fair’s recent successes — it attracted 74,567 visitors in 2014 — which have confirmed its special place on the crowded global contemporary art circuit.The Seine offered Ms. Flay the “strong concept” she was looking for, one that is both obvious and often overlooked. Besides being one of the world’s best-known rivers, the Seine runs by most of Paris’s notable cultural institutions, and for FIAC’s purposes, its most celebrated museums. The Louvre, the Grand Palais, the Musée d’Orsay and the Musée du Quai Branly, the Palais de Tokyo — all these and more are grouped along the banks of the river.Thus was born this year’s FIAC theme — “Musées en Seine” — which uses the river as a way to link not only the FIAC’s own multiple venues, but also some 20 other Paris museums along the way, accessible by a continuous service of leisurely riverboats dedicated to the four-day event, running Oct. 22 to Oct. 25.AdvertisementFor the price of an entrance ticket (35 euros, or about $40) to FIAC or its sister fair Officielle (€15), visitors can board the boats, known as bâteaux mouches, at designated points along the river. Some but not all of the museums’ entrance fees will be free for FIAC visitors.Advertisement“It is a way to understand Paris in a very limpid way,” Ms. Flay said recently. “It slows you down, which is an appropriate way to approach different exhibits.”FIAC has always been anchored in Paris and its artistic traditions, though its return to the city’s center and the renovated splendor of the Grand Palais dates only to 2006. But Ms. Flay, a New Zealand-born Parisian who was FIAC’s artistic director from 2003 until 2010, wanted to make the link even stronger. “It should be in touch with all the institutions,” she said. “We need to put down our roots. We can’t exist in isolation.”Besides putting down roots, the fair this year is, according to Ms. Flay, “spreading its wings,” adding new locations; new kinds of cultural events, including panel discussions on art and sciences, and art and poetry; dance performances; music concerts; and outdoor sculptures scattered throughout the city at “Hors Les Murs,” as off-site venues are called.Some of the choices at these sites are artworks that are easily accessible to a general audience; other offerings, such as dance performances or discussions of poetry, deliberately have nothing to do with the demands of the commercial art market, Ms. Flay said. “It’s important for us to offer the full breadth of cultural experiences, to investigate artistic expression in all its forms,” she said.As in the past, the Tuileries Garden, between the Louvre and the Place de la Concorde, will host some eye-catching sculptures. Giant replicas of 12 Chinese bronze animal heads by the dissident artist Ai Weiwei will surround one of the park’s ponds. The heads are copies of 18th-century originals, made by Jesuit priests in China, that were sacked by foreign invaders in the 19th century; many of them returned in triumph to China in the 20th century. Mr. Weiwei has described his work as an investigation of the value of real versus fake in the modern art world.Also in the Tuileries will be a model “kiosk,” or a cabin, made of steel and glass, created by the brothers Ronan and Erwan Bouroullec, well-known French furniture designers. The structure can be assembled in four hours (a video will show how it is done) and used as an instant exhibition space or meeting room.At the Place Vendôme, where last year’s inflatable “Tree” sculpture by the artist Paul McCarthy caused an uproar because of its resemblance to a sex toy, the American artist Dan Graham will display two pavilions, suggestive of fun houses at fairgrounds. One, called “Two Nodes,” is made of interlocking cylindrical enclosures with two-way mirrors; the other, “Passage Intime,” is a lens-like narrow passageway, inspired by the 19th-century “passages” that dot Paris, in which visitors will see distorted and enlarged images of themselves and others reflected back at them, similar to the effect of a bathroom makeup mirror. Mr. Graham has described the effect as both claustrophobic and intimate.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.New venues are being added to the FIAC this year, including the Maison de la Radio, a landmark modern building along the river that is part of the Hors Les Murs series. The westernmost stop of the Musées en Seine tour, it will offer a group of sound works by contemporary artists and an opportunity to explore historic recordings from Radio France’s archives.AdvertisementAnother new space added to the FIAC galaxy this year is the Musée National Eugène Delacroix, a charming Left Bank museum dedicated to the 19th-century French painter, where the Spanish artist José María Sicilia will exhibit six ceramic birds in the garden.According to Ms. Flay, all the outdoor works will be accompanied by two art students from the École du Louvre who can answer questions.Alongside FIAC’s on- and offsite offerings, Paris at the same time will be hosting its third Outsider Art Fair, which is moving to the Hôtel du Duc, near the Opera Garnier. Following in the tradition of the 23-year-old New York-based Outsider Art Fair, the Paris event will present 36 international galleries showing “art brut” — as outsider art is known in France — with a special exhibit devoted to the Japanese artist Shinichi Sawada.This year will mark the second year of Officielle, the FIAC’s sister fair, at the Docks — Cité de la Mode et du Design, where 50 galleries from 13 countries, representing a new generation of exhibitors, will be sharing space with performances by students from Paris’s celebrated Beaux Arts school.Among the exhibitors this year is a young gallerist from Tunisia, Selma Feriani, FIAC’s first North African exhibitor, who will be showing a Saudi Arabian artist.“Officielle will continue to be a place for discovery,” Ms. Flay said.For all the activity across Paris, the centerpiece of the FIAC remains the Grand Palais, where there will be 173 galleries from 23 countries, predominantly European. Among the galleries exhibiting here for the first time are the Modern Institute of Glasgow in Scotland, the Long March Space of Beijing, and Landau Fine Art of Montreal.There are fewer galleries this year compared with last year’s 191, but according to Ms. Flay, each one will benefit from expanded space in the limited confines of the Grand Palais.As in previous years, the FIAC is putting emphasis on galleries offering works by modern masters such as Picasso and Léger. Last year, despite the lingering recession in France, there were 10 sales between $5 million and $7 million, Ms. Flay said.“The FIAC is known as the fair where you sell from the opening to the very end,” she said.A version of this special report appears in print on October 22, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »