AdvertisementSupported byBy Mike HaleFrom practical magic (“Jonathan Strange & Mr. Norrell”) to bare-knuckle politics (David Simon’s “Show Me a Hero”), from Cold War spies (“Deutschland 83”) to kung fu masters (“Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon: The Green Legend”) — here are 13 new series, mini-series and movies to watch out for on television this summer. (Dates are subject to change.)UnREALLifetime, June 1Marti Noxon (“Buffy the Vampire Slayer,” “Girlfriends’ Guide to Divorce”) is one of the creators of this potentially addictive behind-the-scenes comedy about a reality dating show. Constance Zimmer plays the abrasive show runner (Lou Grant without the twinkle) and Shiri Appleby the volatile contestant wrangler.The WhispersABC, June 1Several producers and writers from the CBS summer success “Under the Dome” are involved in this spooky ABC paranormal mystery. Based on a Ray Bradbury story, the scenario is: Your children are out to get you, possibly with the help of aliens. Lily Rabe stars as an F.B.I. agent.Sense8Netflix, June 5Eight people around the world find themselves linked, able to see and talk to one another, which comes in handy when the usual shadowy organization starts to hunt them down. This mystical thriller is the first series from Andy and Lana Wachowski (“The Matrix”), so expect it to be visually arresting and possibly bewildering. The mostly unfamiliar cast includes Daryl Hannah, Naveen Andrews and one international star, the elfin Korean actress Doona Bae, who also starred in the Wachowskis’ “Cloud Atlas.”Becoming UsABC Family, June 8Part of a small boom in shows about the transgender experience — Amazon’s “Transparent,” E!’s “Bruce Jenner Project” (July 26) — this upbeat reality series focuses on an Illinois teenager, Ben, whose father is transitioning from man to woman. To complicate matters — and answer a reality producer’s prayers — Ben’s girlfriend’s father is also transgender.Jonathan Strange & Mr. NorrellBBC America, June 13Bertie Carvel and Eddie Marsan play the “practical magicians” of the title in this ambitious, handsomely appointed adaptation of Susanna Clarke’s fantasy-historical novel. Even at seven hours, it will inspire fierce debate among fans of the nearly 800-page book over what’s been left out.Deutschland 83Sundance, June 17This eight-part Cold War thriller is being marketed as the first German-language series on an American network, but the subtitles may be less noticeable than the congruences with “The Americans,” as a young East German is recruited by a family member to go undercover in the West. It even begins exactly where the most recent season of “The Americans” ended, with a female Communist operative looking in amazement at a TV carrying Ronald Reagan’s “evil empire” speech.The BrinkHBO, June 21The longtime “Weeds” executive producer Roberto Benabib created this geopolitical satire, set in Pakistan and Washington, with his brother Kim. Aasif Mandvi is the Pakistani driver and Jack Black the American functionary who stumble onto the world stage together; Tim Robbins, in his largest TV role to date, is the philandering secretary of state.PoldarkPBS, June 21The sexiest show on American television in the mid-1970s was on PBS: the 18th-century soap opera “Poldark,” about the unlikely romance between Ross (hunky landowner) and Demelza (spunky servant girl). This deluxe BBC-“Masterpiece Theater” remake offers plenty to swoon over: the Cornwall landscapes, the period costumes and the star, Aidan Turner (who played the vampire in the original “Being Human”). British viewers complained on social media whenever episodes did not include a shirtless Ross.Mr. RobotUSA, June 24The pilot of this asocial-vigilante-hacker drama won an audience award at South by Southwest, probably less for its high-tech trappings and Snowden-esque fight-the-machine ethos than for the distinctive mood set by Rami Malek’s monotone, affectless narration. Christian Slater also stars.Sex&Drugs&Rock&RollFX, July 16Denis Leary lives a particular rock ’n’ roll dream: writing himself a role as a self-destructive New York punk rocker trying to make a comeback on the coattails of his talented daughter (Elizabeth Gillies of “Victorious”). He gets to perform his own songs, and he gets to write cameos for real musicians like Dave Grohl, who says with a straight face that without Mr. Leary’s character “I don’t think there would have been a Nirvana.”Show Me a HeroHBO, Aug. 16 Six episodes about Nicholas C. Wasicsko, the young mayor of Yonkers in the late 1980s who was at the center of a battle over housing desegregation — yes, it’s the latest HBO drama from David Simon, creator of “The Wire.” Oscar Isaac, poised for a new level of celebrity when the next “Star Wars” and “X-Men” films come out, plays Wasicsko in a cast that includes Alfred Molina, Winona Ryder, Catherine Keener and Terry Kinney.Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon: The Green Legend Netflix, Aug. 28Following up on its sucker punch to the TV industry, Netflix takes on the movie business with the first online premiere of a major feature film. Michelle Yeoh returns in this sequel to Ang Lee’s blockbuster “Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon,” directed by Quentin Tarantino’s favorite fight choreographer, Yuen Woo-ping.TodrickMTV, Aug. 31The former “American Idol” contestant Todrick Hall is now a YouTube star who can draw several million viewers for his elaborate videos riffing on Disney musicals, contemporary R&B and Beyoncé. This reality series promises to go behind the scenes with Mr. Hall and his crew as they produce a new video each week.If you’re looking for the return of a favorite show, here are some dates to keep in mind: “The Game” BET, June 3; “Hannibal” NBC, June 4; “Beauty and the Beast” CW, June 11; “Orange Is the New Black” Netflix, June 12; “True Detective” HBO, June 21; “The Strain” FX, July 12; “Masters of Sex” and “Ray Donovan” Showtime, July 12; “Welcome to Sweden” NBC, July 19; “Strike Back” Cinemax, July 31; “Human Resources” Pivot, Aug. 7; “Vicious” PBS, Aug. 23.Advertisement