
Playlist By                     
 JON CARAMANICA
 
MAY 22, 2015
JuggaknotsBaby Pictures [c. 1989-1993]Juggaknots were the great almost-weres of the mid-1990s New York independent hip-hop renaissance. The group’s stellar 1996 debut album “Clear Blue Skies” (Fondle ’Em) was one of that era’s essential documents, a dazzling show of lyricism and scrappy boom-bap purism. But despite a fitful mid-2000s comeback run, that’s remained the group’s defining statement. The excellent lost-tapes reissue “Baby Pictures [c. 1989-1993]” (Chopped Herring) helps color in the lines. Chopped Herring is an England-based obscurantist label with a particular interest in lost gems of northeastern American hip-hop of the 1990s, releasing limited vinyl batches of songs overlooked even by the network of bloggers who have long specialized in this sort of thing. Rescuing these old demos is essential archival work. “Baby Pictures” is full of limber party rhymes, skeletal but earthy musical arrangements and a confidence born of thinking no one was listening. “Ol Faithful,” especially, is a showcase for the rough-edged clinician Breeze Brewin, but mainly these songs cut their expertise with a playful edge. And in these carefree, protean moments, you can hear the template for the uprising to come.KehlaniYou Should Be HereThe promising young R&B singer Kehlani spends most of “You Should Be Here” weighed down by the fatigue of dealing with feckless romantic partners. On “Jealous,” it’s a partner with a phone full of old photos used as weapons. On “Down for You,” it’s someone who’d prefer to keep the boundaries between friend and lover blurry. And it’s not just love that lets Kehlani down. “The Letter” is about a mother who remains distant, and therefore an enigma: “I didn’t deserve you/Maybe I just couldn’t cure you,” Kehlani sings. On this, Kehlani’s second self-released album, there’s a calm swagger that underpins even the most anguished of these songs. She easily channels the attitude and swing of mid-1990s R&B girl groups, especially on “The Way,” a saucy face-off with Chance the Rapper. Kehlani will get her due, though. That’s clear on “Wanted,” where she’s the one in control: “I hate to be you watching him touch me/Now I am blessed to have what I need.”Nick CatchdubsSmoke MachineAs dance music and hip-hop have collided with increasing frequency in recent years, hybrids that were meant to underscore their similarities have often ended up doing the opposite: Hip-hop cool gets appropriated on the cheap, or clobbered by high-energy production that’s deaf to rapping’s subtleties. Nick Catchdubs is, along with the D.J.-producer A-Trak, a founder of the Fool’s Gold label, which has been successfully pulling these two worlds together for years. What’s so striking about “Smoke Machine,” Nick Catchdubs’s first proper album, is how sensitive it is to its guests’ particular vocal textures and cadences, making room for the tinny staccato rhymes of Jay Ant, the frenzied rantings of Roach Gigz and the woozy morality of Heems (who also does a decent Fatman Scoop imitation). Yes, these are rappers who can hold their own at high speeds, but Nick Catchdubs is best when importing club music texture into hip-hop structures, like on “Chromed Out,” or simply going full electro-rap on “Bizness.” And in places, “Smoke Machine” recalls the Crooklyn Clan, party breaks kings of the 1990s who specialized in turning hip-hop shouts into dance-floor anthems. Orthophonic Joy: The 1927 Bristol Sessions RevisitedWhen Victor Records set up shop in Bristol, Tenn., on the border with Virginia, in the summer of 1927, would-be musicians came from all over, lured by the promise of a $50 upfront payment for recording a song and the promise of untold royalties if the song was a success. The result was a genuine groundswell — several dozen songs, including the first commercial recordings of the Carter Family among others. Much of the template for country music was laid down here. Last year, the Birthplace of Country Music Museum opened in Bristol, Va., and the new compilation “Orthophonic Joy: The 1927 Bristol Sessions Revisited” (Legacy/Sony) is a benefit for it. It features covers of songs from the Bristol sessions by modern country music luminaries interspersed with historical narration by the Grand Ole Opry M.C. Eddie Stubbs. Those who do best are the ones able to strip themselves clean of modernity and embrace the bare-bones charm of the originals. The bluegrass stalwarts Doyle Lawson & Quicksilver achieve a lovely, swaying breeze on “I’m Redeemed,” and Dolly Parton’s interpretation of “When They Ring Those Golden Bells” is affectionate and sweet. One of the most faithful reads, though, comes from maybe the youngest artists here: the twin sister bluegrass outfit the Church Sisters, who handle “Where We’ll Never Grow Old” like a dear old relative, embracing it warmly and with care.A version of this article appears in print on May 24, 2015, on Page AR17 of the New York edition with the headline: Fresh R&B;, Retro Hip-Hop, Foundational Country.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »