By JOE COSCARELLIMAY 22, 2015
Overeducated and underemployed during the financial crisis in 2009, Franklin James Fisher, the singer of the protest band Algiers, took a job as a bilingual receptionist at a French investment bank. While he formed some lasting friendships at the New York office, it was “an old boys’ club,” he said, recalling rampant racism and sexism. “A really nasty atmosphere.”“It sent me to therapy after a while,” he added.It also helped birth a striking, impeccably timed debut album, “Algiers” (Matador), out June 2, which marries the ambient doom of those post-crash days and more recent unrest in Ferguson, Mo., and Baltimore with a full-throated critique of the systems responsible. Algiers puts its politics over industrial drum machines and raucous Southern hymns, finding common cause in the shouts and claps of punk and gospel.Mr. Fisher, 33, was raised in suburban Atlanta, where he met his bandmates, Ryan Mahan and Lee Tesche, before spending time in France and at King’s College London. While the pursuit of graduate degrees spread them across three countries, they wrote songs by file-swapping online and kept a mood board of influences (James Baldwin, German post-punk, Public Enemy) on a shared Tumblr. The resulting polemics on religion, race and late capitalism, with titles like “Black Eunuch” and “Blood,” are vicious and dense. The band will play at the Mercury Lounge on June 9 and Baby’s All Right in Brooklyn on June 10.In a recent interview, Mr. Fisher, who has a loud and easy laugh, talked about protest culture and discovering punk. These are excerpts from the conversation.AdvertisementQ. When did you realize you had complicated feelings about growing up in the American South? A. When I was 17, my cousin took me to London for Christmas vacation, and it completely blew my mind. I was one of the only black kids in my community for a really long time. Some people abroad still have a very romanticized view of the South, like it’s an updated version of “Gone With the Wind.” People don’t realize what it is now. It’s a consumer culture: Target and strip malls and grocery stores. It’s really alienating, but you don’t realize that until you can leave.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.What was your relationship to the church and gospel music as a kid? It’s very much a part of who I am, not just on a spiritual level but on a cultural level. Where I grew up, my dad was the second black doctor ever in that county. In the early ’80s, we wound up going to a predominantly white church as a social necessity for him to blend into that community. But my sisters and I knew the music my parents grew up with in North Carolina, where I was born. We would listen to it in the car on the way to church, and then we got there and the party was over. Because we had limited access to it, it made it all the more poignant.How did you develop your singing voice? I still don’t consider myself a singer. In the black community, if you’re going to call yourself a singer you better sound like D’Angelo. It wasn’t until I started getting into punk music that I embraced this idea that it’s O.K. if it doesn’t sound pristine and is rough around the edges.Do you feel a sense of momentum with the protests from Ferguson to Baltimore, or do you see it as another chapter in an ongoing struggle? It’s both. Police violence is just one of the last, most obvious forms of institutional violence in a long thread of it. Now it’s part of the national discourse, which is really healthy because it can’t keep happening. I was more ambivalent about a month or two ago. Something’s definitely happening, and I don’t know where we’re going to wind up next. People are definitely mobilizing; it just needs to be in a constructive manner.A version of this article appears in print on May 24, 2015, on Page AR2 of the New York edition with the headline: A Collision of Punk and Gospel.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.