AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben SisarioThroughout a surprise club show in Brooklyn this month, Florence Welch of the British rock band Florence and the Machine was stuck on a stool. It was a strange confinement for a performer whose natural state is crisscrossing a festival stage as her red mane and silken gowns float in the breeze. Which is pretty much what she was doing at Coachella last month before she jumped into the crowd and broke her right foot.Her injury threatened the choreographed campaign behind “How Big How Blue How Beautiful,” the group’s third album, which comes out June 2 after a four-year wait. Expectations are high. Since 2009, without really cracking pop radio, the band has sold millions of records with baroque, surrealistic songs like “Dog Days Are Over,” and Ms. Welch’s magnetic stage persona has raised her profile at a time when mainstream female rock stars are rare. As Avery Lipman, the president of Republic Records, the band’s American label, put it, “We will not be satisfied with anything but a No. 1 release.”But over coffee the day after the Brooklyn show, Ms. Welch, 28, described her scaled-down promotional shows as an opportunity. While Florence and the Machine rose by celebrating elaborate, dramatic artifice — lots of twinkling harps and Lady of Shalott costumes — the new album is rawer and less adorned, with Ms. Welch detailing a failed relationship.“So much of this new record was about stripping down layers of things to hide behind — big sounds, big dresses, metaphor,” Ms. Welch said. “There’s something kind of nice about being able to do these shows acoustic and stripped-down. You’re forced to be yourself, your absolute self.” She paused. “I would have preferred to maybe not break my foot,” she added, and broke into a roaring laugh.The Coachella spill would not be the first twist in the rise of Florence and the Machine, which has taken a circuitous route to success through touring, film placements and the occasional dance remix. Ms. Welch’s highest position on Billboard’s singles chart was as a featured vocalist on Calvin Harris’s 2012 dance hit “Sweet Nothing,” which went to No. 10.Ms. Welch has also been a muse for top designers like Riccardo Tisci, the creative director of Givenchy, which has made her a front-row presence at fashion shows and a mainstay in style magazines and blogs. Mr. Tisci has dressed Ms. Welch for the Grammys and the Met Gala, and made her part of his celebrity rat pack along with Kanye West and Liv Tyler.“We have something in common,” Mr. Tisci said. “We know how to take a risk to the edge between elegance and craziness.”Meeting in a SoHo hotel lounge, Ms. Welch was helped to her seat by a publicist, and wore a sheer black top that revealed a black bra and layers of upscale hippie jewelry. When she speaks, she tends to come in like a soft-spoken lamb and go out like a lioness, her belly laughs turning seemingly every head in a room.“This album was about tackling those two sides of my personality — the extrovert, this extreme freedom that often results in broken bones and the person who is quite restrained,” she said. “When the break happened, it was almost the quiet person who had written the album and then had to take over.” From its first song, “Ship to Wreck,” a blast of anger and self-doubt, “How Big How Blue” has a driving, rock ’n’ roll pulse, while Ms. Welch’s lyrics take aim at an indecisive partner. In “What Kind of Man,” she relays a dreamlike scene of “trying to cross a canyon with a broken limb” and tells her lover, “You were on the other side, like always/Wondering what to do with life.” (“Songs become like strange predictions,” Ms. Welch says now of the “broken limb” line.)“When I was younger, it was about these dark, gothic, imaginary folk tales,” she said. “With the intensity of feeling on this record, it was just clear to me I couldn’t hide anymore.”In branding terms, it’s a reboot. While Florence and the Machine’s early videos were high-concept productions with Ms. Welch in extreme gownage, the newer ones show her in domestic scenes, arguing with a man. “Ship to Wreck” was even shot at Ms. Welch’s home in London.Those changes strike some of Ms. Welch’s early supporters in the music industry as a calculated effort to make her more marketable. “I think she had become this very imposing figure, unapproachable and cold in a way,” said Jason Bentley of KCRW, the influential public radio station in Santa Monica, Calif. “I have the sense that they are trying to cast her in a more approachable and vulnerable light with this album, presenting the quirkiness and individuality of an artist.” Of course, she has always been quirky and individual, with a knack for writing gorgeously gloomy fantasies with anthemic choruses, and a stage approach that made her pop’s most intensely theatrical performer this side of Lady Gaga. A decade ago, while still a teenager, Ms. Welch began making music with Isabella Summers, her friend and partner in crime, using names like Florrible and Misrabella and Florence Robot/Isa Machine. The rest of the band took shape after Ms. Welch was signed to a record deal in 2008, with Ms. Summers on keyboards, Rob Ackroyd on guitar, Mark Saunders on bass, Chris Hayden on drums and Tom Monger as the busy harpist. When the band’s debut album, “Lungs,” came out in 2009, Mr. Lipman said, the label hoped for 50,000 sales; it eventually reached 1.3 million, helped by the inclusion of “Dog Days Are Over” in the trailer for the Julia Roberts movie “Eat Pray Love.” The band’s performance of that song at the MTV Video Music Awards in September 2010 was its introduction to the American mainstream, which continued with “Saturday Night Live” and a spot opening for U2 in stadiums. From the beginning, Ms. Welch attracted fashion brands like Mulberry and Gucci. Karl Lagerfeld tapped her for an eye-catching performance at a Chanel show in Paris in 2011 — a giant clam shell opened up to reveal her in white and silver, like a magical mermaid.“Florence put a couture spin on bohemian chic, which is so big with posh young London women,” said Bronwyn Cosgrave, a fashion historian and the author of “Made for Each Other: Fashion and the Academy Awards.” “Florence just did it with a more French, fashion-forward edge.”Fashion fame has given Ms. Welch a special kind of cultural currency and introduced her to a wider global audience. But when it comes to the pop marketplace, that exposure matters less than a hit song and a strong stage show.“It helps people be more aware of what she is wearing and how she makes those choices,” Hannah Giannoulis, one of Ms. Welch’s two managers, said of her fashion presence, “but I don’t know how much that translates into selling her albums or her tickets.”A star by her early 20s, Ms. Welch also took eagerly to the decadent lifestyle that British rock stars so excel at, her every heavy-lidded party exit documented by the London tabloids. Today, Ms. Welch and Ms. Summers giggle with half-remembered stories of drunken debauchery on the road — something about ending up in a tiger costume and covered in fake blood, or “up a tree dressed like Elton John.” The party continued even after the tour for “Ceremonials” (2011) ended, as Ms. Welch struggled to start her life as an adult and an exhausting on-off relationship finally ended. While in Los Angeles, where Ms. Summers now lives, the two experimented with a concept album that Ms. Welch said quickly veered into studio self-indulgence. At the same time, she was writing simpler, more personal songs about her unraveling relationship. She presented them to Markus Dravs, the album’s producer, who encouraged her to strip everything down as much as possible. To write the songs, she delved into the feelings of indulgence and its aftermath and picking up the pieces afterward. “St. Jude,” one of the most powerful tracks on the record, is a softly pulsing meditation on letting go.“I’m fun up to a point, and then it gets destructive,” she said. “That’s how I wrote ‘Ship to Wreck.’ It was: ‘What have I done? Oh my God! Why do I keep doing this?’ It’s that feeling that you love something so much, and it’s always the first thing to break.”Ms. Welch got sober and dedicated herself to the work, arriving at the studio by bike every day. “There’s nothing starlike about Florence unless of course when she’s putting on a show,” Mr. Dravs said. “But in her day-to-day work commitment, she gives you 100 percent.”The new album has almost no harp. But Ms. Welch couldn’t resist some ornamentation, and so there is piccolo trumpet and multiple euphoniums. The album’s title song, inspired by the Los Angeles skyline, has a string and brass section three dozen strong. This summer, the band will tour widely, including major festivals like Governors Ball in New York on June 5. Her foot, she said, should be healed by Glastonbury, the giant British festival from June 24 to 28.The songs have already had a strong reception on alternative radio stations but once again have not reached the pop sphere that drives the biggest record sales. Jess Besack, who programs the Spectrum, a channel on SiriusXM that plays acts like Adele, U2 and Mumford & Sons, contrasted the new songs with the “young girl’s daydream” of earlier Florence and the Machine records. “She can talk about heartbreak in a way that real women and real girls experience,” Ms. Besack said.And naturally, Ms. Welch’s musical recasting has affected her stage wardrobe. She has moved on from the “Lord of the Rings”-meets-Stevie Nicks gowns and capes and embraced a more androgynous look. At the first weekend of Coachella, where she broke her foot, Ms. Welch was wearing a white pantsuit that she says was directly inspired by Nick Cave, the Australian rock star and author. “I want to be able to move, and I want to be able to feel strong,” Ms. Welch said. “I love gowns, I love dressing up, but I don’t want to feel restricted by anything.”Advertisement