AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn Shattuck8 P.M. (Bravo) INSIDE THE ACTORS STUDIO In the shattering drama “I Smile Back,” opening Friday, Sarah Silverman is a mentally ill housewife with addiction issues. In this interview with James Lipton, she talks about her own struggle with depression; her 2011 memoir, “The Bedwetter”; the setbacks that defined her future as a performer; and her experiences as a pioneering female comedian. (Image: Ms. Silverman and Josh Charles in “I Smile Back”)12:55 P.M. (Encore) THE ROYAL TENENBAUMS (2001) Bring on the brats: Ben Stiller, Gwyneth Paltrow and Luke Wilson tap into their petulant sides to play grown-up prodigies — a financial whiz, an award-winning playwright and a tennis champion — whose estranged father wants to weasel his way back into the fold. This Wes Anderson comedy is set in a fantasy New York with a fantastic ensemble, including Gene Hackman, Anjelica Huston, Owen Wilson, Bill Murray and Alec Baldwin.The movie is “at once endearing and unbearably show-offy” and “finally elicits an exasperated admiration,” A. O. Scott wrote in The New York Times. “Yes, yes, you’re charming, you’re brilliant. Now say good night and go to bed.” (Image: Mr. Hackman)8 P.M. (Fox) BONES Is there anything this woman can’t do? Betty White guest stars as a brilliant forensic anthropologist called in to investigate the remains of a real estate agent gnawed on by some coyote-wolf hybrids. Turns out she has a thing for fantasy football, just like the victim, who was owed a chunk of money by the N.F.L. commissioner and mired in a Twitter feud with one of its stars, played by the former Tampa Bay Buccaneer Ronde Barber.8 P.M. (Flix) WHITE FANG (1991) This one’s a wolf-dog hybrid — Jack London’s — enduring the Klondike gold rush, and the young man who loves him, played by Ethan Hawke. It’s not “Lassie.”8 P.M. (ABC) GREY’S ANATOMY The show hits its 250th episode as everyone finally meets Callie’s new girlfriend — you know, the one who couldn’t save Derek’s life. Shonda Rhimes Night continues with “Scandal,” at 9, in which Olivia asks to be rescued. And in “How to Get Away With Murder,” at 10, Asher demands to speak with Annalise. Alone. Now.9 P.M. (NBC) THE BLACKLIST Red goes in search of a woman called the Djinn, whose specialty is revenge fantasies. In “The Player,” at 10, a student hacks into the Pentagon and is pursued by the Chinese government while the house places a bet.10 P.M. (Comedy Central) NATHAN FOR YOU Nathan Fielder figures out how a ranch can accommodate hefty horseback riders, creates a man zone in a women’s boutique and discovers that he may have committed a hate crime.10 P.M. (TruTV) BILLY ON THE STREET Anna Kendrick takes a quiz on Katy Perry’s cat, Kitty Purry, and helps Billy Eichner find love using Tinder.What’s Streaming NowCARNEGIE HALL LIVE Andris Nelsons conducts the Boston Symphony Orchestra in Rachmaninoff’s Symphonic Dances and Prokofiev’s “Alexander Nevsky,” featuring the mezzo-soprano Nadezhda Serdyuk and the Tanglewood Festival Chorus. Thursday at 8 p.m. (carnegiehall.org, wqxr.org)THE UMBRELLAS OF CHERBOURG (1965) Catherine Deneuve, in her breakthrough role, is an umbrella seller’s ravishing daughter in coastal Normandy, adored by Nino Castelnuovo’s handsome auto mechanic, who must leave her behind when he’s drafted into the Algerian War. Michel Legrand wrote the score to this rainbow-hued movie musical from Jacques Demy, including the hit “I Will Wait for You.” Writing in The Times, Bosley Crowther called it “a cinematic confection so shiny and sleek and sugar-sweet — so studiously sentimental — it comes suspiciously close to a spoof.” (fandor.com) (Image: Ms. Deneuve)Advertisement