By KATHRYN SHATTUCKMAY 25, 2015
3 P.M. (FX Movie Channel) THE HURT LOCKER (2009) In this Oscar winner for best picture, the director, Kathryn Bigelow, focuses on the men of an Army unit whose job is to detect and defuse — or if that doesn’t work, detonate — improvised explosive devices in Iraq. The unit’s wild card is Staff Sgt. William James (Jeremy Renner, above left, with Anthony Mackie), who “looks like a man having the time of his life,” A. O. Scott wrote in The New York Times, as “he approaches each new bomb or skirmish not with dread but with a kind of inspired, improvisational zeal.” He added, “Ms. Bigelow, practicing a kind of hyperbolic realism, distills the psychological essence and moral complications of modern warfare into a series of brilliant, agonizing set pieces.”7 A.M. (CUNY) ONE TO ONE Mary Norris, a copy editor at The New Yorker, talks about her memoir cum usage guide, “Between You & Me: Confessions of a Comma Queen.”NOON (Yes) A SOLDIER’S STORY This 12-minute film — part of pregame coverage of the New York Yankees-Kansas City Royals match starting at 1 p.m. — pays tribute to Maj. Stephen Reich, who served four tours of duty in Afghanistan before being killed in June 2005 during a mission to save a Navy SEAL team, the basis for the 2013 film “Lone Survivor.” Major Reich, a pitcher at the United States Military Academy at West Point, where he had the most wins for a pitcher in the academy’s history, played only two professional games for a Baltimore Orioles farm team before being summoned back to active duty.12:30 P.M. (TCM) FROM HERE TO ETERNITY (1953) Soldiers, their women and the days leading up to Pearl Harbor, as inspired by the James Jones novel. The outstanding cast of Fred Zinnemann’s Oscar-winning adaptation includes Montgomery Clift, Frank Sinatra and Ernest Borgnine. But the best part is watching Burt Lancaster and Deborah Kerr’s immortal kiss.Advertisement6 P.M. (AMC) SAVING PRIVATE RYAN (1998) Tom Hanks stars as Capt. John Miller, a World War II squad leader sent to find a soldier (Matt Damon), lost somewhere in Normandy, whose brothers have died in combat. Steven Spielberg directed this graphic, Oscar-winning drama, which Janet Maslin, writing in The Times, called “soberly magnificent.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.9 P.M. (History) TEXAS RISING Sam Houston (Bill Paxton) and Gen. Antonio López de Santa Anna (Olivier Martinez) jockey for strategic advantage after the battle at the Alamo in this mini-series, directed by Roland Joffé. The cast also includes Jeffrey Dean Morgan as the Texas Ranger Deaf Smith; Cynthia Addai-Robinson as Emily West, the bed-hopping information gatherer known as the Yellow Rose of Texas; Ray Liotta as the wild-eye Lorca, who rises from a mass grave to exact revenge on a solo mission; and Kris Kristofferson as President Andrew Jackson. But “a story that seems as if it should be characterized by adventure and derring-do instead is often as flat and drab as a Western plain,” Neil Genzlinger wrote in The Times. “The result is just a disjointed collection of clichés, often staged with the clumsiness of bad community theater.”10 P.M. (NBC) THE ISLAND The survivalist Bear Grylls drops 14 men on a deserted island and leaves them to hunt for food, source water, build shelter and establish a community with only minimal tools, the clothes on their back and a camera with which to film it all. The only prize: bragging rights.AdvertisementWhat’s Streaming NowMASTERS OF SEX Michael Sheen and Lizzy Caplan (below) star as Dr. William Masters and his collaborator, Virginia Johnson, who sought to demystify arousal during the dark ages before the sexual revolution. He was a brilliant, obsessed and often imperious surgeon determined to make his name by decoding the physiology of pleasure. She was a former nightclub singer and sexually liberated woman with a desire for a career and a deft touch with people. Together they spent thousands of hours researching the arousal stages of subjects wired to monitors during intercourse, masturbation and other sexual activity. They also had lots of sex with each other. There’s time to brush up on Seasons 1 and 2 before the third round of this Showtime drama begins on July 12. (showtimeanytime.com, iTunes) KATHRYN SHATTUCKA version of this schedule appears in print on May 25, 2015, on Page C7 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Monday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.