By CORINNA da FONSECA-WOLLHEIMMAY 24, 2015
African-American stories are rarely reflected in opera. But within the span of three weeks, three composers have brought new works to the stage that draw their subject matter from black history.On May 15, the composer Frances Pollock unveiled an opera, at 2640 Space in Baltimore, about George Stinney Jr., a black 14-year-old from South Carolina who was wrongly executed for the murder of two white girls in 1944. On June 5, Opera Philadelphia will present Daniel Schnyder’s “Charlie Parker’s Yardbird,” about that jazz saxophonist and composer, with the tenor Lawrence Brownlee in the title role. And last weekend at Roulette in Brooklyn, George Lewis, a composer, jazz trombonist and scholar on the faculty of Columbia University, presented “Afterword, the AACM (as) Opera.”The acronym in the title stands for the Association for the Advancement of Creative Musicians, which was founded on the South Side of Chicago in 1965 to foster experimental music by black musicians, many of whom had fled the repressive cultural climate of the South. In 2008, Mr. Lewis wrote a book about the organization’s history to which this work, scored for singers and chamber orchestra, forms the “afterword.” Though there was much to admire about Mr. Lewis’s innovative orchestration, he never succeeded in putting emotional muscle on the bones of social history. Institutions don’t make for compelling characters onstage.To be fair, the performance I witnessed on Saturday, conducted by David Fulmer and featuring the International Contemporary Ensemble and a trio of impressive vocal soloists, was merely a concert version. The final version of the opera will be unveiled at the Museum of Contemporary Art in Chicago in October with additional visual and dramatic components.AdvertisementThe singers, the tenor Julian Terrell Otis, the contralto Gwendolyn Brown and the soprano Joelle Lamarre, did not represent specific characters but shared in the delivery of lines taken from Mr. Lewis’s interviews with association members. As a result, the voices of musicians who recount the humiliations of Jim Crow law in the South, the hardships of migration and the struggle for self-determination and creative independence remain oddly disembodied. The single voice is often drowned out by group rhetoric.Perhaps inevitably in a biopic of an institution, procedural entanglements stand in for drama. The choice of name and acronym are the focus of one scene. Another climaxes on a motion to adjourn.AdvertisementAll this is set to music that is bracingly dissonant, with spiky vocal lines and fragmented utterances from the ensemble. The most arresting moments are the instrumental interludes (and one a cappella trio of virtuosic hisses, tongue clicks and ululations) that link one scene to the next. Mr. Lewis’s astute ear for expressive and unusual sounds and his command of structured improvisation brought forth music that was evocative, atmospheric and — potentially — pregnant with psychological nuance. All that was missing: flesh-and-blood characters.A version of this review appears in print on May 25, 2015, on Page C4 of the New York edition with the headline: An Operatic Voice Behind Stories of Black History.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.