AdvertisementSupported byBy Neil GenzlingerThe word “Alaska” or a variant of it in a reality-show title sets you up for low expectations. “The Last Alaskans,” an affecting series that begins Monday on Animal Planet, defies quite a few of them.Where Alaska-based shows about truckers, pilots, gold miners, fishermen or survival-competition yahoos tend to be characterized by humans-against-nature bravura, this one thrives on sensitivity and solitude. It’s about the handful of people who still live at least part of the year in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge in northeast Alaska, their right to do so grandfathered in.“In 1980, the U.S. government banned new human occupation from the refuge,” the program explains. “Only seven cabin permits remain.”And then we meet an assortment of these residents, living in isolation (they are widely separated from one another), though some electronic contact with the rest of the world is evident. This is in some sense just another survivalist show — these hardy people try to live off nature, so much of any given episode involves the hunting of moose or caribou, the catching of salmon.“I tell you, caribou heart, caribou kidneys, caribou liver and caribou stomach — boy, you couldn’t ask for a better meal than that,” says Heimo Korth, whose story was previously told in a Vice documentary, in the book “The Final Frontiersman” and elsewhere.But unlike in other shows, here the quests for sustenance are presented merely as facts of life. The compelling part of the series is the why: Why live like this?The answers vary, and though sometimes the subjects address the question directly, for the most part their reasons emerge only slowly, as the patient camera lets you get to know them. Mr. Korth and his wife, Edna, have a particularly heart-rending reason to stay. Another resident, Tyler Selden, describes the lifestyle as a kind of addiction, and like drug or alcohol addictions, it has cost some of these people relationships. Plenty of Americans dream of going off the grid, but the bittersweet message of this series is that solitude, sometimes blissful, also entails a certain melancholy. Oh, and beyond that, wilderness living is just plain hard.“Everything’s work,” says Bob Harte, who lives by himself, as he tries to drag a heavy engine to his boat alone. “It’s work putting the boat in. It’s work taking it out. It’s easy to die up here. Everything else is work.”Advertisement