AdvertisementSupported byBy Gia KourlasIn 1977, when Chuck Davis planted the first seed for his DanceAfrica festival, he presented his company in the Lepercq Space at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, where he built an African village. Now in its 38th year, the event continues at the academy’s opera house as a beloved tradition that rings in Memorial Day weekend with a cacophonous bang.The festival, which began with a performance on Friday, marks Mr. Davis’s final year as the artistic director of DanceAfrica, which includes an outdoor bazaar and a film series. Next year he passes the reins to the artistic director designate, Abdel R. Salaam, who helped to organize the 2015 installment subtitled “Brazilian Rhythms. African Roots.” Even though the program was capped by Balé Folclórico da Bahia, a Brazilian company, the night was all about bidding a fond — and percussive — farewell to Mr. Davis. The first half featured the youthful, adorably vigorous BAM/Restoration DanceAfrica Ensemble, along with Bambara Drum and Dance Ensemble, from the Bronx, in “Unchained,” a scintillating arrangement of West African dances. The drumming just about shook the theater. But after intermission, a lethargy set in with the presentation of the recipients of the academy’s Samuel H. Scripps Scholarships, as well as the announcement of the new Baba Chuck Davis Emerging Choreographer Scholarship. Was this an award show or a performance? After the program passed the three-hour mark, the problem became clear: editing. This was at least two shows rolled into one.At least Balé Folclórico’s African-influenced folkloric dances, with vibrant touches of capoeira and samba, were worth waiting for. The company presented “Sacred Heritage,” featuring short works that paid honor to African deities, including Ednei Cruz’s vehement god of iron and war as part of “Xirê,” and Nildinha Fonseca’s stately, shimmering sea goddess — during which a piece of her dress turned into a net — in “Puxada de Rede” (“Fishermen’s Dance”). A capoeira section demonstrated the male dancers’ acrobatic sinuousness. But the most vivid moments occurred at either end of the performance. In the peaceful beginning, performers, bathed by orange lights, entered through the aisles and took a long pause. For the raucous finale, they departed the way they came in, dancing and drumming up the aisles, but this time they continued out onto the street. Just like that, a pop-up Brazilian carnival was born. DanceAfrica 2015 continues through Monday at the Brooklyn Academy of Music’s Howard Gilman Opera House, 30 Lafayette Avenue, Fort Greene, Brooklyn; 718-636-4100, bam.org. Advertisement