AdvertisementSupported byBy Alastair MacaulayEvery year, American Ballet Theater announces, more than half a year in advance, not only some eight or nine programs for its eight-week May-July season at the Metropolitan Opera House but, for some of them, as many as eight casts. This establishes a climate of balletomania, where dancers matter as much as repertory; and usually the Met balletomanes reach peak frenzy in late June, with Ballet Theater’s productions of “Romeo and Juliet” (love, death and acting) and “Swan Lake” (love, death and fouetté turns). But its production of “Giselle” (love, death and dance, dance, dance) gives the fans their richest reward. The staging, by its artistic director, Kevin McKenzie, is good (so good you want it improved), with picturesque scenery by Gianni Quaranta and costumes by Anna Anni. In both Act I’s village setting and Act II’s in the forest graveside, this “Giselle” creates a real world, tells a serious story and sustains this ballet’s status as an enduring classic. And the roles of Giselle and Albrecht are challenging and revealing — which anyone can see at a first viewing — while changing considerably with each performer.Ballet Theater gives its audiences deluxe casting in this ballet; no company in the world offers such choices. Saturday evening was a special occasion, with Mr. McKenzie onstage welcoming the 200 past and present members of the company who were in the audience, with several Giselles and Albrechts of note among them. (My row contained Nina Ananiashvili, who made her farewell to Ballet Theater in 2009; I saw her first Giselle in 1986, with the Bolshoi Ballet in Paris; she looks as fresh as she did then.) Stella Abrera, a soloist who joined Ballet Theater in 1996, has often danced in Act II as Myrta, queen of the spectral wilis. In her company debut, in the title role (which she has danced elsewhere), she was replacing the injured Polina Semionova, who has withdrawn from the 2015 season, but the audience greeted her with the warmth usually reserved for the most revered ballerinas. Some of her dancing was luminous, and all of it was stylish and heartfelt; but above all in Act II, where the dead Giselle dances to save her living lover, Albrecht, from death, she made it clear that dance was a spiritual act. Her steps were filled with yearning for him and devotion to dance itself.Her partner was the boyish, endearing Vladimir Shklyarov, who has rapidly risen to become the foremost male dancer of St. Petersburg’s Mariinsky Ballet. New York first saw him with that company in 2011 (and again this January), and he made his Ballet Theater debut in 2014 in “La Bayadère” (the other classic in which a hero communes in dance with a dead heroine whose forgiveness he seeks). He matched Ms. Abrera in terms of devotion: Ardor beamed outward from his steps. His dozens of glittering entrechat-six — his feet rapidly crisscrossing in the air while his arms slowly ascended as if to suggest he was reaching a transcendent delirium — will stay in memory. The matinee on Saturday featured Isabella Boylston and Alexandre Hammoudi. Mr. Hammoudi, tall and slender with dark, suffering eyes, makes Albrecht a noble martyr along conventional lines, correct but uninteresting. Ms. Boylston is moving into the front rank of the American front rank. A few small things hold her back from greatness as Giselle (“streaked” hair; a variable emphasis on ornamentally angled wrists; eyes that do not let the audience into her mind); and she does not yet do much to suggest the role’s spiritual dimension. But her dancing has many glorious features — not least the extraordinary buoyancy with which she takes to the air as if it were her home. And the best sign of her rare artistry is the way she brings music keenly into focus.“Giselle” is in repertory through Thursday at the Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center; 212-362-6000, abt.org. Advertisement