The performance artist Karen Finley, the writer Wayne Koestenbaum and the free-form-radio d.j. Vin Scelsa are among those who will lead “participatory walks” and other events around various corners of New York as part of the arts group Elastic City’s second annual festival.The festival, which will take place from July 7 to Aug. 18, is dedicated to “exploring various planes of human and aesthetic experience” by getting outside the confines of the traditional artist talk — often by going literally outside.During Mr. Koestenbaum’s session, titled “Making Marks,” participants will start at 441 E. Ninth Street, where Frank O’Hara lived when he wrote his poem “Second Avenue.” From there they will start ambling, writing and drawing as they go using “pencil, pen, stick, stone, scrap, spit” and other substances. In Ms. Finley’s piece, “Sea Glass Mermaid,” she and her daughter, Violet Overn, will lead a group along a beach in the Rockaways, where they will “create living tableaus” from flotsam and jetsam and “be castaways for a day.” (Most of the walks will be repeated more than once; all are free. Reservations and more information at www.elastic-city.org/artists.)There will also be walks through Prospect Park and unspecified hotel and office corridors, as well as events at indoor locations like the Sunview Luncheonette in Greenpoint, Brooklyn, where Mr. Scelsa will appear in conversation on Aug. 9 with his daughter, Kate, a young adult novelist, and his wife, Freddie, a “self-proclaimed ‘professional audience member.’” That event is not the only family affair on the program. In an event called “The Man I Love,” held on Aug. 17, the classical pianist Leon Fleisher will appear with his son, the singer-songwriter and actor Julian Fleisher, for an evening summed up in the program as: “Dad’s downtown, there’s a piano, and Julian’s making the arrangements.”A version of this article appears in print on 05/26/2015, on page C3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Elastic City, Family Style.