AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn ShattuckMIDNIGHT (TCM) PAPILLON (1973) Steve McQueen (left, with Dustin Hoffman) stars as Henri Charrière, a.k.a. Papillon, an honorable safecracker framed for the murder of a pimp and sentenced to life in a penal colony on Devil’s Island, off the coast of French Guiana. Mr. Hoffman plays his best friend, Louis Dega, a convicted counterfeiter with bad eyesight and enough money to buy Papillon as his bodyguard. After a hairbreadth escape, Papillon is befriended by Indians who “inhabit what looks to be the West Indies’ newest and most chic island resort and cabana colony and, to be hospitable, present him with his very own Dorothy Lamour, a maiden named Zoraima who is played by Ratna Assan,” Vincent Canby wrote in The New York Times. “Though its native girls go topless, and the production budget was huge, ‘Papillon’ is the escapist movie we used to go see on Saturday night without even bothering to read the marquee.”7:40 A.M. (Cinemax) CRIMES AND MISDEMEANORS (1989) When the mistress (Anjelica Huston) of an ophthalmologist, Judah Rosenthal (Martin Landau), threatens to go public with their affair and his unethical financial dealings, he has his brother (Jerry Orbach), who has mob connections, set up her killing. Woody Allen received nominations for best director and best screenplay for this film, in which he plays Cliff Stern, a married documentarian infatuated with another woman (Mia Farrow). Sam Waterston is Judah’s best friend, a rabbi; Alan Alda is a TV producer and Cliff’s brother-in-law. “The wonder of ‘Crimes and Misdemeanors’ is the facility with which Mr. Allen deals with so many interlocking stories of so many differing tones and voices,” Vincent Canby wrote in The Times. “The film cuts back and forth between parallel incidents and between present and past with the effortlessness of a hip, contemporary Aesop.”8:15 A.M. (Sundance) DR. T AND THE WOMEN (2000) The most popular gynecologist in Dallas (Richard Gere, above with Helen Hunt) experiences an onslaught of problems: an emotionally troubled wife (Farrah Fawcett) and her flighty sister (Laura Dern), a daughter (Kate Hudson) about to be married and a fetching new golf pro (Ms. Hunt). Writing in The Times, A. O. Scott called Mr. Gere’s performance in this Robert Altman film “relaxed and generous, a show of beleaguered, sincere chivalry.”8 P.M. (Fox) ARE YOU SMARTER THAN A FIFTH GRADER? A new crop of young brainiacs, overseen by Jeff Foxworthy, helps adults remember all they’ve forgotten since elementary school.8 P.M. (NBC) AMERICA’S GOT TALENT  This two-hour, 10th-season premiere introduces new features to the show, including an enhanced Golden Buzzer that judges can hit for an exceptional performance, a reconfigured audition process and extreme acts filmed in Pomona, Calif. Heidi Klum, Howard Stern, Howie Mandel and Melanie Brown return as judges; Nick Cannon hosts.9 P.M. (ABC) EXTREME WEIGHT LOSS In this Season 5 opener, Chris and Heidi Powell, trainers and coaches specializing in the “superobese” help Robert (381 pounds) and Raymond (378 pounds), twins and former high school basketball players, get fit. N.B.A. players past and present — among them Kobe Bryant and James Worthy — offer inspiration.10 P.M. (NBC) I CAN DO THAT Six celebrities — the choreographer Cheryl Burke; the musicians Ciara, Joe Jonas and Nicole Scherzinger; the comedian Jeff Dye; and the actor Alan Ritchson — try to master famous routines, starting with acts by the Harlem Globetrotters and Penn & Teller. 10 P.M. (Esquire) KNIFE FIGHT Ilan Hall moves his underground cooking contest from Los Angeles to New York, where he challenges chefs to use alligator, python, frogs, turtles and eel — some of them still breathing.10 P.M. (13, 49) OBAMA AT WAR “Frontline” traces the Obama administration’s struggle to deal with the civil war in Syria, exacerbated by the rise of the Islamic State.What’s Streaming NowBETWEEN When a mysterious disease wipes out everybody in a town who is older than 21, the government quarantines those within 10 miles and leaves them to fend for themselves in this polite, low-budget Canadian science-fiction series. (netflix.com) KATHRYN SHATTUCKAdvertisement