AdvertisementSupported byBy Alastair MacaulayAs the current New York City Ballet season advances, every performance brings a sharp change in the company barometer. Not all the news is good news. Some valued dancers have been absent with injuries; some tedious ballets have returned to repertory; some casting has made good choreography look no more substantial than cotton candy; and some debuts of important dancers in important roles haven’t worked out.Still, some engaging choreography has returned; the company’s production of “La Sylphide” (which had its debut on May 7) has been settling in with successive casts; and a number of talented young dancers have been making progress, in some cases arrestingly so.Two ballets by Jerome Robbins are particularly welcome, each after a two-year absence: “N.Y. Export Opus Jazz”  (1958), which returned to repertory on Friday night, and “West Side Story Suite” (Robbins’s 1995 revisitation of the 1957 musical), which returned the previous week. This week brings debuts in both; but Friday’s performance of “Opus Jazz” included three dancers (Ashley Laracey, Georgina Pazcoguin, Giovanni Villalobos) whose contributions were memorably caught in a 2010 film, while in “West Side Story Suite” Ms. Pazcoguin’s Anita remained an enduring source of vitality, both blazing and acerbic.These two ballets capture the adolescent New York body language of the late 1950s in ways that make it both historic and mint-fresh. I hope one day to see them share a program with George Balanchine’s “Agon”; you can hardly miss the way all three embody the same climate. But, whereas “Agon” — wired into several centuries — is high energy and classical, these two Robbins dances (as acute in catching their historic moment as documentaries) smolder in between occasional explosions. Balanchine would say to dancers, “What are you saving it for?” while Robbins, asking for a more casual look, would say “Easy, baby”; what’s fascinating is how Robbins’s more laid-back requirement gets deep into our nervous system.A yet more striking highlight of recent repertory has been Justin Peck’s “Rodeo: Four Dance Episodes,” new this February. It’s a pleasure to see Andrew Veyette (injured shortly before the premiere) in the first and fourth movements of the role originally designated for him; his virile force is just right for it, and his colleagues Gonzalo Garcia and Daniel Ulbricht have no finer roles. In the sole female role, Sara Mearns (on May 14) has acquired more piquancy in the opening solo and a softer bloom in the pas de deux; but when she and Amar Ramasar were injured, Brittany Pollack and Adrian Danchig-Waring replaced them admirably on Thursday.This has become a ballet that makes people (myself among them) proud to belong to its moment. Its most poetic sequence is its second section, the “Corral Nocturne,” an all-male adagio quintet in which each dancer’s part is subtly individual: an image of same-sex nonsexual cooperation with flowing arabesque lines and a ravishingly fluid use of space. I’m not alone in wishing its five men were given a curtain call at the end; the spell they cast is rare.Amid a crowded season, I briefly report that Peter Martins’s “Symphonic Dances” and “Morgen” have returned after much shorter absences, and that every move in each is a cliché. In “Morgen,” which rejoined repertory on Friday, the three women (Sterling Hyltin, Rebecca Krohn, Teresa Reichlen) take turns abandoning themselves to a series of men in effusive pas de deux; apparently to these ladies it matters not to which man they rapturously bare their hearts. The choreography never makes a good case that this score — 10 orchestral songs by Richard Strauss — is dance music; the soprano Marjorie Owens, though her vibrato is sometimes too intrusive for Strauss’s long lines, often sings with a beautifully glowing repose.Balanchine’s “Raymonda Variations” (1962) tends to evaporate when it’s not danced with full-stretched energy and musical incisiveness. When it returned on Friday night, with Ashley Bouder injured, its powers were diminished. Erica Pereira, replacing her on short notice in the ballerina role, was sugary. Since the five soloists are dressed alike (pink tutus), the ballet needs plenty of dance individuality to differentiate them. Among Friday’s five, the elegantly focused Meagan Mann does the most to single herself out; Brittany Pollack, Kristen Segin and Savannah Lowery each have distinctive moments, but not enough to make the ballet matter.The company’s double bill of “Bournonville Divertissements” and “La Sylphide” has been settling in with multiple performances (the last on this past Sunday). It would be good if both ballets stayed around, but probably on separate programs in the future; and “Bournonville Divertissements,” which was first staged by City Ballet in 1977 but has been through several revisions, could use some further changes. The choreography is full of pure-dance rewards, but the three décors tug in different directions; and many of us miss such pieces as the “Kermesse in Bruges” pas de deux and the “La Ventana” pas de trois, which all used to be part of this feast.Many dancers have won new eminence in this double bill: Sara Adams, Harrison Ball, Joseph Gordon, Ashly Isaacs, Russell Janzen, Ms. Mann, Ms. Pollack, Andrew Scordato, Indiana Woodward. The most gorgeous moment of the “Divertissements” occurs when Mr. Gordon is dancing in the “Napoli” tarantella: As he hops backward in an arc, the fluent spring of his step and the singing radiance of his line turn a simple phrase into a thrilling event.Pre-eminent among these youngsters is Anthony Huxley, whose Sunday afternoon account of James, the hero of “La Sylphide,” was gloriously vivid: played with complete conviction and danced with heroic beauty. Who’s ever thought of Mr. Huxley, with his discreetly masklike face, as an actor before? In the event, he carried the whole ballet; and that face shone like a lamp. So did the beacon-bright classicism of his steps.Advertisement