AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben RatliffJoanna Newsom“Divers”(Drag City)Why “Divers” as an album title? Because its lyrics contain diving as a metaphor for love and moving through time. Maybe, also, because that is the Middle English spelling of diverse, a word that hints at the multiplicity in Joanna Newsom’s work. She plays the harp using polyrhythms; the sound of her music reflects the serious singer-songwriter folk-pop of the 1970s, American folk traditions, art song and operetta. Her voice is a wild bunch of tonal shadings, and her compositions tend to move through several strains. And maybe, also, “Divers” because this rather brilliant record is heaving you into the deep end. You might as well go headfirst.This is Ms. Newson’s first album in five years. It’s heavy in meaning but more manageable in form than “Have One on Me,” her triple album from 2010, which was full of tracks pushing past six or seven minutes. The average length here is about four, and that helps. Almost nothing in the way this music is composed, produced (by Ms. Newsom and Noah Georgeson) or recorded (by Steve Albini and Mr. Georgeson) seems incidental or accidental. You almost want to hold the whole thing still, flatten it out and study it.Here, Ms. Newsom’s narrator is preoccupied with thoughts of birth, aging and death, and seems only halfway to enlightenment. In “Waltz of the 101st Lightbourne Elite,” she asks: “Why is the pain of birth lighter borne than the pain of death?” (Is it, necessarily?) And she pronounces: “When cruel birth debases, we forget.” (Do we, always?) As usual, she presents obscure images constructed through multiple lines, and words with precise meanings. In various places on “Divers” you’ll come across “anelectric,” “nacre” and “grayscale.” But she can also be funny and terse. “The longer you live, the higher the rent,” she sings in “Leaving the City.” And in “A Pin-Light Bent,” she sighs:My life came and went.Short flight; free descent.Poor flight attendant.But, by the end, all sentimental absolutes — beginnings, ends, loneliness — become red herrings. “Divers” doesn’t take the short or self-absorbed view. The title of the track “Sapokanikan” was the pre-Colonial Lenape name for the area of Manhattan corresponding to Greenwich Village. Its lyrics paraphrase Shelley’s “Ozymandias,” a poem about the inevitable diminution of power on earth: how kingdoms turn to deserts. But, by the end, “Divers” refers — obscurely — to Demeter, symbol of fertility, goddess of harvest. Newsom-watchers have already pointed this out, as they have pointed out that the album closes with a half-word — “trans” — which, when connected with the album’s first word might deliver an overarching theme.You may not have to know all of that. Ms. Newsom’s unusual singing and the way she constructs her music contain the same information: In one way or another, they make you think about time and metaphysics. “The Things I Say” begins like a modal folk song. “If I have the space of half a day, I’m ashamed of half the things I say,” Ms. Newsom sings. The tone of her voice oscillates between goofy young-girl singsong and constricted old-woman crackle. But on the last word of the next line — “I’m ashamed to have turned out this way” — her voice suddenly goes soft, full and focused. And after two minutes, the simple song starts repeating and echoing and running backward. At a climax, it disappears.Advertisement