AdvertisementSupported byBy James PoniewozikKara Zor-El (Melissa Benoist), Earthling name Kara Danvers, comes from the same planet as her cousin Superman. But her personal kryptonite is her tendency to apologize for herself.Early in “Supergirl,” which begins Monday on CBS, we find Kara not leaping tall buildings but saying “Sorry! Sorry!” to a guy she bumps into on the street. She has superpowers, but she’s chosen to hide them: “I decided the best thing I could do was fit in,” she says. Even her domineering boss, the media mogul Cat Grant (Calista Flockhart), criticizes her meek-mannered nature at the office. “If you can’t take credit when you do something well,” Cat says, “you’re going to be at the bottom of the pile forever.”Fortunately, in her second job, Kara can fly. The zippy-as-a-speeding-bullet pilot of “Supergirl” had the built-in challenge of making its heroine more than Superman’s female brand extension. But the co-writers Ali Adler, Greg Berlanti and Andrew Kreisberg have smartly fit Supergirl’s origin story to a very current feminist theme: that women must overcome being socialized to say sorry, to put themselves second, to efface themselves. It’s a superhero story whose motto could be “Up, up and lean in!”Like her supercousin (whom we see in brief glimpses), Kara is express-mailed as a child from an about-to-explode Krypton. Unlike him, she takes a time-warp detour and arrives on Earth after he has grown and become famous. Put in care of a human family, she grows up and moves to National City (like Metropolis, but with palm trees) with her foster sister Alex (Chyler Leigh), who encourages her to keep a low profile.But when Kara finds herself the only one able to stop a passenger jet from crashing, she accepts her powers and discovers that she likes the family business. Like Clark Kent, though, Kara still has a day job to hold down, and colleagues to guard her secret from, including Jimmy — sorry, James — Olsen (Mehcad Brooks), recently hired from The Daily Planet.“Supergirl” comes amid a mini-renaissance of TV superheroines — ABC’s “Agent Carter,” Netflix’s coming “Jessica Jones” — but Hollywood’s spotty record still looms. A recent attempt to reboot “Wonder Woman” for TV fizzled, and tent-pole movies have tended to marginalize what few superheroines they have. (Last season, “Saturday Night Live” scathingly imagined Marvel casting Black Widow of “The Avengers” in a sappy rom-com.)Kara’s unveiling in “Supergirl” plays as a meta-comment on these potential pitfalls. Designing an outfit with the confidant Winn (Jeremy Jordan), she rejects a Lynda Carter-esque get-up complete with hot pants. And she’s chagrined with the diminutive name that Cat uses to christen National City’s new savior in the media.“I’m a girl,” Cat shoots back. “And your boss and powerful and rich and hot and smart. So if you perceive ‘Supergirl’ as anything less than excellent, isn’t the real problem you?” The defensiveness is blatant, but it’s a genius provocation to give the argument to Ms. Flockhart, who on “Ally McBeal” in the ’90s weathered criticism that her lawyer character — with her miniskirts and visions of dancing babies — was a bad feminist.Judging from the first episode, the “girl” in “Supergirl” doesn’t diminish the character so much as define the story, a coming-of-age tale of someone embracing her nature, which happens to involve a cape and heat vision. It’s upbeat, like “The Flash” on CW. Ms. Benoist gives her character’s coming-out an infectious joy reminiscent of a recent Netflix comedy: She’s Unbreakable Kara Zor-El.“Supergirl” is an average action show thus far, but its star is engaging. Kara’s first mission, saving a burning jet about to crash, is the pilot’s visual showpiece, but the most striking image is the glimpse you get of Ms. Benoist’s face as she hangs upside down bringing the plane to safety. She’s not just determined or straining — she’s exhilarated.Her enemies are less exciting. The pilot pits her against a sneering escaped alien convict, a musclebound threat but a dramatic zero. “Supergirl” needs an adversary with the kind of charisma and amoral zest Ms. Flockhart brings to Cat. That said, a twist at the end suggests that the series may soon get a villainy upgrade.Superheroes are all about helping others, of course; as James says of Supergirl and her ilk, “Saving people is what they’re born to do.” But we’ve seen that a million times. The biggest pleasure of “Supergirl” is watching Kara Zor-El free herself.Advertisement