AdvertisementSupported byOpera ReviewBy George LoomisBERLIN — Can the massive grand operas of Giacomo Meyerbeer speak to a modern audience? That the question has been posed for so many years while the operas themselves have been neglected may suggest a negative answer. Yet how can we write off a composer who stood at the pinnacle of the opera world for more than three decades of the 19th century, when some of the most enduring works of the modern repertoire were created?Perhaps the Deutsche Oper Berlin, which has made a commitment to Meyerbeer no other house has approached, will give us an answer. This month it unveiled a new production of “L’Africaine” billed as “Vasco da Gama,” which, according to Jürgen Schläger, who prepared a new critical edition of the score, was the title favored by Meyerbeer and his librettist, Eugène Scribe. Two more of Meyerbeer’s French grand operas are planned here.A passion for the spectacular was in Meyerbeer’s blood. Even his early Italian operas have big embarkation scenes and grand processions. Paris, where visual spectacle was embedded in the opera tradition, offered him ideal conditions. Born in Berlin to a wealthy banking family, Meyerbeer allowed his operas long gestation periods, and the longer the wait, the more the public craved them. As Berlioz put it, Meyerbeer “was not only lucky to have talent,” he also had “a talent for being lucky.”His luck survived him, but since the 1930s his operas have seen only sporadic revivals, typically with ruinous cuts. The Deutsche Oper has put an end to that. Although judicious cuts, including the ballet, have been made, the running time for “Vasco da Gama” approaches five hours.As you might guess, the opera deals with the Portuguese explorer’s voyages of discovery and embraces the kind of cultural clashes that French grand operas thrive on. Here, Europe is set against the East Indies. Dashing figure that he is, Vasco has a lover in each camp — Inès, his Portuguese sweetheart, and Sélika, an Indian princess — and has difficulty choosing between them. Ultimately Inès wins out, while Sélika chooses suicide by breathing the toxic fumes of the manchineel tree.The production by Vera Nemirova treats the story lucidly but does not resist injecting some unwanted contemporary touches, especially regarding religious fanaticism. Sélika is forced to participate in a Christian ceremony wearing clerical garb, and later, in a gratuitous episode, Nélusko, a treacherous compatriot of Sélika, rapes a nun.Jens Kilian’s décor, which relies heavily on decorative sails and a circular map showing the areas of Vasco’s travels, is more tasteful than extravagant, but the opera’s main scenic coup — the wreck engineered by Nélusko of a Portuguese ship on a reef — is disappointingly done. At Nélusko’s command, Indians come on board and subdue passengers and crew, but the ship suffers no visible damage. Moments later the Indians mow down the Portuguese with machine guns, a departure from the libretto, which has the killings take place later and off stage.A more serious problem stems from Meyerbeer’s death in 1864, a year before the opera’s premiere, which prevented him from applying finishing touches. Changes during rehearsal were routine at the Paris Opera and you can bet that Meyerbeer would have made some.And the Deutsche Opera’s “Vasco da Gama” seems to move at a slower pace than other Meyerbeer operas. The conductor, Enrique Mazzola, though alert to subtleties of detail, could have given the score more rhythmic backbone. Still, the work evoked a rare form of operatic grandeur. And the music — often beautiful, rarely formulaic, occasionally exotic and consistently apt dramatically — spoke with a distinctive voice. The audience clearly took to it.Like other tenor leads in Meyerbeer, Vasco is slightly crazed. Obsessed with achieving immortality, he extols the dazzling beauty of the new-found land around him in his famous aria “O paradis,” even as his countrymen have just been slaughtered. Heading a strong cast, Roberto Alagna sings Vasco stirringly and invests him with swagger. Sophie Koch’s plush mezzo-soprano thrives on the challenges of Sélika’s music, and Nino Machaidze sings Inès with iridescent tones. Markus Brück brings a firm baritone and ample menace to Nélusko.“Vasco da Gama” gets a mixed report, then, but whets the appetite for Meyerbeer’s “Les Huguenots” next season.No discussion of Meyerbeer would be complete without mentioning his chief detractor, Richard Wagner, whose virulent attacks — motivated by anti-Semitism, jealousy or self-promotion — are sometimes cited as reasons for Meyerbeer’s fall from popularity. Yet “Die Meistersinger von Nürnberg,” in a new production at the Berlin State Opera, offers a choice example of how he influenced Wagner’s stagecraft, if not his music. The brawl in Act 2 of “Meistersinger” was clearly inspired by the tensions between Catholics and Protestants on the streets of Paris in Act 3 of “Les Huguenots,” which even includes a counterpart to Wagner’s Night Watchman.The brawl is unusually brutal in Andrea Moses’s staging, but otherwise she has an admirably light touch when dealing with the opera’s nationalism in the context of today’s prosperous, nonbelligerent Germany: When the poet-shoemaker Hans Sachs delivers his unsettling encomium to “holy German art,” cheering rightwing demonstrators among the assembled Nuremberg populace are quietly led away.Wolfgang Koch is a splendid Sachs, especially touching in his monologue about why the knight Walther’s new style of singing so displeases the Meistersingers. In a sense, the popular tenor Klaus Florian Vogt is the ideal singer for Walther: His crooning style represents something unorthodox, which is why the tenor remains controversial among today’s purists. Julia Kleiter is a lovely, clear-voiced Eva, and while Eva is destined for Walther, her scenes of gentle flirtation with Sachs are high points. Markus Werba delivers Beckmesser’s botched entry in the song contest so stylishly that he deserves at least an honorable mention. Several of the Meistersingers are amiably portrayed in cameos by veteran Wagner performers and everything comes together handsomely under Daniel Barenboim’s sometimes impetuous leadership.Advertisement