By STEPHEN HEYMANOCT. 21, 2015
The Turkish entrepreneur Efe Cakarel created the movie streaming platform Mubi in 2007, the same year Netflix expanded to streaming, but his company operates on a more discriminating model, a bit like a virtual cinemathèque. Thirty movies — typically international films, documentaries and independent features — are available to stream for just 30 days, with a new movie appearing every day. The paid streaming service has attracted about 100,000 subscribers, including some noted filmmakers. The Coen Brothers and Sofia Coppola are members. So is Paul Thomas Anderson, who this month chose Mubi to premiere his new music documentary, “Junun.” That was only the latest coup for the small service, which also has signed distribution deals with Sony and Paramount Pictures. While the company’s reach is growing — it now has subscribers in 158 countries — Mr. Cakarel said he had no plans to compete with mainstream streaming services, likening Mubi to the “Staff Picks” section in your favorite indie video store. The following interview has been edited.I read that when Paul Thomas Anderson e-mailed you saying he wanted to debut his new film on Mubi, you were so shocked you fell off your chair.Almost. I walked in in the morning and saw the subject line — from Paul Thomas Anderson — and just started jumping on my chair and shouting. The whole building rushed to my desk. We’ve been working so hard to be able do things like “Junun.” It’s not really a documentary, it’s not a short film, it’s this sonic, amazing experience. Basically, it’s a Paul Thomas Anderson movie. His films — and movies like them — that’s the reason we’re doing this.Q.  How did you become an online cinema entrepreneur? A. I’m from a small city on the west coast of Turkey, Izmir. My childhood was very simple. We just roamed around. In the morning my breakfast was a tomato picked right from the vine. I didn’t start to learn to read or write until I was 8. But I was always good at math. And in high school they saw something in me and they really nurtured me. I was chosen for Turkey’s national math team and I placed third in the European Math Olympiad. That opened the world for me. M.I.T. gave me a scholarship and invited me to Cambridge. So I went from this little town in Turkey to M.I.T. at 18, and that’s how my life started.AdvertisementQ. You studied computer science but began your career in finance?A. I arrived at M.I.T. in September of 1994, the month Netscape was launched. So I found myself in the middle of this thing called “The Internet.” I studied computer science and electrical engineering. But like every engineer who didn’t immediately know what to do with his degree, I went to Goldman Sachs.AdvertisementQ. And you later went to business school, at Stanford. You would think these experiences might have discouraged you from focusing on arty, challenging movies. They’re not the most lucrative.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A. If I was still wearing my Goldman Sachs hat and thinking about just maximizing money, I wouldn’t be doing this, period. But the world needed this — it needed a place online where the art of film is valued. I think we’re losing touch with great cinema. Fewer and fewer films are now being produced with bigger and bigger budgets. Ten years ago studios produced 400 films. Last year it was something like 120. And because there are fewer films, they have to be more mainstream. So we are losing quality. I wanted to create a platform where we focus on quality films that are made both inside and outside the studio system.Q. What was the first sign that Mubi was getting traction?A. Probably when Martin Scorsese chose us as the home for the classic films he restores with World Cinema Foundation. That put us on the map, but we were still a small, niche platform.Q. The selection of films you can watch on Mubi is different based on where you are. Do you think people who live in different places want to watch different kinds of movies?A. Yes, and our data show that this is true. In Turkey, they like Middle Eastern dramas. In Norway, they like Japanese anime. Germans like German films. But there are some films that you want everyone to see, and that is a very big challenge — getting the global rights. Let me give you a real-life example. I went to Pedro Almodóvar and said I want to show “Women on the Verge of a Nervous Breakdown” on Mubi. His people tell me, “Efe, that’s great, but it’s already sold in 42 countries.” So I bought the distribution rights in the other 164 countries and immediately started monetizing the film from Jamaica to Vietnam. Then I went to the distributors who already owned the rights in different countries, like Studio Canal in the U.K., and I said: Look, I’m showing this film in 164 countries. It’s already encoded, generating a social media reaction. Can we make a deal?Q. That kind of deal-making sounds almost old-fashioned for an Internet company.A. It’s true. This is not just like Instagram, where you can build a beautiful app and it grows on its own. No, this is a real business and these are rights and it takes many, many years to negotiate and build a global library. But it is possible. The whole film world is controlled by about 3,000 people and I’m not exaggerating when I say we’ve probably met 1,000 of them. It’s very challenging but it’s necessary if you have a global vision, which we do. Stephen HeymanA version of this article appears in print on October 22, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.