AdvertisementSupported byBy Jon CaramanicaLast week, Jay Z was testifying in a trial about an uncleared sample in one of his old hits, and was asked to describe the scope of his work. He listed many of his business interests but overlooked one. His lawyer prodded him: “You have a music streaming service, don’t you?”Jay Z replied, “Yeah, yeah. Forgot about that.”It’s easy to forget about Tidal, the streaming service that got underway in March with a news conference featuring Jay Z and a gaggle of celebrity friends, all of whom had taken ownership stakes in the company. What was intended as a show of the artists’ solidarity in the face of the slow erosion of their work’s value in the streaming era instead came off as a conclave of titans looking to charge the public for something that’s typically more or less free.More important, Tidal doesn’t feel essential, not in a world with Spotify and Apple Music and Rhapsody and others. Having so many artists in its brain trust has yet to trickle down into a significantly more valuable consumer product.But it does mean that, when necessary, Tidal can pull off a huge show of force, as it did during the Tidal X: 10/20 concert, which took place on Tuesday night at the Barclays Center and was streamed live on Tidal.Jay Z, Beyoncé, Nicki Minaj, Lil Wayne, T.I., Usher and more than a dozen other artists all performed severely truncated sets in this concert, which was as much a nonevent as a show featuring several of the most important pop musicians of the 2000s could be. (At one point, Prince was scheduled to be part of the bill; he did not materialize.)For the most part, the stars came out, put in their few minutes, then disappeared — the night played like an old-fashioned telethon. Maybe that’s why the performances from the show that were broadcast later in the night on “Jimmy Kimmel Live” were more impressive: Sweeping cameras and strong editing can do wonders.Perhaps the telethon approach was deliberate: 100 percent of the ticket proceeds from this extravaganza went to the New World Foundation, with the money earmarked for “organizations dedicated to advancing positive community relations and effecting systemic change for the development and sustainability of just societies,” according to Tidal’s website.But Tidal needs a hand, too. From the beginning, it has been beleaguered. Last month, it announced it had passed one million subscribers, a big number but still a modest one compared with some of its competitors. Exclusivity and access are its ostensible selling points, but this show offered little in the way of content that couldn’t be matched or bettered with a simple YouTube search.In moments, the potential of the accumulated star power won out over the stilted format. During “Feeling Myself,” Nicki Minaj and Beyoncé and their respective backing crews had a quick and exuberant dance-off. During her 10 minutes, Beyoncé worked hard — she’s never not working hard — singing with ferocity and dancing with even more. And midshow, on a stage at the center of the arena, Meek Mill, Rick Ross, DJ Khaled and French Montana all converged for about five minutes of maximalist hits performed, in effect, in the round.Otherwise, though, this was standard stuff, and that was both unfortunate and shortsighted. The first hour was baffling, filled with a cavalcade of not-yet-stars who were met with almost total indifference by the crowd, though some were worthy, especially the unhurried young soul singer Alessia Cara. (This was also where the night’s token diversity cropped up, with performances by the dour French rock band Indochine and the genteel country charmer Thomas Rhett.) The show’s all-star line-up was also, at least subliminally, a salvo in Tidal’s war with other streaming services, most notably Apple Music.Other charity concerts wear their good deeds on their sleeves; not so much this one, apart from a couple of stray mentions of the show’s good intentions and some videos about injustice sprinkled between acts. Also, Usher, Nas and Bibi Bourelly performed “Chains,” an ambitious but vexing new song about police brutality and gun violence that, for all its topicality, felt completely out of place.Tidal has gotten this right before: In May, Jay Z performed a pair of relatively intimate Tidal concerts at Terminal 5, devoted to the more obscure corners of his catalog and featuring special guests from his past guaranteed to sate the faithful. It was a gesture of good will, and also prized creativity. This show was merely too big to fail, and so of course it did.It’s hard to see Tidal as something other than an oligarchic hustle when it primarily engages in oligarchic behavior. At this show, Damian Marley was introduced as “the newest artist-owner of Tidal” — the room shrugged. People generally don’t root for corporations.At the end of the night, Jay Z said this would be the first in an annual series of charity shows, and the claim seemed both preposterous and inevitable. But he has backed up unlikely boasts before. The second song he performed on Tuesday was “U Don’t Know,” released in 2001, in which he tallied, using some infelicitous phrasing, what then seemed like unthinkable numbers: “You are now looking at the forty million boy/ I’m raping Def Jam ’til I’m the hundred million man.”Later, he bought his way out of his Def Jam deal, took control of his master recordings, visited the White House several times, bought part of the Brooklyn Nets and also the Barclays arena, then sold those things to begin work as a sports agent. He partnered with Samsung for the early release of his last album, “Magna Carta . . . Holy Grail,” to people who had a certain kind of cellphone and didn’t mind giving up an abundance of personal information to an app (two of the songs he performed Tuesday were from that release).In each of those cases, he was setting precedents that others could follow, rewriting the rules of access and power for a hip-hop star. At 45 years old, he has been right more than he’s been wrong, and often been right when it looked as if he was wrong. But in rare cases, Tidal being one, he’s the underdog again, and taking lumps is something you don’t forget.Advertisement