This week in Brooklyn, the Tidal X: 10/20 concert — billed by Jay Z as the first annual charity event backed by his celebrity-fronted music streaming service — brought in about $1.5 million to be donated to social causes, the company said in a tweet on Thursday.Tidal had said previously that it hoped to raise between $500,000 and $1 million, and that the funds would be allocated by the New World Foundation, which focuses on civil rights issues, in association with Sankofa.org, a social justice nonprofit founded by Harry Belafonte. (In 2012, Mr. Belafonte criticized today’s high-profile artists for having “turned their back on social responsibility,” citing Jay Z and his wife Beyoncé specifically.)In an interview on Friday, Dania Diaz, the managing director of philanthropy for Jay Z’s Roc Nation, detailed the money raised at Tuesday’s sold-out show at the Barclays Center, which, in addition to Jay Z and Beyoncé, featured Tidal-affiliated artists including Usher, Nicki Minaj and Lil Wayne. (A scheduled appearance by Prince was canceled.)“Most people didn’t even know that it was charitable concert, but that made it even better once people realized,” Ms. Diaz said. “People were just blown away by the lineup so that’s what they focused on more.”Still, she said, “We did remarkably well through ticket sales, suite revenues, merchandise sales, matching programs and sponsors.”The majority of the money raised — “close to a million,” Ms. Diaz said — came from ticket sales, with 100 percent of the face value for each attendee going to the Tidal X fund. Tidal also matched the face value of tickets sold through an official pre-sale, where prices ranged from $74 to $244. That resulted in another $230,000, Ms. Diaz said.The remainder of the nearly $1.5 million raised came from donated ticketing fees from Ticketmaster, as well as donations from the Barclays Center and the night’s sponsor, HTC. Fan donations beyond the ticket price, which were requested starting at $5, totaled about $820, Ms. Diaz said.Performers for the night “donated their time,” she added, with expenses covered by sponsors. “Tidal’s contribution came largely through the donations and underwriting some other minor costs for travel and transportation,” Ms. Diaz said.Now Tidal and Roc Nation, which Ms. Diaz said lends its services voluntarily to “affiliated partners,” will meet with the New World Foundation to discuss a “strategic grant-making process,” with a focus on organizations dealing with income and racial inequality, childhood education and relationships between local communities and law enforcement.“We’re already starting to wire some funds,” Ms. Diaz said, with full allocation expected in three to six months.