AdvertisementSupported byAsk a ShowrunnerBy Jeremy EgnerOnce mostly anonymous, the producers who oversee top television series have sometimes become as well known as the actors who star in them. On occasion, The Times will pose questions from readers (and pose some of our own) to notable show runners, and post their responses. (Interviews are edited for clarity.)This week, Scott M. Gimple of “The Walking Dead” discusses the line between fan service and storytelling, the perceived One Black Guy at a Time rule and what those zombies are actually eating onscreen.Coming soon: Noah Hawley of “Fargo.”Q. As a show runner, I’m sure you hear many comments from fans and hear about how particular characters have stronger fan bases (for example, Daryl and Michonne). Do you ever feel like the fans’ love of particular characters influences some of your decisions? — Monique Geddes, Perth, AustraliaA. The fandom and the story should be separate things. The peas should not touch the mashed potatoes in this case. The peas can be mashed though.Q. All the major characters have clearly changed in some way or another, but Carol seems to have made a complete transformation, from passive domestic violence victim to ruthless and strategic survivor. How soon did the writers and creators know what her story would be? — Katie Camara, Fall River, Mass.A. All I can say is that I personally think all stories are about change, in some way or another. When we were working on Season 2, I got very excited about the possibilities of the character and where she could go. I thought about it a great deal, not really knowing if we would take that journey I was interested in taking. When I began show-running the show, I had this fan fiction in my head that I wanted to see play out, and it’s been very gratifying working with the writers, with Melissa, with Greg and the other directors to make it real.Q. Considering the immense popularity of the show, what do you think it is saying about North American society? Invasion narratives were very popular during the Cold War and the zombie renaissance certainly began after 9/11, so these stories seem to speak to certain anxieties. What other concerns might the show be addressing about contemporary society? - Faye Trecartin, MontrealA. If you ask me, and, er, you just did — I think it’s actually about a desire for simplicity and authenticity (one of the big words of the moment). I think there’s a fantasy element to having everything stripped away to the barest of essentials. The world the characters of “The Walking Dead” inhabit is one of pure survival. Now that survival may be about one’s actual life or their humanity, but it’s survival in both cases. I think there’s also something to people wanting to find out who they really are. The situations these characters find themselves in define them and expose the core of who they are or who they can become. I think we want that. There is so much artifice to our lives, so much noise, so much distraction, fakery and fiction that I think there’s an attraction to seeing it all stop, and being left with nothing but to keep yourself alive and find out who the person is looking back at you in the mirror.Q. The story has followed the comic at times but diverged widely at others. Do those decisions generate much internal controversy? I think the show has been much better when it followed the original. Do you get much fan feedback about this and, if so, what’s the consensus? — Texan in NYCA. No consensus. There are comics fans who want the comics followed to the letter and others that want to see things played around with, as they’ve already read the story. Initially, I was pretty adamant about following the comics religiously — Robert Kirkman was actually more about mixing it up in the beginning. Over the years, I’ve moved more towards following the emotional intent of the comic in places, to generate the feeling I had reading the stories, knowing we’d remix aspects to get there. And with the butterfly effect of characters in the comic who are alive being dead on the show and vice versa, along with characters who didn’t exist in the comic at all, along with our timeline and the medium of TV itself, changes simply have to happen. But it’s very cool to employ those changes to get to those unbelievably great moments from the comic that you want to do as faithfully as possible. Further, the story of the comic focuses a bit more on Rick and Carl. “The Walking Dead” TV show is a bit more of an ensemble story, and thus a lot of the characters’ stories from the comics are expanded upon in the show, but often do lead to big moments from the comic for those characters.Q. From a narrative standpoint, what is the value of withholding the source of the plague?A. This is definitely something I’ve followed Robert’s lead on, and I really have come to value it a great deal. This story isn’t about that. Hamlet is handling the plague stuff. We’re telling an epic tale with Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.Q. What are the advantages of keeping the setting “rural” (cost not withstanding) as opposed to the urban locations many of the zombie efforts seem to favor? — M. Daigle, IstanbulA. If you’re asking what the “pros” are, they’d be not having to deal with as many cars, crowds and non-apocalyptic looking cityscapes. I also think there’s a lushness to the show amidst such scenes of death and decay, that there’s a very cool paradox going on under the surface of a great many scenes. Sometimes it feels the walker apocalypse is the revenge of planet Earth.Q. How many zombie heads can get smashed in without it becoming tedious? Where do you go from here without endlessly repeating what has already been done? — Jim Emerson, SeattleA. I think if it were about the head smashing, we’d be in trouble. Heads do get smashed along the way. Not all the time. Every so often. I do know that “Head Smashers” on HGTV is in its 32nd season and that just mystifies me. I have no idea how they keep doing it. With us, we are trying to tell stories about characters who are evolving, who are changing, who are changing each other. People do go through a lot of the same human experience, but how does that person go through it. How does that particular person affect another particular person? And if you’re talking about mixing up walker gags, we push ourselves and each other hard — and we have this very smart director/executive producer/makeup effects genius named Greg Nicotero, to boot — to do new and better things in terms of action and walkery.Q. When the walkers are eating someone, what is it the actors are actually eating? — Bobbie McConnellA. Many times, chicken. But meats and other foodstuffs are often employed.Q. Wouldn’t the zombie threat take care of itself at some point, as the dead just decay away? — Thom Gabrukiewicz, WyomingA. I do believe that where walkers are concerned, there are periods of accelerated decay and periods of dormancy as well as possible sustaining elements generated by the times of accelerated decay. Is that the exact science at play? Can’t really say that, as we do have a great deal of mystery to the show. These sorts of questions really won’t be answered. I have answers in my head, but I don’t think we’ll be in a place for a character to lay this stuff out and say what the exact phenomena is and how it all exactly works.Q. I really enjoy the show. But what’s the deal with the whole One Black Guy at a Time rule? Will there ever be more than one strong African-American male character? — John, Ann ArborA. No deal, no rule. This is a very difficult topic — we do, sadly, lose characters on a regular basis; it’s a part of our show. With casting, I don’t preclude anyone from the process. In the comics, Bob was Caucasian. Lawrence Gillard came in and had one of the best auditions I’ve ever seen. I knew Bob was destined to die at the beginning of Season 5, but I didn’t want to deny the show a tremendous actor. Noah was a character invented for the show. I also knew he was going to die, but when Tyler James Williams came in and gave me a lump in my throat with his audition, the role was his. Above all, I want to tell you a great story, and I want to continue to hire the best actors, period, and cast them without any boundaries.Q. The show seems to have full creative freedom and has aired some very intense scenes. Has AMC stopped a storyline that it deemed too intense to air? Or have writers started a storyline and then not continued it, due to its intense nature? — Mark Canevaro, New JerseyA. We’ve followed emotion and character and that’s kept the stories from being “too intense,” and, for us, there’s always been a point to them. Some horrific things have happened on our show, but it’s always been about taking the character on a journey. The story of Lizzie and Mika was tragic and horrific. But the impact it had upon Carol and Tyreese was everything. The story wasn’t over when those girls died, and their story continues through Carol.Q. What is the best show on TV right now and why? What is your favorite show on TV right now and why?A. “Rick & Morty.” It’s inventive, gut-destroying, sad, humanistic, real, impossible, true and relentlessly entertaining. There is nothing cynical about it. I am proud to share bandwidth and/or broadcast frequency with it.Advertisement