Updated, 12:53 p.m. | 









Sepia-toned tears, rain, wind-swept hair and high notes — Adele is back.
On Friday the singer released “Hello,” her first song in three years, along with an appropriately dramatic video made by the Canadian director Xavier Dolan (“Mommy,” “Tom at the Farm”). The single is also the first song on Adele’s 11-track album, “25,” due out on Nov. 20 via Columbia.
“My last record was a breakup record and if I had to label this one I would call it a makeup record,” the singer, 27, said of the project earlier this week. “I’m making up with myself.”
In an interview with the BBC, Adele called her new song “very intimate” and “very conversational.” She added, “I’m singing very high up in that chorus, trying to have a Meatloaf moment or something.”
Adele’s previous video, for the 007 theme song “Skyfall,” was released in 2012. It currently has more than 121 million YouTube views, while the top singles from her last album, “21” — “Someone Like You” and “Rolling in the Deep” — have been watched more than 1.2 billion times combined.
The video for “Hello” features Adele in a dusty country home, reminiscing about a broken relationship as told through flashbacks starring the actor Tristan Wilds (“The Wire”). It was shot earlier this month outside of Montreal — the first music video to be filmed with IMAX cameras, according to the company.
In an interview, Mr. Dolan, 26, said Adele approached him about directing the video over the summer, summoning him from Paris to London in order to meet and hear the song. The singer was a fan of his films “Mommy” and “I Killed My Mother,” Mr. Dolan said: “She mentioned having cried and the emotion at the core of our respective creative process. We create things that are always reminiscent of our childhood and unrequited romances.
“We’re very young, both of us,” he added. “We’ve had journeys that have been marked by rituals of emotional outpouring.” 
Listening to “Hello” in front of Adele, “I was psychologically destroyed, ruined and concealing the obvious emotion,” Mr. Dolan said. “I listened to it again and again.” The concept occurred to him immediately, and matched the singer’s thinking. 
“I’m a simple guy,” Mr. Dolan explained. “I listen to a song and I hear, ‘Hello, it’s me,’ and I imagine a girl picking up a phone and saying, ‘Hello, it’s me.’ I’m not good at imagining unfathomable concepts. I’m not that guy. I’ll see very basic things, pretty close to the lyrics.”
Next came casting Mr. Wilds. “This is not about an interracial relationship, but the fact that it is mattered to us,” Mr. Dolan said. “We were excited about that because it feels just normal to say: ‘This is society, this is how we live.’” 
The shoot took five days, with Mr. Dolan employing his usual collaborators in his native Quebec. “I was afraid that in another country, I would feel insecure,” he said. “This wasn’t a time to be experiencing new things. I wanted to give Adele my all.”
He praised the singer’s naturalism on camera, despite her warnings that she couldn’t act. “Adele is exuding such a strong charisma and authority artistically,” he said, adding, “Let’s get this out of our way: She is one of the most drop dead gorgeous people I’ve ever seen in my life.” 
Adele told Apple’s Beats 1 radio, “I learned a lot and it made me want to be an actress. He had me crying.” She added, “It’s not like a groundbreaking video in terms of effects and dance moves, but it’s my best video and I’m so proud of it.” 
While the story in the video is “very simple,” Mr. Dolan said, the impact comes from the little details, like the coat Adele wears, which was homemade from fabric purchased by the director. 
Another specific feature Mr. Dolan insisted on: old-school flip phones. “As much as I love iPhones in real life — well, love-hate because autocorrect is driving me insane — it’s so distracting to see an iPhone in a movie,” he said. “It’s so implanted into our reality that you are sort of taken out of the material — I would have hated to see her write a text on her iPhone. I’d rather it be obsolete and use flip phones.
“I’m much comforted that people are already making GIFs of that,” Mr. Dolan added. “It’s the true mark of glory, let’s be honest, to have people making GIFs of your work.” 
Sepia-toned tears, rain, wind-swept hair and high notes — Adele is back.On Friday the singer released “Hello,” her first song in three years, along with an appropriately dramatic video made by the Canadian director Xavier Dolan (“Mommy,” “Tom at the Farm”). The single is also the first song on Adele’s 11-track album, “25,” due out on Nov. 20 via Columbia.“My last record was a breakup record and if I had to label this one I would call it a makeup record,” the singer, 27, said of the project earlier this week. “I’m making up with myself.”In an interview with the BBC, Adele called her new song “very intimate” and “very conversational.” She added, “I’m singing very high up in that chorus, trying to have a Meatloaf moment or something.”Adele’s previous video, for the 007 theme song “Skyfall,” was released in 2012. It currently has more than 121 million YouTube views, while the top singles from her last album, “21” — “Someone Like You” and “Rolling in the Deep” — have been watched more than 1.2 billion times combined.The video for “Hello” features Adele in a dusty country home, reminiscing about a broken relationship as told through flashbacks starring the actor Tristan Wilds (“The Wire”). It was shot earlier this month outside of Montreal — the first music video to be filmed with IMAX cameras, according to the company.In an interview, Mr. Dolan, 26, said Adele approached him about directing the video over the summer, summoning him from Paris to London in order to meet and hear the song. The singer was a fan of his films “Mommy” and “I Killed My Mother,” Mr. Dolan said: “She mentioned having cried and the emotion at the core of our respective creative process. We create things that are always reminiscent of our childhood and unrequited romances.“We’re very young, both of us,” he added. “We’ve had journeys that have been marked by rituals of emotional outpouring.” Listening to “Hello” in front of Adele, “I was psychologically destroyed, ruined and concealing the obvious emotion,” Mr. Dolan said. “I listened to it again and again.” The concept occurred to him immediately, and matched the singer’s thinking. “I’m a simple guy,” Mr. Dolan explained. “I listen to a song and I hear, ‘Hello, it’s me,’ and I imagine a girl picking up a phone and saying, ‘Hello, it’s me.’ I’m not good at imagining unfathomable concepts. I’m not that guy. I’ll see very basic things, pretty close to the lyrics.”Next came casting Mr. Wilds. “This is not about an interracial relationship, but the fact that it is mattered to us,” Mr. Dolan said. “We were excited about that because it feels just normal to say: ‘This is society, this is how we live.’” The shoot took five days, with Mr. Dolan employing his usual collaborators in his native Quebec. “I was afraid that in another country, I would feel insecure,” he said. “This wasn’t a time to be experiencing new things. I wanted to give Adele my all.”He praised the singer’s naturalism on camera, despite her warnings that she couldn’t act. “Adele is exuding such a strong charisma and authority artistically,” he said, adding, “Let’s get this out of our way: She is one of the most drop dead gorgeous people I’ve ever seen in my life.” Adele told Apple’s Beats 1 radio, “I learned a lot and it made me want to be an actress. He had me crying.” She added, “It’s not like a groundbreaking video in terms of effects and dance moves, but it’s my best video and I’m so proud of it.” While the story in the video is “very simple,” Mr. Dolan said, the impact comes from the little details, like the coat Adele wears, which was homemade from fabric purchased by the director. Another specific feature Mr. Dolan insisted on: old-school flip phones. “As much as I love iPhones in real life — well, love-hate because autocorrect is driving me insane — it’s so distracting to see an iPhone in a movie,” he said. “It’s so implanted into our reality that you are sort of taken out of the material — I would have hated to see her write a text on her iPhone. I’d rather it be obsolete and use flip phones.“I’m much comforted that people are already making GIFs of that,” Mr. Dolan added. “It’s the true mark of glory, let’s be honest, to have people making GIFs of your work.” 