Storm Women: Women Artists of the Avant-Garde in Berlin 1910-1932
Schirn Kunsthalle.
Oct. 30.-Feb. 7.“The Storm” magazine was founded in 1910 and covered art and culture in Germany in the years when Expressionism and Surrealism grew into major movements. The magazine (and the galleries and literary scene it inspired) is associated with major artists whose works appeared in its pages — like Klee, Chagall and Kandinsky — and in the gallery it operated. This exhibition focuses on the women associated with the “Storm” scene. Artists on view include Sonia Delaunay, Gabriele Münter and Jacoba van Heemskerck.Festival/Tokyo
Various venues.
Oct. 31-Dec. 6.“God Bless Baseball,” a trilingual theater piece featuring South Korean and Japanese performers that explores the long shadow American culture casts over East Asia, is part of an international lineup featuring a mix of prominent companies from abroad and Japanese talent. Visiting productions include the Théâtre de la Ville de Paris’s take on Eugène Ionesco’s “Rhinoceros,” which explores the rise of far right movements; and the Spanish theater director Angélica Liddell’s “All the Sky Above the Earth (Wendy’s Syndrome),” which follows Wendy as she leaves Neverland and takes a trip across the world. Mori Art Museum
Oct. 31-Mar. 6.The artist Takashi Murakami (born 1962) is best known for being uncharacterizable: He was trained in classical painting, but often riffs on anime culture in his work. The solo exhibition showcases his recent output and centers on “The 500 Arhats” of 2012, his 300-foot long painting inspired by Buddhist lore. A selection of arts events taking place across the world in the coming week.Constant-New Babylon
Museo Nacional Centro de Arte Reina Sofía.
Through Feb. 29.The Dutch artist and architect Constant Nieuwenhuys spent around 20 years of his life refining plans for New Babylon, a utopian city that would sprawl across the world and be run entirely by robots. This exhibition, co-organized with the Gemeentemuseum in the Hague, brings together models, blueprints, film clips and other archival materials about Nieuwenhuys, who died in 2005. It focuses in large part on his legacy as a major mid-century artist and includes a special section dedicated to his fascination with Spanish culture. Panorama Festival
Various venues.
Oct. 30-Nov. 15.This dance festival offers traditional pieces and performances that test the limits of the genre. International works include “Untitled_I will be there when you die,” a juggling piece created by the Italian performer-choreographer Alessandro Sciarroni, and “Sensescapes,” an interactive performance designed for parents and young children to participate in together.  “Durational Rope” by the artist duo Quarto will also appear.Franciscan Art. Masterpieces of Italian Art and Asian Lands from the 13th to the 15th Centuries
Galleria dell’Accademia.
Through Nov. 10.In the early years of the 13th century, Francis of Assisi, the son of a wealthy merchant, renounced his significant inherited wealth and devoted himself to God. His piety inspired a movement, eventually giving birth to the Franciscans. This exhibition focuses on the Medieval religious art that Francis and his followers inspired and includes a number of artistic depictions of the Franciscan order. Artworks come from countries as distant as China and demonstrate the order’s worldwide renown, even in the Middle Ages.Cavalleria Rusticana/Pagliacci Teatro
Municipal de Santiago.
Oct 29-Nov. 8The operas “Cavelleria Rusticana” (about a love triangle gone awry), and “Pagliacci,” (about a troupe of commedia dell’arte actors) have been performed together since the late 19th century. New productions of the classic doublebill will appear here this month, directed by Fabio Sparvoli. Two casts alternate in each production. In November, the theater will open the ballet “Manon,” which the choreographer Kenneth Macmillan created in 1974, set to music by Massenet. Sanctum
Temple Church.
Oct. 29-Nov. 21.The artist Theaster Gates is best known for staging “urban interventions” in the blighted area of Chicago where he works — like pop-up shows in revamped, once-derelict houses. Mr. Gates organized this festival, which features hundreds of Bristol-based artists, musicians and actors performing around the clock in the city’s bombed-out 14th-century Temple Church. Performers include the samba band and dance group African Sambistas, the soul singer Jill Draper and the carnivalesque folk music group Ushti Baba. The festival’s schedule is secret, so visitors only learn which performances they will see when they arrive. Fotofestival
Various venues.
Through Nov. 15.Seven museums in Mannheim, Ludwigshafen and Heidelberg — three small cities in southwest Germany — are taking part in this showcase of contemporary artistic and documentary photography. The festival this year includes work by big names like Ai Weiwei, Thomas Hirschhorn and Sharon Lockhart. Other artists include Rico Scagliola and Michael Meier, whose multimedia installations incorporate film and photography; and Hiroko Komatsu, who makes large-scale installations using black and white photographs that are scribbled on and printed at several times their original size. 