AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn Shattuck9 P.M. (Showtime) COMPARED TO WHAT? THE IMPROBABLE JOURNEY OF BARNEY FRANK (2015) Retirement, according to the cranky Mr. Frank, has some benefits. “I don’t even have to pretend to try to be nice to people I don’t like,” that Massachusetts representative and Democrat said before stepping down in 2013, tapping into what Rachel Maddow called “a sense of humor that he wields like a wrecking ball.” This documentary chronicles Mr. Frank’s 32 turbulent years in Congress, where he was chairman of the Financial Services Committee as Wall Street was imploding. He also became the first sitting member to marry a same-sex partner when, in 2012, he and Jim Ready promised to love each other “for better or for worse, on MSNBC or on Fox.” (Image: Mr. Frank, center, and Mr. Ready, right)9 P.M. (MSNBC) THE RACHEL MADDOW SHOW Hillary Rodham Clinton gives her first interview after testifying before the House committee on Benghazi.9 P.M. (13) BILLY ELLIOT: THE MUSICAL LIVE All he wants to do is dance: This Tony-winning musical about a boy’s journey from boxing to ballet, performed by its London cast and featuring 25 Billies past and present in a mash-up finale.9 P.M. (NBC) DATELINE NBC: TIPPING POINT It was the case that pushed the public over the edge. In 1990 — the most violent year in New York City history, with 2,245 homicides — Brian Watkins, a tourist, was stabbed on a subway platform while trying to protect his family from muggers. This month, Johnny Hincapie, one of seven men convicted of felony murder in Mr. Watkins’s death, was released after 25 years in prison, his conviction overturned by new evidence and his contention that his confession was coerced. Lester Holt interviews Mr. Hincapie, his family and New York City Police Commissioner William J. Bratton.9 P.M. (CUNY) TIMESTALKS Robert Redford and Cate Blanchett discuss “Truth,” their film about the controversy over a CBS report that President George W. Bush received preferential treatment from the Air National Guard. When Mary Mapes, the producer, could not authenticate documents that supported the charges, she was fired, and Dan Rather later stepped down as anchorman. Also appearing: Ms. Mapes and Mr. Rather. (Image: Mr. Redford)10 P.M. (Discovery) PACIFIC WARRIORS Some brave souls use ancient techniques and modern sea kayaks to chase monster fish in Hawaii. The high point: “Hawaiian sleigh rides,” when they hook a behemoth that drags them out to sea 10 miles or more.10 P.M. (Cinemax) THE KNICK Would you want a heroin addict operating on you? The board of the Knickerbocker Hospital doesn’t think so and tries to prevent Dr. Thackery from returning.What’s Streaming NowTHE HUNGER GAMES: MOCKINGJAY PART 1 (2014) Katniss Everdeen, now squirreled away in District 13, once thought destroyed, leads the charge against the Capitol. This is essentially a war movie and the first time in the series that the filmmakers treat Jennifer Lawrence’s “butch goddess of dystopian cinema,” Manohla Dargis wrote in The New York Times, “just like, well, the girl.” (hulu.com) (Image: Ms. Lawrence)HEMLOCK GROVE Evildoers run rampant in a dingy Pennsylvania industrial town as the friendship between a werewolf and a rich guy who likes the taste of his own blood comes to a disturbing end. (netflix.com)Advertisement