AdvertisementSupported byBy Brian SeibertBorn in 1904, the same year as George Balanchine, Leonid Yakobson was among the forward-thinking ballet artists who stayed in Soviet Russia. Younger dancers who did leave, like Natalia Makarova and Mikhail Baryshnikov, attested to the importance and daring of Yakobson’s choreography, but it was little seen in the West. That’s still the case 40 years after his death, though in recent weeks some of his work was shown in New York. Earlier this month, Boston Ballet performed his “Pas de Quatre” at the Fall for Dance festival. And on Friday at the 92nd Street Y came more.This was “The Hidden Erotic Body of Soviet Ballet,” a presentation by Janice Ross, a professor at Stanford and the author of a recent book about Yakobson, “Like a Bomb Going Off: Leonid Yakobson and Ballet as Resistance in Soviet Russia.” After an introduction by Ms. Ross, dancers performed excerpts from Yakobson’s “Pas de Quatre” (1971) and “Rodin” (1958). Nikolay Levitskiy and Vera Solovyeva, who were members of Yakobson’s company and who now stage his ballets, gave the dancers some coaching notes, and a panel discussed how much (or how little) of Yakobson’s legacy might be retrievable.Early in her talk, Ms. Ross showed a photo of Pussy Riot, the Russian feminist protest group. “Before there was Pussy Riot, there was Yakobson,” she said. She presented Yakobson as artist who used ballet to challenge authoritarian rule. Under the threat of censorship (and potentially much worse), he resisted in covert ways, she said, “claiming ballet was innocuous while making it a weapon.”Restaging old dances is hard enough, but recreating a context in which it’s shocking to turn legs in rather than out is nearly impossible. Perhaps that accounts for the disconnect between the political drama of Ms. Ross’s descriptions and the tameness of the works performed. Apart from a heated argument among dance experts in the audience, no bombs went off, and the erotic body remained mostly hidden.Maria Baranova from Boston Ballet danced the first solo of “Pas de Quatre” charmingly, but you probably would have to have lived under Stalin to find its neo-Romanticism radical. Natasha Sheehan and Davide Occhipinti, two trainees at the San Francisco Ballet School, performed “Eternal Spring” and “The Kiss” from “Rodin” with a youthful freshness that made both pieces equally chaste.Fortunately, Mr. Levitskiy and Ms. Solovyeva were there to correct them. “More sex,” these marvelously frank Russians advised, pushing the youngsters’ pelvises together. In that moment, I could imagine something of Yakobson’s spirit coming through.Advertisement