By JOSHUA BARONEOCT. 22, 2015
Information on events for possible inclusion in Spare Times should be sent to weekend@nytimes.com by Friday at 5 p.m. for publication that week. Longer versions of Around Town and For Children listings are in a searchable guide at nytimes.com/events.Halloween WeekCandlelight Ghost Tours and 1865 Funeral Re-enactment(through next Friday) The Merchant’s House has inevitably racked up a few ghostly presences since it was built in 1832, and when members of the Tredwell family died, their funerals were held in the front parlor. (At 4 p.m. on Sunday, the museum will host a re-enactment of Seabury Tredwell’s funeral, with a procession to the rarely open New York City Marble Cemetery.) The dimly lit walking tour of the house is mostly a history lesson, but with a frightening twist. A premium option, the Super Spooky Tour, includes a visit to the fourth-floor servants’ quarters. Tours begin every half-hour from 6:30 to 9:30 p.m., 29 East Fourth Street, East Village, 212-777-1089, merchantshouse.org.Cemetery Walk and Tombstone Talk(Thursday) The Bartow-Pell Mansion Museum is showing off its spookiest assets in this candlelit walk through its cemetery. Afterward, the tombstone expert and carver Robert Neal Carpenter will discuss the art of funerary monuments. Registration is required. At 6 p.m., 895 Shore Road North, Pelham Bay Park, the Bronx, 718-885-1461, bartowpellmansionmuseum.org.Día de los Muertos(Saturday and Sunday) The New York Botanical has one last trick up its sleeve before the exhibition “Frida Kahlo: Art, Garden, Life” closes on Nov. 1. For the next two weekends, the show will also include festivities for Día de los Muertos, the Mexican holiday for celebrating the lives of dead friends and family. In keeping with tradition, the garden will put up an altar for the star of the show, Frida. Other activities throughout the day include making masks and painting faces. (Also Oct. 31 and Nov. 1.) From 10 a.m. to 8 p.m. on Saturdays; to 6 p.m. on Sundays. Bronx River Parkway (Exit 7W) and Fordham Road, the Bronx, 718-817-8700, nybg.org.AdvertisementEdgar Allan Poe and His Ghostly Neighbors of Greenwich Village(through next Friday) Poe is the spooky name to peg this tour to ghosts and Halloween, but his ghostly neighbors include other major American figures like Eleanor Roosevelt and Aaron Burr. Of course, several of Poe’s haunts will also be stops along the way. The tour meets at 85 West Third Street, between Thompson and Sullivan Streets in Greenwich Village. Daily at 7:30 p.m. and also at 9:30 p.m. Thursdays through Sundays, 646-493-7092, ghostsofny.com.AdvertisementGravesend Inn(Friday, Saturday and Thursday) This haunted house is really a playground for students at the New York City College of Technology, City University of New York. As in previous years, the aim is to push the boundaries of haunted house high-tech, with some help from Theatreworks, the school’s resident theater troupe. (Also next Friday and Oct. 31.) At various times, Voorhees Theatre, 186 Jay Street, at High Street, Downtown Brooklyn, 718-260-5592, gravesendinn.org.Halloween Harvest(Saturday and Sunday, through Nov. 1) For the next six weekends, Halloween is taking over Luna Park’s activities, games and rides. For example, Jack’s Pumpkin Shack will give visitors a chance to guess the weight of a giant pumpkin, and Camp Luna will be a s’mores-making station. More information is at lunaparknyc.com. 1000 Surf Avenue, Coney Island, Brooklyn, 718-373-5862.‘Hannibal’(Sunday) As in Hannibal Lecter. And he’s getting the opera treatment in this premiere with One World Symphony. The conductor, Sung Jin Hong, also wrote the music for this follow-up to his 2014 opera “Breaking Bad — Ozymandias.” Other items on the evening’s program include selections from Stravinsky’s “Rite of Spring,” Fauré‘s Requiem and Bach’s “Goldberg” Variations, as well as the Finnish composer Kaija Saariaho’s 2005 work “Ballade.” At 8 p.m., Holy Apostles Church, 296 Ninth Avenue, at West 28th Street, Chelsea, 718-462-7270, oneworldsymphony.org.New York Haunted Hayride(through Oct. 31) New Yorkers needn’t travel far for a this quintessential fall activity. Little is quaint about this ride, though. The hay wagon passes through a series of Halloween hellscapes, complete with ghostly figures, demonic possessions and, of course, wicked clowns. Wednesdays through Sundays at midnight, Randalls Island Park, 302-751-5747, newyorkhauntedhayride.com.Tompkins Square Halloween Dog Parade(Saturday) The pups in this parade don’t usually come in half-baked or simple costumes. Last year’s participants included, for example: a French bulldog with a “Star Wars” theme; a papal Westie mix; a terrier ballerina, not quite on pointe on all fours; and a pair Grand Prix-ready Chihuahuas. Now in its 25th year, the Tompkins Square Halloween Dog Parade, sponsored by Purina Beggin’, is expected to bring in hundreds of costumed dogs — not to mention thousands of people. The runway competition begins at noon, and the winner gets a title familiar to canines and their fans: Best in Show. Afterward, the parade with all contestants and their owners begins. From noon to 3 p.m., between Avenues A and B and East Seventh and East 10th Streets, East Village, tompkinssquaredogrun.com/halloween; free.Museums and SitesAmerican Museum of Natural History: ‘Countdown to Zero’(continuing) Smallpox is the only human disease to have been eradicated, but what about Guinea worm, polio, malaria and others? This exhibition, presented in collaboration with the Carter Center, examines international efforts to control and wipe out infection. Daily from 10 a.m. to 5:45 p.m., Central Park West and 79th Street, 212-769-5200, amnh.org.Brooklyn Historical Society: ‘Brooklyn Americans: Hockey’s Forgotten Promise’(through March 27) The New York Islanders may be new to Brooklyn, but the borough isn’t new to hockey. This exhibition tells the story of its first National Hockey League team, the Brooklyn Americans. The team wore red, white and blue jerseys and represented Kings County at the height of World War II and in the early days of the N.H.L. Still, as the exhibition shows, the team was unsuccessful and ultimately financially doomed. 128 Pierrepont Street, near Clinton Street, Brooklyn Heights, 718-222-4111, brooklynhistory.org.Advertisement‘Global Citizen: The Architecture of Moshe Safdie’(through Jan. 10) This touring exhibition, a retrospective of Mr. Safdie’s career of more than 50 years, makes its way to New York with new material based on the architect’s recent work related to dense urbanism in Asia. Donald Albrecht from the Museum of the City of New York organized the material in this show, which also explores Mr. Safdie’s design philosophy that buildings should be extensions of their physical, historical and cultural contexts. National Academy Museum, 1083 Fifth Avenue, at 89th Street, 212-369-4880, nationalacademy.org.Intrepid Sea, Air & Space Museum: ‘On the Line: Intrepid and the Vietnam War’(through Sept. 1, 2016) Visitors familiar with this museum are likely well aware of its flight deck, perhaps even some of its wartime history. During the Vietnam War, the Intrepid served three tours overseas between 1966 and 1969. Now, in an exhibition set in the space where the crew lived and worked, the museum tells their stories with artifacts, film clips and photographs. Pier 86, 46th Street and 12th Avenue, Clinton, 877-957-7447, intrepidmuseum.org.Museum of Chinese in America: ‘Sub Urbanisms: Casino Urbanization, Chinatowns and the Contested American Landscape’(through January) Stephen Fan, an architecture professor and curator, examines the trend of Chinese casino workers in Connecticut converting suburban homes into multifamily communities. This exhibition is both creative and historical; it takes the present to imagine the future of housing design while looking back on the events that created the trend of suburban migration. 215 Centre Street, between Howard and Grand Streets, Lower Manhattan, 212-619-4785, mocanyc.org.Museum of the Moving Image: ‘How Cats Took Over the Internet’ (through January) Even people who hate cats can’t easily get through an hour of browsing online without coming across some kind of feline clickbait. This exhibition takes a critical look at and tells the story of how we, as a society, got to this point. Yes, there are cat GIFs. 35th Avenue at 37th Street, Astoria, Queens, 718-784-0077, movingimage.us.National Museum of the American Indian: ‘Meryl McMaster: Second Self’✓(through Dec. 11) Meryl McMaster, an artist from Canada and a Plains Cree member of the Siksika Nation, shows her “Second Self” photography series, which uses portraiture to explore the complex ways in which identity is constructed. 1 Bowling Green, Lower Manhattan, 212-514-3700, nmai.si.edu; free.New-York Historical Society: ‘Superheroes in Gotham’ (through Feb. 21) New York is safe as long as its long roster of comic-book heroes stick around. It’s been this way for nearly a century as these characters have defended the city in books, TV shows, movies, video games — even the Broadway stage. New-York Historical Society’s latest exhibition tells the story of how super heroes became a cultural staple for all ages and media. 170 Central Park West, at 77th Street, 212-873-3400, nyhistory.org.New York Transit Museum: ‘Bringing Back the City’(ongoing) This new exhibition comes three years after Hurricane Sandy took a swipe at the city’s infrastructure. But what of the people who put the pieces back together? “Bringing Back the City” tells the stories of everyday services — like electricity and mass transit — that become extraordinary in times of crisis. Boerum Place, at Schermerhorn Street, Downtown Brooklyn, 718-694-1600, bringingbackthecity.com.New York Transit Museum Grand Central Terminal Gallery Annex: ‘New York’s Transportation Landmarks’(through Nov. 1) It’s been 50 years since New York passed its Landmarks Law, which covers over 30,000 buildings and structures around the city. To celebrate the anniversary, the New York Transit Museum has created an exhibition that explores the history of development, use and even rescue of these landmarks. More information: 212-878-0106, web.mta.info/mta/museum.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.‘Sea Level: Five Boroughs at Water’s Edge’ (through December) In its first pop-up exhibition for the Seaport Culture District, the American Institute of Architects presents a water’s eye view of the city through photos by Elizabeth Felicella and accompanying essays by Robert Sullivan. The panoramic view of New York starts at New York Harbor and makes its way along the East River, showing the shore of each borough along the way. Center @ the Seaport, 181 Front Street, South Street Seaport, Lower Manhattan, 212-683-0023, cfa.aiany.org.Advertisement‘Webtoon’(through Oct. 29) This exhibition highlights the culture of Korean webtoons — comics specifically made for the Internet. In addition to displaying the comics, this show will also take a look at the media and commercial products that have been inspired by popular webtoons. Korean Cultural Service New York, Gallery Korea, 460 Park Avenue, at 57th Street, Manhattan, 212-759-9550, koreanculture.org.Events‘In Your Face — New York’(Sunday) Among the events planned to celebrate the new home of St. Ann’s Warehouse is the premiere of this podcast, hosted by the Tony Award-winning playwright and performer Sarah Jones. The subject is New York — a broad, ambitious undertaking, but diversity is the point: Each episode will feature sketches, songs and storytelling from local artists and writers. Among the guests at the premiere are the New Yorker writer Patricia Marx, Brian Lehrer of WNYC and Bruce Weber, an obituary writer for The New York Times. At 5 p.m., 45 Water Street, at Old Dock Street, Dumbo, Brooklyn, 866-811-4111, inyourfaceny.org.The International Show(through Thursday) This art and antique fair, founded in 1989, has a fitting home inside the old, ornate Park Avenue Armory. The selection covers a broad range of categories that includes rare books, jewelry, sculpture — even armor. From 11 a.m. to 6 p.m., and to 7:30 p.m. on Friday, Saturday, Monday and Wednesday, 643 Park Avenue, at 67th Street, Manhattan, 212-642-8572, haughton.com.PDN PhotoPlus International Conference and Expo(Friday and Saturday) This massive show brings together roughly 21,000 photographers, filmmakers, students, teachers and photography fans. The schedule of events includes seminars, demonstrations and new technology on display. More information is at photoplusexpo.com. At various times, Jacob K. Javits Convention Center, 655 West 34th Street, Manhattan.Two-Prov Tournament(Saturday) Q.E.D. regularly offers improv comedy shows; this fall, it has gotten into the business of presenting its own tournament in which audience members vote for their favorite two-person improv teams. The finale, hosted by the stand-up comedians Lauren Hope Krass and Kimberly Sparkle Stewart, will be judged by the Magnet Theater co-founder Armando Diaz, as well as the improv instructor TJ Mannix and Chris Aurilio, a performer and general manager of the Peoples Improv Theater. At 8 p.m., 27-16 23rd Avenue, near 28th Street, Astoria, Queens, 347-451-3873, qedastoria.com.Videology Presents Movie Trivia(Tuesday) Videology, the Brooklyn bar and cinema, hosts a free film-themed trivia contest every week. The game varies; you will want to know theme songs, facts, quotations (especially ones from Nicolas Cage) and more. The winning team receives a free round of drinks, and there are chances to win drinks each round. At 8:30 p.m., 308 Bedford Avenue, at South First Street, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, 718-782-3468, videologybarandcinema.com.Spoken Word‘Hilton Als: I Don’t Remember’(Friday) Mr. Als, the essayist and New Yorker theater critic, gives this Mellon Visiting Artists lecture about his life in the 1980s, when he was a young writer at the Village Voice and the AIDS crisis turned over the gay social and intellectual scene downtown. In revisiting his personal history, he will examine what fraternal ideals mean for gay men. At 6 p.m., Schapiro Hall, Columbia University, 605 West 115th Street, near Broadway, Morningside Heights, arts.columbia.edu/public-programs; free.Luc Sante(Wednesday) Mr. Sante, a writer and critic, discusses his new book, “The Other Paris.” As the title suggests, it’s an unconventional look at the City of Light — its history of artists, homeless people and all-around outcasts who are becoming increasingly rare. At 7 p.m., Strand Book Store, 828 Broadway, at 12th Street, 212-473-1452, strandbooks.com.AdvertisementMimi Sheraton and Gabrielle Hamilton(Wednesday) If you’re in need of a food bucket list, Ms. Sheraton’s “1,000 Foods to Eat Before You Die” may be a good starting point. She will join Ms. Hamilton, a chef and author, in discussing food around the world, with an eye toward the Jewish, Chinese and Latin cuisine of the Lower East Side. At 7 p.m., Museum at Eldridge Street, 12 Eldridge Street, Lower East Side, 212-219-0888, eldridgestreet.org.Rod Stewart in Conversation With Hoda Kotb(Thursday) Mr. Stewart’s latest album, “Another Country,” comes out on Friday. It’s his 30th release in a career that has spanned five decades and two Rock and Roll Hall of Fame honors. He will discuss his life and work — London’s club scene of the ’60s and writing “Maggie May,” for example — with Ms. Kotb, the television personality and “Today Show” host. At 7:30 p.m., 92nd Street Y, 1395 Lexington Avenue, 212-415-5500, 92y.org.‘Tannhäuser’ Seminar(Sunday) The Wagner Society of New York’s annual seminar takes its theme from the Metropolitan Opera’s current run of the composer’s early masterpiece “Tannhäuser.” Participants include Wagner scholars, as well as members of the Met’s cast, including Eva-Maria Westbroek, Peter Mattei and Michelle DeYoung. From noon to 5 p.m., St. Joseph’s School, 420 East 87th Street, Manhattan, 212-749-4561, wagnersocietyny.org.Walking ToursBryant Park Public Tours(Wednesday) Bryant Park hasn’t always been the clean, open space it is today. This tour provides some insights on its history, including its darker days as a “needle park” in the 1970s, as well as its award-winning design and maintenance efforts. The tour meets at the fountain at 41st Street at Avenue of the Americas. Registration is required. At 11 a.m., Bryant Park, 212-768-4242, bryantpark.org.Central Park(Sunday) Central Park’s green-leafed days are numbered. This walking tour — which stops at places like the Bethesda Terrace, Belvedere Castle and the Ramble — could be a good chance to explore the park before its welcoming lawns like Sheep Meadow say goodbye until the spring. History will also figure heavily into discussions; the park is more than 150 years old, after all. The tour meets at 2 p.m. at Central Park West between 66th and 67th Streets, Upper West Side, 888-606-9255, bigonion.com.Flatiron district Walking Tour(Sunday) This free tour meets at 11 a.m. on the southwest corner of Madison Square Park, at 23rd Street and Broadway, in front of the William Seward statue. Sponsored by the Flatiron/23rd Street Partnership; discoverflatiron.org.History of Wall Street Tour(weekdays) Stops on this tour, led by Wall Street Walks, include the New York Stock Exchange, Trinity Church, the Wall Street Bull, and ground zero and the Sept. 11 memorial. The tours last 90 minutes and begin at 11 a.m. and 1:30 p.m. (Also at 3 p.m. on Tuesdays and Fridays.) More details: wallstreetwalks.com.Save the Village(Saturday and Tuesday) Last year the Steven Kasher Gallery in Chelsea put on an exhibition with the photography of Fred W. McDarrah, who documented the changing scene of Greenwich Village since the 1960s. Now, the spirit of that show has taken the form of this walking tour, which includes stops at the places McDarrah captured on film: locales like Washington Square Park and the Stonewall Inn. At 10 a.m.; the tour meets at Christopher Park, Stonewall Place, at Seventh Avenue, West Village, savethevillagetours.com.Union Square: Crossroads of New York(Saturday) Sponsored by the Union Square Partnership, this free year-round tour focuses on the area’s political and social histories. The walk, led by guides from Big Onion Walking Tours, meets at 2 p.m. by the statue of Lincoln in Union Square Park, near the 16th Street transverse. 212-517-1826, unionsquarenyc.org.A version of this schedule appears in print on October 23, 2015, on Page C33 of the New York edition with the headline: Spare Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.