By ROBIN POGREBIN, BRETT SOKOL and HILARIE M. SHEETSOCT. 22, 2015
People who populate paintings by the French artist Jean-Antoine Watteau tend toward delicate aristocrats, sashaying through his dreamy, pastoral landscapes and refined soirees.Yet early in his short career (he died in 1721 at 37), Watteau also ventured into military subjects, painting about a dozen intimate scenes of life off the battlefield during the War of the Spanish Succession. Though known mainly to specialists, the paintings were owned by figures like Catherine the Great and Louis François Joseph, Prince of Conti.Only seven works have survived, and the Frick Collection plans to show four of them in a July exhibition — which they say is the first devoted solely to this body of Watteau’s work. “These are paintings of war at the margins of war — what happens outside of battle,” said Aaron Wile, the show’s curator.Absent are the usual rearing horses or glittering uniforms of military paintings; Watteau focused on the quiet moments amid the fighting, when soldiers played cards or smoked pipes.AdvertisementThe show will center on the museum’s own “Portal of Valenciennes,” (1709-10) depicting soldiers lounging in the early-morning light, apparently outside the fortifications of Watteau’s birthplace. The recently rediscovered “The Supply Train” portrays a kitchen assistant tending a kettle, a soldier unsaddling his horse. Inspired by 17th-century Dutch and Flemish genre scenes, Watteau also did studies of soldiers in red chalk, several of which will be on view. ROBIN POGREBINMiami’s art museums are grabbing headlines with splashy staff hires and well-heeled additions to their boards. Yet when it comes to actual artwork, the city’s marquee collectors — and their personally run exhibition spaces — continue to steal the show. The latest example of “The Miami Model”? A sprawling retrospective from the German blue-chip artist Anselm Kiefer that fills nearly a quarter of the 45,000-square-foot Margulies Collection at the Warehouse — a garment factory transformed into a showcase for art holdings of the real estate developer Martin Margulies.AdvertisementThe exhibit opens Wednesday, but “it will be up forever,” Mr. Margulies said. “If you think I ever want to go through this again … .” he trailed off, motioning to the flurry of activity throughout the Warehouse this week. Mr. Kiefer directed a small army of art handlers whirring about on hydraulic lifts, racing to install an array of 25,000-pound detritus-filled sculptures, 10-feet-high neo-runic paintings, and charcoal wall inscriptions, just hours before a dinner benefiting the Lotus House homeless shelter. The works include the new sculpture, “Ages of the World,” a 17-foot stack of 400 unfinished canvases, lead books, rubble and dried sunflowers.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Margulies played down the show being any kind of aesthetic shot across the bow of the Pérez Art Museum Miami, despite his public feud with that institution over its continuing to receive millions in tax dollars from a struggling community rather than relying solely on private contributors. Instead, Mr. Margulies hoped visiting schoolchildren would learn from Mr. Kiefer’s handiwork: Don’t let meager materials limit your vision. “They should realize this is the creative process of an artist.”Mr. Kiefer, 70, remains a controversial figure within the art world, alternately lionized and denounced for artwork invoking both World War II Germany and the kabbalah. Some see transcendent statements, others a reduction of the Jewish experience to kitsch. Both factions will find plenty of grist at the Warehouse, where Mr. Kiefer’s works refer to everything from the poet and Nazi labor camp survivor Paul Celan to the Old Testament’s Lilith.“Important work always creates polarization,” Mr. Kiefer explained. “The victims understand. Those people who see in me a glorifier of fascism — when you look into them, you find they have something to hide themselves.” As for the distinction between having his work shown in a “private” versus public museum, Mr. Kiefer hoped the former would proliferate. Collectors should be free to bypass museum curators, he said, and lavishly pursue their own tastes. He compared the phenomenon with the early 20th-century construction of public libraries by moguls like Andrew Carnegie: “I think it was J. P. Morgan who said, ‘If you die rich, it’s a mistake.’ ” BRETT SOKOLThose heading to Dumbo or Manhattan will get a bold shout out come Nov. 9, when Deborah Kass’s first public sculpture is installed in Brooklyn Bridge Park. Huge yellow aluminum letters, visible from the F.D.R. Drive, will spell “YO” against the backdrop of Brooklyn. The flip side, for those gazing at Manhattan, will read “OY.” The Two Trees Management Company, a Dumbo-based real estate developer, commissioned the artwork, on view through next summer.Ms. Kass — known for appropriating the styles of male artists as both homage and feminist one-upmanship — first created “OY” as a painting riffing on Edward Ruscha’s 1962 Pop canvas, “OOF.” After a friend pointed out its reflection, she painted “YO” as a diptych that nodded to Picasso’s 1901 self-portrait, “Yo Picasso” (“I, Picasso”).Ms. Kass, who has a show of new word paintings, “No Kidding,” opening Dec. 9 at Paul Kasmin in Chelsea, said the question was which word to aim at which place. “ ‘Yo, Brooklyn’ was kind of a no brainer, so ‘Oy, Manhattan’ resolved itself,” she said. HILARIE M. SHEETSA report in the Inside Art column on Friday about the installation of Deborah Kass’s first public sculpture in Brooklyn Bridge Park next month, using information from the Paul Kasmin Gallery, misstated the opening date of a show of Ms. Kass’s paintings at the gallery. It is Dec. 9, not Dec. 8.A version of this article appears in print on October 23, 2015, on Page C22 of the New York edition with the headline: Watteau in Wartime, Off the Battlefield.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.