OCT. 22, 2015
Full reviews of recent classical performances: nytimes.com/classical. A searchable guide to these and other performances is at nytimes.com/events.Opera‘Persona’(Friday and Saturday) Ingmar Bergman’s dark psychothriller morphs into an opera in the hands of the composer Keeril Makan and the librettist and director Jay Scheib. The fierce new-music ensemble Either/Or performs under the music direction of Evan Ziporyn; the cast includes the mezzo Amanda Crider as Alma and the baritone Joshua Jeremiah as Man. Friday’s performance is followed by a 10 p.m. concert of chamber works by Mr. Makan performed by the Aeolus Quartet. At 8 p.m., National Sawdust, 80 North Sixth Street, at Wythe Avenue, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, 646-779-8455, nationalsawdust.org. (Corinna da Fonseca-Wollheim)★ ‘Rigoletto’(Friday and Wednesday) The luminous soprano Olga Peretyatko is a captivating Gilda opposite the bright-voiced tenor Stephen Costello as the Duke of Mantua in this fresh and confident revival of Michael Mayer’s production set in a Las Vegas casino. The baritone George Gagnidze marshals impressive depths in the title role; the bass Stefan Kocan and the mezzo Katarina Leoson make a fine pair as the assassin Sparafucile and his sister Maddalena. Pablo Heras-Casado conducts. At 8 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)★ ‘Tannhäuser’(Saturday and Tuesday) It was hard for James Levine’s admirers not to be concerned when he withdrew from conducting the Metropolitan Opera’s upcoming new production of Berg’s “Lulu” so that he could concentrate his energies on the revival of Wagner’s “Tannhäuser.” But on opening night, despite his ongoing health troubles, he conducted this work with the requisite stamina and deep insight, drawing glowing, unforced playing from the orchestra, despite stretches now and then when the music-making lost some focus. The strong cast is headed by the clarion-voiced tenor Johan Botha, who may not have much dramatic presence but sings the punishing role with verve, power and beauty. Michelle DeYoung as Venus and Eva-Maria Westbroek as Elisabeth also give impassioned performances. And the great baritone Peter Mattei is magnificent as Wolfram. Otto Schenk’s very traditional production, which has its merits, has been gone from the house since 2004. Saturday at 7:30 p.m. and Tuesday at 7 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Anthony Tommasini)Advertisement‘Tosca’(Saturday and Thursday) One of the most controversial productions of the Peter Gelb era, Luc Bondy’s “Tosca,” returns to the stage for a run that lasts through Dec. 1. This week there are two tragic heroines: Oksana Dyka on Saturday, and perhaps the great Tosca of the age, Angela Gheorghiu, on Thursday. The casts otherwise remain the same, with Roberto Aronica as Cavaradossi and Zeljko Lucic as Scarpia. Paolo Carignani conducts. Saturday at 12:30 p.m., Thursday at 7:30 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (David Allen)Advertisement‘Turandot’(Monday and next Friday) The lavish spectacle of Franco Zeffirelli’s glittering, ornate production of Puccini’s “Turandot” continues its run on Monday. Paolo Carignani conducts the soprano Lise Lindstrom as the icy princess, the tenor Marcelo Álvarez as Calàfand the soprano Leah Crocetto as Liù. Monday at 7:30 p.m., next Friday at 8 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Vivien Schweitzer)Classical MusicAmerican Composers Orchestra(Friday) The omnivorous Sonic Festival concludes with a concert chock-full of world premieres by composers including Michael-Thomas Foumai, Melody Eötvös, Hannah Lash, Judah Adashi and Conrad Winslow. At 7:30 p.m., Zankel Hall, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)Joshua Bell and Sam Haywood(Wednesday) These excellent musicians return to Carnegie Hall for a program featuring two major works of the piano-violin duo repertory — Beethoven’s “Kreutzer” Sonata and Fauré’s Sonata No. 1, as well as T.A. Vitali’s Chaconne in G minor. Additional pieces will be announced from the stage. At 8 p.m., Isaac Stern Auditorium, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Schweitzer)Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center(Sunday and Thursday) Sunday’s intriguing program, titled “Piano and Winds,” explores chamber works that combine the piano with various woodwinds, as well as that interloping brass instrument that so often crashes wind ensembles: the horn. There are pieces by Ligeti, Rimsky-Korsakov, Poulenc and Albéric Magnard. This season the society is also presenting ambitious surveys of complete string quarter cycles by various composers. First up is the influential Austrian Alexander Zemlinsky (1871-1942). On Thursday at the Rose Studio the excellent Escher String Quartet performs the four Zemlinksy quartets, works spanning 1896 to 1936. Sunday at 5 p.m., Alice Tully Hall; Thursday at 7:30 p.m., Rose Studio; Lincoln Center, 212-875-5788, chambermusicsociety.org. (Tommasini)Matt Haimovitz(Friday and Saturday) The adventurous Israeli-born cellist Matt Haimovitz has performed in unconventional settings in New York, from the High Line to CBGB. Lately, in cooperation with Columbia University’s Miller Theater, he has been performing free solo programs of Bach’s cello suites along with new works by various composers in different locations around the campus. The final Campus Concert is on Friday afternoon; details will be posted that day on Miller Theater’s Facebook page and Twitter account, @MillerTheatre. To end the project, at the theater on Saturday he’ll perform a traditional, ticketed concert — a program of Bach Suites No. 1, 2 and 6, along with works by Philip Glass, Du Yun and Luna Pearl Woolf. Friday at 1 p.m., Saturday at 8 p.m., Miller Theater, Broadway at 116th Street, Morningside Heights, 212-854-7799, millertheatre.com. (Tommasini)★ Angela Hewitt(Wednesday) This superb pianist, admired for her performances and extensive recordings of Bach on the Hyperion label, waited until recently to study Bach’s monumental “Art of Fugue,” a work that initially resonated less with her than Bach’s other music. She performs this complex, spiritual work with clear voicing and expressive nuance. At 7:30 p.m., Kaufmann Concert Hall, 92nd Street Y, 1395 Lexington Avenue, 212-415-5500, 92y.org. (Schweitzer)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.★ Jennifer Koh and Shai Wosner(Monday) Ms. Koh, a violinist, and Mr. Wosner, a pianist, have collaborated to fine effect recently. They continue their partnership with a series of four concerts featuring the complete Beethoven violin sonatas alongside new works inspired by a sonata on the program. The opening event features Beethoven’s fiery “Kreutzer” sonata, the Violin Sonata in D (Op. 12, No. 1) and Vijay Iyer’s “Bridgetower Fantasy,” a homage to the 19th-century violinist George Bridgetower, for whom Beethoven composed “Kreutzer.” At 8:30 p.m., 92nd Street Y, 1395 Lexington Avenue, 212-415-5500, 92y.org. (Schweitzer)Lang Lang(Friday) He may divide the critics, but audiences love this superstar of the piano for his ability to turn in exciting performances. Here he takes on Bach’s Italian Concerto, Tchaikovsky’s “The Seasons” and a selection of Scherzos by Chopin. At 8:30 p.m., Isaac Stern Auditorium, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)Advertisement★ London Symphony Orchestra(Friday and Sunday) The firebrand conductor Valery Gergiev leads this excellent ensemble in two programs of stirring music with the powerful pianist Yefim Bronfman as soloist. Friday’s concert, at 8 p.m., presents the complete “Firebird” by Stravinsky alongside Bartok’s Piano Concerto No. 3 and his Suite from “The Miraculous Mandarin.” On Sunday, at 3 p.m., the all-Bartok lineup features the Dance Suite, Concerto for Orchestra and Piano Concerto No. 2. David Geffen Hall, Lincoln Center, 212-721-6500, lincolncenter.org. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)New York Philharmonic(Friday, Saturday and Thursday) The Philharmonic, back in town after its residence in Michigan, presents two programs this week. First up, Semyon Bychkov conducts Brahms’s Symphony No. 1 and Double Concerto, with Lisa Batiashvili and Gautier Capuçon, as well as a Brahms homage by Detlev Glanert (at 11 a.m. on Friday and at 8 p.m. on Saturday). On Thursday, at 7:30 p.m., Jaap van Zweden conducts Beethoven’s Symphony No. 5, Britten’s “Sinfonia da Requiem” and, with Inon Barnatan at the keyboard, Mozart’s Piano Concerto No. 23. David Geffen Hall, Lincoln Center; 212-875-5656, nyphil.org. (Allen)Orchestra of St. Luke’s(Thursday) Pablo Heras-Casado, the dynamic young conductor of this fine ensemble, returns to Carnegie Hall with a program featuring Stravinsky’s “Suite No. 2”, Mendelssohn’s Violin Concerto in E minor (Op. 64) with Christian Tetzlaff as soloist, and Tchaikovsky’s Symphony No. 1 “Winter Daydreams.” At 8 p.m., Isaac Stern Auditorium, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Schweitzer)★ Maurizio Pollini(Sunday) The towering Italian pianist Maurizio Pollini almost has a New York residency this month, starting with a recital on Oct. 11 at Carnegie Hall, followed by a performance with the New York Philharmonic for the first time in 20 years. He returns to Carnegie this weekend for another recital, this time playing works by Schoenberg and three Beethoven sonatas, including the tumultuous “Appassionata.” At 3 p.m., Isaac Stern Auditorium, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Tommasini)‘Refuse the Hour’(through Sunday) William Kentridge, whose “Lulu” is soon to the stage at the Metropolitan Opera, explores the theme of time in this multimedia chamber opera. Billed as a “lecture-performance” involving ticking metronomes, spinning dances, animations and video projections, the score is by Philip Miller: Kentridge himself stars. Friday and Saturday at 7:30 p.m., Sunday at 3 p.m., BAM Harvey Theater, 651 Fulton Street, Fort Greene, Brooklyn, 718-636-4100, bam.org. (Allen)Rushes(Friday) One of the most unusual ensembles in the increasingly diverse music world — of seven bassoons, and seven bassoons alone — gives a program of a single work, “Rushes,” by Michael Gordon, founder of Bang on a Can. At 8 p.m., Board of Officers Room, Park Avenue Armory, 643 Park Avenue, at 67th Street, Manhattan, 212-933-5812, armoryonpark.org. (Allen)St. Lawrence String Quartet(Thursday) This excellent ensemble offers a program featuring Haydn’s String Quartet in F minor (Op. 20, No. 5), Beethoven’s String Quartet in C-sharp minor, (Op. 131), and the New York premiere of John Adams’s Second Quartet. At 7:30 p.m., Zankel Hall, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Schweitzer)★ Gil Shaham(Sunday) In a formidable test of musical and mental concentration, the brilliant violinist Gil Shaham will play Bach’s complete partitas and sonatas for solo violin — six long, difficult and astonishing works. In a creative leap, the performances will be accompanied by newly commissioned films by David Michalek, a visual artist known to be inspired by movement and gesture. At 7 p.m., Zankel Hall, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Tommasini)A version of this schedule appears in print on October 23, 2015, on Page C17 of the New York edition with the headline: The Listings: Classical.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.