AdvertisementSupported byBy Laurel Graeber‘The Velveteen Rabbit’When viewed with love, even the plain and ordinary can become vibrant and beautiful. That simple observation lies at the heart of “The Velveteen Rabbit,” one of the more wrenching children’s classics. Although the death and destruction that are threatened in the story do not prevail, loss does.That sadness, though, has not diminished the work’s popularity with playwrights, and now Atlantic for Kids, part of the Atlantic Theater Company, is presenting an imaginative musical adaptation. Written by Anya Saffir and Cormac Bluestone, and directed by Ms. Saffir, “The Velveteen Rabbit” adheres closely to the 1922 book by Margery Williams (credited here as Margery Williams Bianco) in both spirit and content.Like all Atlantic for Kids shows, this one unfolds on the set of the company’s concurrent adult production (“Cloud Nine,” by Caryl Churchill, designed by Dane Laffrey). But this marriage of convenience has become a genuine romance. Wooden bleachers, arranged in the round, and a stark performance area covered only with artificial grass intensify the intimacy. Like the toy rabbit itself, the staging has no mechanical gimmickry or flashy embellishments: just ingenious props, a couple of instruments (a cello and a guitar, with a brief banjo cameo), frequent a cappella and sometimes mere hints of costumes.But what enchantment these elements achieve as the cast members narrate, sing and act out the story of the Velveteen Rabbit (a tenderly devoted Jessika Doyel) and the Boy (Wesley Zurick, happy and heedless, above with Ms. Doyel). The Skin Horse (Hugh C. Smith) tells the rabbit that a child’s love can make toys real, and the rabbit senses that transformation. But after the boy recovers from scarlet fever, only a fairy’s magic, which turns the rabbit into a wild hare, prevents him from being burned with other contaminated playthings.The writers have leavened the tale with humor — a musical number in which the more elaborate nursery toys boast is particularly funny — and they’ve even given it a feminist streak, as when the Porcelain Doll (Mina Walker) displays a superheroine’s swagger. Mr. Bluestone has also injected wit into his score, which ranges in tone from barbershop quartet to doo-wop to English-style folk music.Yet not even a rousing bunny dance (Alison Beatty is the show’s choreographer) undercuts the poignancy. As the Skin Horse admits, and the rabbit learns, love sometimes hurts. But to deny love is to be less than fully alive.(Saturdays and Sundays at 10:30 a.m., through Nov. 1, at the Linda Gross Theater, 336 West 20th Street, Manhattan; 866-811-4111, atlantictheater.org.)For Children‘Alice in Wonderland’(Saturday and Sunday) Literally Alive Theater, which adapts books into children’s productions, has followed the White Rabbit to Greenwich Village, where it has revived this musical — using video projections and over 30 instruments — based on Alice’s adventures. Written by Michael Sgouros and Brenda Bell, the show is preceded by a workshop in which young theatergoers learn about Lewis Carroll’s work and make a story-related craft to take home. (Through Nov. 8.) Saturday at 11 a.m. and 3 p.m.; Sunday at 11 a.m.; workshop one hour before the performance. Players Theater, 115 Macdougal Street, at Minetta Lane, 212-352-3101, literallyalive.com.‘Archaeology Zone: Discovering Treasures From Playgrounds to Palaces’(Continuing) Children will step into the shoes of an explorer like Indiana Jones in this permanent exhibition at the Jewish Museum, but the adventures will be purely scholarly. Still, there is plenty of excitement in analyzing Middle Eastern artifacts like a jar handle, a clay jug and a bangle and figuring out the purpose behind ancient pieces like a Greek helmet and a bull-shaped vessel. This interactive show, for ages 3 to 10, also includes a recreated room from the Ottoman period (around 1900) where young archaeologists can dress in costume and portray early-20th-century immigrants to Palestine. 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92nd Street, 212-423-3200, thejewishmuseum.org.Baby Loves Disco: Halloween Hop(Sunday) Mommy and Daddy often love disco, too, and they can enjoy these afternoon dance parties — with bona fide D.J.s and nostalgic hits — along with their offspring. (The target age range is 6 months to 7 years.) Unlike clubs, these disco gatherings often feature diaper-changing stations, and unlike playgrounds, they usually have snacks and bars open for adults. This event, at University Settlement, has a Halloween theme, with a family dance costume contest. From 11 a.m. to 1 p.m., Speyer Hall, 184 Eldridge Street, at Rivington Street, Lower East Side, babylovesdisco.com/events.Boo at the Zoos(Saturday and Sunday) This weekend the Prospect Park Zoo joins the Bronx Zoo in helping visitors celebrate the wilder side of Halloween. From 11 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., the zoo in Brooklyn will offer games and crafts; treat-filled Halloween pumpkins for dingoes and baboons; the Spooky Barn, a haunted habitat; Wildlife Witch shows featuring animal guests; and a costume parade and dance party, among other attractions. In the Bronx, where the theme is “Mystery and Mischief,” the schedule, from 10 a.m. to 5 p.m., includes animal-theme magic shows; a hay maze; creature mystery stations; an Extinct Animal Graveyard; the Jack-O’-Lantern Illumination, a walk filled with creatures carved from pumpkins; and a twice-daily costume parade. Prospect Park Zoo, 450 Flatbush Avenue, Brooklyn, 718-399-7339, prospectparkzoo.com. Bronx Zoo, Bronx River Parkway and Fordham Road, Fordham, 718-367-1010, bronxzoo.com.‘Brooklyn Sewers: What’s Up Down There?’(Through May 29) When it comes to subterranean infrastructure projects, New York City’s subway system seems to get all the attention. But a group of teenage curators at the Brooklyn Historical Society would like to introduce you to another underground marvel: Brooklyn’s sewer system, one of the city’s oldest and most extensive infrastructure projects. This exhibition explores engineering conundrums and courtroom battles and tells the story of the sewer system through photographs, drawings and maps. 128 Pierrepont Street, near Clinton Street, Brooklyn Heights, 718-222-4111, brooklynhistory.org.Children’s Potions and Pumpkin Tea Parties(Saturday) If children haven’t received their invitations yet to study at Hogwarts, this may be the next-best thing. Gallow Green, the rooftop restaurant at the McKittrick Hotel, has revived this series, welcoming children ages 4 through 10 to learn all about herbal potions and plantings. An English tea — with pink lemonade for young guests — will be served, and each participant may bring a favorite stuffed animal or doll. (Each adult attending must be accompanied by at least one and no more than three children; each child should bring a recyclable bottle for concoctions.) (Through Oct. 24.) At 10 a.m., 542 West 27th Street, Chelsea, 212-564-1662, events.mckittrickhotel.com/childrenspotionsandplanting. Reservations required.CirKiz(Sunday) Electronic dance music doesn’t have many child-friendly connotations, but these raves are strictly about wholesome fun for the 6-to-12-year-old set. Established by Jenny Song and Jesse Sprague (Mr. Sprague’s 9-year-old son, DJ Alden, will again work with his father to provide entertainment), the CirKiz series of dance parties include dance lessons, D.J. lessons and crafts. This extravaganza, devoted to Halloween, will also feature costume and dance contests and performances by the 11-year-old singer-songwriter Lulu Scout, the kids’ dance company Kozmic Edge and the Dream Lab’s LED Robot. From 1 to 5 p.m., Space Ibiza New York, 637 West 50th Street, Clinton, cirkiz.com/events.‘Connected Worlds’(continuing) Human choices and actions have an impact on the world’s ecosystems, but people usually can’t see the effects as they happen. That isn’t true in this new permanent exhibition in the renovated Great Hall of the New York Hall of Science. Consisting of huge screens (one is 38 feet tall), the show depicts six interconnected environments with a shared water supply. With the help of technology that responds to gestures, “Connected Worlds” allows children to use simple motions to plant, harvest, cut trees, create clouds and make other changes in the projected landscapes — and see how the native flora and fauna fare. 47-01 111th Street, Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, Queens, 718-699-0005, nysci.org.‘Cooking With Frida’ (Through Nov. 1) The New York Botanical Garden is honoring the Mexican artist Frida Kahlo (1907-1954) in its exhibition “Frida Kahlo: Art, Garden, Life,” and it offers programs to introduce its youngest visitors to this famous Latina. In this one, at the Ruth Rea Howell Family Garden, children can explore the raw ingredients of Mexican cuisine and enjoy cooking demonstrations inspired by Kahlo’s entertaining. This weekend, the Howell garden will also offer “Dig! Plant! Grow!: Goodnight, Garden!,” a program from 1:30 to 5:30 p.m. that will focus on getting the place ready for winter. Children will rake leaves, bury bulbs and learn how to save seeds. It is Día de los Muertos Weekend on the grounds, too, celebrating the Mexican Day of the Dead. Highlights include a huge procession with skeletons and puppets (noon to 4 p.m.) and mask-making workshops in the Everett Children’s Adventure Garden (11 a.m. to 3 p.m.) “Cooking With Frida” workshops are on Wednesdays, Saturdays and Sundays at 2 and 4 p.m.; Bronx River Parkway (Exit 7W) and Fordham Road, the Bronx, 718-817-8700, nybg.org.Family Festival: ‘Swedish Wooden Toys’(Saturday) Sometimes the best playthings are the most basic. This free celebration at the Bard Graduate Center accompanies the exhibition “Swedish Wooden Toys,” which showcases the doll houses, pull toys, trains, planes and more that artisans created out of the simplicity of wood. Children can invent their own works at this event, collaborating with the Brooklyn organization ConstructionKids. They can also hear Phyllis Chen play music on toy pianos and enjoy marionette performances by the Swedish theater troupe Marionetteattern. From 11 a.m. to 3:30 p.m., Bard Graduate Center, 18 West 86th Street, Manhattan, 212-501-3011, bgc.bard.edu.‘Fashion Academy, the Musical’(Saturday and Sunday) Vital Theater Company’s latest show for children over 7 focuses on a middle-schooler, MacKenzie Williams, known as Mickey. When her colorful and completely original style doesn’t go over well at her new school, Fashion Academy of Brooklyn, she decides to make over not only her wardrobe, but also herself. Based on the book “Fashion Academy,” by the mother-daughter team of Sheryl Berk and Carrie Berk, this adaptation, by the elder Ms. Berk and Sabrina Chap, asks whether Mickey’s new persona, Kenzie, is really worth the sacrifice. (Through Oct. 31.) Saturdays and Sundays at 3:30 p.m., Marjorie S. Deane Little Theater, 10 West 64th Street, Manhattan, 212-579-0528, vitaltheatre.org.Film Forum Jr.: ‘Ghostbusters’(Sunday) Who you gonna call? If you don’t know the answer to that famous line already — or even if you do — head over to Film Forum, which is showing this indelible 1984 comedy just in time for Halloween. Part of Film Forum Jr., a series introducing classic movies to children, this hilarious adventure stars Bill Murray, Dan Aykroyd and Harold Ramis as a group out to destroy any obnoxious protoplasm causing trouble in New York City. And imagine the chaos when their foes turn out to be real. At 11 a.m., 209 West Houston Street, west of Avenue of the Americas, South Village, 212-727-8110, filmforum.org.‘Flight School, the Musical’(Saturday and Sunday) If you want to fly, and you’re a bird, you should be all set, right? Well, not if you happen to be a penguin. That’s the challenge confronting the little hero of this new musical from Vital Theater Company, adapted from “Flight School,” a picture book by Lita Judge. With a script by Cara Lustik, lyrics by Joshua H. Cohen and a score by David Mallamud, the show, recommended for ages 2 through 7, chronicles Penguin’s determination to remove the technical obstacles between him and the sky. (Through Oct. 31.) At 1 p.m., Marjorie S. Deane Little Theater, 10 West 64th Street, Manhattan, 212-579-0528, vitaltheatre.org.‘Frolic!’ at the Children’s Museum of Manhattan(Through Dec. 31) You’re never too young to rock — and this space proves it. A new pop-up installation at the museum, “Frolic!” uses rock music and a themed décor to stimulate sensory play and learning in visitors ages 5 and under. In addition to a stage, a pretend ticket booth and ’70s-style props — including a Volkswagen mini-van to climb into — the 1,500-square-foot area has programs of workshops and live performances to help little ones get into the groove. The Tisch Building, 212 West 83rd Street, 212-721-1223, cmom.org.The FunkeyMonkeys(Sunday) These aren’t zoo residents but a band formed by Joshua Sitron, composer and musical director for the Nickelodeon show “Dora the Explorer.” The members make up stories and do comic bits along with their music, which is funky, of course. And their intended audience — those 2 to 6 — can sing along and dance to tasty tunes like “Cupcake” and “Baba Ganoush (Do You Want to Eat a Pita?).” At 11:30 a.m. and 2 p.m., Jewish Museum, 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92nd Street, 212-423-3337, thejewishmuseum.org.‘The Gazillion Bubble Show: The Next Generation’(Friday through Sunday) Children love bubbles, and this interactive show promises not just a gazillion but also some of the largest ever blown, along with light effects and lasers. The stars are the members of the Yang family: Fan and Ana Yang and their son Deni and others, who rotate as M.C.s for the production. Audience members may even find themselves in bubbles of their own. (The run is open-ended.) Fridays at 7 p.m.; Saturdays at 11 a.m. and 2 and 4:30 p.m.; Sundays at noon and 3 p.m.; 340 West 50th Street, Clinton, 212-239-6200, gazillionbubbleshow.com.‘Ghouls & Gourds’(Saturday) You can find both — at least around Halloween — at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden, whose annual celebration offers all manner of children’s activities. Returning attractions include a flying flea circus and Ralph Lee’s Mettawee River Theater Company, which will lead a hootenanny with fantastical woodland creatures. Special attractions include “Bug Day Afternoon,” a slate of programs including an insectorium and an investigation of worms; “Edgy Veggies,” where visitors can bowl with brussels sprouts and create potato people; and “Crazy Critters,” in which children can make their own monster repellent in the Discovery Garden. The Children’s Book Barn is back, with visiting authors and illustrators, along with a final costume parade. From noon to 5:30 p.m., rain or shine, 1000 Washington Avenue, at Eastern Parkway, Prospect Heights, Brooklyn, 718-623-7200, bbg.org/ghouls&gourds.‘The Gruffalo’(Saturday and Sunday) What happens when the fearsome creature you’ve invented to scare away your enemies turns out to be real? That’s the situation the mouse confronts in “The Gruffalo,” Julia Donaldson’s best-selling children’s picture book. In this revival of a theatrical adaptation for ages 4 through 7 by Tall Stories, a London theater company (the sets and costumes are new), young audiences help provide sound effects for the Gruffalo, the beast the mouse thought it had only imagined. (The show closes this weekend.) At 11 a.m. and 3 p.m., with an additional performance on Saturday at 7 p.m. (The 3 p.m. show on Sunday will be sign-language interpreted and will feature drop-in arts activities an hour before the performance.) New Victory Theater, 209 West 42nd Street, Manhattan, 646-223-3010, newvictory.org.Halloween in Prospect Park(Saturday and Sunday) The Halloween Haunted Walk on Lookout Hill may technically be a walk in the park, but the squeamish might not want to call it that. In this Prospect Park tradition, geared to ages 7 through 12, zombies, werewolves, witches and other haunted souls lurk along a wooded pathway, ready to provide some friendly frights. The park also offers a Halloween Fair on the Nethermead, where children can meet someone not at all scary: Snoopy from “Peanuts,” as well as the artists from Blue Sky Studios who worked on the coming film “The Peanuts Movie,” who will teach how to draw that beloved beagle. Both events are on Saturday only, from noon to 3 p.m., but other park activities go on all weekend. On Saturday and Sunday afternoons, the Prospect Park Audubon Center will offer “Creepy Crawly Halloween” (1 to 4:30 p.m.), with animal encounters (including a feeding) and owl pellet dissection, and the Lefferts Historic House will host “Scary Stories With Tammy Hall” (2 to 4 p.m.), in which Ms. Hall will entertain with tales told two centuries ago when Flatbush was a village. Directions are on the website; prospectpark.org/halloween;‘Hansel and Gretel’s Halloween Adventure’(Friday through Sunday, and Tuesday through Thursday) This pair already know how to deal with a witch, and they have encounters with many more fantastical creatures in this puppet musical at the Swedish Cottage Marionette Theater. Geared to ages 3 through 9 (and appropriately tame), the show is a sequel to the theater’s original “Hansel and Gretel,” introducing characters like mermaids, cute monsters, charming vampires and valiant pirates. (Through Oct. 31.) Weekdays, except Mondays, at 10:30 a.m. and noon, with an extra performance on Wednesdays (and on Halloween) at 2:30 p.m.; this weekend at 11 a.m. and 1 p.m. (Some shows are sold out.) At 79th Street and the West Drive, Central Park, 212-988-9093, cityparksfoundation.org/arts. Reservations required.‘The Hunger Games: The Exhibition’(Through Jan. 3) What enterprising 12- or 13-year-old wouldn’t like to foment a little rebellion? Such a visitor can do so vicariously at this attraction at Discovery Times Square, stepping into the role of Katniss Everdeen, the teenage heroine of “The Hunger Games” and the ultimate leader of the resistance against her nation’s totalitarian government. Based on the Lionsgate film adaptations of Suzanne Collins’s novels, the show includes costumes and artifacts from the movies, as well as re-creations of Katniss’s journey and interactive, role-playing elements like a gamesmaker’s table and a chance to learn and practice stunt choreography. 226 West 44th Street, Manhattan, 866-987-9692, discoverytsx.com, thehungergamesexhibition.com.‘If You Lived Here, You’d Be Home’(Through Jan. 17) Maps present facts, but they can also engage the imagination. This new exhibition at the Children’s Museum of the Arts explores the intersection of cartography and art, showing work that expands upon, redefines or simply refers to maps. Among the eight artists represented are Matthew Cusik, who makes collages from map fragments; Joyce Kosloff, who layers images and textured paint onto maps; Loren Munk, who adds plaques of color and information to street maps; and Nikki Rosato, who subtracts from maps, cutting away all but roads and rivers. In the museum’s Cynthia C. Wainwright Gallery, 103 Charlton Street, between Hudson and Greenwich Streets, South Village, 212-274-0986, cmany.org.Jazz for Kids(Sunday) Every Sunday during most of the school year, Jazz Standard presents not just jazz for kids, but also jazz by kids: The featured players at its Sunday brunches are the members of the Jazz Standard Youth Orchestra, a group of talented young people ages 11 to 18. In this free series (donations are requested for the Jazz Standard Discovery Program, an initiative that brings musical performances to city schools), beginning its 14th season this weekend, the musicians play new arrangements of big-band classics while listeners enjoy barbecue offerings purchased from a menu that includes children’s fare. (Through mid-May.) Doors open at 1 p.m.; shows are from 2 to 3 p.m.; 116 East 27th Street, Manhattan, 212-576-2232, discoverjazz.org/upcoming.‘Jean-Michel Cousteau’s Secret Ocean’(Friday through Thursday) Ever encounter a goby or a blenny? How about a Christmas tree worm? These small marine species, often unnoticed and uncelebrated, are among the stars of this new Imax movie at the American Museum of Natural History. Filmed by Jean-Michel Cousteau, son of the ocean explorer Jacques Cousteau, and Holly Lohuis, a marine biologist, the film captures 30 species that are among the tiniest to inhabit the seas. (Through Jan. 10.) Hourly from 10:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., with 2-D screenings at 11:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m.; all other screenings are 3-D. Central Park West and 79th Street, 212-769-5200, amnh.org.Kids ‘N Comedy: ‘The Scary Pre-Halloween Show’(Sunday) The class clown gets applause, not detention, at this series, in which tween and teenage comics perform stand-up. At this show, the theme relates to Halloween, with the young monologuists joking about topics like the flesh-eating zombies who ride the subway. The material is recommended for children 9 and older, but there’s no need to worry about appropriateness (profanity is banned) or knock-knock jokes (these kids are sophisticated). Reservations required. At 1 p.m., Gotham Comedy Club, 208 West 23rd Street, Chelsea, 212-877-6115, kidsncomedy.com.‘LARD: Life’s a Real Dream’(Saturday) This show about LARD, the concept, has nothing to do with lard, the substance. An acronym for “Life’s a Real Dream,” “LARD” is the title of a rollicking musical production starring Lard Dog, who also happens not to be a dog. The alter ego of the multimedia artist Steven Erdman, Lard is a gregarious out-of-this-world character who has flown in from the planet Belopio on a giant pretzel. He and his Band of Shy perform this hourlong entertainment, which includes cartoon graphics and a pretzel toss. (Through Jan. 2.) Saturdays at 11 a.m., 13th Street Repertory Theater, 50 West 13th Street, Greenwich Village, houseoflard.com.‘The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe’(Saturday) If the children of the Pevensie family could travel to the magical land of Narnia through something as simple as a wardrobe, why shouldn’t two hard-working actors be able to play them and all the characters found there? That’s what Chris Boerner and Erin Layton are attempting in the Off Broadway Family Theater’s first production, le Clanché du Rand’s adaptation of C. S. Lewis’s classic novel. (The run is open-ended and continues on Saturdays.) At 11 a.m., St. Luke’s Theater, 308 West 46th Street, Clinton, 212-239-6200, narniaoffbroadway.com.Music in Motion(Saturday) That motion is the gentle rocking of a boat for this series of family neighborhood concerts presented by Bargemusic, the floating barge at the foot of the Brooklyn Bridge. As always, the material — announced just before the performance — is chamber music, but these programs differ in important ways from the regular Bargemusic fare: With unreserved seating, they last only an hour, include a post-show question-and-answer session with the musicians and are free. (Through Nov. 28.) At 4 p.m. (doors open at 3:45), Fulton Ferry Landing, next to the Brooklyn Bridge, Brooklyn, 800-838-3006, bargemusic.org.National Dance Institute Celebration Team(Saturday) More than 100 young people, all under 15, mean a lot of happy feet. National Dance Institute, a nonprofit bringing arts programs to public schools, will present the enthusiastic performers in one of its most advanced training groups in this show at Symphony Space. The program will include an excerpt from “This Land Is Our Land: The Power of American Song,” a repertory including signature music like bluegrass, blues and spirituals. At 2 p.m., Peter Jay Sharp Theater, 2537 Broadway, at 95th Street, 212-864-5400, symphonyspace.org.‘NYC & Me: A Little Bite of the Big Apple’(Through Jan. 18) There’s one place where little citizens can safely run loose on the streets of New York: the Children’s Museum of Manhattan. This new interactive 3,000-square-foot gallery is a city microcosm for small visitors, allowing them to pretend to be taxi drivers, bus drivers, construction workers, street performers and, most impressively, the mayor. Activities include directing traffic, erecting a skyscraper, “ice skating” in their socks and investigating urban tales on the steps of the New York Public Library. The Tisch Building, 212 West 83rd Street, 212-721-1223, cmom.org.‘One Wild Ride’(Saturday) This would seem to be an apt title, since one of the stories in this hourlong show is about a subway car with extraordinary powers. But an even wilder ride may be provided by the young audience members themselves, who will be involved, along with the adult cast, in an adventure of their own choosing. The presenting company, BKBXKids!, a division of Broken Box Mime Theater, does this production, which closes on Saturday, with a talking M.C. After the performance, the cast will also give a workshop in mime. At 2 p.m., Here, 145 Avenue of the Americas, at Dominick Street, South Village, 866-811-4111, brokenboxmime.com.‘Rock or Treat’(Saturday) You’re heard of rocking around the clock — this Halloween show is all about rocking around the world. Developed by Funikijam, an organization devoted to early-childhood entertainment and education, “Rock or Treat” offers high-energy tunes and movement that are globally inspired for ages 3 through 10. The interactive 45-minute musical, not frightening despite its location — Times Scare — encourages children to come dressed for the holiday and participate in a costume parade. (Through Oct. 31.) Saturdays at 11 a.m. and 1 p.m., Cabaret Theater, Times Scare, 669 Eighth Avenue, near 43rd Street, funikijam.com.‘The Secret Life of C-Notes: A Workshop for Teens Who Like Money’(Saturday) Did you ever meet a teenager who didn’t like money? In this presentation, Harley J. Spiller, a.k.a. Inspector Collector, author of “Keep the Change: A Collector’s Tales of Lucky Pennies, Counterfeit C-Notes, and Other Curious Currency” (Princeton Architectural Press), will highlight the technology that makes $100 bills so hard to counterfeit. Participants can inspect bills under ultraviolet light and with magnetic detectors, discuss financial philosophies and design their own banknotes. (Prizes will be awarded.) Declan Hurley, an adolescent collector, will assist. From 11 a.m. to noon, Museum of American Finance, 48 Wall Street, at William Street, Lower Manhattan, 212-908-4110, moaf.org.‘Skeletons … A Day of the Dead Bedtime Story’(Saturday) According to Mexican tradition, the spirits of deceased loved ones are revived on the Day of the Dead, a holiday that is joyous rather than ghoulish. In this production from Teatro SEA, the Latino children’s theater, Jimmy is in mourning for his grandfather, who actually comes back to life for one night. Written by Richard Marino, the company’s managing director, “Skeletons” portrays the comical adventures that result when Grandpa and other departed relatives try to help Jimmy get on with his life. (Through Nov. 1.) At 3 p.m., Los Kabayitos Puppet and Children’s Theater, Clemente Soto Vélez Cultural Center, 107 Suffolk Street, at Rivington Street, Lower East Side, 212-529-1545, teatrosea.org.‘Sleepy Hollow’(Friday through Sunday) Ichabod Crane and the Headless Horseman are off and riding again in this musical revival from Be Bold! Productions. Inspired by Washington Irving’s “The Legend of Sleepy Hollow” and recommended for theatergoers older than 9, this show, by Michael Sgouros and Brenda Bell, focuses on the love triangle and the mystery inherent in Irving’s tale. It also explores a darkness beyond the story’s fearsome woods: that of the human heart. Friday and Saturday at 7 p.m. (no show on Oct. 31); Sunday at 2 p.m.; Players Theater, 115 Macdougal Street, at Minetta Lane, Greenwich Village, 866-811-4111, hollowthemusical.com.‘A Voyage Through Jewish History’(Continuing) This journey involves not just miles, but years. In this permanent interactive exhibition at the Jewish Children’s Museum, young visitors can travel from Abraham and Sarah’s tent to the Western Wall in contemporary Jerusalem and beyond. Activities along the way include giving water to Rebecca’s camels, playing the strings on David’s harp (a high-tech version with beams of light that emit sounds when struck) and taking part in the exodus from Egypt. 792 Eastern Parkway, at Kingston Avenue, Crown Heights, Brooklyn, 718-907-8833, jcm.museum.Advertisement