AdvertisementSupported byBy Brian SeibertFor the José Limón International Dance Festival, now in its second and final week at the Joyce Theater, the Limón Dance Company has invited troupes from across the country and the world to join it in performing the work of its namesake choreographer, who died in 1972. The intention is to show the spread of Limón’s legacy, but during Program C on Tuesday, that wasn’t the only effect.Members of sjDANCEco, a company founded in San Jose, Calif., by the former Limón dancer Gary Masters, performed “Mazurkas,” Limón’s 1958 suite of dances to Chopin. They did not perform it very well. Even apart from the wobbles and stumbles, the dancing was tentative and imprecise, only in the general vicinity of the choreography’s shapes and rhythms.In the context of the festival, though, this subpar performance functioned as a reminder of how hard it is to get Limón right — not just how physically difficult the movements are, but also how much concentration and faith it takes to keep the style from seeming irredeemably antiquated and hokey. The failure of sjDANCEco in this respect set into relief the amazingness of what the Limón Dance Company regularly accomplishes.On Program C, the host troupe had less to work with than on previous programs. “Carlota” was the last piece that Limón made before his death, and it’s a weaker version of earlier dramas. It is about the Empress Carlota, whose husband, Maximilian, was the short-reigning Hapsburg emperor of Mexico (Limón’s home country), until he was executed in 1867. The original dancer in the title role was Carla Maxwell, who has heroically served as the company’s artistic director since 1978 and recently announced her plans to retire.The dance takes place inside Carlota’s grief-addled mind. In silence save for the scream before the lights first rise, she remembers Maximilian’s final days amid treacherous court ladies and stamping guerrillas. The work is uneven as theater, but Brenna Monroe-Cook, as Carlota, made the unraveling of her dignity affecting, spinning in her hooped dress, rolling in it on the floor, biting its hem.Let’s hope that the Limón company’s transfer of power goes more smoothly. In the meantime, American Repertory Ballet, from New Jersey, reestablished that other troupes can do justice to Limón classics. “There Is a Time,” Limón’s 1956 treatment of Ecclesiastes and temporal cycles (a time to be born, a time to die), is in its use of circles a testament to eternal verities of choreographic construction. As danced by American Repertory, and as staged by the Limón alumna Sarah Stackhouse, this piece stood up to time’s tests a little while longer.The José Limón International Dance Festival continues through Sunday at the Joyce Theater, Manhattan; 212-242-0800, joyce.org.The José Limón International Dance Festival continues through Sunday at the Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, Manhattan; 212-242-0800, joyce.org.Advertisement