By ALASTAIR MACAULAYOCT. 22, 2015
Dance theater uses music in many different ways — but ballet theater almost invariably depends on much tighter connections between movement and music, which the dance world labels musicality. (Though there have been ballets to silence or independent of music, they have been too few to change the history of the art.) And when music, unencumbered by scenery or scenario, becomes the subject of the dance, then theatrical alchemies can occur that are beyond the power of music or dance alone.The opening gala of American Ballet Theater’s two-week fall season at the David H. Koch Theater on Wednesday seemed intended to illustrate this point. The company could have chosen to showcase its celebrated new principal Misty Copeland or its most redoubtable male star, Marcelo Gomes. Those dancers will be featured in several roles this season. (Mr. Gomes is also choreographing a new ballet, with Ms. Copeland in the lead role, opening next week.) The gala, though, was all about musical choreography by three of history’s most renowned dance makers. There was no scenery — though lighting and costumes made strong effects. Music and dance were the evening’s heart.Mark Morris’s “After You,” new this month, was receiving its New York City premiere; it’s to Johann Nepomuk Hummel’s “Military” Septet in C major, No. 2. The company gave its first performance of Frederick Ashton’s “Monotones I and II” (1965-66) to Erik Satie’s “Trois Gnossiennes” and “Trois Gymnopédies.” And Twyla Tharp’s “The Brahms-Haydn Variations” (2000) returned to repertory after five years. To watch and hear how these choreographers respond to music was fascinating. There were stars in all three, beautiful dancing throughout, but only in the “Brahms-Haydn” was stardom occasionally — happily — an issue.Mr. Morris has made a few of the finest ballets of the last 30 years — my mind flies to “Drink to Me Only With Thine Eyes” (1988) and “Beaux” (2012) — but it’s striking that he’s insistently offbeat when it comes to creating for ballet companies. He chooses music that doesn’t easily lend itself to theater, he presents men and women in unconventional ways, he draws attention to the mechanics of steps that usually pass without emphasis, and he avoids wow effects. When the curtain descends at the end of “After You,” it’s a surprise: You expect a development or resolution he never gives, chiefly because he omits the music’s final movement.Advertisement“After You” is beautifully costumed by Isaac Mizrahi: The 12 dancers make a close but brilliant spectrum of color from pink to yellow, each dancer in a separate hue. The Hummel music, far less military than its title despite a trumpet, is intimate, highly sensuous, full of decorum, often recalling the grace of Mozart (Hummel’s teacher), especially in its writing for the clarinet. An initial viewing begins to show how Mr. Morris reveals aspects of its structure; there’s more to see here than a single viewing yields.Some cavils nonetheless arise. Although Mr. Morris (60 next year) did much to create the modern equal-rights presentation of men and women that has begun to pervade many new ballets this century, “After You” is one of the pieces in which his organization of the sexes is at times so schematic that he seems to have an agenda. He overemploys several constructions — most obviously dance trios in which the three dancers all follow the same figure-eight floor pattern — and several steps (notably the Bournonville grand jeté, an advancing jump toward the audience with back leg held at an angle). And we can often tell that Mr. Morris is pursuing these repetitions regardless of changes in the music.Advertisement“After You,” over all, is cleverly innocuous. Along the way it contains marvels of wit, charm and intricacy; individual phrases, short and long, stay in the head (not only because we see them so often). It and Ballet Theater’s dancers complement each other; the principals Gillian Murphy and Stella Abrera coexist with 10 junior dancers in a stage organization in which everyone casts light. Hummel’s music, however, is lovelier than this dance.The remote, spacious, poetic realms of “Monotones I and II” make this a most distinguished addition to Ballet Theater repertory. The six dancers are excellent; Ms. Abrera, Isabella Boylston and Joseph Gorak particularly distinguish the first, green trio, to “Trois Gnossiennes,” with classical dancing whose lines sing in space. Cory Stearns is especially fine in the second, white trio to “Trois Gymnopédies”; Veronika Part and Thomas Forster join him in an almost entirely fluent rendition. Ormsby Wilkins, conducting, finely judged the pulse and sonorities of these orchestrated Satie pieces.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Gymnopédies” (1965) has many of Ashton’s most breathtakingly imaginative inventions: The ballerina’s hyperextension becomes celestial, and the men become her divine-acrobat brothers. Even so, I find “Gnossiennes” (1966) greater yet. There seems no end to Ashton’s knowledge of how to phrase dance to music; to analyze his response to harmony, melody and rhythm here would be rich work. When the first “Gnossienne” ends, the dancers are balanced, each on one leg, in a vertical chain facing the audience: It’s an image of suspense, and the way they then sustain balance through the changing movements that open the second “Gnossienne” is quietly momentous. Later, all three make jumps, each arriving on one leg in a splendidly stretched, winged, attitude shape. Pouncing unexpectedly onto a minor beat, they become young griffins catching their prey in the air.Exhilaratingly, “The Brahms-Haydn Variations” made a judicious big ending to Wednesday’s program, with high energy, hierarchical organization, virtuoso steps and large groups. The 30 dancers, all powerfully immersed in the choreography, included Ms. Murphy and James Whiteside, Maria Kochetkova and Herman Cornejo, Ms. Boylston and Sterling Baca, among other luminaries.At every point, “Brahms-Haydn” shows how many resources Ms. Tharp has, deploying them wonderfully to Brahms’s Variations on a Theme of Haydn for Orchestra (Op 56A). (Charles Barker conducted.) The eye is repeatedly led from one side of the stage to another by the multiplicity of action. Exits and entrances alone become dramatic effects. Bravura steps are casually rather than showily delivered.Six other ballets follow in this season; anticipation is high. Meanwhile, these three, especially “Monotones” and “Brahms-Haydn,” cry out for further acquaintance.The American Ballet Theater’s season continues to Nov. 1 at the David H. Koch Theater, abt­.org.A version of this review appears in print on October 23, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: A Feast for the Eyes and Ears.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.