AdvertisementSupported byFor full reviews of recent concerts: nytimes.com/music. A searchable guide to these and other shows is at nytimes.com/events.★ Blur and Courtney Barnett(Friday) Nineties Britpop got its reputation for punchy, anthemic rock largely on the backs of Blur, whose worldwide hits (“Girls and Boys,” “Song 2”) belied slyly subversive kicks. The group returned this year with “The Magic Whip,” its first record in 12 years and an inspired comeback ride. With Ms. Barnett, whose stellar debut studio album, “Sometimes I Sit and Think, and Sometimes I Just Sit” noses into the minutia of everyday lives over simple, scrappy shrieks of guitar. At 8 p.m., Madison Square Garden, 866-858-0008, thegarden.com. (Stacey Anderson)Chance the Rapper(Friday and Sunday) On his new track “Family Matters,” this smart young rapper flips a sample by another Chicago firebrand, Kanye West, into sage singsong. The artist (whose real name is Chancelor Bennett) found acclaim for his breakthrough second mixtape, “Acid Rap,” in 2013; its unpredictable, syncopated rhymes and jazz-infused structures added depth to every rhyme. With Hiatus Kaiyote, D.R.A.M., and more. At 8 p.m., Terminal 5, 610 West 56th Street, Clinton, 800-745-3000, terminal5nyc.com. (Anderson)★ Gary Clark Jr.(Wednesday and next Friday) This much-vaunted blues singer-guitarist has been called “the next Hendrix” for several years, though none of his axes sport scorch marks yet. In 2014, he shone on the concert disc “Gary Clark Jr. Live,” which features a cover of Hendrix’s “Third Stone From the Sun,” and he recently topped the Billboard Blues charts with the sultry studio album “The Story of Sonny Boy Slim.” At 8 p.m., Terminal 5, 610 West 56th Street, Clinton, 800-745-3000, terminal5nyc.com. (Anderson)★ Disclosure(Saturday) In the still exploding fray of electronic dance music, overnight solo D.J. stars are 10 a penny and collaboration is much more rare. Disclosure, consisting of the British brothers Guy and Howard Lawrence, melds garage beats with minimalist house orchestration, punctuated by occasional bursts of dubstep decadence and soul vocals, for an enthusiastic change of expectations and a fantastic concert experience. The duo’s second album, “Caracal,” is more downpace but no less thoughtful, with stellar vocals from Lorde, Gregory Porter, the Weeknd and more. With Claude VonStroke and Pomo. At 8 p.m., Madison Square Garden, 866-858-0008, thegarden.com. (Anderson)Garbage (Saturday) Plenty of mid-1990s bands toyed with the roiling proto-shoegaze atmospherics of My Bloody Valentine and the Cure, but none of them added a glamorous pop sheen better than Garbage. The glam ensemble celebrates the 20th anniversary its self-titled debut album by playing the record in its entirety. At 8 p.m., Kings Theater, 1027 Flatbush Avenue, near Tilden Avenue, Brooklyn, kingstheatre.com. (Anderson)★ Gesaffelstein (D.J. Set)(Thursday) The French techno star and fashion scene darling (whose real name is Mike Lévy) also has a green thumb with the mainstream: He co-produced two tracks on Kanye West’s “Yeezus,” including the pinnacle single “Black Skinhead,” and has remixed Phoenix and Lana Del Rey. His D.J. sets are charismatic dance bursts with fleet pacing and aggressive borders. At 10 p.m., Output, 74 Wythe Avenue, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, outputclub.com. (Anderson)Here We Go Magic(Saturday) Aided by the producer Nigel Godrich (of Radiohead fame), this band of Brooklyn psychedelic rockers last released “A Different Ship,” in which the frontman Luke Temple’s existential angst sounded freshly grandiose. “Be Small,” its follow-up, is out this month. With Big Thief and Aerial East. At 9 p.m., Bowery Ballroom, 6 Delancey Street, near the Bowery, Lower East Side, 800-745-3000, boweryballroom.com. (Anderson)The Hum (Mondays through Oct. 26) This inventive weekly residency brings together female musicians across genres for collaboration. The successful first installment in April included Shilpa Ray and Teen; this time around, they’ve booked musicians from Wilsen, Balancer and Salt Cathedral, among others. At 9 p.m., Manhattan Inn, 632 Manhattan Avenue, hypnocraftpresents.com. (Andrew R. Chow)Kaskade(Saturday) This house D.J., still one of the top dogs in electronic dance music, showcased his own vocals for the first time on the title track of “Atmosphere,” his most orchestral album, released in 2013. Estelle and Sasha Sloan took on singing duties on his follow-up, “Automatic,” released last month. At 9 p.m., Pier 94, 711 12th Avenue, at 52nd Street, Clinton, 212-209-7500, pieroffear.com. (Anderson)Jerry Lee Lewis(Friday) The original hell hound of rockabilly, whose 1950s hits “Whole Lotta Shakin’ Goin’ On” and “Great Balls of Fire” heavily influenced both rock ‘n’ roll and its rebellious spirit, doesn’t swing by New York very often. At 80, he is now something of a mythic figure on the more debauched end of the unofficial Great American Songbook. 8 p.m., B.B. King Blues Club & Grill, 237 West 42nd Street, Manhattan, 800-745-3000, bbkingblues.com. (Anderson)★ Ashley Monroe(Tuesday) Barbed and dryly hilarious, Ms. Monroe was elevated to country solo acclaim with her 2013 album, “Like a Rose.” Its fantastic follow-up, “The Blade” was released this summer. When not performing solo, as she will for this show at the Bowery Ballroom, Ms. Monroe also sidles up alongside Miranda Lambert and Angaleena Presley in Pistol Annies, a twangy trio that harmonizes with slow-cooking confidence. At 9 p.m., 6 Delancey Street, near the Bowery, Lower East Side, 800-745-3000, boweryballroom.com (Anderson)The Month in CabaretThe last week of October brings cabaret highlights such as Alexa Ray Joel, Billy’s singing and songwriting daughter, a Café Carlyle through Oct. 31. (Tuesdays through Saturdays at 8:45 p.m., 35 East 76th Street, Manhattan, 212-744-1600, thecarlyle.com.)Jarrod Spector and Kelli Barrett’s show, “This Is Dedicated: Music’s Greatest Marriages,” at Feinstein’s/54 Below, salutes married show business couples from Sonny and Cher, to Beyoncé and Jay-Z (through Friday). Also at that venue, on Wednesday through Oct. 31, Barb Jungr and John McDaniel eviscerate the songs of the Fab Four in “Come Together: The Music of the Beatles.” (At 7 p.m., 254 West 54th Street, Manhattan, 646-476-3551, 54below.com.)In more dangerous avant-garde mode, Tammy Faye Starlite’s “Cabaret Marianne” pays tribute to the equally nervy Marianne Faithfull (Thursdays in October at 7:30 p.m., 178 Second Avenue, between East 11th and 12th Streets, East Village, 212-995-0900, pangeanyc.com.) And that’s just skimming the surface. (Stephen Holden)★ Kacey Musgraves(Saturday) She sings with a down-home drawl, but the country singer-songwriter is full of ambition as she rhymes cleverly of breaking free from her small-town doldrums and finding romance, if only for one evening. Her major label debut album, “Same Trailer Different Park,” was unerringly assertive; a follow- up record, “Pageant Material,” was released earlier this year, and also follows up a sanguine recent duet with Brian Wilson on his album “No Pier Pressure.” At 7:30 p.m., Apollo Theater, 253 West 125th Street, Harlem, 800-745-3000, apollotheater.org. (Anderson)Nash Bash, with Lee Brice (Monday) Country and western continues to draw a sizable audience in New York, as evidenced by the Farmborough Festival in June. Now NASH FM 94.7, a local country station, heads back to the Beacon Theater for its first showcase there in nearly two years. Lee Brice, a Billboard country chart-topping singer and songwriter, headlines a twangin’ roster that also includes Rodney Atkins and Mo Pitney. At 7:30 p.m., Beacon Theater, 2124 Broadway, at 74th Street, 800-745-3000, beacontheatre.com. (Anderson)★ Peaches(Saturday) The fearless Canadian electro-rapper delights in lyrics that confound gender norms and stage shows that veer from the avant-garde to the salacious. This artist marches to the beat of a very different, likely naked drummer; her bawdy, beats-driven new album, “Rub,” features vocals from Feist and Kim Gordon. At 7 p.m., Irving Plaza, 17 Irving Place, at 15th Street, Manhattan, venue.irvingplaza.com; sold out. (Anderson)The Polyphonic Spree(Tuesday) Usually, following the scent of patchouli and a brigade of white-robed beatniks ends with a thin fictionalization on “Law and Order.” Tonight, it merely leads to Webster Hall, where these benevolent choral-poppers will probably perform from their latest album, “Yes, It’s True.” At 8 p.m., Highline Ballroom, 431 West 16th Street, Chelsea, 866-468-7619, highlineballroom.com. (Anderson)They Might Be Giants(Sunday) These Brooklyn-rooted eccentrics of the highest order represented Keep Williamsburg Weird decades ago with the 1990s singles “Istanbul (Not Constantinople)” and “Snail Shell.” The band recently released a 17th studio album, “Glean,” and staged a half-year residency at the Music Hall of Williamsburg. Clearly, the group can’t stay away from the club; it currently has four more dates planned here through Jan. 2. At 8 p.m., Music Hall of Williamsburg, 66 North Sixth Street, Brooklyn, 718-486-5400, musichallofwilliamsburg.com. (Anderson)Youth Lagoon(Thursday) This lo-fi psychedelic pop project from the 20-something singer-songwriter Trevor Powers folds in on itself like a pained personal retreat from reality. On his engrossing second record, “Wondrous Bughouse,” Mr. Powers unveiled an achingly macabre dimension, in one song wailing at the bedside of a dying relative as he imagines his own body below dirt. At Webster Hall, he will likely sample from a new effort, “Savage Hills Ballroom.” With Moon King. At 8 p.m., Webster Hall, 125 East 11th Street, East Village, 212-353-1600, websterhall.com/events. (Anderson)Advertisement