By BRIAN SEIBERTOCT. 1, 2015
“Welcome to our fun house,” said a man wearing a furry pink outfit and an animal mask on Wednesday. He was in Studio C of Gibney Dance’s downtown space, the Agnes Varis Performing Arts Center, and the people he was addressing were being guided from studio to studio to watch segments of Patricia Hoffbauer’s accurately titled “Dances for Intimate Spaces and Friendly People.”Not including the finale, the work comprises four short sections. Since each takes place in a different studio, the whole thing functions as a tour of the facilities, still sparkling after a major renovation last year. To make these intimate spaces more intimate, audience members are split into groups, each encountering the work in a different order.In the least interesting part, four dancers in ski masks and an excess of sports padding act unfriendly, aggressively posturing and shoving one another to the ground. It is supposed to be significant that these dancers are women. The tightest portion of the performance is a comic duet based on the 19th-century ballet “Le Corsaire,” a rehearsal scene in which the woman bosses around the man. As a critique of colonialism, it has little bite, but the funny costumes and standard slapstick amuse.More recent dance history is embodied in the “Super Trio” section. This trio is super mainly because of who is in it: the veteran dancers Jennifer Way Rawe, Keith Sabado and Sara Rudner, who’s one of the greats, now 71 and, in spurts, still capable of making nothing much look extraordinary. Also, it isn’t just a trio. Yvonne Rainer, that mother of postmodern dance, emerges from the audience as a bag lady in a battered top hat, singing an old pro-labor protest song. She trails the other dancers as they swap articles of clothing while reminiscing, lip-syncing to Julie Andrews and doing a raggedy soft shoe, more sweet than super.“Welcome to our fun house of applied social science” was what the man in fur (George Emilio Sanchez) said more completely. His section comes closest to fulfilling the work’s aspirations as political art (closer than the left-field Nazi references), as three black male dancers reject his leadership to bicker about blackness and to dance pointed allusions to Alvin Ailey and Misty Copeland.But the best part is the end, when all the friendly people, dancers and spectators alike, come together. On Wednesday, there was a feeling of expansion, of a joyful family reunion, as everyone chatted, and the performers reprised a thread that runs through all the pieces, “I Could Be Happy With You,” from “The Boyfriend.” As long as you didn’t take “Dances for Intimate Spaces” very seriously, it was easy to be happy with them.­“Dances for Intimate Spaces and Friendly People” runs through Saturday at Gibney Dance, Manhattan; 646-837-6809, gibneydance.org.A version of this review appears in print on October 2, 2015, on Page C14 of the New York edition with the headline: Fun and Intimacy Striving to Be Political.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.