By JAMES R. OESTREICHOCT. 22, 2015
It has become a familiar refrain: The maestro visiting the New York Philharmonic this week must be reckoned a serious candidate to succeed Alan Gilbert as the orchestra’s music director. Just now it is Semyon Bychkov.The Russian-born Mr. Bychkov, 62, made his Philharmonic debut in 1984 with a memorable performance of Rachmaninoff’s Second Symphony and has since amassed broad experience, though relatively little with this orchestra. On Wednesday evening, he delivered excellent accounts of Brahms’s First Symphony and Double Concerto, with the violinist Lisa Batiashvili and the cellist Gautier Capuçon as soloists, and Detlev Glanert’s “Brahms-Fantasie.”Mr. Glanert subtitles his work, composed in 2011-12 for the BBC Scottish Symphony Orchestra, “Heliogravure for Orchestra,” after a 19th-century technology through which, he says, “photographs are painted over with a chemical substance to yield a new material that has been transformed.” He bases his work on the initial measures of Brahms’s First Symphony, which he so transforms that the opening syncopated fanfare sounds more like Carl Nielsen.To my ear, he quotes Brahms more or less directly only in a phrase or two midway through the piece, and in another one at the end. The first half features an ostinato bass, perhaps alluding to the passacaglia finale of Brahms’s Fourth Symphony.For the rest, you would probably not discern a Brahms connection if not alerted to it by the title, any more than you would necessarily find a direct Haydn connection in Prokofiev’s “Classical” Symphony, which Mr. Glanert cites as a model. Still, the fantasy is attractive and compelling in its own right.Advertisement“The music of Brahms is always intimate, no matter how loudly it’s talking,” Mr. Bychkov writes on his website. “For me this is the great paradox: The monumentality of Brahms is in its intimacy.”AdvertisementParadox, indeed, as applied to the First Symphony, with which Brahms grandly announced to the world his arrival as a symphonist. But Mr. Bychkov made a case for his claim, highlighting the chamber-music-like interchanges of soloists not only in the concerto but also in the symphony. And the commanding virtuosity of Ms. Batiashvili and Mr. Capuçon was matched in the symphony by the orchestra’s woodwinds, especially the principal oboist, Liang Wang.Frank Huang, the new concertmaster, played beautifully in his big solo. The French horns were stellar, and the whole orchestra responded alertly to Mr. Bychkov’s direction.This program will be repeated on Friday morning and Saturday evening at David Geffen Hall, Lincoln Center; 212-875-5656, nyphil.org.A version of this article appears in print on October 23, 2015, on Page C4 of the New York edition with the headline: A Composer Monumental in Intimacy.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.