AdvertisementSupported byAntiquesBy Eve M. KahnNewly rediscovered daguerreotypes are upending some long-held presumptions about that medium.The process of producing photographs on silvered plates, which Louis Daguerre first unveiled to the public in 1839, caught on among rich and middle-class patrons seeking to document their loved ones, possessions and travels. This year, the photos have bee the subject of books, exhibitions, scholarly presentations and at least one movie.“Carrying Off the Palaces: John Ruskin’s Lost Daguerreotypes” (Quaritch), by the husband and wife photo dealers and historians Ken and Jenny Jacobson, analyzes images of European buildings and landscapes that the aesthete and philosopher John Ruskin took in collaboration with a few favorite photographers in the 1840s and ’50s. In 2006, the Jacobsons paid about $130,000 for a forgotten trove of Ruskin’s plates at an auction in Cumbria, England. They had been stored in a scuffed mahogany box that had no label but the word “Venice.”Mr. Jacobson said they had not decided the eventual fate of the photos, which are nestled in custom cases lined in black satin and handmade paper. During nearly a decade of research, he said, he kept discovering how Ruskin had manipulated angles and lenses at the dawn of photography. “He never seemed to do anything in a straightforward way,” Mr. Jacobson said.About 60 daguerreotypes will go on view Nov. 3 at the Getty Center in Los Angeles as part of the exhibition “In Focus: Daguerreotypes.” The subject in one of the works, long labeled “Portrait of an Older Native American Woman,” has been newly identified as Queen Kamala of Hawaii. In the 1850s she posed for Hugo Stangenwald, an Austrian émigré who practiced as a physician and daguerreotypist in Honolulu.From Nov. 5 to 8, the Daguerreian Society of professional and amateur enthusiasts will hold its annual symposium and sale in Pasadena, Calif. Lecture topics include the historian Cybèle T. Gontar’s research into daguerreotypes from the 1840s showing the sculpture “The Greek Slave” by Hiram Powers.The sculptor made slightly different marble versions of the work to send on tour, and he sold photographs of various iterations, including small models in plaster and porcelain. “Greek Slave” exhibition souvenirs were so coveted that, Ms. Gontar said, “I don’t think it mattered one bit” if the photo depicted a different carving than the one they had seen in person.A new documentary, “Carvalho’s Journey,” about the 19th-century daguerreotypist Solomon Nunes Carvalho’s travels from South Carolina to California, is being shown at film festivals. A few weeks ago the Nelson-Atkins Museum of Art in Kansas City acquired Thomas Martin Easterly’s daguerreotype portraits of a Sauk tribal leader and warrior that had long been thought lost.Jane Aspinwall, a photography curator at the Nelson-Atkins who helps run the Daguerreian Society, said that after decades of intensive scholarship in the field, “there are still incredible things surfacing.”Researchers are also exploring how to prevent the deterioration of fragile metallic compounds on the daguerreotypes. Taina Meller, the chief conservator at the George Eastman Museum in Rochester, said every silvered plate representing a frozen moment in time is vulnerable: “It is a biologically active surface.”The Eastman and other institutions, including the new Lens Media Lab at Yale, are trying to determine how best to display and store the photos. Paul Messier, head of the Yale lab, said that options including enclosures full of inert gas are “something we’re wrestling with now.” Karen Hellman, curator of the Getty show, said the museum’s staff would closely monitor the images on view for any sign of change as a result of exposure to light and air.Advertisement