
Antiques By                     
EVE M. KAHN

OCT. 22, 2015
James M. Goode, a historian and bookplate collector in Washington, has pursued some of his field’s most esoteric works. He has sought bookplates that were custom-made for other bookplate collectors as well as for designers and printers. He has pasted his own bookplates into his reference books about bookplates, and has acquired advertisements for bookplate designers and bookplates that depict libraries overflowing with books.On Nov. 4 and 5, Heritage auction house in Dallas will offer his holdings of thousands of bookplates — now in batches of 100 lots — as well as his reference library, with estimates mostly starting at a few hundred dollars a batch. (The sale will be at the Waldorf Astoria in New York, and previews start there on Nov. 2.)After moving into smaller quarters, Mr. Goode, 76, no longer has room for his collection of about 330 framed sets of bookplates. “They were floor to ceiling in all the rooms,” he said.Heritage is auctioning them in his frames. The mats have gilded rims and calligraphy captions, already prepared for museum display. (He has lent them over the years to institutions including the University of Virginia and the Hagley Museum & Library in Wilmington, Del.)AdvertisementMr. Goode has organized them in various categories: There are frames devoted to miniatures about a half-inch tall, and to bookplates printed by Paul Revere. A lion bookplate made for Charles Dickens is juxtaposed with a wolf bookplate for Jack London. A grouping of scientist bookplates includes one for Albert Einstein, which shows a tiny human engulfed in whirling astral bodies. And Charles de Gaulle’s has a frame to itself, showing a V for victory biting into a fallen swastika.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Among Mr. Goode’s favorites are the inventive bookplates once owned by actors: Anna May Wong’s, designed by the Hungarian-born artist Willy Pogany, shows a bonsai growing out of a book; Joan Crawford’s has a sketch of the Venus de Milo with the movie star’s face superimposed on that armless sculpture; and on Gloria Swanson’s punning bookplate, a swan is paddling at sundown.AdvertisementMr. Goode also gathered bookplates that depict globes, musical instruments, monks, sphinxes, magicians, demons, sports equipment, garden colonnades and sailing ships.Now that his framed sets are gone, he said, “I miss them very much.” Some consolation may come for him next month, however, when his new book, “Capital Houses, Historic Residences of Washington, D.C., and Its Environs, 1735-1965,” is due out from Acanthus Press.A version of this article appears in print on October 23, 2015, on Page C29 of the New York edition with the headline: Bookplates for Famous Bookworms.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »