By DANIEL McDERMONOCT. 22, 2015
A preview of the film.Looking for something to do? The Times’s arts team can help.We asked our editors: What one thing would they recommend?The offbeat filmmaker Michael Almereyda wrote and directed this portrayal of the social psychologist Stanley Milgram, portrayed here by Peter Sarsgaard. In one of the best-known experiments of the 20th century, Milgram found that a surprising number of test subjects were willing to deliver (what they thought were) painful electric shocks upon command. Our critic Manohla Dargis wrote that “Mr. Almereyda has a boundless gift for finding new ways to tell old stories, and ‘Experimenter,’ as befits its title, is less a straight biography than a diverting gloss on human behavior, historical memory and cinema itself.”(Read Ms. Dargis’s full review or find a showtime.)Grown siblings share a house and family collisions ensue in a new show produced by the filmmaker Jason Reitman. Just renewed for a second season, the show “is the kind of alternative-family comedy you’ll find on broadcast or basic cable, just more closely observed, sexually frank and emotionally raw,” our critic James Poniewozik writes. He adds, “There’s all manner of sex in ‘Casual’ — teenage and middle-aged hookups, open relationships and foursomes — but the series is less sex farce than family dramedy. It’s about sex as a means toward or escape from connection.”(Read Mr. Poniewozik’s full review or check it out here.)Five years in the making, Ms. Newsom’s new album, “Divers,” offers a heap of her densely layered songs, joining multiple musical traditions and highly allusive lyricism. “I definitely can’t write an easy song,” she told The Times’s Jon Pareles. “There is a group of people who are showing up with absolute, complete faith that there’s something worth digging for in the lyrics. And if I don’t put it in there, it’s like breaking a contract.”(Read Ben Ratliff’s full review.)The French painter and sculptor Jean Dubuffet may now be better known for his vast collection of outsider art than for his own work. His trove of Art Brut works, as he called it, included work by children, inmates and self-taught artists — those who were, Dubuffet said, “uncontaminated by artistic culture.” As our critic Roberta Smith writes, “This show is an undeniable feast, but it raises interesting larger questions.”(See more here.)We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.