AdvertisementSupported byExhibition ReviewBy Sam RobertsBy the city government’s own broader definition of poverty, nearly one of every two New Yorkers is still struggling to get by today, fully 125 years after Jacob Riis seared the Gilded Age public conscience with crude photographs of the Lower East Side tenements that revealed “How the Other Half Lives.”In the 21st century, the biblical prophecy about the permanence of the poor is not belied by the proliferation of $500-a-night hotels in the Bowery and $5 million apartments. Nor is it nullified because most New Yorkers who pay more than 30 percent of their income on rent might also own an air-conditioner or other creature comforts, or because the 60,000 or so people identified as “homeless” are legally guaranteed some form of shelter.Inequality in “two cities” is not new. But few crusaders have rallied the public to its implications. While video of Eric Garner gasping “I can’t breathe” as police officers restrained him on Staten Island last year can still shock, viewers today have been largely numbed to the power of imagery.The technology of photography was still novel when Jacob Riis invoked it to make the poor of his generation visible. People actually paid to view their plight.His lantern slide shows (delivered with a Danish- accented high-pitched voice) and illustrated articles and books harnessed the nascent potential of grainy flash photography. His evangelical zeal defined the agenda of public officials, including Theodore Roosevelt, the former police commissioner, who was fortuitously catapulted into the presidency just as Riis’s own immigrant success story, “The Making of an American,” was being published.Through March 20, the Museum of the City of New York is presenting “Jacob A. Riis: Revealing New York’s Other Half.” This heart-rending retrospective reprises and expands upon the museum’s exhibitions in 1947 and 1995, which celebrated Riis as an amateur photographer, and unites its own collection of his spectral images, the world’s largest, with 125 letters, manuscripts and other printed material and artifacts from the New York Public Library and the Library of Congress.It was organized by Bonnie Yochelson, the museum’s former curator of prints and photographs, who also wrote an accompanying encyclopedic catalog.Visitors may also view two videos, abridged, but faithful re-creations of the enormously popular slide shows that Riis staged around the country (individual tickets might have cost about $7 in today’s dollars; Riis made about $4,000 per lecture), complete with the requisite anecdotes, ethnic stereotyping (“money is their God,” he said of Jews; “Italians were happy-go-lucky and content to live in a pig sty”) and Christian moralizing (the finale was typically an illustration of Christ).“He was a state-of-the-art, media-savvy journalist,” Dr. Yochelson said, “but in his sentimentality and in appealing to the Christian conscience he was a creature of the Victorian, rather than the Progressive, era.”The exhibition, designed by Studio Joseph, will travel to the Library of Congress in Washington (from April 14 through Sept. 5) and to museums in Copenhagen and Ribe, Denmark, where Riis was born in 1849.Riis arrived as a penniless immigrant. One night as a vagrant, a guest in a police lodging house, his gold locket keepsake was stolen and his dog was clubbed to death. That night, he recalled, cured him of dreaming.But he became a journalist (for The New York Tribune and The Evening Sun), then grasped the potential of nighttime photography to contrast the tenements, back alleys and sweatshops of the Lower East Side with the Four Hundred of New York high society, whom Ward McAllister was chronicling at the same time. Riis determined, in the emerging muckraking tradition, to galvanize the public in a campaign to improve housing, health care, education, parks and the assimilation of the nation’s growing immigrant population.His earliest photographs were posed to approximate reality or starkly caught their subjects by surprise in the flash of magnesium powder and potassium chlorate. Later, he coaxed people to appear more natural as he interviewed them.When he was finally assigned to a daytime beat, he began collaborating with Felix Adler, the educator and voice of the Tenement House Commission (who also helped temper Riis’s prejudices about Jews).“My eggs hatched,” Riis declared.He delivered his first illustrated lecture in 1888, taking two hours to narrate 100 slides to an audience of amateur photographers in Manhattan and, of course, invited journalists. While he said “the most pitiful victim of city life is not the slum child who dies, but the slum child who lives,” he later abbreviated the title of his lectures from a more morbid “How the Other Half Lives and Dies.”Today, the poor often die pretty much the same way as he depicted: thousands of forgotten New Yorkers are buried annually in the same unmarked trenches on Hart Island off the Bronx that Riis photographed.Who was buried and who survived? Look into the eyes in his captivating photographs: Whatever happened to the three children of the English dockworker and his family living in a one-room flat on West 28th Street near what is now the High Line? Or the barefoot boys, whom Riis called Street Arabs, who posed huddled above a grate on Mulberry Street in Little Italy.As his letters and notes demonstrate, he did not merely appeal to Christian moralism. Everybody wanted to get ahead, but lessening inequality of opportunity, in the abstract, was, by itself, not enough of a goad.“The battle with the slum began the day civilization recognized in it her enemy,” he wrote. “It was a losing fight until conscience joined forces with fear and self-interest against it.”More than a century later, Dr. Yochelson said, “we’re still struggling with it and at the core of the struggle is that we who are in the half that is better off are willing to not act and to turn a blind eye. A lot of his themes are the same. To the extent that they still resonate, how could he not be disappointed?”“Jacob A. Riis: Revealing New York’s Other Half” continues through March 20 at the Museum of the City of New York, 1220 Fifth Avenue, Manhattan; 212-534-1672; mcny­.org.Advertisement