AdvertisementSupported byBy Gavin EdwardsBLUR’S most famous American hit, “Song 2,” made it to Madison Square Garden long before the band did. The song’s “woo-hoo!” chorus has galvanized fans during timeouts at Knicks games for years; the British band is stepping onto the stage at the arena for the first time on Friday night. The singer Damon Albarn, however, has headlined the Garden before — with Gorillaz, one of his many side projects. “The first time you play Madison Square Garden, it’s a truly momentous occasion,” Mr. Albarn said. “I felt it was something the rest of the band would enjoy doing.”The group played its first New York gig in 1991, at the Marquee club, now closed, in an “excessively oiled” state, the guitarist Graham Coxon said.Mr. Albarn remembered clambering “onto the ceiling in a Spider-Man way” and falling into the V.I.P. area, landing in the lap of Charles Koppelman, their record company’s chief executive. The early ’90s, it turned out, wasn’t the ideal time to be a young British band trying to crack the United States: Americans had homegrown bands like Nirvana and Pearl Jam to love.“We got freaked out and ran home with our tails between our legs and became really English,” Mr. Coxon said.When they retreated from the United States, Blur became a leading act of the Britpop movement, feuding with their rivals in Oasis and joyfully singing about younger Brits on holiday (“Girls & Boys”) and older Brits feeding the pigeons (“Parklife”).While Oasis represented working-class meat-and-spuds rock, Blur emerged from England’s tradition of chameleonic art-school pop, riffling through styles and attitudes — but always featuring Mr. Coxon’s guitar wizardry and Mr. Albarn’s oblique charisma. The more obviously commercial Oasis played Madison Square Garden first, but after 12 years of Blur not touring the United States (including six years when they were broken up), there was a lot of pent-up demand for the band. Blur booked a two-date victory lap with its biggest American shows ever: one night at the Garden, and one this past Tuesday at the Hollywood Bowl.“We’re playing very big places, and we don’t even go out of the hotel because we’re besieged by crazy fans,” a bewildered Mr. Coxon said. “We’re aging indie rockers — I can’t get my head around it.”Mr. Albarn and Mr. Coxon were speaking, in separate phone calls, from Buenos Aires, where they were playing last week with the other two members of Blur: the drummer Dave Rowntree, who has become a lawyer and run for Parliament as a Labour Party candidate, and the bassist Alex James, now a gentleman farmer and cheesemaker.“Alex turned up at the airport dressed as a chef,” Mr. Coxon said. “He’s just crazy — he doesn’t care. What I find funny about Damon and Alex is what’s on the inside is very quickly on the outside.”The quartet’s recent shows have been bolstered by a multitude of additional musicians, including brass players. The band’s last New York concert, in April, was a free show at the Music Hall of Williamsburg in Brooklyn to promote their first album in 12 years, “The Magic Whip.” While they played most of the new disc at that show, now their set list features a few “Whip” highlights, along with hits spanning their previous seven albums.“The Magic Whip” was mostly recorded in Hong Kong in 2013, when the band had some time off. A year later, Mr. Coxon drafted Stephen Street, who had produced five albums with the band in the ’90s, to help edit the files. “There were songs there — it wasn’t just a ceaseless, boring jam session,” Mr. Coxon said. “They were familiar and alien at the same time, like another band that sounded a bit like your band.”“We wanted to make sure that we’d have something good enough to inspire Damon,” Mr. Street said. “We didn’t want to mess with the legacy.”The finished record was hypnotic but mournful. “It’s quite difficult to write jolly music,” Mr. Albarn admitted. “I’m really, really trying with this next Gorillaz record to do music that is not melancholy.” (His Gorillaz collaborator, the cartoonist Jamie Hewlett, has announced that he’s started working on art for a 2016 album.) “Making a simple, fast, upbeat pop record is, to someone of my experience and age, one of the hardest things you could imagine,” Mr. Albarn said.When he’s not on tour, Mr. Albarn, 47, works five days a week in his London studio, 9:30 a.m. to 5:30 p.m. His next project is “wonder.land,” a musical with lyrics and book by Moira Buffini, scheduled to open at the National Theater in London on Nov. 23.“I really love writing musicals,” Mr. Albarn said. “This is my third one; if it doesn’t work, I don’t know whether they’ll give me another chance.”The show, inspired by “Alice in Wonderland,”  is “about a teenage girl’s relationship to the Internet and her journey to find herself,” he said. (Mr. Albarn has a 16-year-old daughter, Missy — named after the hip-hop artist Missy Elliott — with his partner, the visual artist Suzi Winstanley.)Looking for a real-world rabbit hole, Mr. Albarn visited North Korea in 2013 — which didn’t help the musical, but did yield the song “Pyongyang” on “The Magic Whip.” Albarn said of that country, “It’s like going into a room and it being beautifully decorated, but you know there is something dreadful behind the wallpaper.”Speaking from his room in a hotel surrounded by an army of Argentine Blur fanatics, Mr. Albarn said, “You allow yourself to go with the madness of it.” His thoughts shifted back to a different form of insanity: shows at the Hollywood Bowl and Madison Square Garden. “It’s not something that seems to be part of a career trajectory,” he said. “It may well be a sort of barely impressive full stop.”Advertisement