By MATT WOLFOCT. 22, 2015
LONDON — You may feel at first as if you’ve been there before with “The Father,” a 90-minute play that was a hit in France and has now arrived on the West End in a zingy translation from Christopher Hampton, with a separate production planned for Broadway in the spring.Couldn’t that précis just as well have described “Art,” the French play from two decades ago that also played at Wyndham’s Theater? An English-language version from Mr. Hampton went on to be performed in New York, winning a best-play Tony along the way. In outline, the two works may seem cut from the same theatrical cloth, but while “Art” dealt with a friendship under siege, “The Father” tells of nothing less than a mind becoming unmoored.Now in its third British playhouse following runs in Bath and then at north London’s Tricycle Theater, Florian Zeller’s play charts a journey toward a terrifying psychic blankness that finds a visual equivalent in Miriam Buether’s cunning set. Take note of what you see onstage when the curtain goes up and then watch as that landscape is transformed or, more accurately, eradicated for keeps.When first encountered, 80-year-old Andre (Kenneth Cranham, memorably folding a palpable fear into this aging man’s bluff and bluster) is fussing about the disappearance of a watch. But it isn’t long before the truth of what seems to be happening looks to be up for grabs. Are events occurring in Andre’s home or that of his daughter Anne (Claire Skinner) — if, indeed, it really is Anne to whom he is speaking and not someone else or even, very possibly, himself?AdvertisementAs directed by James Macdonald, whose revival of the Caryl Churchill play “Cloud Nine” opened Off Broadway the same night this play did this month, the scenes progress like pieces of a splintering mosaic, the set-change music striking discordant notes as if to signal the halting thought processes of a once-fine mind. We hear from a carer here or a son-in-law there, and from an increasingly beleaguered Anne, but the focus throughout is on the craggy determination of Andre to maintain equilibrium even as circumstances demand that he find a greater degree of protection from himself. (Intriguingly, a second play on a related topic — in this instance early-onset Alzheimer’s — opened on Tuesday night at the Royal Court. Called “Plaques and Tangles,” Nicola Wilson’s intermission-free drama is a grittier if less moving piece that suggests the physical indignities of this illness to a degree left unexplored by “The Father.”)AdvertisementMuch has been made of Mr. Zeller being all of 36 and yet writing with such empathy and skill about the privations of someone twice his age. But surely the creative imagination exists to elide the years or Shakespeare would never have penned “King Lear.” That, in fact, is the very play to which “The Father” has been repeatedly compared and while the two are completely different, their shared take on the blight wrought by a mind in grievous freefall is something to behold.The Orange Tree Theater in Richmond, West London, is doing its bit for the cross-Channel alliance by mounting a rare revival of “French Without Tears,” an early comic hit for Terence Rattigan (1911-1977), who went on to be one of his generation’s leading chroniclers of suffering and loss in plays like “The Browning Version” and “The Deep Blue Sea.” (A separate Rattigan evening of two plays on a single bill opens Nov. 7 at the Garrick Theater, under the auspices of Kenneth Branagh’s new West End company.)Will the director Paul Miller’s production make stars out of its mostly unknown cast in the way the play’s 1936 London premiere featuring a young Rex Harrison and Jessica Tandy gave them a push on their storied careers? It’s difficult to say, and some of the acting is a bit overeager in ways that extend beyond the natural enthusiasms of the characters, all of whom are discovering a thing or two about the byways of desire while possibly learning some French at the same time.The play’s resident siren is the vampy Diana (Genevieve Gaunt, marking her professional stage debut), who manages to pique the interest of the various Englishmen gathered to perfect their language skills. The lads’ tutor, in turn, is the contrastingly demure Jacqueline, a local to whom the actress Sarah Winter brings both charm and an irreproachable French accent.Rattigan mines the expected laughs from the English visitors’ lamentable attempts to sound Gallic, and Tom Hanson in particular makes the most of the determinedly hearty Brian, for whom female affection in any case is most easily bought. That leaves three other impressionable and variably anxious 20-somethings to make their own amorous way, Rattigan seeding the text with multiple suggestions that the fellas are probably happiest in one another’s company and not navigating the landmine represented by women at all.“We’re brothers under the skin,” the naval commander Bill (William Belchambers) tellingly remarks to would-be diplomat Alan (Alex Bhat), and given the same character’s affinity for citing Sigmund Freud, one has to wonder what the Viennese master would make of that throwaway remark.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The psychoanalytic pioneer would surely have plenty to say about the Vienna on view in Joe Hill-Gibbins’s Young Vic staging of “Measure for Measure,” a characteristically take-no-prisoners production from a directorial iconoclast who likes to meet the classics head on.His brio in this case extends to heavily filleting the text so that Shakespeare’s play runs less than two hours without a break and to making clear from our first glimpse of a stage strewn with inflatable dolls that its licentious urban landscape is a strange and disturbing place indeed.AdvertisementIt has been awhile since this much-debated “problem play” among Shakespeare’s comedies has generated so few laughs, and those that are here intended feel mighty forced. Tom Edden (a 2012 Tony nominee for his exuberant physicality in “One Man, Two Guvnors”), for instance, plays the lowlife Pompey with a tortured American snarl that merely takes one out of the surveillance-intensive hothouse that Mr. Hill-Gibbins has gone to great lengths to create: Several scenes are presented behind closed doors so that they are only available to us on camera.Elsewhere, the evening casts an unusually merciless eye on the play’s central men. Why does the Duke hand over power to his deputy, Angelo, only to stay on and watch, disguised as a friar, so that he can then manipulate an entire community to suit himself? The expert Zubin Varla suggests a ruler who enjoys pressing the buttons of power, while Paul Ready’s no less fine Angelo is a bible-clutching zealot who turns the self-admission “I have begun” into a chilling premonition of misdeeds to come.Playing the object of both Angelo’s suddenly unleashed libido and the Duke’s affections at the final curtain, Romola Garai presents an Isabella visibly sickened by the choices she is forced to make. And when the company is brought together for a closing lineup in which all is ostensibly well, it’s no surprise to see that they mostly give off the air of so many lambs being led to slaughter — Shakespeare’s darkest comedy existing a measure or two away from tragedy.The Father.  Directed by James Macdonald. Wyndham’s Theater. Through Nov. 21.French Without Tears.  Directed by Paul Miller. Orange Tree Theater. Through Nov. 14.Measure for Measure.  Directed by Joe Hill-Gibbins. Young Vic Theater. Through  Nov. 14.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.