AdvertisementSupported byBy Alice RawsthornLONDON — When Charles and Ray Eames were designing a fiberglass seat for a chair in their Los Angeles studio in the early 1950s, they hired a local boat builder to make two prototypes. Sadly for the Eameses, they could only afford to pay for one, and had to leave the other with the boat builder, who plonked it on top of a metal trash can and sat on it for years.The battered seat and trash can are now displayed in “The World of Charles and Ray Eames,” an exhibition running through Feb. 14 at the Barbican Center in London. The story fits neatly with the popular perception of the Eameses as the dashing Charles and his resourceful wife, Ray, who were among the most successful and accomplished furniture designers of the 20th century, and were so devoted to their work that, even when broke, they spent every spare dollar on prototypes.The Eameses’ acclaimed furniture, including the 1958 Aluminum Group chairs and 1962 Tandem Sling Seating that still furnish countless offices and airports respectively, appears throughout the Barbican show, but its focus is on the couple’s less well known, but no less compelling work as filmmakers, information designers and design theorists.“So many people think of Charles and Ray Eames as the brilliant designers of famous chairs, and so they were,” said Catherine Ince, who curated the exhibition. “We felt it was time to look at them afresh by showing their full range of work. To the Eameses, design was a way of life and a means of looking at the world, trying to understand how it was changing, and visualizing those changes for other people.”This vision of the Eameses is timely, given the growing interest in a similarly fluid and eclectic interpretation of design. The Eameses’ use of films and exhibitions to explain complex scientific and technological developments to the public also syncs with the emergence of data visualization as a new form of information design that pursues the same goals. “Powers of Ten,” a 10-minute film made by the couple in 1968 to demonstrate the power of a number and the relative size of the universe, was reinterpreted as a performance in “Superpowers of Ten” by the Office of Political Innovation, a group of young New York and Madrid-based architects, this month at the opening of the Chicago Architecture Biennial. “Powers of Ten” is the closing work in the Barbican show, which covers the period beginning in 1941 after Charles, then 34, married Ray, 29, and they moved to Los Angeles.The couple had met the previous year at Cranbrook Academy of Art in Michigan, where Charles had become a star teacher (and campus lothario) after a patchy career in architecture, and Ray had worked as an assistant on one of his projects. Their wedding followed a month after Charles finalized his divorce from his second wife.As newlyweds in Los Angeles, the Eameses continued the experiments with plywood that they had started at Cranbrook. Charles supported them financially by working as a film set designer for MGM, sneaking potentially useful materials off the lot to build a plywood molding machine in the spare bedroom of their tiny apartment. In 1943, the Eameses commenced production of plywood splints and stretchers in an old garage at 901 Washington Boulevard in Venice, where they worked until Charles’s death in 1978. Ray Eames died in 1988.The Barbican show traces the furniture they developed there, mostly for the Michigan manufacturer Herman Miller. The design of their early plywood and fiberglass seating fulfills the Modernist criteria of being light, compact, inexpensive and delivering “the best to the greatest number of people for the least,” as Charles put it. By the late 1950s, their furniture had become more luxurious, like the 1956 Lounge Chair whose richly patinated wood and opulent leather upholstery was a familiar sight in late 20th-century executive suites.The Eameses constantly refined their designs, devising different bases for each chair, for example. They also experimented with ingenious ways of displaying and publicizing the finished products. This material, painstakingly art directed by Ray, together with the many photographs they took of their studio and the manufacturing process fueled the mythology of the Eameses at the time, and, as displayed in the Barbican exhibition, paints a vivid picture of their work and working lives.Both Eameses spent most of their time in the studio, and regarded their home life as inseparable from their work. The Eames House, which they built from scratch in Pacific Palisades in 1949, was a showcase for their improvisational approach to design, from its prefabricated structure to the placing of a dried tumbleweed they found on their 1941 drive to Los Angeles beside a Robert Motherwell painting in the living room. Ray orchestrated their domestic aesthetic with the same rigor as studio projects, always insisting that the cushions were plumped and candles burnt down to a specific height before guests arrived.By the mid-1950s, the Eameses had become as indispensable to the American computer company I.B.M. as they were to Herman Miller. I.B.M. commissioned them to produce increasingly ambitious films and exhibitions to educate the public about science and technology, including “Powers of Ten” and a pioneering multimedia spectacle on the future of information at the 1964-65 New York World’s Fair. “They had a remarkable understanding of technology’s potential,” Ms. Ince said. “And they were unusually imaginative in making computers seem fun and accessible at a time when many people were frightened of them.” Yet the Eameses were equally passionate about craftsmanship, inspired by their visits to India, Japan and Mexico. When they were commissioned to produce a government report on the future of Indian design, they suggested that India should modernize its design culture by building on its rich craft heritage.All of these projects are exhibited at the Barbican, presenting a fascinating portrait of the Eameses’ ambition, energy and their polyphonic approach to design. The show also demonstrates how — diverse though their work appears — its unifying theme is the zest and sensitivity with which they humanized technology and modernity. And many of the most memorable exhibits are the personal letters, doodles and notes the Eameses sent to one another, revealing their constant exchange of ideas.Take a letter written by Ray to Charles on Aug. 25, 1955, when he was in Paris. After a detailed report on the development of the Lounge Chair, she suggested that he meet with an interesting French designer Jean “Prouvet” — Prouvé, presumably. Ray then submitted an illustrated shopping list of items she wished him to buy, including black lace stockings, a bottle of Balmain’s Jolie Madame perfume and “very short” Christian Dior leather gloves in an “interesting color — yellow, or pale blue, or violet blue, or brilliant blue.”Advertisement