
The Knick By                     
 MIKE HALE
 
OCT. 24, 2015
“The Knick” began on a dark note on Friday night, with the discovery in the East River of the not very healthy body of the health inspector Jacob Speight, his face a pale blue that blended well with the show’s muted palette.Speight’s fate — we last saw him agreeing to meet someone on the docks after dark to discuss bubonic plague — was not the episode’s primary concern, however. The main event was the return of Dr. John Thackery from his exile in rehab. He was accompanied by the triumphant Everett Gallinger, who last week kidnapped Thackery and dried him out in order to restore him to his post of chief of surgery at the Knick and bring down Gallinger’s rival, Algernon Edwards.Telling the hospital’s board that he was clean of both cocaine and heroin, Thackery declined to return as a surgeon, announcing his quixotic goal of finding a cure for addiction, which at the turn of the 19th century was considered a moral lapse rather than a disease. Always pragmatic, he pushed the idea of making the Knick the go-to spot for rich New Yorkers to kick their habits.Back in his office — where he took a long look inside the drawer where he used to keep his cocaine — Thackery was confronted by Lucy Elkins, the nurse who loves him, and promptly broke her heart. Telling her she should start anew, he tried to send her away, but she tearfully informed him she couldn’t leave — she’d been sent to check his arms for needle marks.AdvertisementThe sad scene with Lucy was book ended by the episode’s emotional high point, when Thackery and Edwards made up. Thackery, upon his return, had immediately insulted Edwards by scrapping the new system of charts Edwards had devised and making him redo them all. But now, storming into Edwards’s office to deliver another complaint, Thackery noticed the problem with his colleague’s eye. Edwards confessed to his detached retina — the reason he was suddenly reluctant to do surgeries — and asked Thackery to perform a procedure to reattach it. This was of course not just a bonding moment but a chance for Thackery to overcome his own demons regarding surgery. It was also a return to the bad old days of secret nighttime operations at the Knick.AdvertisementIt would be nice to report that Thackery kept steady and the surgery was a success, but instead he had his recurring vision of the girl he killed on the operating table and shook so badly that Edwards stopped the operation. (Before that, we were treated to some especially skin-crawling shots of Thackery preparing the eye for surgery, including the injection of cocaine into the eyeball.)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In other news:• Elkins’s father, an evangelist, arrived from the South for a visit and was played by the estimable Stephen Spinella. The episode closed with a hypnotic scene of him preaching and speaking in tongues (all to the show’s eccentric synthesizer score).• Cornelia Showalter returned from San Francisco and learned of the death of Speight, her former colleague in battles against infectious disease. Turned away by the police and by Tammany Hall (where an official said she would need to give him a bigger bribe than that offered by the people who didn’t want Speight’s death examined), she enlisted the former gravedigger Tom Cleary to unearth Speight’s body — only to discover an empty coffin.• It was a bad episode for Bertie Chickering, whose unrequited love for Lucy Elkins gave him special reason to be upset by Thackery’s return. When he tendered his resignation, Thackery embarked on an awkward speech about false notions of virginity, only to discover that Bertie hadn’t known that Thackery and Elkins were lovers. Oops.• Sister Harriet remained in jail, where her spirits were sinking. Cleary hired an expensive lawyer for her, but couldn’t pay for his services, given the problems with the new motorized ambulance and Cleary’s incompetence as a wrestling manager. His last resort was to ask Cornelia for help.• And finally, in the episode’s most uncomfortably comic scene, Ping Wu brought his first batch of prostitutes to the Knick for clandestine medical examinations. Herman Barrow planned to let Elkins take care of them, but when the new and incompetent Dr. Mays happened on the scene, he gladly volunteered to take on the job. What followed was a quick lesson in turn-of-the-last-century gynecology, as he turned down stirrups — the women could just put their legs on his shoulders — and scoffed at the notion of taking swabs to test for venereal disease. All a doctor needed, he declared, was his eyes and his nose.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »