By KATHRYN SHATTUCKOCT. 24, 2015
INSIDE OUT (2015) For the price of a couple of multiplex tickets, you could make it family night at home with this sparkly Pixar jewel. Riley, an 11-year-old recently displaced from Minnesota to San Francisco, suffers the usual atmospheric tweenage angst: a rough patch at school, a spat with Mom and Dad, a disappointing hockey tryout. But on the inside, her brain is controlled by five competing emotions whose bickering resembles a typical day on “The Office.” The voice work features a comedy dream-team: Bill Hader as Fear, Lewis Black as Anger, Mindy Kaling as Disgust, Phyllis Smith as Sadness and Amy Poehler as Joy, who reigns supreme. In The New York Times, A. O. Scott called it “a thrilling return to form for Pixar Animation Studios.” (iTunes; $19.99 HD) (Image: Joy and Sadness)DEMON ON WHEELS (2015) In this “Catskill Mountains hot rodding love story,” Christina Eliopoulos follows Mike Ondish — a former racer and moonshiner turned aging mechanic — as he tries to restore his 1968 Ford Mustang in tribute to the revered muscle-car designer Carroll Shelby. But will he lose Martha, his girlfriend of 30 years, in his quest for one more time around the track? (amazon.com, iTunes)THE MAN IN THE HIGH CASTLE A special “preview weekend” offers the first two episodes of this Philip K. Dick tale, set in a 1960s America occupied by Japan and Germany, before the show’s official debut on Nov. 20. (amazon.com)What’s On TV SaturdayNOON (13) THE OPEN MIND That motor-mouth J. B. Smoove explains why comedy will never die.Advertisement2:30 P.M. (NBC Sports) RUGBY WORLD CUP 2015 South Africa, last year’s runner-up, faces New Zealand, the defending champion, in this semifinal match from Twickenham Stadium in Britain.Advertisement8 P.M. (HBO) BAD WORDS (2014) Jason Bateman goes dark as a 40-year-old bully who worms his way onto the spelling bee circuit and mows down the competition with his potty mouth until he reaches the nationals. But he meets his match when a 10-year-old nerd shows up wanting a friend. For more Bateman humor, watch “Dodgeball: A True Underdog Story,” at 9, on FXX. (Image: Mr. Bateman)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.8 P.M. (Starz) DA VINCI’S DEMONS It’s the final season, and in this first episode, Leonardo’s genius is used against him when the Ottoman Empire steals his designs.9 P.M. (CUNY) THE SEVENTH SEAL (1958) Ingmar Bergman’s masterpiece: A medieval knight returning from the Crusades challenges Death to a game of chess in exchange for his life. Unlike some critics, Bosley Crowther of The Times recognized the film’s brilliance, calling it “a piercing and powerful contemplation of the passage of man upon this earth.” (Image: Bengt Ekerot, left, and Max von Sydow)9 P.M. (BBC America) DOCTOR WHO The Doctor must save the world from a 17th-century highwayman called the Knightmare.9 P.M. (Esquire) ESQUIRE’S CAR OF THE YEAR The “car matchmaker” Spike Feresten burns rubber with the Nascar driver Brian Vickers to choose the best new ride.10 P.M. (OWN) LEGENDS: OWN AT THE APOLLO Gladys Knight commandeers the stage of the fabled Harlem theater. Stevie Wonder; Dionne Warwick; Yolanda Adams; and Gladys’s Pip of a brother, Merald Knight Jr., join in on “Midnight Train to Georgia,” “Neither One of Us” and “Best Thing That Ever Happened.”A version of this schedule appears in print on October 24, 2015, on Page C7 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s Streaming Now.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.