By SIOBHAN BURKEOCT. 23, 2015
What to expect from a dance called “Stripe Tease”? This hourlong work by the Minnesota choreographer Chris Schlichting, which had its New York premiere at Danspace Project on Thursday, does include a slow, incremental reveal — you could call it a tease — of colorful vertical stripes. (Jennifer Davis did the visual design.) And a lot happens in the realm of repetitive patterns, if not exactly linear ones, among the six dancers as they migrate around the sanctuary at St. Mark’s Church.The uncovering of stripes, then more stripes, is one of the work’s most endearingly spontaneous features. About 15 minutes in, a drab curtain parts to expose Ms. Davis’s fluorescent- and silver-striped backdrop. Later, that backdrop grows taller, as an identical set of stripes rises creakily out of the first. Other pulled-back curtains reveal a live rock band — Jeremy Ylvisaker and Alpha Consumer, with JT Bates (drums) and Jim Anton (bass) — and stenciled images of tigers. You know what they have.“Stripe Tease,” while playful in these regards, tends toward the serious and sensuous. Max Wirsing and Dustin Maxwell set the tone with a luxuriant duet in silence, caressing their own and each other’s silhouettes and bathing their hands in a pool of light. They introduce a fatigued brow-wiping that re-emerges later through a thicket of related gestures, curved and curlicue articulations of the hands and arms.Mr. Ylvisaker’s irresistibly danceable, occasionally choppy score, kicking in as more performers arrive, drives the piece forward — directly forward at first, as the dancers march in twos from the back of the stage into the audience, which is seated on the church altar. Advancing swiftly, they point to the ceiling and corners of the room, as if getting their bearings or giving us ours.AdvertisementMr. Schlichting makes elegant use of the space, which buzzes with activity. (His costumes, black shorts and tops and jumpsuits, are elegant, too.) A duet for Mr. Wirsing and Pareena Lim — mostly for their flapping, cupping hands — crops up in the balcony, then back on our level. Increasingly whirring, airborne phrases zip across a diagonal, toward and away from the band, settling into a gentler swaying.It’s all attractive and attractively danced. But as it evolves — and sometimes stagnates — so does a sense that something is missing, some deeper logic or intrinsic motor. What exactly? It’s hard to tell with this work, and in that sense, it’s kind of a tease.Advertisement“Stripe Tease” continues through Saturday at Danspace Project, St. Mark’s Church, 131 East 10th Street, Manhattan; 866-811-4111, danspaceproject­.org.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.