AdvertisementSupported byBy Gia KourlasCatherine Hurlin, a 19-year-old member of American Ballet Theater, hit the jackpot twice when she was cast in Paul Taylor’s 1991 “Company B”: She gets to follow in the footsteps of both her mother and her godmother.When Mr. Taylor choreographed “Company B,” set to songs by the Andrews Sisters, Denise Roberts Hurlin — Ms. Hurlin’s mother — was a member of the Taylor group, along with Rachel Berman, Ms. Hurlin’s godmother. One section, “Joseph! Joseph!,” features Catherine Hurlin dancing around a man and grieving over his body. It was the part performed by Ms. Berman.Catherine said “Company B” was the one ballet that she was hoping to be cast in this season, and was chosen for the first cast. “I know how Paul Taylor dancers move,” she said, “and it felt sort of natural.”That said, it’s not easy for a ballet dancer to cover space the way a Taylor dancer does. “I have so much respect for my mom now, knowing all the things that she had to do for that company,” Catherine said. “In ballet, you have to look pretty and like you’re fluttering around the stage, but in Paul Taylor pieces, you have to run as if you were running for your life.”“Company B,” which will be performed by Ballet Theater beginning on Saturday, is a classic example of Mr. Taylor’s ability to present worlds both dark and light. In the foreground, jitterbugging dancers are as happy as can be, but in the background, soldiers collapse in silhouette.Denise Hurlin recalled that when Mr. Taylor was choreographing the “Joseph! Joseph!” section of the dance, he told the women that they should be thinking, “ ‘You want these guys, these guys don’t want you — and you’ve gotta get them!’ So that section is a constant thing of chasing after them. It’s this easy, breezy leading into it and then all of a sudden there’s an explosion of movement and swirling motion and somebody falls and somebody gets up — and it’s the guy who falls is who she comforts. It’s very subtle. And in the end, you don’t get the guy.”Denise, who left the Taylor company in 1995 when she was 14 weeks pregnant with Catherine, watched a performance of “Company B” this month when Ballet Theater presented a season at Bard College’s Richard B. Fisher Center for the Performing Arts. “I was so happy to see her really run,” she said of Catherine. “Because it’s hard — you have to get into your thighs, and it’s a place that ballet dancers don’t generally go to all the time.”Catherine didn’t ask her mother for advice when rehearsing the role, but after the performance quizzed her. “She did say I needed to work on one thing — it’s a very popular Paul Taylor running step, like a chug forward and you’re in a back attitude,” Catherine said. “She said it’s common for most ballerinas to be very up straight, where the actual pose is to be leaning forward a little bit.”It’s fast, and Catherine said she knew she didn’t have it right: “As soon as I tried it, I knew — that’s not what Paul Taylor dancers look like.”American Ballet Theater performs “Company B’” on Saturday and Sunday and Oct. 28–30 at the David H. Koch Theater, Lincoln Center; 212-496-0600, abt.­org.Advertisement