By BRIAN SEIBERTOCT. 23, 2015
Aakash Odedra is quite a dancer. A British man of South Asian descent, he was trained in the classical Indian forms of kathak and bharatanatyam, but he also has some of the loose snap of hip-hop. His bare feet can slap out complex rhythms incisively. His arms and wrists can curl like smoke. Without ice, he can spin like an ice skater, shaping his pliant body into one sculptural position after another while rotating at top speed. Without theatrical tricks, he can whip up a whirlwind.But in the two works he performed at the Baryshnikov Arts Center on Thursday (as part of Lincoln Center’s White Light Festival), these skills and gifts are misused, shrouded in veils of underwhelming theatrical effects, clunky metaphors, bad music and weak choreography.“Inked,” choreographed by Damien Jalet, begins promisingly with the sound of Mr. Odedra’s articulate feet. But then it descends into a tiresome exercise of Mr. Odedra painting himself and the floor with black ink. Rolling around with tangled limbs, he sometimes resembles Houdini trying to squirm out of a straitjacket — a symbol for restrictions of tribal identity. But the true constriction is the choreography, dull where it isn’t derivative. When Mr. Odedra turns eyes inked onto his shoulders into the face of an alien, the transformation is striking, but that effect is awfully similar to one that Akram Khan, Mr. Odedra’s mentor, used at the White Light Festival in 2013.In “Murmur,” it’s the idea that’s promising: to represent Mr. Odedra’s struggles with dyslexia and his freeing discovery of the language of dance. Onto long, translucent curtains, video by Ars Electronica Futurelab projects swirling flocks of starlings (behaving, perhaps, as letters do in Mr. Odedra’s mind) and heat-sensor images of Mr. Odedra. Though he is partially obscured by the curtains, you can see that the choreography, made by him in collaboration with Lewis Major, is wispy. Later, the revelation of a minor biographical crisis (Mr. Odedra long misspelled his own first name) is followed by a blizzard of paper blown by electric fans, another conceit that feels overly familiar.Inside that blizzard is a talented dancer, as could be seen in the more traditional kathak number that Mr. Odedra brought to the Fall for Dance festival last year. As he follows Mr. Khan’s path into high-tech spectacle, I hope that dancer doesn’t get lost.Aakash Odedra performs through Saturday at the Baryshnikov Arts Center, Manhattan; 866-811-4111, bacnyc.org.A version of this review appears in print on October 24, 2015, on Page C5 of the New York edition with the headline: Pliant Body as Paintbrush.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.