By ANTHONY TOMMASINIOCT. 23, 2015
What makes a conductor the right fit for an orchestra? In August, after just one season as music director of the Boston Symphony Orchestra, the dynamic Latvian conductor Andris Nelsons  signed an extended contract that will keep him in that post until 2022. Questions still hover over his leadership. His long-term artistic vision for the institution seems unclear. He has yet to demonstrate genuine enthusiasm for contemporary music, a serious shortcoming. And last month, Mr. Nelsons accepted the directorship of the Leipzig Gewandhaus Orchestra in Germany, starting in 2017, a prestigious position that can only dilute his focus.Still, the reasons the Boston Symphony organization is committed to Mr. Nelsons came through, and how, on Wednesday at Carnegie Hall. Mr. Nelsons, 36, led the inspired players of this re-energized orchestra and a thrilling cast in a seething, inexorable-sounding concert performance of Strauss’s “Elektra,” a one-act shocker, completed in 1908 and the composer’s most boldly modernist score.The night belonged to the American soprano Christine Goerke, who simply owns the title role. Over the last decade, she has developed into one of the most fearless and formidable dramatic sopranos of the day. Last month, she excelled in the title role of Puccini’s “Turandot” at the Metropolitan Opera. On Wednesday, she brought effortless power, gleaming sound and dramatic intensity to this unforgettable Elektra, earning an ovation so ecstatic she was overcome with teary emotion.This was also, however, Mr. Nelsons’s night. While drawing colorful, textured sound from the orchestra, building stealthily to chilling climaxes, he was sensitive to the expressive subtleties of Ms. Goerke’s singing. For all the fire and gnashing intensity of this performance, Mr. Nelsons captured the lushly beautiful, poignantly delicate moments in the work.AdvertisementThis was the second of three programs for the Boston Symphony at Carnegie Hall. On Tuesday, Mr. Nelsons conducted the New York premiere of “Divisions,” a restless, 12-minute orchestra piece by Sebastian Currier; then Beethoven’s Third Piano Concerto with Lars Vogt as soloist; and Brahms’s Second Symphony, a solid, well-played but not noticeably insightful interpretation. Mr. Vogt took a feisty approach to the Beethoven, sometimes playing with elegant lyricism and subdued passagework, other times dispatching the music with impetuous outbursts and punchy accents. His expressive freedoms may have been a little hard to follow, but not enough to account for some moments of tentative coordination between soloist and orchestra.AdvertisementOn Thursday, joined by the sizable Tanglewood Festival Chorus, Mr. Nelsons led the cantata that Prokofiev fashioned in 1939 from his score for the classic Eisenstein film “Alexander Nevsky,” a performance that plumbed the music’s dark colorings and weightiness. The mezzo-soprano Nedezhda Serdyuk brought tremulous gravity to “The Field of the Dead,” the song of a young woman wandering a battle ground in search of her husband. After intermission, Mr. Nelsons conducted a rhapsodic account of Rachmaninoff’s Symphonic Dances. But in comparison with the “Elektra” both programs seemed almost routine.From Ms. Goerke’s first entry — hurtling up the steps on the side of the stage, wearing a blood-red dress and looking slightly crazed — she seemed determined to make you forget this was just a concert performance. The general plot, adapted by the librettist Hugo von Hofmannsthal from the Sophocles play, is familiar. Years before the opera begins, Elektra’s beloved father, Agamemnon, the king, was murdered by Klytamnestra, his wife, and Aegisth, her lover. Two obsessions drive Elektra: a determination to exact revenge upon her mother and Aegisth, and a yearning to one day dance at a funeral rite for her father.In Elektra’s first monologue, Ms. Goerke sang with aching grief and earthy colorings. Yet, when she pleaded with her dead father to show himself to fortify her resolve, Ms. Goerke sent Strauss’s phrases soaring with a burnished power that stunned you.Her sister, Chrysothemis was sung by the bright-voiced German soprano Gun-Brit Barkmin, who sang the title role in the thrilling concert performance of Strauss’s “Salome” that Mr. Nelsons conducted with the Vienna Philharmonic last year at Carnegie Hall. The weak-willed Chrysothemis harbors horror over her mother’s actions and feels trapped at the palace. But how long, she repeatedly asks Elektra, can you cling to hatred? Ms. Barkmin, singing with steely power and volatility, conveyed that the emotional prison Chrysothemis lives in is more confining than the near-servitude she endures at the palace.The veteran mezzo-soprano Jane Henschel nailed the role of Klytamnestra, a woman haunted by dreams and her murderous past. Just when you were starting to feel a glint of sympathy for this outrageous mother, Ms. Henschel shattered it: Hearing the news that Orest, her avenging son, is dead, she laughed maniacally.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Actually Orest lives, and shows up, here the husky baritone James Rutherford, who exacts revenge first upon his howling mother and then sniveling Aegisth (the tenor Gerhard Siegel).Moment after moment of gleaming ferocity came through in the performance Mr. Nelsons led. What I will especially remember, though, was the way he made the recognition scene — when Elektra realizes that the sullen stranger who has arrived is her beloved brother — seem the most sadly beautiful music Strauss every wrote. And Ms. Goerke suffused her phrases with longing and lyricism.So what now for Mr. Nelsons? It was almost frustrating to hear him conduct Mr. Currier’s vibrant piece with such command. This commissioned work, written to mark the 100th anniversary of World War I, begins as sputtered fragments and disjointed bits that slowly cohere and gain thrust. Mr. Nelsons could be an able advocate of new music if he were to make it a priority.The Boston Symphony insists it is pleased about Mr. Nelsons’s Leipzig appointment. There will be co-commissions and alternating residencies, like “Leipzig Week in Boston.” Composers in the New England area, who have long felt that the Boston Symphony does not do enough to foster new music in its hometown, might ask: How about a Boston week in Boston?AdvertisementBut no matter how his tenure develops, Mr. Nelsons led one of the most memorable performances at Carnegie Hall in some time. And Ms. Goerke rules as Elektra.Members of the Boston Symphony Orchestra perform an all-Dvorak program on Saturday at Boston Symphony Hall; 888-266-1200, bso­.org.A version of this review appears in print on October 24, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: Gleaming Intensity From Boston.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.