AdvertisementSupported byBy Vivien SchweitzerIn William Kentridge’s multimedia chamber opera “Refuse the Hour,” the concept of tempo rubato, or stolen time, is taken to mad-scientist extremes. Words in the Berlioz aria “Spectre de la rose,” sung by  Ann Masina, are surreally elongated against a backdrop of speedometers, Leonardo da Vinci-like diagrams, bike wheels and megaphones.The production, which opened at the Brooklyn Academy of Music on Thursday, explores time from cultural and musical viewpoints, including the colonial imposition of Western notions of time.Mr. Kentridge, the South African artist whose production of Berg’s “Lulu” opens on Nov. 5 at the Metropolitan Opera, was inspired to create this work after conversations with the science historian Peter Galison about topics including black holes and relativity. It opens with Mr. Kentridge recounting the myth of Perseus. In other lecture-discourses he ruminates on the speed of light, photography and the synchronization of clocks in 19th-century Europe.The quirky sound effects and relentless pulse of Philip Miller’s incidental music for small ensemble flowed and contracted with the eccentric theatrical elements. At one point, three giant metronomes ticked rapidly at unsynchronized speeds as a man played African drums. Mr. Kentridge’s remarkable cinematic sequences included scenes of the artist procrastinating in his studio.The otherworldly utterances of the singer Joanna Dudley added to the sensation of time’s being distorted and manipulated. The bold, incisive gestures of the South African dancer Dada Masilo illustrated time in movement. With a leg and an arm in giant silver cones, she rotated slowly on a small platform. Racial and gender stereotypes were explored in images static and moving, among them a film of Ms. Masilo walking bent over, a prostrate Mr. Kentridge on her back.With its insistent drumbeat of ideas and images, the staging proved both fascinating and overwhelming — a fitting metaphor for the deadline driven, round-the-clock digital clamor of modern society.­“Refuse the Hour” runs through Sunday at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, Harvey Theater, 651 Fulton Street, Brooklyn; bam­.org.Advertisement