AdvertisementSupported byBy Scott ReyburnPARIS — October is the month when London and Paris, with their respective Frieze and FIAC fairs, compete head-to-head as international destinations for buying contemporary art.Back in the early 2000s, when Britannia — and the movement of brash young artists it had produced — was considered cool, Frieze London became Europe’s must-visit fair for emerging art. But since 2010, under the New Zealand-born director Jennifer Flay, the Foire Internationale d’Art Contemporain here, with its mix of new and 20th-century art, has become a compelling rival.“People come to Paris and they focus on the fair,” the New York art adviser Candace Worth said at the Wednesday preview of the 42nd edition of FIAC at the Grand Palais. This year’s edition, which closes on Sunday, features 173 galleries from 23 countries. Frieze London and Frieze Masters had a total of 294 booths.“In London, there’s so much going on, it’s a distraction,” Ms. Worth said. “You get pulled in more directions. You don’t have nearly as much in the contemporary art market here. And yet who doesn’t like coming to Paris?” Ms. Worth said that quality levels of new contemporary works at FIAC compared with Frieze London (whose 13th edition closed on Oct. 17) were broadly similar.At times, the works on view were almost interchangeable. The New York dealer Metro Pictures, for example, was showing more of the kind of new work by the French artist Camille Henrot that had sold out at the booth of the Paris dealer Kamel Mennour at Frieze London. Here, Metro sold the 2015 drawing “Fitness Program” for $35,000 and a complete series of eight 2014 bronze biomorphic “Personal Development” sculptures to various buyers, priced at $37,000 each.Ms. Henrot’s latest “Minor Concerns” series is, at times, redolent of the work of 20th-century Parisian artists like Picasso and Henri Laurens. The museum show “Picasso Mania” is currently drawing crowds in another part of the Grand Palais, but sadly, such has been FIAC’s determination to rival the erstwhile funkiness of Frieze, that high-quality modernist works have become a rarity at the Paris fair. This year, Landau Fine Art of Montreal, a stalwart of The European Fine Art Fair in Maastricht, the Netherlands, rejoined FIAC to strengthen that sector of the fair. The Canadian dealer showed a fine 1953 Picasso painting of Françoise Gilot, “Femme assise,” priced at 7.9 million euros, about $8.8 million.But even though there was a dearth of their works at the fair, the influence of that extraordinary generation of Paris-based artists lingered here. Two large-scale paintings of heads by George Condo, both inspired to varying degrees by Picasso, sold for $600,000 each at the booths of Skarstedt and Sprüth Magers. The totemic 2013 Rebecca Warren hand-painted bronze “Sieben” (Seven), at the booth of the New York dealer Matthew Marks, was reminiscent of an elongated Giacometti sculpture. From an edition of three, this was sold to an international collector for 100,000 pounds, or $154,000.But some dealers, who have access to works by older, longer-established artists, find FIAC the more lucrative fair. “This is a higher level fair than Frieze,” said Gordon VeneKlasen, director of the New York and London dealer Michael Werner, who also exhibits at Frieze London, but not Frieze Masters. “You can bring older, serious things to FIAC. It’s a real fair and it’s gotten much better over the years.”Mr. VeneKlasen sold at least seven works priced at more than $60,000 during the first six hours of the preview. These included the seven-foot-high 1989 Georg Baselitz painting “Nachter Baum” (Naked Tree), priced at $1.8 million, to an American collector.But these days, the rivalry between Frieze and FIAC isn’t just about fairs. It’s about entire weeks in the art world built around these fairs.London’s “Frieze Week” is a highly sociable frenzy of high-end art fairs, gallery shows, museum exhibitions and auctions. There were no fewer than nine sales in the second week of October at Christie’s, Sotheby’s and Phillips, which netted a total of £233.4 million. Paris can’t compete with that. Last year, London’s auction houses sold $2.8 billion of art, more than six times the equivalent turnover in Paris, according a report published in April by the French-based analysts Artprice.On the other hand, “FIAC Week” offers more of the satellite fairs that attract collectors searching for new international talent. While “Frieze Week” offers its fairly modest Sunday Art Fair of just 25 galleries, FIAC has its own satellite, Officielle, at Les Docks-Cité de la Mode et du Design in the east of Paris. The second edition, featuring 50 galleries from 13 countries, opened to VIPs on Tuesday, the day before the main fair. There is also Slick (whose 10th edition features 31 galleries) and the Outsider Art Fair (in its third year in Paris, with 36).But the hit of the week, in terms of a “discovery” event, was the new Paris Internationale fair, which opened on the same day as Officielle. Organized by a nonprofit association of four dealers from Paris and one from Zurich, the inaugural event, held in the rambling shabbiness of an empty hôtel particulier near the Arc de Triomphe, reminded a number of visitors of the popular Liste fair in Basel in June.The 41 exhibitors from 13 countries included the Kosovo dealer LambdaLambdaLambda, which showed a video by Flaka Haliti, who is representing Kosovo at this year’s Venice Biennale; it was priced at €7,700.The London dealer Carlos/Ishikawa made some early sales: Three witty ideogrammatic paintings of men’s faces by the British artist Steve Bishop, inspired by hotel shaver sockets, were bought by collectors at the preview for €3,400 each. “Because this is self-organized and nonprofit, this feels like a young fair that’s still attached to the grassroots,” said the gallery’s co-founder, Vanessa Carlos. “We’ve seen a lot of new people.”Out in the galleries of Paris, it’s recognized that the city doesn’t have as extensive a dealer scene as London, where big-name New Yorkers like Mr. Werner, David Zwirner, Gagosian, Pace, Dominique Levy, Marian Goodman and Skarstedt have all established new spaces since 2011. All put on serious exhibitions during this month’s “Frieze Week.” But when an internationally regarded (and commercially desirable) artist does open a show in Paris during FIAC, that artist can attract plenty of attention.Danh Vo at Chantal Crousel and Adrian Ghenie at Thaddaeus Ropac are this year’s stand-out gallery exhibitions. The presentation by Mr. Vo, a Vietnamese-born conceptual artist (now representing Denmark at the Venice Biennale and best known for his “We the People” sculptures reproducing sections of the Statue of Liberty), is centered on a new installation, consisting of a mirrored room engraved with homoerotic poems by Xiu Xiu and lined with photographs of boys in Vietnam taken from 1962 to 1973 by Joseph M. Carrier and reprinted by Mr. Vo in 2010. Titled “Take My Breath Away,” the installation is priced at €350,000; the photographs, from an edition of 24, are €35,000. The 2015 sculpture, “Fabulous Muscles,” juxtaposing a fossilized mammoth tooth with a vintage ivory letter opener, is priced at €140,000.Mr. Ghenie is also a prominent figure at the 2015 Biennale, representing his native Romania. His expressively worked, historically aware oil paintings have been the subject of admired one-man shows at the Pace galleries in New York and London. The 10 new “Self-Portraits” he was unveiling at Thaddaeus Ropac’s elegant Marais gallery will be his first solo exhibition with a Paris dealer.The centerpiece of the show is the monumental nine-foot-high canvas, “Self-Portrait as Vincent van Gogh,” rendered in violent swathes of pigment that decompose the depiction of skin and hair into a painting about painting.“It’s a landscape portrait, like Picasso and Bacon,” Mr. Ghenie, 38, said in an interview. “Bacon is Picasso made flesh. I’m following in that tradition, trying to unite them.”Like Mr. Vo, Mr. Ghenie is a relatively young artist who has attracted plenty of commercial and critical attention. During “Frieze Week,” a relatively small 2012 painting by Mr. Ghenie sold at Christie’s for £446,500. There is a lengthy international waiting list for his new paintings, which are priced by Thaddaeus Ropac at €100,000 to €440,000.But why Paris?“For a European, Paris is what New York is for an American,” Mr. Ghenie said. “It’s so connected with a certain kind of art history which I always refer to.”It’s this historical connection that sets Paris apart. And it’s this distinctness, at least during “FIAC Week,” that is making Paris an increasingly attractive destination to buy contemporary art.Advertisement