AdvertisementSupported byThe AffairBy Mike HaleIt was a long, bad day for both Helen and Noah on Sunday night’s episode of “The Affair,” one that began with them on opposite sides of a courtroom and ended with Helen in jail and Noah checked into a motel with three of his children.The opening scene, a custody hearing, was one of just two that we saw from both Solloway points of view. There were some of the usual discrepancies in detail. But the differences were more about what they remembered, not how they remembered it.Helen’s scene was funnier, as usual, with Gottlief, her lawyer, repeatedly referring to Alison as Noah’s “paramour” (he told her later it was the proper legal term). But what she focused on was a misstep by Gottlief that opened up the question of Helen’s substantial assets, in front of a judge who, as she later told her mother, “doesn’t like rich people.”Noah’s scene was all about the absent Alison. The judge asked whether anyone else would be living at Noah’s potential new apartment in Brooklyn. Noah’s lawyer said no but Noah, in one of his bouts of situational honesty, said that Alison would be there when the children weren’t and eventually when they were. The judge didn’t like that and he issued an order preventing Alison from having contact with the kids.The rest of Helen’s chapter was a slow, sad downward spiral fueled by the pot lozenge given to her by Max at the fund-raiser in the season premiere. At home her mother, Margaret, was putting on a brave front as she left for her Bryn Mawr reunion, but when Helen asked her to contact her husband (so Helen could discuss the financial impact of the divorce with him), Margaret had to admit that she didn’t know how to reach him — the last she heard he was in Tulsa with a former student. (Kathleen Chalfant made Margaret’s fear and wounded pride palpable.)Next was a visit from Max, bearing flowers (stargazers? really?) and a gift: tickets for a getaway to Buenos Aires. In a major concession, he had cleared 90 minutes in his schedule, 70 of which remained for them to have sex. But the plane tickets threw Helen off her game. “I can’t do this,” she said — things were moving too fast. And Max just isn’t the right guy, as he proved when he quickly got angry, telling her no one could make her happy.Now Helen’s day really began. Chugging wine, singing Lucinda Williams’s breakup anthem “Changed the Locks,” pulling out a white hair, Helen checked out her middle-aged hotness in the mirror and defiantly popped the marijuana candy. She then had a series of increasingly embarrassing misadventures. At her boutique she chastised the clerk for not making any sales, but when Helen tried to make a sale herself she ended up chasing the customer out of the store and calling her a “botoxed hipster.” At a salon to get her hair colored, she felt the paranoia kicking in, looking at the women around her laughing and gossiping and wondering why, in the wake of her separation, she had no friends. (The show’s occasional heavy-handedness popped up in these scenes. A discussion of oil and vinegar was a little obviously symbolic, and we didn’t need to have Helen see her mother’s face looking back at her from the mirror in the salon — it was a point we’d already gotten from Ms. Tierney’s performance.)A phone call from her son Trevor started the awful denouement, a nightmarish illustration of Helen’s single-motherhood in which she rushed to pick up her two youngest children because she had mixed up the dates. We knew that driving was a terrible idea, and sure enough she backed her minivan into another car, giving her daughter Stacey a bump on the head in the process. A policeman saw inside her purse and noticed the vaporizer she uses to smoke marijuana. Wrestling for her purse with Trevor (would a young boy really try to force his mom to show her bag to a cop? Just asking), she accidentally struck the cop and was put in cuffs. Noah arrived, yelling at her and asking if she’d lost her mind. Helen, in her own point of view, looked at him and quite coherently asked, “Why are you doing this to us?” As usual, he had no answer. The last we saw of Helen, she was in a holding cell with two prostitutes, finally taking the tin foil from the salon out of her hair.In Noah’s chapter, he went from the custody hearing to a cafe in Brooklyn where he met Alison, who was excited about an apartment she had just seen. But this is Noah, for whom nothing good can ever happen, and he told her that their plan to live together part time in Brooklyn wouldn’t work because of the judge’s order. He didn’t expect Alison’s reaction: that he could just see the kids less. They were about to get into it when Noah’s phone rang. There, we saw a much more obviously stoned Helen, who responded to Noah’s demand that she stop laughing by saying: “Why should I? Why do you get to” mess up “and I don’t?” Then she lay down in the police car and went to sleep.Thus began Noah’s own dark journey, as he first took Trevor and Stacey home to Helen’s brownstone — where the older son, Martin, was waiting — and then on the spur of the moment packed them into the damaged minivan and drove to a suburban house where we met a whole new set of characters, including Noah’s sister, Nina, played by Jennifer Esposito, and his father, played by the veteran character actor Mark Margolis. Any thoughts Noah might have had of a happy homecoming were quickly dispensed with. His father, with whom he clearly had a difficult relationship, told a not very believable story about his ailing wife offering to set him up with another woman on his 50th birthday (Noah is 46), but “I told her no because I loved her.” Strike 1 against Noah. Then his sister read him the riot act for the nightmare he was putting his children through and questioned whether he really wanted full custody of them (now seemingly a possibility because of Helen’s downfall). That was Strike 2, and before he could get a third he decided to pack up the kids and leave, which led to Martin swearing at him and Noah’s father getting off the parting shot, “You tell Helen I’m sorry.”Back on the road, now in the dark, Noah had no plan but pulled into a concrete monstrosity of a motel when Martin started not to feel well. Martin shut himself in the bathroom — an ominous development, if you remembered his supposedly fake suicide attempt in the series premiere — and lay on the floor in pain. It seemed like very bad parenting that Noah didn’t just take him to an emergency room, which is what Alison, the former nurse, told him to do when she conveniently called in the middle of Martin’s crisis. Oddly, what looked like a case of acute appendicitis passed without further trouble, and soon all three children were peacefully asleep. Noah talked to Alison again, and she told him to look outside, where she was waiting in the parking lot, having driven over from Brooklyn. They sat on the motel terrace — scrupulously observing the no-contact-with-the-children order — and Alison asked, “What’s going to happen to us?” Just as when Helen asked, “Why are you doing this to us?,” he had no answer.After an episode last week with no glimpses of the future, Sunday gave us one short scene at the end of Noah’s chapter in which Gottlief attempted to get the venue of Noah’s trial moved from Suffolk County. He failed, and he also turned down a plea offer we hadn’t heard before: criminally negligent homicide, one to three years in prison. As Alison watched, the judge set the trial for four months in the future. That’s a lot of time, when you only give the future story a few minutes per week.Advertisement