
Season 5, Episode 4: “Why Is This Night Different?”O.K., O.K., you were right. I was wrong. Allison (Miranda Otto) is indeed, as so many of you sensed episodes ago, a conniving snake. It is she who set up Peter Quinn (Rupert Friend) to kill Carrie (Claire Danes); she who, presumably, has facilitated the blowing-to-bits of General Youssef (Igal Naor) and his family, foiling the United States’s plans for regime change in Syria. She’s batting for the Russians. She wouldn’t even consider sparing the life of a girl who’d just had a kidney transplant.And to think that I wanted her for my new BFF. What does that say about my people instincts?Let’s move on.You know when I began to suspect I’d been taken for a ride?
It was when she showed up in her Swiss medical clinic administrator’s costume. The length of her skirt was unattractive — something we would not normally  see on TV — and it signaled to me, in that same split-second flash-of-insight way that allows Carrie and Quinn to react just in time to save their lives when they’re under sudden attack, that something was terribly amiss. No wonder she’s clueless about people, you’re thinking, if this is what passes for emotional intelligence. Well, there was also the discordant note of the General’s commenting that her Swiss accent was all wrong. But no matter. Let’s again move forward.What did you think of Saul’s broken-voiced “Oh my god” as the general’s plane burst into flames? Was it the break that will bring us back the old Saul? Carrie clearly still believes in him. She says that Saul is someone “I trust more than I’ve ever trusted anyone,” and knows he wouldn’t put her name on a kill list, no matter how cranky he might happen to be. Which brings us to Sunday’s opening Seder, and the chanted questions that give this episode its name. I’m loath to admit to any more of my foolishness, but, as a glutton for punishment, I’ll reveal: Given the way the Seder scene was intercut with the images of Carrie’s awakening, I assumed that it was the Israelis who had made her their kill target. To teach her a lesson, perhaps, for dealing with Hezbollah. Or to hit Saul where they figured it would most hurt, as payback for being a not-so-great friend to Israel, lying to the Jewish state, and on German soil, no less. But again, I was wrong.Leading us to our own set of four questions to answer: Why does Allison have it out for Carrie? How did she become a double-agent? What is her end game? And how long will it take for Saul to catch on?Let’s switch now to a happier theme: Carrie and Quinn, together again.Didn’t you love the setup: Carrie waking up, as if from one of the worst of her manic nights out, in a strange bed, with a glimpse of a strange man’s toothbrush and food debris, only to find, with great relief, that Quinn is there. A brief moment of terror follows, then come the words that tell Carrie, finally, that she’s safe: Now play dead.As a plot device, it was really pretty ingenious. By which I mean that there really was no way for Carrie to go back to being Carrie so long as she was also functioning as Franny’s mother. Her story requires the same sort of untethered freedom that allows heroes of children’s books — Harry Potter, Sara Crewe, and all the other child-protagonists whose narrative life depends on the death of their parents — to undergo their loss-fueled trials and triumphs. “If you want Franny to be safe, you have to be dead,” Quinn says.And so the adventure begins.There’s a bit of push-pull at the outset, as Quinn makes a short-lived attempt to resist their old romance. He allows Carrie to fear, just for a few terrible moments, that he’s actually going to kill her. He notes, with jealous pride, that while living with Jonas, she never updated her old “fallback plan.”“I guess you weren’t sure your new life was gonna work out,” he says.He shrugs off her attempt to rewind to the point of their last near connection: “Doesn’t matter now,” he insists, when she asks him where he’s been, and she tells him she’s never stopped thinking of him.And yet it so clearly does, and things heat up fast.Quinn, as we know, is a man of few words, so instead of flowery declarations of love, we get moans and whimpers from him — sounds I am sure Quinn would have muted, had someone other than Carrie been there to witness his pain. She ministers to his gunshot wound with yet another shot full of love. (“It’s good they both know how to do so many things,” my husband said, as Carrie and Quinn quickly assessed his wounds, applied pressure, and prepared a syringe of morphine.)“I’m not leaving,” Carrie has declared. “I’m not.”   Quinn can take a bullet and carry on without medical care; it’s all part of his training. But can he survive the pressures of being Carrie’s everything? Judith Warner, a contributing writer for The New York Times Magazine, is the author, most recently, of “We’ve Got Issues: Children and Parents in the Age of Medication.”