AdvertisementSupported byThe Walking DeadBy Jeremy EgnerThis recap contains spoilers for Sunday’s episode of “The Walking Dead.”Early in Sunday’s episode of “The Walking Dead” an unknown Alexandrian — if he had a name, I didn’t catch it — set a record for quickest suicide-by-kvetch. “We’re done and it’s because of him,” he moaned, referring to Rick. No sooner had he started whining then he was being eaten. (As always on this show: get yourself a name, don’t be a jerk, you might survive.)The thing is, he wasn’t wrong. So far Season 6 has been an extended thriller about Rick’s unraveling plan to relocate the walkers, which, we now know, left Alexandria vulnerable to attack by the Wolves. That invasion, in turn, scuttled the walker drive when the trucker inconveniently died on top of the horn. (Perhaps they should have just torched the zombie quarry after all, as many commenters suggested.)After last week’s detour to the Wolves onslaught, we were back among the zombies in Sunday’s episode, a dark, anxious hour full of oh man I can’t bury the lead any longer did Glenn really just get torn apart? It sure looked like it, unless that was Nicholas’s lifeless body being feasted upon. Even after rewatching the scene several times, as pleasant as that was, I’m still not totally sure what happened. (More on this in a second.)Of course, I could just be deluding myself. Even as Glenn fell at the feet of the walkers I immediately wondered if he might be able to crawl under that Dumpster, or if Daryl might ride up to distract the zombies, or if some other equally improbable last second reprieve might present itself. Hope can make you ignore what’s sitting there staring you in the face.For evidence of that look no farther than the former pizza boy possibly having his innards removed there on the pavement. Glenn has been arguably the most one-dimensional character of the core survivors. Sure he’s grown from a callow boy into a seasoned warrior but his default state was one of optimism and esprit de corps. “Don’t worry about what’s going wrong,” went a typical Glennism on Sunday. “Figure out how to make this go right.”Granted, this dimension could be a welcome counterpoint to the unremitting bleakness found elsewhere, but he lacked the emotional complexity of Rick or Carol or even Daryl, and occasionally this stretched the bounds of credulity.After the premiere I noted the implausibility of his mercy toward Nicholas — in effect the killer of Noah and attempted murderer of Glenn. (Even Maggie and Tara were perplexed.) “But undiluted nobility is kind of Glenn’s thing,” I wrote, and on Sunday we saw what that got him. Nicholas was a walking disaster, a delicate coward at best. This was abundantly clear to anyone paying attention and Glenn was paying the most. Yet after some brief misgivings, he gave him another chance, and it was his undoing.If there’s a lesson here it’s a stark one, something outlined by Rick in the opening minutes of the episode: The weak will drag you down. Contrast Glenn with Carol, who also began this show as a relative naïf, at least when it came to post-apocalyptic survival. Hardened by the death of her daughter — still for my money the most devastating loss in a story full of them — Carol has developed into the iciest operator in this show. She’s learned how to dispassionately read people and situations and respond accordingly. Glenn, in his own way, never did. And if there’s one thing this show punishes people for, it’s a failure to adapt.The scene on the Dumpster was a stunner, the various components — performance, makeup, sound, direction — coalescing into a woozy, terrifying sequence that ranks with the series’s best. At times “The Walking Dead” presents the zombies almost like waves or flocking birds, or some other inexorable natural phenomenon. (“Sometimes it feels the walker apocalypse is the revenge of planet Earth,” Scott M. Gimple, the show runner, told The New York Times this week.) There was something oddly beautiful about the undead swarm, something inviting about giving in to it, for Nicholas at least. Michael Traynor, as Nicholas, did a nice job with the crackup, coming unglued bit by bit and then going convincingly dead in the eyes. “Thank you” he calmly said. (For trying? For giving me another chance? Some combination of those perhaps.) He then put the gun to his head and gave Glenn yet another in a long line of ghastly memories. (You’ll recall his extreme close-up point of view on Noah’s still-recent death in the revolving door.)As they fell, Nicholas’s body seemed to be arcing in a way that would cause it to land atop Glenn’s. The shots on the ground, meanwhile, were framed in such a way that it wasn’t explicit whether the aforementioned entrails actually belonged to him. Obviously even if they didn’t, Glenn is still surrounded by roughly a billion zombies. They’d get to him eventually, one would think. But it also seems obvious that, had they wanted to, the writers could’ve made his end more conclusive. (Also noteworthy: Steven Yeun didn’t appear on “Talking Dead” for the usual kill-off goodbye.)So did Nicholas thank Glenn with a death sentence? Or is there a Glenn Snow thing happening here? Until I see the body (or a Glenn zombie), I’ll do my best to figure out how to make this go right — to pay tribute to the man, if nothing else.(Update: A statement from Mr. Gimple was read on “Talking Dead” after Sunday’s episode. It said, in part: “In some way we will see Glenn, some version of Glenn, or parts of Glenn again, either in flashback or in the current story, to help complete the story.” So make of that what you will.)So what else happened on Sunday? Oh right: more carnage. At least four other Alexandrians died including Mr. Betsy, who didn’t even get to send along his letter. Quick favor to ask: If you ever find yourself holding a gun and standing behind a gate, watching me being slowly, excruciatingly consumed by zombies, be a pal and put me out of my misery, O.K.? I’d do it for you.Finally, there was Rick, who had the bad luck to strand the RV at the nexus where the Wolf and walker menaces met. Rick being Rick, he dispatched the human threats with relative ease but the zombie swarm might prove trickier to vanquish.“Yo Daryl? Forget what I said about staying with the herd. HELP! Over?”• So if Glenn’s really gone, is that it for Maggie? She already lost her father and sister in heartbreaking fashion, will Glenn be the one who turns her into this season’s Sasha? You’ll recall that the successive losses of Bob and Tyreese sent her around the bend last season — soon she was shooting up family photos and mingling inappropriately with walkers. She seems better now.• “Thank You,” a taut episode with several memorable set pieces, was a nice “Walking Dead” debut for the director Michael Slovis. He previously helmed episodes of “Game of Thrones” and “Breaking Bad,” among other series.• “Have you ever done things that made you feel afraid of yourself afterward?” Michonne asked Heath in response to his criticism of Rick. “Have you ever been covered in so much blood that you didn’t know if it was yours or walkers’ or your friends’? Huh? Then you don’t know.” A little later, Heath caught a reflection of himself covered in blood. It was a little on-the-nose but regardless: Welcome to the club, my friend.• Don’t miss Mr. Gimple’s responses to Times readers’s “Walking Dead” questions, in which he discusses the line between fan service and storytelling, why the show diverges from the comics and what those zombies are actually eating on screen.Advertisement