AdvertisementSupported byThe LeftoversBy Jen ChaneyThis week’s episode of “The Leftovers” turns its focus back to Miracle and confirms that the departure has finally touched the allegedly untouchable. In spite of a huge search effort, Evie and her two girlfriends remain lost, leading Evie’s brother Michael to conclude they’ve been zapped out of Miracle by a higher power, something Patti more or less verifies. But the episode’s subtext suggests they may not have disappeared so much as been transported elsewhere.The episode begins with the third look at the night of the earthquake, this time from the perspective of Nora, who awakens, sees no sign of Kevin and assumes the worst. The worst is temporarily confirmed when she learns that Evie and her friends are “gone,” then sees a dog running loose in the street, just like the ones back in Mapleton. The close-up of Nora’s face in that moment is wonderfully reminiscent of the famously tight shot of Jimmy Stewart’s panic-stricken George Bailey in “It’s a Wonderful Life”; suddenly, Nora’s ideas about Miracle, her version of Bedford Falls, have turned inside out.That whole opening sequence, including Nora’s panicked 911 call (“Did it happen again? Are the people gone?”), is both nerve rattling and heartbreaking, thanks to Carrie Coon’s visceral portrayal of Nora’s PTSD attack. But Nora’s concerns subside as soon as Kevin walks in the door, proving he’s alive and enabling her to resume believing she and the people she loves are immune from going poof.“The Sudden Departure was a one-time-only event,” Nora later insists to Jill while they do shots of Wild Turkey, the customary way (obviously) for daughters and pseudo-stepmoms to bond. As evidence, Nora refers to a case from her work in the fraudulent claims division of the Department of Sudden Departures, when she investigated the whereabouts of a husband who went suddenly AWOL while he and his wife were about to walk their dog. Nora eventually tracked down the man in Puerto Rico, which, she says, proves he intentionally ditched his spouse and blamed it on an act of God.But let’s pause and review for a minute. So far this season, “The Leftovers” has noted that Mark-Linn Baker, the former star of “Perfect Strangers” who allegedly departed, was found in Mexico. In last week’s episode, we learned that a so-called “wing nut” — possibly Holy Wayne, though that has not been confirmed — emerged from a cave in Perth, claiming to have been resurrected. Now Nora mentions this deadbeat husband who ended up in Puerto Rico. As a journalist, I’m trained to believe that three makes a trend here. Puerto Rico and a portion of Mexico both fall just below the northern hemisphere’s Tropic of Cancer, while Perth is located just beneath the southern hemisphere’s Tropic of Capricorn, suggesting there’s some parallelism between these locations. It seems possible that departing may not mean being whisked up to heaven, but getting sucked up and eventually spit back out somewhere else.“Are they ever going to find those girls?” Nora asks at the end of the episode. “I don’t think so,” Kevin responds. Which is exactly why I think Evie and those girls will be found: Because the opposite of whatever the characters on “The Leftovers” expect is what tends to happen.“The Leftovers” excels, as usual, at creating a heavy mood of surreal melancholy. Compared to the first three episodes, though, this one contains a bit more on-the-nose dialogue. (“Thanks for saving me,” Jill says to Michael, clearly conveying a double meaning after he fixes the Garvey’s kitchen sink.) Then there’s the matter of Chatty Patti (Ann Dowd) whose guiding/haranguing of Kevin tips a little closer to annoying in “Orange Sticker”; she’s starting to feel like a more aggressive version of Nate Fisher Sr. from “Six Feet Under,” or perhaps a more grating take on Dave, the nonexistent “friend” Hurley hung out with on “Lost” during his stay at a mental institution.Like those other figments of addled TV imaginations, Patti pushes Kevin to understand deeper truths about himself. At least it seems that way until she starts singing “Never Gonna Give You Up” by Rick Astley, the theme song for rickrolling, the ultimate online bait-and-switch. Is Patti rickrolling Kevin, i.e. presenting certain information only to mock or confuse him? Also, is this the first documented example of unreliable narration via rickrolling?Patti tells Kevin that he really did try to kill himself by tying that cinder block to his ankle. “If not for an act of divine intervention, you’d be gone,” she says. But was it divine intervention? Or did Evie and her friends try to save Kevin in the pond, then go bye-bye because of it? When John gets shot in this episode, he, like others in Miracle, refuses to visit a hospital, which makes me wonder whether these secondary departures tend to happen to people, like doctors, who successfully save the lives of others.If so, maybe Kevin’s sleepwalking/suicide attempt has served a higher purpose, allowing someone like Evie, who Erika calls “special,” to prove there really are miracles in Miracle. The trouble is that such “miracles” also mean scraping away the orange stickers that supposedly verify that certain houses, and the families inside them, are safe.• Matt finally explains that his wife Mary (Janel Moloney) woke from her catatonic state after they arrived in Miracle, but only temporarily. Was Matt dreaming? Why didn’t Mary stay awake? Will someone please finally allow Donna Moss to talk on this show?• We finally learn the name of the older African-American man who seems to know everything about other people’s pasts, including Nora’s. He is Virgil, a name shared with the poet who joins Dante on his journey through the Inferno and, eventually, re-emerges on Earth. (Maybe in Puerto Rico?)Advertisement