By HOLLAND COTTEROCT. 1, 2015
Born in 1944, the Japanese photographer Kazuo Kitai made his mark when he was barely 20 for pictures he took of political demonstrations at the United States Navy base at Yokosuka. His work was radical at the time for its shaky snapshot style and for being shot from the point of view of a participant in the event. He pushed further in this direction when, in 1968, he embedded himself in a four-month student occupation of Nihon University in Tokyo. One of the characteristic images in this small, early career survey, of a roll of toilet paper hanging from ropes against a wall covered with broadly brushed graffiti, is a souvenir of that siege.In 1969, Mr. Kitai literally pulled back when he documented, with a wide-angle lens, the protest by farmers of the building of Narita International Airport on their land near Tokyo. His distant shot of a handful of women facing off with a line of police officers on a bare hill under open sky gives a sense of the hopeless odds the farmers were up against. In the 1970s, Mr. Kitai began withdrawing from confrontational politics. He retreated to the countryside to record a disappearing village life in pictures that seem composed of snow, old wood and steam.The show’s 28 tonally subtle black-and-white photos, some vintage, some newly printed, tell a half-century story of cultural turmoil and change that the world at large still knows little of. A fleshed-out context for Mr. Kitai’s art can be found in a museum exhibition that he is also part of, “For a New World to Come: Experiments in Japanese Art and Photography, 1968-1979,” half of which is now on view at Grey Art Gallery, New York University, with a second half opening at Japan Society on Oct. 9. But this gallery show, organized with Zen Photo Gallery in Tokyo, distills his deeply involved but muted tenderness.Kazuo KitaiStudents, Workers, Villagers 1964-1978Miyako Yoshinaga547 West 27th Street, ChelseaThrough Oct. 24A version of this review appears in print on October 2, 2015, on Page C26 of the New York edition with the headline: Kazuo Kitai’s Record of a Japan in Transition.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.