LOS ANGELES — Hollywood had a horrendous weekend.“The Last Witch Hunter” flopped. “Steve Jobs” struggled to find a mainstream audience. A Paramount Pictures maneuver involving the latest “Paranormal Activity” movie appeared to leave millions of dollars in ticket sales on the table. And “Rock the Kasbah” and “Jem and the Holograms” played in wide release to virtually empty theaters.As a result, holdovers reigned. It was a photo finish between “The Martian” (20th Century Fox), which took in about $15.9 million, for a four-week total of $166.4 million, and “Goosebumps” (Sony), which collected $15.5 million, for a two-week total of $43.7 million, according to Rentrak, which compiles ticketing data.Among new releases, “The Last Witch Hunter” (Lionsgate), with Vin Diesel in the title role, collected $10.8 million, or about 30 percent less than analysts had expected. The movie cost an astounding $75 million to make, although Lionsgate limited its financial exposure with foreign pre-sales. One takeaway: Mr. Diesel, whose “Riddick” also fell flat in 2013, appears to have little box office appeal outside of the “Fast and Furious” films.Paramount’s “Paranormal Activity: The Ghost Dimension,” which cost about $15 million to make, took in $8.2 million, or 55 percent less than its series predecessor, even though this “Paranormal Activity” benefited from higher-priced 3-D screenings. The sharp decline did not appear to be the result of fading interest — pre-release surveys indicated a solid amount of moviegoer enthusiasm — but rather a shortage of theaters.Three of the four major American theater chains refused to play the film after Paramount decided to make “The Ghost Dimension” available on fast-growing digital services just 17 days after they leave most theaters in return for a cut of digital revenue. Theaters typically insist on a 90-day exclusive window to play new films.“We are hopeful that eliminating the gap between the theatrical window and the digital window will yield significant additional revenue,” Rob Moore, Paramount’s vice chairman, said in an email on Sunday. Studios notably receive a greater share of video-on-demand revenue than they do box-office revenue.Coming in behind “The Ghost Dimension” was “Steve Jobs” (Universal), which collected a disappointing $7.3 million in its first weekend of wide release, for a new total of about $10 million. Universal is hoping that the art film, which cost $30 million to make and at least that much to market, will benefit in the weeks ahead from positive word of mouth and early traction on the annual film awards circuit. Completely rejected were “Rock the Kasbah” (Open Road), a $15 million comedy starring Bill Murray, and “Jem and the Holograms” (Universal), which cost $5 million to make and marked an effort by Blumhouse Productions to move beyond horror. “Kasbah,” which was independently financed, took in $1.5 million; “Jem” collected $1.3 million.