AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn Shattuck8 P.M. (TNT) THE DARK KNIGHT RISES (2012) The director Christopher Nolan concludes his operatic Batman trilogy with a burst of light. It begins as Batman has retreated into the shadows since the death of his foe Harvey Dent and the woman they both loved. But Bane, an overmuscled brute fitted with a pain-relieving gas mask, is intent on destroying Gotham City. And there’s a new kitty in town. With Christian Bale, Tom Hardy and Anne Hathaway. Brush up on the back story in “The Dark Knight” (2008), at 5 on IFC. (Image: Ms. Hathaway)9 A.M. (CNN) STATE OF THE UNION Round and round the candidates go: The Republican Donald Trump discusses his campaign here and on “This Week,” at 10 on ABC. His rival Ben Carson makes his case on “Fox News Sunday,” at 10 on Fox, and “Meet the Press,” at 10:30 on NBC; and Gov. Chris Christie, Republican of New Jersey, appears on “Face the Nation,” at 10:30 on CBS.7 P.M. (CBS) 60 MINUTES Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. gives his first television interview since deciding not to run for president.8 P.M. (Fox) THE SIMPSONS It’s “Treehouse of Horror” time again. And yes, Sideshow Bob murders Bart (but then …), Homer can’t remember what happened yesterday, and Lisa and Bart develop superpowers. (Image: Sideshow Bob and Bart)8 P.M. (CBS) MADAM SECRETARY President Dalton freezes Elizabeth out after she disagrees with him about Russia. In “The Good Wife,” at 9, Alicia tangles with the bond court judge after supporting her client’s innocence.8 P.M. (MTV) 2015 MTV EMA The Europe Music Awards unveil a new category: the MTV Video Visionary Award, with Duran Duran as the first recipient. Ed Sheeran and Ruby Rose host in Milan; Pharrell Williams, Ellie Goulding, Jason Derulo, Twenty One Pilots, Tori Kelly, James Bay, Jess Glynne, Macklemore & Ryan Lewis and Andrea Bocelli perform.9 P.M. (Showtime) HOMELAND Carrie learns that Saul put her name on the kill list. In “The Affair,” at 10, Helen lets her vape pen cloud her judgment.9 P.M. (HBO) THE LEFTOVERS As an earthquake rattles Miracle, Nora awakes to find Kevin missing. Then he returns with no memory of the previous night.10 P.M. (ABC) QUANTICO In the present, the trainees go undercover. In the future, Alex gives her first public interview declaring her innocence.10 P.M. (13, 49) THE GUILTY We’ve been here before: A child goes missing, the parents lie about key facts, and a spurious confession throws everything into chaos. Tamsin Greig, of Showtime’s “Episodes,” plays the no-nonsense detective who takes over the case five years later, but for viewers it may be too little too late. “ ‘The Guilty’ may have ‘Broadchurch’ in its DNA, but the resemblance is purely cosmetic,” Mike Hale wrote in The Times. (Image: Ms. Greig and Tommy Potten)What’s Streaming NowHIGH MAINTENANCE The husband-wife team Katja Blichfeld and Ben Sinclair are behind this web series — soon headed to HBO and its platforms with six new episodes — which follows a cyclist who delivers marijuana in Brooklyn and Manhattan. (vimeo.com)Advertisement