By FINN COHENOCT. 23, 2015
New York lost a sizable, smelly piece of punk-rock history the day the nightclub CBGB was dismantled in 2006, but until a few years ago, almost nobody knew that another archive of the city’s nascent punk scene was still intact, albeit collecting dust in a storage space in Westchester County. The haul — piles of old invoices, letters, photographs and record contracts — belonged to Charles Ball, who died in 2012. He was president of the now-defunct Ork Records, a label founded in 1975 by Terry Ork (born William Terry Collins), a film buff who traveled in Andy Warhol’s circle in the late 1960s. Mr. Ork died in 2004.Mr. Ork’s foray into the music business lasted only five years and 13 releases, but the sounds he discovered and encouraged — Television’s guitar wizardry, Alex Chilton’s post-Big Star meanderings, even the rock critic Lester Bangs’s brief sojourn into boozy lounge ballads — reverberated around the world.“That’s the funny thing about punk: Its nihilism kind of created a throwaway culture,” said Ken Shipley, one of the owners of the Numero Group, the Chicago-based reissue label, who stumbled upon the Ork archive when he and his partner visited a record store in Ithaca, N.Y., whose owner had purchased the contents of Mr. Ball’s storage room.When they found out about the mound of paper, it became a trail that they followed for two and a half years. Now Numero, known as premier curators of 20th-century music previously known only to a small community, is releasing “Ork Records: New York, New York” on Friday, Oct. 30. The boxed set of the entire Ork catalog includes photographs, gig fliers and notes from the archives, as well as interviews with many of the musicians (from bands including the Marbles and the Idols) whose work is finally being released.Advertisement“We uncovered so much paper that painted a portrait of a story that I don’t think a lot of people even really knew happened,” Mr. Shipley said. “The reality is, this information is just going to disappear, and then what? And then it will be like it never happened at all.”What unfolds in the hefty book that accompanies the set is a portrait of Mr. Ork as a man with dreams much larger than his wallet. (In the 2013 film “CBGB,” he was portrayed by “The Big Bang Theory” actor Johnny Galecki.) After moving to New York from California, Mr. Ork screenprinted Warhol’s work, dove into the Factory’s drug scene and worked at Cinemabilia, a Greenwich Village store for film obsessives. He started his music industry tenure as Television’s manager and soon began booking shows at CBGB. But many Ork releases were sidelined by unpaid studio bills, and, until now, remained that way.“Maybe he was jealous of Warhol’s relationship to the Velvet Underground, but he wanted to sponsor a band and create a scene,” said Richard Lloyd, the former guitarist for Television, whose single “Little Johnny Jewel,” was the first Ork release. “Terry was the guy behind the scenes without which there’d be nothing.”AdvertisementRichard Hell, who formed Television with Tom Verlaine, laughed when describing Mr. Ork. “He was a bundle of joy. I loved him,” he said. “But he was basically a hustler and a hedonist and a dilettante, like a lot of people in New York.”Mr. Hell, who this month published a collection of essays and articles titled “Massive Pissed Love,” left Television before the band’s single was recorded and formed the Voidoids, a group whose first EP is included in the box set. He said he was skeptical when contacted about an Ork anthology.“It seemed so random, his catalog,” Mr. Hell said. “It just seemed really a stretch to make a big luxury package out of that.”Encased in tape hiss and cheap reverb, with the occasional out-of-tune guitar, the 49 songs included in the set outline the tiny Ork empire. Mr. Chilton’s contributions, compared with the lush pop of Big Star’s three albums, are a sloppy, tinny mess, a casualty of his documented alcohol intake at the time. (He died in 2010.) The Erasers, whose single for the label was recorded by Mr. Lloyd (and never released), offer an early form of “no wave” that drew the attention of Brian Eno, who wanted them for his own compilation of New York bands at the time. Mr. Ork also resurrected Link Cromwell, a project recorded in 1965 by the Patti Smith Group guitarist Lenny Kaye.Mr. Kaye likened the Ork set to “a little time capsule that has been unearthed” and said the more time passes, “the more special and weirdly mythic” the CBGB days become.Mr. Lloyd lived with Mr. Ork during Television’s early years. “He was a communist the way Christ was a communist,” Mr. Lloyd said. “He wanted everybody to have everything. The revolution he planned took place. Spread to England, then spread back over to America, to L.A., Minneapolis, Seattle.”Ork Records faded in 1980, and following a brief retreat to Europe, Mr. Ork moved to California. According to information included in the boxed set, he adopted a pseudonym, served as editor in chief for a film magazine and spent some time in jail for fraud. The day before he died, of colon cancer in 2004, he sent Mr. Hell an email, a request to help him publish an edition of his poems.“You probably have more plans the day before you die than you ever have any other time,” Mr. Hell said.AdvertisementFor other acts on Ork Records, the boxed set is a welcome companion to the mythology that has grown around New York punk’s genesis — the tattered clothes and drug-addled mystique that later became part of the genre’s marketability. (In a 1995 interview quoted in the set’s book, Mr. Ork observed: “Punk is now bigger than ever. Of course, nobody knows what it is.”)Susan Springfield, the vocalist and guitarist for the Erasers, described the era that influenced the music. “That was kind of the miracle of the circumstances — out of this very dire time in New York City, there was this melding of people from different cultural perspectives,” she said. “It was like a flower growing in a garbage dump. It was precious, and you have to marvel when you see something like that.”Mr. Lloyd isn’t bullish on the idea that a similar scene could rise again in the city. “New York is now — in a way, it’s over. Too much money,” he said. “That thing will never happen again.”Mr. Lloyd went on to paint a colorful picture of the Bowery in the 1970s:“They had one place where they had a line that was like a hit movie,” he said, using an emphatic adjective to describe a location where customers queued up to buy drugs. “ ‘Put your money in the hole, say what you want and it’ll come out the bottom of the door.’ But that can’t happen now.”A version of this article appears in print on October 25, 2015, on Page AR17 of the New York edition with the headline: The Mythology of a Nihilistic Niche  .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.