AdvertisementSupported byBy James R. Oestreich“I know my place and my limits,” the Hungarian-born pianist Andras Schiff said in a recent interview. We should all be so limited.The versatile Mr. Schiff, 61, was speaking from California and referring, actually, to conducting. He had just led the San Francisco Symphony in Mozart’s Piano Concerto No. 27, from the keyboard, and in Haydn’s “Lord Nelson” Mass, and played in a post-concert recital of Schubert lieder. And he was about to lead the Los Angeles Philharmonic in Mozart’s Concerto No. 25 and Haydn’s “Mass in Time of War,” and then again accompany Schubert songs.“Despite his easygoing, supportive, soft-spoken way, there was never any doubt about what he wanted,” said Ragnar Bohlin, the director of the San Francisco Symphony Chorus. “He was Toscanini with a velvet glove.”Mr. Schiff’s account of the experience was not so grand. “It’s good for a little Jewish boy to do Catholic Masses,” he said. “I love them. Sacred choral music brings out the best of most composers. It’s something they clearly want to do, partly out of belief.”He has also performed other Masses: Bach’s B minor (Roman Catholic in form, if not intent), Schubert’s E flat (D. 950) and Beethoven’s “Missa Solemnis.” In choral as in symphonic music, he chooses only composers for whom he feels a real affinity.“You won’t see me conducting Mahler or Stravinsky, much as I love them,” Mr. Schiff said. “But Bruckner is not out of the question.” By the same token, you won’t see him playing knuckle-busting composers like Liszt and Rachmaninoff. It is partly a matter of physical limitations (un-Rachmaninoffian hand size), as he has said before, but also of temperament. Though something of a showman in his own understated way, he has little taste for virtuosic display.He turns again and again to his favorite composers — restudying, he says, not recycling — as in the recital of piano sonatas that he recently played in Seattle, San Francisco and Los Angeles and will repeat at Carnegie Hall on Friday, Oct. 30: Haydn’s Sonata in E flat (Hob. XVI:52); Mozart’s, in D (K. 576); Beethoven’s, in C minor (Op. 111); and Schubert’s, in B flat (D. 960). This program completes a series of three, surveying the composers’ late sonatas, and each one here is its composer’s last.Missing from the program is Mr. Schiff’s favorite composer, Bach, whose keyboard works are of a different sort. But Mr. Schiff filled that gap when he gave the same recital at the Verbier Festival in the Swiss Alps in July. Having concluded the demanding program with an ethereal performance of the Schubert, he added Bach’s Partita No. 1 in B flat, all seven movements of it, as a typically generous encore. The audience’s delight may not have been his entire reason for playing it.Mr. Schiff, who speaks English with a laid-back drawl and is quick to laugh, is fiercely intelligent and deadly serious about his work, yet he is not above an occasional mischief. He was well aware — he now admits, though he did not at the time — that the august pianist Grigory Sokolov was to open his Verbier recital the next night with the same work. What Mr. Schiff will not admit was that he was trying to twit or upstage Mr. Sokolov, who is something of a cult figure in Europe.“I just felt like staying in B flat,” he said. For some 17 minutes, evidently.To support his capricious streak, Mr. Schiff can call on a capacious memory and seemingly endless stamina, so his choice of encores is often intriguing. Bach is always a lively possibility, since Mr. Schiff has repeatedly performed all of Bach’s keyboard works from memory, and many are undoubtedly still lodged in the recesses of that big brain. He spends two or three hours a day at the piano when he can, one of them devoted to Bach.What might he be contemplating as an encore for Carnegie? “Maybe I won’t do one,” he said, unconvincingly. “Maybe something by Bach. Or maybe the last big piano piece by Schumann, the ‘Ghost’ Variations, which are in E flat, like the Haydn sonata.”That the works on the program are final sonatas does not necessarily mean that they are late works in the usual sense. Haydn and Mozart were writing at the heights of their careers (1794 and 1789), probably with no notion of finality.Mr. Schiff sees the Beethoven sonata (1822), with its two-movement structure and mystical cast, as a farewell to the genre, though the composer’s death was still five years off. But the Schubert (1828), written mere months before his demise, suggests a full awareness of his mortal plight.“The first two movements are about death,” Mr. Schiff said. “The third is a kind of hallucination of life after death.” He sees in the tumult of the finale and the alternation between C minor and B flat major an ambiguity between death and life.In the interview, Mr. Schiff seemed fixated on Schubert and Beethoven. He played Schubert sonatas often for a time, he said, then let them rest while concentrating on Beethoven. He returned to Schubert two years ago and found that something had changed. His Schubert playing had gained gravity. (Listeners can judge for themselves in his new Schubert CD from ECM.)“That was something I didn’t have 20 years ago,” he said. “Beethoven, who often writes for two fists, taught me that.” Beethoven is “a hard nut to crack, and I’m still cracking it.”And he’s still cracking heads, as needed, which George Li found out the hard way. Scarcely had Mr. Li, an astonishingly gifted American pianist, then 19, pocketed a silver medal at the 2015 Tchaikovsky International Competition in Moscow, in July, when he ran into a buzz-saw-like Mr. Schiff in a master class at the Verbier Festival.Mr. Li’s first mistake was choice of repertory: the same Beethoven sonata (No. 32 in C minor) that Mr. Schiff was to perform. Mr. Li played through the piece, showing remarkable technique. But Mr. Schiff was looking for soul.“I played that when I was 50, after I had played all the other 31 sonatas,” Mr. Schiff said to Mr. Li (and the assembled crowd). “I would not give you this piece, but we are here, so we’ll do it.”And so they did, with agonizing deliberation. Mr. Schiff demanded that Mr. Li plumb virtually every phrase for its “spiritual message.” There seemed almost a calculated cruelty to Mr. Schiff’s approach, and if so, he had come by it rightly, having studied in his youth at the Liszt Academy in Budapest with the fearsome Ferenc Rados. “There was never a positive word from him,” Mr. Schiff said of Mr. Rados in a public interview before the class. “Everything was bad, horrible. But it instilled a healthy attitude, an element of doubt.”Mr. Rados, it happened, was also in Verbier, and Mr. Li played for him in a master class the next day. Unable to attend, I asked Mr. Li afterward whether Mr. Rados had been as hard on him as Mr. Schiff had. “Even more so,” Mr. Li said. “But it was exactly what I needed.”Mr. Schiff lives with his wife, Yuuko Shiokawa, in London; Florence, Italy; and Basel, Switzerland. He has been an outspoken opponent of the government of Viktor Orban in Hungary and has not set foot in the country since the death of his mother in 2010, vowing that he would do so only if there was a radical political change. He is not optimistic.“Tolerance levels are extremely low,” he wrote in a 2011 letter to The Washington Post. “Racism, discrimination against the Roma, anti-Semitism, xenophobia, chauvinism and reactionary nationalism — these symptoms are deeply worrying. They evoke memories that we have hoped were long forgotten.”The situation in Hungary has been exacerbated by the migration crisis in Europe, Mr. Schiff said: “Now the No. 1 priority is to build a huge wall.” What Mr. Orban says, Mr. Schiff maintains, is “not all nonsense, but the way he’s doing it is really disgusting.”“He is probably the most hated politician in Europe,” Mr. Schiff adds, “and that is quite an achievement.”The Hungarian conductor Ivan Fischer, who has worked with Mr. Schiff often, spoke of his “human and moral values” in an interview from Berlin: “He’s a very rare example of a musician who sets moral standards for the world.”Mr. Fischer said he agrees with Mr. Schiff about the political climate in Hungary, but his situation, as the music director of the Budapest Festival Orchestra, is different. “I am responsible for the orchestra and for thousands of subscribers for whom music means everything,” he said. “I cannot abandon them. Andras and I are using different ways to achieve the same thing.”Advertisement