By MARINA HARSSOCT. 22, 2015
“I have heard that angels dance,” the tenor sings in “Hagoromo,” a new multidisciplinary opera based on a popular Noh play, which is to have its premiere at the Brooklyn Academy of Music’s Harvey Theater on Nov. 3. How, exactly, does an angel dance? This is a question that had particular resonance for the man behind this new production, David Michalek, a New York artist whose work has encompassed photography, film and installation. He also happens to be the husband of Wendy Whelan, the recently retired New York City Ballet star. A few years ago, when he came across “Hagoromo,” he thought, This would be perfect for Wendy.At the time, Ms. Whelan was still submerged in the grueling schedule of a full-time ballerina — she has since embarked on a freelance career — so the idea had to be filed away for future use.More recently, Mr. Michalek began collaborating with the innovative flutist Claire Chase, a tiny woman of explosive energies and powerful enthusiasms who directs the International Contemporary Ensemble, known as ICE. Not content to just stand and play, she asked Mr. Michalek to choreograph her most recent solo recital. Then she suggested that they try something bigger. The germ of an idea was born.AdvertisementThat idea has grown into something much larger than either of them imagined: an opera both danced and sung, involving puppets and a large chorus. “Hagoromo” now includes: four musicians from ICE (including Ms. Chase), a mezzo-soprano and a tenor (Katalin Karolyi and Peter Tantsits), two dancers (Ms. Whelan and her longtime City Ballet partner Jock Soto), 20 girls from the Brooklyn Youth Chorus, life-size puppets and six puppeteers to handle them.AdvertisementThe creative team is large, too, consisting of a composer, Nathan Davis; a dramaturge, Norman Frisch; a librettist, Brendan Pelsue; a choreographer, David Neumann; and a puppeteer, Chris Green. The richly colored costumes are by the Flemish designer Dries Van Noten. That’s a lot of cooks.To assist with coordination, Mr. Michalek brought on American Opera Projects, an organization collaborating with opera companies, festivals and orchestras to produce new work. (American Opera Projects is producing the show with the academy.) “Usually we prefer to have a good amount of the material nailed to the ground in advance,” said Charles Jarden, American Opera’s general director, in a phone interview, “but here we’re seeing a lot of the elements come together in real time.”As in Noh, the set (by Sara Brown) will be spare. The musicians and singers will be arranged above the stage, while the two dancers will enact the story, about an angel who loses her heavenly mantle, without which she cannot fly. A fisherman finds it hanging in a tree after a storm, and, not without some prodding, agrees to return it on one condition: that the angel dance for him. An extended pas de deux ensues.The task of finding the right movement has been handed to Mr. Neumann, an experimental choreographer who has also studied Noh. He is conscious of not wanting to imitate an ancient technique that takes decades to master. (All the participants spoke of their desire to avoid exotic clichés.) Rather, his intention is to “respond in some way” to Noh theatrical traditions, he said recently by phone, by having the dancers explore the symbolic quality of each movement. The choreography is slow and taut, sometimes angular, with a ceremonial feel.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Neumann has also drawn upon the ballet technique that is deeply ingrained in these dancers’ bodies, and on their distinct qualities: Ms. Whelan’s ethereality, Mr. Soto’s rootedness and intensity. “There’s this moment where they’re the only people moving,” Mr. Neumann said. “They revolve around each other; they completely own the movement.”Mr. Davis, whose first opera this is, has used a compositional method that is similar to that of a choreographer. He began by improvising on his own — he’s a percussionist — then filled in colors, sonorities and pacing in sessions with his singers and musicians. Unlike many traditional composers, he thrives on collaboration; at a rehearsal in American Opera’s Brooklyn headquarters just a month before the premiere, he was still taking suggestions. A faster tempo here? Sure. A crack of the wooden block to mark an entrance? Why not.The resulting score is lush and layered, sometimes dissonant, and filled with unexpected textures: the windlike hissing of breath, Baroque-ish ornamentations, hand claps, ululating girls’ voices, fluttering fans, the rasp of stone against terra-cotta. Ms. Chase plays a bass flute — a big, curved, heavy-looking object with a surprising range of sounds — as well as a traditional one, and a contrabass flute taller than she is. At certain points she whispers into her instrument, as if she were telling it a secret; at others she seems to suck air from it, as if she were gasping for breath.“I was thinking about the flute and the voice as the angel’s language,” Mr. Davis said in a phone conversation.AdvertisementMr. Neumann is also responsible for choreographing the puppets, two of which are life-size doppelgängers of Ms. Whelan. They have proved more of a challenge than anyone imagined. The first prototype, an almost identical model of her body, was heavy and difficult to handle. A lighter, more abstracted version has permitted expanded movement. Each is manipulated by three puppeteers, which allows for unique personalities to emerge, “their own volition, their own thought,” said Mr. Green.They can do certain things a human can’t, like fly. “Sometimes I find myself sizing them up; I get a little jealous of the things they can do. But I’m smarter,” Ms. Whelan said with a laugh on a recent afternoon.The puppets and their dance are meant to embody the angel’s aura. They are an apt metaphor for Ms. Whelan, whose own dancing has always had an air of mystery. “There is a principle of Japanese aesthetics called yugen,” Mr. Michalek explained, “like the beauty of a fall evening after a day of working in the fields, with the dust rising all around. It’s a kind of melancholy. Wendy brings yugen to everything she does.”A version of this article appears in print on October 25, 2015, on Page AR16 of the New York edition with the headline: Steps Not Found on the Head of a Pin.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.