
Weekend Miser By                     
 JOSHUA BARONE
 
OCT. 1, 2015
Alice might be the most popular girl in New York. You know her? Blond hair, blue dress, little white apron, fell down a rabbit hole? If you don’t, she’ll be hard to miss this weekend as at least 10 museums, theaters and libraries celebrate the 150th anniversary of Lewis Carroll’s “Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland.”The festivities are a crowded field, but this weekend’s offerings are focused and fresh. For example, on Friday the New York Public Library for the Performing Arts opens its free exhibition “Alice Live!,” which centers on the history of Carroll’s heroine on the stage.Carroll’s typewriter will be displayed, along with posters, costumes, audio and more from the novel’s many adaptations. If you like hearing Meryl Streep sing on film, you may enjoy clips from her youthful turn in Liz Swados’s “Alice in Concert” at the Public Theater. Or you could see other actresses play Alice, like Kate Burton on Broadway in 1982.Charlie Lovett, who collects Carroll memorabilia and is the curator of this show, will read from the author’s manuscript as part of a storytelling event at the library on Saturday morning.Advertisement(Exhibition open Mondays and Thursdays, noon to 8 p.m.; noon to 6 p.m. on Tuesdays, Wednesdays, Fridays and Saturdays; reading at 10:30 a.m. Saturday; 111 Amsterdam Avenue, at 65th Street, Lincoln Center; 917-275-6975; nypl.org/lpa.)AdvertisementThis is just the beginning of the Alice events this weekend. The Grolier Club has an exhibition about the book’s history of translation, while Columbia University’s Butler Library has a small show about Alice Liddell (the real-life girl who inspired Carroll) and Sony Wonder Technology Lab has a look behind the scenes of Tim Burton’s 2010 film adaptation. Your bible for what to see and where to go is at alice150.com.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.There is also a little more than a week left to see the Morgan Library and Museum’s exhibition “Alice: 150 Years of Wonderland,” for a less than Miserly admission fee of $18 (free from 7 to 9 p.m. on Fridays), but the show includes the book’s original manuscript.(Through Oct. 12; extended hours next Saturday and Sunday, 10 a.m. to 7 p.m.; 225 Madison Avenue, at 36th Street; 212-685-0008; themorgan.org.)Meatpacking District MarketThe meatpacking district, not known for low prices, will make itself uncharacteristically accessible this weekend during Open Market, which features free concerts, tours, public art, yoga classes and other events, most of them on the cobblestone stretch of Ninth Avenue between 14th and Gansevoort Streets. Many of the district’s stores are offering discounts of 10 percent or 20 percent, which may not make couture much more affordable, but gifts — treats and champagne at Diane von Furstenberg on Saturday, for example — can sweeten the experience of window-shopping.The real gem of the weekend’s offerings could be a screening of the documentary “Florent: Queen of the Meat Market” at SoHo House on Friday afternoon. You may remember Florent, the friendly, fun French diner on Gansevoort Street that closed in 2008, a casualty of rising rents. Fans of the restaurant will appreciate the film’s nostalgia; newcomers may wish they’d been there.(Screening at 4 p.m. Friday, 29-35 Ninth Avenue; other events at various times and locations; the schedule is at openmarketnyc.com; registration is required.)A version of this article appears in print on October 2, 2015, on Page C30 of the New York edition with the headline: Weekend Miser.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »