AdvertisementSupported byBy Jon CaramanicaSPRAINED ANKLE“Sprained Ankle” (6131), the bracing debut solo album from the Tennessee singer-songwriter Julien Baker, is packed thick with the sort of lyricism that would be triumphant if it weren’t so worrying. Ms. Baker sings in a shivering whisper, the voice of a naïf, but her imagery is colorful, direct, intricate, harrowing. Mostly, she paints vignettes of addiction (“Rejoice”) and physical frailty (“Brittle Boned”) and belief, inheriting the unobstructed bloodletting of second- and third-wave emo — “Something” owes debts to Waxahatchee and Dashboard Confessional — but stripping it free of artifice. She sings without self-consciousness, like on “Everyone Does”: “You’re gonna run when you find out who I am/I know I’m a pile of filthy garbage you will wish you’d never touched.” And her lyrical precision can be gobstopping, like on “Sprained Ankle”: “Shaving off breaths/Each one so heavy, each one so cumbersome/Each one a lead weight hanging between my lungs, spilling my guts.” The lone sign of hope on this bleak album comes at the beginning, on “Blacktop,” which reads as a long-shot prayer from a broken person who’s held on to faith. “Come visit me in the back of an ambulance,” Ms. Baker pleads, and you hope it’s not too late.WHAT DREAMS ARE MADE OFThis summer, like so many before it, saw a song that streamlined Caribbean rhythms into lithe mainstream pop: the Felix Jaehn remix of “Cheerleader,” by the little-known reggae singer Omi, which for a time was the No. 1 song in the country. On its heels, naturally, comes an island-informed album that aims to make deeper inroads: The only problem is it’s not by Omi. “What Dreams Are Made Of” (Kemosabe/RCA) is the major label debut album by R. City, the duo of Theron and Timothy Thomas, brothers from St. Thomas. For almost a decade, they’ve been potent songwriting forces behind Rihanna, Miley Cyrus, Justin Bieber and dozens more, and that adeptness is on full display on this album of sticky, elegant, slightly saccharine transnational pop. They, too, had a summer hit: “Locked Away,” a strong song that would be stronger without the insipid Adam Levine chorus, and one of several intuitive gems here. There is precedent for their approach — the occasional reggae crossover star like Sean Paul, the pop-peak Fugees, Akon (the brothers were previously signed to Akon’s label, KonLive) — but R. City is more naturally glossy than any of those artists, making the high number of songs here that preach the virtues of hard work a surprise: The Thomas brothers make it sound like everything comes naturally.HEARTBREAKER OF THE YEARA sultry country classicist with a tremble in her voice, Whitney Rose is partial to the magisterial gestures of the 1950s and 1960s. And so for her stately second album, “Heartbreaker of the Year” (Cameron House), she enlisted the Mavericks, keepers of that era’s flame, for backup duty, and its frontman, the silky Raul Malo, as producer. Apart from two covers, Ms. Rose wrote all the songs here, and she is gifted with the eccentric detail: On “The Last Party,” a sweet Dusty Springfield-esque waltz, she implores friends to “go cover every jukebox, smash all the guitars,” and on the title track, she muses, “You must have taken a class in fading away.” Ms. Rose can be a slightly reserved singer, but it’s in those moments that the Mavericks come in handy, playing vintage country with high viscosity. And when Mr. Malo steps in to duet, like on “The Last Party” or the Ronettes cover “Be My Baby,” the two achieve a melancholy twinkle much like the one between George Jones and Tammy Wynette.WOMEN’S RIGHTS“Women’s Rights” (Suicide Squeeze) is the second album of savagely comic talk-punk by the Seattle band Childbirth, a nu-riot-grrrl supergroup made up of members of like-minded bands: Julia Shapiro (Chastity Belt), Bree McKenna (Tacocat), Stacy Peck (Pony Time). Each song is taut and short, using three chords, if that. And they spill over with feminist punch lines, political stands distilled into sneers, giggles and raised eyebrows. Take “Baby Bump,” about bringing cocaine to a baby shower (“I’m just really excited about your baby”) or “Nasty Grrls,” a comment on expectations of feminine purity (“We don’t wash our hands!”). In places, Childbirth is smart-alecky to the point of being mildly cheekily retrograde, like on “Since When Are You Gay?”: “Don’t you know you’re pretty enough to have a boyfriend/I thought this would only last ’til graduation.” Or there’s “Siri, Open Tinder,” a laundry list of dating-app crimes — single dad, Chacos, gym rat, dreadlocks — each followed by a happy shriek: “Swipe left!”Advertisement