
Blindspot By                     
 NEIL GENZLINGER
 
OCT. 26, 2015
Jane may have lost her identity, but one thing she hasn’t lost, we discovered in the opening moments of Monday’s episode, is her sex drive.We learned this from her steamy dream, which involved rolling around in the sheets with an unidentified man with a tree tattooed on his arm. Was it her favorite F.B.I. agent, Kurt Weller? That seemed to be a good bet until the episode’s closing shot, which showed a guy with the same tattoo lurking outside Jane’s apartment.Between those intriguing bookends, we got a reasonably satisfying thriller involving Russian drug runners who were trying to steal a truckload of Homeland Security weaponry. Why this truckload of weaponry existed in the first place was never quite clear to me, but the plot involved a rogue app that enabled bad guys to pinpoint the location of government vehicles by hacking into their tracking software.The best part of the episode was a teenager named Ana Montes (Aimee Carrero) who had written the software for that app, apparently thinking she was doing so for the government. She ended up helping Weller’s team. I wouldn’t mind seeing her become a regular.AdvertisementIt was Ana who contributed the insight that may have the most far-reaching effects on the series: She recognized that even the apparent masking tattoos on Jane’s body were full of import.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Jane: “You’re saying every one of these tattoos could have a double meaning?”Patterson (Ashley Johnson, who got a lot of work in this episode): “Or triple. Or more.”AdvertisementWeller: “We should go back over every tattoo we’ve already decoded.”Us: “That certainly gives them a way to extend this show for another season or two if the ratings hold up.”A couple of simmering subplots were nudged along. Patterson expressed concern to Weller about the stonewalling she was getting from Mayfair (Marianne Jean-Baptiste) on an earlier case. And Weller managed to stay in the same room as his father (Jay O. Sanders) long enough to tell the old man that Taylor, the missing girl Dad was suspected of killing, is alive. That may or may not be true, as we regular viewers know, but the father’s reaction to the news was wrenching.The main emotional thread of the episode, though, was the turn in the relationship between Weller and Jane, which had been starting to simmer. Acting on separate but similar advice, each decided to put on the brakes and go into strictly-professional mode. What do we think? Should these two crazy kids just knock off the angst and get hot and heavy? Or would that ruin the show?We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »