Al Pacino is off to a fast start in his return to Broadway.“China Doll,” a new play by David Mamet starring Mr. Pacino, grossed nearly $1.1 million in its first six preview performances — a high number for any Broadway show, but especially for one that is not a musical.Mr. Pacino, appearing on Broadway for the 12th time, is an Academy Award winner and a two-time Tony Award winner who has demonstrated his theater box office appeal before: He led a financially successful revival of the Pulitzer Prize-winning play “Glengarry Glen Ross,” also by Mr. Mamet, that opened in 2012. Mr. Mamet has had a tougher time with his newer works: “The Anarchist,” which also opened in 2012, was a fast flop.“China Doll,” which officially opens on Nov. 19, is about “big money, fast planes, a beautiful young woman and other objects of desire,” according to its producers. The show is being directed by Pam MacKinnon, who won a Tony Award for her direction of a 2013 revival of “Who’s Afraid of Virginia Woolf?,” and produced by Jeffrey Richards, Jerry Frankel and Steve Traxler, who have frequently produced Mr. Mamet’s work.Another new play with a cast led by a movie star is also doing well in previews. “Misery,” starring Bruce Willis, grossed $622,939 in its first four performances, according to figures released Monday by the Broadway League for the week ending Oct. 25. The play, by William Goldman, is an adaptation of the novel by Stephen King, which was previously adapted into a much-loved film.“On Your Feet,” a new musical about the lives of Gloria and Emilio Estefan, cracked the $1 million mark last week, grossing almost $1.1 million in eight preview performances. The show, which uses songs by the Estefans, is the first new musical to perform that strongly since “Hamilton,” which opened in August.“Amazing Grace,” a musical that closed on Sunday, finished with the strongest week of its disappointing run, grossing $476,631. The show, about the British slave trader-turned-abolitionist John Newton, was disliked by critics and could not find a sufficient audience; it failed to recoup its $16 million capitalization.