AdvertisementSupported byBy Stephen HoldenWith his towering pompadour, crocodile smirk, pencil-line mustache and comic pseudonym, Buster Poindexter, a.k.a. David Johansen, may be the ultimate rock ’n’ roll lounge lizard. This devoted custodian of zany pop-jazz arcana reminds you of the primacy of anarchic humor in a musical style increasingly burdened with a weighty historical solemnity. A little bit of reverence is fine. But to take it too seriously is to miss out on the fun. First-generation rockers may be in their 60s and 70s, but when the music was invented these rambunctious rebels were in their early teens. (Mr. Poindexter got his start in the 1970s punk band New York Dolls.)At Tuesday’s opening night show of his return engagement to Café Carlyle, Mr. Poindexter regaled an upscale audience whose members had paid top dollar with a set that reminded you that rock music is inseparable from a goofy, devil-may-care playfulness. His set was dutifully peppered with grown-up ballads associated with Frank Sinatra (“Deep in a Dream”) and Dinah Washington (“This Bitter Earth”), but his interpretations didn’t try to smooth out his raw vocal yawp.The songs were interspersed with very funny jokes. “What do you call a beautiful woman on a friend’s arm?” he asked. “A tattoo.” He belongs to a showbiz tradition that includes Cab Calloway, Louis Prima, Sinatra and his Rat Pack era, and countless rock ’n’ roll cutups.The only problem was an audience that largely refused to get into the music’s antic spirit. By cabaret standards, Mr. Poindexter’s set was too long, and after the 90-minute mark, people began to exit. The coolness of his reception was undeserved. He and his loose, flexible band, which included Brian Koonin on guitar, Richard Hammond on upright bass, Ray Grappone on drums and Brian Mitchell on piano, appeared unperturbed. They sustained the atmosphere of mild slapstick fun.“Let others take the high road/I will take the low,” Mr. Poindexter crowed, applying his stamp to a sophisticated Broadway tune: “The Seven Deadly Virtues,” that cheerful catechism of bad attitudes from “Camelot.” “It’s not the earth the meek inherit, it’s the dirt.” Riffing on the pope’s visit to New York, he gleefully proclaimed himself an atheist. Singing the old Kingston Trio hit “Zombie Jamboree,” he located its essence of pure nonsense. Mr. Poindexter may be 65, but he is still 15. He reminded us that fundamentally, whether we like it or not, we are, too.Buster Poindexter continues through Oct. 10 at Café Carlyle, Manhattan; 212-744-1600, thecarlyle­.com.Advertisement