AdvertisementSupported byBy Jeremy EgnerSERIES: “Supergirl,” debuting Monday on CBS, is the latest series from the super-producer Greg Berlanti (“Arrow,” “The Flash,” “Blindspot”). Ali Adler (a co-executive producer on “Glee” and “Chuck”) and Andrew Kreisberg (“Arrow,” “The Flash”) are the other creators.STORY: Melissa Benoist is Kara Danvers, a put-upon executive assistant in National City who also happens to be Superman’s cousin. (Her birth name: Kara Zor-El.) She longs to embrace her inner power and when a number of threats arise, she does. Calista Flockhart is her amusingly caustic media mogul boss. Mehcad Brooks is James Olsen, the noted photographer and associate of Kara’s super-cousin, who relocates from Metropolis to National City.TONE: “The Flash” meets “Unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt”CRITICS SAY: The series creators have “smartly fit Supergirl’s origin story to a very current feminist theme: that women must overcome being socialized to say sorry, to put themselves second, to efface themselves,” James Poniewozik wrote in The Times. “It’s a superhero story whose motto could be ‘Up, up and lean in!’” Elsewhere: Fans laud the show’s blend of impressive special effects and heart. Others say that whatever the feminist pretenses, the series actually reinforces patronizing notions about accomplished women.WHY YOU’LL LOVE IT: Ms. Benoist brings an openhearted charm to Supergirl, expressing infectious delight in her emergence as a hero. It’s fun to watch her come into her own, primarily via a humorous training and costume montage. Ms. Benoist has a nice chemistry with both Jeremy Jordan, playing her sidekick Winn, and Ms. Flockhart.WHY YOU MIGHT NOT: The pilot manages to make an extraterrestrial law enforcement agency, intergalactic fugitives and exploding semis seem perfunctory and dull. Two-dimensional chauvinism abounds. David Harewood, a fine actor, seems wasted as a surly bureaucrat. The villains are snarly but boring, though a twist points toward improvement in this area. And not to nitpick, but how does Winn, an I.T. guy, have access to bulletproof polymers, again?Advertisement