Makhar Vaziev, the artistic director of La Scala Ballet, will replace Sergei Filin as the ballet director of the Bolshoi Ballet on March 18, the Bolshoi Theater announced Monday. Mr. Vasiev, who ran the Mariinsky Ballet from 1995 to 2008, was widely seen as a likely candidate after the Bolshoi announced in July that it would not renew the contract of Mr. Filin, who was seriously injured in an acid attack organized by a Bolshoi dancer in January 2013. “Makhar Vaziev needs no introduction,” Vladimir Urin, the theater’s general director, said in a statement on the Bolshoi’s website. “The theater world knows his name not only in Russia but also abroad.”His title, ballet director, differs from Mr. Filin’s title of artistic director; in July, Mr. Urin said that that position would cease to exist, but the Bolshoi has not responded to requests for clarification about whether the ballet director’s duties will be different in any way.Mr. Vaziev, who was born in in 1961 in Alagir, a town close to the Russian border with Georgia, has a textbook résumé for his new job. He attended the prestigious Vaganova Academy in St. Petersburg, and was taken into the corps de ballet of the Mariinsky (then called the Kirov Ballet) in 1981, rising quickly through the ranks to become a principal dancer by 1989.During his tenure as the Mariinsky’s director, Mr. Vaziev broadened the company’s repertoire to include a range of 20th-century ballets. He also commissioned work from a younger generation of Russian choreographers, including Alexei Ratmansky, who created his first full-length ballet (“Cinderella,” in 2002) for the Mariinsky. After leaving the Mariinsky in mid-2008, Mr. Vaziev joined La Scala — far less known for ballet than for opera — the following year. During his time there he has commissioned work from Mr. Ratmansky, Mauro Bigonzetti, Francesco Ventriglia and Martha Clarke and brought in guests like Roberto Bolle, Svetlana Zakharova, Natalia Osipova and Sergei Polunin, raising the profile of the company.Mr. Filin’s outward-looking approach to repertory frequently came under attack from conservative quarters at the Bolshoi, who wanted a return to the big story ballets of the 19th century and the Soviet era, for which the 200-plus member company is famed. Mr. Vaziev, known for championing young talent, seems unlikely to take that direction.A version of this article appears in print on 10/27/2015, on page C3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Bolshoi Names Director of Ballet.