By KATHRYN SHATTUCKOCT. 26, 2015
8:30 P.M. (CBS) SUPERGIRL She says she’s sorry, a lot. She’s always putting herself second. And she plays down her abilities. But Kara Danvers — a. k. a. Superman’s cousin Kara Zor-El, played by Melissa Benoist — is about to embrace the superpowers she’s subverted for the last 12 years while masquerading as a normal Earthling. Mehcad Brooks plays her Jimmy Olsen, who prefers to be called James; Calista Flockhart is her media-mogul boss, who can’t stand Kara’s wallflower ways. It’s an origin story with a feminist theme “whose motto could be ‘Up, up and lean in!,’ ” James Poniewozik wrote in The New York Times. (Image: Ms. Benoist)5 P.M. (21); 6 P.M. (13) METROFOCUS Former New York City Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly discusses his new book, “Vigilance: My Life Serving America and Protecting Its Empire City,” and defends his stop-and-frisk policy. And how ’bout them Mets?8 P.M. (CW) CRAZY EX-GIRLFRIEND Rebecca throws a housewarming party to impress Josh, despite not knowing anyone in West Covina and a childhood phobia of festive occasions.9 P.M. (CNN) LONG ROAD TO HELL: AMERICA IN IRAQ Fareed Zakaria assembles some big guns to discuss the United States’ military intervention in Iraq, among them former Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain; Antony J. Blinken, the deputy secretary of state; L. Paul Bremer III, the presidential envoy to Iraq under George W. Bush; Richard A. Clarke, a former national security aide; Douglas J. Feith, a former under secretary of defense; and retired Gen. David H. Petraeus.Advertisement 9 P.M. (CW) JANE THE VIRGIN When last we saw Jane (Gina Rodriguez), she was evaluating her options — Rafael or Michael? Michael or Rafael? — à la “The Bachelorette,” but fiercely clung to her final rose. In this week’s challenge, the suitors must prove their fatherhood potential after Jane is ripped away from Mateo far sooner than expected when a graduate program opens up. (Image: Justin Baldoni as Rafael and Ms. Rodriguez)Advertisement9 P.M. (HBO) HOW TO DANCE IN OHIO (2015) Developmentally challenged young people from Columbus prepare for their first spring formal.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.10 P.M. (NBC) BLINDSPOT Jane and Weller try to keep things professional while taking down an app that tracks government vehicles and has already led to one assassination.10 P.M. (FX) FARGO The Gerhardts ramp up their search for Rye, who has since been turned into ground chuck. Peggy, meanwhile, hears a new theory about the Waffle Hut shooting. (Image: Angus Sampson as Bear Gerhardt and Jean Smart as Floyd Gerhardt)10:30 P.M. (TruTV) SUPER INTO Celebrities take us inside their private passions, starting with Michelle Rodriguez, who goes superbiking down the Pacific Coast Highway in California before screaming around the Laguna Seca track at the world championships.11:35 P.M. (NBC) THE TONIGHT SHOW STARRING JIMMY FALLON David Spade and Mike Tyson are guests. Blake Shelton performs with some coaches from “The Voice.”What’s Streaming NowTHE RUTH RENDELL MYSTERIES Acorn TV adds 17 whodunits from this Queen of Crime to its slate. The first stars Colin Firth as a silent type with a penchant for the wild, windy moor (be still my heart) — and maybe murder. (acorn.tv)A version of this schedule appears in print on October 26, 2015, on Page C7 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Monday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.