By NEIL GENZLINGEROCT. 25, 2015
You’ve seen those three-minute feature stories on the evening news: During a meaningless late-season high school football game somewhere, the special-needs kid who has attended practices with the squad but never been allowed to play is inserted into the game long enough to (with the complicity of the opposing team) score a touchdown. The crowd cheers, and everyone has a feel-good moment.These kinds of vignettes actually annoy some parents of special-needs children, who think they give the rest of the world license to go on marginalizing such children. “Hey, Marge, a disabled kid just scored a touchdown. Problem solved, so let’s resume forgetting that kids with disabilities exist.” “How to Dance in Ohio,” a piercing documentary Monday night on HBO, might from its pocket description seem to be a variation on this evening-news staple. It’s about teenagers and young adults in Columbus, Ohio, who are preparing for a spring formal dance. But Alexandra Shiva, the filmmaker, goes so much deeper than the corsage-and-boutonniere snapshot that the piece, though it too has feel-good moments, ultimately paints a portrait of young people whose futures are full of anxiety and uncertainty.The film focuses on a social skills therapy program for young people on the autism spectrum run by a clinical psychologist named Emilio Amigo. His efforts to teach his clients how to interact with one another and the broader world lead him to announce that they’ll all be participating in a spring formal, including everything that entails: finding a date, picking an outfit, learning to dance, understanding how to engage in the simple small talk of a social function.AdvertisementMs. Shiva focuses on three young women and their families: Marideth Bridges, 16; Caroline McKenzie, 19; and Jessica Sullivan, 22. The dance becomes merely a device for examining the myriad challenges the three and their parents face as adulthood nears. Will they be able to go to college, live independently, make friends, hold jobs?Advertisement“I always wanted it to be some sort of bridge of understanding, and to me there was no better way than to take something that we have all in some way experienced and tell the story through that,” Ms. Shiva said of the film. “The dance is sweet and the dance is lovely, but the biggest challenge is how do we show you as a viewer that for Marideth to just say ‘Hi,’ that’s an accomplishment?”The three young women are relatively high functioning, which enables Ms. Shiva to let them be the guides to their world; this is not a traditional documentary full of talking heads sharing detached academic wisdom. The three understand their limitations and the obstacles they face, and Ms. Shiva secured great access to them and their families.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“What I wanted to do was have them speak for themselves and have them have agency in this process,” she said. “And we were very conscious that we stayed within their story.”She singled out a scene in which Ms. Sullivan talks about her obsession with anime, a beautifully honest moment.“I dream in cartoons,” she says. “I feel like I’m a little bit of a cartoon. Plus, cartoons never judge you like people do.”Ms. Shiva said the intent was to give the viewer Ms. Sullivan’s perspective. “Hopefully that’s a moment where you’re in her experience,” she said. “You’re not looking at her, you’re in her experience.”Yes, the film pays off in smile-inducing images once the dance arrives, but getting there means, for the viewer, confronting hard-to-think-about questions involving what happens to young people with disabilities once they age out of the school system and what society’s obligations to them are. Ms. Shiva has made two previous films, “Bombay Eunuch” and “Stagedoor,” both of which also involve people who don’t fit into the mainstream in one way or another.“There’s a running theme for me, which I didn’t even realize till I started making this one, which is that I’m very interested in people searching for belonging, and I’m very interested in people living in the margins,” she said. “To me, you learn more about human experience from people who are struggling than from people who are, ‘Everything’s just fine.’ ”How to Dance in OhioRunning time: 88 minutesA version of this review appears in print on October 26, 2015, on Page C6 of the New York edition with the headline: Facing Adulthood With Added Uncertainty.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.