AdvertisementSupported byBy Gia Kourlas“The Green Table,” the antiwar classic choreographed by Kurt Jooss in 1932, has some years on it, yet with the right dancer cast as the Death figure and a stark simplicity of grimness, it continues to survive. Performances by American Ballet Theater on Thursday and Friday at the David H. Koch Theater proved that it’s not time for this trenchantly dark work to claim its spot in the modern-dance graveyard — that place where contractions, outstretched palms and flexed feet no longer hold their own.Subtitled “A Dance of Death in Eight Scenes,” it begins and ends the same way: Diplomats wearing masks, or the Gentlemen in Black, line either side of a baize-green table while gesticulating in repetitive vehemence. The sight is unnerving, yet now these characters have a cute Muppets air about them. (Remember Statler and Waldorf?) Still, the sentiment remains: Corruption and politics go hand in hand.Jooss created the dance in Germany as Hitler was rising to power, but what follows in the next six tableaus is about more than war. Set to F. A. Cohen’s piano score, “The Green Table” explores life and death, alienation, and how a lack of control brings on despair. Death always wins. Each performance featured a debut in the Death role: the leading principal Marcelo Gomes — self-possessed, crisply strident, shiver-inducing — and the soloist Roman Zhurbin, a talented character dancer whose grim deep gaze gave his rendition a quality both crude and nurturing.Herman Cornejo, a slithering sight as the Profiteer in Thursday’s cast, reappeared on Friday to sensually invade Sarah Lane’s dream in Michel Fokine’s “Le Spectre de la Rose.” But the biggest star in Ballet Theater’s season has been the choreography. In the company premiere of George Balanchine’s windswept, rapturous “Valse Fantaisie,” one man, James Whiteside, and five women, with Hee Seo in the lead, twist and turn to Glinka’s music as if their bodies were controlled by the air. It’s over before you know it: After four women exit, the leads leap into opposite wings.The principal couple grasped the ballet’s spirit even when they couldn’t meet all of its demands. While dancing it will improve them, the ballet wasn’t improved by their dancing. “Valse Fantaisie” is a tale of speed and drive; Mr. Whiteside handled Ms. Seo admirably, but was given to stiffness in his solos, and Ms. Seo, in blue, started strong and faded in momentum.The programs repeated Frederick Ashton’s luminous duo, “Monotones I and II” — the uneven performances were shaky in one moment, fluid in the next — as well as two works created for Ballet Theater: Twyla Tharp’s 2000 “The Brahms-Haydn Variations,” performed with delicacy and grandeur on the stage that Balanchine built, as it rightly belongs, and Mark Morris’s new “After You.” Inconspicuous and all the more elegant for it, “After You” is a reaction against much contemporary ballet, with its frequent sight of whacked legs, meaningless gestures and partnering that turns women into brainless machines.Despite the specificity of Mr. Morris’s shapes — low arms, eloquent feet and épaulement that opens not only the chest but the back — there’s no strain, only an ease of movement enhanced by Isaac Mizrahi’s gorgeous jumpsuits. Throughout, we see “after you,” a gesture of substance, performed with a flourish of the arm and an outstretched palm. Usually uttered by men, here it’s shared by all. “After You” may or may not be a feminist statement, but it’s clearly an enlightened view of classical dance, and in the male-dominated world of ballet, that’s progress.American Ballet Theater performs through Nov. 1 at the David H. Koch Theater, Lincoln Center; 212-496-0600, abt­.org.Advertisement