By JON CARAMANICAOCT. 25, 2015
“Latch,” the 2012 collaboration between Disclosure and Sam Smith, was the first hit for either party and also the song that set them on their respective courses: Mr. Smith, to becoming an elegant, restrained rising blue-eyed soul star, and Disclosure, on its way to becoming one of the most popular dance music production outfits in the world.But “Latch” also signified a severe left turn for Disclosure, one that took the duo away from the skittish, intricate, sometimes quirky music they’d been making and steered them in a far more literal direction — a road that led directly to the biggest headline show of their career at Madison Square Garden on Saturday night.Last month, Disclosure — the brothers Guy and Howard Lawrence — released “Caracal” (Capitol), its second album, a backward conceptual leap from its 2013 full-length debut, “Settle.”Disclosure got its start faithfully reimagining the slinky up-tempo soul of 2-step garage, which dominated British dance floors in the late 1990s. But as the two have become more popular, they have become more linear, shifting the emphasis from the space between the beats to the beats themselves.AdvertisementThe new album finds the Disclosure sound flattened even further in the name of heavyweight vocal collaborations: The Weeknd on the spooky “Nocturnal,” Lorde on the heaving “Magnets,” Mr. Smith on the limp thumper “Omen.” Even when the singers are less well known, Disclosure is taming itself, like on “Willing & Able,” with the muted, impressionistic soul man Kwabs, or the charming but plain “Holding On,” with the resonant jazzman Gregory Porter. (Generally, Disclosure is partial to soul singers with strong but edgeless voices; see: Mr. Smith.)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The result is on-the-one house music equally palatable to festivalgoers and people who Shazam the music in car commercials. The rhythmic structures are there, but the textures have been denuded and the melodies are often square. It fills rooms, but it doesn’t move bodies in the interesting ways the duo’s early songs did, nor does it stimulate minds.At this lovely but largely tepid show, the brothers mainly performed behind semicircular banks of instruments: Guy, on the left, mostly on drum pads and keyboards; Howard, on the right, occasionally pulling out a bass for a taut, clever line. They were joined by a handful of vocalists from the album — not the A-listers, but Brendan Reilly for a misty “Moving Mountains,” and Lion Babe for a frisky “Hourglass.”AdvertisementOlder songs, from when Disclosure’s compromises were less severe, were the highlights here, especially “F for You” and “When a Fire Starts to Burn.” And “Bang That,” which samples the frisky “Pass Out” by 313 Bass Mechanics, was a welcome burst of jiggle and energy. But for the most part, Disclosure remained polite right up until the end, closing the encore with “Latch,” the song that got them here, and where it all began to go wrong.A version of this review appears in print on October 26, 2015, on Page C2 of the New York edition with the headline: With a Shift in Direction, a Duo Lands at Madison Square Garden.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.