AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael Cooper and Robin PogrebinThe New York Philharmonic could be getting an East Side address when the planned renovation of its Lincoln Center hall leaves it homeless for two seasons: The orchestra is in talks with Hunter College about moving into a 2,000-seat auditorium there.The orchestra plans to play at a number of places around all five city boroughs during the renovation of its home, David Geffen Hall, a project expected to cost $500 million, begin in 2019 and last for two seasons. But orchestra officials, who have mapped where their subscribers and single-ticket buyers live, recognize that they will need to play most of their core season at centrally located spots in Manhattan, and that they will need a base of operations for most concerts and rehearsals. That is where Hunter comes in.There is a history behind the idea: In 1960, when the Philharmonic feared that its old home, Carnegie Hall, would be razed before its new home at Lincoln Center was ready, the orchestra made plans to move to the Hunter auditorium for the 1960-61 season. But a group led by the violinist Isaac Stern saved Carnegie Hall, and the planned Hunter season never happened.Several hurdles must be surmounted if the orchestra is to move to the Hunter hall, which is on the college’s East 68th Street campus, at Park Avenue. The space, known as Assembly Hall but commonly called the auditorium, needs renovations to make it right for the Philharmonic. Officials said that could cost $20 million to $25 million, which Hunter hopes to raise through a combination of private philanthropy and public money, and, because it is part of the City University of New York, public funds as well. Many other details would need to be worked out. But officials at both Hunter and the Philharmonic sounded optimistic.“We have moved into serious conversations about what it would take for us to have a facility that would meet their needs,” Jennifer J. Raab, the president of Hunter, said in an interview last week. The hall — a 1939 Art Moderne space — has “beautiful bones” that could be adapted into a hall that would serve the orchestra, and, after it moves on, the college, she said.Matthew VanBesien, president of the Philharmonic, said that while it was “early days,” the orchestra was very interested in performing a large part of its core season at Hunter, while presenting additional concerts elsewhere at Lincoln Center and in other Manhattan spaces, which he declined to name.Ms. Raab said that modernizing the hall, bringing the Philharmonic to campus, and getting the orchestra and its musicians involved with students would be a huge boon as the college seeks to expand educational offerings in the arts. And Mr. VanBesien said that the idea of developing a closer relationship with City University was attractive to the Philharmonic, which has recently started educational projects in Shanghai, Michigan and California.Mr. VanBesien said that the hall would require some work. “I would describe it as refurbishment-plus: modernizing the venue, seating amenities, looking at the stage,” he said. “We want to have a venue that is comfortable for our audiences, and comfortable and appropriate for our orchestra, but also balancing that with what Hunter needs, and can use, longer term.”Ms. Raab said Hunter had applied to the state for money from a new program that Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo created to give City University colleges grants for capital improvements that lead to significant economic development. And she said that she had been in talks with philanthropists who have expressed “significant interest” in making donations.The clock is ticking. As Mr. VanBesien put it, “while it’s nearly four years away, it’s only four years away — so time will be of the essence.”And, of course, there is all the money that must be raised to renovate Geffen Hall. The Philharmonic and Lincoln Center need to raise roughly $500 million for the project. So far they have announced a $100 million gift from Mr. Geffen, and said that the project will get part of a $25 million gift to the Philharmonic from the chairman of its board, Oscar S. Schafer, and his wife, Didi, which will also be used to bolster the orchestra’s endowment and to continue the annual free concerts in city parks. Planning for the renovation is going forward, with an announcement on an architect expected next year.If the plan works out, it will return the Hunter auditorium to one of its original uses: a concert stage. The Philharmonic played a number of concerts there in the 1940s, including the 1949 performance in which Bruno Walter led the orchestra in Beethoven’s Symphony No. 3, the “Eroica.”Advertisement