By MICHAEL COOPEROCT. 1, 2015
Now New York City’s other other opera company is closing. Gotham Chamber Opera, a small, imaginative troupe that had seemed poised to fill some of the void after New York City Opera closed in 2013, announced on Thursday that it would shut down because its new executive director had uncovered a large, previously undisclosed deficit.The rapid demise of Gotham was stunning — the operatic equivalent of the sudden death of an outwardly healthy person. The troupe had seemed to offer a new model for opera in the 21st century: It gave critically acclaimed performances of small-scale works, often sharing the costs with other presenters, in locales as varied as the Hayden Planetarium, a louche downtown nightclub and the Arms and Armor Court at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.Things began to unravel in June, after Edward Barnes took over as the company’s executive director and discovered what he described in an interview as unrecorded invoices and contracted fees that had never been put on the books. The opera’s board of directors worked through the summer to try to resolve the problem but decided it was insurmountable and voted on Thursday to close.“I’m crushed,” said Neal Goren, who founded the company 15 years ago and served as its artistic director and conductor, leading it in repertoire from Monteverdi to Kaija Saariaho.AdvertisementCompany officials declined to say exactly how large the deficit was, but described it as being in the “mid six figures.” Gotham’s annual budget was under $2 million, according to its most recent tax filings, which the company said it would have to amend to reflect its true finances. Mr. Barnes — who took over as executive director from David Bennett, who left to become general director of the San Diego Opera — said that it was unclear whether “Charlie Parker’s Yardbird,” which it planned to put on in May as a production with the Apollo Theater and Opera Philadelphia, could be performed without its participation.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Beatrice Broadwater, the president of Gotham’s board of directors, said that the deficit Mr. Barnes had uncovered had not been disclosed to the board, and that the board could not raise enough money to put on the coming season and pay off the debts. She said that the company would wind down its affairs, and was exploring whether it needed to file for bankruptcy.Advertisement“Unfortunately, we were operating on the wrong premises,” she said in an interview, adding that the board had made decisions in the past based on “misinformation.”Mr. Bennett, the former executive director, denied that he had kept the board in the dark about Gotham’s debts. “Some of the internal controls could have been better, but they weren’t undisclosed,” he said, noting that he had produced opera with a shoestring staff. “We sat on the razor’s edge for years, but we created some amazing things.”Mr. Goren, who said that the end of the company he had brought to life had come upon him “suddenly and shockingly,” added that he would be looking for other conducting projects. “I’m definitely underemployed,” he said.A version of this article appears in print on October 2, 2015, on Page C2 of the New York edition with the headline: Facing a Large Deficit, Gotham Chamber Opera Announces That It Will Close.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.