Pharrell Williams was recently named artist in residence at the Tisch School of the Arts at New York University. But last night in a talk at Town Hall, the producer admitted that such accolades always make him feel awkward — like when his mom would brag about him to her friends in Virginia Beach.“Honestly, I’m like the Mr. Magoo of music,” he told Jason King, a professor at the Clive Davis Institute of Recorded Music at New York University, at the event at the 1,500-seat theater. Hits like the Daft Punk and Niles Rodgers collaboration “Get Lucky,” he explained, were born mostly of coincidence. He said he had seen Daft Punk “at a Madonna party, and I was like, ‘Man, that ‘Tron’ music was so sick.’ ”” ‘Anything you need — I’ll even play tambourine,’ ” he continued. When he added that he had been listening to a lot of Chic, he had no idea that they had just recorded with the band’s guitarist.The conversation began on the subject of politics, and Mr. Williams rejected the idea that artists should double as pundits. He then recounted his meeting the Neptunes production partner Chad Hugo in middle school and broke down their obsession with A Tribe Called Quest: That trio’s style showed them a way to be alternative, and the beat on their hit “Bonita Applebum” reminded Mr. Williams of the bridges he adored in songs by Steely Dan and Earth, Wind and Fire.“For the next three or four years every girl I dated had to love that record,” he said. “That’s my make-out song for life.”The event was attended mostly by undergraduates, and their excitement gave the evening the energy of a school assembly. Mr. Williams advised those studying music to cultivate the things that made them unique, as he had done.“We had no choice but to be ourselves,” he said, remembering how out of place he and Mr. Hugo felt on their first trips to New York. “What looked like us celebrating our difference was really us just going, ‘You know what? This is going to end sometime. You might as well just be yourself.’ And then it just started working.”The pair would go on to produce more than 20 Top 10 hits, and according to Mr. Williams, their attitude never changed. The key was finding a label, Virgin Records, that would support their avant-garde visions. “They didn’t, like, lock us in a box,” he said. “Like, ‘OK, you guys are black. Wear some throwback jerseys.’ It wasn’t that. They were like, ‘You guys are a bunch of weirdos — sounds good though!’ ”