AdvertisementSupported byBy Zachary WoolfeGood morning, music lovers!The Met Meets the MetsWith the World Series starting tonight, the Metropolitan Opera got in on the action: Mr. Met, the team’s mascot, led members of the company’s orchestra and chorus in “Meet the Mets” this morning.A Showcase for Female ConductorsOn Monday the Lucerne Festival in Switzerland, among the more progressive of the high-market European summer music getaways, gave a peek at its plans for next year. Those plans include a fact that shouldn’t be as surprising as it is: 11 female conductors will be part of the monthlong festival, including established artists like Marin Alsop, Emmanuelle Haïm and Susanna Malkki and rising stars like Mirga Grazinyte-Tyla.It’s an important nod by a prominent institution toward the need for greater gender diversity in conducting. If only Lucerne hadn’t seen fit to give this programming focus the unfortunate title “PrimaDonna.”A Pianist and His PedalNew York pianophiles are looking toward Friday, when Andras Schiff comes to Carnegie Hall to complete a cycle of three recitals featuring the late sonatas of Haydn, Mozart, Beethoven and Schubert.“The first two movements are about death,” Mr. Schiff tells James R. Oestreich of Schubert’s mighty B-flat sonata (D. 960). “The third is a kind of hallucination of life after death.”Alex Ross spoke with Mr. Schiff after he played the same program in Los Angeles, a conversation that centers on the Schubert sonata and particularly a significant trill near its beginning. Saying he avoids the piano’s sustaining pedal at that crucial moment, Mr. Schiff reminded me of a talk we had a few years ago, when he came to New York to play Bach’s “Well-Tempered Clavier,” entirely — and proudly — without using the pedal.“I think that the sustain pedal is used even in later music, like Chopin, in a very indiscriminate way,” he said then. “They think it’s like an automobile, and your right foot is on the gas pedal permanently. It’s the same mistake as string players who vibrate every single note.”Under the RadarA more varied solo-piano meal will be provided by Emanuele Torquati, appearing on Wednesday at the Italian Academy at Columbia University. The program, “Nordic Ballades,” includes works in that genre by Saariaho, Brahms, Grieg and Zemlinsky.And for Zemlinsky aficionados, that will be merely a teaser for the Escher String Quartet’s concert at the Rose Studio on Thursday, under the auspices of the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center, featuring all four of that composer’s quartets.Happy Birthday, Howard Hanson!Howard Hanson, born on Oct. 28, 1896, was the longtime director of the Eastman School of Music in Rochester. Last year I traveled there to hear the Rochester Philharmonic Orchestra give a rare concert performance (which it then brought to Carnegie Hall) of his opera “Merry Mount.” Based on a Hawthorne story, it had its stage premiere at the Metropolitan Opera in 1934 and then promptly vanished into obscurity.It is, I’m sorry to say, a rightfully overlooked work, but there’s a crazy grandeur to the music and, in the tortured Puritan minister Wrestling Bradford, at least one vibrant character. Here’s the great baritone Lawrence Tibbett, the Met’s original Bradford, in one of the arias:And here’s his brooding “Mosaics,” from 1957:Happy 119, Mr. Hanson! Let me know what you’re listening to: leave a comment, email zach.woolfe@nytimes.com or tweet @zwoolfe.Advertisement