
Jane the Virgin By                     
PILOT VIRUET

OCT. 27, 2015
There were many decisions to be made in this week’s episode of “Jane the Virgin” and each outcome will have a big impact on the episodes ahead.I’ve been lukewarm on Petra’s arc this season. There is certainly something emotional and a little heartbreaking about her overwhelming desire to be with Rafael by any means possible — even if that involves artificially inseminating herself with a turkey baster. But that feeling doesn’t often stick because it’s Petra. She’s not as comically telanovela-ish as Sin Rostro, of course, but she sometimes veers into a place where it’s hard to connect with her character. It’s also odd to throw in a second baby when Mateo has only been around for three weeks. Still, I have faith in the creators that this will go to more interesting places down the line.All that said, it did provide a great scene tonight in which Petra lays out the three options to Jane and Rafael: Petra can get an abortion, she can find someone to date (preferably a Russian oligarch) and convince him that it’s his baby, or she can stick around and the two (or three) of them can raise Mateo together as co-parents. Jane is hesitant to choose because she and Rafael aren’t with each other, though option C is ultimately chosen. Michael declines to comment on the situation, though for a different reason.Earlier in the episode, Rogelio gave Michael some bad advice: be more “macho” with Jane — less talkative and helpful, more short and distant — in order to win her over. When Jane tries to confide in Michael, he barely offers a full sentence in response. It’s frustrating to watch, especially as Jane begins to think that maybe Michael is taking himself out of the running for “Jane’s Perfect Boyfriend.” But, as always, we have to give Michael a little more credit. He immediately recognizes that Rogelio’s advice is terrible and though he keeps it up for three days, he also walks around making notes in his book — which is not a diary — about the things he would’ve said to Jane after each of these conversations. It’s incredibly sweet (as Michael is) and Jane’s face as she reads it practically glows … which is what makes the end of the episode so complicated.AdvertisementBefore that, however, there are a few other major developments. Jane learns that she was accepted into graduate school for writing and is positively overjoyed but her excitement is short-lived when she then learns that she has to quickly take a summer course in order to attend. She’s only had three weeks with Mateo and she’s understandably not ready to part with her new child — just last week she was forgoing showers so she could be with him practically every second she was awake — and, like many new mothers, she worries about missing his “firsts.” An attempt to bring him to class fails, so she rejects the acceptance letter, only to be reassured by both her mother and grandmother that Mateo will be fine and that Jane can’t let motherhood get in the way of everything. It’s wonderfully progressive of the show: “You’re about to let motherhood hijack your goals.” Jane reaccepts the offer, potentially setting up a busy balancing act for the remainder of the season.A baptism was another episode highlight. Focusing much of a comedic episode on a religious ceremony in a casual, matter-of-fact way instead of playing it up or down was a lovely choice. And it seamlessly fit into the show’s love triangle, as Rafael is the father and Michael is the godfather. It also culminates in a tear-jerking speech presented in montage, switching from Spanish to English, blending the two languages and the two worlds in a way that’s still new to television The plotline about Xo’s jealousy as Rogelio passionately makes out with his ex-wife for a scene is straightforward but ultimately cute, while Luisa’s kidnapping is off the wall but quickly intriguing.AdvertisementYet it’s a testament to how well-written the love triangle is that the reveal about Luisa’s kidnapping has less of an impact than another cliffhanger: Rafael and Jane finally kissed again. Let’s just bask in that bliss before something else goes down next week.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »