By BEN RATLIFFOCT. 26, 2015
People make music, but music doesn’t behave like people. As soon as a note leaves a musician’s hands and body, it takes on its own life. We project our sensibilities through other modes of communication: physical demeanor and speech and writing, for instance. But we can’t map them precisely onto what we play. Maybe this is why a short and organized melody — written only to be understood as a song — can hold you at a distance, while a single sustained tone or chord, less like a song and more like the sound of a refrigerator, can absorb you.On Sunday night at National Sawdust in Brooklyn, Stephen O’Malley of the group Sunn O))) played a set of solo electric guitar while a film ran behind him: parts of “Unground,” by Gast Bouschet and Nadine Hilbert, showing high-contrast black-and-white close-ups of a dripping underground ceiling. The music gave no indication that it was going to change much, and, in a formal sense, it didn’t; it stuck, more or less, to a single chord. When Mr. O’Malley started, you might have suspected that you were in for something other than pleasure.Last year the English music writer David Toop described the experience of going to hear an ensemble called Cranc. “To use a detestable shorthand,” he wrote on his blog, “this was drone music, a genre (if that’s what it is) with which I have lost much of my patience.” He explained that the excitement he felt long ago at hearing, say, La Monte Young’s long-held chords for the first time, had been “vaporized by hearing too many men in black hunched over electronic equipment in the gloom, pouring out long tones of indifferent interest.” That’s cold, and I understand what he means. But the point is that he liked Cranc, and the reason was a quality he understood as a “raw active life” in the music, the opposite of what drones do at their worst, which he described as “safe ground through fixity.” I’m inevitably going to express something similar here.Drones are never just drones: There are always other considerations. Not so much the musicians’ sensibility or emotional intent, but the instruments, the room, the atmosphere. National Sawdust is shallow and high-ceilinged; Mr. O’Malley ran his guitar through four stacks of amplifiers and various distortion and sustain pedals. He’s devised a rich and volatile sound, as if biological material were growing from it as you listen. It comes from a combination of overtones bouncing around, tube-amplifier science and digital manipulation. (It doesn’t come across as the sum of various recognizable effects.) He understands that a note can contain infinite life, and he’s worked out ways to represent it.He slowly added more tones to offset the anchoring tone of his chord. They began to suggest a mode. At this point a listener could begin to hear things that hadn’t even been played yet. Perhaps because the sound was so fertile, full of Mr. Toop’s “raw active life,” or perhaps because listening is based on expectation and expectation makes you restless, you might have begun your own modal improvisation in response. This became part of your perception of the music. Perceptions work for a while, until they don’t. The trick is for the musician to stop before the perception wears out. In my case the timing worked; I’d started my song, lived with it for a while and was just beginning to look for a way out of it.The concert was a triple-bill of solo electric guitar, part of the independently-produced Tinnitus Music Series, and first on the lineup was Andrew Hock, of the band Psalm Zero. He sat down to play, and used what could be called drones — or at least long sustains — cleaner than Mr. O’Malley’s, with lots of composed single-note figuration inside them. After Mr. Hock came Reg Bloor, who took her position at center stage as if leading an imaginary polytonal metal band. She stood with one leg thrust in front of the other, power-strumming high, abstruse, unsettling chords, making rumbling wipes of sound up and down the neck. Of the three, Ms. Bloor was the most agitated and alive, and the one who most clearly wanted us to remember that the electric guitar has sometimes been associated with rock music.A version of this article appears in print on October 27, 2015, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline: The Living Worlds Within a Soloist’s Single Chord.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.