AdvertisementSupported byBy Michaelangelo MatosIn 1980s New York club culture, it was nearly impossible for female D.J.s to make a name for themselves outside of the gay disco realm. Only a handful managed to break out. Anita Sarko was one of them. Ms. Sarko, a rock D.J. who was a crucial bridge between the city’s punk and disco scenes, committed suicide this month at age 68, according to the night-life chronicler Michael Musto.“She really was alone in a man’s world,” Mr. Musto said. “She fit right in with that mid-80s downtown scene where everything was large.”Ms. Sarko grew up in Detroit, where she discovered her love of music early. “Whenever there was a party, I was the one who brought records,” she told The New York Times in 1987. “It was obvious I’d end up being a D.J., but I didn’t realize it. When you go to a job counselor, they don’t tell you being a D.J. is one of your choices.”She attended the University of Arizona in Tucson and graduated from Michigan State University, telling The Times that her psychology and education classes proved useful: “I was trained to deal with emotionally disturbed and socially maladjusted children. Nothing helps more in a nightclub situation.”Ms. Sarko relocated to New York in 1979. Ignoring the ultrahot disco Studio 54, she and a friend headed to the Mudd Club in TriBeCa. “The Mudd Club was established as the anti-Studio 54,” Mr. Musto said. “It was a place for minimalism and skinny ties and posing, as opposed to the elaborate hoopla of 54.”Ms. Sarko explained to the author Anthony Haden-Guest in his 1999 book, “The Last Party,” how she had to “sneak” into the Mudd Club. “The doorman didn’t think we were cool enough.” She took over the D.J. booth at Mudd’s V.I.P. room a month later.Eclecticism was the watchword, and Ms. Sarko’s musical knowledge was encyclopedic. “I was taken by the bracing mix of music that she was serving,” Mr. Musto said. “She would play offbeat funk, British dance music, unusual mixes and surprise oldies. ‘Incense and Peppermints,’ by the Strawberry Alarm Clock — that was her oldie.” Once, Ms. Sarko had ashtrays thrown at her for playing a long set of African music.The painter Chuck Nanney, then a Mudd doorman who went on to work with Ms. Sarko at several other venues, said she was one of the first to play hip-hop downtown: “The first time I ever heard Kurtis Blow or the Sugar Hill Gang was when Anita put it on at the Mudd Club.”Equally startling was Ms. Sarko’s look. Ann Magnuson, who had co-promoted nights with Ms. Sarko in the ’80s, described her as decked out like a classic Hollywood film star. “There was no way to ignore Anita Sarko,” she said.That big personality matched a sharp temperament. “You were either in or out with Anita,” said Steven Lewis, who worked with Ms. Sarko at Palladium in the ’80s. “If you were in with Anita she’d bite your head off, and if you were out with Anita she’d really bite your head off. I think she didn’t think of it as rude so much as instructive.”By 1983 Ms. Sarko was spinning at Danceteria. Among a staff that included the artists David Wojnarowicz, Keith Haring, Peter McGough, Brian Butterick and Zoe Leonard, she was a north star. She co-hosted the roving party No Entiendes with the doorman Haoui Montaug.“They’d bring out up-and-coming acts, which included Madonna, the Beastie Boys and Karen Finley,” Mr. Musto said. “She helped introduce all those acts to the public.”In 1985, Ms. Sarko went to work for Steve Rubell, the Studio 54 co-founder, when he opened the Mike Todd Room at the Palladium, a club within a club. There she spun below enormous canvases by Jean-Michel Basquiat and became known for her ability to read and play to a room. When she spun Mr. Lewis’s wedding in 1987, he said: “I didn’t have to tell Anita what to play. She knew.”Once, during a downtown artists’ cocktail party at Jefferson Theater on 14th Street, Mr. Nanney recalled Ms. Sarko mesmerizing the room with a mix between a Timothy Leary spoken-word record, “field recordings of birdsong” and “this weird John Cage thing that basically sounded like steam banging in pipes.” He added, “It totally altered my idea of what a D.J. was about.”During the 1990s, Ms. Sarko became a D.J. for several major designers, playing shows for Vivienne Westwood and Marc Jacobs in New York and Europe. She also became a contributor to downtown magazines like Paper, Egg and Interview. In 2011, Ms. Sarko wrote about surviving ovarian cancer.But a full-time job with the photographer Patrick McMullan became “more part time,” Mr. Musto said, and work was increasingly difficult to find. With the visual artist Scott Taylor, Ms. Sarko hosted a Sirius XM program that was dropped after a season; she began readying her diaries for possible publication.“It was hard for her to see what New York had transformed into, that the idea of a village elder was not held in very high regard, unless you were an extremely wealthy, influential village elder,” Ms. Magnuson said.Ms. Sarko is survived by her husband, Erzen Krivca.“Anybody in a club situation where they were at the top of the heap — if they showed any weakness or vulnerability, people would be really fickle and abandon you,” Mr. Nanney said. “That seems intrinsic to a certain part of New York — always having to keep on your game face, never show any signs of weakness. And that breaks my heart.”Advertisement