By SIOBHAN BURKEOCT. 26, 2015
“I’ve discovered that if I have a little bit of potato chip, and orange juice from two bottles, the dance goes better,” the choreographer Trajal Harrell said. He was explaining his actions to an audience in a tucked-away gallery at the Museum of Modern Art on Sunday, at the start of his latest work, “The Return of La Argentina.”The dance, of course, had already begun. And the chips and juice, which Mr. Harrell consumed while crouched over a stash of provisions, were a kind of mundane entry into a series of less prosaic, more enigmatic tasks, through which he channeled the ghosts of soloists past.You wouldn’t know from its surface that “The Return of La Argentina” was inspired by “Admiring La Argentina,” a 1979 solo by the Japanese dancer Kazuo Ohno, which was itself inspired by the Spanish dancer Antonia Mercé, known as La Argentina. Mr. Ohno was a pioneer of the postwar Japanese dance-theater form Butoh, along with Tatsumi Hijikata, who is the focus of Mr. Harrell’s two-year residency at the Modern, and who directed “Admiring La Argentina” in its premiere. Just a little context.Meandering though it is, that back story illuminates what might otherwise be a thoroughly inscrutable if intriguing solo. Mr. Harrell first appeared waltzing toward us through an adjacent room, clutching a ruffled pink dress, like a flamenco dancer’s, to the front of his body. He would later coyly disappear along the same pathway. All of this, and much else in the roughly half-hour work, might have seemed insubstantial if not for his unflinching conviction. He moves as if nothing else matters.Except, maybe, for yogurt with white peach jam and raw pistachios, which he also insisted on eating by way of preparation. From his seat on a piano bench, he fixed the meal and dug in. There was something terribly melancholy in this solitary chewing and swallowing, and it only deepened as he scraped and stabbed the bottom of the emptied bowl. A clinking soundscape, like the product of faulty castanets, arose from the act of stirring, along with a slow, writhing dance.The only other sounds (save for a rogue announcement over the museum intercom) came from a jingle-generating, motion-censored light box and Mr. Harrell’s heavy breathing, as he worked himself into a stamping, spitting, smirking, skirt-hiking storm: the spirit of La Argentina, perhaps, without the steps, just a feeling passed down through the decades.A version of this review appears in print on October 27, 2015, on Page C2 of the New York edition with the headline: Pistachios and Chips Feed a Solo.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.