By ZACHARY WOOLFEOCT. 26, 2015
Forget the more famous “Andrea Chénier” or “Fedora.” “Siberia” was Umberto Giordano’s favorite among his operas, and there are moments when you can see why. A doomed courtesan, her lover and her jealous pimp all together in a Russian prison camp: The story is “Manon Lescaut” meets “From the House of the Dead.”Set in the Siberian wilderness, the second and, even more, the third act bring out Giordano’s sweep and ingenuity, artfully blending Russian folk music — a balalaika band makes a spirited appearance — with Italianate lyricism. Perhaps most impressive is this composer’s agility: Full-throated passion keeps swiftly receding into passages of idyllic calm before gradually rising again. There are barely any stand-alone numbers to impede the dramatic ebb and flow.Originally performed in 1903, “Siberia,” with a libretto by Luigi Illica (“Chénier” and “Lescaut,” among many others), was revised in 1927. It took on the streamlined form — with just over 90 minutes of music — in which Teatro Grattacielo presented it on Saturday evening at the Gerald W. Lynch Theater. This company is devoted to concert performances of overlooked operas of the “giovane scuola” group of Italian composers who came of age in the late 19th century.The conductor, Israel Gursky, a Grattacielo regular, is a sure guide through this lush repertory. On Saturday he was flexible with the singers without ever losing momentum, and the orchestra bloomed for him. (Here, the balalaikas were mandolins.) The Cantori New York chorus, directed by Mark Shapiro, was effectively solemn in the prisoners’ despondent marches.Among the leading roles, the baritone part of the villainous Gleby is particularly intriguing, since the character never loses a savage humor that recalls that of Tonio in “Pagliacci.” Daniel Ihn-kyu Lee sang with intelligence and resonant tone. Raúl Melo’s steady tenor rose to vehement high notes in his portrayal of the young soldier Vassili.The soprano Marie Masters, as the beleaguered Stephana, was articulate and fervent in “Qual vergogna tu porti,” the rough equivalent of “La mamma morta,” Maddalena’s outpouring from “Andrea Chénier” (1896). If “Chénier” has heights of melodic and emotional inspiration that place it beyond “Siberia” in the public imagination, the later opera hardly deserves total obscurity.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.