AdvertisementSupported byBy David AllenAbout halfway through “Heretical Angels,” a transfixing meditation on mortality conceived by the singer-scholar Katarina Livljanic and performed in the James Memorial Chapel at Union Theological Seminary, something happened that was both ethereal and workaday.The violinist Albrecht Maurer paused to tune his fiddle while hidden behind a black megalith that represented a gravestone or perhaps a gate to the beyond, in this powerful staging of Bosnian, Herzegovinian and Croatian songs from the 14th to the 18th centuries.Musicians often retune period instruments, like those used by Mr. Maurer and the flutist Norbert Rodenkirchen, who, along with Ms. Livljanic, make up the Dialogos ensemble. But on Tuesday, when this offering from the White Light Festival opened, my hearing had been rearranged by Kantaduri, a quintet of traditional singers, whose ancient music sounded remarkably contemporary. So the fiddle tuning, with its unpredictable pitch bending and its elemental drone, sounded like the beginnings of another song.Not that this music is strictly old: Its sounds have been recovered from the annals, wrapped in the passage of time. Reconstructed from archival records by Ms. Livljanic and Josko Caleta, these works depended on sources — including prayers, tombstone inscriptions and readings from the Miscellany of Radosav, a key book in the Bosnian Church — that mostly had texts in Old Church Slavonic and other Balkan dialects, but lacked musical notation.In a dance of the living and the dead, it therefore had to be recomposed, using medieval manuscripts and oral customs, for instruments including the rebec (a boat-shaped fiddle held in the crook of the arm), the gusle (a bowed, single-stringed instrument played in the lap) and the dvojnice (a double-bored recorder). The songs themselves are musically bracing, particularly when sung in ganga, an intensely dissonant multipart style from the Dalmatian hinterland.The result on this night, in a ritual that alternated solo songs with choral interludes in a simple staging by Sanda Herzic that effectively used the chapel’s aisles and choir loft, was somewhat repetitive but largely enthralling. Ms. Livljanic’s pure voice had an incantatory power, not least in a chanted reading from the Book of Revelation, and there was an energy in Kantaduri’s singing that belied the group’s monkish demeanor.As drama, this poignant, often wry narrative had a veiled quality even where more fire might have been expected. That earnest modesty was undermined only by a superfluous use of recorded sounds, including a rainstorm cornily tacked on as the voices drifted away.Lincoln Center’s White Light Festival runs through Nov. 22 at various locations; 212-721-6500, whitelightfestival­.org.Advertisement