The Byrds were instrumental in bridging the gap between the rock and folk worlds in the mid-1960s, bringing covers of Bob Dylan’s “Mr. Tambourine Man” and Pete Seeger’s “Turn! Turn! Turn!” to different audiences with the band’s signature 12-string guitar twist. Mr. Seeger, meanwhile, remained a titan his whole career, from his time in the pop-folk quartet the Weavers through his antiwar efforts and his tireless campaign to clean up the Hudson River. He performed at Barack Obama’s inauguration ceremony. He died last year, at the age of 94.In 1994, Mr. Seeger and Roger McGuinn, the Byrds’ frontman, solidified their musical bond in a concert at the Bottom Line in New York. It was the only show they played together. The two collaborated on hits including “If I Had a Hammer” and “Bells of Rhymney” at the performance, which will now be released as part of the Bottom Line archive series. The two-disc recording, “Pete Seeger & Roger McGuinn: Live at the Bottom Line,” will be available on Oct. 30.Mr. McGuinn recently discussed Mr. Seeger’s influence and the night they shared the stage. These are edited excerpts from that conversation.What did Pete Seeger mean to you as a rising musician?I remember hearing the Weavers on the radio in the late 1940s at my grandmother’s house. She had one of those big floor model wooden radios — it was an ornate, kind of cathedral-looking thing. I remember hearing “Goodnight Irene” and “On Top of Old Smokey” — they were big hits at the time. I loved the sound of the Weavers. I loved the harmonies, the banjo and guitar interplay. And Pete was always so amazing with his vocals. He could sing so high and yodel.And then I went to his solo concerts and was a little concerned that he wouldn’t be able to pull it off by himself. But he was amazing. He had multiple instruments and got the audience singing in three parts. I kind of went, “That’s what I want to do when I grow up.”What else do you remember about going to see him live?I’d see him at Orchestra Hall in Chicago. I had a Pete Seeger long-neck banjo, which I brought to the concert, and I felt like an idiot.I met him when I was 16 — I went to a concert of his and talked to him backstage. I asked him how he accounted for being so popular. He said: “Well, I get people singing along with me, and they hear themselves, and then they like me.”What did you learn from him as a banjoist yourself?Almost everything I do on the banjo is almost a direct result of listening to Pete. The kind of strumming he does: the chording, the hammer-ons and even the Scruggs picking. I heard Earl Scruggs do it, but Pete was doing it too; he had his own kind of style.How did you come to record his song “Turn, Turn, Turn?”I had heard Pete do it in concert. I was musical director on Judy Collins’s third album, and she did “Turn, Turn, Turn!” on that. So I knew the song. When we got the Byrds going, I was into putting a Beatles beat, a 4/4 rock beat, to different folk songs. Someone asked me about “Turn, Turn, Turn!” and I came up with that arrangement, which is different from Pete’s legato arrangement.Did you have any inkling that song was going to hit No. 1?No, we had no idea. Our manager was dead against it. He thought it was going to turn off the rock audience because of its religious connotations. He wanted us to do another Dylan song.What do you remember about being onstage with him in 1994?He played a 12-string accompanying me when I did the break on “Turn, Turn, Turn!” At the second set, I did “Bells of Rhymney.” He did the whistling part at the end, it was great. We finished the show and I was in the dressing room with my wife, Camilla. Pete came in and said, “I gotta tell you, I’ve never heard ‘Bells of Rhymney’ done so well.” We both got tears in our eyes, it was so incredible.Did you pick up any secrets from him?I think Pete didn’t have any secrets. Everything was above board. He was forthcoming about his politics and everything he did.Is there an artist of a younger generation that you have already developed a bond with, or would like to, in a similar way that you and Pete bonded?I know Jeff Tweedy. I’d put him in that category. Tom Petty, too, but what is he, 60 now?I have to ask: Is there any chance of a Byrds reunion in the near future?No. I’m too happy doing what I’m doing, which is sort of like what Pete did.