AdvertisementSupported byFront Row CenterCompiled by Christopher D. SheaA look at the opera, dance and orchestral offerings at the world’s leading performing arts centers this autumn.OPERA AND BALLETAMSTERDAMDutch National Opera In the late 18th century, as the French government clamped down on religious institutions in an effort to forge a secular nation, a group of cloistered nuns unwilling to renounce their faith went to the guillotine. Francis Poulenc’s 1957 “Les Dialogues des Carmélites” tells their story, and ends with the sound of an offstage guillotine. The director Robert Carsen’s sleek, pared-down production of the opera will be revived here in November. In December, Lotte de Beer, who cut her teeth with avant garde operas across Europe, will mount a major new staging of Engelbert Humperdinck’s “Hansel and Gretel.”BERLIN Deutsche Oper Benedikt von Peter, whose career has so far straddled traditional and avant garde opera, will direct a new production of “Aida” here in November, one of the theater’s major premieres of the year. Tatiana Serjan will play Aida, and Alfred Kim will play Radames, the military man who falls in love with her and rescues her from slavery, only to seal her gloomy fate. Mr. von Peter takes over as the artistic director of the Luzerner Theater in Switzerland next year. In December, the opera house will stage a concert-style version of Donizetti’s “La Favorite.”Staatsoper Mozart’s buoyant “The Marriage of Figaro” will get a new revival here in November under the direction of the theater’s artistic director, Jürgen Flimm. The Venezuelan conductor Gustavo Dudamel will conduct the production, and the Estonian baritone Lauri Vasar will sing the title role. In December, the opera house will open a new staging of Verdi’s “La Traviata,” with Sonya Yoncheva in the role of the beautiful, doomed courtesan Violetta. Several popular productions — like the opera house’s version of “Der Fliegende Holländer,” in which much of the action takes place inside a gigantic painting frame — run alongside the new productions.BEIJING National Center for the Performing Arts The military and political leader Yang Jingyu fought valiantly for the Chinese in the second Sino-Japanese War. “Yang Jingyu,” an opera about his efforts against Japan and for Communism, runs in December, part of the center’s ongoing celebrations marking the end of “70th Anniversary of the Victory of the Counter-Japanese War and the Anti-Fascist War.” Arts companies visiting this autumn include the Mariinsky Ballet, the Taiwan Guoguang Opera Company and the Martha Graham Dance Company.BRUSSELS La Monnaie/De Munt The Chicago-based puppetry company Manual Cinema, whose “Ada/Ava,” — a story of two elderly sisters told with silhouettes and shadow puppets — drew raves when it appeared earlier this year in New York, turn their attentions next to Humperdinck, staging a new version of his opera “Hansel and Gretel” here in December. Also that month, Anne Teresa de Keersmaeker’s dance company, which works frequently with La Monnaie, will stage “Die Weise von Liebe und Tod des Cornets Christoph Rilke,” a danced adaptation of the writings of Rainer Maria Rilke.BUENOS AIRES Teatro Colón Prokofiev’s “The Fiery Angel,” which had its world premiere in Venice in 1955, tells the tale of Rupprecht, Renata and Heinrich, three star-crossed lovers whose love triangle is further complicated by the fact that one character is possessed by a demon. A new production of the opera will premiere here on Nov. 3, starring Elena Popovskaya as the possessed Renata. Ira Levin, who works prolifically at the Teatro, conducts. In December, the company opens a new production of Wagner’s final opera, “Parsifal.”LONDON English National Opera Benedict Andrews, an Australian director known for subversive opera updates, has staged a new “La Bohème” for ENO. Set in the present day, the production includes several updates to the material. (Mimi, for example, suffers from heroin addiction rather than tuberculosis.) The production, which runs through November, capstones a busy autumn season for the company, which is also staging productions of “The Barber of Seville,” “The Mikado,” and Verdi’s “The Force of Destiny.” “Destiny” is directed by Calixto Bieito, also known for bold reworkings of his source material (for a 2006 production of “Un Ballo in Maschera” here, he famously sat the chorus on toilets).Royal Opera House Two takes on Bizet’s “Carmen” are running simultaneously at the opera house this fall. A high-profile revival of the opera, featuring stars like Jonas Kaufmann, runs on dates through November. Elena Maximova and Anita Rachvelishvili trade off performances of the role of the ill-fated gypsy, Carmen. Meanwhile, the dancer-choreographer Carlos Acosta’s new version of the story is showing on dates through Nov. 12. The short ballet features music adapted from Bizet’s original. It is part of a mixed bill that also includes works by Liam Scarlett, Jerome Robbins and George Balanchine.MELBOURNE Opera Australia at Arts Center MelbourneAs summertime approaches in Australia, Opera Australia will stage two of the liveliest mainstays in the opera canon — “The Marriage of Figaro” and Donizetti’s “The Elixir of Love.” David McVicar, who mounted a well-loved production of “Figaro” for the Royal Opera in 2006, will take on the work once again here. From Nov. 21-28, the company will revive Simon Phillip’s production of the Donizetti opera, set in the Australian outback at the height of World War I.ST. PETERSBURG, RUSSIAMariinsky Theater The opera company’s director, Valery Gergiev, stepped down as chief conductor at the London Symphony Orchestra in October but kept his post as artistic director here. He will sink his teeth into a new production of Tchaikovsky’s “The Oprichnik” in November. The opera takes place during the reign of Ivan the Terrible, among a group of oprichniks — high-ranking government henchmen, who the tsar instated to protect him from threats. Other performances in the company’s autumn season include revivals of dance and opera mainstays, like “La Sylphide” and “Boris Godunov.”PARISParis Opera Ballet In “La Voix Humaine,” a solo opera, a woman speaks over the phone to her ex-lover, at first appearing composed and slowly revealing the extent of her pain. The composer Francis Poulenc set a monologue by the filmmaker Jean Cocteau to music for the opera. A new production of the piece opens here in November in a double bill that also includes Bela Bartok’s fantastical 1918 opera “Bluebeard’s Castle,” based on a French myth about a landed aristocrat who slaughters each of his new wives. In December, the opera will show the premiere of a new production of Berlioz’s “La Damnation de Faust,” starring (Dec. 5 to 20) the formidable tenor Jonas Kaufmann as the doctor who sells his soul for worldly success.TEL AVIVIsraeli OperaOn Dec. 26, Daniel Oren will take the stage here to conduct “Il Trovatore,” Verdi’s operatic take on a battle between the King of Aragon, and the Count of Urgel, a rebel in his court who sparked a civil war. Michal Znaniecki, from Poland, will direct. Before that, the Lithuanian National Opera will visit Tel Aviv to perform their take on Mozart’s classic “The Marriage of Figaro.”TOKYONew National TheaterVerdi’s final opera, “Falstaff,” focuses on the lighter aspects of Shakespeare’s loveable antihero, the obese drunkard Falstaff. Jonathan Miller directed this production, which last showed at the opera house in 2007. The Georgian baritone George Gagnidze plays the title character. Other productions in the theater’s autumn season include “Tosca” and a danced production of “The Tales of Hoffmann” (which is usually performed as an opera) choreographed by Peter Darrell.VIENNAVienna State OperaA mysterious, 300-year-old opera singer with a dwindling supply of the elixir of life is at the center of Janacek’s 1926 opera “The Makropulos Case.” Peter Stein directed the company’s production, and Jakub Hrusa will conduct. The production sinks or swims on the strength of its lead soprano, who will be played here by the American singer Laura Aikin.ORCHESTRABERLINBerliner PhilharmonikerAfter a busy November spent largely on the road, the orchestra returns to the Philharmoniker on Nov. 29 with several concerts featuring the soprano Anna Caterina Antonacci, conducted by François-Xavier Roth. The French-inspired evenings will include works by Ravel, Debussy and Berlioz, among others. The company’s artistic director, Simon Rattle, returns on Dec. 16 to conduct several semi-staged performances of the opera “Pelléas et Mélisande,” directed by Peter Sellars.HONG KONG Hong Kong Philharmonic OrchestraOn dates beginning in November, the Philharmonic’s music director Jaap van Zweden tackles Beethoven, conducting his nine symphonies in the course of four nights. (The cycle ends with the most iconic, the First and Ninth.) Other concerts in the company’s bustling fall season include crowd-pleasers like an evening of Mozart and Strauss led by the rising conductor Karina Canellakis; and an evening of holiday and pops music modeled on the Vienna Philharmonic’s New Year’s Eve concert tradition, which takes place at the end of December.SEOUL, SOUTH KOREA Seoul Philharmonic OrchestraThe Finnish conductor Osmo Vanska will play his first concert with the orchestra on Nov. 13, leading performances of music by two fellow Finns, Kimmo Hakola and Jean Sibelius, as well as by Beethoven. The orchestra’s star conductor, Myung-Whun Chung, returns to Seoul in December for two performances of Beethoven’s Ninth Symphony. Mr. Chung will also conduct the symphony — which includes the “Ode to Joy” — at the Bunkamura Orchard Hall Tokyo in December, in a concert marking 50 years of friendly diplomatic relations between Japan and South Korea.VIENNA Vienna PhilharmonicThe conductor Daniel Barenboim will descend on Vienna for two concerts of music by Mahler in November. But it’s the Latvian conductor Mariss Jansons who rules the Philharmonic’s calendar in the months to come. He will lead the orchestra in concerts of music by Stravinsky and Shostakovich in November. And in December, he will conduct the orchestra’s famed New Year’s Concert, a double program that takes place on both the last day of the old year and the first of the new. The concert program is yet to be announced.Advertisement