By ALEC M. PRIESTEROCT. 28, 2015
11:10 A.M. (TMC) AMERICAN GRAFFITI (1973) It’s the last evening of summer in 1962, and a bunch of recent high school graduates drive around town while Wolfman Jack growls over car radios in this film by George Lucas. They fret about the future and try to purchase “a Three Musketeers, and a ballpoint pen, and one of those combs there, a pint of Old Harper, a couple of flashlight batteries and some beef jerky.” Harrison Ford drives a black Chevrolet. With Ron Howard, Cindy Williams, Richard Dreyfuss and Candy Clark. (Image: Mr. Howard and Ms. Williams)4 P.M. (HBO) X-MEN: DAYS OF FUTURE PAST (2014) In the present, the mutants have been hunted nearly to extinction by robots called the Sentinels. In the 1970s, a mutant-hating arms manufacturer played by Peter Dinklage is developing the robots and selling them to the government. Wolverine travels back to the ’70s to prevent the Sentinel program from getting out of control while the other mutants stay behind to battle robots.7 P.M. (AMC) HALLOWEEN (1978) Michael Myers commits his first murder at 6 and is sent to a sanitarium. Fifteen years later, on Oct. 30, he breaks out and carnage ensues as he ruins Halloween for Jamie Lee Curtis and everybody else, except the viewers of this classic film, directed and scored by John Carpenter. (Image: Ms. Curtis)8 P.M. (Disney XD) KIRBY BUCKETS The vagaries of tipping terrorize even children. Pizza delivery boys exact an elaborate revenge after being stiffed by Kirby, Eli and Fish.Advertisement9 P.M. (SYFY) GHOST HUNTERS At a college in Vermont, ghosts are blamed in a tale of a legendary love triangle and suicide.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.10 P.M. (AHC) NATURAL BORN OUTLAWS The story of the Prohibition-era criminal Machine Gun Kelly involves the kidnapping of an oil tycoon and, yes, a Thompson submachine gun.Advertisement10:45 P.M. (IFC) THE DARK KNIGHT (2008) Is it tougher to be part of a love triangle or to have to fight an unparalleled supervillain? In the second film in Christopher Nolan’s Batman trilogy, Batman’s popularity has inspired clumsy crime-fighting copycats in Gotham City. Enter the Joker, a grotesque, unhinged villain whose goal is to introduce chaos. Meanwhile, Bruce Wayne struggles with his affection for Rachel Dawes, who is in a relationship with Harvey Dent, the new district attorney. The Joker teams up with the mob as Harvey tries to crack down on crime. “Pitched at the divide between art and industry, poetry and entertainment, it goes darker and deeper than any Hollywood movie of its comic-book kind,” Manohla Dargis wrote in The New York Times.11 P.M. (BET) ROOMIELOVERFRIENDS Two roommates sleep together, which, predictably, complicates things. In this episode they work through issues of trust.WHAT’S STREAMING NOWOFFICE SPACE (1999) Peter Gibbons hates wasting his life in his cubicle but won’t do anything about it. When his hypnotist dies before waking him out of a trance, Peter’s permanently hypnotized state allows him to act without inhibitions, ask out Jennifer Aniston and generally take control of his life. Mike Judge wrote and directed this cult comedy. (iTunes) (Image: Ron Livingston, right, as Peter, and Gary Cole as his boss)A version of this schedule appears in print on October 28, 2015, on Page C7 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Wednesday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.