By JON CARAMANICAOCT. 27, 2015
Peter Dougherty, a behind-the-scenes downtown fixture of the 1970s and ’80s who went on to help shape MTV’s early identity, most notably as a creator of the influential show “Yo! MTV Raps,” died on Oct. 12 at his home in Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y. He was 59.The cause was a heart attack, said his brother, Paul.In the mid-1980s, Mr. Dougherty was working in the on-air promotions department of MTV when he began advocating for a show focused on rap music. He was a friend of the Beastie Boys, the producer Rick Rubin, the artist and bon vivant Fab 5 Freddy and the artists who congregated around the Fun Gallery in the East Village, and he “was always the guy who took you to the newest, coolest club, the most underground place,” said Doug Herzog, an early MTV programming executive and now the president of the music and entertainment group of Viacom, MTV’s parent company.“He knew everybody, everybody knew him,” Mr. Herzog added. “People like Peter were always pushing: ‘Let’s be hipper, more cutting edge. What’s the new thing?’ ”MTV was notoriously inhospitable to black music at the time, but Mr. Dougherty and Ted Demme, who worked under him, were eventually permitted to shoot a pilot for a rap music show. Broadcast in August 1988, it became the highest-rated show in MTV’s history.By October, MTV was presenting a weekly version with Fab 5 Freddy as host. Ratings were so high that by March 1989 there was a daily version, too, hosted by Ed Lover and Doctor Dré (not the Dr. Dre of N.W.A.). “Yo! MTV Raps” quickly became the genre’s highest-profile showcase and sped the music’s dispersion to all corners of the country — and eventually the world.AdvertisementPeter Dyer Dougherty was born on Dec. 13, 1955, in Queens to Philip H. Dougherty, who later became the advertising columnist for The New York Times, and Dorothy Patt Dougherty, a homemaker. In his teenage years, he became a tireless consumer and collector of downtown culture, traveling to Manhattan from Forest Hills, Queens, to frequent punk clubs like CBGB and Max’s Kansas City — often with a cassette recorder in hand.AdvertisementMr. Dougherty was “a hooker-upper, a connector,” said Adam Horovitz, better known as Ad-Rock, of the Beastie Boys, who first met him in the early 1980s at a friend’s apartment on St. Marks Place. “He was there when things were happening — not just one thing, but all the big things”: punk and hip-hop, New York and London, CBGB and MTV.While a student at Ithaca College, Mr. Dougherty spent a semester abroad in London and immersed himself in the nascent punk scene there, meeting key figures like the D.J. Don Letts. When he returned to New York, he mailed tapes across the Atlantic to his new friends. Mr. Letts wrote in an email, “How else would a black kid from Brixton have known to include the likes of Patti Smith, Television and the Ramones into my dub reggae D.J. sets at the legendary Roxy Club?”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.After graduating from Ithaca in 1977, Mr. Dougherty returned to New York, where he worked as a waiter until getting a job in 1983 as a production assistant at MTV, then a fledgling network. By 1985, he had become a producer, working on promotional spots including the brief interstitial clips that gave the network its edge, especially in its early years, when the music videos themselves could be tedious.“The fact there was this cool, zooty, subversive content around the videos kept you going,” said Van Toffler, the former chief executive of Viacom’s music group. Mr. Dougherty also used the space to showcase work by artists like Jean-Michel Basquiat and Andy Warhol.Mr. Dougherty directed a handful of music videos himself, including “Hold It Now, Hit It” for the Beastie Boys and “Fairytale of New York” for the Pogues, a wry Celtic punk band that Mr. Dougherty, who was of Irish extraction, particularly admired.Mr. Demme (who died in 2002) eventually took control of “Yo! MTV Raps,” which ran through 1995, and in 1990 Mr. Dougherty left for London to work for MTV Europe in various creative capacities. He moved back to New York in the mid-2000s.In addition to his brother and mother, he is survived by a sister, Margaret; a son, Ciaran; and a daughter, Nia.For someone so connected to New York’s various subcultures, Fab 5 Freddy recalled, Mr. Dougherty had a “strait-laced veneer” and an Orchard Street apartment that was “orderly, quaint, middle-class.” But when Fab 5 Freddy visited, he recalled, Mr. Dougherty pulled out bins of bootleg concert cassettes he had personally recorded: “He kept everything — every tape, every flyer, every little handbill.”Some he gave to friends — Mr. Horovitz has a few, he said — but most of that collection is now archived at the Fales Library at New York University.A version of this article appears in print on October 28, 2015, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Peter Dougherty, 59; Brought Rap to MTV .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.