By ROBERTA SMITHOCT. 27, 2015
Maureen GallaceTwo decades ago, Maureen Gallace started making small landscape paintings whose implicit awkwardness avoided the bucolic, replacing it with an unsettling ambiguity. You never knew if she was painting from life or abbreviating images from postcards.Ms. Gallace is still painting small landscapes, and they’re still ambiguous, but now each part of each image has its own character and is played against the others more clearly. Each of the 13 paintings here is a series of tugs of war: between thick and thin paint; loose and photographic realism; solid and empty; near and far. In “Beach Shack, Door,” for example, the shack’s door is quite solid, while its walls taunt us with an almost see-through airiness; the horizon seems to cut through the structure. Above it, the blue sky splits into different tones where the roof peaks. In “Storm,” the turbulent forms of brush, rock, surf and clouds all sit thickly on the surface, but sky and ocean meet smoothly in the distance — a semblance of peace. Paramount among the new developments in these works is a much closer attention to real light.The looseness of 19th-century oil studies was one of the avenues toward Impressionism. Ms. Gallace means to revive them in their own right, adding new twists to their connections to the realities of both life and painting.This show continues through Saturday at 303 Gallery, 507 West 24th Street, Manhattan.Lynda Barry“Everything Part II,” as this exhibition is titled, surveys the busy career of the comic artist Lynda Barry, among this country’s greatest conjoiners of words and images, known for plumbing all kinds of touchy subjects in cartoons, comic strips and novels, both graphic and illustrated. Since the late 1970s, Ms. Barry’s efforts have appeared, sometimes in syndication, in scores of alternative weeklies like The Chicago Reader and The Village Voice as well as Esquire. The more than 80 original works here, including about a dozen drawings for book covers, span that time as well as a restless, expanding style that leaves few stones in any given area unturned.AdvertisementArranged not quite chronologically, with section titles repeating as needed, the works range from the simple ink drawings for “Two Sisters Comeek,” which deftly capture the special hostilities of sibling rivalry, to increasingly elaborate treatments of the inner lives of women — a large, painful subject. This is especially demonstrated by scenes from the long-running strip “Ernie Pook’s Comeek” featuring Marlys, Ms. Barry’s alter ego. Color enters the picture, followed by collage; an affection for working on pads of lined yellow paper increases the surface richness.AdvertisementIn her drawn and written introduction to “The Best American Comics 2008,” Ms. Barry copies other cartoonists’ styles, demonstrating the ventriloquial skills that helped her learn her craft. Also featured: 18 original drawings from Ms. Barry’s latest book, “Syllabus: Notes From an Accidental Professor,” inspired by her students at the University of Wisconsin.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Ms. Barry’s dedication to exploring the unconscious — whether hers, ours or theirs — makes this show beyond immersive. But luckily most of her excursions are newly accessible thanks to a series of compilations being issued by Drawn & Quarterly, her Canadian publisher.“Everything Part II” continues through Saturday at Adam Baumgold Gallery, 60 East 66th Street, Manhattan.Louis M. Eilshemius  and Bob ThompsonPaintings by two of American art’s most intriguing odd men out meet to inspiring effect in “Naked at the Edge.” Louis M. Eilshemius (1864-1941) and Bob Thompson (1937-1966) shared a sense of independence, a love of the past, a fixation on nude figures in landscapes and a clumsiness that was both a limitation and a strength. Admired by Duchamp, Eilshemius populated sketchily painted landscapes that could have sustained more development with ineptly rendered women and nymphs that probably could not. Hilarious yet touching, these figures frolic beside rivers, confront sea monsters and often appear within slightly campy painted frames. In one of the best works, and one of the few scenes set indoors, a doll-like woman prepares to wash in a basin. In another, a clothed damsel apparently flees a merman on a moonlit shore. Generally, you may wonder if it might have been better, pictorially at least, for Eilshemius to have jettisoned humans altogether.In 17 paintings Thompson made from 1958 to 1965, most of the figures are based on royal portraits and Renaissance scenes both biblical and pagan. Surrounded by bright, dense landscapes, they are painted in flat, undiluted colors that recast them as modern silhouettes, disguise their nakedness and render race moot for all viewers — no small thing in a racially charged time like the 1960s, and probably especially meaningful for an African-American artist like Thompson. In “Charles I,” a bright red man in a large black hat has the dandyish mien of Van Dyck’s portrait of the king on a hunt; his grooms are now female nudes of yellow and blue. Tintoretto’s “Origin of the Milky Way” inspires another painting in which gods in primary colors hover before a sky of red and yellow. Here you wonder mainly what Thompson, who died when he was 28, might have accomplished. He was off to a great start.“Naked at the Edge” continues through Saturday at Michael Rosenfeld Gallery, 100 11th Avenue, at 19th Street, Manhattan.A version of this review appears in print on October 28, 2015, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline: Unsettling Landscapes, a Comic-Strip World and Odd Men Out.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.