By DAVID ALLENOCT. 27, 2015
It is hard to think of two pianists more different than Maurizio Pollini and Lang Lang. Each draws crowds, on the evidence of their Carnegie Hall recitals this weekend, but those crowds are noticeably distinct in age and temperament.Greeted by an older, calmer audience, Mr. Pollini, a spry 73, is now in the sunset of his career, an image unexpectedly emphasized during his Sunday matinee by lighting that had both pianist and piano dimly silhouetted. During a series of New York performances this month, he has played music strongly associated with his long career: Chopin’s Piano Concerto No. 1 (with the New York Philharmonic) and Schumann and Chopin (in an earlier Carnegie recital).Sunday’s concert paired rigorous, radical accounts of Beethoven sonatas with pieces by Schoenberg. Mr. Pollini’s repertoire is now forgivably staid, and his fingers are not as nimble as they once were. His slips in performance make his risks seem even more daring, though, as he takes his assessments of familiar works to their logical extremes.In Beethoven’s “Tempest” sonata, for instance, the spread chords and turbulent, searching runs that are set up in the first bars as the polarities of development were impressionistic in their details. But they didn’t need to be any more than that to provide the two distinct atmospheres that Mr. Pollini used in an analysis that felt not cold, but lived.AdvertisementThe peculiar F sharp major sonata (Op. 78) also had a coiled, concentrated power, leaving the impression by the end of its cheeky final movement that there was really nothing more to say. And if the “Appassionata” was less ferociously coherent than the last time Mr. Pollini played it here, in 2013, it still had a remarkable tension, as if unspooled from a single steel wire.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Pollini’s concision in Beethoven was echoed in his performance of Schoenberg’s “Three Piano Pieces” and “Six Little Piano Pieces,” all marked by a subtle touch when it counted most, and by a resolute, questioning quality also present in the Beethoven sonatas. The connection between the two composers was underlined in two Beethoven encores, the third and fourth Bagatelles (Op. 126), that were as aphoristic as Schoenberg’s miniatures.There were moments in the 33-year-old Mr. Lang’s showy, rapturously received recital on Friday evening when you sensed a searching mind at work, too. In a traversal of all four of Chopin’s Scherzos, the third was merciless, fast and destructive. And parts of Tchaikovsky’s “The Seasons, ” especially the melodious barcarolle of “June,” showed that delicacy is not beyond this pianist.AdvertisementNo, Mr. Lang is no charlatan: He has genuine talent, somewhere beneath his look-at-me glances, his stomping feet and his love of conducting with a spare hand. Yet, on this occasion, he drew an unpleasantly metallic sound from his Steinway that stifled expression. Moreover, garbled scales, missed notes and gaudy phrasing, particularly in Bach’s “Italian” Concerto, only underlined the fact his playing at its worst is as inaccurate as it is vacuous.A version of this article appears in print on October 28, 2015, on Page C4 of the New York edition with the headline: Pianists at Opposite Ends of the Scale  .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.