AdvertisementSupported byBy James R. OestreichAs Valery Gergiev comes to the end of his eight-year tenure as principal conductor of the London Symphony Orchestra, prominent voices in London are bidding him a fond good riddance. It was a dubious formula to begin with, as both sides surely knew: congenitally overcommitted maestro coupled with perennially overworked orchestra.But has it really been that bad? “Over the past decade and more, he has consistently spread his considerable talent far too thinly,” Andrew Clements writes of Mr. Gergiev in The Guardian, “so that routine and sometimes underprepared performances have been far too frequent, and his concerts with the L.S.O. have included more than their fair share.”This sort of thing is hard to judge from a distance, since orchestras and maestros are typically on their mettle when they arrive on tour. Mr. Gergiev and the London Symphony have given solid performances in New York and did so again in programs of Bartok and Stravinsky on Friday evening and Sunday afternoon in David Geffen Hall.On the other hand, Mr. Gergiev’s work seemed less dynamic and colorful here than it often does with other ensembles, notably his own Mariinsky Orchestra of St. Petersburg. And though the London players performed at a high level individually and collectively, it was hard to discern any specific imprint he might have made on this always versatile band.Friday’s program opened with the Suite from Bartok’s ballet score “The Miraculous Mandarin”; ended with the full score of Stravinsky’s ballet “The Firebird”; and also included the pianist Yefim Bronfman in Bartok’s Third Concerto. Mr. Bronfman did Bartok’s Second on Sunday’s program, which began with Bartok’s “Dance Suite” and closed with his Concerto for Orchestra.Stravinsky might have seemed the odd man out in all of this, but there were strong reminders of him in Bartok’s music: “The Rite of Spring,” at the close of the “Mandarin” Suite; “The Firebird” in the “Dance Suite”; and “The Firebird” and “Petrouchka” in the Second Concerto. As the musicologist Michael Beckerman pointed out in an excellent preconcert lecture on Sunday, that concerto’s opening subject is sometimes called the “Firebird” theme.Mr. Bronfman’s appearance was heralded by an alarming bit of publicity: a photograph of a bloody keyboard on the piano Mr. Bronfman had used to play the Third in London, which circulated widely on the Internet. Reportedly, he had cut his finger that day but soldiered on, leaving listeners none the wiser.The Third Concerto, which Bartok wrote for his wife, Ditta Pasztory, is actually less relentlessly demanding for the pianist than the Second, which he wrote for himself. In any case, Mr. Bronfman, with his outsize technique, vanquished both works with seeming ease, and if blood was shed, it was not evident from Row R. As so often, his work was as impressive for its delicacy and nuance as for its sheer power.There were encores all around: from Mr. Bronfman, Schumann’s “Arabesque” (Op. 19) on Friday, and Scarlatti’s Sonata in C minor (K. 11) on Sunday; from the orchestra, “Montagues and Capulets” from Prokofiev’s “Romeo and Juliet” Suite No. 2 on Friday, and Brahms’s Hungarian Dance No. 1 on Sunday. The Brahms was especially apt in illustrating Mr. Beckerman’s distinction between what was thought of as “Hungarian national music” before Bartok (Gypsy music) and what it became after his researches (peasant and folk music).Advertisement