AdvertisementSupported byBy Roslyn SulcasFrançoise Gilot jumped to her feet and opened one arm with a sweeping gesture. “I paint with my body!” she exclaimed. “That’s why I appreciate dance.”The French-born Ms. Gilot, an artist who is perhaps most famous for being a longtime lover and muse of Picasso, looks like a dancer herself. She is 93, with a slim frame, ramrod-straight posture and dark hair cropped into a chic bob. She is still a prolific painter, working every day in the high-ceiling studio in her apartment just off Central Park West. (“Balanchine lived here too.”)On Wednesday night, one of her recent paintings will provide the backdrop for “AfterEffect,” a new ballet by Marcelo Gomes, the Brazilian-born American Ballet Theater principal, who has created his first major piece for his home troupe, set to Tchaikovsky’s “Souvenir de Florence.” It’s the first homegrown work for the company since Robert Hill’s “Dorian” in 2003.Mr. Gomes, who is widely admired by the dance public (and critics) for his combination of technical prowess, fine acting and beautiful form, said that he had been interested in choreography for years. “I used to grab Misty Copeland in class and start improvising with her, and we would work in the studio and put little pas de deux together,” he said. “Now she is in this piece.”Kevin McKenzie, the artistic director of Ballet Theater, said he had been aware of Mr. Gomes’s interest in choreography and saw him create small works for students and small troupes. “He has had so many pieces created on him, and has been assimilating all the great choreographers he has worked with,” Mr. McKenzie said. “I watched him develop and recently I thought, Now he is ready to do his own piece.”Mr. Gomes and Ms. Gilot didn’t know each other when the idea of a collaboration was first broached by Scott Schlexer, Mr. Gomes’s agent, who had met Ms. Gilot through a mutual friend. “When I saw Françoise’s work, I really saw motion,” Mr. Schlexer said. “So I just asked.”Chance favors the prepared mind, Ms. Gilot observed, quoting Louis Pasteur. “I was immediately open to the idea, because I have all my life been interested in dance, although perhaps more in modern dance,” she said. “From when I was very young, I wanted to understand how the body functions; things are dynamic even in abstraction for a painter.”Despite a lifelong interest in dance and theater, Ms. Gilot has rarely created for the stage. (The exceptions are a set and costumes for a 1953 ballet, “Héraklès” by Janine Charrat at the Théâtre des Champs-Elysée, in Paris, and for a concert of original music by Joel Thome, at the Guggenheim Museum in New York in 1985.)“Most of the time artists put forms or objects onstage that interfere with the dance,” Ms. Gilot said. So she suggested that she show Mr. Gomes a number of designs and he could select and adapt one as a backdrop.“We went to her atelier, and she had put aside a number of paintings that she thought might suit,” Mr. Gomes recounted. “It was such a difficult choice, because there were several paintings I loved, with very specific imagery. But then there was the one I finally chose, with the title ‘Question and Answer.’ It was very abstract, but it really spoke to me, and I made a decision right then not to put the dancers in a specific environment.”The costumes have been designed by Reid Bartelme and Harriet Jung who have, Mr. Gomes said, used Ms. Gilot’s painting as a reference.“AfterEffect” draws on a short piece to the first movement of “Souvenir” that Mr. Gomes choreographed in 2013 for Ballet Theater’s fall gala, but the work as a whole, now for 26 dancers, has changed. “The ballet deals with post-traumatic experience after a tragedy,” he said. “I’m amazed by how people manage to carry on after events like 9/11, tsunamis, earthquakes, and how communities help them get through. How do you carry on? Or are you always missing a part of yourself?”Mr. Gomes said Ms. Gilot’s painting evoked ideas in him of fragmented feelings and emotions. “My idea was that the painting wouldn’t be fully lit initially, and would come fully together by the end of the piece, representing prevailing and being able to carry on.”Cassandra Trenary, a soloist who has a leading role in the ballet, said Mr. Gomes had a clear vision in rehearsals. “He is very good at getting the dancers to draw upon and connect with a narrative, even though there is no time period and the costumes and set are abstract,” she said, adding that Mr. Gomes had handled the transition from dancing peer to choreographer with skill.Ms. Gilot said she was greatly looking forward to seeing her painting as a backdrop, after a painstaking large-scale re-creation from the original canvas, which was kept at hand for color and textural comparison.“I think it won’t fight with the dance,” she said. “That’s the most important thing.”Advertisement