AdvertisementSupported byDance ReviewBy Roslyn SulcasLONDON — What exactly did Carlos Acosta want to do in his new “Carmen”? Created for his home company, the Royal Ballet, and given its first performance at the Royal Opera House on Monday night on a mixed bill that included works by Liam Scarlett, Jerome Robbins and George Balanchine. The new ballet presents a cautionary tale. Not the usual one of desperate love and passion, amoral sex and murder, and lives thrown away. The one about how difficult it is to choreograph a narrative ballet.You can see the appeal of Bizet’s “Carmen” for choreographers. It has a good girl and a bad girl, two equally contrasting male leads, a dramatically concise story — innocent boy meets bad girl who leaves him for bad boy — and wonderfully dancey (and, to most, very familiar) music. Many notable choreographers have tried their hand at it; perhaps most famously Roland Petit and Antonio Gades, but also Alberto Alonso, John Cranko, Mats Ek and Richard Alston.The problem is — and there is no nice way to say this — Mr. Acosta is not a choreographer. Lots of people are able to create combinations of steps (ballet teachers do this in class every day), and Mr. Acosta, a principal guest artist with the Royal Ballet and a superstar dancer, can certainly do that.In his 2013 reworking of “Don Quixote” for the Royal Ballet, that was almost enough, since he more or less stuck to the traditional structure of the ballet, which imposed its own dramatic shape. But in “Carmen,” his second major work, he has tried something more ambitious. The result exposes his inability to create narrative tension, evoke character through movement or impose an overall unifying vision on the work.This “Carmen” suffers from multiple personality disorder. Is it a contemporary ballet, pared down to its essence? Tim Hatley’s costumes (black jeans and tops, no flamenco skirt flounces) and sets (a few chairs, and a huge red-outlined circle at the back of the stage representing sun, moon, bullring, cosmos) are minimal, and the story is pared down. There is no Micaëla, no subplot with Zuniga, not much smuggling action. The focus is on the love triangle. (Mr. Acosta is performing both male roles during the ballet’s run.)Or is it an opera-ballet amalgam like Pina Bausch, Trisha Brown and others have done in “Orpheus and Eurydice,” with singers onstage, moving amid the dancers? This happens for a few minutes in an early scene with Escamillo, and later when a fortune-teller breaks into an aria as she deals the cards, revealing to Carmen that she is fated to die. At other points, the chorus is heard from the pit. But these sudden vocal entries are inconsistent, without any particular reason for occurring at one point rather than another.At other moments — and the card-dealing episode is one of these — the ballet slips into folksy 19th-century mode, with exaggerated gesturing and caricatural fooling about. And at other times, we’re suddenly in an inadequate Matthew Bourne work, with sudden contemporary, grounded movements with the odd flamenco flourish. (This underlines the fact that Mr. Bourne’s choreography is no easy business and brings his own “Carmen” riff, “The Car Man,” longingly to mind.)These shifts in tone are disconcerting, but most problematic is the lack of dramatic tension or plausibility. The whole point of “Carmen” is, surely, Carmen. We need to feel that she is irresistible to all, not just as a focus of desire, but as a life force, a creature beyond rules and norms. That’s never established in the ballet, which opens with Carmen (Marianela Nuñez) dancing in the center of a semicircle of men, who systematically tear their clothes off as she kisses and toys with them in turn. There is no special sense of her magnetism or allure; she seems like a common flirt (to put it politely; my companion didn’t).This diminishes the impact of her meeting with Don José (Mr. Acosta), whom she seduces only after he is obliged to arrest her for attacking another girl with a knife, rather than — as happens with far more theatrical impact in the opera — capturing his unwilling attention beforehand. Their first pas de deux (set to an orchestration of the aria she sings to effect that seduction, “L’amour est un oiseau rebelle”) happens mostly within the bars of Carmen’s cell. Because it is hard to see what is going on, the dance loses its impact.Later, when Carmen and Escamillo (Federico Bonelli) dance together, the vocabulary of seduction and desire seem little different; Mr. Acosta establishes nothing individual about the relationships, and so character is never destiny; we never feel the driving force of fate at their backs, despite the embodiment of such a figure in the form of a man (Matthew Golding) with bull’s horns who occasionally appears with burdensome significance, usually lighted in glowing red in the center of the ring that dominates most of the backdrop.All dance well in Mr. Acosta’s mostly conventional blend of ballet with hints of other styles; the dancers can’t really be blamed for making little of their characters since they have so little to work with. The score, arranged and orchestrated by Martin Yates into an hourlong work, is serviceable and sometimes imaginative, incorporating non-Bizet percussive interludes and onstage musicians. But this is “Carmen” without the blazing fire of the title character, the darkness that pervades the original, or even any memorable dance. Mr. Acosta gives us no reason to care.Advertisement