AdvertisementSupported byAmerican Horror StoryBy E. A. HanksDetective and Dr. Lowe are not having a good time of it. John has gone back to the booze, thanks in part to Elizabeth Taylor, the bartender whose caftan wardrobe is surpassed in quality only by her taste in literature. (She’s moved on from “Ulysses” to “Das Kapital.”)Meanwhile, Alex, never without her camel beret, has gone to the dark side, begging the Countess to turn her into a vampire so she can be with her beloved son, Holden. The price for her new, eternal vitality is simple: “undying loyalty.” Whether her estranged husband will notice her new immortality, and her new employer, remains to be seen. He’s busy with dinner plans.Forget Halloween, this is Devil’s Night, when the real ghouls come out to play.I mean real — as in, nonfiction.Realness is a problem for the horror fan; viewers want to be scared, not actually horrified. We flirt with wanting to be disturbed, but would never want to actually be distressed. It can look real, but we don’t want it to be real. If it gets too close, the instinct is to call off the show, bring the house lights up, and remember: It’s just a story.Unless it isn’t.The bulk of this week’s episode, “Devil’s Night,” was spent at Mr. March’s dinner party for the crème de la crème of serial killers, “the Mount Rushmore of murder.” The invitees included a masked Zodiac (running late because he was “writing letters,”) John Wayne Gacy, Jeffrey Dahmer, Richard Ramirez (a.k.a. the Night Stalker) and the “American Horror Story”company player Lily Rabe as Aileen Wuornos. (Have a heart for any actress trying that role after Charlize Theron’s Academy Award-winning turn.)Viewers of previous seasons will recall that in the world of this show, the 24 hours of Halloween are the only time ghosts can leave the place where they died and walk among the living, or, in this case, dine among the also-dead.This who’s who of death dealers have all benefited from the tutelage of Mr. March, “the Master,” who met each of them in the Hotel Cortez at some point on their journey of horror and infamy. Call him the Tutor of Torture.This year Mr. March has invited John, our nominal protagonist, to join the festivities. John is supposedly trying to solve the Ten Commandments murders, but that plotline has been mostly relegated to one or two clunky lines of exposition. Instead, it seems that Mr. March has plans for the detective: “I thought he would appreciate this dark evil, given the line of work he’s in,” sighs Mr. March when his guest recoils at the evening’s festivities. “But John is clearly not yet our kind.”(With all of John’s blacking out and hallucinating, let us hope that his story line isn’t headed toward an end in which he finishes what one presumes is Mr. March’s work of the Ten Commandment killings — exactly like the ending of “Se7en,” one of the two David Fincher movies this season has visually referred to.)During what we are told (twice!) is the social event of the season, Mr. March tearfully praises his guests: “I look around and I see the definition of American success. They write books about you. They make movies of your lives … Years after your death, they continue to be enthralled. You made your mark in history. Like the “Iliad,” your stories live on forever.”A critique of American culture and the way we glorify, even fetishize serial killers, as if they were demented rock stars, would not be without merit. The dig on hipster celebrity endorsements when John Wayne Gacy giggled, “Johnny Depp loves my paintings!” was certainly on the nose. Viewers might also remember a snide joke in Season 3 about the New Orleans mansion of Delphine LaLaurie, a real woman who tortured and murdered slaves in the mid-1800s: “Wasn’t this house owned by the guy in ‘Face/Off’?”We are, it’s true, still enthralled; even as the episode aired, tweets pinged back and forth over who at Mr. March’s serial killer soirée was everyone’s “favorite.”Yet the hypocrisy of having such a dark condemnation of our unquenchable thirst for violence as entertainment come from “Hotel” was as hard to swallow as an amuse-bouche that’s still breathing.After all, this episode gave us the fake Jeffrey Dahmer drilling, and then injecting poison, into the brain of a young man, draped only in a towel, exactly as the real Jeffrey Dahmer did to one of his actual victims, a boy named Konerak Sinthasomphone.All the while, fake Aileen and fake Richard Ramirez danced woozily to the Cowboy Junkies’ “Sweet Jane.” Most disturbing of all, this re-creation was treated like one measly course in a tasting menu of depravity.“Hotel” can keep playing both sides of the moral argument over the glorification of twisted violence, but dialogue never sounds quite as good when it’s coming out both sides of the proverbial mouth.Advertisement