AdvertisementSupported byBy Alec M. Priester4:35 P.M. (Cinemax) HIGH FIDELITY (2000) John Cusack plays a Chicago record store owner who tries to make sense of his failing relationship with his girlfriend by going through his top five breakups. Adapted from a Nick Hornby novel, the movie is peppered with references to music and popular culture, and has a terrific performance by Jack Black. (Image: Mr. Cusack, left, and Todd Louiso)8 P.M. (BBCA) FROM DUSK TILL DAWN (1996) This movie, written by Quentin Tarantino and directed by Robert Rodriguez, stars George Clooney (in his “ER” days) and Mr. Tarantino as brothers who have gone on the lam after killing a sheriff during a liquor store robbery. They flee to Mexico, where they intend to cool their heels at a bar but are instead embroiled in a shootout in which the bouncer, bartenders and strippers are all killed. The dead soon reawaken as vampires, and the brothers must fight them off to survive until morning. “This is violent, profane filmmaking,” Janet Maslin wrote in The New York Times.8 P.M. (Fox) BONES Brennan and Booth are puzzled by a corpse from the 18th century. Enter Ichabod Crane and Abbie Mills from Fox’s “Sleepy Hollow,” who team up with Brennan and Booth in this crossover episode. At 9, on Sleepy Hollow, Brennan and Booth use modern forensics to help Crane and Mills.8:25 P.M. (CBS) N.F.L. FOOTBALL: MIAMI DOLPHINS AT NEW ENGLAND PATRIOTS 9 P.M. (FYI) MAN VS. CHILD: CHEF SHOWDOWN The professional chef Larry Monaco competes against children in a cooking contest.10 P.M. (Comedy Central) NATHAN FOR YOU Nathan Fielder’s unconventional business idea in this episode is to persuade people to work for a moving company without pay.11:03 P.M. (Animal Planet) MONSTERS INSIDE ME This medical program dramatizes a variety of parasitic infections. This episode is called “There’s Something Living in My Knee?!” In The Times, Mike Hale wrote, “There’s also science amid the pounding headaches and unrelenting diarrhea, and the stories really are frightening, even when the show reassures us that, for instance, finding the raccoon roundworm in humans is extremely rare.”11:30 P.M. (VH1) GOODFELLAS (1990) Growing up in East New York, Brooklyn, in the 1950s, Henry Hill (Ray Liotta) aspires to be a gangster. Later, his exploits and those of his friends become increasingly severe, their behavior more lurid and reckless. Martin Scorsese directed the film, which also stars Joe Pesci and Robert De Niro. “ ‘Goodfellas’ doesn’t end,” Vincent Canby wrote in The Times. “It crashes, with Henry, into the sobriety of the straight world. It disturbs, and even makes one think.” (Image: from left, Mr. Liotta, Mr. De Niro, Paul Sorvino and Mr. Pesci)WHAT’S STREAMING NOWABOUT A BOY (2002) Hugh Grant plays Will, a bachelor who has meaningless relationships while he lives off the royalties from his father’s hit Christmas tune. A strange 12-year-old boy (Nicholas Hoult) enters and upends his life. “You succumb to the movie’s warmth and bonhomie because the alternative is to remain in the isolating, self-protective cynicism from which Will has been lucky to escape,” A. O. Scott wrote in The Times. (iTunes) (Image: Mr. Grant and Mr. Hoult)Advertisement