By ZACHARY WOOLFEOCT. 28, 2015
In “Concerto Barocco,” set by Balanchine to Bach’s D minor Concerto for two violins, the steps are sometimes on the beat and sometimes not. The dancers are sometimes lifted through the air as the musical line soars, and sometimes as it doesn’t; what seems a duet in the score can become, fascinatingly, a trio or a quartet onstage.It is possible, in other words, when visualizing the abstraction that is Bach’s music, to respond to, to amplify and to challenge it. The artist David Michalek did none of those in “Bach Six Solos,” a numbing combination of his extreme-slow-motion films and Gil Shaham’s live performance of Bach’s complete works for solo violin, on Sunday evening at Zankel Hall.Taking as his starting point “basic themes of birth, death and rebirth,” as he writes in a program note, Mr. Michalek has created short pieces to accompany each of the movements of Bach’s three violin sonatas and three partitas. The performance (which, with two intermissions, stretches to three hours) starts sentimentally, with a close-up of a baby, the camera slowly panning up to a smiling mother and sibling. Other sections bring a still life of a vase of flowers; a woman kissing an old man in a hospital bed; an actress (Lili Taylor) soberly mulling a note she holds in her hand.This is the tepid stuff of advertisements for blood pressure medication, not a worthy partner for Bach. Mr. Shaham deserved better: He built in intensity through the long performance, his tempos brisk but never rushed. As he also proved recently at Carnegie Hall with the Philadelphia Orchestra and Bartok’s Violin Concerto No. 2, he is a genial and virtuosic — if sometimes slightly overmild — guide through musical gnarls, playing with thoughtful moderation.He delivered the seething, sprawling Chaconne from the D minor Partita with evocative changeability. But Mr. Michalek chose to complement the piece with footage of the Japanese dancer Sachiyo Ito, wearing a kimono and bearing fans — a wan gesture toward cross-cultural connection that, rather than feeling broad-minded, rendered Ms. Ito’s exquisite art merely decorative.Dancers absorbed Mr. Michalek most in this project, including a few prominent ones — like Bill T. Jones, Herman Cornejo and Janie Taylor — and some children. Mr. Michalek slowed their movements to an adoring, pristine sheen wholly, and uninterestingly, at odds with Bach’s endlessly shifting, searching music. The one moment the film element intrigued was when it seemed to malfunction, with the arms of the dancer accompanying a movement of the B minor Partita blurring and pixelating, on the verge of dissolution. Here, at least, was a vision of a body more complex than Mr. Michalek’s usual generic admiration and glacial swoops of gowns.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.