By CORINNA da FONSECA-WOLLHEIMOCT. 28, 2015
In the pantheon of composers who died under memorable circumstances, Albéric Magnard (1865-1914) occupies a special place. Next to the deaths of Lully, who contracted gangrene after stabbing his foot with his conducting staff, Chausson (bicycle crash) and Guillaume Lekeu (bad sorbet), Magnard’s stands out as enviably heroic. In the early days of World War I, he defended his country manor in the north of France against advancing enemy forces. After he shot a German soldier he was killed, and the house, containing many of his scores, was burned to the ground.The tension between his manner of death and the pro-German penchant suggested by his Wagnerian first name also runs through Magnard’s music. One of his surviving works is a quintet for flute, oboe, clarinet, bassoon and piano, which formed the centerpiece of Sunday afternoon’s concert by the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center at Alice Tully Hall. An ambitious, seething work with moments of vibrant sensuality as well as ponderous passages, the 35-minute Quintet represents a fascinating distillation of Wagner’s influence muddled with French tradition.The work received a burnished performance by the pianist Jean-Efflam Bavouzet, the flutist Tara Helen O’Connor, the oboist Stephen Taylor, the clarinetist Romie de Guise-Langlois, and the bassoonist Peter Kolkay that nevertheless could not paper over its weaknesses. But the musicians were attentive to the work’s frequent changes of stylistic terrain, which included a whiff of Celtic folk material in the second movement and, in the third, an alluring Moorish oboe solo accompanied by an irregular, gnomish piano riff.Sunday’s program of music for piano and winds also included Ligeti’s Six Bagatelles and works by Rimsky-Korsakov and Poulenc. It was an unusually adventurous lineup for the Chamber Music Society, which tends to sequester newish or offbeat music in a much smaller recital space, the Kaplan Penthouse. As it happens, the two 20th-century works on Sunday brilliantly outshone the others in wit, ingenuity and sophistication.Ligeti’s 1953 Bagatelles for flute, oboe, clarinet, bassoon and horn (Radovan Vlatkovic) are based on material originally written for piano alone. In the arrangement for winds, the music’s dance-hall energy dazzles, as in the opening Allegro, which the musicians played with rhythmic pep. The slow movements include Balkan folk material that is often shared across players, so that two instruments — the clarinet and bassoon, for instance — briefly morph into a new organism with a wider wingspan. In the Adagio, a movement dedicated to Bartok’s memory, quiet, floating dissonances sustained by the flute and clarinet created a subtle trembling effect that was unexpectedly poignant.Rimsky-Korsakov’s Quintet for flute, clarinet, bassoon, horn and piano offered only modest melodic charm and grating joviality. But Poulenc’s Sextet (1932-39) burst with jazzy confidence and angular, jaunty rhythms. Moments of lyricism were all the more captivating for being offered without sentimentality. Idiomatic wind solos highlighted the caramel tone of Mr. Vlatkovic’s horn, the plangent refinement of Mr. Kolkay’s bassoon and the pliant sweetness of Mr. Taylor’s oboe.A version of this review appears in print on October 29, 2015, on Page C6 of the New York edition with the headline: Interplay With Piano  and Winds.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.