AdvertisementSupported byBy Jon ParelesCar Seat Headrest“Teens of Style”(Matador)After releasing 11 albums on his own since 2010, Will Toledo — who records as Car Seat Headrest, mostly as a one-man studio band — has learned a lot about how songs are made. He’s a self-conscious, noisily introverted low-fi rocker who has clearly studied Beck, Weezer, Brian Wilson, Daniel Johnston and perhaps Guided by Voices. Like them, he confesses bleak thoughts in uplifting melodies. Brash guitars and celebratory, multilayered vocal harmonies fill choruses like the one in “Los Borrachos,” which meshes overlapping lyrics: “I miss you” and “I don’t have any hope left, but the weather is nice.”Car Seat Headrest’s first 11 albums were released on his Bandcamp page. Now signed to the indie-rock label Matador, Mr. Toledo has a plan. “Teens of Style” is filled with remakes of songs from his earlier recordings, mostly from “My Back Is Killing Me” (released in 2011) and “Monomania” (2012). (The one new song, “Bad Role Models, Old Idols Exhumed,” has social networking in mind: “I’m going to delete you,” Mr. Toledo sings.) An album of new material, “Teens of Denial,” is due next year. Perhaps Car Seat Headrest is acting out a lyric from “Maud Gone”: “Sweetheart please let me hold on/To these old songs I’ve loved too long.”The remakes suggest a modest technical upgrade, like a better vocal microphone and equipment that doesn’t overload as easily, so Car Seat Headrest can use distortion tactically, rather than merely tolerating it. Some arrangements have been recast for clarity, with keyboard replacing guitar and vocals pushed forward. And instead of recording as his own rhythm section, Mr. Toledo made the album with Andrew Katz on drums and Jacob Bloom on bass.But the music isn’t anywhere near pop-radio gloss. As Mr. Toledo sings about alienation, frustration, suicidal despair and, in “Times to Die,” about theological disputes and getting his demos heard, he’s still every bit the lone outsider. He’s lucky that he exorcises his troubles in the studio — or maybe we are.Advertisement