By DANIEL McDERMONOCT. 1, 2015
Looking for something to do this weekend?The Times’s culture team can help.We asked our colleagues: What one thing would they recommend?You could do some yoga this weekend, or you could sample a droll web series about yoga. It’s called “Om City,” it’s set in New York, and it’s full of knowing details that will amuse any current or former yoga practitioners, probably because Jessie Barr and Tom O’Brien, the husband-and-wife team who created it, both teach yoga. Ms. Barr plays Grace, a yoga teacher who wants to keep some spirituality in her lessons; Mr. O’Brien is Mitchell, who owns the studio where she works and wants her to knock it off with the “om.” Seven episodes are up.(Look within here.)As the singer Lana Del Rey has learned to fully inhabit her damp-cheeked, glassy-eyed persona on record — “What was once something of an elaborate performance has become merely a simple mode of being,” Jon Caramanica wrote of her new album, “Honeymoon” — she has also perfected the hyperstylized visual aesthetic that is so central to her project. Ms. Del Rey’s latest video, for “Music to Watch Boys To,” is a languid, long goodbye to summer, with our star lounging on patio furniture, adorned with flower-petal headphones and an umbrellaed drink. Her continued tweaks to a nostalgia-drenched formula invite a reverse-chronological tour of her music video collection — from “High by the Beach,” which somehow subtly features a rocket launcher, all the way back to the undeniable “Video Games,” from 2011 — to see just how idols are (self-)made in the YouTube age.(You can see and hear “Music to Watch Boys To”  here.)Back in the bosom of HBO (after a detour to Bravo and a 10-year hiatus), Matt Damon and Ben Affleck’s uncensored and compulsively watchable reality show “Project Greenlight” — which awards a newbie filmmaker the dubious prize of directing a feature in full view of a gloating television audience — is more contentious than ever. Talented and uncompromising in equal measure, this season’s winner is throwing elbows from the first episode, straining HBO’s checkbook and everyone’s patience. Add the Farrelly brothers as mentors and you have the perfect recipe for movie mayhem.(Make your pitch here.)On Monday, at the reliably radical Bluestockings bookstore in the Lower East Side, three authors will be chatting about how we’ll likely be personally affected by the Anthropocene, a term which describes the current era as one in which humans have irreparably changed the planet. Hurricane Joaquin might arrive that very day, making the timing particularly apt.(Declare which side you’re on here.)We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.