AdvertisementSupported byBy James PoniewozikIn the second season of “The Returned,” Camille (Yara Pilartz) has some bad news for two friends: They’re dead. So is she. Their school bus plunged off a cliff near their village in France. Four years later, they — and sundry other local deceased — have begun showing up again, healthy and with no memory of dying.But there’s an upside! “When you’re dead,” she tells her newly arrived friends, “you’re immortal. You can’t die again.” She holds a broken bottle to her throat to prove the point until a boy challenges her. “How do you know you’re immortal?” he asks. “You know the rules, do you?”That is one of the things that makes this transcendent horror series, which returns to SundanceTV on Saturday (Halloween), so transfixing and unsettling. We don’t know the rules, or even the game.“French zombie drama” has become the shorthand for “The Returned,” though if it were a straight-up zombie story, it would be bloodier and less scary. Those tales usually have clear parameters, borders between us and them. We know what the zombies look like (rotting, shambling), how they’re created (a virus, a bite), what they want (braaaains), what the stakes are (life and undeath).“The Returned” offers no such clarity. Even the French title — “Les Revenants” — is ambiguous; the English loanword, “revenant,” means “one that returns after death or a long absence.” (The series airs in French, with English subtitles.)Just so with these dead. In Season 1 (available via streaming, including on iTunes and Netflix), they simply tried to reassimilate into their old lives. They weren’t evil or dangerous — unless they had been in life. For their loved ones, a universal prayer came true: the resurrection of the dead and life (possibly) everlasting. But it felt like a curse.The story was less a creepshow and more a mourner’s unsettled dream. Families and lovers reunited uneasily. The living squabbled over whether to welcome or fear the returnees. Terror crept in around the edges, until, in the season finale, a horde of revenants emerged from the countryside to demand that the town’s risen join them.Season 2 picks up six months later. The village is largely abandoned, partly submerged by a flood that rose the night the horde arrived. Most of the deceased are encamped on the other side of the Styx-like waters, along with Camille’s still-living mother, Claire (Anne Consigny). Ms. Consigny and Ms. Pilartz are terrific, grounding a supernatural story in the febrile tension of a mother and a rebellious daughter. (Here, the new crowd Camille’s running around with just happens to be dead.)The few remaining villagers include Adèle (Clotilde Hesme) — pregnant, to her horror, with the baby of her undead boyfriend, Simon (Pierre Perrier) — and Jérôme (Frédéric Pierrot), Camille’s father, who still hopes his wife and daughter will return. The woods and waters, meanwhile, are disgorging more residents, from characters who died last season to victims of another disastrous flood 35 years ago.“The Returned” is mesmerizing television, with an ethereal electronic soundtrack by the Scottish band Mogwai, inky nighttime scenes like old masters paintings, and strikingly composed shots that contrast the mountain landscape with the fluorescent-lit village.The series makes great use of silence and shadows, knowing that it’s the thing that you don’t see that’s the most chilling. This is one case where French art-film aesthetics perfectly serve hair-raising entertainment. (An American remake on the A&E network this year failed. Like a fine Burgundy, this terror requires terroir.)The first three new episodes complicate the plot more than advance it. In addition to the multiplying dead, there’s Berg (Laurent Lucas), a visitor who’s investigating the flood — no one’s told the world about the revenants, and who would believe them? — but who seems to know more than he’s saying. It’s fair to ask whether “The Returned” can also play coy for much longer without giving us answers.But the questions are tantalizing. Like HBO’s “The Leftovers,” this is a gorgeous, full-hearted drama about grief, rich with metaphor. There’s something mythic about that floodwater, a symbol of death and rebirth that makes “The Returned” feel like an ancient fairy tale, where wilderness spirits grant wishes with a cruel twist.In a scene that manages to be both creepy and heartwarming, an undead mother reads her children one such story, “The Nixie in the Pond,” by the Brothers Grimm. In it, a water sprite offers a poor miller fantastic wealth, but tricks him into promising her his newborn son. “What good are happiness and riches to me,” the miller cries, “if I must lose my child?”The lost children — and many adults — are regained in “The Returned,” but at a cost. The moral of this story is yet unclear, except for the takeaway from many such parables: Be careful what you wish for.Advertisement