AdvertisementSupported byBy Siobhan BurkeAt first sight, Jon Kinzel’s “Cowhand Con Man” is a world of strange and incongruous materials. In a large studio at Gibney Dance: Agnes Varis Performing Arts Center, where the work had its premiere on Wednesday, a strand of fluorescent lights cuts across the floor. An expanse of ghostly cheesecloth, draped over scaffolding or something like it, looms along a mirrored wall. Across the room, there’s another scaffoldlike structure, sprouting what could be fungi — bulbous and flaking — alongside a fortress of lightweight foam, or is it heavy rock?Archaeology and moldy basements come to mind. It all suggests accumulation and erosion, processes of building up and wearing down, the way a body does over time.Five compelling dancers — Nico Brown, Simon Courchel, Omagbitse Omagbemi, EmmaGrace Skove-Epes and Mr. Kinzel, the oldest and huskiest — drift and dart and flock through that landscape over one trancelike hour. (Jarrod Beck created the sculptures, Nina Katan the whimsical, motley costumes.) The viewer’s attention might drift, too. “Cowhand” is not dull, but it does invite the mind to wander and come back, asking no more or less of us than to share the same time and space.Mr. Kinzel’s choreography, as textured as the visual design, is the result of nearly three decades of dancemaking and improvisation. His movement, like a material itself, can be frayed or smooth or barbed. In an opening duet, Mr. Brown perches on Mr. Courchel in poses as pristine and breakable as porcelain. Later, in a funnier moment, Mr. Courchel and Ms. Omagbemi explore ways of not crushing a person, stepping gingerly on and over Ms. Skove-Epes’s prone, unresisting body.The soundscape (attributed to sources including Mr. Kinzel, Jim Dawson and the Talking Heads), is also a cyclical collage, of muted conversations, street noise and a wafting, funky melody. There’s as much surprise as repetition. A makeshift campfire comes out at the end — fan, tinsel, floor lamp — replacing Nicholas Houfek’s cool lighting. Mr. Kinzel and Mr. Courchel (where have the others gone?) recline beside it.I found myself wanting to watch “Cowhand” again, even as it was still going, to get a better grasp on its slippery paradoxes: the puttering, tossed-off quality (Ms. Skove-Epes excels in that department) and the delicate sense of craft, the caring and not caring, always working in tandem. But there’s pleasure, too, in just having to let them go.“Cowhand Con Man” continues through Saturday at Gibney Dance: Agnes Varis Performing Arts Center, 280 Broadway, Manhattan; 646-837-6809, gibneydance­.org.Advertisement