
The Knick By                     
 MIKE HALE
 
OCT. 30, 2015
Ambition — the brawling energy of early-20th-century New York — is always a theme on “The Knick,” and it was prominent in Friday night’s episode. The show favors the bold. Bertie Chickering moved from the Knick to Mount Sinai and is chafing at his new hospital’s conservatism. (Fleeing the presence of his former mentor, John Thackery, he remains indelibly marked by Thackery’s teaching.) Algy Edwards is pushing for more exacting standards of surgery to the irritation of his rival, Everett Gallinger. Cornelia Showalter is pursuing the show’s new (and not yet very interesting) mystery plot at the expense of alone time with her pliant husband, Phillip. Genevieve Everidge (introduced this week and played by Arielle Goldman) is a crusading journalist who covers up her Jewishness to improve her chances.And then there was the boldest character of all, seen for the first time in a sharply funny closing scene. Edwards raced to the Robertsons’ house in response to a phone call, but it didn’t come from Cornelia, his secret lover. It came from his parents (the Robertsons’ domestics), and it summoned him to deal with the wife that they — and we — didn’t know he had. The imperious Opal Edwards had sailed from Europe to claim her husband (even though she didn’t know where he was — she docked in Boston first), and she was not going to be turned away. My favorite moment of the episode: when Edwards’s mother, bursting from the strain of being polite to Opal, took the first chance she got to slap her son in the face. (Opal is played by Zaraah Abrahams, a British actress who’s logged 180 episodes of the popular soap opera “Coronation Street.”)Running parallel to all that hubris was the theme of prejudice and xenophobia, which was ladled on fairly thickly, in ways that baldly echoed current debates over immigration. In a mild example, Everidge slyly baited Bertie over his assumption that she couldn’t be a surgeon. (Which she wasn’t, of course.) The racism that keeps Algy and Cornelia’s love under wraps found a particularly nasty expression in a discussion of the then trendy academic discipline of eugenics, with a laundry list of inferior groups clearly meant to foretell the coming victims of Hitler. Sister Harriet’s woes only intensified when she found herself in front of an anti-Catholic judge, and Phillip Showalter refused his wife’s request to finance the nun’s defense, saying he wouldn’t help a “child murderer.”While those were the noticeable themes, the excitement was elsewhere. The question, raised in a Knick board meeting last week, of how Thackery would conduct his research into addiction was answered just as we knew it would be — the episode began with him snorting a ball of cocaine and heroin the size of a peanut M&M. His current obsession also led him to bargain for the corpses of overdose victims, but then he was sidetracked by trying to find a syphilis cure for his former fiancée, Abigail. By the time the series is over, Thackery will presumably have cured all of the 20th century’s major afflictions.AdvertisementJust as Abigail’s nose couldn’t be fully restored, the false teeth of Gallinger’s wife, Eleanor, aren’t looking exactly like new. But there are bigger problems — word that she killed her own baby (because of postpartum depression) has leaked out, and now her sisters in Pennsylvania can’t find husbands.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.And then there was Lucy Elkins, who in her eternal naïveté stood up to testify at her father’s revival meeting. We’ve been waiting for the penny to drop on the seemingly saintly Reverend Elkins, and sure enough, he did not react well to his daughter’s public recitation of theft, drug use and fornication. Embarrassed and disgusted, he berated her, knocked her down and administered a spanking, which in its way was a relief, since Steven Soderbergh staged the scene in a way that suggested worse. (Stephen Spinella was suitably chilling as the father, though the whole scene felt a little predictable. Did the Southern evangelist have  to turn out to be a heartless charlatan?)The episode overall was not a Soderbergh showcase, though there were moments. Chickering took Everidge to Huber’s, a “dime museum” arcade featuring freak-show acts and other attractions, and the re-creation of it was great to look at. (The actual Huber’s was on East 14th Street near Union Square.) And the scene between Cornelia and Phillip, in their bedroom, was at first eccentrically shot from a ceiling vantage point, at a distance and in a wide frame that took in the whole room, emphasizing their physical and emotional isolation from each other. Then, after they had sex, the point of view suddenly shifted to a series of close-ups. Cornelia, who shortly before was passionately kissing Edwards, now smiled at her husband as she tried to persuade him to pay for Sister Harriet’s defense.AdvertisementLet us know what you thought of Sunday’s episode of “The Knick.” I hope everyone’s looking forward to seeing a lot more of Opal!We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »