AdvertisementSupported byBy Amy QinTOKYO — The video opens on a Japanese man in a World War II-era uniform, lying in the grass. Later he runs through a forest with a rifle strapped to his back, then crawls on his elbows among tall reeds, stalking an imaginary enemy. He sings love ballads at a karaoke bar and shows off his collection of military uniforms to no one in particular. Dressed as a bartender, he talks about Japan’s role in World War II, about the Vietnam War and his interest in battlefield re-enactments.“We Japanese lost the war,” he says to the camera. “That’s a simple fact. But why did we? Why did we start that war? No one has discussed this for 70 years. War is evil. That’s about it. But why?”The video, by the artist Dinh Q. Le, is titled “Everything Is a Re-Enactment.” Yet throughout its 26 minutes, a viewer is also questioning: Is this real or staged? Why is the man always alone?The uncertainty is intentional. The mutability of history, memory and human experience has been a recurring theme of Mr. Le’s work. The artist, 47, has often brought this preoccupation to explorations of the war in Vietnam, where he was born. “Everything Is a Re-Enactment,” one of two new works being presented in a solo exhibition, “Dinh Q. Le: Memory for Tomorrow,” at the Mori Art Museum in Tokyo, represents an expansion of his gaze to regions beyond Vietnam and the United States.The show, which runs through Oct. 12, is Mr. Le’s first large-scale exhibition in Asia. It is also the first time that the Mori, which focuses on midcareer Asian artists, has put the spotlight on a Southeast Asian artist, and is only its second major show since it reopened in April after extensive renovation.“Before this exhibition, I was kind of concerned that some people might be offended by this new piece,” said Natsumi Araki, a curator at the Mori who organized the exhibition, “because it looks a little right-wingish with its focus on this guy in a military uniform. But people have shown a lot of interest in the piece. It gives us a lot of clues in terms of discussing our past from different angles.”With its overall emphasis on wartime memory and reflection, the exhibition comes at a particularly apt time in Japan. For several months countries around the world have been marking the 70th anniversary of the end of World War II, sometimes, as in China and South Korea, criticizing Japan for what they see as the government’s refusal to fully come to terms with its history of aggression.While the Japanese government has expressed remorse for what Prime Minister Shinzo Abe called the “immeasurable damage and suffering” inflicted during the war, Mr. Abe has also appointed right-wing revisionists to some government posts and has paid visits to the controversial Yasukuni Shrine, where Class A war criminals are memorialized along with millions of other war dead.Mr. Le himself has visited the shrine, out of curiosity about the growing right-wing movement in Japan, since 2009, when he was doing a residency in Tokyo. It was during a visit last year that he came across a group of men dressed as World War II soldiers.His eye was drawn to one of the younger men, who seemed to be lagging behind the group. That is how he met the subject of his video, a 40-year-old bartender named Nakaura Yoichi.“Here is somebody who is very curious about Japan’s World War II history but has found it difficult to find places where people are willing to talk about it openly and in a balanced way,” Mr. Le said in an interview. “The shrine is one of the only communities where he can have this conversation. Unfortunately, it’s all from a very problematic perspective.”Problematic perspectives abound in the show. The opening piece, “The Farmers and the Helicopters,” is perhaps the most notable of the 25 works presented here. In this three-channel video from 2006, the image of the helicopter as a symbol of military strength is undercut as Mr. Le juxtaposes parts of Hollywood movies, news footage and interviews with Vietnamese who, understandably, have different views of an aircraft that often terrorized them from above. Installed alongside the projection is a helicopter built from scratch by a young Vietnamese mechanic, who is interviewed in the video, and a friend.Reviewing a show by Mr. Le at the Museum of Modern Art in 2010, Holland Cotter of The New York Times called the video “remarkable” for “its visually tight and ideologically porous weave of fact and fiction, memory and illusion, with the elements of each pair in constant, volatile interchange.”Elsewhere at the Mori, the artist uses editing to challenge other war-related stereotypes. In “From Father to Son: A Rite of Passage” (2007), he splices together scenes from the 1979 film “Apocalypse Now,” starring Martin Sheen, and the 1986 film “Platoon,” starring Charlie Sheen, so that father and son, both of whom play American soldiers in Vietnam, appear to be speaking to each other.Mr. Le said he first envisioned a piece about the relationship of fathers, sons and war in the late 1980s, during a course he took about the Vietnam War while studying for his undergraduate degree at the University of California, Santa Barbara. His family had fled to Southern California from war-torn Vietnam in the 1970s, and he was troubled by what he saw as the one-sided, America-centric history of the conflict that was being taught.“Many of my classmates had fathers or relatives who participated in the Vietnam War, so the class was extremely emotional,” he said. And while not hearing any Vietnamese views presented disturbed him, he said he “came to understand that this was the generation that was trying to understand and be closer to their fathers.”These days, having spent so much of his life trying to understand the past, Mr. Le is preparing to set aside the subject of war to address another matter of conflict: the scramble for natural resources and island territories. Inspired by what he called a “drama of absurdity, greed and human suffering” in the mid-19th century, he is planning a video installation dealing with what happened when a global craze for guano, a natural fertilizer made from bird droppings, led the United States to take possession of a cluster of islands off the coast of Peru. (The three-part installation is to be presented for the first time in January at the Ikon Gallery in Birmingham, England.)Yet even with this new subject, he has discovered how the past reverberates in the present.“It’s kind of similar to what China is doing in the South China Sea,” said the artist, who spent several weeks in Peru in August. “The U.S. wanted guano, and the Chinese want control of the energy resources and waterways. It’s just history repeating itself.”Advertisement