Some explicit paparazzi photos aside, it’s been all tabloid-proof wins recently for Justin Bieber: an apology-tour charm offensive fortified by three successful singles, including “What Do You Mean?”, his first-ever No. 1. The well-charted comeback will culminate Nov. 13, with the release of “Purpose,” his third official album and the first with adult audiences in mind.But on Thursday in Oslo some cracks started to show in the matured veneer. Mr. Bieber, 21, stormed off stage at a television taping for a Norwegian talk show after losing his patience with overeager fans in the front row. “What are you doing?” the singer told the grabby front row as he tried to wipe the wet stage floor. “Stop it! Come on, I said stop it!” “Never mind, I’m done – I’m not doing the show,” he said, removing his jacket and heading backstage.Video of the walkout spread instantly on social media, alongside cries of confusion from the Beliebers in the crowd.WHAT IS HAPPENING OMG pic.twitter.com/WHueWMJ3Id— PURPOSE (@JBEmpire) October 29, 2015;“Sadly it’s been a rough week for me, long days no sleep, while having to be ‘on’ as they would say for cameras fans etc,” Mr. Bieber wrote soon after the incident in a raw Instagram caption, matching the tone of his latest single, “Sorry.”He continued: “In no way did I mean to come across mean, but chose to end the show as the people in the front row would not listen. Hopefully people will understand where I am coming from. I don’t always handle things the right way but I’m human and I’m working on getting better at responding not reacting.” (In a happier moment this week, Mr. Bieber used Instagram to announce the track list for “Purpose,” with each song title revealed via a graffiti mural in some international locale.)“For anyone I may have disappointed I’m sorry,” he concluded on Thursday. “Sorry for wasting the TV people’s time I’ll be sure to make it up to you next time on tour.”While largely succeeding in avoiding off-script moments this year, Mr. Bieber reportedly walked out of a radio interview in Spain on Wednesday. But Europe was not a total bust for him: On Sunday he performed without a hitch at the MTV Europe Music Awards in Milan, where he took home five awards.Mr. Bieber’s exhausting schedule will not relent any time soon. With “Purpose” due out in two weeks, the promotional blitz is only beginning.