By JEREMY EGNEROCT. 30, 2015
Here’s a fun Halloween trick: Mention the Peacock family to an unsuspecting “X-Files” fan and enjoy the reaction.It’s likely to be some combination of a shudder, a squeal and a groan, a mix of delight and revulsion. (A reporter’s wife: “Please, God, not at the dinner table.”) The Peacocks are at the center of “Home,” an “X-Files” episode that originally aired in October 1996. Viewers complained that the tale about the murderous inbred clan was too disturbing and network executives apparently agreed. While “Home” appeared later on the cable channel FX, it was never again broadcast on Fox, save for a special Halloween airing in 1999; network ads at the time billed it as “an episode so controversial, it’s been banned from television for three years.”The episode has since become a fixture on various “scariest shows ever” lists and endures as one of the most beloved in the series’s history. It’s available on Netflix and Hulu, and if you haven’t seen it, be warned that spoilers start now.Netflix describes “Home” as “the agents encounter a family of inbred animal-like brothers living on a farm,” which is accurate but also leaves out plenty. The episode begins, fittingly, on a dark and stormy night, as the hideously disfigured Peacock brothers bury a deformed baby in a field. After a group of children discover the tiny corpse, Mulder and Scully arrive to investigate, and the brothers kill multiple townspeople in an attempt to preserve their way of life. Eventually the agents discover Ma Peacock, a ghastly, limbless torso, played by Karin Konoval, who lives on a rolling cart under a bed in the family home. She is the mother, lover and puppet master of the brothers (one of whom is also the father of the other two). “A boy will do anything for his mother,” she growls to Scully, not long before she and one surviving son escape with plans to start a new family.AdvertisementAside from the scares, “Home” functions as a sort of dark mirror onto vintage Americana, imagining a sinister underbelly to insular small towns, motherhood and family, classic Cadillacs and even Johnny Mathis. (The brothers brutally club the sheriff and his wife to death to “Wonderful, Wonderful.”)AdvertisementGlen Morgan and James Wong, who wrote “Home,” among many other memorable “X-Files” installments, weren’t trying to be provocative, they said recently. They were aiming only to make a straightforward “Monster of the Week” episode, one that also explored fears about change and nodded at the fact that the writers were returning to the series after working on a different show the previous season.“The episode was called ‘Home’ because Jim and I were returning ‘home’ to ‘The X-Files’ to do some more episodes, and that caused us to think about the notion of ‘Home,’ ” Mr. Morgan said. “One person’s safety and comfort is another’s nightmare.”“We were trying to make a terrifying show,” Mr. Wong added. “We didn’t think we were pushing the envelope of taste in the way people seem to ascribe to us — ‘Oh, there’s incest, there’s killing a baby.’ ”That said, the writers have come to enjoy the notoriety that came from the episode. Each wrote and directed a new “X-Files” installment as part of the show’s new six-episode run, which begins on Jan. 24 on Fox. Mr. Morgan titled his “Home Again,” he said, “knowing that suckers out there would think it was a sequel to ‘Home.’ ”He added, “Some places bought it.” (For the record, it’s not.)Mr. Morgan and Mr. Wong recently looked back on “Home” in a joint phone call. These are edited excerpts from that conversation.Q. Where did the story come from?A. Morgan: My wife, Kristen, had shown me “Brother’s Keeper” [a 1992 documentary about an illiterate rural man’s suspected murder of his brother], which was about this family close to where my brother and I grew up. The other major thing was, in college I had read Charlie Chaplin’s biography. Before he was famous he was traveling in musical theater, and he rented a room in a tenement with a family that took a liking to him. They said, “Hey, we got something to show you.” And they take him up to a room with a cot, and under the cot was a man on a platform, and he was wheeled out and they stood him up and they clapped and danced and the guy did tricks. It just seemed like such a horrifying situation, and I’d been trying to use it. So we had been working out the story where there was another brother under the bed, and Jim Wong one day goes: “It’s the mother! The mother’s under the bed!” And I felt Freud and Joseph Campbell do back flips, and that was that.Q. Did you have any sense that what you were doing might be controversial?A. Wong: We were obligated to do four episodes that season, and we thought this was the most down-the-middle, straightforward “X-Files” of all of them. As it turns out it, it was one they never repeated until several years later.AdvertisementQ. What was the rationale?A. Wong: I think it had to do with the incest.Q. There was also the buried baby in the opening scene.A. Wong: Originally it was obviously alive when they buried it, but we changed it a little bit because it was too harsh. It was inspired by this book called “Dark Nature.”Morgan: It was about, is nature moral?Wong: Nature is pretty heartless.Morgan: So we had this family of human beings act as nature does. When the bird is sick, the mother kicks it out of the nest. Everybody seems to think that’s fine and they love birds. But if a human does it, you get banned from TV.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Q. What can you tell me about the Johnny Mathis song “Wonderful Wonderful”? Why was it such a key element in the episode?A. Morgan: I personally find sweet melodic pop songs creepy. My mom had been a big Johnny Mathis fan and I always found the tone of “Wonderful, Wonderful” creepy and unsettling and had been looking for a situation to use it in a show. It has nothing to do with the words. It is the orchestration and that odd lonely whistle that disturbs me. I don’t know why. When I write horror, I listen to the Rhino CD box set “Have a Nice Day: Super Hits of the ’70s.” I just find it all disturbing. Maybe as that is the music from my teenage years and that is the most horrifying stage of anyone’s life.Q. Is it true Mathis refused to allow his version of the song to be used after he read the script?A. Morgan: That is what we were told. The associate producer, Paul Rabwin, handled this and reported Mathis would not let us use his recording. However, Paul had found an outstanding “sound-a-like” recording by a singer named Kenny James. Many people believe it  is Mathis. Since Mathis did not compose the song, he could not prevent us from using it. My mom was annoyed with us.Q. What other details come to mind?A. Morgan: The Peacocks were an actual messy family that lived next to my fastidious grandmother in Rochester, N.Y. “The Peacocks” had been a running joke in my family for decades. A joke more about my grandmother than her neighbors.The Peacocks were actually lovely people. Just slobs. My grandmother, who had moved from Rochester 20 years earlier, was anxious when the episode aired that her old neighbors, the Peacocks, would find out.The pig head at the base of the Peacock stairs is a sight my father witnessed with horror while visiting another member of our family’s ranch. So, “write what you know!” and unsettling families are right up my alley.Q. When did you realize people were reacting strongly to the episode?A. Wong: The people who responded first were the executives. I remember getting a call from a producer. He goes, “You guys are sick!” I thought, ‘What is he talking about?’ I thought we had done more extreme stuff.AdvertisementMorgan: We were starting to get a little concerned, so I brought in our broadcast standards and practices executive when we edited the scene when the three brothers were murdering the sheriff. They killed him with clubs. We had a rule — in baseball, if you “break” your wrists, it’s a strike. So we never let the characters break their wrists when they were swinging down to hit the sheriff.Q. I guess that didn’t help.A. Morgan: No. The next thing you know, they weren’t going to rerun it. They didn’t want the grief. In fact, the next year Jim and I ran the show “Millennium,” which Chris Carter also created, and the ratings were low on that show and we thought, ‘Hey, what if Lance Henriksen finds the surviving members of the Peacock family?’ Everybody thought that was a great idea. And we were all set to do a sequel to “Home” and then we got a call from Fox that was: “Those characters never appear on television again.” So we dumped it.Q. Of course they did appear again on FX and later on Fox, and now “Home” routinely tops lists of the scariest episodes on television.A. Morgan: Jim and I are both surprised at the reaction. I don’t know if anyone would remember it if it wasn’t kind of banned.Wong: It took on this kind of legend. But I’m happy about it, and I’m proud of it. We thought it was going to be terrifying, but we didn’t know it was going to get the outraged response that it got.Q. Any other theories about why it’s resonated over the years?A. Morgan: I think it’s the mother under the bed. Jim and I are both fortunate because though both our moms are gone now, they’re like heroes to us. But I’ve seen a lot of people have problems with their mothers. And the fact that the mother is the monster under the bed, is mangled and has no arms and yet these boys have to feed her, profess their love to her. And that she loves them. That stuff just goes to your lizard brain.Wong: Even in her torso state, she still kind of controls them. I think there’s a Freudian psychology at work. Our moms still run us, no matter how disabled or how far away they are.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.