Sculpture by the Sea
Bondi Bay.
Through Nov. 8.Sculptors from Japan, Canada, the United States and Slovakia are on view in this show of large-scale works set in seaside venues around the city. Among them are “Intervention,” a large, metallic mesh sculpture by Mike Van Dam that shows a hand holding a whale and is dedicated to humpbacks; and “Harbour,” an eerily grinning, reclining giant by Chen Wenling. Annette Thas is showing a sculpture that looks from afar like a sand-colored tidal wave; up close, it is revealed as hundreds of carefully perched Barbie dolls.Taipei Golden Horse Film Festival
Various venues.
Nov. 5-26.This festival’s top prize is regarded as the most prestigious in Chinese-language cinema. Opening the festivities is “Distance,” which is made up of three stories, each starring Chen Bolin, directed by Xin Yukun, Tan Shijie and Sivaroj Kongsakul. The movie was produced by Anthony Chen, whose “Ilo Ilo” won the Caméra d’Or award at the Cannes International Film Festival in 2013. The show closes with “The Tag-Along,” a mystery directed by Wei-Hao Cheng that is based on an urban legend about a mysterious child connected with disappearances. The award ceremonies take place on Nov. 21.Iceland Airwaves
Various venues.
Nov. 4-8.A number of Icelandic artists will perform alongside some rising indie names at this festival, which has a dance and electronica bent (Björk was to have been there, but she has canceled several autumn appearances, citing emotional exhaustion related to her recent album “Vulnicura,” which is about a breakup). Scheduled to appear are QT, a singer whose act centers on a spoof energy beverage, DrinkQT; the Baltimore band Beach House, whose “Depression Cherry” was released in the summer; and the British group Hot Chip, who will play the festival’s closing concert.A selection of arts events taking place across the world in the coming week.Palais de Tokyo
Various shows.
Through Jan. 10.New exhibitions are underway at this contemporary art space in the city’s 16th Arrondissement. The Icelandic artist Ragnar Kjartansson — who toys with the boundaries between visual art and performance — is showing “Only the one who knows desire,” which includes appearances by actors, a film and an installation that evokes stage sets from the 1950s. The Swiss artist Ugo Rondinone created the exhibition “Ugo Rondinone : I (heart) John Giorno,” dedicated to the American poet John Giorno. The exhibition includes work by around 15 artists, including Pierre Huyghe and Andy Warhol.Il Rigore e la Grazia
Palazzo Pitti.
Through May 17.The Confraternity of St. Benedict the White was founded in 1357. Over the course of several centuries, the lay order of devout Florentines amassed a trove of religious art, much of which was placed in storage during World War II. A broad selection of newly restored artworks collected by the group is on view in this exhibition, which focuses on the 17th century and includes pieces by artists of renown like Carlo Dolci. Admission to the show offers visitors the chance to see the rooms surrounding Palatine Chapel at the Palazzo, which have been transformed into exhibition space.From Ukiyo-e to Photography: Cultural Awakening in Japan’s Visual Field
Edo-Tokyo Museum.
Through Dec. 6.“Ukiyo-e” is the name generally given to a style of print-making and painting that prevailed in Japan from the 17th century through the 19th. The country’s most renowned artists, like Hokusai, were masters of the form. This exhibition examines the late years of the Ukiyo-e era. It focuses in particular on how the emerging medium of photography influenced painting and printing and how Ukiyo-e’s influence can be seen in the composition of early photographs.A Rush of Color: Masterpieces of German Expressionism
Leopold Museum.
Through Jan. 11.The heavy hitters of Germany’s Expressionist movement are in this show, a survey of early modernism that focuses on two leading prewar schools of painters: “Die Brücke” — which originated in Dresden and whose most famous members include Ernst Ludwig Kirchner and Otto Mueller, both on view here) — and “Der Blaue Reiter,” which got its start in Munich and included Franz Marc and August Macke, whose works were more abstract. Some lesser-known artists from the era are also on display. The museum is also showing “Sengl Paints,” a retrospective dedicated to the Austrian artist Peter Sengl. Mr. Sengl’s eerie works often include elements of the surreal. “The Two Fridas, Puppetholding,” his 1994 reworking of the artist Frida Kahlo’s iconic self-portrait “Two Fridas,” for example, shows its subjects hooked into a blood-filled IV.Unpacking the Studio: Celebrating the Jehangir Sabavala Bequest
Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj Vastu Sangrahalaya.
Through Dec. 31.The painter Jehangir Sabavala (1922-2011) was born in India, and studied in the subcontinent and across Europe. His wide-ranging work includes traditional oils that hark back to the 19th century, and edgy landscapes that evoke European Modernism but train their eye on the drama of the Indian landscape. The exhibition includes work from throughout the artist’s career, including late paintings and early diaries and sketchbooks. The works were given to the museum by Sabavala’s wife, Shirin.