Ringo Starr had no idea that his concert tomorrow night at Kings Theater would mark his first  appearance in Brooklyn. Still, he claimed that he’s happy for any excuse to come to New York, ever since the Beatles first arrived here in unforgettable fashion in 1964.“New Yorkers to this day feel we belong here,” he said in a conversation this week in the lounge of his Midtown hotel. “Because we landed here and became part of the magic of New York.”Saturday’s show is the final stop — “It’s Halloween, and that’s our last night, can you dig it?” — of a tour with his All-Starr Band that is taking them to 20 cities this month. Though it’s been one of his most rigorous outings in decades, Mr. Starr, who turned 75 in July, has no thoughts of hanging up his drumsticks.“I need to keep doing it,” he said. “It’s what I do. I’m doing more gigs now than I ever did — building up, not building down. Every tour I say, ‘That’s it,’ but there’s already talk about Europe next summer.”Mr. Starr was in town to promote his book “Photograph,” a collection of pictures of his life, including many never-been-seen images of the Beatles that he shot. “Just a gang of lads in the room, hanging out,” he said. (The book was initially released in a limited edition by Genesis Publications in 2013, but is now being made widely available.) He appeared at the Strand Bookstore on Monday afternoon, where the E Street Band guitarist and radio host Steven Van Zandt quizzed him about the backstories for some of the photos. Mr. Starr revealed, among other things, that he and John Lennon once nearly blew their fingers off with firecrackers while entertaining their sons.“The photos are great because they jog your mind,” he said. “I remember being on the train from New York to Boston and it was like, ‘What else are we gonna do on the train?’ So a lot of it was just something to do — it wasn’t like, ‘This’ll make a book.’ I never had that thought once. It was just stuff I did.”“Photograph” seems to have given Mr. Starr a new chance to reflect on his relationships with the other Beatles. “I loved each one of them,” he said. “I felt, I’m an only child and now I’ve got three brothers. Everyone looked out for each other.“I miss the two that aren’t here,” he continued, looking out the window at Central Park. “I’m in New York and of course John comes to mind, a beautiful human being. So there’s a lot of love in these photos.”A version of this article appears in print on 10/31/2015, on page C3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Brooklyn Really Is Cool: Ringo Is Showing Up.