
Friday File By                     
 MARY JO MURPHY
 
OCT. 30, 2015
There are a million stories you could write when your perpetually basement-dwelling ball club makes it to the World Series. But some of those stories are of a certain type that could only have been about the ’69 Mets — the original Amazin’s, the Miracle Mets.Take this one, for example, which was published in The Times under the headline “World Series Jitters? It’s the Mets’ Wives Who Are Suffering.”The article began:“Some of the happiest women in town filed into a tiny brick house in Flushing yesterday, each one prettier than the other, and all but one as slender as a Ford model.”The exception, according to the article, was an eight-months-pregnant Lyn McAndrew, wife of the pitcher Jim McAndrew.“ ‘Times sure have changed,’ said Mrs. McAndrew, a pale, blue-eyed blonde from Iowa who looks like one of those models you always see in Scandinavian travel posters. ‘When I used to tell someone what my husband did, they’d say, “The Mets? Your husband plays for the Mets?,” and then they’d turn their heads and laugh.’ ”AdvertisementTimes have indeed changed, and The Times with them. But this was 1969, and even though the women’s rights movement was in full flower, stories like this, especially about women connected to the sports world, were not exactly unheard of. This article about the gathering of Met wives went on:“The talk was about baseball, of course, and the trip to Baltimore (the wives leave by bus at 1 P.M. today from Shea Stadium), and about high-strung husbands, and clothes and children — and what they plan to do with the $15,000 each of their husbands will get if the Mets beat the Orioles in the World Series. (They’ll have to settle for $10,000 if the Orioles are victorious.)Advertisement‘We’d really like to buy a duplex,’ said Mrs. Jack DiLauro, 26-year-old wife of the relief pitche r, whom she has known since high school days in Akron, Ohio, when they were voted ‘the cutest couple in the graduating class.’ ”The wives agreed “that the current crop of Mets’ wives are the prettiest, best-dressed group of women in the team’s eight-year history,” the article said.They also agreed “that a Met wife can’t do certain things that other women do, such as adopt a no-bra look. (‘We’ve got to consider what the fans would think,’ Mrs. McAndrew said. ‘And besides, I don’t think our husbands would like it.’)”For the record, Judy Klemesrud, the Times reporter who wrote the article, was a supporter of “women’s lib” and also wrote articles on the movement’s development.One of the more unusual articles written about the ’69 Mets was an unsigned editorial that imagined a Mets fan getting his hands on Mao’s “Little Red Book” and providing a Mets-centric translation. Like the story about the wives, this one could be described as having an expiration date, but the book had just been published in 1964, and by 1969 it was in enormous circulation around the world. Here’s an excerpt from the editorial:“Mao: Political power grows out of the barrel of a gun.Mets: A hit in time saves the nine.”And another:“Mao: The atom bomb is a paper tiger.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mets: Don’t swing for the fences when a double will bring in the run.”And this:“Mao: You young people, full of vigor and vitality, are in the bloom of life.Mets: Let’s go, Mets!”A version of this article appears in print on October 30, 2015, on Page C34 of the New York edition.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »