
Weekend Miser By                     
NICOLE HERRINGTON

OCT. 30, 2015
When it comes to Halloween, kids have it easy. They get to dress up as their favorite characters and go door to door for free candy. Not so adults, who may still feel pressure to go out or even don a costume.While you’re on your own on the costume front, the Miser has some suggestions for you brave souls considering whether to venture out:‘The Unknown’ BAMcinématek presents Tod Browning’s 1927 silent film in which Lon Chaney is an armless — or is he? — circus sideshow knife-thrower pining for his partner, a young Joan Crawford, who’s afraid of being pawed by men. It would seem a perfect match, but the macabre — not romance — is the name of the game here, as it is for Browning’s later classic “Freaks,” which further mined the lives of carnival performers with deformities. Setting the eerie mood on Saturday will be Steve Sterner, on piano. (Saturday at 7 p.m., BAM Rose Cinemas, Peter Jay Sharp Building, 30 Lafayette Avenue, Brooklyn, 718-636-4100, bam.org; $14.)It Came From Within: A David Cronenberg Horror WeekendA highlight of the Museum of the Moving Image’s programming this week is its tribute to another filmmaking pioneer: Mr. Cronenberg, the Canadian director. His films, while often cerebral, are not for the squeamish, and the museum wastes no time getting down to business on Friday at 7 p.m. with the gory “Scanners” (that poor head). His explorations of technology (“Videodrome,” in new 35-millimeter prints and digital restorations), technology versus nature (“The Fly”) and duality (“Dead Ringers”) can also be seen during screenings throughout the weekend. (Friday through Sunday at various times, 36-01 35th Avenue, Queens, 718-777-6888, movingimage.us; $12 per screening.)K2 Friday NightsYou won’t be able to wear any of the masks in the exhibition “Becoming Another: The Power of Masks,” but you just may be inspired by them. They can be viewed during this weekly series at the Rubin Museum of Art. In addition to the exhibitions, visitors can let loose to the music of the D.J. and producer Don Cerati and find out what goes into a Wrathful Deity or a Thirsty Ghost, some of the evening’s themed cocktails. At 9:30 p.m., the museum will screen “Night of the Living Dead,” George Romero’s horror classic with a social message that’s still relevant. (Friday from 6 to 10 p.m., 150 West 17th Street, Manhattan, 212-620-5000, rubinmuseum.org; free admission, but you’ll have to pay for food and drinks. The movie is $10.)Advertisement‘Empanada Loca’ This solo thriller — inspired by “Sweeney Todd” and real events — is an “exuberantly macabre solo show,” Charles Isherwood wrote in his review for The New York Times. It stars Daphne Rubin-Vega, who, he wrote, “seems to take on a furtive, almost feral quality that had me shivering all the way home.” This Labyrinth Theater Company production wouldn’t normally make the Miser’s list, but it’s here because of the free Halloween performance, at 10 p.m. on Saturday. All tickets will be distributed via an online lottery, which can be entered until noon on Friday. (Bank Street Theater, 155 Bank Street, Manhattan, 212-513-1080, labtheater.org.)Theater for the New City’s Village Halloween Costume Ball While the ball is the main event, the free outdoor activities leading up to it are just as festive: R&B and Dixieland bands, fire eaters, jugglers, story weavers and stilt dancers will be on hand. Still, at $20, the ball is just within the Miser’s reach, and not a bad deal, considering the assortment of entertainment: ballroom dancing, a costume contest and cabaret and theater performances in all four theaters and public spaces. Food and drinks can be bought separately. (Outdoor festivities: Saturday from 3:30 to 7 p.m., East 10th Street, between First and Second Avenues, Manhattan; doors open for the ball at 7:30 p.m., at 155 First Avenue; costume or formal wear required; 212-254-1109, theaterforthenewcity.net.)AdvertisementVillage Halloween Parade Across town, in Greenwich Village, this free annual affair will give you plenty to gawk, er, look at. So, you’ll want to get there early for a good spot along the route. Billed as the nation’s largest public Halloween celebration, the parade can also be viewed on TV on NY1. (Saturday at 7 p.m., on Avenue of the Americas, from Spring Street to 16th Street, halloween-nyc.com.)Macabre Greenwich Village What would Halloween be without a good old scary ghost story or two? Joyce Gold, a history professor at New York University, has a bounty of tales that she’ll share during this tour — including that of the haunting artist; Edgar Allan Poe’s home and his inspiration for “The Raven”; and information about famous missing persons, specters, hauntings and ghosts. (Saturday from 1 to 3 p.m., meeting at the Washington Arch, at Fifth Avenue near Eighth Street, Manhattan, joycegoldhistorytours.com; $20.)‘Nosferatu’ and Procession of the Ghouls The Cathedral Church of St. John the Divine hosts its annual Halloween extravaganza, which this year includes a screening of F. W. Murneau’s 1922 horror classic, “Nosferatu,” with Max Schreck as the nightmare-inducing vampire Count Orlok. Timothy Brumfield will provide the soundtrack on the Great Organ. A procession featuring Ralph Lee and the Mettawee River Theater Company’s ghosts and ghouls will follow the screening. (Friday at 7 and 10 p.m., 1047 Amsterdam Avenue, Manhattan, 212-316-7540, stjohndivine.org/visit/calendar; $20.)Halloween Party Brookfield Place Winter Garden has plenty of shops, but the main attraction there on Saturday will be this Halloween event for families, which culminates with a costume parade. In addition to trick-or-treating at participating shops, children can take part in pumpkin-carving demonstrations; a spooky science lab, with Halloween-themed experiments; and a costume catwalk. The afternoon will also include puppetry, storytelling and live music. (Noon to 3 p.m., 200 Vesey Street, Manhattan, artsbrookfield.com/event/halloween; free.)A version of this article appears in print on October 30, 2015, on Page C35 of the New York edition.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »