By JOE COSCARELLIOCT. 29, 2015
Just a few months after what was billed as the Grateful Dead’s last stand — five sold-out stadium shows for some 212,000 fans that grossed more than $60 million in ticket and pay-per-view sales — the band is rising once again, albeit in a slightly fractured arrangement.This weekend, insatiable Deadheads can see all of the group’s so-called core four living members in just two stops: Madison Square Garden, which will host Dead & Company — featuring Bob Weir, Mickey Hart and Bill Kreutzmann, joined by the pop singer and guitarist John Mayer, the bassist Oteil Burbridge and the keyboardist Jeff Chimenti — for two sold-out shows on Saturday and Sunday; and at the Capitol Theater, about 30 miles north in Port Chester, N.Y., where the Dead bassist Phil Lesh will play three consecutive nights starting Friday (with another run Nov. 5 to 7).“Only in the world of the Grateful Dead could that happen on Halloween,” said Peter Shapiro, the concert promoter who owns the Capitol and organized this summer’s “Fare Thee Well: Celebrating 50 Years of Grateful Dead” shows in Chicago and Santa Clara, Calif. The Dead had a penchant for blown-out holiday concerts, he noted, and both locales are “institutional venues” where the full band played dozens of times.“Dead 50 wasn’t the end — it was the end of them as a unit, you won’t see that again — but the music goes on,” Mr. Shapiro said, adding that the farewell concerts “re-lit a flame under the whole tribe.”AdvertisementWhile Mr. Shapiro, a renowned Deadhead himself, is unaffiliated with Dead & Company, which will tour the United States through the end of the year, he had booked the shows at the Capitol before “Fare Thee Well” as part of his partnership with Mr. Lesh. AdvertisementMr. Lesh, who is 75 and recently announced that he has bladder cancer, said that he preferred to pick his spots instead of hitting the road hard after the summer anniversary shows. This month, he began cancer treatments, canceling only a few gigs. “It’s under control,” he said, and his doctors “are very confident that it’s not going to be an issue going forward.”In addition to his health, Mr. Lesh said he planned to focus most of his energy post-Dead on Terrapin Crossroads, the music hall and restaurant he owns with his wife in Marin County in California.“When I agreed to do Dead 50, my stipulation was, ‘That’s it,’ ” he said this week by phone from his home in Marin. Touring with the rest of the group “was a nonstarter from the beginning,” he added. “It was just understood. They were all ready before we even started rehearsals, talking about going out themselves. I’m just not into touring, and those guys are.” (Citing rehearsal obligations, the members of Dead & Company declined to comment.)Still, the anniversary shows demonstrated that the Dead’s music was still vibrant — and could find a seemingly endless audience, despite the protestations of some hard-line fans who believe the group died with its de facto frontman, Jerry Garcia.“I don’t think there’s any band in history that could’ve pulled that off like that — 20 years after their main guy died,” Mr. Lesh said. “It wasn’t really so much about the band and the music as it was about the Deadheads coming together again. It almost didn’t matter how well we played. It was about them.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He compared the shows to “a big family reunion, and we were the house band” — although the familial vibes did not necessarily translate to the musicians. “It was all pretty professional,” Mr. Lesh said.The giant crowds also left Mr. Lesh with mixed feelings. “It’s a thrill to play to that many people,” he said. “That said, it’s not something I want to do very much. It definitely has its limitations artistically, because of the disconnect between the stage and all of those people.”While his old band mates play the Garden, Mr. Lesh will use the more intimate Capitol Theater on Sunday to recreate a Grateful Dead show held at the Richmond Coliseum in Virginia exactly 30 years earlier. His Nov. 5 show will replicate the set list from the band’s Feb. 19, 1971, show at the Capitol itself.AdvertisementAnd if Deadheads weren’t being catered to enough already, Dead & Company will play Madison Square Garden a third time on Nov. 7, this time as a free show — 10,000 tickets were given away online — with a live stream directed by Brett Ratner (“X-Men: The Last Stand,” “Rush Hour”).Asked if he might run into his band mates during their overlapping New York stops, Mr. Lesh said: “Absolutely not. I am so busy.” However, they have been in touch since July’s cathartic valediction.“I congratulated Bob on his birthday,” Mr. Lesh said of Mr. Weir. They have plans for dinner upon everyone’s return from tour.An article on Friday about bands formed by surviving members of the Grateful Dead misstated the name of the music hall and restaurant that Phil Lesh, the Grateful Dead bass player, and his wife own in California. It is Terrapin Crossroads, not Terrapin Station. (That is the title of a Grateful Dead song.)A version of this article appears in print on October 30, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: Life After Dead Means Concerts.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.