AdvertisementSupported byBy Brian SeibertAli Moini was born and raised in Iran. He now lives and works in France. Those biographical facts, and other intermediate ones, are the principal subject of Mr. Moini’s “Lives,” a solo work of performance art that had its United States premiere at New York Live Arts on Tuesday. The gap between where he is from and where he is gives the collection of data some dramatic tension, but not nearly enough.In “Lives,” presented as part of the Crossing the Line festival, many of the facts come in a voice-over by Mr. Moini, who speaks in English, sometimes awkwardly. Onstage he is mute, methodically enacting visual metaphors. He stands between two metallic panels, and each time he attaches an elastic tube with a magnet at each end to one panel or the other, another event from his life appears in print on that panel’s surface (birth, revolution, his previous productions, his father’s stroke), like an answer on the TV game show “Family Feud.” Eventually, there are 24 facts connected to 24 tubes, which Mr. Moini then connects to magnets on his clothing.The image is elegant: this man tethered to his biography, ensnared, nourished. As his body sways and vibrates, the written facts sway and vibrate with him, but only physically. He does a little sinuous stepping-in-place dance. He removes each of the tubes from his body, and they snap back to the panels. In deference to the work’s plural title, he throws in suggestions of other selves: biographical data borrowed from a baby his mother miscarried, imagined facts of a future self.Yet the energy stays low. Mr. Moini has a mild magnetism himself, staring at us impassively in his handsome beard as he rolls his hips. In contrast to the conceptual-art trappings, his manner is ingenuous. “I am not a dancer,” his voice confesses. “What am I doing?” his voice asks. “I am doing what I love, talking about myself.”But not even when an electronic speaker inside his mouth chirps like a bird, a nightingale that he says his mother believes is saying “Come home,” do hints of the pain and guilt of separation rise above faint. A folk tale recounted at the start of the work introduces the idea of his homeland having a magical attraction. That is what “Lives” lacks as theater. Mr. Moini connects the facts of his life to his own body, but not to a viewer’s heart.Advertisement