By JOSHUA BARONEOCT. 29, 2015
Information on events for possible inclusion in Spare Times should be sent to weekend@nytimes.com by Friday at 5 p.m. for publication that week. Longer versions of Around Town and For Children listings are in a searchable guide at nytimes.com/events.Museums and SitesAmerican Museum of Natural History: ‘Countdown to Zero’(continuing) Smallpox is the only human disease to have been eradicated, but what about Guinea worm, polio, malaria and others? This exhibition, presented in collaboration with the Carter Center, examines international efforts to control and wipe out infection. Daily from 10 a.m. to 5:45 p.m., Central Park West and 79th Street, 212-769-5200, amnh.org.Brooklyn Historical Society: ‘Brooklyn Americans: Hockey’s Forgotten Promise’(through March 27) The New York Islanders may be new to Brooklyn, but the borough isn’t new to hockey. This exhibition tells the story of its first National Hockey League team, the Brooklyn Americans. The team wore red, white and blue jerseys and represented Kings County at the height of World War II and in the early days of the N.H.L. Still, as the exhibition shows, the team was unsuccessful and ultimately financially doomed. 128 Pierrepont Street, near Clinton Street, Brooklyn Heights, 718-222-4111, brooklynhistory.org.‘Global Citizen: The Architecture of Moshe Safdie’(through Jan. 10) This touring exhibition, a retrospective of Mr. Safdie’s career of more than 50 years, makes its way to New York with new material based on the architect’s recent work related to dense urbanism in Asia. Donald Albrecht from the Museum of the City of New York organized the material in this show, which also explores Mr. Safdie’s design philosophy that buildings should be extensions of their physical, historical and cultural contexts. National Academy Museum, 1083 Fifth Avenue, at 89th Street, 212-369-4880, nationalacademy.org.AdvertisementIntrepid Sea, Air & Space Museum: ‘On the Line: Intrepid and the Vietnam War’(through Sept. 1, 2016) Visitors familiar with this museum are likely well aware of its flight deck, perhaps even some of its wartime history. During the Vietnam war, the Intrepid served three tours overseas between 1966 and 1969. Now, in an exhibition set in the space where the crew lived and worked, the museum tells their stories with artifacts, film clips and photographs. Pier 86, 46th Street and 12th Avenue, Clinton, 877-957-7447, intrepidmuseum.org.AdvertisementMuseum of Chinese in America: ‘Sub Urbanisms: Casino Urbanization, Chinatowns and the Contested American Landscape’(through January) Stephen Fan, an architecture professor and curator, examines the trend of Chinese casino workers in Connecticut converting suburban homes into multifamily communities. This exhibition is both creative and historical; it takes the present to imagine the future of housing design while looking back on the events that created the trend of suburban migration. 215 Centre Street, between Howard and Grand Streets, Lower Manhattan, 212-619-4785, mocanyc.org.Museum of the City of New York: ‘The New York City Marathon: The Great Race’(through March 8) On Sunday morning, more than 50,000 runners will make their way through all five boroughs of New York, starting on Staten Island and ending in Central Park. This annual race — a spectacle for anyone watching along the course — began modestly in 1970, with 127 people running laps around Central Park. City Museum’s timely exhibition tells the story of how the New York City Marathon became the world-class race it is today, including photos from amateurs and professionals on display.While the show is open for the next several months, the museum has programs planned specifically for the marathon this weekend. A talk at 3 p.m. on Saturday, “Winning the Great Race: NYC Marathon Champions Tell All,” features two previous winners of the race: Bill Rodgers (1976) Frank Shorter (1994 and ’95). They’ll speak with George Hirsch, who founded the first five-borough version of the marathon in 1976. And on Sunday, the museum will be open with free admission to celebrate race day.The museum is open daily from 10 a.m. to 6 p.m.; Saturday’s talk is sold out. Fifth Avenue at 103rd Street, 212-534-1672, mcny.org.Museum of the Moving Image: ‘How Cats Took Over the Internet’(through January) Even people who hate cats can’t easily get through an hour of browsing online without coming across some kind of feline clickbait. This exhibition takes a critical look at and tells the story of how we, as a society, got to this point. Yes, there are cat GIFs. 35th Avenue at 37th Street, Astoria, Queens, 718-784-0077, movingimage.us.National Museum of the American Indian: ‘Meryl McMaster: Second Self’(through Dec. 11) Meryl McMaster, an artist from Canada and a Plains Cree member of the Siksika Nation, shows her “Second Self” photography series, which uses portraiture to explore the complex ways in which identity is constructed. 1 Bowling Green, Lower Manhattan, 212-514-3700, nmai.si.edu; free.New-York Historical Society: ‘Holiday Express: Toys and Trains From the Jerni Collection’(through Feb. 28) Toys of yore are on view in a mountainous landscape for trains and scene-setting trinkets pegged to the holiday season. This massive display also incorporates theatrical lighting and soundscapes, including a multimedia installation designed to make it feel like the museum’s 77th Street entrance is in the midst of passing trains. 170 Central Park West, at 77th Street, 212-873-3400, nyhistory.org.AdvertisementNew-York Historical Society: ‘Superheroes in Gotham’(through Feb. 21) New York is safe as long as its long roster of comic-book heroes stick around. It’s been this way for nearly a century as these characters have defended the city in books, TV shows, movies, video games — even the Broadway stage. New-York Historical Society’s latest exhibition tells the story of how super heroes became a cultural staple for all ages and media. 170 Central Park West, at 77th Street, 212-873-3400, nyhistory.org.New York Transit Museum: ‘Bringing Back the City’(ongoing) This new exhibition comes three years after Hurricane Sandy took a swipe at the city’s infrastructure. But what of the people who put the pieces back together? “Bringing Back the City” tells the stories of everyday services — like electricity and mass transit — that become extraordinary in times of crisis. Boerum Place, at Schermerhorn Street, Downtown Brooklyn, 718-694-1600, bringingbackthecity.com.New York Transit Museum Grand Central Terminal Gallery Annex: ‘New York’s Transportation Landmarks’(closes on Sunday) It’s been 50 years since New York passed its Landmarks Law, which covers over 30,000 buildings and structures around the city. To celebrate the anniversary, the New York Transit Museum has created an exhibition that explores the history of development, use and even rescue of these landmarks. More information: 212-878-0106, web.mta.info/mta/museum.Rubin Museum of Art: ‘Sacred Spaces’(through March 27, 2017) This exhibition’s premise is a question: What is a sacred space? It could be the museum’s Tibetan Buddhist Shrine Room, an immersive look at a traditional space for prayer and meditation. Or it could be a panoramic vista among the Himalayas. It could even be a video installation about Jain devotional rituals. All are on view in this exploration of veneration and its venues. 150 West 17th Street, Chelsea, 212-620-5000, rubinmuseum.org.‘Sea Level: Five Boroughs at Water’s Edge’(through December) In its first pop-up exhibition for the Seaport Culture District, the American Institute of Architects presents a water’s eye view of the city through photos by Elizabeth Felicella and accompanying essays by Robert Sullivan. The panoramic view of New York starts at New York Harbor and makes its way along the East River, showing the shore of each borough along the way. Center @ the Seaport, 181 Front Street, South Street Seaport, Lower Manhattan, 212-683-0023, cfa.aiany.org.Events‘Awakening in Ink’(through Nov. 7) The Morris-Jumel Mansion presents its first commissioned play, drawn from the letters and ghost stories in its archives. Set and performed in the mansion, it follows a young woman’s first night as the house’s caretaker. To celebrate Halloween, Saturday’s performance offers a post-play paranormal tour of the mansion (tickets very limited). Thursdays through Saturdays at 8 p.m., 65 Jumel Terrace, between 160th and 162nd Streets, Washington Heights, 212-923-8008, morrisjumel.org; tickets are at awakeninginink.brownpapertickets.com.Bad Theater Fest(Friday, Thursday and through Nov. 7) Don’t worry: This isn’t a festival for theater that aims to be bad. The idea is that no theater — art in general, really — is universally loved. Writers may fear sharing their work because of its reception. Here, they can try out theater that hasn’t been seen by the public yet, or they can present discarded material that never made it to the stage. Multiple productions are put on each night; the schedule is at badtheaterfest.com. At various times, the Loft, 154 West 29th Street, Chelsea.Bann Konte(Sunday) This procession of music, games and folktales will make its way through Crown Heights as the culmination of a residency with Allenby Augustin — director of Akoustik Prod., a Haitian arts organization — at the Haiti Cultural Exchange. The roving event involves songs and storytelling alongside traditional elements like a Haitian conch and konè, a long metal horn, as well as bamboo trumpets and Haitian drums. At 2 p.m., starting at the Haiti Cultural Exchange, 558 St. Johns Place, between Classon and Franklin Avenues, Crown Heights, 347-565 4429, haiticulturalx.org/bannkonte.AdvertisementFestival Albertine(Thursday through Nov. 9) Albertine, the French- and English-language bookstore inside the Payne Whitney mansion, experimented last year with hosting a festival about the French-American exchange of books and ideas; there’s still more conversation to be had. It begins Thursday at 7:30 p.m. with “Talking Across History: Literature as Dialogue,” which features the novelists Kamel Daoud and Francine Prose. All events will be streamed at livestream.com/frenchembassy. More information is at albertine.com/festival-albertine-2015. At various times, 972 Fifth Avenue, at 79th Street, Manhattan, 212-650-0070; free.First Thursday Gallery Walk(Thursday) Galleries in Dumbo, Brooklyn, stay open late in this monthly event to showcase more than a dozen of the neighborhood’s latest artistic offerings. Other Dumbo businesses get in on the party as well; restaurants and bars have First Thursday specials to offer gallery visitors. More information, including a list of participating venues, is at artindumbo.com. From 6 to 9 p.m.Morris-Jumel Mansion Culture & Arts Festival(Saturday) In it’s fourth year this annual festival doubles as a celebration of the mansion’s 250th anniversary. (Roger Morris and Mary Philipse purchased the 130-acre property and began construction in 1765.) The day’s events include a series of performances, beginning at noon with a concert by Leslie Odom Jr., who plays Aaron Burr in Broadway’s “Hamilton.” Among the other activities are a vintage costume contest, a lesson with the Harlem Swing Dance Society and a guided tour of the mansion. More information, including the performance lineup and list of art vendors, is at morrisjumel.org. From 11 a.m. to 6 p.m., 65 Jumel Terrace, between 160th and 162nd Streets, Washington Heights, 212-923-8008; free.Videology Presents Movie Trivia(Tuesday) Videology, the Brooklyn bar and cinema, hosts a free film-themed trivia contest every week. The game varies; you will want to know theme songs, facts, quotations (especially ones from Nicolas Cage) and more. The winning team receives a free round of drinks, and there are chances to win drinks each round. At 8:30 p.m., 308 Bedford Avenue, at South First Street, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, 718-782-3468, videologybarandcinema.com.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Winter Village at Bryant Park(through March 6) The ice rink is back. Admission is free if you bring your own skates; if you don’t have any, they’re available for rent. Through Jan. 3, the park will also host an open-air market for holiday shopping with about 125 vendors. Avenue of the Americas, at 40th Street, 212-661-6640, wintervillage.org.Spoken WordPaul Goldberger(Wednesday) Mr. Goldberger talks about his recently released biography of the prolific architect Frank Gehry, “Building Art: The Life and Work of Frank Gehry.” The Wall Street Journal’s architecture columnist, Julie V. Iovine, will join him in exploring why Mr. Gehry is one of the world’s most widely recognized and respected architects. At 7 p.m., Macaulay Honors College, City University of New York, 35 West 67th Street, Manhattan, macaulay.cuny.edu/community/author-series; free.George Grella and Bryan C. Parker(Thursday) Mr. Grella, The Brooklyn Rail’s music editor, will discuss his study of the Miles Davis album “Bitches Brew” as part of the 33 1/3 series, a collection of book-length essays about albums. He will be joined by Mr. Parker, who’s 33 1/3 book took on Beat Happening’s self-titled 1985 album. At 7 p.m., Word, 126 Franklin Street, at Milton Street, Greenpoint, Brooklyn, wordbookstores.com.David Hare and Michael Cunningham(Wednesday) The Rubin Museum of Art’s series of conversations about karma continues with Mr. Hare, whose memoir “The Blue Touch Paper” comes out on Tuesday. He will speak with the author Michael Cunningham (“The Hours”) about cause and effect in art, friendships and love. At 7:00 p.m., 150 West 17th Street, Chelsea, 212-620-5000, rubinmuseum.org.‘Hir’ Symposium(Monday) The latest offering from Playwrights Horizons, Taylor Mac’s “Hir,” includes this talk with the author and Glenn M. Smulyan, a creative arts therapist and sexual wellness educator. In the play, the character Isaac returns to his suburban home after war to an ailing father, a mother on a rampage against patriarchy and a newly out transgender brother supporting her. At 7 p.m., 416 West 42nd Street, Clinton, 212-279-4200, playwrightshorizons.org; free. (Sold out, but a waitlist is available.)AdvertisementDavid Mitchell(Tuesday) Mr. Mitchell, known for his best sellers like “Cloud Atlas” and last year’s “The Bone Clocks,” is back with a new book, “Slade House.” Like his other novels, it skips from genre to genre and from decade to decade, this time to tell the story of a haunted house in Britain. Here he’ll read from the novel and discuss it with the Random House editor David Ebershoff. At 8 p.m., 92nd Street Y, 1395 Lexington Avenue, 212-415-5500, 92y.org.Nancy Updike, Dan Ephron and Ira Glass(Wednesday) The public radio program “This American Life” recently aired an episode about the assassination of the Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin 20 years ago. The reporting came from Nancy Updike, a producer for “This American Life,” and her husband, Dan Ephron, a former Jerusalem bureau chief for Newsweek who was at the rally where Rabin was shot. Decades later, the assassination is the subject of conspiracy theories, public shouting matches and political divides. As part of the Live from the NYPL series, they join Ira Glass in conversation about why Rabin’s murder still matters. At 7 p.m., Stephen A. Schwarzman Building, New York Public Library, 917-275-6975, nypl.org/locations/schwarzman.‘Wonder of Wonders: A Cultural History of “Fiddler on the Roof” '(Sunday) Events to mark the return of “Fiddler on the Roof” to Broadway are not in short supply this fall. The latest is this talk with Alisa Solomon, a Columbia University professor whose book “Wonder of Wonders: A Cultural History of Fiddler on the Roof” was released in 2013. In the book she provides an inside look at the creative team behind the musical that became a household name and a cultural phenomenon around the world. At 3 p.m., Museum at Eldridge Street, 12 Eldridge Street, Lower East Side, 212-219-0888, eldridgestreet.org.Walking ToursLong Island City Tours: Queens Cool Uncovered(Sunday) The idea behind this tour is that Queens is due for more attention, starting with Long Island City. The tour includes highlights of the neighborhood’s history and arts scene, with stops at galleries and crafts and food vendors. The meeting location is given at registration. At 1:30 p.m., 212-209-3370, bqetours.com.America’s Museum: Art and History of the Metropolitan(Friday) Art history doctoral candidates lead this tour of one of the country’s most popular, prestigious museums. Highlights include classic artworks, as well as anecdotes from New York’s cultural history — and the story of the museum’s only benefactor to have been eaten by cannibals. At 11 a.m., meeting in front of the Duke Semans Mansion, 1009 Fifth Avenue, at East 82nd Street, Upper East Side, 888-606-9255, bigonion.com.Flatiron District Walking Tour(Sunday) This free tour meets at 11 a.m. on the southwest corner of Madison Square Park, at 23rd Street and Broadway, in front of the William Seward statue. Sponsored by the Flatiron/23rd Street Partnership; discoverflatiron.org.History of Wall Street Tour(weekdays) Stops on this tour, led by Wall Street Walks, include the New York Stock Exchange, Trinity Church, the Wall Street Bull, and ground zero and the Sept. 11 memorial. The tours last 90 minutes and begin at 11 a.m. and 1:30 p.m. (Also at 3 p.m. on Tuesdays and Fridays.) More details: wallstreetwalks.com.‘Revolutionary New York: Celebrating American History’(Tuesday) This tour is a close look New York’s Revolutionary War-era history hidden amid Manhattan’s cityscape. Highlights include the graves of the war’s key players, the site of George Washington’s inaugural address and Fraunces Tavern. At 1 p.m.; beginning at Broadway and Murray Street (at the gate of City Hall Park), Financial District, 888-606-9255, bigonion.com.AdvertisementSave the Village(Tuesday) Last year the Steven Kasher Gallery in Chelsea put on an exhibition with the photography of Fred W. McDarrah, who documented the changing scene of Greenwich Village since the 1960s. Now, the spirit of that show has taken the form of this walking tour, which includes stops at the places McDarrah captured on film: locales like Washington Square Park and the Stonewall Inn. At 10 a.m.; the tour meets at Christopher Park, Stonewall Place, at Seventh Avenue, West Village, savethevillagetours.com.Skyscrapers Gallery Tour(Saturday) Midtown’s gallery district — spaces spread along 57th Street — is the star of this walking tour that covers seven stops in two blocks. Among the exhibitions are photography-ceramics hybrids, uncanny bronze statues and paintings that depict a socially charged New York. At 1 p.m., beginning at 24 West 57th Street, 212-946-1548, nygallerytours.com.Union Square: Crossroads of New York(Saturday) Sponsored by the Union Square Partnership, this free year-round tour focuses on the area’s political and social histories. The walk, led by guides from Big Onion Walking Tours, meets at 2 p.m. by the statue of Lincoln in Union Square Park, near the 16th Street transverse. 212-517-1826, unionsquarenyc.org.Halloween WeekendDía de los Muertos(Saturday and Sunday) The New York Botanical has one last trick up its sleeve before the exhibition “Frida Kahlo: Art, Garden, Life” closes on Nov. 1. This weekend, the show will also include festivities for Día de los Muertos, the Mexican holiday for celebrating the lives of dead friends and family. In keeping with tradition, the garden will put up an altar for the star of the show, Frida. Other activities throughout the day include making masks and painting faces. From 10 a.m. to 8 p.m. on Saturday; to 6 p.m. on Sunday. Bronx River Parkway (Exit 7W) and Fordham Road, the Bronx, 718-817-8700, nybg.org.Edgar Allan Poe and His Ghostly Neighbors of Greenwich Village(Friday) Poe is the spooky name to peg this tour to ghosts and Halloween, but his ghostly neighbors include other major American figures like Eleanor Roosevelt and Aaron Burr. Of course, several of Poe’s haunts will also be stops along the way. The tour meets at 85 West Third Street, between Thompson and Sullivan Streets in Greenwich Village. At 7:30 and 9:30 p.m., 646-493-7092; information about this as well as other ghost-themed tours on Halloween are at ghostsofny.com.Gravesend Inn(Friday and Saturday) This haunted house is really a playground for students at the New York City College of Technology, City University of New York. As in previous years, the aim is to push the boundaries of haunted house high-tech, with some help from Theatreworks, the school’s resident theater troupe. At various times, Voorhees Theatre, 186 Jay Street, at High Street, Downtown Brooklyn, 718-260-5592, gravesendinn.org.Halloween Harvest(Saturday and Sunday) Halloween is taking over Luna Park’s activities, games and rides. For example, Jack’s Pumpkin Shack will give visitors a chance to guess the weight of a giant pumpkin, and Camp Luna will be a s’mores-making station. More information is at lunaparknyc.com. 1000 Surf Avenue, Coney Island, Brooklyn, 718-373-5862.Haunted Waters(Saturday) Murder, mayhem and mystery are among the stories in the history of Queens’s waterfront. This walking tour, which begins under the Hell Gate Bridge (Shore Boulevard, at Ditmars Boulevard) follows the water and its haunted past, with tales told by Richard Melnick from the Greater Astoria Historical Society. At noon, 718-278-0700, astorialic.org.New York Haunted Hayride(through Sunday) New Yorkers needn’t travel far for a this quintessential fall activity. Little is quaint about this ride, though. The hay wagon passes through a series of Halloween hellscapes, complete with ghostly figures, demonic possessions and, of course, wicked clowns. At midnight, Randalls Island Park, 302-751-5747, newyorkhauntedhayride.com.A version of this schedule appears in print on October 30, 2015, on Page C16 of the New York edition with the headline: Spare Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.