OCT. 29, 2015
Museums and galleries are in Manhattan unless otherwise noted. Full reviews of recent art shows: nytimes.com/art. A searchable guide to these and many other art shows is at nytimes.com/events.Museums★ Asia Society and Museum: ‘Philippine Gold: Treasures of Forgotten Kingdoms’(through Jan. 3) More than half a millennium before Ferdinand Magellan reached the archipelago now called the Philippines in 1521, a number of related societies thrived there. One of the few things known about them today is that they were astoundingly skillful goldsmiths. This gorgeous and historically intriguing exhibition presents nearly 120 pieces dating from the 10th through the 13th centuries, including bracelets, necklaces, pendants, collars, finger rings, bowls and a balance scale made entirely of gold. The star of the show is a gleaming, nine-pound sash made of gold beads that could be mistaken for a futuristic ammunition belt. 725 Park Avenue, at 70th Street, 212-517-2742, asiasociety.org. (Ken Johnson)★ American Folk Art Museum: ‘Art Brut in America: The Incursion of Jean Dubuffet’(through Jan. 10) This extraordinary show revisits and partly recreates a little-known chapter in outsider art history: the decade (1951-61) that the groundbreaking, still-forming Art Brut collection of Jean Dubuffet — the artist and one of the field’s earliest explorers — spent in the East Hampton mansion of the artist Alfonso Ossorio. While seen by a host of art world luminaries, it had little impact, as proved by how many of the impressive artists here are still unknown in this country. 2 Lincoln Square, Columbus Avenue at 66th Street, 212-595-9533, folkartmuseum.org. (Roberta Smith)★ El Museo del Barrio and Loisaida Inc.: '¡Presente! The Young Lords in New York’(through Dec. 12) On July 26, 1969, a group of young Latinos stood on stage of the band shell in Tompkins Square Park, in the East Village, and declared the founding of the New York branch of a revolution-minded political party called the Young Lords. Its purpose was to gain social justice for New York’s working-class Latino population, then largely Puerto Rican and treated with contempt by the city. Most of the people on stage that day were recent college graduates well-versed in leftist political theory. To gain the trust and cooperation of the grassroots communities — concentrated in the East Village, East Harlem and the South Bronx — they knew they needed to get their feet on the street, and they wasted no time. They cleaned up neighborhoods; battled for health care; and created spaces for art and music. Spread over three institutions, "¡Presente!” rescues a crucial episode in the city’s history and treats a vibrant political organization as both a cultural and an ideological phenomenon. Through Dec. 1 at Loisaida Inc., 710 East Ninth Street, Lower East Side, 646-757-0522, loisaida.org; through Dec. 12 at El Museo, 1230 Fifth Avenue, at 104th Street, East Harlem, 212-831-7272, elmuseo.org. (Holland Cotter)AdvertisementBrooklyn Botanic Garden: Isamu Noguchi(through Dec. 13) The Noguchi Museum and the Brooklyn Botanic Garden are to be commended for installing such a show, in which sculpture is exposed to the elements (and the wandering visitors). But this exhibition of 18 of the Japanese-American artist’s sculptures parceled throughout the garden can be frustrating, as you attempt to locate his works on a specially provided map. The showcase of the exhibition is an installation of several Noguchi sculptures inside the Japanese Hill-and-Pond Garden, a marriage of modern and traditional forms, and there are works just below the Native Flora Garden that offer moments of successful communion with art and curated nature. 990 Washington Avenue, at Eastern Parkway, Prospect Heights, 718-623-7200, bbg.org. (Martha Schwendener)Advertisement★ Brooklyn Historical Society: ‘Personal Correspondence: Photography and Letter Writing in Civil War Brooklyn’(through spring 2016) Symbolically, the Civil War ended when Robert E. Lee surrendered to Ulysses S. Grant in the spring of 1865. For many people who lived through it, though, the war never ended at all, and it lives on in letters sent to and from the battlefield. Thousands of these ended up half-forgotten in attics and bureau drawers; a small stash comes to light in this exhibition that consists of just one little room with a lot in it — including letters, Civil War souvenirs and explanatory texts — with everything as readily accessible as if in a well-packed suitcase. 128 Pierrepont Street, near Clinton Street, Brooklyn Heights, 718-222-4111, brooklynhistory.org. (Cotter)Brooklyn Museum: ‘Impressionism and the Caribbean: Francisco Oller and His Transatlantic World’(through Jan. 3) Francisco Oller (1833-1917) was the most celebrated Puerto Rican artist of the 19th century. For most of his career he was a facile imitator sojourning in Madrid and in Paris, where he hung out with Impressionist painters like Pissarro, Monet and Cézanne. But it wasn’t until after settling down in San Juan around age 60 that he came into his own, producing haunting landscapes and some mysteriously powerful still-life paintings that can plausibly be called great. This show presents 40 paintings by Oller and 45 works by other artists, including his European and American contemporaries and his Puerto Rican predecessors. 200 Eastern Parkway, at Prospect Park, Brooklyn, 718-638-5000, brooklynmuseum.org. (Johnson)Brooklyn Museum: ‘Zanele Muholi: Isibonelo/Evidence’(through Nov. 8) Describing herself as a “visual activist,” the South African photographer Zanele Muholi is dedicated to increasing the visibility of black lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex people with notable international success. Her stark black-and-white photographs often respond to the violence inflicted on those groups. But the exhibition also includes colorful photographs of same-sex weddings that are radiant, both with African sunshine and irrepressible joy. 200 Eastern Parkway, at Prospect Park, 718-638-5000, brooklynmuseum.org. (Schwendener)★ Frick Collection: ‘Andrea del Sarto: The Renaissance Workshop in Action’(through Jan. 10) The big-guns highlights of the Frick show, this first major American exhibitoon devoted to the Renaissance artist Andrew del Sarto, (1486-1530) are three spectacular paintings, including “Portrait of a Young Man” from London and “St. John the Baptist” from the Palazzo Pitti, Florence. But the substance lies an array of 45 drawings, mostly in red chalk, in which we can follow del Sarto as he feels his way into compositions and molds figures into life with an angel’s hand, a scientist’s eye, and a striver’s drive for perfection. 1 East 70th Street, Manhattan, 212-288-0700, frick.org. (Cotter)Guggenheim Museum: ‘Alberto Burri: The Trauma of Painting’(through Jan. 6) This Italian artist’s prescient paintings from the 1950s and early ‘60s — in patched, burned and otherwise abused burlap, plastic or wood — form a lavish, beautiful and admirable, if sometimes monotonous retrospective at the Guggenheim. Unfortunately, he may also inaugurate a bane of current art: the use of found materials so inherently affecting — burlap is one — that they require little of the artist. 1071 Fifth Avenue, at 89th Street, 212-423-3500, guggenheim.org. (Smith)★ Jewish Museum: ‘The Power of Pictures: Early Soviet Photography, Early Soviet Film’(through Feb. 7) Revolutions sell utopias; that’s their job. Art, if it behaves itself and sticks to the right script, can be an important part of the promotional package. That’s the basic tale told by this exhibition of photographs and vintage films of the 1920s and ’30s, but with a question added: What happens to art when the script is drastically revised? Russia was an experiment in progress in the heady years following the 1917 revolution, and avant-garde art, free-spirited by definition, was officially embraced. When Joseph Stalin came to power art became government-dictated propaganda and its makers, often under threat, towed the line. Remarkably, the show presents a dozen films — some familiar, some not — full-length, on a rotating schedule of four a day, in a small viewing theater built into one of the Jewish Museum’s galleries. 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92nd Street, 212-423-3200, thejewishmuseum.org. (Cotter)★ Metropolitan Museum of Art: ‘Ancient Egypt Transformed: The Middle Kingdom’(through Jan. 24) Ancient Egypt is box office gold: Do a show, and people will come. Why? Mummies, Hollywood and Queen Nefertiti contribute to its allure. Also, we tend to identify with Egyptians of thousands of years ago. In art, they look exotic, but not out of reach. They drank beer, collected cats and wore flip-flops. They yearned to stay young and to live forever, with loved ones nearby and snack food piled high. Who can’t relate to that? Few institutions have done a better job at illuminating Egyptian art than the Met. And it returns to the subject in an exhibition low on King Tut bling and high on complicated beauty, about a broad swath of history (circa 2030 to 1650 B.C.) that has never had a comprehensive museum showcase till now. 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org. (Cotter)Advertisement★ Metropolitan Museum of Art: ‘Andrea del Sarto’s “Borgherini Holy Family”’(through Jan. 10) This fascinating gem of a show runs concurrently with the larger exhibition “Andrea del Sarto: The Renaissance Workshop in Action” at the Frick Collection and adds important layers to it. It both places the Renaissance artist within the political context of his time, and it draws on modern imaging technology to reveal his method for transforming and recycling images. 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org. (Cotter)Metropolitan Museum of Art: ‘Grand Illusions: Staged Photography from the Met Collection’(through Jan. 18) With 40 works, this small, choice exhibition forms a freewheeling survey of the ways and means of staged photography — the arranging objects or people for the camera — and the many needs and sensibilities it has served. Its smart installation jumps between past and present, commercial and fine, pre- and postmodern, and is peppered with surprises by artists well-known and not. 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org. (Smith)★ Metropolitan Museum of Art: ‘Kongo: Power and Majesty’(through Jan. 3) For centuries the West assumed that African art had no history, because none had been found written down. But this tight, intense show, beautifully designed, with a stirring catalog, demonstrates otherwise. It begins in the 15th century when the rulers of Kongo peoples in Central Africa were sending luxury textiles to European courts and receiving gifts in return. It continues through the devastations of the slave trade, shifting from art made for pleasure and profit to art made to save lives and souls. It concludes with 15 sensational, just under life-size sculptures that were last-ditch responses to the slow-motion emergency of colonialism. 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org. (Cotter)★ Metropolitan Museum of Art: ‘Paintings by George Stubbs from the Yale Center for British Art’(through Nov. 8) A rare sighting in New York: eight paintings by the inimitable English painter George Stubbs (1724-1806). They include two of his best race-horse pictures, with their stunning precision of anatomy, portraiture, landscape space and inter-species psychology. Four other paintings follow two men through a day of shooting small game and the fifth shows the gentle killing of a wounded doe at a hunt’s end. 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org. (Smith)★ MoMA PS1: ‘Greater New York’(through March 7) With a multigenerational team of organizers, MoMA PS1’s every-five-years-roundup of New York art steps away from its founding premise of newness, the idea that it would be an update on the metropolitan market. The 158 artists on the roster range from 20-something to 80-something; a few are deceased. The notion that an “emerging” artist has to be young is discarded. Older artists newly in the spotlight, or back after a long delay, qualify. And history works in two directions. Art from the 1970s and ’80s is presented as prescient of what’s being made now, and new art is viewed as putting a trenchant spin on the past. 22-25 Jackson Avenue, at 46th Avenue, Long Island City, Queens, 718-784-2084, ps1.org. (Cotter)★ Morgan Library & Museum: ‘Ernest Hemingway: Between Two Wars’(through Jan. 31) Mounted on walls that have been painted tropical blue to suggest Hemingway’s years in Key West and in Cuba, this show takes him all the way from high school to roughly 1950 with photographs, handwritten first-drafts and personal correspondence. But the largest and most interesting section focuses on the ’20s, Hemingway’s Paris years, and reveals a writer we might have been in danger of forgetting: Hemingway before he became Hemingway. 225 Madison Avenue, at 36th Street, 212-685-0008, themorgan.org. (Charles McGrath)Museum of Modern Art: ‘Scenes for a New Heritage: Contemporary Art from the Collection’(through April 10) MoMA’s latest installation of works from its permanent collection fills the second-floor contemporary galleries with videos, installations, sculptures, drawings, prints and photographs produced by more than 30 artists during the past three decades. It’s an uneven, haphazard selection, but leaving artistic quality aside, its unusually optimistic-sounding title inadvertently raises a large and intriguing question: At a time when contemporary art seems to be spinning its wheels, what could a new heritage be? 212-708-9400, moma.org. (Johnson)Museum of Modern Art: ‘Design and Violence’(continuing) Described on the museum’s website as a “curatorial experiment,” “Design and Violence” was and is an exhibition that exists almost entirely on the Internet. The show includes pictures, descriptions, essays and discussions about design objects used for violent purposes, including the AK-47 rifle, animal slaughter systems, bullets, plastic handcuffs and graphics depicting everything from refugee migration to incarceration demographics to violent video games. It’s a heavy and heady gathering of information that leans at times toward a symposium rather than an exhibition, but remains grounded in innovative objects that have made — or could make — a cultural impact. Online at designandviolence.moma.org; 212-708-9400. (Schwendener)AdvertisementMuseum of Modern Art: ‘Endless House: Intersections of Art and Architecture’(through March 6) This scattered but enjoyable exhibition, drawn from the museum’s art collection as much as its design holdings, focuses on the single-family home as a place of experimentation and regeneration; of conflict as well as dreams. Its highlight is a series of drawings and photographs by Frederick Kiesler, the Austrian-American polymath whose Endless House — never completed — fused fine art, architecture, furniture and lighting design into a bulbous, unstable whole. Several artists here echo Kiesler’s theme of the house as a reflection of the psychology of its inhabitants. None is more powerful than Rachel Whiteread’s sober image, made with white correction fluid, of a dwelling in East London: a preparatory drawing for a now lost sculpture crafted by filling the house with liquid concrete. 212-708-9400, moma.org. (Jason Farago)★ Museum of Modern Art: ‘Picasso Sculpture’(through Feb. 7) Nearly a work of art in its own right, this magnificent show redefines Picasso’s achievement with the first full view here in 50 years of his astoundingly varied forays into sculpture. His materials, not his female loves, become the muses, and are different each time out. The basic plotline: After introducing sculptural abstraction and space, he spent about 50 years counting the ways that the figure was far from finished. 212-708-9400, moma.org. (Smith)★ Museum of Modern Art: ‘Transmissions: Art in Eastern Europe and Latin America, 1960-1980’(through Jan. 3) Visiting this big, spirited group show is like walking into a party of intriguing strangers. For every person you recognize, there are 10 you don’t know. One topic everyone’s talking about, at different intensities, is the anti-institutional politics that swept Europe and the Americas in the 1960s, and almost everyone speaks the language of Conceptualism. A product of an in-house research initiative called Contemporary and Modern Art Perspectives, or C-MAP, intended to expand MoMA’s narrow Paris-New York view of modernism, the show is very much the beginning rather than the end of a learning curve. But with curators exploring material new to them — just steps ahead of their audience — the show has a refreshing buzz of surprise as it takes the museum in a realistic new directions. 212-708-9400, moma.org. (Cotter)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Museum of the City of New York: ‘Activist New York’(continuing) With a focus on activist tactics from the 17th century to the present, this exhibition — designed by the firm Pentagram — is a room-size onslaught of sensory stimulation, complete with videos, graphics and text. Told through 14 “moments” in New York activism, it includes a facsimile of the Flushing Remonstrance (1657), a petition for religious tolerance given to Peter Stuyvesant, director-general of the settlement, as well as contemporaneous objects, like a Dutch tobacco box, a Bible and “Meet the Activists” kiosks adjacent to each display, which identify activist groups working in the present. Fifth Avenue at 103rd Street, 212-534-1672, mcny.org. (Schwendener)Museum of the City of New York: ‘Folk City: New York and the Folk Music Revival’(through Jan. 10) Handwritten Bob Dylan lyrics, well-strummed guitars from Lead Belly, Judy Collins and Odetta, concert posters, Sing Out! magazines, video from a raucous protest over banning folk singers from Washington Square, the street sign from Gerdes Folk City and plenty of songs on headphones evoke idealism and ambition in “Folk City.” The exhibition explores how New York City became a magnet for and a champion of rural styles and then the center of a pop-folk movement, from leftist “people’s music” efforts in the 1930s and ’40s, and the Red Scare reaction, to the civil rights rallies, coffeehouses and hootenannies of the folk revival at its peak. The tangle of tradition and change, earnestness and pop machinations are on view, along with the makings of a legacy that roots matter and a song can change the world. Fifth Avenue at 103rd Street, 212-534-1672, mcny.org. (Jon Pareles)Museum of the City of New York: ‘Jacob A. Riis: Revealing New York’s Other Half’(through March 20) The Danish immigrant muckraker’s stark photographs, coupled with his documents from the New York Public Library and the Library of Congress, vividly portray the changing face of poverty since Riis exposed the poor to an oblivious public 125 years ago and remind viewers of the lingering challenges. Fifth Avenue at 103rd Street, 212-534-1672, mcny.org. (Sam Roberts)★ Neue Galerie: ‘Berlin Metropolis: 1918-1933’(through Jan. 4) Another outstanding museum exhibition joins New York’s autumn roster with this ambitious, expertly designed and organized account of the rich cultural ferment of the fragile Weimar Republic. With many loans from Germany, it musters an egalitarian array of mediums into a poignant, detailed view of the tragic cost — less in human life than in immeasurable human potential land achievement — of Hitler’s devastating rise and rule and the shattering of a great city. 1048 Fifth Avenue, at 86th Street, 212-628-6200, neuegalerie.org. (Smith)★ New Museum: ‘Jim Shaw: The End Is Here’(through Jan. 10) In Mr. Shaw’s art, form follows polymorphous perversity. A virtuoso chameleon possessing an amazing range of skills, he does Surrealism, Pop Art, Abstract Expressionism, Conceptualism, cartoons and comic strips, psychedelic posters and myriad kitschy illustration styles all with his own endlessly inventive, comedic twist. His works range from huge to miniature and from political allegories to drawings documenting his dreams. Selections from his personal collections of found paintings and wacky religious materials add to the delirium. 235 Bowery, at Prince Street, Lower East Side, 212-219-1222, newmuseum.org. (Johnson)★ Whitney Museum of American Art: ‘Archibald Motley: Jazz Age Modernist’(through Jan. 17) Let’s take it as a good omen that the first solo show to appear in the Whitney’s new home is a career retrospective of a still understudied artist. Motley (1891-1981) was born in New Orleans and lived in Chicago, where he painted the cultural life of the city’s African American neighborhood known as Bronzeville, portraying it with an eye for calibrations of class and race, and with a sense of his own conflicted position within its context. The show is modest in size but has features that many larger, sexier exhibitions lack: an affecting narrative, a distinctive atmosphere, and a complex and troubling political and moral tenor. 99 Gansevoort Street, at Washington Street, 212-570-3600, whitney.org. (Cotter)AdvertisementGalleries: Uptown★ ‘Swedish Wooden Toys’ (through Jan. 17) This presentation of more than 300 playthings from the late 16th to the early 21st centuries will be catnip for anyone into antique toys. The show features diminutive vehicles of all kinds from old-time wagons, trains and fully-rigged sailboats, to futuristic cars and a rocket ship. There are naturalistic and anthropomorphic animals, weapons, puzzles, games, dollhouses and architectural construction kits. While many of these items were produced by big manufacturers like BRIO and Playsam, many others are one-of-a-kind wonders like a miniature baking set from around 1900 that includes rolling pins, spatulas and other implements all lovingly carved from wood and fitting into a tray just eight inches long. Bard Graduate Center Gallery, 18 West 86th Street, Manhattan, 212-501-3011, bgc.bard.edu. (Johnson)Public ArtJeppe Hein: ‘Please Touch the Art’(through April 2016) People with small children likely will enjoy Mr. Hein’s three-part show. If it’s a hot day, the kids will rush to be drenched by “Appearing Rooms,” which has water spouting up unpredictably from a square platform of metal grating. Youngsters as well as grown-ups also may be fascinating by the perceptually confounding “Mirror Labyrinth NY,” which consists of mirror-surfaced planks of stainless steel in varying heights planted in the grass in a spiral formation. Meanwhile, guardians can rest on one of 16 fanciful, shocking orange park benches while their young charges clamber about on the furniture’s surrealistically altered parts. Brooklyn Bridge Park, 334 Furman Street, Fulton Ferry, Brooklyn, publicartfund.org. (Johnson)Out Of Town★ Lynda Benglis: ‘Water Sources’(through Nov. 8) The most compelling temporary exhibition at Storm King Art Center in recent years focuses on a heretofore unfamiliar but important dimension of Ms. Benglis’s distinguished career: creating working fountains. The show’s main attraction is a quartet of gorgeous fountains rising from temporary, circular pools embedded in the lawn outside the center’s home building. Two of them have abstract forms suggesting psychic monsters surging up from unconscious depths. The others feature flower shapes stacked into majestic columns. 1 Museum Road, New Windsor, N.Y., 845-534-3115, stormking.org. (Johnson)‘Donald Blumberg Photographs: Selections From the Master Sets’(through Nov. 22) In his early days shooting on the streets of New York, Mr. Blumberg discovered that parishioners walking out of the gaping door of St. Patrick’s Cathedral appeared to be emerging from deep, empty space. His resulting photographs, shot from 1965 to 1967, reduce St. Pat’s to a sea of black, and turn the worshipers into highly detailed, if physically awkward, specimens in the void. Soon after, Mr. Blumberg’s gaze shifted from the street to his television screen, arranging images of Lyndon Johnson or Richard Nixon into conceptually sophisticated mosaics. Now 80, he is still shooting his TV, and though he continues to keep one eye on politics, the other is gazing at the inanities of home shopping and televangelism. Yale University Art Gallery, 1111 Chapel Street, New Haven, 203-432-0600, artgallery.yale.edu. (Jason Farago)Dia:Beacon: Robert Irwin: ‘Excursus: Homage to the Square³'(continuing) A walk-in maze with walls of white scrim lit by color-filtered fluorescent tubes, Mr. Irwin’s “Excursus: Homage to the Square³” had its debut in 1998 at the Dia Center for the Arts in Chelsea. It was so popular that the curators elected to keep it on view a year longer than its originally planned run. It’s reincarnation here is similarly transporting, if not as thoroughly as the original was. But to experience it at Dia:Beacon along Minimalist works by other artists that encourage heightened perceptual attention to the here and now is as spiritually calming as it is historically illuminating. 3 Beekman Street, Beacon, 845-440-0100, diaart.org. (Johnson)★ ‘Enigmas: The Art of Bada Shanren (1626–1705)'(through Jan. 3) Beginning next January, the Freer Gallery of Art in Washington will go dark for a year and a half while it’s 1923 building gets an overhaul. Its Chinese painting collection will be especially missed. And as if intent on leaving a potent memory of it, the museum has served up a sparkler of final show, centered on a charismatic 17th-century superstar whose life encompassed dramatic shifts of fortune, and whose art holds mysteries yet to be understood. 1050 Independence Avenue SW, 202-633-1000, asia.si.edu. (Cotter)★ Museum of Fine Arts Boston: ‘Made in the Americas: The New World Discovers Asia’(through Feb. 15) One of the great gifts that multiculturalist thinking gave us was freedom from the tyranny of purity. Simply put, there’s no such thing, at least not in art. Everything is a mix, and this has always been true. Globalism, which we take to be so 21st century, is as old as the hills. In this smallish show those hills encompass the Andes, the Alps, the Appalachians and Mount Fuji between the early 16th to the late 18th century. The main setting includes large swaths of North, Central and South America being colonized by various European powers, all of which had lucrative commercial links to Asia, and they were bringing Asia with them to the New World. The result: some of the most brilliant American art ever. 465 Huntington Avenue, Boston, 617-267-9300, mfa.org. (Cotter)★ National Museum of African Art: ‘Conversations: African and African American Artists in Dialogue’(through Jan. 24) For its 50th anniversary, this museum has brilliantly thread together work from two sources: its own holdings in African material and the Camille O. and William H. Cosby Jr. collection of African-American art. The Cosby collection, weighted toward canonical figures like Romare Bearden and Charles White, will bring in the crowds, but it is the curators and museum itself, which is in a period of renaissance, that have made the show rise well above predictability. Smithsonian Institution, 950 Independence Avenue SW, Washington, 202-633-4600, africa.si.edu. (Cotter)Advertisement★ Wadsworth Atheneum Museum of Art(ongoing) The skilled refurbishing of the Atheneum’s storied Morgan Memorial Building reveals as never before the museum’s splendors. The Great Hall is triple-hung with European paintings encircled by a spirited art-historical Cliff Notes from Egypt to Florence. On the second floor the fabulous Cabinet of Art and Curiosities leads to even more often outstanding paintings – Baroque to Modernism – accompanied by an array of decorative objects, especially porcelains. 600 Main Street, Hartford, Conn., 860-278-2670, thewadsworth.org. (Smith)Last ChanceBilly Childish: ‘flowers, nudes and birch trees: New Paintings 2015’(closes on Saturday) This skilled if unoriginal painter, who is better known as a poet and musician, should avoid figures and stick to his landscapes. These have a pleasant Nabi-like density, although they need to be differentiated more from the photographs on which they are apparently based. They might be even closer to Peter Doig’s hallucinatory scenes of nature – but that’s a more interesting problem. Lehmann Maupin Chelsea, 536 West 22nd Street, Chelsea, 212-255-2923, lehmannmaupin.com. (Smith)★ ‘Elaine de Kooning Portrayed’(closes on Saturday) While she is probably best known for having been Willem de Kooning’s wife, Elaine de Kooning had an interesting life and career of her own. Indeed, if an enterprising filmmaker wanted to make a romantic biopic evoking the New York artworld from the rise of its bohemian avant garde in the 1930s and ’40s through the pluralist era of the ’70s and ’80s, he or she could not find a more suitable subject than Ms. de Kooning. Adding up to a collective portrait, this show’s 18 paintings and drawings include four outstanding self-portraits by the artist herself along with works by Mr. de Kooning, Fairfield Porter, Hedda Sterne and Alex Katz. Pollock-Krasner House and Study Center, 830 Springs-Fireplace Road, East Hampton, N.Y., 631-324-4929, sb.cc.stonybrook.edu/pkhouse. (Johnson)Robert Indiana: ‘Sign Paintings 1960-65’(closes on Saturday) A chance to see the Pop artist at his earliest, smallest and possibly best, in a gallery that seems made for their display, this show presents 17 canvases and one painting on wood that investigate the visual potential of words, numbers and the occasional eating implement. The ubiquitous four-square “LOVE” motif is included. Craig F. Starr Gallery, 5 East 73rd Street, Manhattan, 212-570-1739, starr-art.com. (Smith)Metropolitan Museum of Art: ‘The Roof Garden Commission: Pierre Huyghe’(closes on Sunday) This outdoor rooftop exhibition is about time. The main attraction is a massive fish tank containing a curious assortment of objects, animate and inanimate. As if by magic, a boulder of lava floats in the water, its top rising a bit above the surface. A couple of inches below is a mound of sand around which are swimming little brown eel-like lampreys and bright orange Triops cancriformis, or tadpole shrimp, two species thought not to have evolved in millions of years. Elsewhere on the roof, a boulder of Manhattan schist, the material that forms the bedrock for many New York City skyscrapers, represents geological duration. 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org. (Johnson)Eduardo Paolozzi: ‘Horizon of Expectations’(closes on Sunday) In the best Pop Art tradition — that is, blurring the boundary between art and life — the three Eduardo Paolozzi sculptures from the 1960s and ’70s here actually did time as playground equipment, before being stripped of paint and becoming sculpture again. Accompanying the sculptures are screen prints from two series: the bright, hallucinogenic “Z.E.E.P. (Zero Energy Experimental Pile)” series, made from Paolozzi collages from 1969 to 1970, which include images that illustrate Cold War fears and manias; and the muted and pastel “Calcium Light Night” (1974-6) series, which responds to musical compositions by Charles Ives, but also mirrors the repeating curves and mechanical patterns of the sculptures. Clearing, 396 Johnson Avenue, at Morgan Avenue, Bushwick, Brooklyn, 718-456-0396, c-l-e-a-r-i-n-g.com. (Schwendener)★ Josh Smith: ‘Sculpture’(closes on Saturday) This artist is devoted to unpredictability and a seeming nonchalance that usually pay off, or at least stir curiosity about his next move. His new “sculptures” — no exception – feature loose, spare marks on panels painted white that were made a few years ago and left outside. The results suggest works abandoned by Cy Twombly. Once more Mr. Smith’s version of bone elegance, robust touch and assured composition convince. Luhring Augustine, 531 West 24th Street, Chelsea, 212-206-9100, luhringaugustine.com. (Smith)A version of this schedule appears in print on October 30, 2015, on Page C20 of the New York edition with the headline: The Listings: Art.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.