AdvertisementSupported byFull reviews of recent dance performances: nytimes.com/dance. A searchable guide to these and other performances is at nytimes.com/events.★ American Ballet Theater(through Sunday) The company’s fall season — and its 75th anniversary celebration — conclude with three more mixed bills, which include works by Frederick Ashton, Kurt Jooss, Mark Morris, Alexei Ratmansky, Paul Taylor, Twyla Tharp and the newest of the bunch, the principal dancer and budding choreographer Marcelo Gomes. Friday at 7:30 p.m., Saturday and Sunday at 2 p.m., David H. Koch Theater, Lincoln Center, 212-496-0600, abt.org. (Siobhan Burke)★ Ballet Memphis(through Sunday) Ballet Memphis makes a concerted effort to ensure that the dance it presents is reflective of its hometown. Initiatives like the River Project and the Memphis Project have stocked the company’s repertory with work inspired by the city (the “river” being the Mississippi, which flows right by). Six original works, many hailing from those initiatives, come to New York in the company’s first visit since 2007. Choreographers include Matthew Neenan, Gabrielle Lamb, Julia Adam and several company members. Friday and Saturday at 8 p.m., also at 2 p.m. on Saturday and Sunday; Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-242-0800, joyce.org. (Brian Schaefer)BalletCollective(Wednesday and Thursday) Troy Schumacher, a dancer with New York City Ballet — and, increasingly, a choreographer for that company — runs this troupe on the side, a vehicle for his inventive collaborations with composers and visual artists. He unveils two new pieces, including a duet for the City Ballet dancers David Prottas and Taylor Stanley, alongside two works from last year, “Dear and Blackbirds” and “All That We See.” At 7:30 p.m., Skirball Center for the Performing Arts, 566 La Guardia Place, at Washington Square South, Greenwich Village, 866-811-4111, nyuskirball.org. (Burke)BalletNext(through Nov. 7) Michele Wiles, a former dancer with American Ballet Theater and the founder of this adventurous company, continues to challenge ballet in new ways. Last year, she collaborated with Jay Donn, a flex dancer, to find harmony in their disparate styles. They’re back with the premiere of “Don’t Blink,” which builds on that dialogue. Also in that program, running through Saturday, is Ms. Wiles’s “Ushuaia” and Brian Reeder’s “Strange Flowers.” For Program B, Tuesday through Nov. 7, Ms. Wiles turns to jazz, recruiting the Grammy-winning trumpeter Tom Harrell and his ensemble for “Apogee in 3.” At 7:30 p.m., with additional performances on Saturdays at 2 p.m., New York Live Arts, 219 West 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-924-0077, newyorklivearts.org. (Schaefer)Monica Bill Barnes(Wednesdays through Dec. 16) Karaoke night meets office party in “Happy Hour,” the latest concoction from Ms. Barnes and Anna Bass, best known these days as the dancers — alongside the radio personality Ira Glass — in the touring revue “Three Acts, Two Dancers, One Radio Host.” Their new weekly gig, in a Lower Manhattan dance studio, features the cheeky duo playing two guys playing their everyday selves, as Ms. Barnes continues her love affair with awkwardness, failure and physical comedy. The audience gets drinks, prizes and the chance to sing. At 6:30 p.m., Studio G, Gibney Dance: Agnes Varis Performing Arts Center, 280 Broadway, near Chambers Street, 646-837-6809, monicabillbarnes.com. (Burke)★ Company XIV(through Nov. 15) This flirtatious company, which combines ballet and contemporary dance with elements of baroque and burlesque, specializes in sexy, spicy, opulent interpretations of fairy-tale classics. This fall, the director and choreographer Austin McCormick introduces his take on “Cinderella,” which comes with a dash of opera and vaudeville. Because of titillating costumes and scenarios, and free-flowing libations, performances are for adults only. Tuesdays through Saturdays at 8 p.m., Sundays at 5 p.m., Minetta Lane Theater, 18 Minetta Lane, Greenwich Village, 800-745-3000, companyxiv.com. (Schaefer)Garth Fagan Dance(Tuesday through Nov. 8) In a new work, Mr. Fagan pays tribute to his friend — and a friend of many in the worlds of theater, dance and film — the multitalented Geoffrey Holder. Restructured since its summer premiere at Lincoln Center Out of Doors, the piece evokes the festive spirit of Mr. Holder’s work and life, as well as his 59-year marriage to the great dancer Carmen de Lavallade. The evening, saluting the company’s 45th anniversary, also includes some Fagan classics and a premiere by the longtime company member Norwood Pennewell. Tuesday and Wednesday at 7:30 p.m., Thursday and next Friday at 8 p.m., Nov. 7 at 2 and 8 p.m., Nov. 8 at 2 and 7:30 p.m., Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-242-0800, joyce.org. (Burke)★ Neil Greenberg, Yvonne Meier and Jennifer Monson(Thursday through Nov. 7) In “together and separately,” these thoughtful, experienced experimentalists perform, well, together and separately, offering their own works and a brief collaboration. Ms. Monson revisits old ways of working in “Folkdances for an Untidy Cardinal”; Mr. Greenberg presents “this solo,” an outtake from his most recent evening-length work; and Ms. Meier makes some noise with sound-generating costumes and the drummer Chris Jager. It remains to be seen how the three will come together. At 8 p.m., Jack, 505½ Waverly Avenue, near Fulton Street, Clinton Hill, Brooklyn, jackny.org. (Burke)Sally Gross, Kenneth King and Sally Silvers(Friday through Sunday) The Construction Company, a 45-year-old arts organization, presents an evening of new and revivified works by the veteran choreographers Ms. Silvers and Mr. King, as well as their colleague Ms. Gross, who died in July. The program, “A Trail of Irreverence,” honors their shared and enduring commitment to choreographic rule-breaking. It also celebrates the publication of Mr. King’s two new novels and his return to dance after a writing hiatus. Friday and Saturday at 8 p.m., Sunday at 3 p.m., University Settlement, 184 Eldridge Street, at Rivington Street, Lower East Side, 212-924-7882, universitysettlement.org. (Burke)★ ‘Hagoromo’(Tuesday, Thursday through Nov. 8) This highly collaborative new work, directed by the visual artist David Michalek and choreographed by David Neumann, reimagines a classic of Japanese Noh drama through opera, dance and puppetry. The sprawling cast and creative team includes members of the Brooklyn Youth Chorus, the musicians of International Contemporary Ensemble and, most centrally, the former New York City Ballet principals Jock Soto and Wendy Whelan, who inhabit the roles of a fisherman and a fallen angel. Tuesday and Thursday through Nov. 7 at 7:30 p.m., Nov. 8 at 3 p.m., Harvey Theater, Brooklyn Academy of Music, 651 Fulton Street, Fort Greene, 718-636-4100, bam.org. (Burke)Niall Jones and Nico Brown(Wednesday through Nov. 7) Gibney Dance brings back its DoublePlus series, in which well-known choreographers present the work of emerging and underexposed artists. First up this season, selected by Tere O’Connor, are two powerful dancers with smart ideas. Mr. Jones’s “Part II: Jean” explores loss and how the body holds onto it, while Mr. Brown’s “Miami Spice” takes formal inspiration from the wide-open landscapes of his rural upbringing. At 7:30 p.m., Gibney Dance: Agnes Varis Performing Arts Center, 280 Broadway, near Chambers Street, Lower Manhattan, 646-837-6809, gibneydance.org. (Burke)★ Jon Kinzel(through Saturday) Mr. Kinzel, a maker of gently convoluted dances, unveils a curiously titled new work for an intergenerational cast, “Cowhand Con Man.” A meditation on “physical endurance and psychic restlessness,” according to a news release, the piece draws on his almost 30-year history as a choreographer and improviser. At 7:30 p.m., Gibney Dance: Agnes Varis Performing Arts Center, 280 Broadway, near Chambers Street, Lower Manhattan, 646-837-6809, gibneydance.org. (Burke)★ Ralph Lemon(Tuesday through Nov. 10) Mr. Lemon’s exquisitely interdisciplinary “Scaffold Room,” which some New Yorkers may have seen last fall at Bard College, comes to the Kitchen in an expanded format. Part installation (on view during gallery hours) and part performance — or what Mr. Lemon calls “a lecture-performance-musical” — the work engages deeply, sometimes violently, with ideas about the female artist in American contemporary art and pop culture. This iteration includes a Graphic Reading Room, where artists including Yvonne Rainer, Fred Moten and Miguel Gutierrez read explicit passages from works of literature on themes of power, identity and sexuality. Performances at 8 p.m., with additional 2 p.m. performance on Nov. 10, 512 West 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-255-5793, thekitchen.org; see website for Graphic Reading schedule. (Burke)Mina Nishimura(through Saturday) While reading “Sickened Primadonna,” a biographical novel by Tatsumi Hijikata, the founder of the Japanese performance art butoh, the Tokyo-born artist Mina Nishimura drew hundreds of pictures, including a character she called Princess Cabbage. That character in turn begot a work of the same name in which Ms. Nishimura undergoes what Siobhan Burke described in The New York Times as a “chilling” metamorphosis. “Princess Cabbage” is paired with “Celery of Everything,” a quartet that, according to the venue’s website, attempts to connect “internal landscapes and external forms.” At 8 p.m., Danspace Project, St. Mark’s Church, 131 East 10th Street, East Village, 866-811-4111, danspaceproject.org. (Schaefer)Stephen Petronio(Friday) Mr. Petronio joins forces with the artist Teresita Fernández for “Luminous Mischief,” an improvisational performance beneath Ms. Fernández’s hovering, reflective sculpture in Madison Square Park. A group of dancers and brass musicians, solicited for the occasion, meets for the first time at the event’s outset. Mr. Petronio directs, leaving plenty of room for spontaneous encounters among performers and passers-by. At 6 p.m., Madison Avenue, at 23rd Street, madisonsquarepark.org; free. (Burke)Lionel Popkin(through Sunday) In Lionel Popkin’s “Ruth Doesn’t Live Here Anymore,” the titular Ruth refers to Ruth St. Denis, a doyenne of early modern dance (Martha Graham was a pupil). St. Denis was known for her “oriental” dances, which Mr. Popkin wrestles with. Valid artistic influence or cultural appropriation? The Los Angeles-based Mr. Popkin, who is half-Jewish and half-Indian, turns the question on his own work with help from three dancers, two musicians and a leaf blower. Friday and Sunday at 7:30 p.m., Sunday at 3 p.m., Abrons Arts Center, 466 Grand Street, at Pitt Street, Lower East Side, 866-811-4111, abronsartscenter.org. (Schaefer)★ Sankai Juku(Friday and Saturday) Nearly a decade since its last visit to New York, the venerable butoh collective Sankai Juku returns with “Umusuna: Memories Before History.” The 2012 work meditates on the geography of birth, both as a specific place and as a broader concept that includes earth and its elements (represented by rich colors). Bald and powdered white, crawling across the stage or floating in skirts, the performers evoke newborns and ghosts. Sand, cascading throughout, renders the stage a giant hourglass. At 7:30 p.m., Howard Gilman Opera House, Brooklyn Academy of Music, 30 Lafayette Avenue, at Ashland Place, Fort Greene, 718-636-4100, bam.org. (Schaefer)★ Spectrum Dance Theater(Friday) In 1991 Donald Byrd created “The Minstrel Show” to critique the convention of blackface and to give historical context to the racially motivated murder of 16-year-old Yusef Hawkins. In the more than two decades since, Mr. Byrd has updated the work to reflect on contemporary race relations and recent killings, like those of Trayvon Martin, Eric Garner and Michael Brown. In “The Minstrel Show Revisited,” Mr. Byrd’s Seattle dance troupe presents a provocative fusion of entertainment and social indictment. At 8 p.m., Skirball Center for the Performing Arts, 566 La Guardia Place, at Washington Square South, Greenwich Village, 866-811-4111, nyuskirball.org. (Schaefer)Emily Wexler(Friday and Saturday) A dance called “Blood Trees” sounds appropriately spooky for this time of year, especially one by Ms. Wexler, who’s been known to induce chills with her wildness onstage. The choreographer is one of six performers in this long-developing new work, which addresses the public consumption of women’s bodies and the nature of being seen. At 8 p.m., Center for Performance Research, 361 Manhattan Avenue, near Jackson Street, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, 718-349-2010, cprnyc.org‘Where Sculpture and Dance Meet: Minimalism from 1961 to 1979’(closes on Saturday) This exhibition at Loretta Howard Gallery examines the interchange of ideas among choreographers and sculptors in the 1960s and ′70s. Sculptures by Ronald Bladen, Donald Judd, Robert Morris, Andy Warhol and Sol LeWitt share the space with videos of performances by Trisha Brown, Lucinda Childs, Merce Cunningham, Simone Forti and Yvonne Rainer. Friday from 10 a.m. to 6 p.m. and Saturday from 11 a.m. to 6 p.m., 525-531 West 26th Street, Chelsea, 212-695-0164, lorettahoward.com. (Burke)Zullo/RawMovement(through Sunday) In the collection of essays “Space & Psyche,” contributors consider the psychological impact of architecture. That book, and that idea, inspired “The Architecture of Proximity,” a new work by John J. Zullo for his company. Drawing from elements of postmodern dance and vogueing, Mr. Zullo explores the relationship of bodies to space – a shared feature of dance and architecture – in particular the space between dancer and audience. Friday and Saturday at 8 p.m., Sunday at 3 p.m., 14th Street Y LABA Theater, 344 East 14th Street, East Village, 646-395-4322, 14streety.org. (Schaefer)Advertisement