OCT. 29, 2015
Full reviews of recent classical performances: nytimes.com/classical. A searchable guide to these and other performances is at nytimes.com/events.Opera★ ‘Lulu’ (Thursday) The artist William Kentridge’s much-anticipated production of Berg’s masterpiece, new to the Metropolitan Opera, will go on without the involvement of the company’s music director, James Levine, who withdrew earlier this month to focus on a run of “Tannhäuser.” Lothar Koenigs has stepped in to lead a cast that includes the world’s reigning Lulu, Marlis Petersen, in her final run in the role, as well as Susan Graham, Daniel Brenna, Paul Groves, Johan Reuter and Franz Grundheber. At 7 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Zachary Woolfe)★ ‘Rigoletto’(Saturday and Wednesday) The luminous soprano Olga Peretyatko is a captivating Gilda opposite the bright-voiced tenor Stephen Costello as the Duke of Mantua in this fresh and confident revival of Michael Mayer’s production set in a Las Vegas casino. The baritone George Gagnidze marshals impressive depths in the title role; the bass Stefan Kocan and the mezzo Katarina Leoson make a fine pair as the assassin Sparafucile and his sister Maddalena. Pablo Heras-Casado conducts. Saturday at 8 p.m., Wednesday at 7:30 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Corinna da Fonseca-Wollheim)★ ‘Tannhäuser’(Saturday) The strong cast in this revival of Wagner’s “Tannhäuser,” conducted by James Levine, is headed by the clarion-voiced tenor Johan Botha, who may not have much dramatic presence but sings the punishing role with verve, power and beauty. Michelle DeYoung as Venus and Eva-Maria Westbroek as Elisabeth also give impassioned performances. And the great baritone Peter Mattei is magnificent as Wolfram. Otto Schenk’s very traditional production, which has its merits, has been gone from the house since 2004. (The Saturday matinee is also an HD broadcast to international movie theaters.) At noon, Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Anthony Tommasini)Advertisement‘Tosca’(Monday) The tenor Roberto Aronica continues his impressive portrayal of Cavaradossi in this revival of Luc Bondy’s grim-louche production, conducted by Paolo Carignani. The soprano Angela Gheorghiu steps into the title role; the baritone Zeljko Lucic takes on the evil Scarpia. At 8 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Corinna da Fonseca-Wollheim)Advertisement‘Turandot’(Friday, Tuesday) Lise Lindstrom, the exciting American soprano, continues her run in the title role of the Met’s revival of Franco Zeffirelli’s spectacular and problematic 1987 production. Marcelo Álvarez remains a firm Calàf, Leah Crocetto is Liù, and James Morris continues as Timur. Paolo Carignani leads the orchestra and massed chorus with taste. Friday at 8 p.m., Tuesday at 7:30 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (David Allen)Classical MusicAmerican Classical Orchestra(Tuesday) The American Classical Orchestra, a respected period-instrument ensemble, performs Bach’s towering “St. John Passion” with its chorus and a strong roster of vocal soloists. The tenor Rufus Müller sings the Evangelist, a role for which he has been internationally acclaimed. Thomas C. Crawford, the group’s founding music director, conducts. At 8 p.m., Alice Tully Hall, Lincoln Center, 212-721-6500, lincolncenter.org. (Tommasini)Piotr Beczala(Friday) In what is billed as his New York recital debut, this thrilling tenor, long a star at the Metropolitan Opera, sings Schumann’s “Dichterliebe,” plus songs by Dvořák, Rachmaninoff and, most interestingly, Mr. Beczala’s Polish countryman, Mieczysław Karłowicz. At 7:30 p.m., Zankel Hall, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Allen)★ Christine Brewer and Paul Jacobs(Sunday) The soprano Christine Brewer may disappoint some admirers of her sumptuous voice by not performing more often in opera. Still, she makes up for it by giving some imaginative concert programs, including this one, titled “Prayer,” part of the White Light Festival, for which she is joined by the brilliant organist Paul Jacobs. There will be works by Bach, Handel, Wolf, Puccini, Nadia Boulanger and others. Sunday at 5 p.m., Alice Tully Hall, Lincoln Center, 212-721-6500 , lincolncenter.org. (Tommasini)Chamber Music Society(Thursday) The popular contemporary-music series in the intimate Kaplan Penthouse presents a fine roster of performers including the pianist Michael Brown, the cellist Nicholas Canellakis and the horn player Eric Reed for a program of new chamber works. Among the composers are George Perle, Andrew Norman, Paul Lansky and the rarely performed Soviet “underground” composer Edison Denisov. At 7:30 p.m., Kaplan Penthouse, Lincoln Center, 165 West 65th Street, 212-875-5788, chambermusicsociety.org. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)Michael Couper(Saturday) This saxophonist leads the world premiere of John Plant’s “Insomnia,” featuring ChoEun Lee on piano and the soprano Yungee Rhie. Also on the bill are works by Mohammed Fairouz, Joseph Waters and William Bolcom. At 2 p.m., Weill Recital Hall, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Allen)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Daedalus Quartet(Monday) The lively, young string players of the Daedalus Quartet are joined by members of SPEAKmusic, a collective of Columbia University and Juilliard School musicians and composers, for an enticing program titled “A Legacy of Czech Music.” Presented in the intimate Buttenwieser Hall at the 92nd Street Y, the program includes works by Martinu, Ullmann, Cilkova, Kalabis and Jezek. At 8:30 p.m., Buttenwieser Hall, 92nd Street Y, 1395 Lexington Avenue, 212-415-5500, 92y.org. (Tommasini)★ Evgeny Kissin(Tuesday and next Friday) The Russian virtuoso pianist always plays to overflow crowds at Carnegie Hall. This season, as part of Mr. Kissin’s Perspectives series at the hall, he will play a demanding recital program twice in a single week, the first pianist to do so at Carnegie since Horowitz. His program has works by Mozart, Beethoven, Brahms, Albéniz and Larregla. Tuesday and next Friday at 8 p.m., Isaac Stern Auditorium, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Tommasini)AdvertisementNew York Philharmonic(Friday, Saturday and Wednesday through Nov. 7) Jaap van Zweden conducts Beethoven’s Fifth in a program that also includes Mozart’s life-affirming Piano Concerto No. 23 with Inon Barnatan as soloist and Britten’s Sinfonia da Requiem. On Wednesday and Thursday Alan Gilbert takes the helm for an all-Mozart program that includes the Divertimento in D, the Gran Partita for winds and the Horn Concerto No. 2 with Philharmonic principal Philip Myers as soloist. Friday at 2 p.m., Saturday at 2 and 8 p.m., Wednesday and Thursday at 7:30 p.m., David Geffen Hall, Lincoln Center, 212-875-5656, nyphil.org. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)Oratorio Society(Monday) Kent Tritle reprises Juraj Filas’s “Requiem,” which he also conducted as his goodbye to the musicians of the Church at St. Ignatius Loyola in 2011. With the chorus and orchestra of the venerable Oratorio Society sing soloists Susanna Phillips, Matthew Plenk and John Moore. At 8 p.m., Stern Auditorium, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Allen)Richard Tucker Music Foundation Gala(Sunday) Since 1975, the Richard Tucker Music Foundation has been fostering the careers of emerging singers. The yearly gala benefit concert has become a must-attend event for opera-lovers in New York. This year’s winner of the prestigious Tucker Award is the exciting mezzo-soprano Jamie Barton, who will perform along with eminent artists including Renée Fleming and Christine Goerke. There are four tenors on the program: Piotr Beczala, Stephen Costello, Lawrence Brownlee and, believe it or not, Andrea Bocelli. (Will he sing without the amplification he typically utilizes?) Eugene Kohn conducts members of the Metropolitan Opera Orchestra. Sunday at 6:30 p.m., David Geffen Hall, Lincoln Center, 212-721-6500, richardtucker.org. (Tommasini)★ András Schiff(Friday) The eminent and unmissable Hungarian pianist addresses the question of late style with this recital, in which he plays the final sonatas of Haydn, Mozart, Beethoven and Schubert. At 8 p.m., Isaac Stern Auditorium, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Allen)Sonic Blossom(Friday through Nov. 8) “May I give you the gift of a song?” Don’t say no if you are accosted with this question at the Metropolitan Museum this weekend. Answer in the affirmative and you not only receive the gift of a Schubert song, sung by one of a roving team of young singers, but become part of the artist Lee Mingwei’s interactive performance work, “Sonic Blossom.” The Blanche and A. L. Levine Court (Friday and Saturday and Nov. 6 through 8), the Arthur M. Sackler Gallery (Sunday through Thursday), During museum hours. 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)John Zorn Festival(Friday and Saturday) A continuation of National Sawdust’s Zorn festival has four concerts. On Friday, there’s music for solo piano, then music for cello(s), both including world premieres. Saturday’s Halloween special includes “Walpurgisnacht” and “All Hallows Eve” before a performance of Zorn’s recent album “Simulacrum.” At 8 and 10 p.m., 80 North Sixth Street, at Wythe Avenue, 646-779-8455, nationalsawdust.org. (Allen)‘A Midsummer Night’s Dream’(Friday through Sunday) Expect an explosion of high-energy drumming and powerful voices as the Isango Ensemble, a South African company that draws on the deep pool of vocal talent from the townships around Cape Town, takes on Britten’s opera with a dusting of African folklore. Friday at 7 p.m., Saturday at 2 p.m., Sunday at 12 and 5 p.m., New Victory Theater, 209 West 42nd Street, Manhattan, 646-223-3010, newvictory.org. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)A version of this schedule appears in print on October 30, 2015, on Page C19 of the New York edition with the headline: The Listings: Classical.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.