By KEN JOHNSONOCT. 29, 2015
Wendell Castle, who’s been called the Dale Chihuly of the Studio Furniture movement, produces a seductive species of high-end kitsch. Over the past six decades he’s created tables, chairs, cabinets and sculptural objects marked by exquisite craftsmanship, stylistic variety and playfully inventive ways with form and technique. His works in wood are invariably sumptuous and suavely appealing but rarely if ever so personally imaginative as to tip from postmodernist design into mind-bending art.“Wendell Castle Remastered,” at the Museum of Arts and Design, won’t change opinions for or against Mr. Castle’s work, but it’s an engaging show. It focuses on a process that he became noted for in the 1960s and that he has taken up again recently with the assistance of digital technology. Called “stack lamination,” it involves gluing together thick, flat pieces of wood to create large volumes, which can be carved into shapes that would be impossible to achieve with single logs.Organized by Ronald T. Labaco and Samantha De Tillio, curators at the museum, the exhibition features 15 pieces from the 1960s and 16 from the past four years, along with a selection of drawings and maquettes.Works from both periods have flowing lines and smooth convex or concave surfaces, which are visually counterpointed by the horizontal, parallel lines of the lamination joints. In “Double Chair” (1967), where a conjoined pair of curvy seats grows out of a pedestal resembling a mushroom stalk, there’s an inviting, organic warmth due partly to the ruddy color and oaken grain. Formally reminiscent of the work of sculptural predecessors like Jean Arp and Henry Moore, it has a mildly surrealistic feeling. Because it also calls to mind molded plastic furniture of the ’60s, it has a modish, Pop Art quality.The new works are larger and more complicated than the earlier ones thanks to 3-D imaging technology and a giant, robotic carving machine. One of the most impressive is a table titled “Suspended Disbelief” (2015), which looks as if it were made for the spacious lobby of an expensive Manhattan hotel. From a seven-foot-tall trio of converging, conical forms resembling the tips of monstrous tendrils, a roughly oval slab with an irregular hole near the center extends horizontally and without legs some 10 feet out into space. Made of darkly stained ash, the glossy tabletop is like a hovering pool of black ink. It’s spectacularly chic.Mr. Castle also has lately ventured into bronze casting but with less salubrious results. Two examples made this year now reside on the sidewalk in front of the museum. “Temptation” is a bench in the shape of a dugout canoe supported by podlike forms; “Wandering Mountain” has two bucket seats attached to tall cones leaning this way and that. Lacking the color, grain and organic tensility of wood, both pieces have a dull, leaden appearance made worse by waxy, lumpy, greenish-brown surfaces. They’re downright ugly. Bronze evidently is not Mr. Castle’s thing.­“Wendell Castle Remastered” continues through Feb. 28 at the Museum of Arts and Design, 2 Columbus Circle, Manhattan; 212-299-7777, madmuseum­.org.A version of this review appears in print on October 30, 2015, on Page C34 of the New York edition with the headline: Liberating Whimsy Within the Wood.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.