By KATHRYN SHATTUCKOCT. 3, 2015
8 P.M. (HBO) AMERICAN SNIPER (2014) A beefed-up Bradley Cooper received an Oscar nomination for his portrayal of Chris Kyle, a Navy SEAL sniper who served four tours of duty in Iraq, where he tallied 160 confirmed kills, only to be shot dead in 2013 by a Marine veteran he had taken to a Texas gun range to help deal with post-traumatic stress disorder. Sienna Miller plays Taya, the wife left behind as Mr. Kyle returns to the war zone time after time. “The politics of the Iraq war are entirely absent, which is a political statement in its own right,” A. O. Scott wrote in The New York Times about Clint Eastwood’s controversial adaptation of Mr. Kyle’s memoir. “And though George W. Bush’s name is never invoked, ‘American Sniper’ can be seen as an expression of nostalgia for his Manichaean approach to foreign policy. It can equally — and this may amount to the same thing — be seen as upholding the Hollywood western tradition of turning complicated historical events and characters into fables and heroes.” In other words, he added, “it’s only a movie.”7 P.M. (13) THIS OLD HOUSE A new project begins as the general contractor Tom Silva, the master carpenter Norm Abram and their crew help Katherine and Murat Bicer renovate their 1895 Victorian in Belmont, Mass., by rebuilding the once-grand front porch, opening up the kitchen and converting two bedrooms into a master suite. In a new season of “Ask This Old House,” at 7:30, the landscape designers Roger Cook and Jenn Newada work with students to spruce up a school garden.8 P.M. (NBC) LIVE FROM NEW YORK! Archival footage, stolen moments and interviews with actors, writers, musical guests and crew members trace 40 years in the history of “Saturday Night Live.” At 11:30, Miley Cyrus opens the show’s 41st season as both host and musical guest.8 P.M. (Lifetime) THE UNAUTHORIZED BEVERLY HILLS, 90210 (2015) This latest installment in Lifetime’s “Unauthorized” franchise reimagines what happened behind the scenes in this series’s first four seasons.9 P.M. (13) BULLITT (1968) Steve McQueen shows what he has as Lt. Frank Bullitt, a San Francisco cop with a fast car who is out to find the kingpin who killed a witness under his protection — and save his career from the wrath of a politician (Robert Vaughn). Jacqueline Bisset is Cathy, the love interest, in this film from Peter Yates. McQueen “embodies his special kind of aware, existential cool — less taut and hard-shell than Bogart, less lost and adrift than Mastroianni, a little of both,” Renata Adler wrote in The Times, adding that he “simply gets better all the time.”Advertisement9 P.M. (ABC Family) FAN GIRL (2015) When she has to come up with a final project in her filmmaking class at school, Telulah (Kiernan Shipka), a sarcastic 15-year-old, finds inspiration in her latest obsession: the band All Time Low. Now, if only she could keep her mother, Mary (Meg Ryan), off social media — and out of her life.Advertisement9 P.M. (CUNY) WALLANDER: THE SECRET After a dead boy is abandoned in a barn, Kurt (Krister Henriksson), Linda (Johanna Sallstrom) and Stefan (Ola Rapace) investigate the world of child abuse and try to come to terms with their own secrets in the process.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.10 P.M. (CBS) 48 HOURS When Jenna Neulander heard her father’s screams for help, she dialed 911. Her mother, Leslie, was lying unresponsive on the floor of the shower, where Dr. Robert Neulander was performing CPR. Then he moved her body 60 feet to the couple’s bedroom — an act that led the police to believe that he may have murdered his wife. Jim Axelrod delves into the troubled marriage, financial woes and pending separation behind the case.What’s Streaming NowTHE OPEN MIND Alexander Heffner talks with Maria Freire, the president of the Foundation for the National Institutes of Health, about revolutions in medical research. (thirteen.org/openmind)THE DECLINE OF WESTERN CIVILIZATION (1981, 1988, 1998) In this three-part documentary, Penelope Spheeris chronicles the evolving Los Angeles music scene and its tribal youth — punks, metalheads and, finally, gutter punks — with appearances by the Alice Bag Band, Alice Cooper, Black Flag, Catholic Discipline, Fear, Germs, Ozzy Osbourne, Joe Perry, Steven Tyler, W.A.S.P. and X. (fandor.com)A version of this schedule appears in print on October 3, 2015, on Page C5 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Saturday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.