
Inside Art By                     
 ROBIN POGREBIN
 
OCT. 29, 2015
Why does a particular gallery decide to focus on a particular artist at a particular time? A look behind the scenes at three coming exhibitions offers some of the reasons — to showcase a recent body of work, to rediscover a war horse, to introduce an underrecognized talent.Mary Sabbatino, Galerie Lelong’s vice president and partner, decided to team up for the first time with the dealer Andrea Rosen on a Yoko Ono exhibition that explores the artist’s latest thinking (Ms. Ono’s one-woman show at the Museum of Modern Art of work from 1960 to 1971 closed last month).This show, “The Riverbed” — to be installed in both galleries simultaneously — will involve large stones inscribed by Ms. Ono with instructive words like “remember,” “wish” and “dream.”Visitors are meant to pick up the stones, releasing fury or fear into them before putting them down again. “We just tell our anger to the stone, which will understand and take it from us,” said Ms. Ono, who has worked with stones before.Advertisement“I have no separation from animate and inanimate objects,” she said. “It’s life and it’s pulsating. They’re not dead, they’re whispering some power that we can use.”The show — which runs from Dec. 11 until late January — is particularly suited to the winter, Ms. Sabbatino said. “A lot of people are carrying a lot of psychological weight because of the end of the year, the darkness,” she added.Ms. Sabbatino’s and Ms. Rosen’s galleries will house another recurring Ono installation, “Mending Cup,” in which visitors repair broken cups with twine, tape and glue. Each cup is then displayed on a shelf. ”While you’re mending it,” Ms. Ono said, “you’re mending the world as well.”The exhibition will also include “The Line,” in which visitors continue drawing a line started in pencil on paper by Ms. Ono. “I’m saying, ‘This is a line I’ve created,’ ” Ms. Ono said. “ ‘Will you please follow it and make a line all the way to the end of the planet? Let’s go there together.’ ”The New York artist David Reed has not had a painting show in his hometown for eight years. The dealer Peter Blum thought it was about time. “David hopes for a reset of the understanding of his work in New York,” Mr. Blum said, “feeling that it has often been misscategorized here, while understood elsewhere.”AdvertisementIndeed, Mr. Reed said he had been more warmly received in Europe where, in a series of recent shows, he explored the concept of the filmstrip in his paintings. “It’s always been strange to feel that I’m an American painter who’s much more appreciated in Europe than I am here,” he said.Mr. Reed is creating a work for Mr. Blum’s West 57th Street gallery — seven adjacent Technicolor canvases making a 42-foot-long horizontal piece that appears to extend through a wall and into Mr. Blum’s office. “I hope the painting seems endless,” Mr. Reed said.“I’m excited about what I’m doing now,” he added. “I just hope I live long enough to be able to explore it. Painting is a long game — you need a lot of years. I feel like I’m finally getting a feel for certain things and it’s taken me this long to do it.”The dealer Sean Kelly recently grew captivated by the Belgian artist Ilse D’Hollander, in part because of her short but prolific life (she committed suicide in 1997 at 29), in part because he became increasingly aware of her geometric paintings, some of which were featured at David Zwirner last year.“She has this extraordinary talent for distilling form, landscape, abstraction and color,” Mr. Kelly said. “Her palette is very unusual. It has a lot to do with that great tradition of Belgian Northern European artists dealing with a quality of light.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.So he decided to give the artist her first solo show in the United States, traveling to Belgium recently to choose the paintings and watercolors for the exhibition, which opens Jan. 8 at his 10th Avenue gallery.“It’s impossible to separate Ilse D’Hollander’s work from her personality,” Eric Rinckhout wrote in an essay. “She withdrew into her work as into a house, to seek the rest, order and control she could not find in her head at times.”While Ms. D’Hollander’s work period was brief — from 1989 until her death — the last few years were particularly productive. “She really was blasting through,” Mr. Kelly said.“It is a distinct and pure voice — one that was tragically lost very early,” he added. “Who knows where it would have gone?”A version of this article appears in print on October 30, 2015, on Page C24 of the New York edition with the headline: Two Galleries Share One Yoko Ono Show.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »