By JAMES R. OESTREICHOCT. 29, 2015
Could any musical masterwork reveal less of its character on the notated page? Like so much of Bach’s output, “The Art of Fugue,” the great summation from the end of his life, has no tempo or dynamic markings, no slurs or other suggestions of phrasing, no accents or hints of articulation, no flourishes, almost no ornamentation.But in this case, Bach does not even specify an instrument or group of them. The score consists of individual staffs, usually four of them, each with its own line. It is not a quartet, though it is often played as one. Rather, it is an abstraction, a sort of X-ray of the musical texture.All of which places a heavy onus on any who would perform it to supply the flesh and blood. And it creates no end of finger tangles if done by one player on a single keyboard.So it is the brave pianist who will take it on, as Angela Hewitt did on Wednesday evening at the 92nd Street Y. Ms. Hewitt is an experienced and excellent Bachian, as evidenced by a 15-CD compilation of her Bach recordings on the Hyperion label, released a few years ago. It did not include “The Art of Fugue,” which Ms. Hewitt has since recorded, also for Hyperion.AdvertisementMs. Hewitt’s presentation and performance were exemplary. She began with a little talk at the piano, playing the themes of the various movements — 14 contrapuncti, as the fugues are called, four canons and a chorale — and discussing their structure.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.She singled out the thorny Contrapunctus 11, a triple fugue that, she said, can pose something of a crisis for performer and listener alike. She discussed the mysteries surrounding the work’s ending, since Bach, with death approaching, left Contrapunctus 14 unfinished.There was nothing abstract about Ms. Hewitt’s playing. She found an endless variety of moods, emotions and atmospheres over the work’s 90-minute span. Though she highlighted almost all of the myriad thematic entrances, her fingerwork was mostly immaculate.AdvertisementThere was no muss, no drama of the bad sort. But there was real drama in the deathly silence following that truncated ending.A version of this review appears in print on October 30, 2015, on Page C7 of the New York edition with the headline: A Bach Mystery Gracefully Decoded.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.