By ROBERTA SMITHOCT. 29, 2015
Frank Stella is back. His grand, high-spirited, slightly overstuffed retrospective has taken over the fifth and largest exhibition floor of the new Whitney Museum of American Art, where it looks great. As the first big Stella survey in a New York museum in close to 30 years — and the city’s first to take in his whole career — the show provides an overdue update on the mythic, maligned artist who has adamantly done it his way. It is also a further inauguration of the Whitney’s meatpacking district building; the show could never have been pulled off at its old uptown address.“Frank Stella: A Retrospective,” which opens on Friday, reviews Mr. Stella’s nearly 60-year odyssey through and beyond painting, and back again with about 70 often quite large artworks supplemented by drawings, prints, photographs and studies. It moves from his days at the pinnacle of the New York art world as a Minimalist prodigy and the brightest hope of abstract painting through his rogue years as Minimalism’s most prominent, unrepentant apostate. Mr. Stella began by painting himself into a corner — defining his medium so literally that there seemed nothing left to do with it — and has spent most of his career blasting his way out.The totality of the show can make the mind reel with ideas, insights and arguments. Many of these are fomented by an installation that is alternately dazzling, oppressive and nuts. It surrounds us on every side with the sheer physical invention of Mr. Stella’s art, and his drive to use the latest materials and tools, including the computer, and to constantly challenge ideas about what painting can be. He first abandons painting’s four-cornered canvas, then its flat surface, and sometimes the wall — and yet, from time to time, he returns to them all.The exhibition has been organized by Adam D. Weinberg, the Whitney’s director, and Michael Auping, chief curator of the Museum of Modern Art of Fort Worth, working closely with Mr. Stella. Their inspired idea was to make the presentation generally chronological while also jumping around in time, sometimes juxtaposing pieces up to 20 years apart to create stimulating clashes of color, form and process.AdvertisementMr. Stella works in series that sometimes run parallel, each putting a specific formal scheme through its paces, using titles that pull in history, geography, literature, music, zoology. The selection here represents, with at least one but often several works, about 25 of his estimated 50 or so series. People familiar with Mr. Stella’s history should be able to make sense of this presentation; first-time viewers may be thrown. The bet seems to be that the visual fireworks will keep them looking, which is probably true. Definitely true: An illustrated guide delineating Mr. Stella’s actual chronological development would help everyone comprehend the rearranged one in the galleries.Mr. Stella was born in 1936 in Malden, Mass., and he arrived in New York in 1958, the ink barely dry on his diploma from Princeton. He had painted since the age of 14 and was already completely committed to abstraction. Prominence came quickly, starting with his inclusion in “Sixteen Americans” at the Museum of Modern Art in 1959, followed by his gallery debut with Leo Castelli in 1960. By the time of his second Castelli show in 1962, he had more or less made history. Three series of striped and then shaped paintings — “Black,” “Aluminum” and “Copper” — were quickly seen as crucial in the transition from Abstract Expressionism to Minimalism. Influenced by Jasper Johns’s American flag paintings, they pared the medium down to a flat, uninflected object.Advertisement“What you see is what you see,” Mr. Stella said, coining a Minimalist catchphrase. Donald Judd, Mr. Stella’s Minimalist colleague, admiringly compared the Aluminum paintings to slabs.In 1970, when Mr. Stella was 34, the Modern celebrated his haloed progress with an 11-year survey. In 1987, when the sheen was fading, the museum devoted a second survey of the intervening 17 years of work. He was beginning to seem like the Modern’s fledgling Picasso replacement.And then Mr. Stella moved on, and on and on, repudiating Minimalism’s — and his own — careful logic, simple repetitions and quiet unities. He dropped his reserve for increasingly playful bravura and showmanship. As recounted in this show, his stripes broadened into shapes that knocked canvases off square. His somber colors brightened, and he forsook flat canvas for increasingly flamboyant painted aluminum reliefs that threatened to carom off walls. Sculpture followed, in stainless steel, fiberglass, poured molten aluminum and newly invented plastics.Most Stella watchers will have ideas about how this show could have been different. That’s inevitable with an artist as relentlessly, sometimes mindlessly, productive as he is. Some series are not here at all, others seem skimped and still others could have better examples.For me, the presentation lingers too long on the familiar, fetishized early stripe paintings. It’s great to see some of the pre-“Black” paintings, especially the dark red and black striped “Great Jones Street”; the pulsating distillation of “Black” ones like the “Jill,” with its concentric diamond pattern; and the “Aluminum” series, where holes and notches force the stripes into Deco-ish sidesteps. But after that, there’s a sense of marking time.Things really take off once strict chronology is disrupted, conveniently at the point at which Mr. Stella decisively breaks free of both the rectangle and stripes. This occurs in his “Irregular Polygon” series of 1966, which he rightly seems to feel are his first mature works.AdvertisementIn the show’s third, and possibly best gallery, the shift from canvas to metal relief is radically telescoped by a confrontation between three Irregular Polygons, with their conflated parallelograms and triangles of fluorescent color, and four increasingly elaborate aluminum reliefs from the “Moby Dick” series (1986-97). Their cobbled-together elements suggest waves and they jangle all over, front, back and sides with improvised brushwork and even drips.From here, the show leaps backward and forward. “Harran II,” a great painting from the “Protractor” series (1967-71), returns to paint on flat canvas. Then we see the gradual breaking of the surface in the “Polish Village” reliefs of 1971, which have tipping tine-like bars, reminiscent of the stripes, and mostly replace paint with felt, paper, canvas and cardboard collaged onto wood chassis.Mr. Stella’s fan base started to seriously erode with what came next: the increasingly opulent aluminum reliefs — first the Constructivist-like “Brazilian” series (1974-75), with their wedges and bars of saturated jungle color. The “Exotic Bird” (1976-80) and “Indian Bird” (1977-79) series provided further shocks, with curling shapes derived from drafting tools used to design ships. The “Circuits” series (1980-84) took its undulant motifs from the layouts of international auto racetracks.Paint returns with a vengeance in the aluminum reliefs. And things never before allowed — gestural brushwork, scribbling with lithography crayon — only get crazier. Painting is glorified even as the notion of the artist’s touch is ridiculed and exaggerated. Sometimes glitter tops off the layers of mark-making. Mr. Stella began to be called, and to call himself, a Maximalist.Going through this show may be a matter of deciding how far you can stick with Mr. Stella. You could say it allows us each to answer the question, “Where was Frank Stella when you went off his work?” But also: “Where was he when you came back?”We have all waxed and waned. Here the “Irregular Polygons” come on strong, with the “Protractor” works not far behind. Also in the running: “The Fountain,” a mural-like 1992 detour to flatness that collages together five print mediums. But the aluminum reliefs rule, culminating with a beautiful representative from the “Heinrich von Kleist” series (1996-2008), inspired by that German writer’s stories. “ ‘At Sainte Luce!’ [Hoango] [Q#1]” of 1998 has a captivating papery softness but is actually made of elaborately painted cast-aluminum elements clearly devised on the computer, and less clearly derived from photographs of smoke rings that are also in the show.It’s hard not to be impressed with the hulking aluminum and steel sculpture “Raft of the Medusa(Part 1)” (its splashes of once-molten aluminum conjuring the waves of Géricault’s 1818 painting of that name, not to mention Richard Serra, Anselm Kiefer and recent Matthew Barney), or the two big star sculptures from 2014 on view nearby. But for all their pizazz, Mr. Stella’s sculptures seem generic, as if they could have been made by someone else with access to his resources.My hopes lie with recent works from the spiraling “Scarlatti Sonata Kirkpatrick” series (named for the 18th-century Italian composer and the musicologist who cataloged his compositions). Attached to both wall and floor, these levitating works are made of different extruded plastics, usually colored, and they point back to painting, a referent and anchor that Mr. Stella really cannot do without.His art needs to be in an irreverent, sarcastic dialogue with painting, riffing on it, ridiculing it with splashy brushwork, color and so on. This bond allows him to find new ways to be hands-on, to make paintings while also making fun of painting.AdvertisementThe first glimmer of Mr. Stella’s full-blown sensibility, with its penchant for physicality, irreverence, bravura and even juvenile glee, can be found in a very few very early paintings not in this show. Made in 1958, they parodied a sappy 1955-57 painting by Robert Motherwell festooned with the phrase “Je t’aime.” Mr. Stella replaced the love-letter sentiment with words closer to bathroom graffiti: “Your Lips Are Blue,” “Mary Lou Loves Frank” and finally the simultaneously sexist, tough-girl (and now lost) “Mary Lou Douches With Pine-Scented Lysol.”Mr. Stella is postwar and abstract painting’s great jester and adversary, which is not to demean his achievement. Moving through this compelling, feisty show can bring to mind Wallace Stevens’s high-minded yet grounded advice. In the long poem “Notes Toward a Supreme Fiction,” Stevens stipulates the requirements of great art in the headings he gives its three sections: “It must change/ It must be abstract/ It must give pleasure.”Mr. Stella, one of the most literate artists at work today, must know these words. Regardless, his own supreme fictions have fulfilled them, and with a risk-taking extravagance and momentum that have few equals. It seems clear that, even at 79, he is still not done.“Frank Stella: A Retrospective” continues through Feb. 7 at the Whitney Museum of American Art,99 Gansevoort Street, Manhattan; 212-570-3633, whitney.org.A version of this review appears in print on October 30, 2015, on Page C23 of the New York edition with the headline: From Painting  and Beyond,  a Return.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.