AdvertisementSupported byArt ReviewBy Martha SchwendenerHollywood has chewed up and spat out a lengthy list of artists, writers and intellectuals who accepted paychecks from the movie studios in exchange for their work. Few among these, however, were Communists who imagined using the movie apparatus to awaken the benumbed consciousness of the capitalist masses. Zoe Beloff’s current show focuses on two such figures: the Soviet filmmaker Sergei Eisenstein and the German poet and playwright Bertolt Brecht.In three films, large watercolors, architectural models and display cases filled with archival materials, Ms. Beloff tells their stories. Eisenstein stayed in Los Angeles for six months in 1930; Brecht, fleeing Nazi Germany, was there from 1941 to 1947. Neither produced any finished work, although Eisenstein played tennis with Charlie Chaplin and met Walt Disney. (Eisenstein felt that Mickey Mouse had revolutionary potential.)Eisenstein and Brecht were fascinated with the American Dream, embodied in the single-family detached house. Eisenstein made sketches for a film called “Glass House” that offered total freedom but unlimited voyeurism. Brecht was taken with an article he had read in Life magazine about a family that had lived in a model home, essentially under surveillance, at the 1941 Ohio State Fair.Ms. Beloff deftly weaves together these stories, with reflections on the 2008 mortgage crisis, Eisenstein’s psychoanalysis work and Brecht’s theories of “epic theater” and the concept of failure. Ms. Beloff’s film “Two Marxists in Hollywood” (2015) asks about Eisenstein and Brecht’s unrealized Hollywood plans: “Were their musings a utopian project that ended in failure? Or what if their ideas were merely lying in wait for us?” Underscoring how failure in one decade can be mined for hope or action in another, these questions are also printed on the wall at the gallery’s entrance.Zoe Beloff‘A World Redrawn: Eisenstein and Brecht in Hollywood’The James Gallery, the Graduate Center, City University of New York365 Fifth Avenue, at 34th Street Through Nov. 21Advertisement