OCT. 29, 2015
For full reviews of recent concerts: nytimes.com/music. A searchable guide to these and other shows is at nytimes.com/events.Big Freedia (Friday) This self-described queen of New Orleans bounce, a rambunctious strain of hip-hop involving call-and-response rhymes and driving electro beats, has some fairly self-explanatory hit singles, like “Gin in My System.” She also has a Guinness World Record title for most people twerking simultaneously. With Hibou and Boyfriend. At 11:30 p.m., Irving Plaza, 17 Irving Place, at 15th Street, Manhattan, 212-777-6800, irvingplaza.com. (Stacey Anderson)★ Gary Clark Jr. (Friday) This much-vaunted blues singer-guitarist has been called “the next Hendrix” for several years, though none of his axes sport scorch marks yet. In 2014, he shone on the concert disc “Gary Clark Jr. Live,” which features a cover of Hendrix’s “Third Stone From the Sun,” and he recently topped the Billboard Blues charts with the sultry studio album “The Story of Sonny Boy Slim.” At 8 p.m., Terminal 5, 610 West 56th Street, Clinton, 800-745-3000, terminal5nyc.com. (Anderson)Grimes (Wednesday) The Canadian electro-pop star Grimes (whose real name is Claire Boucher) yodels on the edge of shrillness, darting between crushing synths. The tense formula would falter without her clever melodies anchoring it; her third studio album, “Visions,” is both skittish and stalwart. A new album, “Art Angels,” is expected to be released soon. She headlines the 2015 Guggenheim International Gala pre-party. At 9 p.m., Guggenheim Museum, 1071 Fifth Avenue, at 89th Street, 212-360-4257, guggenheim.org. (Anderson)Advertisement★ Richie Hawtin (Wednesday) Mr. Hawtin, the longtime leader of Detroit’s techno scene — both through his own releases and under his abstract pseudonym, Plastikman — has spoken fervently about electro artists’ need to expand boundaries for new fans in the trendy electronic dance music genre. He aims to educate the young masses during this headlining set at the heaviest-hitting club in Williamsburg, Brooklyn. At 10 p.m., Output, 74 Wythe Avenue, at North 12th Street, outputclub.com. (Anderson)Advertisement★ Jennylee (Wednesday) Jenny Lee Lindberg, the bassist of the stellar postpunk band Warpaint, forges a solo path on the forthcoming album “Right On!” The record furthers her main band’s sexy textures with a more languorous, seeping sense of melody; the result is a hazy character study with humidity and heart. With Young Magic. At 8 p.m., Baby’s All Right, 146 Broadway, near Bedford Avenue, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, babysallright.com. (Anderson)Laidback Luke (Thursday) A late-breaking house notable in electronic dance music, this D.J. (real name: Lucas van Scheppingen) also melds Latin pop with house in Nouveau Yorican, a duo he formed with his wife, Gina Turner. Not only dance music revs him up, though; he is also a champion kung fu fighter. Part of the Brooklyn Electronic Festival with Ms. Turner and Julia Govor. At 10 p.m., Output, 74 Wythe Avenue, at North 12th Street, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, outputclub.com. (Anderson)Richard Lloyd (Friday) The former guitarist for the coolly expansive, cathartic 1970s proto-punks Television has dabbled in numerous group and individual projects since. His efforts include a sprawling collection of Jimi Hendrix covers and the complete revamping of his second solo album, “Field of Fire,” more than 20 years after its 1986 release. With New York Junk and Faith. At 8 p.m., Bowery Electric, 327 Bowery, at Second Street, East Village, 212-228-0228, theboweryelectric.com. (Anderson)★ Youssou N’Dour (Sunday) Mr. N’Dour, the impassioned emissary of Senegalese mbalax music, never fails to deliver generous marathon sets of joyous song and sprightly moves. At 8 p.m., Terminal 5, 610 West 56th Street, Clinton, 800-745-3000, terminal5nyc.com. (Anderson)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Skrillex (Saturday) The reigning American dubstep czar Skrillex has a deft touch with pop crossovers, too: His recent work with Justin Bieber, including the excellent new single “Sorry,” is pivoting that much-maligned pop star into a relevant adult artist. (“Where Are Ü Now,” Mr. Bieber’s previous track with the Skrillex and Diplo project Jack Ü, was also a savvy move.) Even more impressively, Skrillex has consistently pulled off an asymmetrical haircut that has felled hardier souls. He headlines the Pier of Fear Halloween-themed party with Marshmello and Sliink. At 9 p.m., Pier 94, 711 12th Avenue, at 52nd Street, Clinton, pachanyc.com. (Anderson)Mavis Staples and Joan Osborne (Wednesday) Ms. Staples, the former powerhouse anchor of the Staple Singers, remains an indefatigable performer and road warrior. Her most recent album, “One True Vine,” had an earthy dose of lo-fi Americana courtesy of its producer, Jeff Tweedy of Wilco. She is currently touring with the singer-songwriter Joan Osborne, and they make one New York stop on Manhattan’s Upper East Side. At 8 p.m., 92nd Street Y, 1395 Lexington Avenue, 212-415-5500, 92y.org. (Anderson)Ringo Starr and His All Starr Band (Saturday) The most happy-go-lucky Beatle has developed a solid, eccentric career apart of the Fab Four — releasing more than a dozen studio albums, hamming in a British comedy with Peter Sellers and John Cleese (“The Magic Christian”) and narrating a pack of anthropomorphized trains on “Thomas the Tank Engine & Friends.” His All Starr Band, a rotating jam group currently cobbled from high-profile friends like Todd Rundgren, is a good-natured classic rock saloon. At 8 p.m., Kings Theater, 1027 Flatbush Avenue, near Tilden Avenue, Brooklyn, kingstheatre.com. (Anderson)★ Sufjan Stevens (Saturday) This ambitious baroque-pop singer-songwriter once vowed to write an album about every state in the country; he abandoned this musical manifest destiny after Michigan and Illinois. His newest record, “Carrie & Lowell,” is titled after his mother and stepfather, and it is his most gorgeous effort to date — a dauntlessly intimate song cycle that wrestles with the specters of abandonment and disconnection, all inside transcendent electro-meets-acoustic pop arrangements. At 8 p.m., Loew’s Jersey Theater, 54 Journal Square, Jersey City, 201-798-6055, loewsjersey.org, carrieandlowell.com. (Anderson)Advertisement‘Change Begins Within’ With Sting and Katy Perry (Wednesday) Turns out that David Lynch, an auteur of surreal cinema, is secretly an ardent pacifist. His foundation’s Meditate New York initiative is currently raising funds to provide transcendental meditation instruction to local, at-risk veterans and youths. This benefit event includes Zen performances by Katy Perry, Sting, Jim James and more. At 7 p.m., Isaac Stern Auditorium, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Anderson)STS9 (Thursday) This funky electronic instrumental band is a music festival staple as well as vocal champions of renewable stage technology. Its broad bohemian jams are better experienced live; its most recent project, “When the Dust Settles,” was released in 2011. At 8 p.m., PlayStation Theater, 1515 Broadway, at 44th Street, 212-930-1950, playstationtheater.com. (Anderson)Yacht (Thursday) The world is a barren, malignant and highly danceable place in “Shangri-La,” the fifth album from this disco-punk duo. Yacht’s long-form conceptual exploration of a post-apocalyptic wasteland was stacked with hyperactive screams, galvanizing synth beats and graphic narratives that would make Cormac McCarthy flinch. The follow-up album, “I Thought the Future Would Be Cooler,” was – fittingly to the name – less high-strung and more emotionally wrought nü-disco. With Larry Gus. At 9 p.m., Rough Trade NYC, 64 North Ninth Street, at Kent Avenue, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, roughtradenyc.com; sold out. (Anderson)A version of this schedule appears in print on October 30, 2015, on Page C18 of the New York edition with the headline: The Listings: Pop.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.