By SIOBHAN BURKEOCT. 2, 2015
How do you watch a performance when you’ve been given permission to leave — but not come back — at any time? More lovingly or less? That invitation was extended to the audience of Alessandro Sciarroni’s “FOLK-S, will you still love me tomorrow?” on Thursday at New York Live Arts, the New York debut of Mr. Sciarroni, an Italian choreographer. As one of the six dancers explained near the beginning, the work would end when there was one performer left onstage or when one viewer was left in the audience.By then, we were starting to grasp what the next two or so hours, for those who stuck it out, would hold: endless repetitions, by turns beleaguering, hypnotic and curiously mystical, of stamping, clapping, thigh- and foot-slapping steps from the Bavarian and Tyrolean folk dance known as Schuhplattler (“shoe batter”). “FOLK-S,” part of the Crossing the Line festival, strips those dances of their traditional trappings — the knee socks and black shoes, the accordion music — except for a pair of lederhosen and an Alpine cap worn by Mr. Sciarroni. And while there is one accordion, it remains mostly mute, lonesomely propped up near a console of more contemporary sound equipment. Donning it, Mr. Sciarroni draws out a few wheezing breaths that sound like crashing waves.The choreographer, most emblematic of the past in that traditional garb, exits first and early on, as if letting the present take over. The dancers, like the audience members, can leave when they please. But the other five — Marco D’Agostin, Francesca Foscarini, Matteo Ramponi, Francesco Vecchi and Pablo Esbert Lilienfeld, who doubles as a D.J. — stay for a long time, committing to cycle after cycle of the convoluted dance, almost religiously. (The program contains a credit for “Faith Coaching.”) Depending on their configuration, which often begins in a circle and disperses, and on the music, layering various rhythms and anti-rhythms over their own percussion, they look like prisoners or soldiers or children playing.A trust builds among them, which the audience starts to share, cheering them on, laughing with them as they acknowledge their exhaustion. And the title? Who’s addressing that question to whom? The choreographer to the dancers? The dancers to one another? To us? Or is it the dance asking to be remembered? The freedom to leave made me want to stay, and “FOLK-S” grew more lovable as it went on — and on. It’s even better as a memory.“FOLK-S, will you still love me tomorrow?” continues through Saturday at New York Live Arts, 219 West 19th Street, Manhattan; 212-924-0077, newyorklivearts.org.  We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.