AdvertisementSupported byBy Daniel McDermonLooking for something to do?The Times’s culture desk is here to help.We asked our colleagues: What one thing would they recommend this weekend?More than three decades have passed since a group of plucky young people accidentally unleashed ancient demonic forces upon the world, as portrayed in a series of “Evil Dead” films. Now Ash, the steadfast, chainsaw-toting foe of those forces, returns on Saturday in this new Starz horror comedy series, which was just renewed for a second season. Our hero is played once again by Bruce Campbell, and Sam Raimi, who wrote and directed the first three films in the series, is on board, too, as an executive producer and director of the first episode.(Read Mike Hale’s full review, or see a thoroughly unsafe-for-work trailer packed with violent and comedic gore here.)Ten songs in less than 30 minutes — that’s all it takes for this Philadelphia band to blend the beautifully messy rock of the Replacements with the over-the-top emotional confessionalism of Brand New. The group’s debut full-length album, “The Things We Do to Find People Who Feel Like Us” (Polyvinyl), is out Friday and provides an apt soundtrack for Halloween mischief. — Caryn Ganz, pop music editor(You can stream the new album or find more here.)In almost 60 years of work, Mr. Stella has covered the waterfront, from his late-’50s Minimalist monochromes to more recent metal and plastic works that dangle and intrude from their mountings. This show fills the fifth floor at the Whitney Museum of American Art. When asked about this show, the first retrospective at the Whitney’s new home in the meatpacking district, Mr. Stella explained to Deborah Solomon: “It’s an accident. I’m old. I’m not controversial anymore.”(Read Roberta Smith’s full review, Ms. Solomon’s feature article or find more here.)Looking for a scare with some artistry behind it? Try out a few of the selections in the Film Society of Lincoln Center’s Scary Movies series. This annual collection of smartly curated horror includes classics (like a free screening of James Whale’s 1931 “Frankenstein”) to contemporary thrills (the imaginative Irish forest-creature feature “The Hallow,” from Corin Hardy, also coming to theaters and on demand Nov. 6.) — Mekado Murphy, senior staff editorThis feature is an evolving experiment. Tell us what you’d like to see here via email: thearts@nytimes.com.Advertisement