By BRIAN SEIBERTNOV. 1, 2015
The four dancers in Mina Nishimura’s “The Celery of Everything” appear to be a friendly bunch. At Danspace Project, where the work had its premiere on Thursday, they come out wearing cat-lover shirts and say, “Hi.” Ms. Nishimura talks about her cats. Christopher Williams amiably introduces a dance he is going to do, one that he says will make the world disappear. In a voice suited to a kindergarten teacher, he says, “Let’s try.”Yes, there’s something peculiar about these smiling folks. Connor Voss shares his worries about styes, seems to speak the thoughts of the fourth dancer (Sarah Lifson) and keeps opening his mouth as if an egg might come out of it. According to publicity materials, “The Celery of Everything” draws upon textual images — bizarre, nonsensical and grotesque — from the writings of Tatsumi Hijikata, a founder of the Japanese dance-theater form Butoh. Ms. Nishimura’s work, made of one image after another, looks too much like a danced notebook.It’s held together, to some extent, by snatches of Pachelbel’s Canon in D that contrast the otherwise stray sounds of Stephen Cooper’s score. The images are also channeled through interactions among the dancers, who sometimes shadow one another. Words and gestures imply unseen presences (perhaps the spirits of Ms. Nishimura’s dead cats), but it’s the dancers who hold your interest, especially the brilliant Mr. Williams, secure in his strangeness, with his beady-eyed focus and broken-doll body.After “Celery,” there’s a break in the program, so that visitors can examine a couple dozen of Ms. Nishimura’s drawings of bodies. They’re like her: a bit childlike and unthreatening at first glance, disturbing upon deeper acquaintance. Her face at rest is somehow blank and not blank, which creates suspense as audience members take their seats again and she starts in on a solo, “Princess Cabbage.”This is another notebook dance, with wheezing on one page and high-pitched gibbering or spasms like contained sneezes on the next. Near the end, Ms. Nishimura’s face warps like that of someone subject to extreme G-forces. Remarkably, underneath that mask of contortion, recognizable emotions are still visible: happiness, sadness, surprise. The evening’s strongest evocation of internal states, it’s an amazing sight. Taking her bow, Ms. Nishimura rubbed her cheeks.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.