AdvertisementSupported byBy The New York TimesEach year around Halloween, various lists are published attesting to television’s ability to frighten its fans, with compendiums highlighting the usual Rod Serling suspects — “The Twilight Zone,” “Night Gallery” — along with chilling episodes of darkly hued series like “Twin Peaks,” “Buffy the Vampire Slayer” and “The X-Files.”[Related: ‘X-Files’ Writers Recall the Show’s Most Disturbing Episode]This list is different. Terror is nothing if not subjective: There are fun scares, and then there are the ones that leave a mark. Here the television critics and editors of The New York Times recall the perhaps surprising stuff of their own personal nightmares. Feel free to share yours in the comments.Most of what we call scary TV comes with a safety net — the security of knowing that this is an entertainment, something you signed up to watch. If you want genuine, the-call-is-coming-from-inside-the-house fear, you’ve got to break the fourth wall. As in: You’re curled up on the couch, eating chips and watching “Batman,” when your TV suddenly blares an electronic alarm at you.If you grew up during the Cold War, the words “This is a test of the Emergency Broadcast System” were a reminder that nuclear apocalypse was the real-life monster in the closet. “An actual emergency” could come screaming out of the sky with just as little warning. That affectless announcer’s voice. That unnatural screech. That moment of dead silence before the un-reassuring statement that a real alert would be followed by “official instructions.” (Presumably, to plug your ears and hope the bomb hit close enough to make the end quick.)The Cold War ended, we got a new set of anxieties and the EBS was replaced in 1997 by the Emergency Alert System. The new alarm is shorter and better targeted and it still, beyond all reason, scares the living bejesus out of me. I know, I know: This is only a test. I’m turning off the set for a minute anyway. JAMES PONIEWOZIKIn my childhood, CBS’s annual broadcast of “The Wizard of Oz” was the television event of the year, my personal Super Bowl. I watched it religiously, but it wasn’t until later, when the film entered theaters again and I saw it as a college student, that I really absorbed the story of Dorothy and her annoying little dog. It was harder to keep track of what was happening when I was younger, because I always spent half of the movie hiding behind the couch, crying.Talk all you want about ruby slippers and “Over the Rainbow” — “The Wizard of Oz” is a steadily escalating symphony of horror. How many people remember that the plot is set in motion by a threat to have a pet dog put down? Then the house spins off the ground and the madly bicycling Miss Gulch turns into a cackling witch (the first moment of true terror). And it just gets worse from there — the wicked witch’s feet poking out from under the house, the disembodied head of the wizard and finally the flying monkeys, the scariest thing I’ve seen on a TV screen. Long before the wicked witch melts (also scary!), I would tap my heels and say, there’s no place like the back of the couch. MIKE HALEMy father started locking the doors on Nov. 15, 1959. That was the day the Clutters were discovered, some time after Dick Hickock and Perry Smith broke into a Kansas farmhouse in search of a safe and, finding none, killed the farmer and his family. Every night after, my father traced the perimeter of our own Kansas farmhouse, latching screens and sliding bolts. On those vast plains, the locking of doors was our lullaby.My uncle roomed with Herb Clutter at Kansas State University and my father knew him from the Farm Bureau. But I was too young to understand why my parents banished me to my room when CBS broadcast “In Cold Blood” in the ’70s. Mostly I remember grainy black-and-white glimpses of Robert Blake and Scott Wilson cruising down a dark, lonely road in their Pontiac Chieftain — no more ominous to a child than the lost travelers who sometimes wound up in our driveway 20 miles from town. Close the door, my mother said. My father put me in my bed.It took me years to watch that movie all the way through. The road, the car, the house where no one had thought to lock the doors. The terror. By then I knew that in the middle of nowhere, there’s no one to hear you scream. KATHRYN SHATTUCKWhat makes for a particularly impactful moment of terror, one that lingers long in the memory? It’s when things are going along swimmingly, so much so you have a vague unease that it’s too good to be true, and then, sure enough, the bliss is brought to an end more cruelly than your wildest imagination could have conjured. The geeky boy secures a roll in the hay with an impossibly gorgeous girl, only to have a guy in a face mask emerge from the back of the barn and carve her up with a chain saw.By that standard, the scariest moment in TV history, at least for anyone living in New England, as I was at the time, occurred 29 years ago this week. The most wonderful thing in the world was about to happen: Our long-suffering Boston Red Sox had their first world championship in forever within their grasp. Yet no Sox fan felt completely confident; there was a nagging fear that something terrible was going to disrupt the dream. And then it did. Mookie Wilson. Ground ball. First base. Bill Buckner. No chain saw, but a perfectly executed scene of terror and trauma that haunted an entire region of the country for years. NEIL GENZLINGER“The Morton Downey Jr. Show,” the proto-trash-talk show and rage orgy that ran from 1987 to ’89, has been described as a pioneering achievement, as the moment when America went awry, even as a precursor of the Internet. But for me it was two specific things: irresistible and totally terrifying.What exactly was so frightening? All of it. The histrionic, chain-smoking host and his freakishly large mouth. The Thunderdome-ish crowd, a forerunner of the “JERRY!”-screaming hordes who would arrive a few years later. Most of all, the guests: a gothic parade of perverts, white supremacists, bounty hunters and “cryonic” doctors who wanted to deep-freeze my grandparents, as far as I could tell. Mr. Downey’s signature move was to scream insults inches from the faces of his guests, some of whom would scream back or scream at the crowd or shove the people next to them, sending chairs toppling, cameras weaving and the audience into Colosseum-worthy paroxysms of bloodlust.Shot in Secaucus, N.J., the show reached my market when it went national in 1988, and it became something I had to watch — until I couldn’t. I always tuned in but never finished even one episode; it was all too much. Fifteen minutes would send me shuddering into the arms of a “Three’s Company” rerun. For a sheltered, conflict-averse kid in the suburbs, “The Morton Downey Jr. Show” was confirmation that the world was just as dark, brutish and dangerous as overwrought after-school specials had led me to believe.Of course, within a few years I realized that what the show had really been wallowing in was not so much rage or danger as shameless showmanship. (Mr. Downey, after all, was a man who once painted himself with a swastika and blamed it on neo-Nazis.) In retrospect, the show was essentially a media seminar on the power of fear itself, on the utility of boogeymen. The Morton Downey Jr. playbook lived on not only in overheated talk shows like “Jerry Springer” and “Maury” but also on cable news, in the likes of Glenn Beck and Sean Hannity.There was a 2013 documentary about Mr. Downey that reportedly laid out some of these parallels, but I couldn’t tell you for sure if it does. I won’t be watching it any time soon. JEREMY EGNERAdvertisement