AdvertisementSupported byBy Neil GenzlingerBeltway insiders will no doubt drive themselves crazy finding fault with “The Diplomat,” a documentary about Richard C. Holbrooke, showing Monday night on HBO, that was made by his son David. It’s too hagiographic, or not hagiographic enough. It’s oversimplified, or too wonkish. It’s just a way for Hollywood types to give Hillary Rodham Clinton more TV time. And so on.But Beltway insiders aren’t the ideal audience for this film, even though a lot of them turn up in it. Its best use is as a reminder to a more general audience that despite the gathering noise surrounding the presidential election, much of the real work of American foreign policy is done by career diplomats who have the seemingly impossible task of navigating both Washington politics and intractable global trouble spots.Mr. Holbrooke, who died in late 2010 while serving as President Obama’s special representative for Afghanistan and Pakistan, was such a player for almost a half-century. David Holbrooke frames the film partly as a career retrospective and partly as his own rediscovery of his father, who was often absent while he was growing up. He puts just enough of himself and his extended family into “The Diplomat” to give it some audience-friendly poignancy.Mr. Holbrooke’s early work in South Vietnam as a newbie in his early 20s made him a witness to history, and not history at its finest. “He can see McNamara asking the wrong questions, getting wishful answers,” George Packer, Mr. Holbrooke’s biographer, says, referring to a visit to the country by Robert S. McNamara, then the secretary of defense.The film is at its best when detailing Mr. Holbrooke’s work untangling the nightmare in the Balkans for President Bill Clinton and contending with the Serbian president, Slobodan Milosevic. The 1995 Dayton peace agreement, which ended the war in Bosnia, is regarded as perhaps his finest achievement.His reputation after that accomplishment carried into the new century: President Obama asked him to try to work the same peacemaking magic in Afghanistan and Pakistan. His longtime supporter, Mrs. Clinton, was secretary of state and his boss, but that didn’t mean the Obama-Holbrooke union was a good one. David Holbrooke draws on tapes his father made during that period to highlight his dissatisfaction with the assignment and his inability to get the president’s ear. He was stymied, too, by the limits of his own tactics.“This is not a country where you can get anything by pushing,” Ashraf Ghani, the president of Afghanistan, says in a blunt interview. “He could browbeat Milosevic. You can’t browbeat an Afghan.”Mr. Holbrooke may have been a power player, but his last assignment underscored that he wasn’t all-powerful.Advertisement