AdvertisementSupported byBy Neil GenzlingerDoes attaching a famous name to a science documentary make it any more or less interesting than a generic “Nova” episode? Not really. That’s something we learn from “Breakthrough,” a six-part series that begins Sunday on the National Geographic Channel. Prominent entertainment figures direct programs on six scientific challenges facing the world, and the results are interesting enough. They’re just not especially revolutionary, unlike some of the work they document.The first installment, “Fighting Pandemics,” directed and narrated by Peter Berg, is the least successful because news outlets thoroughly covered its subject matter fairly recently, during the Ebola outbreak in West Africa. Mr. Berg retraces that familiar story and looks at how experts are preparing for outbreaks of the future and trying to prevent them.Paul Giamatti fares better with the episode he directed, “More Than Human,” airing on Nov. 8, partly because he puts a bit more spunk into his narration. The program is about robotics, but not just clunky C-3PO imitators. There is fascinating stuff here about the connections that can be made between robotic body parts and neural pathways. It’s an exploration of the notion that we perhaps can be more than our physical bodies.Brian Grazer and Ron Howard are executive producers of the series, and Mr. Howard turns in the best episode, “The Age of Aging” on Nov. 29, which he directs and narrates. Like Mr. Giamatti, he injects a bit of himself into the subject: A sweet collage of Ron Howard through the years begins, of course, with Opie Taylor, his character from “The Andy Griffith Show.”But he’s really interested in a group of scientists who are trying to change the medical establishment’s mind-set so that aging is tackled in the same way a disease is: as something that can perhaps be treated and slowed. Advances in this line of research are detailed, and by the end of the episode people in Mr. Howard’s age bracket — he is 61 — might well think that they can put off making that last will and testament a bit longer.Other episodes include “Decoding the Brain” on Nov. 15, directed by Brett Ratner and narrated by Adrien Brody, and “Energy on the Edge” on Dec. 6, directed by Akiva Goldsman (whose screenplay for Mr. Howard’s film “A Beautiful Mind” won an Oscar) and narrated by Jason Bateman.The series concludes on Dec. 13 with “Water Apocalypse,” directed by Angela Bassett, whose heartfelt narration conveys the urgency of the world’s water supply issues. She focuses on California, Australia and Africa, where people are coping with a growing shortage of fresh water through expensive high-tech efforts and others that are relatively cheap and localized.The installment suggests a tension that remains underexplored in this series: If we radically extend life spans through scientific advances, what does that mean for a planet already short on crucial resources and full of people who want a higher standard of living? The series, developed in partnership with General Electric, feels as if it needs a coda about that question and the ethical issues it raises.Advertisement