AdvertisementSupported byBy Alastair MacaulayThere’s a bloom to the dancing at American Ballet Theater just now; you can feel this even in the darkest or most taxing works. The company’s two-week season at the David H. Koch Theater, which ends on Sunday, has been offering nine works by nine men, representing a century of choreography leading up to two works new this month. The range of styles is wide — and yet there’s a luxuriance to the execution that fills the air, a youthful, ready-for-more brightness. The company should improve its marketing: This meeting of performers and repertory deserves larger audiences than it’s currently attracting at the Koch.The final piece to arrive there, on Thursday, was Alexei Ratmansky’s Shostakovich “Piano Concerto No. 1.” Made as the concluding work of Mr. Ratmansky’s 2013 Shostakovich trilogy, it holds its own independently, too. (The company revives the trilogy, one of the most singularly imaginative creations of our time, for four performances at the Metropolitan Opera House in May.)Like all of Mr. Ratmansky’s ballets to this composer — some date back to his time as artistic director of the Bolshoi Ballet (2004-08) — “Concerto No. 1” is a complex portrait of the Soviet Russia reflected in the music, and, like the rest of the trilogy, it’s double-edged. It repeatedly features high, acrobatic lifts and heroically daredevil virtuosity, but also elements of strain and fearfulness. You can’t miss how one of the two lead ballerinas (on Thursday, Gillian Murphy) protects the other (Maria Kochetkova), twice, as if guarding a younger sister from horror; and you can’t miss the element of peril around much of the ballet’s bravura.No Shostakovich works have been choreographed more than his piano concertos — their slow movements have also turned up in a couple of narrative ballets — but it’s the Ratmansky treatments that best reveal their inner worlds. (His “Concerto DSCH,” to the second one, was made for City Ballet in 2008; though its surface is more dewily innocent, its young athletes belong to a specifically Soviet climate.)Yet, though Mr. Ratmansky is attuned to this music’s nervous system, it’s remarkable how often he veers away from its surface; some of the biggest lifts seem to have no musical peg. Seldom do we find the tight marriage of sound and movement of “Concerto DSCH.” That’s fine; the Balanchine-Stravinsky ballets show no single kind of musicality either. (Christopher Wheeldon’s “Mercurial Manoeuvres,” made to the first piano concerto for City Ballet in 2000, is more neatly pinned to the details of the score, without deepening our appreciation of its spirit.) “Concerto No. 1” has always been physically exciting; renewed acquaintance reveals increasingly satisfying connections to Shostakovich here. More than any other of Mr. Ratmansky’s Shostakovich works, “Concerto No. 1” deals in choreographic motifs.These, not meant to illustrate recurring figures in the music, seem to express aspects of the composer’s coded thought. And they seem designed to go on resonating in our minds after the dance, as if posing questions.The ballet has barely begun when its first ballerina (Ms. Murphy) holds a formal attitude with the support of four men; each lets go in quick succession, leaving her balancing on point, perilously, for just a moment. But as the ballet ends, gender roles are suddenly reversed: In a rapid quartet, the two lead men (Cory Stearns and Daniil Simkin) are supported in, first, multiple pirouettes by their women, and then — as the music ends — in those same formal attitudes (on half-to), with the women now their cavaliers. It’s an emblem of heroic risk.Brilliant images occur throughout. As the final movement starts, the corps makes a momentous entrance: A column of six men — each carrying a woman on his shoulder, her line outstretched but static, as if she were a missile — advances slowly down the diagonal. As they pace to the beat, they make this both a funeral march and an image of huge historic tension.Other works this season that also grow with renewed acquaintance (in some cases, even after many years and many viewings) have been Frederick Ashton’s “Monotones I and II,” George Balanchine’s “Valse-Fantaisie,” Paul Taylor’s “Company B” and Twyla Tharp’s “The Brahms-Haydn Variations.” Each watching of Mark Morris’s “After You” shows further facets — but they don’t deepen it: It’s ingeniously, elaborately bland. (The gentle layerings of its Hummel music, by contrast, become steadily more fascinating.)Dancers at all levels have made big advances. Jeffrey Cirio (his debut season) has proved himself an artist of brilliance and charm. Gabe Stone Shayer, with his large, open face, his much larger jump and his skill in playing with rhythm, has emerged as one of the company’s happiest assets. (Both men shine in solos in “Company B.”)Because Isabella Boylston, Herman Cornejo, Ms. Murphy and Mr. Stearns are established principals, it’s tempting to take them for granted; but all of them are marvels of increasing versatility — and each can make something heart-tightening of a step or a phrase. Ms. Kochetkova, in her first season as a company member rather than a guest, is not an immediately knowable stage personality; but the eager audacity she and Mr. Simkin showed in “Concerto No. 1” was remarkable.Mr. Simkin is a peculiar set of contradictions: Often the way he spins and turns is so weightless as to be the wrong sort of facile. Still, as the Ratmansky proved, his dancing can have both bite and fun. James Whiteside, though not the company’s most elegant male dancer, always takes to the stage with energy and purpose (and with a legible face); there are more stylish dancers who are less visible. Roman Zhurbin has been the company’s best actor for some time; to see the fullness of his dancing in a couple of solo roles has been very welcome.I could mention many more. The repertory for the company’s 2016 Metropolitan season would be tantalizing even if no dancers were announced; but they have been, and they make it doubly so.American Ballet Theater’s fall season ends Sunday at the David H. Koch Theater at Lincoln Center; abt.org.Advertisement