By SIOBHAN BURKEOCT. 30, 2015
There’s nothing disturbing or even mildly unsettling about Sankai Juku’s “Umusuna: Memories Before History,” a work of anesthetized Butoh that had its New York premiere on Wednesday at the Brooklyn Academy of Music. The gulf between this company’s sleek aesthetic and the dark, transgressive postwar roots of this Japanese dance form — an art initially concerned with grotesque scenarios and states of being — has long been noted, and it persists over the 90 minutes of “Umusuna,” which purports to reflect on the origins of human life. (The title loosely translates to “the place you were born.”)The choreographer Ushio Amagatsu, who founded the all-male Sankai Juku in 1975, does what he’s best known to do, ensconcing slow, stark, controlled movement within glossy, elaborately lighted sets. The production’s visual core — throughout its seven sections, which have titles like “Memories From Water” and “Mirror of Forests” — is a column of sand that streams down from the rafters, a reminder that time, yes, is passing by. Framing this are two colossal, conical scales — each with its own trickle of sand — which ascend and lower and seesaw throughout the show. The stage itself is also split: two slightly raised platforms with a pathway down the middle.The first image is of Mr. Amagatsu — bald and bare-chested, cloaked in trademark white dust, as are the seven other performers — inching up that central channel toward the falling sand. Reaching it, he extends his arms, which end in clawed hands, a gesture we’ll see more than once. The sound of cascading rain segues into generic harp music. Were life’s origins accompanied by tunes you might hear in an airport gift shop?A curtain rises, exposing a vein of red light for the most furious section, danced by four men, wearing corsets and long red skirts, whose mouths pop open in silent screams. Elsewhere, amid shades of blue and green, the dancers trace lines in the sand or undulate across it like amphibians.There are a few visually striking passages, but “Umusuna,” over all, has little impact. And it drags. Slow movement can be some of the most transcendent: Take the Butoh-influenced works of veterans like Eiko and Koma, or younger artists like Mina Nishimura. But the members of Sankai Juku often appear to be just going through the motions, as if they’d done it all before.“Umusuna: Memories Before History” continues through Saturday at Howard Gilman Opera House, Brooklyn Academy of Music, 30 Lafayette Avenue; 718-636-4100, bam­.org.A version of this review appears in print on October 31, 2015, on Page C2 of the New York edition with the headline: Life Begins, Time Passes, Sand Flows.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.