AdvertisementSupported byBy Zachary WoolfeArriving for his only appearance this season with the New York Philharmonic, Jaap van Zweden, spoken of as a candidate for its music directorship, was a man with something to prove.Mr. van Zweden, who, with his shaved head and solid body, can resemble a bullet, fairly shot out onstage on Thursday evening at David Geffen Hall, leading a precise, inventive performance. This was a test involving two veterans of the repertory, Mozart’s Piano Concerto No. 23 and Beethoven’s Fifth Symphony, and Mr. van Zweden, the music director of the Dallas Symphony Orchestra, found fresh spirit in each.The third movement of his Beethoven was particularly memorable. For all this conductor’s meticulousness — you watch him place every phrase — the Scherzo danced: sinuous, exotic, even jazzy. I’ve heard it grander and more propulsive, but never quite so seductive. In his tense yet expansive vision of the second movement, plucked lines and bowed ones, overlapping, didn’t feel like textural opposites, simply contrasting, but like subtler neighbors.In that second-movement Andante’s opening, the sound had a dawnlike, hazy cast, just one example of the remarkable soft playing on Thursday from an orchestra known primarily for its loud- and louder-ness. There were also the vaporizing strings, with tones seeming to disappear as they emerged, in the third movement of Britten’s “Sinfonia da Requiem,” which opened the concert. The ensemble’s entrance after the piano solo at the start of the Mozart concerto’s slow movement had hooded, nocturnal mystery.Inon Barnatan, his touch sure and sunny, was an amiable, if less than characterful, soloist in that concerto, blending sweetly with the orchestra’s velvety sound in the opening. But the second movement was Mr. van Zweden’s, as you heard a deeply felt reason for the return of the theme, ineffably deepened in its second iteration from a sweet, sad song into a profound confession. Quiet answers to the strings from the winds and the brasses were played with clarity and charm in the finale, which had grace, if not ideal lightness; the opening of the Beethoven symphony was, surprisingly, more buoyant.The two internal movements of the Beethoven were more persuasive here than the outer two: The final Allegro, its tempo carefully restrained, developed haltingly rather than organically. But conducting this imaginative and playing this varied don’t appear at Geffen Hall every week; both should be celebrated.This program is repeated on Saturday evening at David Geffen Hall, Lincoln Center; 212-875-5656, nyphil­.org.Advertisement