By JAMES R. OESTREICHOCT. 30, 2015
Among the most highly anticipated presentations of the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center this season is the series of string quartet cycles, especially those in the intimate Rose Studio.Yes, there is inevitably Beethoven, performed in six concerts by various fine groups in Alice Tully Hall in January and February. And yes, at about the same time, the Rose Studio offerings include the six Bartok quartets, hardly rarities, played in two evenings by the Jerusalem String Quartet.But for the rest, the Rose concerts are full-evening surveys of less familiar composers: Alexander Zemlinsky, Carl Nielsen, Alberto Ginastera and Leon Kirchner. The Escher String Quartet led off on Thursday with the four quartets of Zemlinsky, a full evening indeed.Zemlinsky is a particularly compelling subject for this kind of treatment, since his quartets were widely spaced over a long period of ferment in the ever-vibrant cultural scene of Vienna. The First Quartet (1896) is barely post-Brahms.AdvertisementThe Second (1913-15) reflects Zemlinsky’s deep engagement, personal and musical, with Arnold Schoenberg and his turbulent world. In 1901, Alma Schindler called off her torrid affair with Zemlinsky to marry Gustav Mahler, and Schoenberg married Zemlinsky’s sister, Mathilde.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mathilde left Schoenberg several years later for the painter Richard Gerstl. When Mathilde returned to Schoenberg in 1908, Gerstl stabbed himself, evidently to meager effect, then hanged himself before a mirror.AdvertisementThe Second Quartet, a 45-minute emotive brawl, responds to these events in a style strongly influenced by Schoenberg and his emancipation of dissonance. But Zemlinsky did not follow Schoenberg all the way to abandoning tonality in favor of 12-tone serialism. In fact, as the composer Bruce Adolphe pointed out in a filmed preconcert talk, Zemlinsky gently mocked Schoenberg’s innovations in the Third Quartet (1924), a sort of requiem for Mathilde, who had died the year before.The Fourth Quartet (1936) is another requiem, this one for Alban Berg, who died in 1935, soon after the premiere of the orchestral version of his “Lyric Suite.” Zemlinsky draws heavily on that work in the quartet, a scintillating consolidation of Bergian, Brahmsian and even Bachian modes.The Escher players — Adam Barnett-Hart and Aaron Boyd, violinists; Pierre Lapointe, violist; and Brook Speltz, cellist — recorded these works a few years ago for the Naxos label and clearly have them in their blood. Their performances were superb, their concentration and stamina especially remarkable in that bruising Second Quartet.­The series continues on Nov. 12 with the Danish String Quartet playing the four quartets of Carl Nielsen at the Rose Studio, 165 West 65th Street, Lincoln Center; chambermusicsociety.org, 212-875-5788.A version of this review appears in print on October 31, 2015, on Page C6 of the New York edition with the headline: Scores Responding to Love, Death and Betrayal.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.