AdvertisementSupported byBy William RobinLOS ANGELES — On a recent Friday afternoon, Yuval Sharon gestured enthusiastically at one of many television screens mounted inside a circular wooden structure under construction in a large parking lot in this city’s Arts District. “It won’t ever be the same thing twice,” he said.Mr. Sharon and his team at the Industry — the experimental-opera company he started in 2012 — were in the midst of completing the Central Hub, the metaphorical and literal center of their ambitious new production: “Hopscotch,” what they are calling a “mobile opera in 24 cars,” which will unfold across Los Angeles beginning on Saturday and running through Nov. 15.Explaining the basics of “Hopscotch” is surprisingly difficult, and the Industry appears content to leave the opera somewhat shrouded in mystery. You buy a ticket and are instructed to arrive at a certain location at a specific time: perhaps across the street from a boarded-up synagogue in the Hispanic neighborhood of Boyle Heights, say, or at the edge of a parking lot near the freeway.A limo pulls up, an attendant gestures you inside, and the opera begins. Singers, actors, instrumentalists and dancers — a total of 128 performers are involved in the production — transform the city around you as you are driven around, occasionally changing cars, going for a stroll in a park or being guided through a building. Enter a vehicle and encounter a cellist; step out of a car and watch a saxophone quartet play in the hills of Griffith Park. The opera’s 24 vignettes take place along three distinct routes — all running simultaneously — so each experience of the piece remains just a partial snapshot of the opera’s elusive whole.“It’s kind of like 24 10-minute operas, basically: They’re all completely unique, but they are all connected,” Mr. Sharon, the opera’s director, said.For the Industry, a company that emphasizes its relationship to Los Angeles, an opera in moving vehicles was a natural next step after its acclaimed 2013 production of “Invisible Cities,” which placed its performers almost unnoticeably in the middle of Union Station’s commuter bustle and had audience members listen in over headphones. Back when “Invisible Cities” was mired in logistical difficulties, Mr. Sharon and his designer began discussing their next project.“We thought, how can we inspire ourselves by proposing something even harder than ‘Invisible Cities’ that will hopefully keep us going?” he said. “What else would feel like a project that could only happen in Los Angeles? And, of course, we started thinking about driving, and cars, because it’s so crucial to the city’s identity.”“Hopscotch” derives its title from Julio Cortàzar’s episodic 1963 novel, originally planned as the opera’s source material. When Cortàzar’s estate refused to grant rights to the story, though, the Industry elected to move forward with an original plot. A team of six writers and six composers — all based in the Los Angeles area — wrote the libretto and the music. In group meetings, the collaborators outlined an overall structure, and composers and writers paired off to work on each individual scene. With fantastical dream sequences and arias that describe the existence of parallel universes, “Hopscotch” is less a traditional plot than a trippy exploration of time and memory. The narrative (such as it is) revolves around the puppet-maker Lucha, who is played by 18 different actors, musicians and dancers in different stages of her life.When asked about the production’s logistical challenges, Mr. Sharon and his collaborators burst out laughing. The team worked closely with the Los Angeles Department of Transportation to engineer precise travel routes. Contingency paths were planned to account for street closings; composers built repeated vamping gestures into scenes, so that an extra red light wouldn’t disrupt the flow of the drama. Communication is key: Musicians standing on a street corner need to know exactly when a limo with audience members might drift by, so that they can begin a new chapter.“Opera is so rarely spontaneous,” Mr. Sharon said. “Everything always seems incredibly fixed, and set. And this will never be that, ever.” Performances are limited to Saturdays and Sundays to assure that the city’s notorious traffic won’t stretch the opera to Wagnerian lengths.Recent preview performances on two of the three routes were surprisingly smooth, a defamiliarizing and ultimately haunting journey through the cityscape. In more subdued scenes, you might ride alongside an older Lucha in the form of a pensive solo flutist, or be crammed next to three guitarists as a teenage Lucha celebrates her quinceañera with a simple song. But each route also includes several stunning set pieces: a thrilling drive alongside a riverbank, as Lucha sings while standing on the back of a Jeep; a psychedelic traversal of the landmark Bradbury Building, with dancers and musicians scattered among multiple stories; an elevator ride to a rooftop pool, where brass instruments trade antiphonal fanfares from atop neighboring buildings. As each trip yields only a third of the full story, it’s never quite clear how it all adds up, but “Hopscotch” leaves a powerful impression.And the disorienting experience still feels operatic. Mr. Sharon cited as his model a lineage of opera that stretches back through Stockhausen and Cage, rather than Rossini and Puccini. “Opera is inherently this mix of media, in an incredibly unpredictable and unstable way,” he said. Snippets of Monteverdi’s “L’Orfeo,” from 1607, float through various scenes.“I feel like I’m composing in three dimensions,” said the composer Ellen Reid, one of the collaborators. “I’m composing an installation, and motion, and using all of my senses, in a different way than it would be for a regular concert piece.”For those dissuaded by the price of “Hopscotch” — tickets begin at $125 — there is also that Central Hub, outside the Southern California Institute of Architecture, free to enter, that simultaneously streams live audio and video from all 24 of the opera’s chapters in a circle of screens. The audience traveling the main routes are given hand-held cameras for several scenes, and can film the action themselves. The final performance of each day also concludes at the Hub, where limos take the audience and musicians for a shimmering final chorus.Mr. Sharon was recently named the Los Angeles Philharmonic’s newest artist-collaborator, and he is already contemplating post-“Hopscotch” opportunities to take that orchestra into the streets starting in the fall of 2017.“I love Disney Hall,” he said of the orchestra’s Gehry-designed home. “But I love the idea also of bringing an institution out into the world that we’ve been creating, which is right into the fabric of the city.”Advertisement