
The Affair By                     
 MIKE HALE
 
NOV. 1, 2015
O.K., it’s obvious that writing snippets of a fictional novel so that they can be read aloud on television — a novel whose author, we’ve been told, is “an incredibly strong writer” — is a losing proposition. They’re never going to be good enough. But when we finally heard bits and pieces of Noah Solloway’s “Descent” on “The Affair” on Sunday night, it was hard to have much sympathy for the screenwriter (in this case the playwright Sharr White).“Would she remember him? His voice felt lost in his throat.” “He lifted her skirt, just an inch. He paused. They listened together to the sound of the marina, hearts shaking in their skin.” “She was sex, the very definition of it. She was the reason the word was invented.” From there it just turned pornographic, 50 shades of sea foam. The expression on the face of Ruth Wilson, as Alison, grew progressively darker as she read the manuscript, which was supposed to be her response to its growing explicitness but which you’d like to think means that she has more taste than people give her credit for.Alison’s perusal of “Descent” — left out on Yvonne’s work desk — was the dramatic high point of the episode’s first chapter, which was devoted to her point of view. Reading the book enraged her, because it brought home to her how powerless she was. She’d just been fired as Yvonne’s assistant, with a strong hint that it was because of Yvonne’s jealousy, fed both by Noah’s book and by how close Yvonne’s husband, Robert, was getting to Alison. Now she saw herself exploited by Noah, depicted as an East End siren with an insatiable sex drive. As she told her ex after she fled back to Montauk, “People don’t see me, Cole.”The real problem is that “The Affair” itself has never exactly seen her as more than a victim and a bundle of guilt, neurosis and small-town, working-class awkwardness. (As if you don’t learn a little sophistication growing up in Montauk.) It’s not that her timorousness doesn’t make sense, given events, but she’s so relentlessly belittled, in both the writing and direction, that it’s hard to have any real sympathy for her. If she gets out of the subway in Brooklyn, she has to be overwhelmed by the city crowd. If she goes into town to run errands for Yvonne, she isn’t given the car — she has to be on her rickety bicycle with Yvonne’s packages in a little-girl handlebar basket. When she gets angry, she expresses it petulantly and destructively, sweeping Yvonne’s books off a shelf. When she helps Robert with his physical therapy, the erection he develops is shot in a giggly close-up out of an “American Pie” movie. When she tells Robert the truth about her affair with Noah — already a questionable decision — she uses language like “I felt this bolt of electricity course through me.” Wait, maybe that was why she was so upset when she read the manuscript — she actually wrote it!AdvertisementMost of the first half-hour of the episode was devoted to Alison’s feeling bad about herself and getting fired, after which she went to Brooklyn and, for some reason, went to Helen’s house to ask for Noah. (Did she really think Helen knew where Noah was, or would tell her if she did?) It was a good decision for the show, however, since Maura Tierney, as Helen, got to deliver a pithy, entirely credible précis of Noah’s personality and romantic habits, at the end of which she warned Alison that another woman would be coming to her someday with the same story. (And really, that’s the biggest strike against Alison as a character — why is she so blindly in love with a guy who, despite Dominic West’s magnetism, comes off virtually all the time as an unappetizing lummox?)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The other half of the episode was devoted to Cole, and it was refreshingly low-key and straightforward. Alison’s ex was still driving his cab, but now providing stud service to Tory, the interior designer who tried to pick him up in the season’s second episode. He was embarrassed to discover Luisa, the attractive woman whose little boy he almost ran over, worked at Tory’s house. Then he was more embarrassed to discover that she was having sex with his ne’er-do-well brother, Scotty, on Scotty’s boat.AdvertisementScotty revealed his latest scheme, to buy the Lobster Roll out from under the debt-ridden Oscar, which would cost $1 million. (He has an investor, who, we can only assume, has connections to the drug business. Scotty is getting by selling drugs off his boat.) Cole, meanwhile, spent the night flirting with Luisa at her bartending job, then went home only to find Alison asleep in the house, having run away from her problems with Noah. The two of them made love, Cole managing to hide the palm on which he’d written Luisa’s phone number.In a short future scene, set in what was now called Lockhart’s Lobster Roll, we learned that Cole had carried out Scotty’s plan to displace Oscar — in an amusing touch, we saw Oscar serving coffee to Noah’s lawyer, Gottlief — and we saw Gottlief floating the idea of Cole as a suspect in his own brother’s death.Let us know your thoughts about the fifth episode of the second season of “The Affair.” Would you agree with the proposition that in the pairing of Joshua Jackson and Catalina Sandino as Cole and Luisa, the show finally, after a season and a half, has a couple with some actual chemistry?We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »