AdvertisementSupported byThe Walking DeadBy Jeremy EgnerAfter the more or less nonstop action of the first three episodes of Season 6, “The Walking Dead” took a 90-minute breather on Sunday to teach us all some aikido and tell us the tale of Morgan.In fact it was Morgan himself who did the teaching, trying to do for his Wolfish prisoner what Norm Gunderson did for Morgan himself once upon a time. The lesson didn’t take, leaving you to wonder if the charismatic young monster will amount to Morgan’s Crighton Dallas Wilton, or if Morgan will give him another shot, after he deals with whatever crisis arrived at the gate at the end of the episode. Or maybe he’ll forget about him and let him starve, in a nice bit of parallelism, although there’s probably some beans or something in that house, and it’s also hard to imagine anyone just ignoring the place entirely for 47 days. (Though maybe it wouldn’t take that long for an underfed cur to expire.)But let’s not get ahead of ourselves. Sunday’s episode, at least the retrospective “Then” portion, was a leisurely installment that meditated at length on core themes of the show: How best to exist in a world stripped of its artifice? What do human beings owe one another?Narratively speaking, the mission was clearer — namely, to fill in the blanks between the raving, paranoid Morgan we saw in Season 3 and the Jedi who showed up at the end of Season 5.Early on he looked a whole lot like the former, hunting walkers and the occasional survivor, tagging rocks in his spare time with cryptic messages written in zombie blood. Morgan was broken, reduced to a binary clear-or-be-cleared mode that was presented in blurry-edged PostTraumatiScope. He sharpened pikes, scowled and muttered, lit in the glow of walker fires that symbolized both his consuming rage and an addled existential hell. It all ensured his survival but didn’t seem like any kind of fun.Salvation came via Tabitha, a goat whose meaty allure led to a confrontation with her owner, Eastman. Played by John Carroll Lynch, the show’s latest notable one-and-done guest star, he was the “man” who introduced Morgan to the ways of the “east.”First lesson: the power of the bo staff, Morgan’s future signature weapon. The encounter ended in unconsciousness; Morgan woke up in a cage and was handed “Art of Peace,” the book based on the teachings of Morihei Ueshiba, the Japanese martial artist who developed aikido in the early 20th century.What followed was the education of Morgan in the tao of aikido, an evolution that channeled “The Karate Kid” and the Yoda scenes from “The Empire Strikes Back,” with a dash of “What About Bob?” thrown in for texture. (Baby steps, leave your cage.) The main principles of aikido involve an appreciation for all life, and a combat style that, as a result, redirects attacks in order to protect both oneself and one’s attacker. “The real way of the warrior is to prevent slaughter,” goes one precept, which sounds good until you remember that without slaughter, there would be no “Walking Dead.”Eastman gave Morgan a staff, taught him the tenets and techniques and exemplified his own respect for life, traditional and reanimated, by dutifully burying even the walkers in a nearby graveyard. Along the way we learned that he had lost his family in brutal fashion, just as Morgan had, and had dabbled in murderous rage as a result. But slowly starving his family’s killer had taught him that you can’t slay your way to enlightenment.“I found my peace when I decided to never kill again,” Eastman said.And thus was the new Morgan explained, his new code for survival solidified when his most coldblooded murder literally came back to haunt him, giving his sensei a mortal nibble. As death descended, Eastman handed over his lucky rabbit foot, the one we saw in the Season 5 finale, and gave a final piece of advice that sent Morgan on the quest back to Rick and friends. “You could stay here, but you shouldn’t stay here,” he said. “Everything is about people; everything in this life that is worth a damn.”And therein, as another sage storyteller once put it, lies the rub. Because not-killing in the name of preserving your own inner peace is great, for you and your adversary, but less so for the people who might encounter that adversary later. The Wolves Morgan declined to kill last season, including the one he lectured on Sunday, later took out others and eventually attacked the Alexandrians who were feeding and sheltering Morgan. At least one of the Wolves he turned loose in Episode 2 appeared to attack Rick last week.Inner peace is great, but preserving it in such a way that jeopardizes the people who both sustain and depend on you is ultimately an act of selfishness. If you let me go, Morgan’s captive told him after his story, “I’m going to have to kill you, Morgan — I’m going to have to kill everyone,” children included. “Those are the rules,” he said. “That’s my code.” So chew on that, Morgan-san.That’s the problem with codes: They work in isolation but get trickier when they bump up against one another. For all the objective nobility of Morgan’s decision about how to exist in the world, it doesn’t really answer the question about what he owes everyone else, and how best to satisfy those obligations. That’s a riddle that he and nearly everyone else on this show, whether it’s Rick’s ruling with an iron fist or Glenn’s encouraging others at his own peril, have yet to solve.• Glenn Watch: No answers this week, not that I expected them. And not that I’m complaining, either. I’m not sure Sunday’s episode needed to be 90 minutes long. (Does any TV show need to be 90 minutes long, which seems to happen more and more these days?) But I do think, after the pace of the first three, we all could use a little break. (Update: Commenters and others point out that Steven Yeun was left out of the opening credits.)• Enjoyed the flaming walker who emerged from Morgan’s fire in the early part of the episode. Seems like you could weaponize those things, right? Light them and direct them into a rival camp? I suppose it doesn’t show much regard for one’s opponent, but it would be fun to watch.Advertisement