General Youssef is dead, Quinn is shot, Jonas is (reluctantly) back in the picture, and Allison is becoming more and more mysterious.Who is this woman, who plots a high-level assassination while practicing deep yogic breathing?On the one hand, we know that she is evil — witness the chilling little smile as she walks away from Saul and Dar on the landing strip in Switzerland, savoring their consternation over the plane explosion that ended their dreams of regime change in Syria —  murdering “the general you never met to discuss the coup you weren’t planning,” as Saul’s old friend and Israeli counterpart puts it.We see that she smokes — always a sign that a TV character is bad to the bone — and that she has no qualms about raising suspicion that her erstwhile lover, and, it would seem, one-time mentor, Saul, is batting for Israel.And yet, she does seem capable of some sort of softer feeling. Her distress upon viewing the (falsified) photo of dead Carrie appears real — although her visible horror maybe less about Carrie’s fate than the thought of her own if the plot to kill Saul’s favorite is discovered.Is she romantically linked to her Russian interlocutor, who holds her hand from his car window, offering silent comfort in a va-et-vient of gray vapor? How did she meet him? What appeal could he possibly have? There’s too much emotion on display — the quivering lip, the teary eyes, the plea to “stay with me a little longer” — to suggest that money alone is motivating the traitorous Berlin station chief.  Is she nursing some sort of deep grievance against Saul’s C.I.A.? Or is she – as, I think, the cigarette suggests — a long-term Russian sleeper spy with really wonderful English-language skills?I don’t think we can go too much longer without some greater explanation and a new turn of events. The actress Miranda Otto, unfortunately, is proving to be much less of a scene stealer than Nina Hoss’s Astrid, whose endearing qualities grow with every episode. (“Nice wig! Very retro. You look like one of the Baader-Meinhof gang,” she declares of Carrie’s new dirt-brown mop top.) I do wish that Astrid and Carrie could find something to like in one another other than their mutual fondness for Quinn – which they don’t like to see in each other at all. Female rivalry over a guy is far too tedious a plotline for the show’s  complex women — unless there’s more to the Astrid/Carrie disconnect than we currently know.While we’re on the subject of Quinn – one thing is clear: The man simply does not need as much blood as the rest of us. As we learn this week, he can leave a good quart of himself behind on a sepsis-inducing mattress and still find the wherewithal to fabricate an elaborate, Sopranos-worthy death-by-drowning kit, and drag himself down to the waterfront to use it . (And all for Carrie! Will our hearts simply explode?)Poor Quinn. For all his expertise in black ops, he really struggles when it comes to achieving his own life goals. Now he’s been “saved” from self-destruction by a guardian angel who, I fear, may have his own nefarious intentions.  Is the good Samaritan in league with Hezbollah? The Syrians? The Israelis? (You never know.)Given the success of operation Black Jack in re-uniting Carrie and Saul — and letting us learn, parenthetically, that it was Mira who divorced Saul! — I don’t think we have too long to wait for answers.A couple more mysteries to explore before you go:What’s going on with Dar Adal? I don’t buy his suspicions of Saul; he’s being far too overtly emotional in expressing them to Allison. That’s not his style. Neither is the persnickety way he routinely snaps at to her: “You a think?” he sneers, when she suggests someone has betrayed them. And later, there’s another snide  “Excuse me?” The delivery is just too of-our-time for Dar, who likes the old ways of doing things, and has maintained a certain elegance of expression in the past, even when enraged. He’s a man wedded to his secrets, not one who thinks out loud, as he also does this week in the presence of Allison.  It’s got to be some kind of setup.
Has Allison planted something on Saul? Her “Don’t forget your bag” after their noticeably chilly kiss outside his hotel seemed loaded with meaning. But then, so did his incredulous look when she asked, “Where are you going?” as he bolted out of the embassy.  Are questions like that a no-no among spies? Will the news that Carrie is about to deliver merely confirm his suspicions? Or have Dar and Saul actually had some sort of Allison-containing game going for some time? After all, as we’ve noted before, Saul of all people would certainly know that Quinn would never kill Carrie.Judith Warner, a contributing writer for The New York Times Magazine, is the author, most recently, of “We’ve Got Issues: Children and Parents in the Age of Medication.”