AdvertisementSupported byBy Gia KourlasNew York Theater Ballet, Diana Byer’s intimate company, presented a new installment of its “Legends & Visionaries” series at Danspace Project at St. Mark’s Church on Thursday night. The mixed bill showcases works by Merce Cunningham and Agnes de Mille (the legends) and David Parker and Nicolo Fonte (the visionaries).Perhaps the entry by Lois Bewley, a former New York City Ballet dancer remembered for her comedic skill as a choreographer, was meant to fall somewhere in the middle? These labels can be hard to swallow. Visionary seems a stretch especially for Mr. Fonte’s “There, and Back Again,” a retelling of “Hansel and Gretel,” and Mr. Parker’s “Two Timing,” despite its charms.Based on Steve Reich’s “Clapping Music,” Mr. Parker’s dance features Jeffrey Kazin, a guest artist, clapping a 12-beat pattern while Elena Zahlmann reproduces the sound with her feet, encased in purple point shoes. As the rhythms draw them in and out of unison — they expand their sonic range by pounding on their bodies — they create a succinct aural landscape that is playful, while not a joke.The program opens with Cunningham’s 1964 “Cross Currents,” set to Conlon Nancarrow’s “Rhythm Studies for Player Piano,” a wonderful trio not so wonderfully danced. Alexis Branagan, Joshua Andino-Nieto and Amanda Treiber have the unenviable task of performing roles originally danced by Cunningham, Carolyn Brown and Viola Farber. Throughout, the performers frequently cross paths; each follows an individual rhythm until the dancers meet at the end of a phrase.While the performers wavered in and out of command of Cunningham’s sharp angles and sustained balances — you could sense when they stopped breathing — the choreography filled the depth of the space in ways that other works didn’t. For much of the program, the theater felt sealed and overly solemn, even in Ms. Bewley’s “Pi r2,” a 1961 parody of the Balanchine sensibility set to Edgard Varèse’s “Poème Électronique,” in which two men braid a woman with overly flexed feet in and out of exaggerated, oddball positions.This vintage ballet, performed too knowingly, remains only mildly entertaining, as is the company’s closer, a suite of Agnes de Mille Broadway numbers. You need distance from the performers’ eager-to-please faces. A highlight, though, was “Another Autumn,” from “Paint Your Wagon,” in which Steven Melendez unearthed real tenderness in his duet with Ms. Zahlmann. The rest inched too closely to a high school musical.New York Theater Ballet continues performances through Saturday at Danspace Project at St. Mark’s Church, Manhattan; danspaceproject.org.Advertisement