AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn Shattuck4:20 P.M. THE LUNCHBOX (2014) Food from (and for) the heart: A neglected Mumbai housewife sends a home-cooked meal to her husband — and ends up pen pals with a widowed office worker after it goes astray. The great Irrfan Khan stars. It’s not a new conceit, but “the idea of two lonely souls connecting in a vast, modern metropolis, and remaining strangers even as their intimacy grows, has a durable charm,” A. O. Scott wrote in The New York Times. (Starz Cinema) (Image: Mr. Khan)9 A.M. STATE OF THE UNION The new House speaker, Paul D. Ryan of Wisconsin, and his predecessor, John A. Boehner of Ohio, talk about the passing of the torch and the state of the Republican Party, on CNN. Mr. Ryan also appears on FOX NEWS SUNDAY, at 10 on Fox; on FACE THE NATION, at 10:30 on CBS; and on MEET THE PRESS, at 10:30 on NBC.8 P.M. MADAM SECRETARY Now that Ostrov is dead, Elizabeth and President Dalton must keep tabs on the power players within the Russian government. Meanwhile, the cybersecurity sleuths try to figure out who hacked into Air Force One. In THE GOOD WIFE, at 9, Eli spices up Peter’s presidential bid. (CBS)9 P.M. BREAKTHROUGH: FIGHTING PANDEMICS Celebrities direct science documentaries, starting with Peter Berg’s examination of the Ebola outbreak in West Africa. Brian Grazer and Ron Howard are the executive producers of this series, which adds Paul Giamatti, Angela Bassett, Brett Ratner and Akiva Goldsman to the mix. General Electric helped develop it. “Does attaching a famous name to a science documentary make it any more or less interesting than a generic ‘Nova’ episode?” Neil Genzlinger asked in The Times. His nonscientific conclusion: “Not really.” (Nat Geo)9 P.M. THE LEFTOVERS The Rev. Matt Jamison leaves Miracle to find treatment that will rouse his wife from a vegetative state. But he can’t go home again. (HBO)9 P.M. HOMELAND Quinn tries to keep the fact that Carrie is still alive classified. Allison assesses the damage to the Syria mission after the plane explosion. In THE AFFAIR, at 10, a chill ensues between Alison and her Hudson Valley hosts. Then she discovers what Noah wrote in his new book that he didn’t want her to read. (Showtime)10 P.M. QUANTICO In the present, the trainees learn surveillance by spying on Miranda and her troubled son. In the future, Alex tries to hack into an F.B.I. computer. (ABC) (Image: Priyank Chopra as Alex)What’s Streaming NowI AM LOVE (2010) Tilda Swinton swoons as the wife of a wealthy Milanese textile manufacturer who awakens to life’s possibilities when she begins an affair with a young chef. Edoardo Gabbriellini is the sensitive beefcake. Manohla Dargis, writing in The Times, called it Luca Guadagnino’s “soaringly beautiful melodrama.” (Amazon, iTunes, Netflix) (Image: Ms. Swinton)Advertisement