AdvertisementSupported byBy Dave ItzkoffAsk a question of David Cross or Bob Odenkirk — say, how’s it going? — and either can answer for both of them. “Collectively, we’re good,” Mr. Cross said in a recent telephone conversation with this comedy duo that pioneered a style of rapid-fire, absurdist and acidly cynical sketches on the HBO series, “Mr. Show With Bob and David,” which ran from 1995 to 1998.Nearly two decades after that influential program’s untimely demise, their individual careers have flourished: Mr. Cross has starred in comedies like “Arrested Development,” while Mr. Odenkirk has become one of basic cable’s seminal antiheroes on “Breaking Bad” and “Better Call Saul.”Now these collaborators are once again pairing up for a new Netflix sketch series that resurrects the “Mr. Show” sensibility (if not its title): called simply “W/ Bob & David,” it also features many of the performers and writers who participated on the HBO series, including Paul F. Tompkins, Mary Lynn Rajskub, Jill Talley and Jay Johnston, and will be released on Nov. 13.Hopefully, its creators say, its four-episode season will be recognized in its own time, or at least encourage audiences to remember what’s special about their working together. As Mr. Odenkirk put it, “We’re briefly returning to remind everybody that we left.”In these further excerpts from that conversation, Mr. Odenkirk and Mr. Cross talk about reuniting on “W/ Bob & David,” and how it is different — but not too different — from “Mr. Show.”Q. Do you see each other socially when you’re not working together?DAVID CROSS We haven’t hung out together in a couple of months. I’ve just been doing my own thing, making honey.BOB ODENKIRK I follow David’s blog. I can tell you this. It’s a [lousy] honey season.CROSS [mock-crying] I’m the last guy you need to tell about that.Was there a specific moment on the original run of “Mr. Show” when you realized it was over?ODENKIRK The day we got a phone call, telling us that [HBO was] moving us from Friday night to Monday night. We looked at each other and we knew it was over then.CROSS We didn’t just pack up camp and move on. We had a live tour called “Hooray for America,” and we did the feature, “Run Ronnie Run,” but we were kicked out of the post process. That was the second deflating experience we had. It was an easy, natural place to go, “All right.” It wasn’t like we cried because we were never going to see each other again. We knew that we’d be collaborating a lot.Was there any hesitation about reuniting on another sketch series, for fear that it might tarnish the reputation of what you did the first time?CROSS There’s always that nagging little voice in your head. But Bob was very, very insistent from the beginning: This isn’t “Mr. Show 2.0.”ODENKIRK I insisted that this was “Mr. Show 2.1.” We would be 0.1 different from another rehash of “Mr. Show.”CROSS We checked with the institute in Switzerland, and they said it was actually 1.9.ODENKIRK There was wariness, and then we got together for this meeting with all the writers. I brought a bunch of sketches in, David had some as well. That was the test right there, sitting down with these guys and seeing if that group would interact the way they used to. Some of those guys in that room were better than they were 16 years ago, by a lot. It was a great meeting.CROSS It was so inspiring. I remember calling Bob from the car, and the two of us going, “That was amazing.” It really put the wind to our backs.What do you think defined the “Mr. Show” aesthetic?ODENKIRK Whenever we get credit for being absurd, I’m like, yeah, but we’re talking about socially relevant issues! We’re very silly for people who are dealing with challenging subjects or being a little confrontational. We’re silly so that you can’t get mad at us.CROSS I think our greatest strength has been the ability to listen to each other and say this is too confrontational or this is too silly. I would turn in something that was button-pushing, a little harsher. And then Bob would say: “No, you’re getting in the way of this other thing. You’ve got this great idea.” I’d fight it. And then, at the end of the day, I’m quite happy that I lost that argument.Do you think that anger was a fundamental part of the show? Have you mellowed over time?ODENKIRK I was a real comedy purist. It’s boring to everybody who’s not a comedy writer, or between the ages of 17 and 23. I was really judgmental, and I still am, of my own stuff. But let’s just have fun. If it’s funny, let’s do it. I would argue the anger is still there. The anger about society and about people being idiots.CROSS I haven’t let go of something that Gerald Ford said to me at a party. I’m not going to get into it. It’s still upsetting to me. He’s dead now. Anyway, that’s for me to deal with.Did you make a conscious decision not to revisit any of the sketches or characters you created on “Mr. Show”?CROSS We could do that if we wanted to, but we didn’t want to, really. We’re in our 50s, and there’s something really unseemly to me about old guys putting on wigs, trying to look like characters they did 20 years ago. I feel strongly about that. It’s just weird. It feels uncomfortable, and there’s a slight badness to it. Neither one of us has a desire — “Let’s check in on Ronnie Dobbs and see what he’s doing!” Ugh, no.Why is the first season of “W/ Bob & David” only four episodes? Will you do more?CROSS We looked at the schedule and the only way we could do this correctly was to do four. We couldn’t do any more than that.ODENKIRK I think we both would like to do more of these tomorrow. But we also have a confidence, especially based on this round of four, that we can do great shows in a year or two, just as good.Do you think sketch comedy is an increasingly precious resource these days? Is it harder to come by, or harder to make?ODENKIRK There was never anything like there is now, with “Key & Peele,” Amy Schumer, Nick Kroll. There’s never been more sketch comedy than in the last five years. But to me, it’s always a rare commodity. America should have more sketch comedy, especially with Hulu and Netflix and all the platforms we have now. There’s a place for more specific points of view. I say “Yea” to sketch comedy. Keep it up.Advertisement