By GIA KOURLASOCT. 30, 2015
As first episodes go, it’s creepy: An aspiring ballerina who has just run away from home to New York gets a phone call. It’s her brother, Bryan, stretched out on her childhood bed in Pittsburgh. “You forgot your ballerina,” he says. “You just left it here.” In one hand, he holds the clear figurine; the other is shoved down the front of his jeans.“I miss you,” he whispers. “Tell me where you are.” She doesn’t reply; instead, sitting barefoot on her fire escape, she pounds a battered toenail with her fist.Moira Walley-Beckett, the creator and an executive producer of “Flesh and Bone,” has an affinity for the dark side, and it is on full display in this eight-episode series, which begins Sunday, Nov. 8, on Starz. It’s a sensibility that has served her well. As a writer on “Breaking Bad,” she won an Emmy for the devastating and arguably best episode, “Ozymandias.”Now she brings her grim imagination to ballet, which she grew up studying in Vancouver, British Columbia, before switching over to musical theater. As Ms. Walley-Beckett, seemingly an innocent blonde, noted at an open casting call for “Flesh and Bone” in New York two years ago: “In my last show I was in Albuquerque casting meth addicts. It’s so nice to get back to my roots.”AdvertisementThe focus of “Flesh and Bone” is Claire Robbins, an emotionally ravaged ballet dancer portrayed by the American dancer Sarah Hay, a soloist at Dresden Semperoper Ballett in Germany. Despite her vulnerability, Claire is ambitious. Upon her arrival in New York, she auditions at the fictional American Ballet Company, impressing its bipolar, bisexual artistic director, Paul Grayson (Ben Daniels), enough to nail the job. Then, as the talented newcomer, she is quickly despised by her fellow dancers, as predicted by her roommate, Mia (Emily Tyra): “Let’s start with the fact that everyone’s going to hate you.”AdvertisementMaking new friends is the least of Claire’s problems as the series progresses. Early on, we learn that she has been sexually scarred and that self-inflicted pain is a survival mechanism. (Of course, this being a ballet drama, it involves toenails.) At night, she covers her body with books, including “The Velveteen Rabbit” and “Charlotte’s Web.” It’s a haunting sight.“I wanted her to have a special connection with books and with one book in particular,” Ms. Walley-Beckett said in a recent telephone interview, “and then I thought, what perfect armor and what a wonderful and alarming and tragic ritual.”Choreographed by Ethan Stiefel, with music composed and conducted by Adam Crystal, the ballet “Dakini” was created to be rehearsed and performed over the eight episodes of “Flesh and Bone”“The Velveteen Rabbit” mirrors Claire’s journey of finding out how to become real. But one integral part of “Flesh and Bone” has already achieved that: The cast members who play dancers are actually dancers. Ms. Walley-Beckett regards the show, a psychological drama about obsession and worship, as the anti-“Black Swan,” the Natalie Portman thriller that was the last ballet drama to achieve mass success; it relies on neither the fantastic nor body doubles. (Interestingly, Ms. Hay was part of the company in “Black Swan.”)“It was really important that we show the dancers doing what they do and put the camera anywhere,” she said. “So that we would have the ability to breathe and sweat and bleed and soar with them.”The cast includes the former American Ballet Theater members Irina Dvorovenko as Kiira, a drug-addicted star, and Sascha Radetsky as Ross, Kiira’s former lover. Ethan Stiefel, another Ballet Theater alumnus, is the show’s choreographer. For the final episode, he created “Dakini,” a four-movement ballet set to a score by Adam Crystal that explores the journey of a young woman from childhood to autonomy.During an onstage shoot at Purchase College in Westchester last fall, Ms. Walley-Beckett, said there were similarities between “Dakini” and Claire’s tale. “Not too literal,” she said, “but the journey of the story is Claire’s quest for herself: independent, not connected to men, just stepping forward, and she winds up in this brave and transcendent place.”She laughed. “It’s so funny because the dancers are like, ‘We’re here, we’re performing in the theater!’ ” she said. “Yet we’ve been shooting them in class, at the barre, and it’s all performing — but to them it just feels like every day.”AdvertisementMr. Daniels, who said he knew nothing about dance, was drawn to the show because of Ms. Walley-Beckett’s reputation as a writer. “I was bowled over that someone had written this story about what it means to be a woman set in this Petri dish of the extreme ballet world,” he said. “It sort of terrified me.”And in this normally sealed universe, “Flesh and Bone” doesn’t miss a stereotype, from drug abuse to eating disorders, sexual harassment, body shame and back-stabbing competition. Ms. Walley-Beckett said that “Flesh and Bone,” like “Breaking Bad,” is grounded in reality — with plenty of creative license. “Could a high school chemistry teacher start to cook meth after a terminal cancer diagnosis?” she asked. “Maybe. It’s possible. Has it been implied that it would be appropriate for me to prostitute myself to a person in a position of power in order to get a job? Yeah. Sure. Are there relevant topical issues of feminism and sexuality and power and the balance of power within that? Yep.”To the willowy Ms. Dvorovenko, the show gets under the skin of each character in a way that feels genuine. “I’ve seen it in my life,” she said recently at a Chelsea cafe. “I know that a lot of artistic directors are hitting on young dancers. I know that there is some involvement with wealthy people. I know that some dancers use drugs. I never tried to use drugs so it was really funny for me.” At her first audition, she recalled, she had to portray sniffing cocaine, “which was hilarious. I said, ‘How the hell should I do this?’ ”She practiced the gesture with her husband, Maxim Beloserkovsky, also a ballet dancer, who told her that she looked like “a vacuum cleaner.”But while “Flesh and Bone” features several diverging stories, the soulful Ms. Hay is its throughline. A native of Princeton, N.J., who studied at the School of American Ballet and the Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis School at American Ballet Theater, she views Claire as the sum of all her professional fears.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“You’re staring in the mirror the whole day, so you can become very insecure, or you can work on yourself and love yourself and get through it,” she said in an interview at the Bowery Hotel. “It’s a very damaging art form to me. I’m very self-critical. All of the fears and rejections and things that I lived in my life through dance, I got to finally express them and use them for some purpose, not just for my own self-loathing but to portray Claire.”If Walter White in “Breaking Bad” was an anonymous middle-aged man who became a criminal mastermind, Claire is the opposite: an extraordinary young talent dealing with extraordinary obstacles. But her desire is to become ordinary. “She’s also the kind of person who would do anything to get to where she needs to get, but her confidence and her ability to connect with people get in the way,” Ms. Hay said. “Her home environment is not good, and all of a sudden she’s surrounded by these horrible competitive girls. She just has to learn how to fend for herself, to get through every day without cracking.”The show, whose executive producers include — in addition to Ms. Walley-Beckett — Lawrence Bender, John Melfi and Kevin Kelly Brown, was initially conceived as a continuing series. But the network decided to change it to a limited series given its steep cost. (Starz would not disclose the production budget.) “It was a massively expensive show,” Ms. Walley-Beckett said, adding that she was “proud of it because we had to do everything right.” From the construction of a shock-absorbing sprung floor — necessary for reducing injuries — to fees for physical therapists, keeping dancers safe isn’t cheap.When she learned of the decision to make “Flesh and Bone” a limited run, she was disappointed. “But only for about 45 minutes,” she said, laughing.She realized that she’d have more time for editing. “And for better or worse, it was a very complete eight episodes,” she said. “I do want it to feel like a movie, and I think it does. It had the potential to become — I don’t know — weekly? This way, it has its engine and these serious and dire consequences to everything, and hopefully it’s just going to motor along at this intense hurtling speed and then explode. And be a brief shining star of a moment.”A version of this article appears in print on November 1, 2015, on Page AR12 of the New York edition with the headline: Beneath the Leotard, Deep Bruises  .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.