By ZACHARY WOOLFEOCT. 29, 2015
Opening in a new production at the Metropolitan Opera on Thursday, Nov. 5, Alban Berg’s “Lulu” is a rich fantasia on the themes of memory, lust and death. These concerns come together at a pivotal moment at the very end of the work’s second act, when Lulu — one of history’s great involuntary seducers — has returned from prison after killing her husband, the newspaper editor Dr. Schön.His son Alwa, who is obsessed with her, serenades Lulu, whereupon she delivers — laconically? wearily? sardonically? — one of the opera’s most memorable lines: “Ist das noch der Diwan, auf dem sich dein Vater verblutet hat?” (“Isn’t that the sofa on which your father bled to death?”)The quiet, almost spoken line is marked “beiläufig” — casual, in passing — which belies the fact that it’s a crucial passage in this classic work. Music experts and members of the creative team for the Met production, which is directed by the visual artist William Kentridge, spoke about the sequence. Here are edited and condensed excerpts from those conversations.When Lulu has finally seduced Alwa, the son of her former lover, she says this line to him. And by all means he should say: “You’re monstrous. I’m out.” But he says, “Stop, stop,” like, “Quiet, quiet, don’t speak about it.” There’s such clarity to the way the music is played in this passage. Very clear notes and clear words enunciated very clearly. I think Lulu should deliver the line fairly cleanly, almost deadpan, not telling Alwa which way the answer should be. There are no illusions, and yet the man makes the wrong choice.AdvertisementBy this point here have been different images on screen. During the sequence in which Alwa is singing an ode to her beauty and thinking about her body in musical terms, what we see on the screen is a naked drawing of Lulu, three stories high, gradually being undressed. Then, by the end of the act, it’s gradually painted over so that you see these isolated two singers on the sofa. A curtain has been painted over it, a series of vertical ink marks, something like the curtain that used to hide Courbet’s “Origin of the World.” At this moment in our production, Lulu has climbed back onto the sofa, and Alwa is on the edge of the sofa, and he can either step back, away from her statement, or step over that line toward her. And that’s what he does. He moves toward her.I’m sitting at that moment on the sofa and pondering, looking at the floor. Lulu’s mind goes back to when Dr. Schön died there and the line comes out, spoken like it’s in her thoughts. I think she speaks it to herself, though Alwa of course hears it. But I don’t think it’s directly spoken to him. He’s falling into her lap there, but she’s away; she’s in another sphere. The line is internal and intimate, at least as far as the Met allows.AdvertisementFor me, Dr. Schön is the one and only person Lulu really loves. So there are always references back to him and their love. Lulu is a person who is never really down. She always thinks ahead. That means that when she is with Alwa, she’s already planning to flee from this place, to go to Paris, and when he sings his hymn to her body she knows that she’s got him. But then she has a last glance at this sofa where his father had died. It’s a very delicate moment because it’s a spoken thing, a floating sense of what’s happened before.A pivotal sequence from Alban Berg’s opera.Of course the sofa is not just a sofa. I was in one production of “Lulu” in which it was represented by a chalk outline, like a police outline of a dead body on the street. And even in this Kentridge production, Dr. Schön doesn’t die on the sofa. I think that for Lulu it’s a metaphor. A metaphor for love, for a place where she’s home.Lulu is a survivor, but Berg’s score constantly recalls her past. He builds an intricate web of recurring themes with choreographic precision; this scene is a case in point. As he sings to Lulu, Alwa glances up at her portrait and his gaze is underlined in the orchestra by a series of chords that have been associated with the painting since the opera’s beginning.The painting represents Lulu’s beauty, but not Lulu herself. Alwa isn’t an artist, but rather a composer, and his effusive declaration of love is full of metaphors of his own art, music, as he compares parts of her body to musical expressions like “cantabile” and “misterioso.”But his idealism comes to a sordid end. The orchestra closes his hymn with a fateful clang in the vibraphone, a doorbell-like sonority that announces almost every turning point in the opera. Lulu deflates Alwa’s outpouring with her deadpan, spoken reminder about his father and the sofa. And when the characters surround the portrait in the third act, now in a dingy apartment in London where Lulu is working as a prostitute, this music returns like a bitter joke.To be honest, it’s a very easy moment for a conductor. You just beat time. The difficult part is a few bars earlier, when you have the score marked “poco animato,” then “calmando,” then “molto tranquillo,” then “tranquillo”: You have five or six different tempo markings in a very short amount of time. The most important thing in this moment is that you catch the molto tranquillo just before she says the line, so that it’s very, very quiet and kind of spooky.AdvertisementYou want to catch the mood so that she can say this very dryly, with a lot of distance. It’s very important that Lulu finds the right sound in her speaking voice. She should never shout it, but she still has to really be almost demanding.The moment is composed for orchestra so that time stands still. It’s almost that time doesn’t move on anymore, and this is kind of eternity. Berg just uses quiet, flowing triplets in the clarinet and in the piano, repeated for almost four bars, and he puts a very smooth line under this in the bassoons and harp.As her phrase is ending, the low brass players interrupt it, and build up a very, very short, big climax and the famous act ending, with this very significant rhythm motif. We remember it from the first act, when there’s a conversation between Dr. Schön and the Painter, and at the end of the conversation the Painter kills himself. It’s a rhythm of death, or destiny.A version of this article appears in print on November 1, 2015, on Page AR10 of the New York edition with the headline: The Question That Stops an Opera.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.