By GERALDINE FABRIKANTOCT. 28, 2015
Standing majestically along the sculpture trail at the National Museum of Wildlife Arts in Jackson Hole, Wyo., are a dozen bronze zodiac heads, each over 10 feet tall — the work of the Chinese artist Ai Weiwei.When the museum’s curator, Adam Duncan Harris, first saw them at the Hirshhorn Museum in Washington, he recalled thinking that “they would look great in a rural setting.” Mr. Ai ultimately agreed, and although the museum does not track how many visitors walk the trail, Mr. Harris said attendance at “Circle of Animals: Zodiac Heads” had been strong.In Jackson Hole, as elsewhere in the United States, museums are increasingly offering Chinese-themed exhibitions. And the displays are not just in places where Chinese tourism is booming, like New York, where the Guggenheim Museum is planning three Chinese-themed shows, and Boston, where the Museum of Fine Arts will open “Megacities Asia” in April.Last month in Sarasota, Fla., for example, the Ringling Museum of Art opened “Royal Taste: The Art of Princely Courts in Fifteenth-Century China.”AdvertisementThe number and wide dispersal of such exhibitions reflects that Westerners, and not necessarily Chinese, are the target audience.AdvertisementAlexandra Munroe, the senior curator of Asian art at the Guggenheim, said that Chinese certainly would go to standout Chinese-themed exhibitions, but that “the majority of Chinese tourists in the U.S. and Europe are on group tours, whose aim is to see as many iconic spots as possible,” Ms. Munroe said. “If they visit the great museums, it is to see Venus de Milo or van Gogh’s ‘Starry Night.’ ”But museum directors say they expect these exhibitions to attract their share of Chinese visitors, since they will remain a dominant force in tourism. And it has gotten easier for Chinese visitors to navigate Western museums with Chinese-language audio guides and guidebooks.In addition, museums are likely to try to attract the support of wealthy Chinese patrons who have settled in the West or are doing business here often. Among backers of the Metropolitan Museum of Art’s well-attended Chinese-themed efforts this year were Wendi Deng Murdoch, the ex-wife of the media mogul Rupert Murdoch, and Silas Chou, a wealthy Hong Kong-based businessman.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »