AdvertisementSupported byBy Anthony TommasiniSingers in all styles of music must find a balance between producing beautiful sounds and projecting words expressively, making them matter.But in “Canta-Concerto” the American composer Marc Neikrug intentionally upends this expectation. The piece, which was given its premiere on Thursday evening by the New York Philharmonic and Alan Gilbert at David Geffen Hall, is in effect a 25-minute concerto for mezzo-soprano and orchestra. To allow the soloist maximum freedom to focus on expressive vocal sounds, Mr. Neikrug liberates the vocal part from text: The mezzo-soprano sings phonetic syllables, like “ah,” “oh,” “da” and such.The brilliant soloist was the mezzo-soprano Sasha Cooke. That you could make no sense of what she sang was the whole point of this skillfully written piece, presented on a program that opened with Mr. Gilbert’s dark, stirring account of Brahms’s “Tragic” Overture, and ended with the pianist Emanuel Ax as the exciting soloist in Brahms’s Second Piano Concerto.Mr. Neikrug’s compositional language for “Canta-Concerto,” established in the first orchestral stirrings of the fitful opening movement, seems inspired by the Expressionist style of Berg. The music begins with a pungent, sustained sonority, a quivering mass of sounds, within which fragments dart about. The soloist enters, singing an unfolding line that has melodic shape, yet keeps breaking into sputtering bursts. For all the variety of the vocal part, which evokes instrumental writing in its virtuosity, it was hard to avoid trying to find some meaning in what Ms. Cooke was singing. Was this some strange language? Surely Mr. Neikrug intended us to have this mixed reaction, both fascinated and frustrated.The second movement, alive with percussion instruments, is short, percolating and angry. The dark, heavy, slow third movement, thick with atonal angst in the orchestra, finally gives the soloist long, searching melodic lines, which Ms. Cooke, singing with warmth and poignancy, made the most of. The jazzy finale has playful stretches, almost like scatting, as the soloist seems to take defiant command of the proceedings.“Canta-Concerto” inventively rattles your expectations of what a work for voice and orchestra can be. The music itself, however, on first hearing, lacked a final measure of inspiration and originality; it was a little dourly Bergian. Mr. Gilbert, who has conducted several works by Mr. Neikrug (including the premiere of his Concerto for Orchestra last year with the Philharmonic), led a glittering, animated performance.Why Mr. Gilbert included this particular new piece along with the two Brahms works was not apparent. Still, the Brahms performances were excellent, especially Mr. Ax’s account of the mighty Second Piano Concerto.The first movement had breadth, flow and, when things turn dark in episodes of pummeling chords, plenty of fiery power. Mr. Ax brought out both the Slavic wistfulness and restless energy of the scherzo and conveyed elegant spaciousness during the great slow movement, ennobled by Carter Brey’s refined playing of the sublime solo cello melody. In the catchy tunes of the finale, Mr. Ax’s bouncy lightness and gossamer colorings made clear that Italianate sunniness infuses this mostly intense Germanic concerto.That the ovation was so ardent was no surprise.The program will be repeated on Saturday evening at David Geffen Hall; 212-875-5656, nyphil.org.Advertisement