By HOLLAND COTTEROCT. 28, 2015
We’re 15 years into the new millennium, but our museums don’t seem to be aware. They’re stuck in the late 20th century, the Arrogant Age, with its love of gigantism in architecture and art. Frank Gehry’s 1997 Guggenheim Bilbao, a sky-reacher with a sasquatch footprint, scaled to accommodate colossal Richard Serra sculptures, epitomized that love. Mr. Gehry’s 2014 Vuitton Foundation museum in Paris, a glass galleon packed with bland blue-chip cargo, reconfirmed it. So we’re still waiting, scanning the horizon for a new kind of museum, a 21st-century museum, to appear.How will we know it when it arrives? There will be no single model, and there shouldn’t be. Art and life, which are equally a museum’s business, are too complicated to be reflected in any one mirror. The new museum won’t be defined by architectural glamour or by a market-vetted collection, though it may have these. Structurally porous and perpetually in progress, it will be defined by its own role as a shaper of values, and by the broad audience it attracts.A new version can’t arrive too soon. Existing ones are, in crucial ways, stagnant. Broad attendance numbers may give the opposite impression: Major urban museums in the United States are getting crowds in the door, but diversity isn’t coming in with them. Despite the dramatic increase in minority populations in this immigrant nation over the past half-century, and a wave of multiculturalist consciousness, our major art museums remain largely the preserve of better-off whites, a group that is losing its majority status in urban settings.And, more recently, there is evidence of significant shifts within that core audience, as once-shared pools of knowledge and interest change. These changes are most graphically evident at so-called encyclopedic institutions, like the Metropolitan Museum of Art. In them, non-Western art has always been a hard sell. But increasingly, so are formerly reliable stretches of Western art.AdvertisementThe Met’s European painting galleries, although splendidly reinstalled a few years back, get relatively light foot traffic, partly because the cultural references in much of the work have lost currency. Even a generation or two ago, the myths and religious subjects that form the basis of, say, Italian Renaissance painting would have been familiar to a general public, thanks to surviving public school variations on a “classical” education. But with changes in schooling in a country that has grown increasingly secular, viewers of art predating Impressionism typically don’t know what they’re looking at.The 21st-century museum is going to have to find ways tell them. And this may well demand particular curatorial skills, such as ever more imaginative storytelling, and the use of quasi-ethnological approaches to presentation. Even in a media-driven age, much art is, at some basic level, personal. People made it, reacted to it, treasured it in ways we can identify with. But art is also intrinsically political, designed to shape a view of the world in empowering ways, ways that write certain people and ideas into the record and leave others out. We need to see art from both perspectives.Museums like the Met are themselves grand history-writing-and-editing machines. Spectacle is built into them. But if they’re going to become 21st-century institutions, they’re also going to have to function in the mode of university teaching museums. Experimental — interdisciplinary, cross-cultural, self-critical, heterodox — approaches to art will have to be tried out if an audience for history, which is only as alive as our sense of investment in it, is not to be lost. (For a comparative look at some recent methods, I recommend Peggy Levitt’s “Artifacts and Allegiances: How Museums Put the Nation and the World on Display,” just out from University of California Press.)AdvertisementWhether any amount of inventiveness can arrest the current retreat from art’s past is, of course, a question. Again, the metrics are paradoxical. Whereas other branches of the arts, like classical music and ballet, are attracting fewer and fewer young people, museums are attracting many, yet the interest of those visitors appears to be specific and narrow: contemporary art. And because the future lies with this audience, museums are shaping themselves to it by acquiring and exhibiting more and more contemporary work.I speak generally: The fact that older art has become hard to acquire, for reasons of price, scarcity and legality, is also a factor. But the reality is that, along with perennial favorites like Vermeer, van Gogh and Picasso, contemporary art is one of the few surefire draws. Even unlikely institutions are getting the message: not long ago, the Morgan Library & Museum did a Matthew Barney show.
        A look at the upcoming auction season and the ways museums and galleries are innovating for the future.This being so, you’d think that a new museum devoted to contemporary art would be the place to find a 21st-century paradigm, but so far, no. The Broad, which opened with tremendous fanfare in Los Angeles this fall, is not a contender. A classic example of a private museum transformed into a public monument, it is devoted to the collection of the multibillionaire Eli Broad and his wife, Edythe, longtime Los Angeles residents who began buying seriously in New York in the early 1980s, when stars of a slightly earlier era, like Richard Prince and Cindy Sherman, were working in SoHo, and younger figures like Jeff Koons had emerged in the East Village.Did the Broads shape the market or follow it? Either way, their collection follows the commercial mainstream so closely as to read less like a “personal choice” than an investment portfolio. Although many of their purchases date from the 1970s and ’80s, when some of the most innovative work was in film, photography, performance and various modes of Conceptualism, the couple heavily favored painting and sculpture. And almost everything in their holdings is by white men. If you were to read art history from this collection, black and Latino New York and Los Angeles barely existed, nor, apart from a patch of Western Europe (Germany), did any world beyond the coastal United States. This is not only a 20th-century museum; it is also one that dates in spirit to the pre-Conceptualist, pre-feminist, pre-black-power early 1960s.A short time ago, you could have said the same of two pre-eminent New York institutions, the Museum of Modern Art and the Guggenheim Museum, which have only recently made efforts to enter the 21st — which, by definition, means global — century.The Guggenheim is doing this in a half-measures way through a program called the UBS MAP Global Art Initiative. Beginning in 2012, with funding from the Zurich-based financial services company UBS, the museum hired three short-term curators, each with expertise in contemporary work from certain geographic locales: South and Southeast Asia; Latin America; and the Middle East and North Africa. Their job was to buy a certain amount of art from within each region and organize a group show of it, after which the work would enter the Guggenheim’s permanent collection.Two of the exhibitions have taken place, with Middle Eastern and North African art still to come. The Asian and Latin American work was, over all, well chosen, if familiar; with the curators departing once their contracts are up, what are the prospects for further and more adventurous additions? In short, the UBS initiative feels like window dressing, a way to “globalize” the Guggenheim cosmetically without committing the museum to anything.The MoMA equivalent, called the Contemporary and Modern Art Perspectives, or C-MAP, seems more substantial. An extension of the museum’s longstanding International Program, C-MAP is hard-wired into the museum as it calls on staff curators to research seldom-tapped areas in the existing collection and, working with colleagues and institutions abroad, to bring that art to light in exhibitions.AdvertisementThe first of these, “Tokyo 1955-1970: A New Avant-Garde” in 2012-13, was a revelation. Even scholars familiar with the period hadn’t seen some of the earlier paintings, made during periods of post-Hiroshima upheaval. The current show, “Transmissions: Art in Eastern Europe and Latin America, 1960–1980,” also introduces fascinating material. Much of it, Conceptual and radically political, forces a rethinking of the vaunted pre-eminence of the Western European and American work of that period that MoMA has staked out as prime turf.If C-MAP’s energy can be sustained, and its purview extended, the museum has a chance of breaking out of the parochial definition of Modernism on which it was founded. MoMA is still a thoroughly 20th-century place: it buys as the market directs; its record with diversity is poor; its master narrative is obsolete. Yet a corner of the institution is showing signs of 21st-century life.Even that cosmopolitan corner, though, has a limited reach, because it’s part of a museum that a significant population of Americans, defined by class and ethnicity, will probably never visit. And that population is growing larger every year. A museum can either accept the reality of us-and-them-ism as a given, or it can try something proactive and start taking art to where people are, turn itself into a museum without walls.There have been isolated, one-off examples of museums operating in this mode from the 1980s forward, and some come immediately to mind. In 1995, under the sponsorship of the Newark Museum, the artist Pepón Osorio created an extraordinarily moving two-channel video installation called “Badge of Honor” in a storefront in a working-class neighborhood in Newark.The piece, which was about a Latino father in prison communicating with his young son at home, was later transferred to the museum, and then to the Ronald Feldman Gallery in Manhattan. It had a very different resonance in each setting. It was particularly powerful at its original site, where its subject was a lived one. It got people talking about the social issues it raised, and about the fact that contemporary art was the means of raising them.The Queens Museum, which has a history of fluid reciprocal relationships with communities in its ethnically rich borough, has supported many long-term projects outside its walls. Beginning in 2011, in conjunction with Creative Time, it sponsored what amounted to a year-and-a-half-long performance piece called Immigrants Movement International, conceived by the Cuban-born artist Tania Bruguera.As part of an international project intended as a practical gesture of solidarity with people living illegally in countries not their own, Ms. Bruguera rented a two-story house in Corona, Queens, a neighborhood that was home to many new arrivals from Ecuador and Mexico. Living upstairs, she opened the first floor as the movement’s community center. Seven days a week, with a tiny paid staff and a roster of volunteers, many of them artists, the center provided free legal aid to undocumented immigrants, as well as language classes, health workshops and art lessons. It also ran discussion groups on how to bring the cause of civil rights for immigrants to the public eye.Puzzled at first, members of the community embraced the center, its founding principle of performance as politics and the idea that they were participating in a living work of art that existed outside their local museum but was part of it. (This summer, Ms. Bruguera was named the first artist in residence at the Mayor’s Office of Immigrant Affairs.)AdvertisementAcross the globe, 20th-century museums in the Bilbao mode continue to rise. That sounds like what we’ll be getting when the Saadiyat Cultural District, built on an artificial island off Abu Dhabi in the Persian Gulf, is finished in the next few years. It will include a Guggenheim franchise designed by Mr. Gehry and a Louvre Abu Dhabi, described by its architect, Jean Nouvel, as a “universal museum,” with “galleries enabling comparisons and contrasts between artworks of different historical periods and geographical areas,” with contemporary art in the mix.Sound old? It is, including the fact that the audience envisioned for these museums is effectively preselected: an international leisure class for whom the island’s museums, luxury hotels and shopping malls are being built.So the new 21st-century museum — where walls are dissolvable, access is open, and art is invited to tell us who we are as an arrogant, exclusionary but possibly teachable culture — is still awaited. Millenniums are artificial markers. But, like New Year’s resolutions, they can be put to practical use to spur invention and to strengthen a resolve to turn old thinking around. Invention and reinvention can start anytime, like now.A version of this article appears in print on November 1, 2015, on Page F10 of the New York edition with the headline: Toward a Museum of the 21st Century  .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »