By LORI HOLCOMB-HOLLANDOCT. 28, 2015
While it’s never a bad time to be young and rich, it’s a particularly intriguing time for those in the deep-pocketed, skinny-jeans crowd to have an interest in collecting art.Whether it’s a sale organized by the rapper Drake, a party in the Hamptons, pop culture-focused auctions, dinners with celebrity chefs or the ability to place bids from an iPhone, auction houses are increasingly focusing their efforts on capturing the attention of young and emerging collectors. Because, much like opera, ballet, theater or any other operation related to the arts, the auction business is facing the fact that while the older audiences that have traditionally supported them are still vital, survival hinges on looking to the next in line.“It’s absolutely critical, essential,” said Jussi Pylkkanen, Christie’s global president and principal auctioneer. “The next generation of artists and buyers and people who are inspired by, and interested in, the art world is absolutely critical to us.”With interests as diverse as their upbringings and cultures, these young collectors are changing the way auction seasons are shaped. Unlike their predecessors, they often do not come from families that collected art, or even possess more than a surface understanding of the art world. They may discover a painting through social media and spend thousands, perhaps even millions, on an item without having ever set foot in an auction house. Time period and an artist’s background often come second to quality and a good back story.AdvertisementWhile the formula varies from house to house, accessibility, education and storytelling seem to be common ingredients in efforts to reach the under-45 crowd and emerging markets in the East, as well as to inspire well-established collectors.For Phillips, approachability has meant rebranding: shrinking catalogs and emphasizing scholarly essays in the hope of creating a more magazinelike experience; making advertisements more colorful and using welcoming language. Overcoming a stuffy, exclusive image is a concern across the board.“I think, for some people, it can be intimidating to even put your toe in the water because it can be such an overwhelming process,” Lydia Fenet, a senior vice president for strategic partnerships at Christie’s, said by phone in late September from Mexico City, where Christie’s was holding an event. “We’re trying to make it something that everyone can participate in.”AdvertisementThe ability to view lots, watch videos, download condition reports and bid online has helped to break down real and perceived barriers to auction houses.Over the past two and a half years, bidders have come to Christie’s sales site from 90 countries, and 44 percent of all new bidders have been under the age of 45. Watches, handbags and Chinese artworks are particularly popular, with the average buyer spending about $16,000, but items in online sales at Christie’s and other houses have also fetched seven figures. This is why so much of the auction world is focusing on social media and online assets like apps and videos, as well as working with e-commerce sites like eBay and Artsy.Phillips’s recent partnership with eBay for the “New Now” sale (formerly known as “Under the Influence,” a title that was also changed as part of the rebranding) produced a 45 percent increase in page views over the last year’s sale.A dress worn by Judy Garland in “The Wizard of Oz” (estimated at $800,000 to $1.2 million).“Transactions were moderate, but we saw a lot of traffic, and for the first time, that’s exactly what we want,” said Trish Walsh, Phillips’s marketing and communications manager.While technology has greatly expanded auction houses’ ability to reach potential customers, the preference is still to get bidders into live settings, where auctioneers can connect with young buyers, educate them and introduce them to the auction world in a low-pressure environment. Some recent examples include a party that Bonhams held in Los Angeles in March that featured a match between two professional Ping-Pong players on a table made of trophies by the artist Ry Rocklen, and an event this past summer in the Hamptons, hosted by Christie’s and NetJets.“There were people at the Ping-Pong event that had never bid with us before who were bidding with us,” said Dane Jensen, a specialist in contemporary art in the Los Angeles office of Bonhams. “Part of that is because of what we’re showing, and part of it is because of that event.”In advance of its fall opening evening sale, an auction on Wednesday, Nov. 4, dedicated to the masterworks of the A. Alfred Taubman collection, Sotheby’s has planned dinners to introduce important potential bidders to the collection, valued at more than $500 million. The first took place in early October in Hong Kong, with chefs from Noma, the famed Copenhagen restaurant. Similar events, this time with the chef Massimo Bottura, are planned for Saturday, Nov. 7, and Sunday, Nov. 8, in New York to preview highlights from Sotheby’s contemporary art sales.Social media goes hand in hand with staging immersive events and creating buzz around auctions. A shining example came in April when the actor Pierce Brosnan posted a selfie on Instagram with a Marc Newson chaise longue at Phillips in London. Several days later, the item set a world auction record, 2.4 million pounds, or about $3.7 million, for a design object.
        A look at the upcoming auction season and the ways museums and galleries are innovating for the future.While there’s no way to link Mr. Brosnan’s Instagram post directly to the auction’s success, Mr. Jensen said social media has had an excellent return on investment.Advertisement“We know that they’re going to respond to works by putting it out there in the world and kind of expanding the platform for us,” he said. “So even if they aren’t bidding on things, how they’re engaging with it has value for us. We’re monetizing our likes.”Along with the shift in presentation, auction houses are adjusting their calendars and routines to fit the next generation’s tastes. Gone are the days when collectors, by and large, focused on just one period of art. Themed sales that unite around an idea, rather than around a specific genre or era, are more common in the midseason but are increasing in the larger November and May sales.“New collectors today are coming into the market collecting in at least five different categories,” Mr. Pylkkanen said. “They want to put Picasso with Basquiat, they want to put Giacometti against de Kooning, Cézanne against Mondrian and against Minimalist artist of the postwar period. They collect very broadly and in interesting ways. Lots of juxtapositions.”Last spring, Christie’s sold $1.7 billion worth of art in a single week of sales that included a cross-period auction of 20th-century art, titled “Looking Forward to the Past.” They’ll again go with that formula this fall, this time with “The Artist’s Muse,” which also comprises works spanning the 20th century. It will open Christie’s main evening sales on Nov. 9. The centerpiece is Modigliani’s “Nu Couché (Reclining Nude),” valued at around $100 million, along with Picasso’s “Homme à l’Épée” (1969), estimated at $25 million, and a painting of the American author James Lord by Alberto Giacometti, valued at a high of $30 million.The auction house plans to take the strategy a step further in the spring, with a themed week of sales it’s calling Classic Art Week, which will include a new curated sale titled “Revolution,” centering on moments in the 18th, 19th and 20th centuries that inspired artistic innovation.Similarly, Phillips will bridge several periods with its 20th-Century and Contemporary Art sale on Sunday, Nov. 8. The decision to move from its usual Thursday start date to a weekend is one that Ms. Walsh said Phillips had been considering for some time with hopes of avoiding buyer fatigue.And when it comes to conjuring up fresh interest, an auction house should never underestimate the power of nostalgia and pop culture.AdvertisementIn late October, Sotheby’s dedicated an online-only sale to personal memorabilia from the collection of Sam Simon, a co-creator of “The Simpsons,” who died in March at 59. (Pieces from Mr. Simon’s art collection, such as Thomas Hart Benton’s “T. P. and Jake,” valued at a high estimate of $2.5 million, will be dispersed over the course of 11 other sales throughout the season.)On Nov. 23, Bonhams is setting a feast of movie memorabilia for collectors with its “TCM Presents … Treasures From the Dream Factory” (on view Thursday, Nov. 5, through Sunday, Nov. 8, in Los Angeles, and Nov. 20 through 23 in New York). Highlights of that auction include a dress worn by Judy Garland in “The Wizard of Oz” (estimated at $800,000 to $1.2 million) and a golden ticket from “Willy Wonka and the Chocolate Factory” ($10,000 to $15,000, or higher if Veruca Salt’s father attends).And on Dec. 10, R M Sotheby’s, the auction house’s automobile department, will auction Janis Joplin’s psychedelic 1965 Porsche, valued at over $400,000.Though the talk of social media, Hamptons parties and partnering with celebrities may make it seem as if auction houses were mainly focused on tapping into a youth-obsessed culture, auctioneers emphasized that inspiring current collectors and reaching new markets are their top priorities.Lisa Dennison, chairman of Sotheby’s North and South America, summed up what many auction houses are thinking now: “We want to be all things to all people.”A version of this article appears in print on November 1, 2015, on Page F6 of the New York edition with the headline: A Bid for Youth.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »