AdvertisementSupported byBy Robin Pogrebin“At New York’s biggest auction house,” the announcer intones, “there are some who have it all — some who want it all — and some who will do anything to get it.”So goes the trailer for the new series “The Art of More,” which has its premiere on Nov. 19. It is the first scripted drama from Crackle, a streaming-video unit of Sony Pictures Television.The 10-episode series, which stars Dennis Quaid, Kate Bosworth, Cary Elwes and Christian Cooke bills itself as an “hourlong drama which delves into the underbelly and surprisingly cutthroat and glamorous world of premium auction houses,” may reflect a growing interest in the art world as fodder for popular culture.Ovation’s original series “Art Breakers” (“Step inside the high-stakes world of art collecting”), a four-episode reality show that followed two art advisers, Miller Gaffney and Carol Lee Brosseau, as they found prize pieces for their clients, had its premiere on Oct. 4.Other art-related reality shows have included “Work of Art: The Next Great Artist” (Bravo, 2010-11), “Gallery Girls” (Bravo, 2012) and “Street Art Throwdown” (Oxygen, 2015).Given the excitement that currently surrounds the art world — largely because of continually rising price tags — the subject area has become increasingly ripe for television.“Because of these high prices, it’s seen as a very glamorous place — the drama of auctions, the high spectacle of it,” said Brett Gorvy, Christie’s international head of postwar and contemporary art. “We’ve got $100 million paintings, celebrities in the auction room — a DiCaprio — a cattle call of names, the sense that the art market is a very sexy place, a lot of conniving and innuendo that might be part of this. I’m not surprised it makes for a TV program.”Mr. Gorvy said the auction world had also become more accessible as the business became more global and those who populate it more recognizable. “The artists themselves have become rock stars,” he said. “Their personalities are very important. A Jeff Koons, a Damien Hirst — all of those people have become more known to the public.”Chuck Rose, who created “The Art of More,” said he was drawn to the auction world as an art buff but also because of the more basic questions it raises about human nature. “What does this say about us — our need to collect, our need to own things?” he said. “There’s just this powerful emotional connection with objects, and I wanted to explore that.”Mr. Rose said he had consulted with Bonhams, the British auction house, adding that the two biggest houses — Christie’s and Sotheby’s — chose not to cooperate. “They told me some wonderful stories,” he said.To some extent, the show draws on actual events, like Christie’s auction of relics from Capt. Robert Falcon Scott’s ill-fated expedition to the South Pole, and the Northern California couple who came upon $10 million worth of gold coins in 2013.“There is mystery behind these things,” Mr. Rose said. “What do they represent to somebody who wants to own them?”Mr. Rose said he had marveled at the aspirational nature of sales like that of the $10 million vintage Ferrari once owned by Steve McQueen at the Ontario-based RM Auctions in August. “These are the things dreams are made of,” he said, adding of the car’s buyer or buyers: “Did they think that would make them Steve McQueen?”“We really want to touch on a wide — forgive the pun — canvas,” he added. “Auctions are not just about art.”Indeed, the show also deals with criminal subjects like forgery and art smuggling. Mr. Rose said he had been greatly disturbed, for example, by the tendency of the Islamic State, or ISIS, not only to remove antiquities but also then to sell them. “Not only are we obsessed with owning things,” Mr. Rose said, but “We don’t care where they came from. There is a connection between people dying in Syria and some billionaire living on Park Avenue.”“Art is so beautiful,” he added, “but yet there can be so much ugliness behind it.”Of course, if these shows really took viewers into the day-to-day life of the auction houses, what they would see would be decidedly less glamorous, insiders say, particularly in the stressful, work-heavy days before big sales.“People don’t look that great — they’re eating bad food and here until 4 in the morning,” Mr. Gorvy said. “In the room itself, it’s high drama. But you go behind the curtain, and you see everything put together with a lot of sweat and tears.”Advertisement