AdvertisementSupported byBy Alastair MacaulayWith its new double bill of “Liebeslieder Walzer” (1960) and “Tschaikovsky Suite No. 3” (1970), New York City Ballet plunges us into the Romantic heart of its founding ballet master George Balanchine. It’s a complex heart, where the needs for intimacy and privacy coexist and clash, and where relationships are shown prismatically, as if from several contrasting angles. The music, by Brahms and Tchaikovsky, comes from the years 1869-1884.As danced on Thursday, the ballets, reflecting their composers’ worlds in different ways, were entirely admirable, clear, but not gripping. The ballets should show — better than this performance allowed us to recognize — the importance Balanchine gives to light and eyes.“Liebeslieder” features an ensemble of four male-female couples, each of which dances some duets alone. The setting is a 19th-century music room with three garden doors, where the couples dance to Brahms’s first set of love-song waltzes (Opus 52, for four voices and two pianos) in formal ballroom attire, with heeled shoes and, for the women, full-length dresses. But Mark Stanley’s lighting makes the current production too indistinct; the very air seems gray.The importance of eyes continually heightens the tension of each couple’s relationship: A single look can seem invasive. In one duet, the woman (Jennie Somogyi) repeatedly stretches away from her partner (Tyler Angle), even bending low and shifting direction as if to evade him; and yet — perhaps the ballet’s single most revealing moment — when she then turns back to gaze into his eyes, he politely shields his face from her, as if to stop her from seeing into his heart.In another duet, the woman (Sterling Hyltin) blithely and slowly circles on the spot, clockwise, while her partner (Jared Angle) rapidly circumnavigates her (counterclockwise) at arm’s length, his outstretched hand touching her waist, a worshiping satellite to her happy planet. At the end of the song cycle, the couples, softly flinging open the room’s French windows, rush out into the garden.After a pause with lowered curtain, Balanchine explodes and transfigures the situation: now we see the women on point, in translucent calf-length tulle dresses, and the room itself has become a hollow frame, open to the elements and to vaster waves of feeling. (The music is Brahms’s second set of love-song waltzes, Opus 65.) Here too lighting should make everything more heart-catching than the current production allows. It’s a matter of serious regret that the current production, as revived a year after Balanchine’s death, with modifications from the one seen in his lifetime, has never shown us the original skyful of stars that made this whole second scene so transcendent.Emotion and expression are taken to a new scale in this second half, as if souls themselves, especially the women’s, are more exposed. And again the use of eyes — often to look away from, rather than at, the beloved — becomes momentous for each couple. All these relationships are ones of love; yet the ballet — continually, subtly, gently — suggests that love alone is not enough, and that, at crucial moments, each woman needs her independence, like an escape route, from her lover.“Tschaikovsky Suite No. 3” is also led by four male-female couples, but these are seen successively: a different pair (attended by a different corps de ballet) leads each of the four movements of Tchaikovsky’s orchestral suite. And here too a single place, a palatial chamber, is transformed, again and again: it’s like a haunted ballroom until, in the spectacular finale, when the chandeliers are fully illuminated, it’s no longer haunted. The women have hair unbound and are in flowing full-length quasi-modern attire for the first three movements; the first movement’s couple are even barefoot (most unusual in Balanchine); but in the finale, formal attire is worn, with women on point and with hair up.In the first scene, the lead woman (Teresa Reichlen) almost exactly reproduces the bending-pivoting movement that we saw in the first half of “Liebeslieder”: We don’t doubt she loves her partner (Russell Janzen, whose newly darkened hair and pale makeup have diminished the usual wonderful frankness of his features) and yet she too, at crucial moments, needs to fold herself in two and turn away in her need to avoid intimacy.There are two other instances when this couple, locking eyes and hands, sink gently to kneeling positions on the floor, mutually absorbed and raptly so: they’re the most closely connected couple in the ballet. With each later couple, Balanchine creates some burning image of eye-and-hand contact, establishing at the same time the proximity of lovers and the chasm between them.The cast of “Liebeslieder,” which dances all this season’s performances, is almost entirely good and could be great; Ashley Laracey (new to the ballet) and Justin Peck (new to his role), Sara Mearns and (the weakest member) Ask La Cour complete the lineup. (Ms. Laracey should revise her eye makeup, which emphasizes the line of her eyes in closure but not their shape when open; few ballets make this matter more.) Later performances should heighten clinching details of poetic eloquence. Tiny moments — the way Jared Angle travels on the beat of a fast waltz as if with wind in his sails — are already marvelous.Thursday’s account of the dances of “Suite No. 3” — though lighting here is on the muddy side too — was pleasingly exact. Ms. Reichlen and Mr. Janzen are, with Taylor Stanley in the second movement, the ones who best capture the Romantic agony of Balanchine’s response to Tchaikovsky. Leading the great “Tema con Variazoni” finale (first choreographed in 1947 and often danced independently as the ballet “Theme and Variations”), Megan Fairchild and Joaquin de Luz give happy lucidity to their virtuoso steps; but Ms. Fairchild’s lack of stylistic amplitude (unlike the four demi-soloists behind her, her line never beams into the space beyond her) makes this an anticlimactic ending.­This program is in City Ballet repertory until Oct. 11, David H. Koch Theater, Lincoln Center, 212-496-0600, nycballet.comAdvertisement