AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben RatliffNIÑOS HEROESOn “Niños Heroes,” the Brazilian singer and songwriter Negro Leo, real name Leonardo Campelo Gonçalves, makes short and pointed tunes that behave like song but sound like noise, and sometimes vice versa. They do something violent and artful and beautiful to pop music — but what is it? Is he deconstructing or reconstructing? Is he taking the bones out, or putting new ones in? Negro Leo is part of a new experimental-music scene in Rio de Janeiro, associated over the last five years with the label Quintavant and the club Audio Rebel. That circle includes the free-rock band Chinese Cookie Poets; the electronic artist Cadu Tenório; and Negro Leo’s wife, the singer Ava Rocha. Animated, charismatic, kind of wizardly with his rhythmic shouting of dream-state symbolic lyrics and his rough musicianship, Negro Leo dares you to demystify his method. So let’s keep trying. The tunes are arranged for a tight band of keyboards, guitar, saxophone, bass and drums. They contain funk and free jazz and noise; they’ve got something to do with the 1960s Tropicalismo movement in Brazil, something to do with Arto Lindsay and New York’s brief late-’70s No Wave movement. His songs have the complicated melodic and rhythmic patterns of conversational speech, which keep tricking you into thinking that they’re made up on the spot. It feels good to keep falling for that trick.MAKI ASAKAWAIt’s pretty late to catch up with the work of Maki Asakawa, the Japanese jazz, folk and pop singer: She made her first record in 1970 and died in 2010. None of her music has been released in the English-language marketplace until now; “Maki Asakawa,” an 18-track anthology compiled by the label Honest Jon’s, is a good way to start. She coded as cult all the way: Her basic sound and image were interior-life bohemian, and in some ways she was cagey with her talent. She didn’t belt or improvise broadly. She picked a limited range of notes and climbed into them, applying a pinch of vibrato, letting her voice fade and crackle. These tracks lean toward her earlier records, including their trendier aspects: backbeat-oriented, quasi-psychedelic, some soul and raga, and bossa nova. But they clearly demonstrate her guiding desire, which was to explore the possibilities of the slow blues in the late 20th century, whatever that might mean: First she was a follower of Bessie Smith and Billie Holiday and Nina Simone, then later an explorer of various forms of dark-side pop and meditative, quasi-ambient music. Some of the most intense recordings she made were English-language covers or Japanese rewrites of American jazz standards, blues songs and spirituals, backed by only acoustic guitar and drums. (If you can get her 1972 album “Blue Spirit Blues,” you’ll hear this tendency clearest.) She sang slowly, as if there were weights on her. And after a while of her working and your listening, you’ll hear it: the way she connects intimately with her task but keeps something private for herself.AMORPHAEBen Monder is a New York jazz guitarist who can play in a number of traditions but has gone further into his own, involving complex chords; deep sustain and swell-and-recede dynamics; fast picking; and long-form composition. Listening to his music can give you a strange, weightless, confusing sensation. He was part of the circle around the drummer Paul Motian, and “Amorphae,” his first album for the label ECM, was initially going to be a set of improvised duets between Mr. Monder and Motian. They finished some of these, but after Motian’s death in 2011 the balance of the record was completed through solo improvisations and duets with another drummer with a similarly expansive sense of time: Andrew Cyrille. (The keyboardist Pete Rende is obliquely present here and there.) The two drummers, using brushes and open space, encourage Mr. Monder in one of his natural tendencies: They help him explore sound. They help him get galactic. The album is an extended listening experience and a great one, especially late at night; its milestone here is a trippy, sepulchral version of Rodgers and Hammerstein’s “Oh, What a Beautiful Mornin’.”AS EVERIn the Brooklyn band Ava Luna, Felicia Douglass sounds cool and responsible against Carlos Hernandez’s impatient yelp. Outside of Ava Luna, with the musician and producer Erik Gundel, she’s created Gemma, a silky, poppy new project with plenty of open space, mid-’80s R&B hooks and gently skittering beats. The songs on “As Ever,” Gemma’s first record, are quiet, alert and beautiful: dance music, party music, but of a seriously adult kind.Advertisement