AdvertisementSupported bySnapshotBy Elise CzajkowskiMany people have embarrassing prom stories, but Hasan Minhaj doesn’t even have that; instead, he’s got a devastating tale of the way racism ruined a date to a school dance. Originally told at a storytelling competition held by the Moth, it has evolved into the centerpiece of his debut one-man show, “Homecoming King,” playing at the Cherry Lane Theater until Nov. 15. With bittersweet humor, he looks back at his experiences as a first-generation Indian-American growing up in Davis, Calif.An inspired response to bigotry helped win this 30-year-old comedian his gig as a correspondent for “The Daily Show” last November. After watching Ben Affleck refute anti-Muslim sentiments on “Real Time With Bill Maher” last year, Mr. Minhaj wrote a piece called “Batman vs. Bill Maher” for his audition, and he got the job on the spot, he said.In the green room of the offices of “The Daily Show,” Mr. Minhaj talked about his “comedy Dad,” Jon Stewart, and about a surprise from a school guidance counselor. These are excerpts from the conversation.Q. You and Trevor Noah were hired at “The Daily Show” at the same time. This must have been a particularly crazy first year.A. It was. Both of us were like: “We got the job! This is a dream job!” And then we find out Dad is leaving, and we’re like: “No! What is happening?” I told Jon: “I just got married. What’s going to happen to the show?” But Jon was on a mission to have somebody internally guide the ship. It’s only when you really come from within the show that you realize how great the writers and the producers are and that they really are the machine that makes this whole thing run. Trevor saw the value in it, and so it worked out.It seems like you and the other correspondents have been getting more screen time with Trevor.If you remember earlier episodes of “The Daily Show” with Jon, it was more of an ensemble cast. And I think Trevor has designed it in such a way, à la the old “Daily Show,” for this to be the new comedy Avengers. We all bring our superpowers to the table.A lot of the childhood stories you tell in “Homecoming King” are very painful. Do you find it difficult to tell them over and over again?Yeah, there are certain parts that it’s really hard to say. How in the third grade, there was that assignment, “What do you want to be when you grow up?” And I wrote, “I want to be white.”I gave a commencement speech at my high school this past summer, and [my former guidance counselor] goes: “Hasan, I had no idea you were going through that. You smiled all the time, and I knew girls that liked you.” And I’m standing there freaking out, like this could have changed my life had I just known that. There would be no need for this show, and I’m going down this rabbit hole.You share stories and social media posts from real people in the show. How did you approach that?I’ve changed names and truncated these events. That way, people don’t turn this into a murder mystery. We live in a very weird time where everyone is an Internet sleuth. I got a call from my local newspaper, and they started asking me questions: “Is Mr. G so and so?” It really hurt me because I felt like they were trying to go on a racist witch hunt. To me, the point of the show is that everybody had changed for the better, and love does conquer what seems like impossible things to conquer, like religion, culture and race. I can’t tell you how awesome it is to see young brown kids stand in front of that poster [of me] outside [the theater] and do their mini-Drake pose in front of it. It’s just the coolest feeling ever.Advertisement