AdvertisementSupported byBy Geraldine FabrikantFor years sculpture was a poor relation to painting. At auction and in galleries, sale prices for sculpture were inevitably eclipsed by what eager buyers paid for canvases to fill their homes, galleries or offices.But that relationship has been shifting in the last few years. In 2010, Sotheby’s sold Alberto Giacometti’s “Walking Man 1,” a six-foot-high bronze, for $104.3 million — at the time the highest price ever paid for an artwork. This year at Christie’s, the hedge fund manager Steven A. Cohen successfully bid $141.3 million for Giacometti’s “Man Pointing,” further evidence of a surging appetite for sculpture.When Jeff Koons’s stainless-steel “Balloon Dog” sold at Christie’s two years ago for $58.4 million, it was then the highest price paid for a work by a living American artist. Similarly, prices for sculpture bought privately have been rising.The high demand for contemporary art has helped fuel the interest in sculpture. “People’s concept of art has expanded and much of contemporary art is configured in three dimensions,” said Simon Stock, senior international specialist at Sotheby’s in London. “It needs space.”The superwealthy are rushing to amass sculptures, sometimes creating gardens to display their expanding collections. Museums too have been adding space — indoor and outdoor — to accommodate the large pieces.Two years ago, the Rijksmuseum in Amsterdam opened a small sculpture garden in front of the museum. That same year, a sculpture park funded by Christian Ringnes, a Norwegian business tycoon, opened in Oslo. In New Orleans, the art patrons Sydney and Walda Besthoff have been working with the New Orleans Museum of Art to create a major sculpture garden with over 60 works. The Besthoff collection went on display in a park adjacent to the museum in 2003.“We have finders who watch the galleries,” Mr. Besthoff said. “Our latest purchase from the James Cohan Gallery is a 20-foot-high steel and fiberglass flag by the Nigerian artist Yinka Shonibare.”Since his appointment in 2008 as curator of modern art at the National Gallery of Art in Washington, Harry Cooper has added several pieces to a nearby sculpture park not attached directly to the museum. “We are trying to make it more dynamic and lively,” he said. “Adding a Robert Indiana and a Roxy Paine has helped draw people back to the garden. There is an appetite for art that is a destination — art that people can interact with.”That impulse is not new. A case in point is the Storm King Art Center, an open-air sculpture park dating to the 1960s that sits on 500 acres in the Lower Hudson Valley and showcases more than 100 works as well as constantly changing exhibitions.Still, today even venerable palaces and castles turn to sculpture to infuse the past with modernity. The Palace of Versailles has been organizing shows of modern sculpture in its gardens since 2008. (The recent Anish Kapoor show attracted international attention when a vandal placed anti-Semitic graffiti on one of the works.) “It is the bridge between our patrimony and the present,” said Catherine Pégard, the palace’s chief administrator. “After all, Louis XIV wanted creativity at Versailles.”Since 2006, Sotheby’s has held an annual exhibition at Chatsworth, the English estate of the Duke and Duchess of Devonshire, where the auction house displays about 30 pieces for sale each year. The site serves Sotheby’s well.“It is sometimes difficult to showcase sculpture or sell at auction because it is often site specific,” Mr. Stock said. “We generally sell about half of what we show. What is popular with visitors is not necessarily what buyers want because they may not have the space.”The show also benefits Chatsworth. “The Duke of Devonshire wants to bring something alive and vivid to Chatsworth,” said David Nash, who runs the Mitchell-Innes & Nash gallery. “It is a marketing tool for them.”By adding a component to a historical site where the collection is fixed, Versailles and Chatsworth are prompting visitors to return to see what is going on. It would be virtually impossible — and highly inappropriate — to create the same modern spark in those rooms so filled with history. Outdoor sculpture parks eliminate the need to reconfigure interior galleries while still creating a contemporary flavor.But the real driver of the vogue in sculpture, and its ever-high prices, is a club of the superrich eagerly shopping for works. “They buy a Jeff Koons for outdoors next to the helicopter pad,” said Wim Pijbes, director of the Rijksmuseum.Often these buyers begin with paintings, then move to bigger things. Joop van Caldenborgh, a Dutch collector of painting and photography, recalled thinking that he might like to have a sculpture for his garden outside The Hague. Then he began filling his large front yard with pieces. Today he has more than 60 works. “Billionaire types will have an estate and they see where the guys next door have a garden and then they want a garden and sculpture for it,” Mr. van Caldenborgh said. He plans to house some pieces in a museum he is building.Business may be the initial motivator. Mr. Besthoff had collected Photorealist works when he bought an office building with an Isamu Noguchi work in front of it and then became infatuated with sculpture.Mr. Ringnes bought a sculpture that he put in front of his Oslo office building. “I saw how fantastic it was,” he recalled. “People were having their pictures taken and everything. So I figured: Why not continue?”“But acquiring sculpture is complicated,” he said. “You need some place to enjoy the pieces. Painting is a millionaire’s game, but sculpture is a billionaire’s game because you need the space.”Today Mr. Ringnes buys works that he and a committee, made up of Oslo city officials and art experts, select for the Ekeberg Sculpture Park, overlooking the fjords where Edvard Munch is said to have been inspired to paint “The Scream.”The economics of collecting, whether for public or private homes and gardens, can be daunting. When Mr. van Caldenborgh installed Mr. Kapoor’s “Untitled,” a massive sandstone sculpture, it had to be placed on logs and then rolled to the park in the same manner that the ancient Egyptians once used.Those with the money and the time may relish working with sculptors. Berlinde De Bruyckere, a Flemish artist, recalled that Mr. van Caldenborgh had asked if she made outdoor sculpture. “Are you able to visit the garden?” she recalled him saying.Ms. De Bruyckere visited once during each season of the year to see how the landscape changed. “Lost in Lead, 2008-2011,” a sculpture of a dead horse lying across a piece of limestone, needed the right setting.“The content of my work has a lot to do with death,” Ms. De Bruyckere explained. “When the trees are naked, it is the best combination. In summer, nature is more powerful than the sculpture.” In the end, she and Mr. van Caldenborgh chose a setting where there were trees close by, but they did not overpower the work.All those challenges have only increased the appetite among buyers, and prices continue to rise.“We have sold works by Shonibare to a number of museums, including the Sheldon Museum in Lincoln, Neb., and the North Carolina Museum of Art” in Raleigh, said Mr. Cohan, the gallery owner. “Today there are a lot of owners of private sculpture gardens as well as museums that are buying.”Advertisement