By MICHAEL CANNELLOCT. 27, 2015
In 2009 Tim Berners-Lee, creator of the World Wide Web, told a TED conference that if cultural institutions opened their collections without limitations, they would “be used by other people to do wonderful things, in ways that they could never have imagined.” He then led the audience in a chant: “Raw data now, raw data now.”Mr. Berners-Lee’s call for open access has grown into a cultural movement. In museum boardrooms, unrestricted sharing is a current fixation. The new openness, loosely known as “open content,” calls for curators to put holdings online without copyright restrictions. As with open-source software, anybody can use the material, and for any purpose. Want to turn a Cézanne still life into a T-shirt or a tattoo? Come and get it.“We hope people will use our images to enrich their lives,” said James Cuno, president and chief executive of the J. Paul Getty Trust, which shares 100,714 images from the Getty Institute and the J. Paul Getty Museum. “But they’re free to make shower curtains or stationery. We don’t care.”The open-content museum dates to 2011, when the Rijksmuseum in Amsterdam made the first of 208,000 images available for download at no cost after curators found more than 10,000 low-quality scans of one of its Vermeers online. The Los Angeles County Museum of Art, the National Gallery of Art and the Yale University Art Gallery soon followed.AdvertisementToday more than 50 cultural institutions have opened their collections for unrestricted use. The number is steadily increasing as administrators come to recognize the value of circulating work to a wider audience online and inviting the public to study and use it at will.
        A look at the upcoming auction season and the ways museums and galleries are innovating for the future.“Most of us see it as part of a museum’s obligation in this century to make this content available in this way,” said Koven J. Smith, director of digital adaptation at the Blanton Museum of Art in Austin, Tex. “The days of art museums being reluctant to release content are drawing to a close.”But not every museum shares that sense of obligation. Some institutions, including the French National Library, have resisted on the grounds that giving away the licensing rights erodes their authority and undercuts their control over valuable images — the most popular of which can earn essential revenue when sold for a download fee or merchandised with holiday cards and T-shirts (though the income may barely cover the administrative costs of the sales).AdvertisementInertia may also prevent museums from adopting open content. It requires no small amount of institutional will, not to mention expense, to digitize collections, post them online with identifying text and untangle the legal obstacles to open use.Encyclopedic compilations like those of the British Museum or the Metropolitan Museum of Art have relatively few legal hurdles because the works have largely passed into the public realm. Contemporary-art museums, on the other hand, face the difficulty of clearing the copyrights of living artists or those of deceased artists with rights controlled by estates. The Museum of Modern Art has withheld images of its collection for just that reason. However, this year MoMA posted a spreadsheet with titles, dates and other vital statistics, known as tombstones, for 120,000 works. The tombstones can be revealing in a way that images cannot. They show, for example, that the lag between creation and acquisition has steadily diminished. And that the most common given name among these artists is John.The most immediate beneficiaries of open content are scholars who can now efficiently search millenniums of cultural history and analyze the results with scatter charts and other big data wizardry commonly applied to subjects like baseball and politics. What percentage of portraits in the Getty depict women? How many paintings at Yale contain animals? Or corpses? Or Jesus? How did yellow’s popularity wax and wane during Impressionism, Surrealism and Abstract Expressionism?The big-picture goal of the open-content movement is to make our entire cultural heritage accessible. Fourteen art museums took a meaningful step in February by agreeing to pool their collections with linked open data, a connective tissue that allows databases to converse in a way that goes beyond simple keyword searches. When completed a year from now, the system will recognize that a doctoral candidate researching John Singer Sargent at the Dallas Museum of Art might also want to know more about 19th-century portraiture and will pull relevant texts and images from the 13 other linked museums.“Linked open data is the bleeding edge of web technology,” said Sara Snyder, chief of media and technology at the Smithsonian American Art Museum, which organized the consortium. “It’s not the easiest starting point for most museums, but it’s potentially more powerful than anything we’ve seen so far because of the baked-in connectedness.”The dream of open content is to put art and artifacts in the public’s hands so that it can be reprocessed in unimagined ways. “We’re trying to put content out there and see what happens,” Ms. Snyder said. “Build what you will, fellow humans! That’s where the museum field is headed.”With that in mind, the Cooper Hewitt, Smithsonian Design Museum last year commissioned a three-dimensional scan of its Manhattan building, a 64-room mansion built by Andrew Carnegie, and offered it free of charge. The scan has been downloaded more than 900 times so far. How it might be used is still a mystery.“We’re open to the fact that remixing will happen,” said Caroline Baumann, director of the Cooper Hewitt. “People can place the mansion in a virtual world or use it for video games. They can change the texture of the walls, or make them glass. And that’s awesome.”A version of this article appears in print on November 1, 2015, on Page F14 of the New York edition with the headline: Downloading Degas.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »