AdvertisementSupported byBy Hilarie M. SheetsIn Lee Miller’s uncommon life, there are two celebrated periods. The first began in 1929, when, at 22, she apprenticed with the Surrealist photographer Man Ray and modeled for him in innovative portraits and radical nudes. The second was during World War II, when Miller was one of five accredited female photojournalists accompanying American troops into liberated concentration camps, documenting atrocities.“The Indestructible Lee Miller,” on view through Feb. 14 at NSU Art Museum in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., focuses tightly on how Miller’s experiences in front of the camera, a conventional role for a striking woman, shaped her radically subjective approach to making her own photos — particularly in how she staged herself in Hitler’s private bathtub in Munich on the day he committed suicide during the Allied siege of Berlin.The exhibition, which was jointly organized with the Albertina Museum in Vienna and originally opened there, includes 92 photographs by Miller, Man Ray and others in her orbit, more than a third of which had never previously been published. It makes a strong case for Miller’s being much more than a muse from the start.Born in Poughkeepsie, N.Y., in 1907, she was “discovered” by the publisher Condé Nast while crossing a New York street, which led to the start of a modeling career that landed her on the cover of Vogue. There, she worked with photographers including Edward Steichen, who recommended that she model for, and study with, Man Ray in Paris. Images of her, some using Surrealist strategies like isolating parts of the body and re-exposing the film in a process known as solarization, reflect the fruits of their collaboration, also a romantic one.Miller took an active role in determining how she appeared in photographs, said Bonnie Clearwater, the director and chief curator of the Fort Lauderdale museum. This is most striking in the slightly blurred black-and-white close-up titled “Lee Miller’s Neck” (circa 1930), from a negative that Man Ray originally rejected and that Miller retrieved from the garbage. “She reworked it and cropped it so that it’s a much more erotically suggestive image than he originally had taken,” Ms. Clearwater said. Miller claimed co-authorship.During this period, Miller co-opted the Surrealist approach of jarring juxtaposition to deliver a rebuke to female objectification. Working on a commission at a hospital in 1929, she placed a breast that had been removed in a mastectomy on a plate within a table setting and photographed it as if it were an entree.“As a fashion model, Lee was used to people looking at her as a thing rather than as a person,” said Antony Penrose, Miller’s son with the English artist Roland Penrose. (She met Penrose in 1937, after breaking off with Man Ray in 1932 and marrying an Egyptian businessman.) “The Surrealists had a particularly proprietorial view of women and they, as much as anyone, are what Lee was rebelling against.”Vogue hired her in 1940 to report on women involved in the war effort in London, and she became an accredited American war correspondent in 1942 at the suggestion of her friend the Life photographer David E. Scherman.She was among the first photographers to shoot the Buchenwald concentration camp after its liberation on April 11, 1945. On April 30 of that year, Miller and Scherman returned to Munich, where the Army’s 179th Regiment had established headquarters in Hitler’s apartment. There, they photographed each other bathing in his tub, with Miller positioning a photo of Hitler in the shot as well as her boots, with the dirt of Dachau staining the bathmat. “I was living in Hitler’s private apartment when his death was announced,” Miller wrote her editor. “He’d never been alive for me until today.”The exhibition shows Miller’s and Scherman’s bathtub images together for the first time, as well as Scherman’s shot of Miller smoking in Eva Braun’s bed in her nearby Munich apartment. “Her photographs were part of the demystification of Hitler,” Ms. Clearwater said.The exhibition includes a large selection of never-before-exhibited photographs that Miller took in Vienna shortly after the war ended, documenting the devastation and starving children in a hospital. “She goes up very close to them, right in the eyes,” Ms. Clearwater said. “Today, those kinds of pictures are familiar from Unicef, but it was rather radical when she was doing it.”This period traumatized Miller, her son said. “It was her finest hour, but it came at an extreme price,” said Mr. Penrose, who oversees the Penrose Collection and the Lee Miller Archives in London, from which all the work in the exhibition is drawn.After the war, Miller married Roland Penrose and moved to a farm in Sussex, sinking into alcoholism and depression. Later she recovered from alcohol abuse and reinvented herself as an expert cook featured in women’s magazines; she died in 1977.Miller blurred the boundaries between art photography and photojournalism in ways that anticipate more contemporary approaches. “Lee’s early experiences led her to a type of photography that’s much more immediate than anybody else who was photographing war at the time,” Ms. Clearwater said. She pointed to pictures in which Miller placed models in front of bombed-out buildings in London; they almost prefigure Martha Rosler’s photomontage series “Bringing the War Home: House Beautiful” (1967-72), in which scenes of carnage in Vietnam jostle with consumer images celebrating American prosperity.Ms. Rosler said she was unaware of those pictures for Vogue in London when she created that series but was influenced by Miller’s earlier Surrealist work as well as by her personal story. “Women war photographers had to fight on two fronts: the bombs, and the men,” she said.Advertisement