AdvertisementSupported byBy Ted LoosThe story of a hometown kid who made good and is now running the big show is irresistible — but rare in the museum world, where the top jobs are few and far between. Usually, a director ends up adopting a new city as his or her own.Not so at the Museum of Fine Arts, Houston, where Gary Tinterow, who grew up in the city’s Braeswood section as the son of a popular local bandleader, and who interned at the museum in the mid-1970s, was named its director almost four years ago.Before that, Mr. Tinterow, 62, worked at the Metropolitan Museum of Art for 28 years, eventually running the departments of 19th-century, Modern and contemporary art and organizing influential blockbusters like his 2009 Francis Bacon retrospective. He applied for the top job there when the Met’s director, Philippe de Montebello, retired, but didn’t get the nod.When Mr. Tinterow arrived in Houston, he hit the ground running, bringing major loan shows to the museum and initiating his own. Most important, he has been spearheading a $350 million expansion, one of the country’s biggest such projects, which just broke ground last month.The beefed-up campus will feature a new building for Modern and contemporary art by the architect Steven Holl, due in 2019. The first phase of the expansion, a building for the Glassell School of Art, also by Mr. Holl’s firm, is scheduled to open in 2017.“Things are percolating along at the museum,” said Mr. Tinterow, who lives around the corner from the institution with his husband, Christopher Gardner, an antiques dealer.Although Mr. Tinterow also maintains a home in the Hudson Valley, north of New York City, he said Houston was unequivocally home for him now. “I’m a born-and-bred Texan,” he said.Yet a significant part of his strength as a leader comes from the international experience he had at the Met. “He has brought a global perspective from the Met and great connections he can really leverage,” said Josef Helfenstein, the departing director of the Menil Collection in Houston.Houston is known for its ambition, and Mr. Tinterow fits right in. “In a pretty short time, he’s established himself as someone who embodies the cultural aspirations of the city,” said David Leebron, the president of Rice University.Of all art museums in the United States, the Museum of Fine Arts, Houston, has the second- or third-largest endowment ($1.14 billion as of this summer), depending on whether you count the Getty Museum alone or as part of the Getty Trust. (The Metropolitan Museum in New York is No. 1.)The $450 million campaign for the museum’s expansion, including $100 million for the endowment, has received two large gifts. The investor Fayez S. Sarofim donated $70 million and the Kinder Foundation $50 million.“We have a great success story in terms of fund-raising,” Mr. Tinterow said.That kind of financial health gives him the muscle to pursue programming aggressively to round out the core strengths in the permanent collection, particularly its trove of 30,000 photographs.Mr. Tinterow pointed to the current exhibition “Mark Rothko: A Retrospective,” on view through Jan. 24, as an initiative with his stamp on it. It’s a modified version of a National Gallery of Art traveling show that has been augmented with the Houston museum’s own holdings of Rothko’s work.He not only used his connections to the leadership of the National Gallery to make the exhibition possible, but he also took the opportunity to rethink the standard catalog that often accompanies such shows.“It’s not a guide to the exhibition, it’s a guide to Rothko,” he said of “Mark Rothko: An Essential Reader,” which contains essays dating to the 1940s. “That’s typical of what I try to do. We’re not making a monument to ourselves. It’s a contribution to scholarship.”A formidable exhibition of Indian art, focusing on the royal arts of Jodhpur, is on track for 2017. “Many institutions have tried and failed to mount significant shows of Indian art,” said Mr. Tinterow, who hired a Mumbai-born former Met colleague, Mahrukh Tarapor, to organize it. “I thought, if anybody could pull this off, she could.”Mr. Tinterow is a scholar of 19th-century French art, and the Degas retrospective he is planning for next year is very much a wheelhouse project. Featuring 100 works, it is being organized with Henri Loyrette, the former director of the Louvre. One of Mr. Tinterow’s earliest triumphs at the Met was a landmark Degas exhibition in 1988.Though the Met has provided Mr. Tinterow with a sterling example, the differences between the two institutions are ever-present in his mind. The Met is a powerful tourism magnet that draws millions of new visitors every year; the Museum of Fine Arts, Houston, is a classic hometown museum serving repeat customers.“I feel a little like the village priest,” Mr. Tinterow said. “I have to come up with a sermon every weekend since I have the same parishioners.”He added that he often consulted his old colleagues from the Met, but he has learned not to mention his old job to his current staff at every meeting.“For a while there, my nickname was A.T.M. — At the Met,” he said. “At meetings, I would say, ‘Well, at the Met …’ So I hung a sign on my door: ‘A.T.M. inside.’ ”A period of adjustment was inevitable. Mr. Tinterow’s predecessor in Houston, Peter C. Marzio, who died in 2010, was director for nearly 30 years and something of a local superstar.By many accounts, Mr. Tinterow found his footing fairly quickly. Although he said he was originally disappointed when he didn’t get the directorship of the Met, he said that he had ended up in the right place, a sentiment that longtime colleagues agreed with.“He got the better job for himself,” said Adam D. Weinberg, the director of the Whitney Museum of American Art. “More freedom, and a town that he knows and loves.”Advertisement