AdvertisementSupported byBy Jon ParelesAlmost exactly 43 years ago, on Oct. 6, 1972, Bill Withers headlined Carnegie Hall and recorded the concert for a live album that’s now a time capsule of 1970s soul. The hand-played music on “Live at Carnegie Hall” reaches into funk, pop, folk, jazz and the fringes of gospel; the songs are kindly, hardheaded, romantic, socially conscious and perfectly plain-spoken. Mr. Withers captured the passions and dignity of everyday life in songs like “Ain’t No Sunshine,” “Use Me” and “Lean on Me”; compassion and empathy shine through.On Thursday night, Mr. Withers, 77, was back at Carnegie Hall, and spoke briefly onstage, for “Lean on Him: A Tribute to Bill Withers,” continuing an annual series of songwriter tributes organized by City Winery. A dozen singers rooted in soul and touched by Mr. Withers’s music — including Aloe Blacc, Ed Sheeran, Dr. John, Ledisi, Keb’ Mo’, Anthony Hamilton and Michael McDonald — performed all the songs from “Live at Carnegie Hall” and other Withers songs. (D’Angelo, the scheduled headliner, was absent with medical problems.)) It was a benefit that raised $50,000 for the Stuttering Association for the Young, which helps children who stutter. “I didn’t make half of $50,000 when I played this joint,” Mr. Withers declared.Mr. Withers released albums consistently through the 1970s, and one more in 1985, before battles with the music business led him to withdraw from it. But his songs have been perennially rediscovered, in part because they never walled themselves into any one genre: His ballads have been reclaimed by folky guitar strummers, his grooves by R&B acts. The 2013 collection “Bill Withers: The Complete Sussex and Columbia Album” won a Grammy for best historical album, and this year Mr. Withers was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame.The band at Carnegie Hall was led by the keyboardist Greg Phillinganes, a mainstay of Stevie Wonder and Michael Jackson, and, it turned out in “Friend of Mine,” a full-throated singer himself. The backup kept the spirit of Mr. Withers’s original arrangements while leaving the singers just enough room to personalize the songs. For “I Can’t Write Left-Handed,” a song narrated by a Vietnam veteran who lost an arm, Keb’ Mo’ sang and played lead guitar, adding bluesy extensions to the soldier’s bitter recollections. Dr. John’s cackling voice made “For My Friend,” which seeks reconciliation after an argument, a little less conciliatory; he was also the right choice for the push-and-pull syncopations of “Use Me,” substituting for D’Angelo. Jonathan Butler brought some South African growl and falsetto to “Lovely Day.” And in “Who Is She (and What Is She to You),” Ledisi let suspicion flare into angry high leaps.Gregory Porter and Valerie Simpson shared “Let Me Be the One You Need” as a duet, making it less of a plea and more of a testimonial to love at first sight. Mr. Sheeran, the English songwriter, infused “Ain’t No Sunshine,” a staple of his live sets, with melancholy; he also brought out the anxiety in “Lonely Town, Lonely Street.” Anthony Hamilton’s preacherly timing magnified the suicidal misery of “Better Off Dead” and later, when he returned, the streetwise determination of “Harlem.” Amos Lee stayed cozily affectionate in “Grandma’s Hands.” And Kori Withers, Mr. Withers’s daughter, brought a jazzy charm to “Let Us Love” in a duet with Kathy Mattea.But the concert’s most head-turning performance was by Aloe Blacc, whose own songs clearly show Mr. Withers’s influence. He sang the heartsick, slowly tolling “Hope She’ll Be Happier” with sustained desolation; he learned from Mr. Withers how to make vocal flourishes sound like cries from the heart. (He also sang “Just the Two of Us,” with Branford Marsalis, supremely overqualified, playing the few saxophone phrases.)Throughout the concert, Mr. Withers’s songs needed no updates. Their melodies are clear and their language is utterly natural; they make a human connection that listeners still need. Mr. Withers basked in the applause, modestly. “I’m still amazed,” he said, “that all these young great artists even know my name.”Advertisement