By JOHN HANCOCT. 27, 2015
NEWHALL, CALIF. — It’s been 90 years since Hollywood’s first great cowboy star hung up his spurs.The 1925 silent film “Tumbleweeds,” about the Oklahoma land rush that started in 1889, was the last of William S. Hart’s 69 pictures. Yet this largely forgotten star from the early days of motion picture history left an extraordinary legacy, one that few Hollywood celebrities of any era could match: the William S. Hart Park and Museum, a gift to the public that had made him one of the top-grossing movie actors in the world from 1914 to the mid-1920s.On the northern fringes of Los Angeles County, the 166-acre park consists of eight early-20th-century buildings on what was once a working ranch; a collection of farm animals; a herd of bison; a picnic area; and four miles of hiking trails. And atop a hill affording views of the surrounding Santa Clarita Valley is the museum, a 22-room Spanish Colonial Revival mansion that Mr. Hart called home for the last 19 years of his life.It’s all free — even parking — because Mr. Hart wanted it that way.“He felt the public had paid for it by going to his movies,” said Rachel Barnes, the museum’s education and volunteer coordinator.AdvertisementMr. Hart died in 1946, at 81. His will donated his ranch to Los Angeles County. The park and museum opened in 1958.The Hart mansion is that rare thing in the museum world: the home of a famous person that has become a historic house museum with no intervening owners and with most of the original contents intact. Not just the furnishings, either, but intimate objects associated with the man himself. “We have his slippers, his pajamas,” said Margi Bertram, the museum’s administrator. “We even have his dentures.”More significant, visitors can see Mr. Hart’s impressive collection of original Western-themed paintings and sculptures by prominent artists like Frederic Remington, Charles Russell and James Montgomery Flagg, as well as documents, photographs and memorabilia associated with some of Mr. Hart’s famous friends and colleagues, who included Wyatt Earp, Amelia Earhart and Mary Pickford.Mr. Hart’s home is a tribute to the Old West he had glimpsed as a boy. Born in Newburgh, N.Y., in 1864, he had a peripatetic early life that took him to the Great Plains and briefly into the Dakota Territories. Helped by his 6-foot-2-inch physique and rich baritone voice, Mr. Hart as a young man drifted into theater, where he enjoyed a successful career as a Shakespearean actor in the 1890s. In the 1900s, he played roles in historical dramas, including popular western-themed plays like “The Virginian.”According to an account in his 1929 autobiography, his film career was spurred by a 1913 cowboy film that incensed him with what he felt was an inaccurate depiction of frontier life. Teaming up with the producer Thomas H. Ince, Mr. Hart wrote and starred in his first western the next year. That movie, “The Bargain,” was a box-office smash, and was followed by a string of hits that established what became known as the “Two-Gun Bill” look — a steely-eyed visage with both guns drawn.Advertisement“He was often the good bad guy,” Ms. Barnes said. “A guy who starts out bad, but in the end does the right thing.”Indeed, his movies were Victorian morality tales set in the Old West, but — with their gritty-looking towns and plain costumes — they were in some ways a more authentic depiction of frontier life than the westerns that came along in the talkie era.Mr. Hart’s career ended because he refused to adapt to the changing tastes of audiences who, even by the 1920s, found his melodramatic acting a bit outdated. “The studios wanted more action, more stunts, more flair in westerns,” Ms. Barnes says. “He wasn’t interested in that.”In retirement, Mr. Hart had the time and money to indulge his two great passions: the Old West and animals. In his will, Mr. Hart donated $50,000 — a not insubstantial sum in 1946 — to the Los Angeles Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals.His love for his horses and dogs is evident today in the park, where some of the most popular attractions are the horse graveyard; the bedroom in the house where his two Great Danes slept (each on its own bed); and the various memorials to his beloved mount, Fritz, a large pinto pony he rode in most of his films and who, according to Ms. Barnes, received more fan mail than he did. The schoolchildren who make up many of the museum’s 22,000 annual visitors love to hear about Fritz, even if their adult chaperones wonder about a man whose bedroom photo of his horse is more prominent than that of his son.On a Friday this year, Ben and Joan Passarelli from Mountain View, Calif., took one of the guided tours of the Hart mansion. While they, like most present-day visitors, were unfamiliar with this star of the silent era, they were impressed with Mr. Hart’s interest in Native American culture, his sensitivity to animals and his generosity.“He sounds like somebody I would have liked to know,” Mr. Passarelli said.A version of this article appears in print on November 1, 2015, on Page F20 of the New York edition with the headline: His Ranch Is Everybody’s.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »