By QUENTIN HARDYOCT. 27, 2015
Some of the greatest museums are repositories of both art and biography. The Morgan Library in New York, the Isabella Stewart Gardner in Boston and the new Broad in Los Angeles celebrate not only works of art but also a patron’s tastes and sensibility. The Frick Collection in New York and the Barnes Foundation’s relocated galleries in Philadelphia even display their Rembrandts and Cézannes the way their owners liked. In cases where a museum was once a mansion, it also colorfully evokes a benefactor’s runaway wealth.Some parts of the United States are less associated with rich collectors than New York or Boston but in their heyday had their ambitious patrons, too. Visiting the institutions that house their collections, you can savor bygone triumphs and dreams that helped define a certain American spirit. Here are some examples.
        A look at the upcoming auction season and the ways museums and galleries are innovating for the future.GEORGE EASTMAN MUSEUM, ROCHESTER The region stretching from Buffalo to Rochester to Ontario once boomed so richly that in 1894, King Camp Gillette, inventor of the double-edged safety razor, proposed the creation of an ideal urban society there. But there was no greater patron of Rochester than George Eastman, the founder of Kodak. Little of his empire remains today, but his home retains one of the world’s great photography collections. Equally compelling is the 35,000-square-foot house itself, which, after a national search, has been restocked with his big-game trophies, pipe organs and home chemistry lab. The estate is in a historic district of beautiful houses built by Eastman’s lieutenants. eastmanhouse.orgPHILBROOK MUSEUM OF ART, TULSA, OKLA. In 1926 the oilman Waite Phillips built a 72-room Italian Renaissance villa on 23 acres that he would donate 12 years later to the city of Tulsa. It evolved into the Philbrook Museum, which boasts works by Bellini, Picasso and Wyeth, along with African, Asian and Native American treasures. Much of the art came from other Tulsa oil millionaires, but the Italianate gardens and the period details testify to the ambitions of Phillips and his wife, Genevieve. philbrook.orgAdvertisementTHE RINGLING, SARASOTA, FLA. A captivating mixture of the glory that was imperial Venice and the grandeur that was Gargantua, “the Largest Gorilla Ever Exhibited.” John Ringling, one of the five brothers who created the Greatest Show on Earth, wintered with his circus in Sarasota, at one time owning about one-quarter of the city. Worth $200 million before eventually dying in debt, he also built a five-story Venetian Gothic palazzo for himself and his wife, Mable. Taking the circus to Europe, he bought enough art, including old masters, that he decided he also needed a 21-gallery space modeled after the Uffizi in Florence. After a long period of decline, the museum and home, left to the State of Florida upon Ringling’s death in 1936, was restored in 2000 and exhibits both artistic and circus-related wonders. ringling.orgNATIONAL MUSIC MUSEUM, VERMILLION, S.D. Vermillion is a two-and-a-half-hour drive from Omaha, and one of its more notable historic moments may have been when Lewis and Clark visited a nearby mound on their transcontinental journey. Yet there is probably no other place in the world that can boast an Indonesian gamelan orchestra; violins, violas and lutes by Stradivari and Guarneri; and rare centuries-old brasses, woodwinds and harpsichords. Fans of more contemporary fare may want to check out a room full of classic Martin and Gibson guitars, then head over to others strummed by Elvis Presley and Johnny Cash, a Bob Dylan harmonica and Bill Clinton’s saxophone. nmmusd.orgAdvertisementWALT’S BARN, LOS ANGELES Before Walt Disney built his Magic Kingdoms, he operated the Carolwood Pacific Railroad, a 1:8-scale live steam rail system, for family and friends. His workshop was a replica of a barn on the Missouri farm where he grew up. Removed from his Holmby Hills estate to the Griffith Park area of Los Angeles in 1999, it contains the scale trains, as well as work benches that Disney made by hand. Open the third Sunday of each month. carolwood.org RICE NORTHWEST MUSEUM OF ROCKS AND MINERALS, HILLSBORO, ORE. An inspiring reminder that you need not be a tycoon to be a memorable collector. Over six decades, Richard and Helen Rice amassed more than 20,000 agates, meteorites, fossils, pieces of petrified wood and other specimens. The largest such collection in the Pacific Northwest, it is housed in a 7,500-square-foot house that Mr. Rice, a logger, made from myrtlewood and quilted maple. ricenorthwestmuseum.orgA version of this article appears in print on November 1, 2015, on Page F8 of the New York edition with the headline: Off the Beaten Path, the Quirky Triumphs of Can-Do Collectors.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »