AdvertisementSupported byBy Robert StraussJames Buchanan was in a huff. Sure, he was president, and the Southern states were talking about secession. But in the old “all politics is local” spirit, he was also upset that landlords in his hometown, Lancaster, Pa., were refusing to rent to students at Franklin & Marshall College, where he served on the board of trustees. As a protest, he opened his own estate, Wheatland, to student tenants. While it seems unlikely, that, say, George H. W. Bush would have rented his seaside home in Kennebunkport, Me., to tourists, things were different in the mid-19th century.Buchanan is often called America’s worst president, mostly for presiding over the country’s descent into the Civil War, but he did leave a gorgeous plantation-like house, now a National Historic Landmark. No students occupy Wheatland’s rooms now, but those spaces and others are filled with authentic Buchanan memorabilia.Sites associated with presidents “try to tell the history of the times through their eyes, in the place where they lived,” said Patrick Clarke, Wheatland’s director. “Whoever comes usually comes interested.”Each year about 500,000 people visit  Jefferson’s home, Monticello, and a million visit Washington’s, Mount Vernon. (Both are in Virginia.) But those presidents who did not make Mount Rushmore usually get only a smattering of tourists at their properties. About 14,000 people visit Wheatland annually, a typical number for sites connected to lesser-known presidents.Since 1980, Sharon Farrell has been the caretaker of the Grover Cleveland Birthplace in Caldwell, N.J., about 20 miles west of Manhattan.“We’re across the street from the Dunkin’ Donuts. That’s how you find us,” Ms. Farrell said, noting that schoolchildren see photos of the rotund Cleveland and ask whether he was a regular customer. Many days, Ms. Farrell does not see a single visitor and works diligently on the collections of Cleveland memorabilia and letters. Her family lived upstairs in the former Presbyterian parsonage — Cleveland’s father was a minister — for a while about 25 years ago.“We get school groups and people on the presidential trail, making sure they chalk up Cleveland on the list,” she said. A foundation started by Cleveland’s friends bought the house to make it a museum in 1907, a year before he died.Cleveland lived there only until he was 3 — his father was transferred to western New York — but Ms. Farrell keeps each room chock-full of hands-on period pieces, like tops for children to play with and top hats and shawls for visitors to try on.Still, only 7,000 a year come to see the home, where Cleveland, the only Democratic president between the Civil War and Woodrow Wilson, spent his early life. That would be maybe a couple of days’ worth of visitors at Mount Vernon.“Americans are selective about remembering their presidents, but they were all significant figures in their days,” Mr. Clarke said of Wheatland. “History is not all Lincoln and Washington. It is Buchanan and Tyler, too.”Frances Payne Tyler certainly thinks so. Astonishingly, she is the wife of the grandson of John Tyler, America’s 10th president, who was born in 1790. He had children in his 60s, and one of those sons had children in his 70s. Two sons of that generation are still living; one is Harrison Tyler, 86, her husband.In the 1970s, when her family moved into the Charles City, Va., house that President Tyler bought more than a century before, “it was a mess,” Mrs. Tyler, 82, said. “If I was going to live in a place of history, I was destined to restore it.” The house, on a plantation named Sherwood Forest, is said to be America’s longest frame house: 300 feet across and one room wide, though up to four stories tall in some places.Visitors have to make an appointment to get a tour of parts of the mansion, which Mrs. Tyler said she used to lead occasionally for groups. “It was a fascinating time, the mid-19th century, and of course I think John Tyler was a fascinating man,” she said.About 20,000 a year make it up to Kinderhook, N.Y., about an hour from Albany, where Martin Van Buren, president from 1837-41, lived much of his life. “I guess we are off the beaten track,” said Jim McKay, chief ranger for the Martin Van Buren National Historic Site. “We get maybe 20 percent presidential buffs and a lot of retirees.”A few more, maybe 35,000 a year, come to see James A. Garfield’s house, 25 miles east of Cleveland in Mentor, Ohio. Garfield was shot four months after he became president in 1881 and died two months later. There was a national subscription fund to pay for living expenses for his widow, Lucretia, and their young children, and she funneled much of the $350,000 collected into the house, including the first presidential library.“It was not quite like President Kennedy, but it was a young war hero dying,” Todd Arrington, chief of interpretation and education at the house, said of Garfield, a Civil War veteran turned president. “Maybe Garfield wasn’t Washington, but those who come here get to know something important, we feel, just as they do in the crowds at Mount Vernon.”Advertisement