By JOHN HANCOCT. 27, 2015
On a cold Monday night in Muskegon, Mich., they gathered to learn more about the war that once defined this city. An audience of more than 200 assembled at the U.S.S. Silversides Submarine Museum, in the Channel View Room (named for its view of the Muskegon Channel, which connects to Lake Michigan), to hear James Campbell discuss his 2012 book, “The Color of War.”The book, subtitled “How One Battle Broke Japan and Another Changed America,” examines two little-remembered but critical events of World War II, both in July 1944: The Battle of Saipan, a decisive victory by American forces over the Japanese, and the enormous explosion at the Port Chicago Naval Ammunition Depot near San Francisco. The Port Chicago disaster killed many sailors, most of them African-American, and prompted others to refuse to load munitions, resulting in a racially charged mutiny trial, the largest mutiny trial in Navy history.In the audience, college students in hoodies and T-shirts sat interspersed with nonagenarians proudly wearing hats emblazoned with the insignia of units in which they had served. Along with middle-aged adults, they were there for the start of the third season of the World War II Lecture Series, a collaboration between the museum and Muskegon Community College.“The meeting of the generations in one room is a really interesting model,” said Mr. Campbell, who lives in Lodi, Wis. “There was a lot of energy in that room.”The speaker series is part of a three-credit Introduction to World War II course offered in the college’s spring semester.AdvertisementThe adults who attend the talks (free to museum members, $5 for nonmembers) don’t have the same academic requirements as the students in the course, but they are encouraged to read the books, papers or materials related to the speakers’ topics. The most recent subjects included the Battle of Moscow, presented by an Australian historian, David Stahel; a survey of the music of World War II, performed and interpreted by a swing band; and wartime life in Muskegon’s African-American community, recounted by two local residents who grew up there.AdvertisementThe 2016 lecture series, which runs from February through early April, will include talks about the war correspondent Ernie Pyle; the Yalta and Potsdam conferences; and a presentation on Clarence Zylman, a World War II soldier and trumpet player from Muskegon who might have been the actual “Boogie Woogie Bugle Boy” made famous in that Andrews Sisters song. In addition, the eight-lecture series will expand beyond World War II for the first time, to include talks about Vietnam and the Korean War.The instructors who developed the museum program, Kurt Troutman and George Maniates, saw an opportunity to promote intergenerational interaction and education. “We said, ‘We have this wonderful World War II museum here in town,’ ” Mr. Troutman recalled. “ ‘Maybe we could somehow incorporate that into the class?’ We decided to have part of the class at the museum. It’s a three-hour class, so each week we’d have an hour and a half in the classroom and an hour and a half at the museum.”They didn’t expect much of a turnout for the lecture series, which began in February 2013. Then “150 people showed up,” Mr. Troutman said.“We were very pleasantly surprised,” said Peggy Maniates, curator of the museum. (She is married to Mr. Maniates.) In retrospect, she said, maybe they shouldn’t have been. “There are not a great deal of continuing ed classes in this area,” she said. “But there is a great interest in World War II history.”Muskegon, today a working-class city of 37,000, was known as one of America’s arsenals of democracy during the war. Here, things like treads for tanks and crankshafts for submarines were manufactured in foundries and factories. It is also the home of a large number of men who served in the Navy’s submarine service. When local citizens heard that efforts to preserve the decorated submarine Silversides — credited with sinking 23 Japanese vessels during the war — were foundering, they stepped in, agreed to relocate and renovate it for the Navy, and created a museum around it, which opened in 1987.The museum’s executive director, Russell Gallas, sees the collaboration with the community college — now in its third year — as essential. “This program is absolutely key to our mission of education and community engagement,” he said. “If we’re not doing that, then we might as well close our doors.”Finding programming that three generations — college-age millennials, their baby boomer parents and older, wartime-era adults — can all enjoy is a challenge. But it seems that, at least in Muskegon, World War II is that common ground.Advertisement“I used to go to the museum with my dad as a kid,” said Nick Haskins, a 19-year-old sophomore when he took the class last winter and attended Mr. Campbell’s lecture. “So I thought the idea of going there as part of the class was cool. You’re listening to this speaker talking about the war, and you have the Silversides docked outside the window, torpedoes — dismantled, of course — all around you, dioramas filled with stories and aspects of the war.”This was Mr. Campbell’s second appearance here. His first was during last year’s lecture series, when he spoke about his 2008 book, “The Ghost Mountain Boys,” on a unit made up largely of National Guardsmen from Michigan and Illinois who fought in the New Guinea campaign of 1942.“The Color of War,” the topic of his talk last February, was a more complicated story, in every sense. “This is not quite the heroic, heartwarming, greatest-generation, good-war story,” Mr. Campbell said, referring in particular to the Port Chicago disaster, which laid bare the blatant racism and injustice of the segregated United States armed forces at the time. “Yet the turnout was still great, and people seemed interested.”One was Wayne Thuma, 58, a retired General Motors employee who has tried to attend every lecture over the last two years. “It was really enlightening,” he said of Mr. Campbell’s presentation. The ugly Port Chicago episode, Mr. Thuma added, is a story that “should be told.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »