AdvertisementSupported byBy John SchwartzThe skin cells in this display are enormous — they look a little like irregular serving platters, and stand in a flattish array taller than an adult. These flesh-colored representations of cells have company: cucumber-green fungi and smaller purple microbes. This small community of cells coexists in balance: The fungi cause athlete’s foot, but the microbes combat that itchy condition. The microbes, however, also cause stinky feet.Yucky. And instructive.The interactions between the hitchhikers on and inside our bodies — much more than hitchhikers, but let’s not get ahead of ourselves here — are one of the most exciting fields of science and medicine today. This is the subject of “The Secret World Inside You,” an exhibition opening on Saturday, Nov. 7, at the American Museum of Natural History in New York.The museum is taking on a major shift in biology, from observing individual tiny organisms to exploring whole batches of them — whether in swamps or in Central Park, lifted from the handholds on the subway or swabbed out of a belly button. Each of us carries around a trillion microbes as part of our human-microbe team. Their genes far outnumber ours, with about 300 times more genes that give instructions for making proteins than our own genome has.The complex relationships and the science that brings them to light might seem challenging to explain in a museum setting, especially if the image that comes to mind when you think of a science or natural history museum is a dusty diorama.The two curators, Susan Perkins and Rob DeSalle, both hold academic positions at the museum’s Sackler Institute for Comparative Genomics. The research and education functions of the American Museum of Natural History are not generally open to the public or even visible to outsiders, but the research these scientists do upstairs from the exhibition halls helps inform what visitors see down below.Drs. Perkins and DeSalle have seen firsthand the explosion in the power of gene sequencing machines to discern genetic codes of entire groups of microorganisms. That power to explore has led to a richer understanding of the communities of organisms that we share our bodies with — in our bellies, for example, where they help with digestion, and which cause problems if their delicate balance is upset, and other batches of microbes fight infection.“How do we explain this to the public?” Dr. DeSalle asked. “Scientists like us find it to be so crucial and important, but how do you explain it?”Conveying difficult and abstract concepts has long been a concern in the museum world; a magazine for the profession in 2008 featured an article titled “Too Big, Too Small, Too Slow, Too Abstract: Exhibiting Modern Science.”At the natural history museum, the new show will feature state of the art exhibits that making complex topics easy to grasp. It is an eye-popping spectacle, with big models like the athlete’s foot sculpture and other colorful re-creations of body processes that involve the microbiome. There are vivid animations at stations surrounding a 14-foot-long video of a woman, each depicting a function like digestion (h. pylori bacteria swimming around the stomach) or infection-fighting (defensive microorganisms around a cut in the skin). The exhibition will also show off several generations of gene-sequencing machines to illustrate the greater power that has led to such discoveries.Another part of the exhibition will interactively teach about microbial diversity in our gut, and how eating lots of processed food reduces gut diversity while things like kale, lettuce and yogurt do more to help.The exhibition, Dr. DeSalle said, is designed to be engaging enough to slow down the “streakers” who take in museum displays at a run and compelling enough to keep the “strollers” moving through to see what comes next.Across the street from the American Museum of Natural History, another curator, Stephen Edidin, dealt with a different challenge: How to bring a little-known aspect of the computer revolution to light.Mr. Edidin, chief curator of the New-York Historical Society, was planning the exhibition “Silicon City: Computer History Made in New York” and wanted to show that AT&T’s early laboratories were in the city and were later in nearby New Jersey; IBM exposed people to computing concepts in its ovoid theater, known as the Egg, at the 1964-65 New York World’s Fair.A multimedia reproduction of the Egg is a centerpiece of the new exhibition, opening on Nov. 13, along with nearly 300 artifacts, including high-tech artwork and computing and telecommunications hardware, along with an early picture phone and even an original (but, obviously, unlaunched) Telstar 1 satellite — all, Mr. Edidin said, “to give people the sense of the possibilities of that period.”Taking on difficult-to-present subjects is something that museums often do and must do, said Eric Siegel, an independent science education consultant who worked with the New York Hall of Science in Queens and who wrote the 2008 journal article on explaining modern science. Models and representations of complex processes like cellular activities might not perfectly illustrate what goes on, he said, but “they capture the valuable aspects — the parts of the thing you’re trying to demonstrate.”Making it easier to understand abstract things is increasingly important in a world that is “not tuned to contemporary science.” Mr. Siegel said. The complexities of science can be difficult to grasp for people who operate by intuition and based on what they can see and feel, and that helps explain this “very difficult cultural moment,” he added, citing societal conflicts over such topics as climate change and evolution.It is easy and common for scientists, educators and others to dismiss or even insult people who do not grasp the issues. But Mr. Siegel said he felt empathy for those not drawn to the sometimes-arcane but important principles underlying science.“It would be much more useful if people like us, who are science-minded, could genuinely empathize instead of just condescending to people who don’t understand it,” Mr. Siegel said. “I think we can be better educators if we’re smarter about this.”If so, maybe museums can help reduce the intensity of the nation’s culture wars.Advertisement