AdvertisementSupported byBy Tom MashbergBOSTON — American curators looking to borrow Dutch masterpieces from foreign museums, particularly those in the Netherlands, often get the brushoff. Pulling together an exhibition of Golden Age art requires, at the least, a compelling new perspective on works that have long been analyzed under microscopes — literally.Which explains why scholars and fellow curators are “amazed” and “astonished” by a prodigious show at the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston,featuring 75 works by more than three dozen Dutch masters, including 24 canvases on loan from the Netherlands. The show may feature three Rembrandts and two Vermeers, but its main appeal is its eye-opening array of paintings by their contemporaries that illustrate the lives of ordinary people.“You can’t just have a gimmick, ‘paintings with animals,’ and expect to get their star works,” said Ronni Baer, senior curator of European paintings at the museum. Punctilious lenders, she added, “need to know you’re doing something serious to advance scholarship and not just another masterpiece show.”Ms. Baer’s conception, “Class Distinctions: Dutch Painting in the Age of Rembrandt and Vermeer,” a show that runs through Jan. 18, has won over Dutch scholars as an original idea that resonates in an era of concentrated wealth. By spotlighting the upper, middle and lower classes, she has been able to assemble paintings depicting fine gradations of Dutch civic, economic and social life in the booming 1600s.The gap between nobles in silk and lace and laborers in crushed hats and bedraggled aprons is inevitably stark. In a painting by Isack van Ostade, a boy sits under a freshly slaughtered pig, blowing air into its slippery bladder to make a toy that “could be tossed like a balloon or squeezed to make rude noises.” Another boy, from an elite family, sits on a muscular steed done up in ostentatious, gold-trimmed velvet hunting apparel in a work by Aelbert Cuyp.Ms. Baer hung the paintings in four connected galleries, the last of which shows images where “the classes come together.” While the works show life through a gauzy lens, extolling status and memorializing virtuous behavior, Ms. Baer said, reliable details about the social fabric of the time are “embedded in these paintings.” No artists before the Dutch left such a comprehensive record in paint of their land, people and possessions.Unlike shows that focus on a single artist, or a genre like still lifes, the exhibition here showcases many hands, styles and subjects. As museumgoers travel from regal apartments to back-alley hovels, examining faces, places and objects rendered in keen detail, they experience the 17th-century equivalent of a social documentary.“It is an excellent concept, yet one that has not been tried before,” said Norbert Middelkoop, paintings curator at the Amsterdam Museum, which provided two works ordinarily used to teach history and hierarchy to schoolchildren. “I think this will really strike a chord with American society.”Ms. Baer, who has a doctorate in art history from the Institute of Fine Arts at New York University, persuaded the hard-to-crack Rijksmuseum, the premier art institution in the Netherlands, to contribute works by greats like Pieter de Hooch and Jan Steen and by others that had never been shown in America. She has brought two of Vermeer’s 36 known works here — a great “get” for a city that has been bereft of its lone Vermeer, “The Concert,” since it was stolen in 1990 from the nearby Isabella Stewart Gardner Museum.Even with the Dutch embrace, it took six years of historical research, analytical writing, careful selecting and some wheeling and dealing to make the show happen. At the Museum of Fine Arts in Budapest, Ms. Baer located a rare seascape depicting the economically vital Dutch herring fishery — a source of jobs and food important enough at the time to warrant armed escort ships.To obtain an illuminating — and laudatory — canvas from the Amsterdam Museum, by an unknown artist, showing the rich distributing bread, peat and other alms to what they called the “deserving poor,” Ms. Baer arranged for her museum to share the cost of restoring a painting that depicts a town hall.“You just keep working to get that irreplaceable painting,” Ms. Baer said. A museum in Frankfurt, for example, “has a great slaughtered pig,” she said, “but they weren’t able to lend me their pig.” After moving on to Budapest, she added, “I found an equally good, if not better, slaughtered pig and the seascape I really needed.”H. F. K. van Nierop, known as Henk, an expert on the Dutch Golden Age at the University of Amsterdam, said the show’s arrangement “should resonate in America with all the haves and have-nots,” even though the 17th-century Dutch “did not themselves think in terms of class but of God-given social order.”“These painters did not set out to paint a tableau of classes,” he said. In fact, the works were often commissioned by well-to-do citizens who simply collected art. But their focus on minutiae, he added, “lets us see how people truly lived their lives.”The “Upper Classes” room features armor-clad nobles, civic and financial elites (in their distinctive high black hats) and gentlemen dilettantes, like the affluent amateur spinning a globe in Vermeer’s “The Astronomer.”Next are the middle classes, encompassing nouveau riche businessmen aspiring to the top rung; shipbuilders, goldsmiths and other merchants who oversaw guilds and syndicates; and barbers, bakers, lace makers and other tradesmen, almost always engrossed in their work. Notable is Rembrandt’s life-size “The Shipbuilder and His Wife,” which features the couple in an animated exchange rather than a stolid pose.Among the lower classes, we see a milkmaid and a fishmonger, an urchin eating porridge and an inn filled with drunken layabouts. Mr. Middelkoop said Dutch painters took license to exaggerate the serenity of pastoral scenes and to caricature loutish behavior, so viewers should bring skepticism to such images. Nonetheless, he said, “I am convinced that you can really get to know this society from all these perspectives.”Ms. Baer said she was gratified because when she first imagined the exhibition, “I never thought it was possible to get so many Dutch masterpieces.”Advertisement