AdvertisementSupported byBy Jane L. LevereA Philadelphia couple’s love affair with the book illustrations of Henri Matisse has led to a groundbreaking exhibition on this lesser-known area of his work, which opened last week at the Morgan Library & Museum in New York.“Graphic Passion: Matisse and the Book Arts,” which runs through Jan. 18, features 30 of nearly 50 such projects by the artist, many of which were collected by the couple, Judge Michael M. Baylson and Dr. Frances Batzer Baylson, and donated to the Morgan in 2010 along with several hundred books related to Matisse. The exhibition also features other books designed by Matisse from the Morgan’s collection; related photographs and works of art from the museum’s Pierre Matisse Gallery archives, amassed by the artist’s son; and a maquette from the Baltimore Museum of Art for Matisse’s first major illustrated book, a 1932 collection of Mallarmé’s poetry.Judge Baylson, a lifelong bibliophile who sits on the Federal District Court for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania, said he had always favored illustrated books, starting with a Bible he received as a child and later a Haggadah, the book used at the Jewish Seders on Passover. For her part, Dr. Batzer, a clinical professor of obstetrics and gynecology at Thomas Jefferson University who uses her maiden name professionally, said that when she was an undergraduate at Swarthmore College, she had become intrigued with Matisse and his goal of “making color three-dimensional.”The Baylsons — he is 76, and she is 69 — married in 1969. In 1981 Judge Baylson gave his wife a “not perfect copy” of “Jazz,” Matisse’s landmark limited-edition 1947 book, after she passed a set of medical boards.“I was still a young lawyer — I knew ‘Jazz’ was the ultimate Matisse illustrated book, and I knew my wife would be very thrilled,” he said. “Seven or eight years ago, I traded it in and bought her a pristine copy.”Not surprisingly, the Baylsons, who donated their Matisse collection to the Morgan because the museum promised to make it available to the public, have favorites among the works. For Judge Baylson, it’s the 1948 collection of love poems by the French Renaissance poet Pierre de Ronsard. “It’s the most varied in terms of content, flowers, faces, men and women making love,” he said of the book, “Florilège des Amours de Ronsard.” “There is a great variety of images, and it’s printed in reddish-brown ink.”Dr. Batzer cites “Jazz,” which she said “celebrated an important point” in her life, and the “magnificent” Ronsard.Advertisement