AdvertisementSupported byCritic's NotebookBy Mike HaleIt’s Carrie Mathison as you’ve never seen her — taking communion with a beatific expression, cavorting at a children’s birthday party with a balloon crown on her head, tucking in her daughter and saying “Gute nacht.”As “Homeland” begins its fifth season on Showtime on Sunday night, everyone’s favorite bipolar spy is in a good place. She’s two years gone from the C.I.A., running security for a German industrialist in Berlin and actually living a normal life with her daughter, Frannie (who’s inherited the departed Nicholas Brody’s reddish hair), and a new boyfriend who’s not in the espionage business.It isn’t really a spoiler to say that this doesn’t last. “Homeland” abhors a happy Carrie, and at some point in the first three episodes (as many as were sent to critics), she ends up back down the rabbit hole. This time it’s a heavy-duty trip, featuring hallucinations, some particularly baroque off-her-meds dialogue and one of those cut-and-paste evidence walls that no television thriller can do without.The early episodes are written and directed by “Homeland” veterans, but they have a different rhythm and mood than we’re used to, in keeping with the new locale, the scene of so many chilly, ticktock Cold War thrillers. (The season is not only set but was also filmed in Berlin.) The temperature is lower, the volume is quieter, and there’s an emphasis on subtle le Carré-style spycraft over lethal action.But in larger ways it’s the same show, for better and for worse. “Homeland” tends to blow itself up every season, so reasons have to be invented for the core characters to get back together. Saul Berenson (Mandy Patinkin) now runs Europe for the C.I.A., and Peter Quinn (Rupert Friend), after a couple years of assassinating people in Syria, comes to Berlin to take on a new assignment. That puts them both in proximity to Carrie (Claire Danes), which is either an amazing coincidence or a setup for a big bait-and-switch twist à la Season 3.There’s a big surprise within these first three episodes, though if you’ve watched enough movies in which messages and instructions are passed through innocent-looking drop boxes, you’ll probably guess what it is well ahead of time. It’s what pushes Carrie off her lithium, and that’s when the season really starts to feel like it’s running down a familiar track, with Carrie battling her recurrent breakdowns (so reflective of our national mood) and trying to resolve her daddy issues with Saul so she can save the Western world, and Peter coolly and reluctantly saving the day.Those three central performances, along with that of F. Murray Abraham as the C.I.A. sensei Dar Adal, still carry the show, though it’s starting to feel as if we’ve seen everything Ms. Danes has to offer as Carrie. Miranda Otto joins the cast as a C.I.A. officer, and Sebastian Koch of the excellent German Cold War tragedy “The Lives of Others” plays Carrie’s new boss.Last season felt like a comeback for “Homeland” after the extended bungling of the Brody story line in Seasons 2 and 3, though in retrospect some of the things that went on in Pakistan in Season 4 were just as unlikely. In the new season, the show feels as if it’s running in place. As you watch Carrie battling her demons once again while Peter quietly and efficiently goes about his business, you can see a graceful and profitable way for the show to avoid overstaying its welcome. A Peter Quinn spinoff, anyone?Advertisement