AdvertisementSupported byBlindspotBy Neil Genzlinger“What is this, a scavenger hunt?” Lou Diamond Phillips, guest-starring as the notorious criminal Guerrero, asked the team in Monday’s episode of NBC’s “Blindspot.” Exactly my question.Mr. Phillips is one of the most appealing actors around, but this episode, more than any of the previous ones, sure felt as if the show was nothing but an elaborate scavenger hunt, rather than a “24”-like thriller in which actions stemmed from identifiable motives and built to something.At the beginning of the episode, we saw the mysterious tattooed-arm guy putting a large case beneath a floor. Then came a two-pronged plotline that saw most of the team head into the Michigan woods in search of Guerrero, who had been heard of but not seen until now, while Patterson and her boyfriend chased down clues that led them to the Brooklyn Historical Society.Both plots were full of not-very-plausible eureka moments as one character after another made a deduction stemming from tattoo clues or related nuggets. The Patterson inquiry began when David recognized one of Jane’s tattoos as the entrance to the historical society, which led him and Patterson to a specific page in a specific book that was full of circled letters and erasure marks, and — oh, come on.Meanwhile, in Michigan, an equally improbable sequence of suppositions led Weller, Jane and the rest to, first, apprehend Guerrero and then, after a gunfire-flecked chase through thick woods, to some abandoned derricks, where they just happened to notice suspicious-looking floorboards beneath which was, you guessed it, that box we saw at the top of the show. (Side note: Off-the-grid anti-government types, at least the ones in Michigan, are lousy shots.)The characters themselves commented on the unlikelihood of it all, but that didn’t make it any more believable for me (though yes, talking about believability with this show is borderline ridiculous). And let’s not even get into the helicopter that was conveniently stashed in the trees. The team did bank a lot on the hope that Jane could fly one, even though the trip to Michigan revealed that she was afraid of riding in an airplane. Anyway, am I the only one who thought this episode achieved new heights of nonsensicalness?I did like Mr. Phillips, though, and the Patterson-and-David stuff was kind of cute. Poor Patterson got chewed out for sharing secrets with her boyfriend, and their relationship is now in jeopardy, but I’ve always thought David was more than just the geek he seems to be. I’ll bet there’s a revelation coming up about him.Advertisement