LOS ANGELES — On Thursday evening, some of Hollywood’s leading lights will gather at Robert Evans’s Beverly Hills estate to raise a glass in honor of Brett Morgen’s documentary “Kurt Cobain: Montage of Heck.” But it won’t be the only Oscar-season gathering to recall a music star who died at age 27 after a ravaging struggle with substance abuse.On Sunday, a planned cocktail party here will celebrate Amy Berg’s “Janis: Little Girl Blue,” about Janis Joplin. And a little over a month ago, there was a luncheon at Craig’s on Melrose Avenue for Asif Kapadia’s “Amy,” about Amy Winehouse; Mr. Kapadia is likely to attend the Nov. 14 Governors Awards, although plans for another reception for his film are still uncertain, according to a person briefed on his plans.All three works figure on a list of 124 documentary features submitted for awards consideration to the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences, which grants the Oscars. Next month, those will be winnowed to a short list of 15 candidates for what will eventually be five Oscar nominations.For each of the performers in those three music documentaries, death came a bit differently.Ms. Joplin succumbed to an overdose of heroin and alcohol in 1970. Mr. Cobain died of a gunshot wound, with considerable heroin in his system, in 1994. Ms. Winehouse was found dead of alcohol-related causes, after having long abused heroin and other drugs, in 2011.But the underlying story in each case is remarkably similar: An extraordinary musical talent emerges from an ordinary family background with mostly ordinary problems; the performer craves love, perhaps more than perfection or professional recognition; sublime artistry gives way to disintegration and death.Ms. Joplin, as portrayed by Ms. Berg, seems the softest and most accessible of the three performers. Late in her life, she was lamenting in letters to family members that she hadn’t learned to do simple things, like bake a pie.Mr. Cobain had the more frightening journey, as told by Mr. Morgen. “Kurt hated being humiliated. He hated it. He hated it,” says Krist Novoselic, the bassist, in describing the psychology of Nirvana, in which he and Mr. Cobain performed with the drummer Dave Grohl (and sometimes others).By the time Ms. Winehouse died, the rituals seemed almost prepackaged. Mr. Kapadia’s documentary is built around interviews with, and intimate film shot by, Winehouse friends and associates who appeared to see it coming, right on schedule, at age 27.A version of this article appears in print on 11/04/2015, on page C3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Oscar Hopefuls and Dead Rock Stars.