Bill Cosby and his former lawyer can be questioned under oath in a defamation lawsuit filed against Mr. Cosby by the onetime supermodel Janice Dickinson, a judge ruled on Monday.No dates have been set for the deposition but the judge, Debre K. Weintraub of Los Angeles County Superior Court, said Mr. Cosby and the lawyer, Martin D. Singer, should be deposed before Nov. 25.Ms. Dickinson, who said in a TV interview last November that Mr. Cosby drugged and raped her in 1982 in Lake Tahoe in California, filed a defamation suit against the entertainer in May, claiming that he had branded her a liar in subsequent statements to the news media. Ms. Dickinson was unable to sue on grounds more directly related to her accusation of sexual assault because of the statute of limitations.In the lawsuit, Ms. Dickinson cited statements in which Mr. Cosby, through Mr. Singer, denied her accusations, calling them “false and outlandish” and “a lie.”Ms. Dickinson’s lawyer, Lisa Bloom, said in an interview about the judge’s decision: “We are very gratified that she agreed with us that their deposition should be ordered.” The judge limited questioning in the deposition to the subject of whether Mr. Cosby and Mr. Singer knew or should have known that the statements made in Mr. Cosby’s defense were false. Mr. Singer can also assert objections based on attorney-client privilege. In a statement issued through Mr. Cosby’s spokesman, Andrew Wyatt, Monique Pressley, a lawyer for Mr. Cosby, said his legal team intended to appeal the judge’s decision.“The court’s unfortunate but not surprising ruling permitting a limited deposition of Mr. Cosby regarding the statements of his former attorney Martin Singer was legally incorrect and deprives Mr. Cosby of a right well-settled under California law to have his motion to strike heard before unnecessary, expensive and burdensome discovery,” she said. “It is disturbing that Mr. Cosby is not receiving the same protections as every other defense litigant in California. We intend to appeal the court’s decision.”Mr. Singer did not immediately respond to an emailed request for comment.In addition to Ms. Dickinson’s suit, Mr. Cosby, 78, is facing two other defamation cases, in Massachusetts and Pennsylvania.He has denied any wrongdoing and has never been charged with a crime.Mr. Cosby replaced Mr. Singer last month with a new firm for Ms. Dickinson’s case and for a California civil lawsuit brought by Judy Huth, who says the entertainer forced her to perform a sex act on him when she was 15.A version of this article appears in print on 11/03/2015, on page C3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Cosby Faces More Questioning Under Oath.