The numbers are in for Adele’s “Hello,” her first single in three years, and they are stunning.Released on Oct. 23, “Hello” has shot to the top of Billboard’s Hot 100 chart, with a record 1.11 million download sales in the United States, according to Nielsen. Even in an era of declining downloads, “Hello” became the first song to rack up more than one million in a week — blowing well past the record of 636,000, set by Flo Rida’s “Right Round” in 2009.The song also had a big splash on the radio and on streaming services, which both also contribute to chart positions on the Hot 100. According to Billboard, “Hello” had 73 million “audience impressions” on the radio — an estimate of how many times the song was heard, not played — and 61.6 million online streams in the United States.How about video? Vevo, the online video platform, said that “Hello” had 100 million plays around the world within five days, the quickest any video has reached that number, and by now it is closing in on 200 million. (Even that mashup video of Adele and Lionel Richie is a hit, with 4.6 million views.)Adele’s new album, “25” (XL/Columbia), is scheduled for release Nov. 20, and it is all but guaranteed to be a blockbuster. But the music industry is still waiting to find out whether Adele will make it available on streaming services like Spotify and Apple Music on the day it is released for sale, or whether its streaming debut will have to wait for a week or more — a strategy to help record sales that has been used by Beyoncé, Coldplay and, way back in 2011, Adele.Also this week, 5 Seconds of Summer’s “Sounds Good Feels Good” (Hi or Hey/Capitol), opened at No. 1 on the album chart with 179,000 sales and 11.9 million streams. Three other albums opened in the Top 10: Carrie Underwood’s “Storyteller” (19/Arista Nashville) is No. 2,  Blake Shelton’s “Reloaded: 20 #1 Hits” (Warner) is No. 5, and Andrea Bocelli’s “Cinema” (Verve) is No. 10.The Weeknd’s “Beauty Behind the Madness” (XO/Republic) holds at No. 3, Fetty Wap’s self-titled album is No. 4, and last week’s top seller, the self-titled new release by Pentatonix, fell seven spots to No. 8.