By BRIAN SEIBERTNOV. 1, 2015
One of the spookiest events this Halloween weekend may have been the dance concert presented by the Construction Company at University Settlement. There were no vampires or zombies, yet on Friday there was more than a suggestion of communication with the spirit world.The program, titled “A Trail of Irreverence,” mixed pieces by three choreographers whose work might form a progression were each artist not so idiosyncratic: Sally Gross began working in the early 1960s, Kenneth King a little later, Sally Silvers in the ’80s.One premiere by Ms. Silvers was titled “Spookierama,” but the spooks she meant were spies. The latest in her series inspired by Alfred Hitchcock films, “Spookierama” focuses on “Topaz,” a Cold War thriller often called Hitchcock’s worst movie. Both Ms. Silvers’s treatment and her five dancers were terrific: sexy, fun, indulging in period style while teasing it a bit.Ms. Silvers’s “Lady’s Grip” was much less gripping. A solo performed by Carolyn Lord to a John Zorn version of a Kurt Weill song, it was too close to dance karaoke. In “Night Covet,” Ms. Silvers herself joined Jamie Di Mare in a duet. Against a backdrop of rippling light projected through water, the two women leaned on each other. At the end, Ms. Silvers walked away toward the light, leaving Ms. Di Mare face down on the floor. The piece was dedicated to Ms. Gross, who died in July.Mr. King communed with the dead in two ways. For his opening solo, “Frances’ Unfinished Dance,” he employed several actorly voices to recite text by Frances Alenikoff, a choreographer who died in 2012. The final line was the takeaway: “This is not how Frances would have choreographed it.” In “Secret Border,” Mr. King performed to recordings from a Spiricom, an ’80s device that supposedly facilitates conversations with ghosts. The sounds were eerie, but it was hard to tell from Mr. King’s odd manner whether he meant us to take them seriously or not.The program closed with “A Sonnet in Movement,” which Ms. Gross made shortly before her death. It is a beautiful work of slow, simple movement and simple text and simple props. At the start, four women pace around and behind three screens of opaque paper, appearing and disappearing. At the finish, they occlude themselves by unrolling scrolls of paper upward and reveal themselves by lowering the scrolls to the floor and walking down them. Choreography can be a voice from the dead, and through “A Sonnet,” Ms. Gross spoke.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.