AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn ShattuckIn January 2011, seated alongside presidents and dignitaries at the Kennedy Center memorial service for Richard C. Holbrooke, his son David finally came to see his father as a historical figure.It has taken far longer to understand him as a parent.The night before that gathering, staff members of Mr. Holbrooke — the Obama administration’s special representative for Afghanistan and Pakistan — convened to remember their boss.“I realized they had all these experiences that I never had with him,” David Holbrooke said. “The humor of it, the warmth of it. He was just so much more present for them.”So this former television news producer, whose parents divorced when he was 7, set out to shed light on the man he never really knew with a film.Ambassador to the United Nations, assistant secretary of state, Peace Corps official: of the many job titles Richard C. Holbrooke accumulated, his son settled on “The Diplomat.” A career retrospective of a brilliant if infuriating statesman who had worked for every Democratic president since Lyndon B. Johnson, coupled with a son’s search for the father who had been absent much of his life, the documentary will be broadcast Monday on HBO — 20 years after the elder Mr. Holbrooke’s finest achievement, the Dayton peace accords that ended the war in Bosnia.“Making any movie is tough, but I knew this was going to be particularly hard,” David Holbrooke said last month at the Russian Tea Room, chosen for its sentiment: It was a favorite of his father’s and is owned by Albanians, for whom he was something of a hero for his unifying work in the region.“My mantra was loving but honest,” he said of capturing the man that Vice President Joseph R. Biden called “the most egotistical bastard I’ve ever met.” His father was flawed, David Holbrooke acknowledged, and to say otherwise would have been disingenuous.Four years, nine countries and scores of politicians and journalists later, the result is a sort of “Diplomat of the Rings,” distilled into three acts: Vietnam, where Mr. Holbrooke trudged through the Mekong Delta as a young Foreign Service officer; Bosnia, where, under President Bill Clinton, he wrangled the Serbian leader Slobodan Milosevic and put an end to atrocities in the Balkans; and Afghanistan, where President Obama hoped he could facilitate peace. That job proved his undoing, the film says, with Mr. Holbrooke’s bull-in-the-china-shop countenance rubbing the cooler president the wrong way.Mr. Holbrooke always had more ambition than most, penning his autobiography when he was 14.His college sweetheart, Larrine Sullivan, was already aware of this when she married him in Saigon in 1964. “Darling Litty,” he wrote to her during one of his absences. “I’m afraid you may not be getting such a good deal as you think. It might be a life with a guy who just can’t be home on time for dinner every night, and who does sort of unexpected things, and who sometimes won’t pay attention when he should and other times gets all tangled up in some point which is not of any interest to you. And sometimes is just inconsiderate.”After the Holbrookes divorced in 1972, weekend visits grew irregular, with Mr. Holbrooke sometimes befuddled as to how to entertain his sons — by now there were two — and seeking assistance from unwitting friends.“I particularly remember swimming at Averell and Pam Harriman’s house in Georgetown many times,” David Holbrooke said. There were also “movies, movies, movies” and a trip to Thailand when he was 15. “Especially as kids, the memories are outsize because they were so big,” he said. “It’s not that we were neglected. It’s just that he wasn’t present.”In 2013, David relocated with his wife, Sarah, also a former television producer, and their three children from Brooklyn to Colorado, where he is the festival director of Telluride Mountainfilm. New York had lost a certain energy after his father’s death. But it was also a choice to live a different life. “My wife taught me a lot about family in a way my parents never could,” he said.Richard Holbrooke was sitting across from Hillary Rodham Clinton, then the secretary of state, with the stress of his Afghanistan mission evident in his face and expanding girth, when his heart gave way on Dec. 10, 2010. He died three days later.In the ambulance to the hospital, an aide took down his final words: that he loved his children, that he wanted to die at home, that his career in public service was over — a list that David Holbrooke reads in the film before wiping away tears.“I liked him a lot and he frustrated me a lot,” David Holbrooke wrote in an email afterward, describing a man who was endlessly entertaining and fascinating — but just not there. “His triumphs, his foibles, all of it is in this grand fashion, and I give him a lot of credit for all of it. He had a remarkable life. I just wish he was able to spend more of it with us.”Advertisement