AdvertisementSupported byBy Mike HaleSheridan Smith is one of the busiest and most popular actresses in Britain, but very little of her work has made it to the United States. She won a Bafta award for playing a famous criminal’s wife (in “Mrs. Biggs”) and was nominated for another for playing a famous singer (“Cilla”). If she’s known here at all, though, it’s for one role — Rudi, the foul-mouthed, fiercely loyal younger sister of James Corden’s Smithy in “Gavin & Stacey.”If you remember her from that lovely sitcom — playing early 20s and wearing a striking shock of razor-cut platinum-blond hair — you’ll find her almost unrecognizable in “Black Work,” a recent British mini-series that begins streaming on Monday at AcornTV.As Jo Gillespie, a police constable struggling with a blended family and covertly investigating the murder of her husband, another cop, she’s the embodiment of drab middle-class respectability, though once again she has noticeable hair, this time so close-cropped it’s a step away from a buzz cut. (It’s presumably the result of an earlier role of Ms. Smith’s in a cancer drama.)“Black Work” is worth watching because of Ms. Smith, who may not be the most technically accomplished performer but who radiates vulnerability and compassion. Everything else about this three-part ITV series is routine and a little gray, like the setting. (The show was shot in and around Leeds, and makes heavy symbolic use of derelict locations — an abandoned warehouse, a broken-down bridge.) It doesn’t help that the story, which involves an undercover investigation into gunrunning and the strong possibility of police corruption, recalls the far superior BBC series “Line of Duty.”Some familiar faces show up, including Matthew McNulty, the least interesting of the junior detectives on “Law & Order: UK,” as the heroine’s only ally, and Douglas Henshall (“Outlander,” “Primeval”) as a senior officer. The ubiquitous Phil Davis, recently seen in “Poldark,” does his grump act in a small part as a disgruntled cop. In the end, though, “Black Work” is really a show about women — Jo clashes most directly with a female superior (Geraldine James) and jousts with her mother-in-law (Sharon Duce) and her husband’s ex (Lisa Dillon), and as she learns more about his past, other women begin to surface. Not everyone will like that much family drama mixed in with their mystery, but from moment to moment Ms. Smith does everything she can to make it convincing.Advertisement