AdvertisementSupported byBy Zachary WoolfeDeep in the second movement of Beethoven’s last piano sonata there’s a passage that’s become known as the boogie-woogie variation. The music, written in the early 1820s, suddenly breaks into a syncopated, showy dance that seems to anticipate the ragtime that would come almost a century later. A swinging riff repeats again and again, punctuated each time by two bold chords.Performing that sonata on Friday evening at Carnegie Hall, Andras Schiff played those chords with grounded, almost admonitory, regularity, bringing the swinging motif back to earth. A strange, even wild, moment kept being rendered stable and under control.It was a choice emblematic of Mr. Schiff’s calm poise: unobjectionable, always impressive, sometimes touching and yet rarely inspiring. He brought to Carnegie a sprawling program, the culmination of a two-season series devoted to the final sonatas of Haydn, Mozart, Beethoven and Schubert. It was an unusually long concert and yet it seemed to pass all too quickly and effortlessly: the tempos judicious, the touch sure, the phrasing eloquent — and the impact elusive.The juxtaposition of these four works did reveal small yet telling connections. Following (without pause) Haydn’s Sonata in E flat (Hob. XVI:52), the opening of Beethoven’s Sonata No. 32 in C minor (Op. 111) transformed Haydn’s aristocratic confidence into something more vexed. Silvery at the top of the keyboard near the end of Beethoven’s second movement, Mr. Schiff handled poignantly the musical line’s drift back downward.That was far from the only sensitively observed texture: In Haydn’s Adagio, Mr. Schiff’s diffuse washes of color sounded startlingly modern, pointing toward the 20th century as uncannily as Beethoven’s boogie-woogie. Mr. Schiff emphasized the pauses in Haydn’s Presto finale, perhaps in a nod to the yawning gaps that dot Schubert’s Sonata in B flat (D. 960), just as the genial obsessiveness in the Allegretto of Mozart’s Sonata in D (K. 576) seemed to instigate the Schubert sonata’s sense of perpetual revising and restarting.Endlessly, indeed relentlessly, articulate, Mr. Schiff was lucid in the desperately hopeful rhythm in the final Allegro of that Schubert work, written by a 31-year-old who knew death was near. Throughout that sprawling sonata Mr. Schiff didn’t shy from personal touches: a note held longingly beyond its written value, an aggressive edge to a repetition of the theme in the Scherzo. Yet for all his nuances, the overall, oddly unanxious, impression was of a work being played past, rather than through.His stamina seemingly undaunted at the end of the written program, Mr. Schiff moved on to Schumann’s final piano work, the “Ghost” Variations: their mood autumnal, his tone rich yet clear. When he traversed Bach’s “Goldberg” Variations two years ago — a performance characterized by the same perplexing mixture of responsiveness and detachment — Mr. Schiff offered as an encore the Arietta from Beethoven’s Op. 111 sonata. On Friday, that sonata still in the audience’s ears, he closed the concert with an unsentimental, graceful version of the opening aria from the “Goldbergs.”Advertisement