By SIOBHAN BURKENOV. 1, 2015
What do a leaf blower and the modern-dance pioneer Ruth St. Denis have in common? For starters, both featured prominently in “Ruth Doesn’t Live Here Anymore,” a multimedia work by the Los Angeles choreographer Lionel Popkin performed at Abrons Arts Center in Manhattan on Friday.Ms. St. Denis, born Ruth Dennis in New Jersey in 1879, borrowed freely from South Asian cultures in her popular solos — “Radha,” “Incense,” “East Indian Nautch Dance,” to name a few — and that aspect of her legacy is Mr. Popkin’s chief concern.But “Ruth,” as farcical as it is dead serious, is not just biographical. Through the lens of Ms. St. Denis’s life and work, Mr. Popkin, who is of Jewish and Indian descent, is searching for something about his own.Now back to that leaf blower, which jump-starts a noisy prelude, as Mr. Popkin aims it at the dancer Emily Beattie. Slowly turning and gazing into the distance, she aims a microphone back at it, amplifying the gust. Her exaggeratedly windswept image is one of many Ruths that Mr. Popkin conjures, both on video and in the flesh.AdvertisementThere’s as much explaining as there is dancing in “Ruth,” beginning with Mr. Popkin’s introduction of the cast that also includes the dancer Carolyn Hall, the violinist Mary Rowell and the accordionist and composer Guy Klucevsek. Most significantly, in a piece where the explication sometimes feels extraneous, Mr. Popkin says that Ms. St. Denis produced and sold kits with instructions for recreating her Orientalist dances. His choreography is based on those kits, ever so loosely. “We’re giving ourselves a lot of leeway,” Mr. Popkin says, “sort of the way Ruth appropriated those cultures.”The resulting interpretations, often backed by projected text, presumably from those kits, range from tussling duets to exploits in dress-up with trunks full of costumes onstage, references to Ms. St. Denis’s worldwide travels. Reams of fabric and piles of socks having been scattered, Mr. Popkin consolidates them, again with the leaf blower. Its disregard for all in its path reflects something of the Ruth whom Mr. Popkin most resents.AdvertisementMore subtle than the critique of cultural appropriation are glimmers of Mr. Popkin’s admiration for Ms. St. Denis, even a suggestion that they might not be so different. Noting the abundant references to India in his own recent works, he questions why he keeps “looking elsewhere to make something here and now.” What would happen if he didn’t?A version of this review appears in print on November 2, 2015, on Page C2 of the New York edition with the headline: Taking Steps Toward Discovery  .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.