AdvertisementSupported byBy Jeremy EgnerRoughly six decades after she teamed with Mike Nichols to form one of comedy’s most influential duos, Elaine May has again signed on for a Nichols project. Ms. May will direct an “American Masters” documentary about the acclaimed director, who died in November 2014 at 83. The film will debut on PBS on Jan. 29 to kick off the 30th season of “American Masters.”The lineup of celebrities who will appear in the show reflects the subject’s status as one of the most beloved figures in entertainment. Steven Spielberg, Meryl Streep, Dustin Hoffman, Tom Hanks, Paul Simon, Matthew Broderick and Alec Baldwin are among the former colleagues and famous fans who will discuss Mr. Nichols’s career, which spanned decades and included some of the 20th century’s most memorable works in film and theater.His films included “Who’s Afraid of Virginia Woolf?,” “Catch 22” and “The Graduate,” the latter of which brought him a directing Oscar. His best known plays include “Barefoot in the Park” and “The Odd Couple.” Mr. Nichols won his ninth Tony in 2012 for directing a well-regarded revival of “Death of a Salesman” starring Philip Seymour Hoffman.He also won Emmys for directing HBO adaptations of Margaret Edson’s “Wit” in 2001, and Tony Kushner’s “Angels in America” in 2003. Mr. Nichols is one of only a few people who have won an Emmy, a Grammy, an Oscar and a Tony.Mr. Nichols first achieved fame as half of Nichols & May, a comedy team that arose in the mid-1950s out of the Compass Players, an early Chicago comedy troupe that was the precursor to Second City. The duo’s three comedy albums, released from 1959 to 1961, all charted, and the album version of their Broadway show, “An Evening With Mike Nichols and Elaine May,” won a Grammy for best comedy album. The former partners collaborated intermittently over the years, including on films like “Primary Colors” and “The Birdcage.”Julian Schlossberg, the producer of the new Mike Nichols documentary, previously oversaw a 1996 “American Masters” installment on Nichols & May.Advertisement