By SCOTT REYBURNOCT. 30, 2015
LONDON — Once the talk was of collusion. Now it’s all about competition.Next week will see Sotheby’s first auctions of the collection of its disgraced former chairman, A. Alfred Taubman, who died this year and who was found guilty in 2002 of colluding with Christie’s to fix prices.But times have changed.Last month, Christie’s jolted the auction calendar by announcing that it would be introducing a new themed week devoted to auctions of historic artworks in New York in April. Instead of holding its old master paintings sales in January in the same week as Sotheby’s, Christie’s will offer them three months later, at the same time that it previews highlights of its May Impressionist, modern and contemporary auctions.Traditionally, for the convenience of dealers and collectors, Sotheby’s and Christie’s, the two rival auction houses, have held their most important sales in the same week.The recent changes extend a trend for Christie’s, which broke with convention in May by holding its New York Impressionist and modern auctions — including a new 20th-century “masterworks” sale — a week after Sotheby’s.AdvertisementThe pattern is being repeated this autumn. Christie’s is concentrating its Impressionist, modern and contemporary material — including a $100-million Modigliani nude — in the week that follows Sotheby’s auctions of works in that category bought by Mr. Taubman, who spent 10 months in prison for the collusion scandal.AdvertisementThirteen years later, Christie’s is now going its own way with old masters, or what it now re-brands as “classic art.”“There’s a sense that classical paintings aren’t fashionable,” said Jussi Pylkkanen, global president of Christie’s International. “But we’ve been selling them at the wrong time of year, when we haven’t been able to show them to our buyers of 20th-century art.”This shake-up of the New York auction calendar is the latest attempt — the Frieze Masters fair in London is another — to re-energize demand for historic works by exposing them to the wealthy collectors of 20th- and 21st-century art who dominate the buying.With that audience in mind, the April 2016 “Classic Art Week” will be given a modernist edge with a new themed “Revolution” sale comprising stand-out works from the 18th to 20th centuries, including photographs. The series will also include an “Exceptional” sale of historic trophy objects, evening and day sales of old master paintings (all shifted from January), as well as auctions of antiquities and of sculpture.The market for historic works certainly needs re-energizing at Christie’s. The company could only muster $9.2 million from its annual evening sale of old master paintings in New York in January. In recent years Sotheby’s old master paintings department, under the leadership of George Wachter, has had the edge at auction. (Sotheby’s January sale in New York raised $57.1 million.) But these numbers are dwarfed by the money being spent on 20th and 21st century art. Christie’s biannnual evening contemporary auction in May in New York, for instance, took in $658.5 million.“Collectors used to be interested in specific periods and artists, and know a lot about them,” Marta Gnyp, an art adviser based in Berlin and the author of “The Shift: Art and the Rise to Power of Contemporary Collectors,” said. “Now their fascination for art is related to a big extent to lifestyle and investment.” She added: “You can interest collectors in excursions into other periods, if the art is presented as a discovery with good value and promises value increase.”There was  evidence of this at Frieze Masters (which ran from Oct. 13-18) where the Amsterdam- and Geneva-based dealers Salomon Lilian sold five old master pictures for prices ranging from  90,000 to 500,000 pounds, or $140,000 to $770,000. Among these was a 1647 oil-on-copper painting of the Temptation of St. Anthony by the Flemish painter David Ryckaert, which was a debut old master purchase for an English contemporary art collector at about £200,000, according to the gallery founder Salomon Lilian.Advertisement“It’s not collecting as it used to be,” Mr. Lilian said. “It’s impulse buying. They fall in love with it, have enough money, and then they buy it.”Whether this kind of unpredictable “crossover” demand can sustain an entire market remains to be seen.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Part of the problem for old masters is that the most valuable works are generally sold privately. The auction high for this category remains the £49.5 million given for Rubens’s rediscovered early masterpiece, “The Massacre of the Innocents,” at Sotheby’s in 2002, the year of Mr. Taubman’s imprisonment.Meanwhile, this year, the French banker Éric de Rothschild discreetly offered for sale  a pair of 1634 Rembrandt paintings, “Portrait of Marten Soolmans” and “Portrait Oopjen Coppit.” These have been jointly purchased by the Louvre  and the Rijksmuseum  for 160 million euros, or about $180 million.A further £35 million, has been pledged by an overseas buyer, in a private transaction brokered by Sotheby’s, for Rembrandt’s 1657 “Portrait of Catrina Hooghsaet” from Penrhyn Castle in Wales.Smaller names and smaller prices tend to be the stock-in-trade of today’s old master auctions. On Oct. 20, the Austrian auctioneer Dorotheum held its  biannual two-part specialist sale of old masters in Vienna. Around 55 percent of the 268 lots found buyers at the auction itself, raising €9.2 million with fees.The star of the sale was a fine quality triptych of the Adoration of the Magi by the early 16th-century Flemish painter Pieter Coecke van Aelst, estimated at €100,000 to €150,000. Helped by a provenance that stretched back to the House of Habsburg-Lorraine, this sold to a European collector for €588,533, showing that old masters can increase in value. The painting failed to sell against a low estimate of £150,000 at Sotheby’s in 1999.But other lots exemplified how far the values of less exceptional old masters have declined. Take the case of the well-preserved triangular gold-ground painting of “Christ the Saviour” by the Sienese artist Andrea di Bartolo (1360 or 1370–1428) that began the sale with a within-estimate price of €25,000.Now, you might not want to spend your evenings watching “Game of Thrones” with Christ looking down in judgment on you, but the fact remains that this was a unique 600-year-old Italian Renaissance painting that sold for the price of a Banksy print. (On Monday, an example of Banksy’s 2007 screenprint “Stop and Search” — number 408 from an edition of 500 — sold for $25,000 against an estimate of $7,000-$9,000 at Phillips in New York.)AdvertisementThis is, by any stretch of accepted art historical value systems, a pretty bonkers price comparison.“The middle market is totally soft at the moment,” said the London, New York and Florence gallerist Fabrizio Moretti, who deals in top-end old masters. “I hope a new generation of young collectors comes along. I don’t know what can be done about it.”Mr. Moretti was one of those who suggested to Christie’s that it shift its New York sales to the spring. “It will be a challenge,” Mr. Moretti said, adding that “some people will come in January, some will come in April, and some will come in both. But it will be an opportunity to talk about old masters in America.”Sotheby’s, for its part, remains relaxed about Christie’s move and has no plans to alter its calendar. “We do a lot of cross-marketing in January as it stands,” said Christopher Apostle, head of old master paintings at Sotheby’s in New York. “Old masters aren’t a gangbusters market.  We’re slowly getting new private buyers. It’s steady.”Mr. Apostle said that in November this month , during its Impressionist and Contemporary weeks, Sotheby’s would be showing the prize lot of its next old master sales in January — the  Italian baroque female nude “Danae” by Orazio Gentileschi, estimated at $25 million to $35 million. The painting, from 1621, has been entered by a trust to benefit the family of the New York dealer Richard L. Feigen, which has been guaranteed a minimum price by Sotheby’s. Highlights from Mr. Taubman’s collection of old masters, which will also be auctioned in January, will be shown alongside his Impressionist, modern and contemporary works, all of which have been guaranteed to the tune of €500 million to see off competition from Christie’s.Sotheby’s pre-auction publicity describes Mr. Taubman as “the visionary who changed the art market.” The market has certainly changed, but perhaps not exactly in the way that he had envisioned it.A version of this article appears in print on November 2, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.