By GIA KOURLASOCT. 29, 2015
Is it brave or foolish? A principal dancer at American Ballet Theater hangs up her pointe shoes to start her own dance company. And she is still in her prime.It has been four years since Michele Wiles left the comfort of Ballet Theater to form BalletNext, which returned to New York Live Arts on Tuesday with the first of two programs. In it, three works show the group’s peculiar split personality: two dances set to live Baroque music, and a third featuring rock and pop samples. That one, “Don’t Blink,” is a collaboration with the Brooklyn-born flex dancer Jay Donn.His brand of storytelling — frequently conveyed with his eyes and mouth open in perpetual amazement — adds little to ballet. And ballet adds just as little to this street-dance form in which dancers, alternating between speed and slowness, reimagine gravity with contortions and slippery footwork.A follow-up to “Something Sampled,” last season’s flawed exploration of ballet and flex, “Don’t Blink,” is similarly lightweight. Mr. Donn runs on- and off-stage like a phantom figure as he observes five women, their long hair whipping, moving together or in solos. Is he a mad scientist? He inches close to them and scribbles onto his palm or mouths the lyrics to songs while balancing on his toes; in a slowed-down rendition of “You’re the One That I Want” from “Grease,” Mr. Donn falls to his knees. It’s not so electrifying.AdvertisementA playfully combative duet between Mr. Donn and Ms. Wiles ends the work, just as one did in “Something Sampled.” Here, Ms. Wiles, rarely without a smile on her face, is at odds with her partner and his twisted, maniacal expressions. As Mr. Donn winds Ms. Wiles around him, or as they link arms back to back, their bodies click together, but “Don’t Blink” shows too few occasions for astonishment.Along with a reprise of Ms. Wiles’s proficient “Ushuaia,” the program featured “Strange Flowers,” a delightful New York premiere by the choreographer Brian Reeder set to music by Jean-Philippe Rameau. This witty ballet brings sensual games of the French court to life as Ms. Wiles and Tiffany Mangulabnan compete for the affections of Jesus Pastor.AdvertisementTold through the language of classical ballet in which the stretch of a pointed foot instills the sensation of tension and refinement, “Strange Flowers” is a tease, but not a cheap one. Mr. Reeder’s imagination is as sharp as his footwork: The twist is that the man ends up alone.BalletNext offers a second program from Tuesday to Saturday at New York Live Arts, 219 West 19th Street, Manhattan; 212-924-0077, balletnext­.com.A version of this review appears in print on November 2, 2015, on Page C2 of the New York edition with the headline: Ballet and Street Dance Share the Stage.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.