
Scream Queens By                     
 NEIL GENZLINGER
 
NOV. 3, 2015
Maybe the Mets lost because they couldn’t stand to wait two weeks for the next episode of “Scream Queens.”The early end to the World Series meant that the show’s hiatus was only a week long, and Tuesday night’s episode had enough red herrings, pop-culture references, plot twists and eerie camera angles to make us glad the break was a short one. Seldom has luncheon meat been so pivotal in an episode of a television comedy-drama.The episode began with Chanel No. 2 in a coffin and Chanel No. 1 giving a funeral oration that included the line, “This is what happens when you rub uglies with my man: You end up dead.”Later the various living Chanels tried to contact No. 2 via a séance and a Ouija board, which led to some pretty funny Q.& A. exchanges. Finally the living No. 1 asked the dead No. 2 the obvious question: Who’s been killing all these people?Advertisement“You,” came the reply, which prompted the other Chanels to plan to murder No. 1. But No. 2 warned No. 1 of the plot in a dream, and also gave her a demented yet strangely plausible description of the afterlife involving beard-grooming, Carl Sagan, Adolf Hitler and, sadly, no dinosaurs.AdvertisementThat story arc also brought the best line of the evening, and possibly of the series. Chanel No. 1 was berating the other Chanels for their lousy rat-poison murder plot against her and its unintended silver lining.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Not only would I have survived your attempt on my life,” she scolded, “it would also have made me skinnier.”Meanwhile, a new character was introduced: Feather McCarthy (Tavi Gevinson), a waifish student who stole Dean Munsch’s husband, who then turned up dead, his head in an aquarium. The dean was arrested for his murder, only to be exonerated by DNA evidence on a sandwich. Bologna was a pivotal piece of evidence.That left the hapless Feather herself to be arrested. But in a confessional monologue at the end, the dean admitted (though only to us, the viewers) that the police had been right the first time: She’d killed her hubbie and framed Feather. Whether that makes her the Red Devil killer remains an open question.Anyway, lots of good stuff in a fast-moving hour; even a “90210” reference. Maybe absence really does make the heart grow fonder. A week away from this series made Tuesday’s episode seem newly invigorating somehow, didn’t it?We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »