PARIS — France’s top literary award, the Goncourt Prize, was awarded on Tuesday to the novelist Mathias Énard for “La Boussole,” or “The Compass.” Set during a long night of opium-fueled conversation, it is one of several books on this year’s short list to tackle the often fraught interactions between the Western and Islamic worlds. Mr. Énard, 43, is a scholar of Arabic and Persian who lives in Barcelona. His critically praised and erudite novel, published by Actes Sud, involves a group of depressive students of Middle Eastern studies. After a page-long opening sentence, it jumps from the Middle Ages to executions by the Islamic State in contemporary Syria.“The Compass” was competing against “Les Prépondérants,” or “The Principals,” by the Franco-Tunisian novelist Hédi Kaddour, published by Gallimard; “Ce Pays Qui te Ressemble,” or “This Country That Resembles You,” Tobie Nathan’s recollections of the Jewish Cairo of his youth, published by Stock; and the love story “Titus N’Aimait Pas Bérénice” or “Titus Did Not Love Berenice” by Nathalie Azoulai, published by P.O.L. Another widely praised French novel of the year did not make the final Goncourt shortlist: “2084” by the Algerian novelist Boualem Sansal. Modeled on George Orwell’s “1984,” the book imagines a future under an Islamic caliphate and was praised by the French novelist Michel Houellebecq.In a symbolic move, the Goncourt jury announced the prize’s shortlist of four novels last month from the National Bardo Museum in Tunis, where jihadis killed 22 people, including foreigners, in attacks in March. The jury of 10 chose Mr. Énard’s novel following one round of voting over lunch — lamb stew, according to Agence France-Presse — at a historic restaurant by the Paris Opera. The Goncourt Academy’s jury serves for life. It is led by the French cultural journalist Bernard Pivot and includes the novelist Tahar Ben Jelloun and the philosopher Régis Debray. The prize carries a nominal award of 10 euros, but is all but guaranteed to give its winner a spot on French best-seller lists. A version of this article appears in print on 11/04/2015, on page C3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Mathias u00c9nard Wins the Goncourt Prize.