
Jane the Virgin By                     
 GILBERT CRUZ
 
NOV. 3, 2015
Sometimes one line can summarize an entire situation. And in this week’s episode of “Jane the Virgin,” it was this one: “She only has two hours to write 2,500 words on ‘The Great Gatsby’ before Mateo has to nurse.’”See, Jane is very busy, as all new mothers are. But since she is not letting motherhood hijack her goals, she is busier than many. In addition to feeding her baby every few hours and doing postpartum group exercises, she is also trying to get some sleep, plan her best friend’s surprise birthday party that she totally forgot about and go to school. It’s a lot. Mateo would probably have an easier time than Jane juggling all of these tasks.Not to mention that love triangle. Since I’m a coward, I won’t announce whether I am Team Michael or Team Rafael. But I will say that this show’s romantic shenanigans get more leeway from me because the circumstances are unique, at least when it comes to TV shows. Jane waffles back and forth not because she’s inherently indecisive or because both options are just both so dang handsome, but because of her very specific situation. “That’s why I can’t choose who I want to be with,” the exhausted mother says to Rafael. “Because I can’t even recognize myself anymore.” All she can see is her new child. Any mother (and their partners) can relate to how easy it is for everything outside of that baby to blur and disappear, and how common it is to wrap up your identity in the fact that you are now responsible for another person.Also this week:• Rafael wants joint custody, and Jane can’t imagine him being responsible enough to take care of Mateo on his own.Advertisement• Rafael has never seen “The Sound of Music.” (Michael’s right, that is weird.)• Some people pronounce “yodel” as “jodel.”AdvertisementWho among us has not received an emotional or important text and, rather than respond in kind, punted by choosing an emoji. (Though would any words have expressed Jane’s feelings better than a grimace face?)After Rogelio admits that his ex-wife is blackmailing him with tapes of their old homemade Scientology audits (“like going to confession, only you’re recorded”), there is this exchange between himself and Jane’s very Catholic grandmother:Jane: “Scientology?”Alba: “Is that one of those Protestant churches?”Rogelio: “Not exactly. It’s a church in which people believe they are immortal spiritual beings.”Alba: “Like the Holy Spirit?”Rogelio: “Or say, aliens, who are trapped on planet Earth and must find their true selves through self-exploration.”Alba: “Like in prayer?”Rogelio: “Or a carefully monetized system of levels on the bridge to total freedom in hopes of uncovering your Godlike secret powers.”Alba silently makes the sign of the cross.An essential definition.Who among us has not sent this very text message?We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »