By ZACHARY WOOLFENOV. 3, 2015
Happy November! It was a gruelingly busy but immensely rewarding October for those of us riding the surge of the fall season. Things have quieted down ever so slightly, but there is still a great deal to see and hear.It’s ‘Lulu’ TimeFor opera lovers, it’s a special week. Thursday brings the Metropolitan Opera’s first new production of Berg’s Expressionist masterpiece “Lulu” since the work first came to the Met in 1977.Some hints as you prepare:It’s Marlis Petersen’s last hurrah in the title role after years of reigning in it in various productions. “I cried a lot,” Ms. Petersen said of her final “Lulu” in Europe, “and I’m sure that I will cry here, too.”Read up on one of the opera’s crucial moments, when Lulu asks the man obsessed with her, “Isn’t this the sofa on which your father bled to death?”AdvertisementHere are images from the production, directed and designed by the visual artist William Kentridge.As Seth Colter Walls noted over the weekend  in The Guardian, Mr. Kentridge “has actually followed Berg’s multimedia instruction to shoot a film to go with the palindromic, two-and-a-half-minute Act II interlude (which represents Lulu’s imprisonment, contraction of cholera and subsequent escape).”AdvertisementThis opera was long the “special baby” of James Levine, the Met’s music director, as Leighton Kerner once observed in The Village Voice. But about a month ago Mr. Levine dropped out of this new production, choosing to focus on Wagner’s equally sprawling “Tannhäuser.” Lothar Koenigs, who’s done very little at the Met but recently conducted “Lulu” at the Welsh National Opera, is replacing him.Schubert at the Metropolitan Museum“May I offer you the gift of a song?” singers will be asking random visitors at the Metropolitan Museum of Art this week, part of Lee Mingwei’s performance piece “Sonic Blossom.”If the answer is yes, a private (or, at least, semiprivate) performance of a Schubert song will follow. James R. Oestreich wrote a moving account of his experience with the work over the weekend; it continues through Sunday.An Enviable CalendarIf you have some free time, here are some recommendations:Tuesday: At the Baryshnikov Arts Center, the tenor Paul Groves and the pianists Conor Hanick and Pedja Muzijevic present a homage to the Princesse de Polignac (the sewing-machine heiress born Winnaretta Singer), a patron of composers like Debussy, Stravinsky, Satie and Reynaldo Hahn.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Wednesday: The pianist-composer Conrad Tao goes down below, playing in the crypt of the Church of the Intercession in Washington Heights.Thursday: “Lulu,” duh. (Although Axiom, a new-music group at the Juilliard School, has a nice program there of works by Thomas Adès, Oliver Knussen and George Benjamin.)Friday: Iktus Percussion plays “a new theatrical work for boxers and percussionists” by Paul Pinto at Roulette.Saturday: As part of the Performa festival, the South African artist Robin Rhode organizes a performance of Schoenberg’s monodrama “Erwartung” in Times Square, widening the piece’s intimate scope to the global struggles faced by women.Happy Birthday, Bellini!Vincenzo Bellini, master of the endless melody, was born on Nov. 3, 1801. Callas, matchless, sings a death-haunted “Ah! Non credea mirarti,” from a sleepwalking scene in “La Sonnambula”:Any Bellini favorites? Put them in the comments, email me at zach.woolfe@nytimes.com or tweet @zwoolfe. Enjoy the week!We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.