

Twyla Tharp


ARTIST’S JOURNAL
NOV. 3, 2015
Twyla Tharp is writing about rehearsing, touring and creating new work, 50 years after her first dance concert.BLOOMINGTON, Ind. — We arrive in Bloomington on Monday evening for two days of activities with Indiana University. There will be a technique class, a session with students from the dance and theater departments and a dinner at which I will receive the university president’s highest honor, all on Tuesday. The performance will be Wednesday evening. For me, these two days are a sort of homecoming.My family moved to San Bernardino in Southern California when I was 8. Born in Indiana, I had spent many happy summers on my grandparents’ farms as a child and so when we left for the desert, I had already programmed many of the farm’s working verbs into my muscles: sweep, bale, gather, hoist, haul, plow, plant. Later, I would reclaim them in the vocabulary of dance.Squeezing in a bit of time between the class and the dinner on Tuesday, I drive with Ricardo, who works with the I.U. concert bureau, to find a farm that looks like how I remember a farm. It is a rainy day and Jay County, where I was born, is a bit to the northeast of Bloomington but after an hour or so of driving I see something that feels believable to me. We stop and I get out, grateful to be slipping on the uneven earth as I guide the camera over the horizon for this panorama.I won’t lie — I did not actually plow fields by hand as a child. But I did love my mud-pie plots, a tin pie plate into which I endlessly arranged flowers from my grandmother’s kitchen garden. In the larger fields I watched seeds I had set into the earth grow, the arc of the drama afforded by the seasons sweeping through. As I tromp back through the muddy field to Ricardo parked by the side of the road, I am still and forever the child feeling plugged into the current of the earth.AdvertisementThe next day our tech rehearsal starts onstage at 2:15. Every opening night has been preceded in the afternoon by a complete run of the show for the new stage crew and new spot operators in each theater. And while the dancers do not dance full tilt, they still walk their paths in these rehearsals marking the entire show in real space and time. I take advantage of this lowered energy level to come close to them with my camera and this is what I see, in our “Preludes and Fugues” rehearsal.Chances are, no one would see or describe these performers as branching, swaying, sweeping, rooted. But for me, the earth is literally my stage as I see the open field of my panorama inside the theater walls, a proscenium bounded by wooded copses stage right and left. As for the words describing the dancers, I try to be a responsible witness.AdvertisementAnd I try to be very careful with my words. I have heard from several readers, referencing my last blog (which dealt with the difficult task of translating a non-verbal medium – dance – into words), about how suspect language with its inadequacies can be. Still, without it, how can we help the non-dancer understand what it is we do? I ended my last blog with “shut up and dance,” which may be truthful to the process, but left nondance readers confused.Wanting to help the people in the audience feel they have a right to think about dances without knowing how they are made, and wanting to give back a bit to my honorary alma mater, I offer a spontaneous Q&A after the Wednesday night show. I guide the dialogue with a single question: “What did you see?”Some quick shout outs:“Vigor.”“Irony.”“The men’s legs didn’t go as high as the girls.”Anatomy I say.“Outfits wrong – why are the men all the same beige and the girls different colors? Is this fair?”There are numerous reasons this choice was made but they all have to do with stagecraft and came after lengthy deliberations, so I simply say this was a decision made by our designer, Santo Loquasto.Someone loves Reed Tankersley in the “Yowzie” trio with the two big girls because he’s so good and so cute.Yes, I say to myself, and such bad casting if you want to punish a villainous womanizer who indiscriminately chases every skirt on the block. Instead Reed’s gaining the audience’s sympathy. But hold on. Maybe the audience has pinned my real intention since most of the men of this ilk I have known are extremely attractive and charming, so I let this one slip by with a simple, “Yes, Reed is wonderful.”AdvertisementSomeone sees abstractions, negative space. I question, “Did anyone think of a painter here?”“Matisse.”“Yes, certainly in the circles.”“Red Grooms, Stuart Davis.”Right I say to all and keep late Goya and Munch to myself, for tonight the audience members are the experts.Though this after-curtain dialogue is empowering for audience members — they are giving the answers not asking the questions — it is also more tiring for me. It is teaching, which I find to be a calling of a very high order and exhausting. I ask for one last question and I am very gratified when it brings me to a really good exit line.From the front row, a woman says that even the struggles of the dysfunctional couple or the womanizing trio somehow manage to deliver a positive and optimistic message because of the dancers’ really great team effort.“Thank you ma’am. We really appreciate that. I think you would agree that we all have to work really hard,” and here I pause, “for love.”And with that I go off, still about age 8. And still seeing farmlands behind the curtain.Twyla Tharp is a choreographer, dancer and writer.A version of this article appears in print on November 15, 2015, on Page AR12 of the New York edition with the headline: More Than Fleeting: Lessons of the Road.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »