AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben RatliffUnderneath all music is a nebulous and hard-to-measure quality that might be called intention. It’s the extent to which musicians imply that they have something to do and they are going to do it.Intention doesn’t define the outward characteristics of music — its stylistic traditions, or the grammar of melody, harmony and rhythm. It doesn’t put musicians into a particular genre or steer them toward a particular listener. And so a musician (or composer, or both) who is strong on intention can produce work that seems categorically different from piece to piece. The electro-acoustic musicians Kevin Drumm and Jason Lescalleet, who played a duo set at Fridman Gallery in the South Village on Sunday night, are two examples.Back in the late ’90s, Mr. Drumm, who is from Chicago, was an amazingly deft tabletop guitar improviser, working wood-and-string sounds within intricate quick-motion traces of analog electronics. In 2002 he made a record of overdriven, scabrous drones — it was almost impossible to tell what the sound sources were — called “Sheer Hellish Miasma,” one of the most aggressive records you will ever hear. Last year he made “Trouble,” one of the quietest, most subtle records you may ever hear. The level of intentionality is the same for all of it: high. Whatever you may get from these records, you will sense that Mr. Drumm has left pieces of his soul in them.Mr. Drumm isn’t part of a school or style, but he’s got a kind of cousin in Mr. Lescalleet, who is based in southern Maine. Mr. Lescalleet seems interested in sources, provenance and process; he uses field recordings, found sounds, tape manipulation and feedback, weaving them together through careful editing into a kind of aural theater, structured compositions that play with your sense of time and expectations. (He’s been producing at a steep rate lately, putting up a series of records called “This Is What I Do” once a month on Bandcamp; he’s up to Volume 14.) His work is sometimes loud, sometimes not, sometimes funny, sometimes not. As with Mr. Drumm, the level of his investment is clear. The records are intense. They can burn holes through you.Sunday night’s concert — part of Amplify 2015: Exploratory, a festival put on by Erstwhile Records and Issue Project Room — also included an improvised set by Anne Guthrie and Vanessa Rossetto, who used a viola and French horn over recordings of urban and metallic sounds, and a carefully composed, dryly funny set by Taku Unami and Devin DiSanto, doing a kind of Fluxus version of a diagnostic test involving memory and pattern recognition. Some stage lights were on for all that; they went black for Mr. Drumm and Mr. Lescalleet, who dove into music from “Busman’s Holiday,” their new album on Erstwhile.Each sat at his own table, behind a laptop, Mr. Lescalleet also within arm’s reach of a couple of reel-to-reel tape recorders and a cheap portable turntable. The tape recorders shared a single loop of tape; one was recording and one was playing back, and what was being recorded was the sound in the room, through an old paging microphone, the sort used for schoolwide announcements from the principal’s office. (As with “I Am Sitting in a Room,” Alvin Lucier’s late-60s landmark, the initial recording becomes a recording of a recording, and so on, until the sound decays.) The purpose of the garage-sale turntable was mostly the feedback it produced. Sometimes he rattled the old machines or banged his fist on them to make them react more.It began with found material: the sound (and sight, on an overhead screen) of Lee Marvin’s footsteps moving down a hallway in the film “Point Blank,” with dissonant organ tones lurking in the soundtrack. After a minute of the film, the assault began, with echoes of those organ tones buried in the rumbling density. Some of the sound came from the laptops and some from Mr. Lescalleet’s real-time manipulations, but you were getting it all together in long blocks, through a powerful sound system in a smallish room, including a giant wooden sub-bass cabinet.It was like an airplane propeller experienced at close range, but also heard as bits and pieces of various instruments mashed together. At intervals the sound trailed off or went into quieter sections, foregrounding the tape loop. Or it stopped to let your hearing catch its breath.Kevin Drumm and Jason Lescalleet will perform on Tuesday at the Nightlight in Chapel Hill, N.C., and Wednesday at the Mammal Gallery in Richmond, Va.; lescalleet­.wordpress.com.Advertisement