By ALASTAIR MACAULAYNOV. 2, 2015
WASHINGTON — Since the death of the choreographer George Balanchine (1904-83), his legacy has both receded and grown. The last of Balanchine’s own dancers have retired. Certain aspects of Balanchine technique have lost their gleaming edge (as he himself often predicted). Yet there’s been a vast posthumous Balanchine surge. I’ve seen more than 60 of his ballets in the last 10 years; Balanchine Without Balanchine is a growth industry.Both trends were evident in recent days, when two of his last ballerinas — Suzanne Farrell and Kyra Nichols — staged his works. Both dancers were in their prime when he died; many of us remember them sharing the stage in several Balanchine ballets, taking the complex facets of his work — classical, Romantic, modernist — to new peaks.At the Kennedy Center in Washington this past weekend, the experienced Ms. Farrell added new repertory (the Fauré “Emeralds” and the Gounod “Walpurgisnacht Ballet”) to her company’s already extensive Balanchine store; her Suzanne Farrell Ballet also revived the divertissement pas de deux from Act II of his Mendelssohn “A Midsummer Night’s Dream” in this engagement. And the week before, Ms. Nichols — a novice at staging Balanchine — produced the Bach “Concerto Barocco” for the Pennsylvania Ballet, a company with a long Balanchine history, at the Philadelphia Academy of Music.What these and other stagings teach us is that there’s no one definitive Balanchine style any more. You find different facets of it in different cities around America, even abroad.AdvertisementWithin the first few seconds of the Pennsylvania Ballet “Concerto Barocco,” the eight women of the corps exemplified many of the virtues of Ms. Nichols’s own dancing: singing lines, long phrases, springing rhythmic brio, easy spaciousness. This was marvelous to see, and it continued into the brightness of the pairs of lead women.AdvertisementThis “Barocco” nonetheless scaled no heights. Unnecessarily bright smiles grew more tense as the ballet proceeded; the lead ballerinas seemed guarded. The Pennsylvania company, now in its second season under Angel Corella’s direction, is in transition, and it may be moving away from the Balanchine style that was its bedrock. In the spring, Ms. Nichols will be staging Balanchine’s “Serenade,” a ballet even more central to her career than “Barocco.” That will reveal more.The Suzanne Farrell Ballet — its repertory is always largely, sometimes solely, Balanchine — is not a year-round institution, but it has given annual seasons at the Kennedy Center since 2001. These have shown how Ms. Farrell’s comprehension of Balanchine extends far beyond the roles she danced herself. This program ended with “Emeralds,” the first of his three “Jewels” ballets (1967). Though she always danced the last, “Diamonds” (which she has staged at the Kennedy Center in the past), her company delivered “Emeralds” with real nuance, sensitivity and freshness. You could feel the many layers of Balanchine’s musicality: rhythmic play, harmonic tension, complex phrasing.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In the role created for Violette Verdy, Heather Ogden (first cast) danced with something of the communicative eloquence associated with the ballerina who inspired it, and in the second part, made for Mimi Paul, Natalia Magnicaballi’s beauty and quiet demeanor found a worthy vehicle.Better yet were Valerie Tellmann and Allynne Noelle in the second cast. Ms. Tellman did not dance with unbroken confidence, but — wonderfully partnered by Kirk Henning — she had moments of incisive grandeur and sweep, while Ms. Noelle, a company debutante, cast a consistent spell — delicate and sure at the same time. (In the first cast she also brought particular sparkle to the pas de trois.) Another welcome company newcomer is the tall, long-limbed, handsome Thomas Garrett, who partnered Ms. Ogden.Most members of the Farrell troupe show a relaxed grasp of basic Balanchine style. Several marvelous features were notable: With many dancers, you could see how movement continued through the arms, even when they were holding fixed positions. And I’d send most of today’s City Ballet dancers to study the way the Farrell performers use their eyes — seldom seeming fixed on a classroom mirror but instead opening up the distances of the auditorium.Few of Ms. Farrell’s dancers, however, have full Balanchine virtuosity. This became an issue in the program’s opening “Walpurgisnacht Ballet,” a work in which Balanchine ballerina technique reaches its most exuberantly rococo: Some steps come in huge flourishes, others in tight knots. The central role has had three superlative interpreters at City Ballet: Ms. Farrell herself, Ms. Nichols, and, today, Sara Mearns. Although, at the Kennedy Center, Violeta Angelova (excellent in less full-throttle roles) and Ms. Magnicaballi both delivered it with light charm, they lacked the strength to bring it either heroic swagger or coloratura force: without which it’s hard to see why Ms. Farrell wanted to present this piece.The exquisite, gossamer-like divertissement pas de deux was well served by two casts. Again, Ms. Noelle — quietly rapt — enchanted. Still, New Yorkers know that this is another dance that has recently regained peak form at City Ballet, notably with Tiler Peck. In Washington, Ms. Farrell followed this with the cute and gushy sensationalism of the Scène d’Amour from Maurice Béjart’s “Romeo and Juliet” (to Berlioz music), the sole non-Balanchine offering on this year’s quadruple bill. Ms. Magnicaballi and Michael Cook and, in another cast, Ms. Angelova and Mr. Henning, danced it eagerly, as if released; the Washington audience gave both the program’s warmest ovation.Few dancers in my lifetime have been as inspiring as Ms. Nichols and Ms. Farrell. Many of today’s dancers still recall Ms. Nichols’s performances (she retired in 2007); many who were born after Ms. Farrell retired in 1989 now watch videos of her dancing with awe. Yet neither is currently working in ideal circumstances. Even though Balanchine’s domain has been enlarged far and wide, these performances remind us that the possibility of recession is always present.A version of this article appears in print on November 3, 2015, on Page C5 of the New York edition with the headline: In Balanchine’s Footsteps, a Legacy Grows and Evolves.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.