AdvertisementSupported byCritic's NotebookBy Anthony TommasiniA long line of people waited outside Alice Tully Hall on Saturday evening, hoping to get returned tickets for a performance of Handel’s “Theodora.” Handel would have felt vindicated. The 1750 premiere in London of this dramatic oratorio, a score of more than three hours, was a major flop for that celebrated composer. But of Handel’s 17 English oratorios, this was his favorite.Today, the oratorio is justly regarded as a stunning masterpiece. Each performance is an event. There was special anticipation for this one, presented under the auspices of Lincoln Center’s White Light Festival by the conductor William Christie and Les Arts Florissants, his essential early-music chorus and orchestra.The performance met all expectations, offering the ensemble in top form. A fine roster of soloists was led by the creamy-voiced soprano Katherine Watson as Theodora, an aristocratic-born Christian in fourth-century Antioch; and the superb countertenor Philippe Jaroussky as Didymus, a Roman officer who has fallen in love with her and secretly converted to Christianity, in defiance of military law.In a perceptive program note, the scholar Ruth Smith suggests reasons Handel’s audiences would have been baffled by the piece. For one, its story represented a departure from Handel’s typical biblical oratorio subjects. It centers on the persecution of a Christian enclave in Antioch and the brutal rule of Valens, the Roman governor, and at its core is an intimate drama involving people of no major consequence.The 18th-century listener may have been taxed by the sheer scope and complexity of the score, though what came through over and over in Mr. Christie’s animated and beautifully nuanced performance was the wondrous accessibility of Handel’s music. Even during passages of intricate contrapuntal writing, the textures are lucid, the orchestration transparent.More likely the ambiguities of “Theodora,” depicting characters caught in moral, religious and civic confusion, may have failed to engage Handel’s original audience. As Ms. Smith points out, this is exactly what lends the work its “uncanny modernity” today.After a stirring overture, in a recitative and air (the English term for aria), Valens, the Roman governor, decrees sacrificial rites and festivities, on pain of death, to celebrate the birthday of the emperor. As Valens, Callum Thorpe, a young bass-baritone with a hearty voice, conveyed the character’s smug bluster. A Chorus of Heathens sings in vehement affirmation. Yet Handel slips an element of forced enthusiasm into this boisterous chorus, a quality captured in the vigorous singing (from memory) by the Arts Florissants choristers.This order leaves Didymus full of self-doubt. Ought we not to leave “the freeborn mind of man still ever free?” he asks in a poignant air. Handel doesn’t give us some Christian dogmatist, but rather a liberal-minded Roman officer who advocates tolerance, plaintively sung by Mr. Jaroussky. There may be countertenors with brighter, bigger voices, but few with such melting sound and elegance.Irene (the expressive if slightly thin-toned mezzo-soprano Stéphanie d’Oustrac), Theodora’s closest friend, also seems in confusion. During her air “Bane of virtue,” she warns her fellow Christians to beware of prosperity, the “soother of vile inclinations.” Though the music is beguiling and purposeful on the surface, Handel embeds suggestions — some primness in the rhythmic gait, a hint of smugness in the lyrical turns — that Irene may be trying to convince herself of something. She seems almost sanctimonious during this alluring air. The Roman senior officer Septimus (Kresimir Spicer, a husky-voiced tenor) is sympathetic to Didymus, his good friend, even after finding out that he has converted. Yet military duty would compel Septimus to turn in his friend.Theodora is one of Handel’s most compelling and sympathetic heroines, a Christian racked by doubt over her choices. Is it right to withdraw from the civic world when it counters one’s beliefs? In air after air, Ms. Watson brought vocal bloom, emotional depth and beguiling phrasing to her exemplary performance.Theodora and Didymus are eventually condemned to death. The oratorio concludes with a consoling chorus for the Christians, “O, love divine,” magnificently performed here. Handel ingeniously folds tragic self-reflection into the music, as the Christians pray to have similar courage in the face of oppression.Mr. Christie, full of vim at 70, led a superb performance. I only wish he could break his habit of facing his soloists and mouthing their words as they sing, an attention-grabbing affectation, and also a distraction.Lincoln Center’s White Light Festival runs through Nov. 22 at various locations; 212-721-6500, whitelightfestival­.org.Advertisement