AdvertisementSupported byBy Gia KourlasIt hasn’t really been forever, though it feels that way. David Hallberg, a principal dancer at American Ballet Theater and the Bolshoi Ballet, has been missing in action since 2014, after an ankle injury forced him to cancel performances at both companies.On Sunday evening, at the opening of the Performa 15 biennial, Mr. Hallberg — his blond hair gleaming, a vision of indelible poise — landed back onstage in “Fortuna Desperata,” a collaboration with the Italian artist Francesco Vezzoli exploring 15th-century Italian court dance, which put down the roots for classical ballet. In other words, no leaps required: at the most, lilting, gentle hops.As the audience, seated on risers along the stage’s perimeter, filtered into the ornate setting of St. Bartholomew’s Church, Mr. Hallberg, wearing nothing but a dance belt, with the rest of his body covered in paint to evoke 15th-century-style anatomical drawings, stood center stage with his arms held out to his sides. The black-and-white floor, by Stefan Beckman, had a mazelike design; after a couple of minutes had passed, Mr. Hallberg would raise his knee and turn, until he had faced each side of the audience. During a blackout, he walked briskly offstage.It was a striking beginning. And then we waited — so long that the pause bordered on worrying. Eventually, Mr. Hallberg reappeared, dressed in a Renaissance-inspired costume credited to Fabio Zambernardi for Prada: a short, pleated skirt attached to a strip of bell-like buttons running up his chest and around his neck, with a bow in the back, and his legs adorned in red and yellow. Now the real dancing could begin.In “Fortuna Desperata,” Mr. Hallberg and Mr. Vezzoli — both are credited with concept and direction — worked with the historian and choreographer Deda Cristina Colonna, who drew from historical texts to reconstruct Renaissance dances. (Named after the Italian song, the titular music is reconstructed by Crawford Young and performed on recording by the Ferrara Ensemble throughout the work.) Mr. Hallberg was joined by five other dancers, who possessed little of his natural finesse; the men’s gawkiness, in particular, was jarring.At various times, the pacing was ragged. As the cast glided in and out of duets, cutting through space with delicate side steps and quick triplets that ended in kneeling poses, the attempt to mirror the graciousness of the period didn’t always coalesce.Manners, in other words, gave way to mannerism, and even Mr. Hallberg, rarely without a knowing smile, was oddly coy, despite how airily he moved through the space. “Fortuna Desperata” didn’t have much to do with showcasing a different time; instead, we were staring at the past through the present, and neither side rose above mediocre in this contest between exhibition and parody. It was a dance made for Instagram.Performa 15 continues through Nov. 22 at various locations; performa­-arts­.org.Performa 15 continues through Nov 22 at various locations; performa-arts.org.Advertisement