AdvertisementSupported byBy Christopher D. SheaBRISTOL, England — At 6 p.m. last Thursday evening, about a dozen musicians with bagpipes and drums marched into Temple Church here, playing their instruments full blast, to kick off “Sanctum,” a performance series that will take place in the church for 24 hours a day for 24 days.Watching from the front row was the Chicago activist and artist Theaster Gates, one of the project’s chief creators. The event is the first European commission of its scale for Mr. Gates, 42, who has built his reputation by staging works that blend art with civic action. It also reflects the artist’s burgeoning international reputation. (This year alone he has taken part in the Venice Biennale and the Istanbul Biennial.)“We’ve done an amazing job of finding people who want to be heard,” Mr. Gates said of “Sanctum” in an interview outside Temple Church. “If people were interested and had a knack for the mike, we tried not to say no.”Mr. Gates worked with Claire Doherty — the founder of Situations, an art group here that stages public projects — for about two years to create “Sanctum” with mostly government funds.Through Nov. 21, hundreds of artists, most of them locals, will perform in a purpose-built shed in the center of the church, a medieval building that was hollowed out by bombing in World War II. The church is in the center of this city in southwest England that, like many others in Britain, was repopulated after the war with the help of waves of immigrants from South Asia and the Caribbean.“Sanctum” can hold fewer than 100 guests at a time, and on Thursday a line for the event, which is free, snaked out the door.The event is a deliberate hodgepodge, drawn from all corners of Bristol’s performing arts community, with some headliner acts thrown in, including the banjo player Bela Fleck, and the band Slaves, which has been nominated for this year’s Mercury Prize, a leading British music award.After City of Bristol Pipes and Drums had played their opening set, the soul singer Celestine and her jazz band, Native Synergy, took the stage. Shortly after, the Roaring Trowmen, an a cappella folk quartet, sang, among other numbers, the goofy ballad “Chicken on a Raft.”Later that night, Sara Zaltash, a Bristol performer, sang a Muslim call to prayer. She will repeat the performance on a different hour of each day of the festival. (In an interview, Ms. Zaltash referred to her work as a “radical act of worship,” since the call to prayer is generally sung by men.)Crucially, the daily schedule for “Sanctum” will remain a secret, so visitors will have no chance to pick and choose acts based on their names. Ms. Doherty said the mystery was central to the project. “What that did was level the playing field for everyone,” she said. “It means that everyone has the right to be heard.”The idea to bring Mr. Gates to Bristol was hatched by Ms. Doherty, who visited the artist in Chicago in 2013 and pitched her plan to work together.“I was very curious about why Bristol felt it needed me, in a way,” Mr. Gates said. He added that after he and Ms. Doherty spoke, he became interested in the parallels between the industrial cities and in working in a city that had been ravaged by war.Mr. Gates’s work is anchored in an urban center — albeit one very different from Bristol. He lives and works on Chicago’s poor, largely African-American South Side, in an area that abuts the affluent University of Chicago campus. For his most famous work, Dorchester Projects, he revamped several derelict South Side buildings and filled them with an artfully arranged library, a vinyl record collection and, in one case, a Black Cinema House, dedicated to film screenings and discussions for the community.He also just opened the Stony Island Arts Bank, an arts venue and history archive that he built in a closed-down 1920s bank that is also on the South Side. He bought the building from the city for $1 and financed his refurbishment in part by making fake bonds from the building’s marble and selling them to art collectors. (Some of the largest bonds sold for $50,000.)Mr. Gates’s reputation has grown steadily in the United States over the past decade, but in Europe it started to take off in just the last year.In January, he won the Artes Mundi prize, a Welsh award of 40,000 pounds, about $60,000, that aims to establish itself as a competitor to the prestigious Turner Prize. In addition to the exhibitions of his work at the Venice and Istanbul biennials, he had a solo show at White Cube Bermondsey in London this summer.Mr. Gates said that his projects in Europe were a natural evolution — he compared himself to a seasoned actor whose stature allowed him to take on more roles abroad.Of the Bristol project, he said he was particularly attracted to the idea of bringing outsider performing communities together with the city’s biggest names.“I thought, who are people that live at the margins of Bristol who are making great music?” he said. “Let’s identify who that is, whether it’s the Pakistani community or Punjabi-speaking folk or West Indians or Nigerians or the Scottish Harmonica player and the Catholic boy choir,” and bring them together with more established artists.Mr. Gates visited the city as he prepared for “Sanctum,” but most of his input on the project was given from afar. Ms. Doherty, Situations and a local theater-producing organization, MAYK, handled many of the on-the-ground decisions. Situations has helped mastermind several projects that have gained international attention — like the 2012 “Nowhereisland,” created with the artist Alex Hartley, and “Future Library,” a time capsule in Oslo by Katie Paterson in which a new author will deposit a book into the library each year for 100 years, all to be published at the end of those 100 years. Margaret Atwood was the first contributor.Mr. Gates, who also sings frequently with his band, the Black Monks of Mississippi, has announced no plans to take the stage at “Sanctum,” but has said a performance isn’t out of the question.He said that his projects abroad had begun to make him think about new vistas for his work, and to realize that his practice “isn’t really a practice that’s about Chicago.”“It’s about re-imagining what’s invisible,” he said, of moving his work beyond Chicago. “And reactivating things that are unseen.”Advertisement