AdvertisementSupported byBy Corinna da Fonseca-WollheimThe Polish tenor Piotr Beczala has developed an ardent fan base in recent years. That much was evident from the adoring capacity crowd that turned out for his recital debut at Zankel Hall on Friday with the pianist Martin Katz. The program of songs by Schumann, Rachmaninoff, Dvorak and the fin-de-siècle Polish composer Mieczyslaw Karlowicz beautifully showcased his rich, virile voice, with its appealingly dark undertow.The Slavic selections, with their congenital melancholy mixed with defiance, proved a particularly good fit for Mr. Beczala’s style. Nobody does plangent as well, or as tastefully. On certain words he pushes his voice to the edge of a sob, where it gives off a glint of molten metal.Used indiscriminately these sorts of vocal hot flashes can sound schmaltzy and fey.But Mr. Beczala uses them judiciously, whether to suggest a sharp pang of nostalgia, as in Rachmaninoff’s “Sing not to me, beautiful maiden,” or to evoke the vertiginous longing of Karlowicz’s “Whence the first stars,” in which the poet measures the depth of his sadness against the vastness of the natural world.Making the switch from opera to chamber music can be tricky. Mr. Beczala, who is about to take over the part of the Duke in the Metropolitan Opera’s production of “Rigoletto,” appeared most comfortable in repertory that called for a full-blooded, vigorous tone. His delivery of Dvorak’s “Gypsy Songs” was magnificently confident.But in Schumann’s “Dichterliebe,” with which he opened the program, Mr. Beczala sometimes sounded unsteady. The floated opening notes of one song felt brittle; one quietly rising octave barely found its landing. This song cycle, which charts the trajectory from innocent optimism to bitter rejection, demands more delicacy and flexibility than Mr. Beczala had at his disposal on Friday.Mr. Katz’s performance was slapdash at times. But in the last song of “Dichterliebe” his slightly sardonic, staccato playing functioned like a raised eyebrow, calling into question the seriousness of the protagonist’s pity party.Advertisement