
Empire By                     
CRAIG JENKINS

NOV. 4, 2015
On Wednesday’s “Empire,” a kidnapping mystery was resolved almost as quickly as it unfurled. Hakeem got snatched by three gang members with matching longhorn back tattoos, but they only held him for an afternoon and asked for a modest $40,000 ransom for his safe return. The ordeal leaves the youngest Lyon shaken, and a smack from the butt of a gun renders him temporarily hearing-impaired and unable to perform. Hakeem’s unearned bravado frequently makes him insufferable, so the vulnerability he radiates throughout the crisis and its aftermath is rewarding, whetever the cost, though he still manages to treat his family poorly throughout.Back at Empire, Andre strains to make his mark by streamlining revenue at Gutter Life Records, Lucious’s pet subdivision, through extensive “pruning.” The plan involves dropping Freda Gatz, the best rapper on Empire’s payroll by some distance, and convincing gangsta rapper J Poppa (Mo McRae of “Sons of Anarchy”) to incorporate religious undertones into his music. It’s all pragmatic, pandering to the undervalued Christian hip-hop fan base and releasing a street rapper whose temper makes her a liability, but it’s not very intuitive. Andre’s business acumen is an invaluable asset, but good record labels are run with great taste, and he hasn’t shown many signs that he’s got it.Cookie’s having trouble at Lyon Dynasty, too. Attacks from a neighborhood gang, whose members claim ownership of the street that houses Dynasty’s headquarters, are escalating. It seems odd that Cookie, a drug runner in her youth, would be gullible enough to think her famous family could set up shop in a sketchy neighborhood without incident. Her response to the kidnapping, which is to put a loaded pistol in Hakeem’s hand and lead him back to the kidnappers, while begging him not to shoot anyone, made even less sense. But the overall message — that alignment with Lucious offers comfort and security — might be powerful enough to kill Lyon Dynasty for good.Lucious also made some shaky moves this week, as Jamal lost steam in his album campaign thanks to the Empire marketing team’s indelicate handling of his sexuality. At times gay hip-hop artists are covered in the media as though their sexual orientation is a distinguishing subgenre, but more often they’re flatly denied opportunities on the insistence that heterosexual audiences can’t relate to love songs that use different pronouns than the ones they’re used to. Jamal drives this home when he informs Lucious that he’s gay and an artist, but not a “gay artist,” but the damage is already done: Los Angeles’s Staples Center turns down a proposed Jamal Lyon show, suggesting he’s “too narrow of an artist” to fill the stadium.AdvertisementThe solution is to bring in Jameson Hinthrope (William Fichtner), a gay executive with a colorful history with Lucious, to add a sensitive ear to the marketing of Jamal’s album. With Jamal freshly hurt by Michael’s tryst with the artist who painted his album cover, though, one wonders how long it will be before Jameson joins every other gay character in “Empire” history in making a pass at Jamal.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Speaking of trysts and passes, here are three eye-catching love connections from Episode 6:● It is revealed at the top of the episode that the Gutter Life artist J Poppa and the Empire A&R executive Becky (Gabourey Sidibe) are sleeping together — and having the time of their lives. Kudos to “Empire” for giving the Academy Award-nominated actress a story and love interest of her own instead of continuing to use her exclusively to draw relationship exposition out of Jamal.● I have been vehemently anti-Kitty this season, but watching her stumble through the streets dead-eyed and disheartened didn’t feel good. She needs a purpose. That purpose should not be Hakeem. It is absurd of him to wander to her doorstep for a makeout session on the heels of his kidnapping, and positively soulless of him to shut the door in her face the next time she came to check on him. The Lyon family is full of liars, backstabbers and murderers. Why is Kitty unredeemable?Advertisement● This week Cookie finally stopped agonizing over her sons’ music careers long enough to soak up some romantic attention from Laz Delgado (the “CSI: Miami” mainstay Adam Rodriguez), the associate who proved his mettle backing her up when Thirsty Rawlings sent goons to rob Lyon Dynasty. Laz is disarmingly cool in casual conversation and unflappable when staring down a pistol sight, but his history and motives are unclear. Is he really just a smooth-talking club promoter who used to work in law enforcement? Why does he have the same tattoo as the henchmen who kidnapped Hakeem? Is he coldly orchestrating attacks on Lyon Dynasty by supplying information from inside? Will we ever find Cookie a man without any blood on his hands?We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »