The Actors Studio in New York City will stage a half dozen free performances of “Mud,” a provocative play by the Cuban-born American playwright and director María Irene Fornés that deals with such themes as illiteracy, hunger and poverty, the non-profit organization announced Wednesday.The 1983 work by Ms. Fornes, who is 85 and has Alzheimer’s disease, runs about an hour and will be performed this Thursday, Friday and Saturday nights and then again Nov. 12-14 at the organization’s headquarters on West 44th Street.The studio is pairing the play with post-performance conversations, one about the effects of such social hardships, and a second that will focus on the life and artistic journey of Ms. Fornes, who was born in Havana in 1930 and moved to the United States when she was 14.On Saturday night, Ian Solomon, the former United States executive director of the World Bank Group who is currently the University of Chicago’s vice president for global engagement, will lead a discussion about poverty. Jim Yong Kim, the president of World Bank Group who had held the same position at Dartmouth College, has described Mr. Solomon as “a leading voice for the poor around the world.”On Nov. 13, the Cuban playwright Eduardo Machado, 62, who grew up in the United States and currently lives here, will discuss his long friendship with Ms. Fornes.The actress Estelle Parsons, who is the directorial consultant on the project, said the organization was also expecting the author Nick Kotz, who wrote “Let Them Eat Promises: The Politics of Hunger in America” and “Judgment Days: Lyndon Baines Johnson, Martin Luther King Jr., and the Lawsuit That Changed America,” will lead a discussion after one of next week’s performances.Show times for the play are at 7 p.m. Tickets must be reserved via reservations@theactorsstudio.org. “Mud” is the second of four plays being presented by the Actors Studio that have to do with the broader topic of social justice.A version of this article appears in print on 11/07/2015, on page C3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Actors Studio to Stageu2018Mud,u2019 a Play by Fornu00e9s.