AdvertisementSupported bySpotlightBy Stephen HeymanAfter finishing high school in Germany, Deena Herr decided to spend her gap year in Rwanda volunteering at a charity center for street children. Three years later, through a series of chance events, Ms. Herr, 22, has become a very unlikely pop star in neighboring Uganda. A self-taught musician who speaks six languages — including Kinyarwanda and some Swahili — Ms. Herr got noticed for singing, apparently without an accent, in Luganda, the country’s most widely spoken language. A music video of her first single, the Afro-beat love song “Mumulete,” written with Meddie Menz, quickly went viral on social media, shared by thousands of Ugandans shocked that a “muzungu,” a white person, could sing flawlessly in their native tongue. “I can’t believe my ears and eyes,” one commenter said. Ms. Herr said she was overwhelmed by the reaction. “It was a huge surprise,” she said by phone from Kampala, where she is finishing up an internship in social work while recording her first album on the local label Ruff N Tuff. “It’s playing on the radio, on the streets, in the clubs, some people even have it on their phones.” The following are excerpts from a conversation.Q. You had serious doubts about whether to release your first single in Luganda. What were you afraid of?A. Honestly, I thought when we came out with this song that people here would be offended by me — because I’m white and I’m doing their music. But actually, it was a very big welcome. People were like, “No matter where you come from, what you look like, if you take the time to learn our language, and love our language, you’re so welcome here.”Q. Do you think you have a gift for languages?A. I guess I do. Even in school I spoke four languages fluently and picked up some Portuguese when I traveled in Brazil. In every country I go to, I really try to start learning the language. In Rwanda, the street children I worked with didn’t speak English or French, so I needed to learn Kinyarwanda. The kids helped me a lot. It’s a whole different system from European languages. Luganda is even harder. I’m still learning it and I try to practice my vocabulary every night.Q. How did your Ugandan music career begin?A. I have friends in the music business here who knew I sang and had an ear for African languages. They were like, “Let’s see if she can sing in Luganda.” A producer saw that I had no accent, and they decided right then to record a song. But before we released it, they wanted me to sing in one show just to see how people would react. They took me to the National Theater. Before the main show started, I played on a little stage and it was just a big success. People were so surprised. So we decided, “Ok, let’s release it.” We put it on Facebook and in 24 hours we had 10,000 shares.Q. Do you find it problematic that you’re getting all this attention for singing Ugandan music when so few local musicians are recognized outside of Africa?A. That’s the topic that’s concerning me the most. What will people say? We have a lot of postcolonial structures in this world. This is one of them. It’s like you suddenly need a white a girl to bring Uganda to Europe. On the one hand, of course that’s bad. But at least it gives me an opportunity to show Uganda or East Africa from another side than it’s usually reported. We know the pictures of black children being hungry somewhere. This is part of the truth but it’s not the whole picture. I have an opportunity to show the people a different side — the music industry, the glamour and the beauty of this culture. Stephen HeymanAdvertisement