Season 1, Episode 6, “The Good Man”“Fear the Walking Dead” spent most of its inaugural season looking very little like “The Walking Dead,” mostly thanks to a general lack of the lumbering flesh-eaters that animate the franchise.That ended on Sunday, as Daniel enacted Operation Flood the Zone, releasing the throbbing arena full of walkers we saw last week. It was a diversionary measure designed to distract the troops protecting the community college-cum-“headquarters” while our heroes freed their family members.They did, eventually — the ones still with us, anyway. (R.I.P. Griselda.) But the upshot was that anyone who’d grown weary of the relative ghoul-lessness of “Fear the Walking Dead” finally got their fill of undead feasting. There were zombie attacks in the parking lot. Zombie attacks in the corridor. Zombie attacks in the kitchen. A walker chowed down on the feet of the greedy soldier who’d hooked up the slick Victor Strand in exchange for nice jewelry. “Keep the watch,” Strand told him, retrieving his cuff links.After the various walker attacks and other obstacles were surmounted, Strand brought everyone to his waterfront estate. Eventually, it appeared, he might bring them all to his yacht. But not everyone will be joining the cruise.True to the grim and angsty tone of the series, the season ended on a note of anguish as Travis was forced to kill his injured ex-wife, Liza, before her walker destiny came to pass. (In a ghastly bit of foreshadowing, Liza earlier watched a mangled solider commit suicide by chopper rotor to avoid turning.) The episode concluded with Travis weeping, clutching at Madison at the edge of an infected continent, an uncertain yacht-based future awaiting them on the horizon.We opened on an aerial view of a dark and deserted Los Angeles, its abandoned highways and general air of desolation a stark counterpoint to the churning metropolis from the season premiere, revealing how far we’ve come in just six episodes. The groaning arena doors promised carnage to come and Madison’s house was still lousy with bad feelings over the torture of Andy the soldier.“You ashamed or something?” Travis taunted Madison.“If Chris was in danger,” she countered, “you’d do whatever you could to protect him, wouldn’t you?”A plan was made and from there, aside from the emergence of Strand’s nautical plan at the end, the finale mostly checked off the boxes drawn in the superior episode last week. Zombies make it out and overrun everything: check. Strand and Nick escape: check. Everyone reunites at the headquarters: check. Daniel and Ofelia learn about Griselda’s death and mourn: check. Everyone leaves: check.Even the choice to kill off Liza had a perfunctory feel. On the one hand, she, more than anyone else at this early stage of the apocalypse, understands that a walker bite is as good as a death sentence, or worse.But on the other, someone from the core group had to go and she was the one least connected to the primary story of survival, and thus the most disposable. Will her departure change the story much, aside from making Chris more sensitive and prickly than he’s already been? I believe that he and Travis are emotionally destroyed but don’t feel much myself. Six episodes don’t offer much time to become invested in a fringe character, especially one who spent the first couple of shows being rather unpleasant.There were certainly some thrilling moments on Sunday, such as when the walkers stalked Nick and Strand in a long hallway as the lights flickered and the other struggled with the door. (ID card readers: always a hassle. Has one ever worked on the first try?) The suspense of even that sequence was undercut somewhat by an interview with Dave Erickson, the show runner, in which he said that Strand was crucial to the direction of Season 2 (and so was probably never in any real danger).Mostly, the Season 1 finale seemed intended to set up the main characters for Season 2, to begin sometime next year.For Travis, his mercy killing of Liza, on the heels of his battering of Andy the idiot solider, continued his quick evolution from a tedious moralist into someone who gets that to survive in the new world, sometimes you have to get your hands dirty. Titled “The Good Man,” the finale made it clear that even though Madison felt like the central character at the beginning of “Fear the Walking Dead,” it was Travis who had the most pivotal arc. He went from an unshakable faith in civilization and law and order to beating a soldier nearly to death with his bare hands. (While I assumed that his letting Andy go early on would come back to bite them, the form it took — Andy coming back to shoot his girlfriend Ofelia, presumably to hurt her father — seemed silly.)How damaged will he be when the show returns? Who will he even be, now that his signature optimism has encountered the chopper rotor of postapocalyptic reality?As for the other key figures, Madison, after starting strong sort of slipped into a thankless role of splitting the difference between Travis and Daniel, when she’s not cursing or caring for Nick. Here’s hoping the producers can find something more interesting for her in Season 2.Daniel, the fatalistic torturer, ended up with a dead wife and a wounded daughter for his troubles. I doubt the fatalism will be changing anytime soon. With Griselda presumably part of that gruesome ash pile out back, Ofelia and Daniel have to reassemble their relationship, and Ofelia must make some sort of peace with her father’s violent past.Alicia’s and Chris’s main job for next season: Find something to do. They had another fairly uneventful episode on Sunday — well, at least they did until Chris’s mother died. Before that, the children’s main job was to wait in the car until three surly troops stole it from them. (The military did not come off well in this show.)For his part, Nick, who began the season in a junkie hellscape, had an odd moment of epiphany in the finale. He concluded that, with the world falling apart, his heroin addiction was the best thing that had ever happened to him. “I’ve been living this for a long time and now everyone is catching up with me,” he told his mother. We’ll see how smug he feels when he’s going through withdrawals in the middle of the Pacific Ocean.A few thoughts while we dust off our sailor hat• O.K., I have to ask: Is the show really going to put these people on a boat? It was certainly a surprising development, especially since it represented a diametrically opposite move from the “let’s head east into the desert” plan we’ve been hearing about all season. But is “The Floating Dead” really sustainable, as an engaging narrative concept, for more than a week or two?• I thought Tobias the nerd oracle might show up again, but no dice. Maybe they’ll come upon him next season in a steampunk watercraft of his own design.• So what say you? Did “Fear the Walking Dead” amount to more than a placeholder for the real thing, which returns next week? Will you come back next season? Please fire away in the comments.