VAUGHAN WILLIAMS: ‘A Sea Symphony’
Katherine Broderick, soprano; Roderick Williams, baritone; Hallé Choir, Hallé Youth Choir, Schola Cantorum of Oxford, Ad Solem; Hallé Orchestra; Mark Elder, conductor
(Hallé)
Manchester’s Hallé Orchestra continues its unbroken streak of valuable releases with this towering account of Ralph Vaughan Williams’s first symphony. Written at the crest of the fashion for seafaring works that swept Britain at the start of the 20th century, and given its premiere just a month after Mahler’s Eighth, it’s a full choral symphony lasting over an hour, a work that astonishes with ambition both compositional and (with texts by Walt Whitman) literary and philosophical. Mark Elder makes clear Vaughan Williams’s debts to Charles Stanford and Elgar, Wagner and Ravel, carrying them along in a reading of tidal power, patient yet inexorable. (David Allen)TCHAIKOVSKY: ‘The Nutcracker’
Stewart Goodyear, piano
(Steinway & Sons)
As a youngster in Toronto, the pianist Stewart Goodyear loved listening to Tchaikovsky’s “The Nutcracker” over and over. Also a composer, Mr. Goodyear channeled his love for the work into his own elaborate, detailed and utterly captivating arrangement for solo piano, which he plays magnificently on this new recording. Like Liszt, a master at transcribing symphonic music for the piano, Mr. Goodyear honors Tchaikovsky’s music through his ingenious arrangement. Without its colorful orchestral enrichments, the score comes through here with stunning freshness and detail, thanks to the elegant, impressively articulate playing. The Overture has Mozartean grace, touched with suspense. Even the exotic dances during the divertissements, so associated with orchestral colorings — like the “Arabian Dance,” with its subdued writing for reedy woodwinds — sound newly magical. And, as promised, he presents the full ballet, more than 82 minutes of music. (Anthony Tommasini)SPOTIFY PLAYLISTTracks from the recordings discussed this week. (Spotify users can also find it here.)