By KATHRYN SHATTUCKNOV. 4, 2015
Happy Hump Day, viewers, and who better to bounce us across the divide than Kareem Abdul-Jabbar, speaking out for the first time in years? We’ve also got over-the-top action from Jackie Chan and Bruce Lee. And for those with a standing date with “Empire,” the Lyons protect their pride. KAREEM: MINORITY OF ONE (2015) on HBO Now and HBO Go. Kareem Abdul–Jabbar — all-time leading N.B.A. scorer (38,387 points!), actor, author, cultural ambassador for the United States and famous avoider of journalists — finally tells his side of the story. It’s all timed to the release of his book (written with Anna Waterhouse), “Mycroft Holmes,” about Sherlock’s older, cleverer brother. “For outsize polymathic energy and accomplishment,” James Parker wrote in The New York Times Book Review, “Abdul-Jabbar rivals Conan Doyle himself.” (Image: Mr. Abdul-Jabbar)BLANK ON BLANK on PBS Digital Studios. Bill Murray, back in 1988, talks about being obnoxious.TAXI TO THE DARK SIDE (2007) on SundanceNow Doc Club. Alex Gibney’s Oscar winner about the use of torture in Afghanistan, Iraq and Guantánamo Bay. 5 FLIGHTS UP (2014) 6:55 p.m. E.S.T. on HBO Signature. Morgan Freeman and Diane Keaton, as moviedom’s perfect couple, decide to take Manhattan after discovering that the value of their Brooklyn apartment has skyrocketed. But what’s this about a bomb on the Williamsburg Bridge? The bigger terrorist may be Cynthia Nixon as a real estate agent. “ ‘5 Flights Up’ would be nothing without its stars,” Stephen Holden wrote in The Times, “whose humanity warms up a movie that otherwise portrays New Yorkers as coldblooded, slightly crazy, hypercompetitive sharks.” Hmm. (Image: Ms. Keaton and Mr. Freeman)AdvertisementTHE 49TH ANNUAL CMA AWARDS 8 p.m. on ABC. “Country music’s biggest night”: Carrie Underwood and Brad Paisley hold court for the eighth time at the Bridgestone Arena in Nashville. Garth Brooks, Luke Bryan, Kenny Chesney, Eric Church and Miranda Lambert compete for entertainer of the year.EARTH’S NATURAL WONDERS 8 p.m. on PBS. The planet as few have seen it. Watch as Sherpas rope a route across the Khumbu Icefall on Mount Everest, conservationists try to save a condor chick in the Grand Canyon, and farmers battle elephants on the slopes of Mount Kilimanjaro.RUMBLE IN THE BRONX (1995) 8 p.m. on AMC. Jackie Chan is a whirling dervish of martial-arts mastery playing a Hong Kong cop who comes to New York for his uncle’s wedding but runs afoul of some nasty dudes. Writing in The Times, Stephen Holden called it “a giddy triple somersault of a film that makes no sense whatsoever.” Check out the man who started it all in “The Way of the Dragon” (1972), 8 p.m. on Esquire, as Bruce Lee takes on mobsters in Rome. (Image: Mr. Chan)AdvertisementEMPIRE 9 p.m. on Fox. Lucious and Cookie protract their claws to protect their cubs.LAW & ORDER: SPECIAL VICTIMS UNIT 9 p.m. on NBC. Well, this is inconvenient (and familiar): The virtuous 13-year-old daughter of a reality-TV family becomes pregnant.A version of this schedule appears in print on November 4, 2015, on Page C7 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Wednesday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.