By CORINNA da FONSECA-WOLLHEIMNOV. 3, 2015
To clap or not to clap? Even seasoned concertgoers can be unsure of what to do between pieces when religious music is on the program. On Sunday afternoon at Alice Tully Hall, the soprano Christine Brewer addressed the awkwardness head-on when she turned to the audience members at “Prayer” and, in a genial tone, encouraged them to relax.But it was hard not to be awed. Behind Ms. Brewer, the 19-ton Kuhn organ, normally hidden behind a wooden panel, stood unveiled in all its breathtaking beauty, its 4,192 pipes gleaming softly in the dimmed auditorium. Seated at the console was the organist Paul Jacobs, a virtuoso of dazzling technical acumen, who anchored this recital of devotional music as part of the Lincoln Center White Light Festival.Gifted with an ample, plush voice of unforced power, Ms. Brewer proved more than capable of holding her own against that magnificent instrument. But for all the sonic riches and episodic prettiness of the music, the selections never quite connected in a way that was emotionally captivating. The performers’ chatty introductions and the incessant applause salvos impeded any budding sense of mysticism.Ms. Brewer’s reading of Bach’s “Bist du bei mir” was exquisitely restrained, over a velvet-gloved accompaniment by Mr. Jacobs. But there was nothing linking this aria’s text, about earthly love softening death’s terror, to “But Oh! What Art Can Teach?,” Handel’s sunny tribute to the power of music.Lili Boulanger’s “Pie Jesu” proved the most unsettling work on the program. A setting of part of the Requiem liturgy, written in 1918, shortly before her death from tuberculosis at the age of 24, it is chromatically tense, save for one searing outburst of anguish. Too bad that it was immediately followed by Puccini’s “Salve del Ciel Regina,” a work expressing all the glib piety of a greeting card.Mr. Jacobs showed off his mastery in a handful of solo selections by Bach, Reger, Charles-Marie Widor and Nadia Boulanger, Lili’s sister. In Reger’s Toccata and Fugue, he built up a wonderfully organic crescendo in which the music expanded in all dimensions — brightness, clarity and volume — until it filled the room with a pulsating, radiant cloud of sound.A version of this review appears in print on November 4, 2015, on Page C5 of the New York edition with the headline: Sonic Riches for Ears Divine and Human.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.