By JENNIFER SCHUESSLERNOV. 3, 2015
BUFFALO — The Michigan Street Baptist Church, built here in the 1840s, was a haven for fugitives on the Underground Railroad, and a place of worship for illustrious citizens like Mary Burnett Talbert, a founder of the movement that led to the creation of the N.A.A.C.P.But one afternoon last weekend, its modest sanctuary hosted some other notable guests: nearly a dozen descendants of authors of slave narratives and other African-American antislavery activists.They included descendants of famous figures like Dred Scott, the plaintiff at the center of the infamous 1857 Supreme Court ruling, and Solomon Northup, the author of “Twelve Years a Slave,” as well as descendants of less famous figures, all of whom had come for an unusual three-day gathering organized by the State University of New York at Buffalo.They arrived with photographs, books and rolling bags full of research materials, along with a shared conviction in the importance of taking history into their own hands.AdvertisementAmong them was Susi Ryan, a quilter from Worcester, Mass., who delivered an emotional presentation on the connections between her handiwork and her ancestor Venture Smith, whose 1798 autobiography describes being captured by slave traders in West Africa as a child and then shipped to the Americas.“He talks about being sold to his first owner for four barrels of rum and a piece of calico,” Ms. Ryan said, pausing to gather herself. “So much of our memory is carried through cloth.”So much African-American memory is also carried through slave narratives, fewer than 250 of which are known to have been published. They have been a growth field in academia over the past few decades, studied both as historical documents and exemplars of what the 19th-century abolitionist Theodore Parker once declared was America’s only truly homegrown literary genre.But the gathering here, organized by Kari Winter, a professor of transnational studies at the university, was perhaps the first to bring together a significant number of their authors’ descendants for a more personal conversation about history, memory and identity.“So many scholars have written about our ancestors, but people also need to hear our voices,” said Regina E. Mason, a great-great-great-granddaughter of William Grimes, whose 1825 narrative, she said, was the first by a fugitive slave to include the words “written by himself” on its title page.AdvertisementGenealogy is one of the great American pastimes. But for African-Americans, the quest to create a family tree can be difficult. Federal census records did not record enslaved people by name, and other documentation can be hard to come by.Ms. Winter opened the workshop by citing the sociologist Orlando Patterson’s argument that the essence of slavery lay in “natal alienation” that deprived people of any claim on kinship or origin.Being a slave meant being “genealogically isolated, with no right of kinship,” she said, to nods and murmurs of recognition. “The fact that you are here, relating ancestor to descendant, and descendant to ancestor, is really powerful.”Some at the workshop had been raised with the knowledge of their author-ancestor, even if the stories didn’t always seem quite real. Corinne Henry Brady, Ms. Ryan’s sister, described hearing their father talk about the exploits of Venture Smith, who was known for his size and strength.“I thought he was confusing him with Paul Bunyan, but with a cool twist by making him black,” Ms. Brady, a parole officer from Providence, R.I., said.Others discovered their ancestor only later in life, by accident. Rhonda Brace, a Massachusetts state employee from Springfield, first heard of Jeffrey Brace from a newspaper article about his 1810 slave narrative, which had been all but forgotten until Ms. Winter published a new edition in 2004.Ms. Brace’s uncle was also named Jeffrey Brace. Working with Ms. Winter, she connected her family tree to the author of the narrative, who had been captured in West Africa as a child and shipped to the Americas, where he fought in the Revolutionary War before gaining freedom.Ms. Brace also chartered a bus and brought some 60 family members from Springfield to meet newfound Brace relatives in Vermont, whom she described as being of “every different shade.”Advertisement“That was really profound for me,” she said, adding, “It was the first reunion my family had ever had.”Not all efforts to connect threads of the past have gone smoothly. Several participants described corresponding with descendants of slave owners, only to get no response when they asked about wills and other family records that might hold genealogical clues.“Emotions run high on both sides,” said Eric A. Sheppard, a descendant of Moses Grandy, whose 1843 narrative described trying to buy his freedom three times.Carver Clark Gayton, a great-grandson of Lewis G. Clarke, a fugitive slave who became a leading abolitionist (and a likely inspiration for the character George Harris in Harriet Beecher Stowe’s “Uncle Tom’s Cabin”), recalled the mixed reaction he got when he contacted some descendants of Milton Clarke, a brother of Lewis who had passed as white.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In 1900, Milton had issued legal threats against anyone who pursued “so-called anecdotes” about his origins, and these descendants, Mr. Gayton said, had no inkling of any African-American roots.Not all of them were excited by the news, said Mr. Gayton, a former executive director of the Northwest African American Museum in Seattle who is retired from Boeing. “But one woman said: ‘We can’t hide history. If we’re going to deal with its remnants, we need to discuss these things.’ ”In Buffalo, the conversation ranged from practical issues like how to access genealogical databases or set up a nonprofit organization to broader questions of social justice, including just who owns history.Some participants expressed frustration with writers, filmmakers and tour operators who profit from their ancestors’ stories or minimize the role of enslaved people in securing their own freedom. (Ms. Winter, for her part, wryly noted that total royalties from her edition of Brace’s memoir, published by the University of Wisconsin Press, were probably less than the previous night’s dinner check.)Lynne M. Jackson, a great-great-granddaughter of Dred Scott, recalled that when she first started her research, she would come across accounts suggesting that Scott, whose 11-year legal effort to gain freedom resulted in the ruling that African-Americans were not citizens, had been a pawn of white abolitionists.Advertisement“It’s a demeaning statement, and it’s just not true,” said Ms. Jackson, a former law firm manager from Creve Coeur, Mo., and founder of the Dred Scott Heritage Foundation, which raised money for the  statue of Scott and his wife, Harriet, in front of the St. Louis courthouse where their case was heard.“Dred Scott had everything to do with his case,” Ms. Jackson said. Most accounts, she said, acknowledge that now.Ms. Brace said the weekend had created “a sense of family amongst us.” But the descendants, who may collaborate on an anthology, agreed they needed to also take the conversation to the wider public.Americans “are all family, at some point,” Mr. Gayton said. “Perhaps more than any of us would like to admit.”An article last Wednesday about a gathering in Buffalo of descendants of authors of slave narratives and other African-American antislavery activists referred imprecisely to William Grimes’s narrative. It was the first by a fugitive slave — not any slave — to include “written by himself” on its title page.A version of this article appears in print on November 4, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: Ties to Slavery, Bound by Vintage Accounts.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.