Season 5, Episode 1: “Separation Anxiety”Boy, oh, boy. I think we’re in for some fun this season.As we begin, Carrie is looking better than ever. She has a new job running security for a German foundation in Berlin, bikes her beautiful little girl to preschool and has a cute young boyfriend from work (will that be a mistake again?). She appears to be finding calm and solace in the Roman Catholic Church. All of which is lovely. And, of course, destined not to last.Peter Quinn (Rupert Friend), on the other hand, is looking just terrible: whiter and skinnier than ever, and mottled, too — his face a strange array of shadows and what appear to be almost-healed bruises. He’s just returned to Langley after two years on the front lines in Syria, and the experience has clearly taken its toll. He’s disgusted with the United States government. “What strategy?” he inquires, when asked in a C.I.A. conference room whether the strategy in Syria is working. “Tell me what the strategy is. I’ll tell you if it’s working.”At the same time, he clearly has no sympathy for the other side. Aware that his ideal strategy for fighting radical Islamists — “Two-hundred thousand American troops on the ground indefinitely to provide support for an equal number of American doctors and elementary school teachers” — is a nonstarter, his Plan B calls for something other than nation-building: to hit reset, and “Pound Raqqa into a parking lot.”One senses that he has probably gone as far as he can within the agency; his managing-up skills are limited. Which is why, at the end of the episode, when Saul Berenson (Mandy Patinkin) now running Europe for the C.I.A., sets him up as a paid assassin, warning that he’ll get “no support … no acknowledgment … no contact,” there’s a general sense of relief all around.Quinn is spinning out — and yet it seems only a matter of time before Carrie is fully reeled back in. With lightening speed, this first episode takes her from wearing a twisty balloon hat to a headscarf to a head-covering sack — with a creepy blue VW bus (diesel, no doubt) thrown in for an extra bit of local color.  The pretty-boy billionaire for whom she handles security, Otto Düring (Sebastian Koch) has gotten it into his head to visit a refugee camp. And he wants Carrie to vet a top secret document held by a Laura Poitras-like character — also named Laura and also living in Berlin — who is about to go public with fatally damning revelations about the German government’s collusion with United States information-gathering on the Fatherland.This is far more stress than Carrie wants or needs — only she could make an extreme sport out of work-family balance — but it’s great for us viewers, because it means we get to see Carrie play-act at female friendship to pry information from the intriguing new Berlin station chief, Allison Carr (Miranda Otto), who quickly outplays her, setting up the dynamic for what I hope will be a frequently revisited game of mutual manipulation. Carrie’s challenges also quickly bring us back in contact with an angry and embittered Saul. He’s sure that Carrie “tanked” his candidacy for the C.I.A. directorship (she says she didn’t, and I believe her) and furious that she’s working for “the other side.” By which he doesn’t simply mean a man whose family fortune came from wartime slave labor, but something much more newly sinister — and frustratingly, for now, unclear. He tells Carrie: “You’re being naïve and stupid. Something you never were before.” No, she never was. I want to know more.But in the meantime, a couple of questions:What is Laura’s job, exactly?In what capacity is she publishing her scoop — the classified C.I.A. files stolen by a couple of anti-jihadist hackers? I assumed she was some sort of a journalist; they’re usually portrayed on screen as just her type of self-righteous, uncaring, moralist.  But maybe I’m making too many assumptions. One way or the other, she’s sizing up to be a royal pain, with ploddingly predictable lines — “You spent the last 10 years killing people. It’s not enough just to stop. You need to do something” — that contrast sharply with the clever subtlety we normally expect even from the least appealing personages of “Homeland.”. Given that the show’s creators were also the masterminds behind “24” (where, let’s recall, torture worked), it’s not surprising that a character meant to recall an Edward Snowden enabler would come in for particularly disdainful treatment. Let’s just hope she becomes a bit more entertaining.And, a more serious query:What is the tradition Carrie is trying to tap into when she pays a personal visit to the Hezbollah commander Al Amin (George Georgiou) and asks him to protect her boss in the Hezbollah-controlled refugee camp? “I have asked you respectfully for safe passage; You are obliged to take my message to the council!”  she shouts after him, something less than respectfully. And it works. And one last, before you go: Why do the bad guys always get the best lines?“Our strength is our suffering. And you provide us with an endless supply,” Al Amin says, before informing Carrie that his son was killed in Beirut while protecting Abu Nazir, all on her watch. His warning, “I will fight you forever,” is just wonderful. Game on.

Judith Warner,  a contributing writer for The New York Times Magazine, is the author, most recently, of “We’ve Got Issues: Children and Parents in the Age of Medication.”