AdvertisementSupported byBy Gia KourlasDancers, in blackface and wearing woolly wigs, stand in a row at the front of the stage. One by one, they spout racist jokes. Here’s a clean one: “What is the best joke in history?” Answer: “Civil rights!”In “The Minstrel Show Revisited,” performed by Spectrum Dance Theater at New York University’s Skirball Center for the Performing Arts last Wednesday, the choreographer Donald Byrd explores minstrelsy as it continues to influence American attitudes. In order to examine events of the present — the shootings of Trayvon Martin and Michael Brown — Mr. Byrd has resurrected his 1991 Bessie Award-winning work, “The Minstrel Show,” inspired by the 1989 murder of Yusuf Hawkins, a black teenager killed by whites in Bensonhurst, Brooklyn.I never saw the original, but in “The Minstrel Show Revisited” Mr. Byrd seems to have a similar purpose: for people to acknowledge their stereotypes about race so they can move on. The program note provides 34 reasons “The Minstrel Show Revisited” is a difficult work, as in, “It is difficult because we laugh.”Soon after the show begins, Alex Crozier, the host, and a group of blackface dancers sing and slap tambourines to “A Hot Time in the Old Town.” Later, Mr. Byrd requests audience volunteers to tell the last racist joke they heard. He separates them onstage; one side he calls Tambo and the other side Bones. He asks the volunteers to bend forward slightly and talk like a creaky old man — a stereotypical minstrel pose — and as soon as they do, he proves his point: even though you feel guilty, you laugh.There are darkly funny and tart scenarios, as when Emily Pihlaja plays a clueless Southern belle while her Mammy (Mr. Crozier) seethes in the background. Dance sequences are especially potent when performed only to the accompaniment of tambourines, giving Mr. Byrd’s footwork a strident, grim pulse.But this overlong production, presented in a vignette form, meanders in a way that overwhelms the viewer — not in terms of subject matter, but in its repetitiveness. And the jokes in this show seem less shocking than stale.The pacing crumbles in the second half, and when two dancers read transcripts from the cases of Mr. Martin and Mr. Brown, it turns into a high school play. By overstaying its welcome “The Minstrel Show Revisited” dilutes Mr. Byrd’s message.Advertisement