AdvertisementSupported byDance ReviewBy Roslyn SulcasPARIS — Four musicians, dressed in black, walk on to the stage and sit with their instruments. Four female dancers, dressed in black, walk on to the stage and stand at the periphery in a rough semi-circle. The dancers look at each other, look at the musicians. Nothing happens. Then the dancers suddenly whip into quick turns toward the center of the stage, stand in a close line, and do little slinky, side-to-side walks. The music starts — Bartok’s String Quartet No. 4 — and they flop unceremoniously to the floor, legs splayed gracelessly, white underwear revealed.Almost any contemporary dance fan could tell you from these first moments that the choreographer of “Quartet No. 4” is Anne Teresa De Keersmaeker, who burst on to the dance scene in the early 1980s with her distinctive combination of formal rigor and idiosyncratic gesture, sexualized yet powerful women and love for a tricky musical score.But few contemporary dance fans would have guessed, back then, that almost 30 years after its 1986 premiere, “Quartet No. 4” would be danced by the Paris Opera Ballet in a full program of early works by Ms. De Keersmaeker. It’s a measure of how the boundaries between ballet and contemporary dance have eroded — and how ballet companies have become the repositories of 20th-century contemporary dance history — that this seems perfectly normal today.At least, normal for the Paris Opera Ballet. Under the 19-year directorship of Brigitte Lefèvre, who retired last year and was succeeded by Benjamin Millepied, the company acquired a remarkable repertory of work by contemporary dance choreographers — Ms. De Keersmaeker, Sasha Waltz, Jérôme Bel, Pina Bausch and Trisha Brown among them. And it’s notable that the dancers show a facility, freedom and joy in performance of Ms. De Keersmaeker’s work that is frequently absent in the company’s classical repertory.The movement vocabulary of “Quartet No. 4” (originally part of a longer evening, “Bartok/Annotations”) is simple, with elaborations on walking and turning movements that incorporate everyday motion (smoothing hair, opening out the hands, a quick unpolished handstand) and folk dance-like skipping, hopping and heel-clicking jumps.The invigorating energy of the piece is palpable, grounded, earthy. The smoothly rounded arms and long lines of ballet are gone, replaced by a looseness and the directness of simply moving to music. But the movement, tightly bound to Bartok’s rhythmically complex, buzzing score, is also highly rigorous and controlled; the women — Laura Bachman, Juliette Hilaire, Sae Eun Park and Charlotte Ranson, all excellent — change with lightning speed from slow to fast, from stylized femininity to aggressive attack, from cheeky schoolgirls to confrontational amazons.The effect of Ms. De Keersmaeker’s formal repetition of pattern and gesture is remarkable, appearing simultaneously meaningless — purely choreographic — and also full of narrative implication. The dancers seem both ordinary in their informal complicity (“shall we dance?”), and extraordinary in the precision and timing of the intricate mosaic of directional changes across the stage.The next work, “Grosse Fugue,” set to Beethoven’s quartet of the same name, has a similar setup. Once again the musicans (Christophe Guiot, Cyrille Lacrouts, Éric Lacrouts and Pierre Lenert) enter, followed by dancers; this time seven men and just one woman (Alice Renavand), all in black suits and white shirts. It’s Ms. Renavand who plunges into movement, falling to the floor and rising again, as the music begins, followed by the male ensemble, who move through dizzyingly counterpointed and canonic sequences to exhilarating effect.Here is much of the vocabulary that characterized Ms. De Keersmaeker’s work in the 1990s, when she brought men into her pieces for the first time. The extensive floor work, the constant falling and rebounding, the out-flung arms and exhilarating running, jumping momentum are all here, bound together with remarkable musicianship and craft. There are also slower, more tender moments, most memorably a long line of prone men who execute a dreamlike sequence of rolls along the floor, pulling themselves up on one elbow only to sink again, as if into the music.This dreamlike quality is at the forefront of the final piece on the program, “Transfigured Night” (1995), set to Schoenberg’s late-Romantic score of the same name. The music, full of shimmering, turbulent tonalities and haunting descending-scale melodies, was inspired by Richard Dehmel’s poem about a woman whose lover tenderly accepts that she is pregnant by another man. Ms. De Keersmaeker doesn’t retell this story explicitly. Instead, eight women and six men meet in a misty nighttime forest — the beautiful lighting is by Vinicio Cheli — in a series of fragmented encounters that suggest, but do not impose, narrative.The bare tree trunks and leaf-strewn ground of the décor, by Gilles Allaud and Ms. De Keersmaeker, and the women’s elegant dresses and men’s suits, by Rudy Sabounghi, evoke the world of Bausch, as do some of the insistently repetitive movement motifs.Women repeatedly hurl themselves at the men’s indifferent backs, or are — incredibly — pulled up from the floor into a kneeling position on the men’s shoulders. But Ms. De Keersmaeker keeps the tone abstract, letting the duets — passionate, tender, violent, confrontational — suggest ambiguous emotions and resolutions.The dancers were all remarkable in this piece, but none more so than Marie-Agnès Gillot in a tortured, whiplashing opening solo; a deeply inward Émilie Cozette; the febrile Léonore Baulac; and Karl Paquette. Often a handsome, bland presence, here he was a riveting force. Anne Teresa De Keersmaeker.  Paris Opera Ballet. Palais Garnier. Through Nov. 8. Advertisement