A major museum is scheduled to host a real estate conference addressing questions like “Where is the bleeding edge of neighborhood transformation?” and “What opportunities for value-add exist in the seemingly picked-over areas?”A warehouse installation by a hip young artist featuring bullet-riddled cars provides a backdrop for a real estate party given by developers who want to relabel part of the South Bronx “the piano district.”Art and real estate are two of New York City’s most prominent fields, but the real estate conference, which is scheduled for Nov. 17 at the Brooklyn Museum, and the installation, by Lucien Smith, which was part of a party held just before Halloween, have prompted an outcry among critics. In both instances, they said, it was unseemly for members of the art world to support development efforts that would appear to result in gentrification, particularly when swathes of the city have become unaffordable for many people, including artists.Those objecting to the conference at the Brooklyn Museum, which is sponsored by Halstead Property and a host of other real estate firms, said that they did not think a leading cultural institution should further business practices that they contend prioritize speculation and profit over the stability of neighborhoods.The conference, called the Sixth Annual Brooklyn Real Estate Summit,  will include “over 600 of the top retail, condo, multifamily and office players in the Brooklyn market,” according to its website. Among other things, it is meant to help people “learn how to create value in places like Crown Heights, Williamsburg, Park Slope, Downtown Brooklyn, where it seems values are already maxed out.”Sarah Quinter, a 29-year-old illustrator and multimedia artist who grew up in Jackson Heights, Queens, and lives in Bushwick, Brooklyn, said that hosting the conference was contrary to the museum’s mission statement, which says it “aims to serve its diverse public as a dynamic, innovative and welcoming center for learning through the visual arts.”“The 600+ top real estate owners, developers and investors gathering at the Brooklyn Museum to scheme about how to wring more profit from our neighborhoods are not serving us as Brooklynites,” she wrote in an open letter to the museum. “They are in fact contributing to the epidemic of gentrification that is decimating working-class communities and communities of color in cities across the globe.”Ms. Quinter said that she was working with others, including Imani Henry of the Brooklyn Anti Gentrification Network, to circulate a petition asking museum officials to cancel the event and had begun contacting contributors to an upcoming show at the museum, called Agitprop, asking them to support those efforts.Green Pearl, the company that organized the real estate conference, did not immediately respond to an email asking for a comment on Ms. Quinter’s assertions and for details of the arrangement to rent the museum.A museum spokeswoman said in an email that the institution was not responding to Ms. Quinter’s letter but had issued a statement on the real estate summit.“By renting the museum for this event, we are not expressing opinions regarding the matters discussed in the conference,” the statement read in part. “We have shared the concerns raised by artists and members of the community with the Summit organizers. We look forward to the opportunity for more dialogue.”Some of that dialogue may come in the form of art. Members of a group called the Artist Studio Affordability Project said they were planning an anti-gentrification show to be held outside of the Brooklyn Museum on the day of the real estate conference. Its title, playing on the name of another show, Crossing Brooklyn: Art from Bushwick, Bed-Stuy and Beyond, that was held last year at the museum, will be Double Crossing Brooklyn, organizers said.The party in the Bronx that Mr. Smith took part in, which featured flaming trash barrels and an elaborate chandelier, was held inside an empty warehouse that is to be replaced by what developers have described as “luxury waterfront” housing. His work on display included  a dance performance, oil paintings, video and a sculpture made up of two automobiles that had been used for target practice — meant to comment on the damage that firearms can do, he said. Some people, including Melissa Mark-Viverito, the speaker of the New York City Council, denounced the event as callous but organizers said they thought it was simply misunderstood.Mr. Smith, 26, shrugged off the criticism. “Maybe it is a little insensitive of me and I do understand why certain people are upset,” he said. “But as an artist it’s not my duty to please people.”