LONDON — Natalia Osipova and Sergei Polunin, two of ballet’s biggest stars, will perform together in a program of new work by Russell Maliphant, Sidi Larbi Cherkaoui and Arthur Pita at Sadler’s Wells next year. The theater announced the new partnership at a news conference on Thursday, along with details of its spring-summer 2016 lineup, which includes a program of all-female choreography for English National Ballet; a new piece by Javier de Frutos for the BalletBoyz; a work for dancers and horses by Bartabas; a new piece by Crystal Pite, and a “multi-installation” event by the lighting designers Lucy Carter and Michael Hulls and the composer Nitin Sawhney.Alistair Spalding, the artistic director of Sadler’s Wells, also announced that Anne Teresa De Keersmaeker’s company, Rosas, and the Tanztheater Wuppertal Pina Bausch will become international associate companies. It was the news about Ms. Osipova and Mr. Polunin that generated most excitement, however, particularly when they confirmed — after an intrepid question at the news conference — that they are a couple offstage. The Ukranian-born Mr. Polunin, who trained at the Royal Ballet School from the age of 13 and became the youngest-ever principal dancer at the Royal Ballet at 19, made headlines in 2012 when he abruptly quit the company, a year before Ms. Osipova joined it as a principal. Since then, Mr. Polunin has danced mostly with the Stanislavsky and Nemirovich-Danchenko Moscow Music Theater and the Novosibirsk State Academic Opera and Ballet Theater, and has been little seen in Britain. His solo performance in a video by David LaChapelle has had over 13 million hits to date. True to form, Mr. Polunin offered a spot of controversy at the news conference by suggesting that “big theaters” were unwilling to let him and Ms. Osipova dance together.  “We are fighting them,” he was reported as saying in The Guardian.The program of new pieces, which is to be performed from June 29 to July 2 next year, will feature a duet by Mr. Maliphant for the pair, as well as “a dance prequel” to Tennessee Williams’s “A Streetcar Named Desire,” by Mr. Pita. It is not Ms. Osipova’s first foray into contemporary work; last year she performed all over the world with Ivan Vasiliev in “Solo for Two,” which included new works by both Mr. Cherkaoui and Mr. Pita. With Mr. Polunin as her translator, Ms. Osipova, who has not danced because of injury for the last few months, said that she felt it was important to tackle new styles of dance while she was still young. As well as holding a principal dancer contract with the Royal Ballet, Ms. Osipova is a regular guest artist with American Ballet Theater and at La Scala. On Tuesday, the Bolshoi Ballet announced that she will be a regular guest star over the next season.A version of this article appears in print on 11/06/2015, on page C2 of the NewYork edition with the headline: A Dance Dream Team: Osipova and Polunin.