The Public Theater is adding a musical about a transgender group of friends to its winter schedule, and putting out a direct call for transgender actors to audition. The prestigious Off Broadway nonprofit said Thursday that it would stage a production of “Southern Comfort,” a musicalization of a 2001 documentary of the same name, which tells the story of Robert Eads, who transitioned from female to male, was diagnosed with ovarian cancer, had trouble finding medical treatment and relied on friends for community as he died. The musical, with book and lyrics by Dan Collins and music by Julianne Wick Davis, was staged in 2011 by CAP21 theater company, in 2012 at the National Alliance for Musical Theater festival, and in 2013 by Barrington Stage Company in Massachusetts.As transgender issues have become more prominent in the nation’s political discourse, an increasing number of plays, television shows and films have been tackling related stories. A new play by Taylor Mac, “Hir,” featuring a transgender character, opens at Playwrights Horizons on Sunday; another play dealing with gender identity issues, “Would You Still Love Me If … ,” by John S. Anastasi, closed recently at New World Stages.The Public, in its announcement, was explicit about its casting goals: “The Public Theater is especially interested in meeting with actors and singers who identify as transgender.” The production, which is scheduled to begin performances on Feb. 23, will be directed by Thomas Caruso, who helped conceive of the musical along with Robert DuSold, based on the film by Kate Davis. Annette O’Toole and Jeff McCarthy, who starred in previous productions of the show, are possible participants in the Public production; casting has not yet been announced. The production is being partially financed (“enhanced,” in theater jargon) by a commercial producer — a common practice for musicals staged by nonprofits — but the Public declined to identify the producer.A version of this article appears in print on 11/06/2015, on page C2 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Transgender Cast Call for u2018Southern Comfortu2019.