AdvertisementSupported byAmerican Horror StoryBy E. A. HanksThe Hotel Cortez is pretty sick. There’s the gratuitous depravity, of course, but what I really mean is that a virus is running rampant. The Countess calls it “our precious virus,” a sort of vampirism that, yes, keeps one young and beautiful, but also spreads death and destruction.Look no further than an elementary school.The season opened with Dr. Lowe admonishing a mother for refusing to vaccinate her young son, Max, who had come down with measles. That illness turned into a case of pneumonia bad enough to land Max in the emergency room, his panicked mother faced with a “Do Not Resuscitate” order.After bingeing on blood bags, Alex slips some of her “infected” blood into Max’s I.V. and in short order, vampire Max has his entire elementary school slaughtering and feeding on teachers and administrators, while outside SWAT teams, television crews and hysterical parents congregate.(Of all the show’s groan-inducing visual references, making a kiddie vampire spree resemble the panic outside a school shooting is by far the most deplorable.)Vampirism is not the only virus that “Hotel” has on its mind. Multiple episodes have discussed H.I.V. and AIDS, most notably Episode 2, “Chutes and Ladders,” in which the Countess recalled the decadence of the club scene. “We were all vampires,” she said. “I mourn it still. I think about everything could have been, had they all lived. My friends. Andy.  Keith.  Robert. All that loss.”AIDS was also invoked in this week’s flashback dedicated to the most well-read bartender outside of Eric Stoltz in “Kicking and Screaming.” Denis O’Hare, one of the anthology show’s more underrated and understated company actors, brought something sorely lacking from this season thus far: human emotion.Mr. O’Hare portrays Nick Breyer, a pharmaceutical rep from Topeka, with a bad comb-over and a wife he tolerated because they share the same dress size. He’s an indifferent father and an unhappy man. During a business trip to Los Angeles, and a stay at the Cortez, Breyer lets loose, as only anonymous hotel guests can do, dressing in a white silk slip and fur coat and ordering a bottle of champagne. At last, a recognizable emotion flashed on the screen: joy.“There’s nothing like whispering a secret aloud,” Liz tells us. “If only to yourself.”Five episodes into the season, “Hotel” has delivered the glamour and glitz promised with the announcement that Lady Gaga would be starring. Hard-core fans have thrilled at the over-the-top costuming, the catty lines, the general fabulousness of this season, but there’s been little heart to the many story lines. (And how can there be? We’re never with any single one for long.)This changed when the Countess pressed her hand to Nick Breyer’s heart and told him that while he might look like a man, his blood smelled like that of a woman. (Does this make sense? No. But if you’re looking for logic, this is the wrong show for you.) Here, Mr. O’Hare is the M.V.P. of the American Horror Story company of actors; here, a performance shows feeling without needing to tell the audience what it’s seeing. Mr. O’Hare falls to his knees, bursts into tears and takes Lady Gaga’s hand, “You’re so beautiful; I’m so ugly.”After the requisite makeover montage, Nick Breyer is reborn: “With that white slip and shame-wrapping fur, I christen you Liz Taylor.” The Countess has made another child — though this one remains human.Lady Gaga is the patron saint of the “Born This Way” generation, preaching that whom we love (or love to have sex with, anyway) is not a choice, but an indelible part of the immutable self. Yet the process of metamorphosis, through which we become truer versions of ourselves, means that some choice is involved: we can chose to be who the world wants us to be, or who we already are. As the Countess puts it: “We have two selves, one the world needs us to be, compliant, and the Shadow. Ignore it and life is forever suffering.”This conversation about vampirism, AIDS, sickness and rebirth might be cluttered with mixed metaphors and burdened by so much plot, but it is by far the most interesting thing “Hotel” has going yet.(Unless you count the mystery of Max Greenfield’s druggie Gabriel. Remember him? Was he brutally sexually assaulted in the first episode? Last seen gasping at a hospital after emerging from out of mattress?)Meanwhile, Detective Lowe continues to unravel, especially after the excitement of Mr. March’s festivities on Devil’s Night. We know Lowe is upset because he’s got beard stubble. When Lowe tells a superior that he believes March to be a copycat killer, recreating famous deaths from killers past, he’s fired. “Hotel” has lobbed some remarkably clunky exposition at viewers, but I think my favorite thus far has to be “I probably should never have signed off on that marginal psych evaluation you received five years ago after your breakdown.”Lowe evidently comforts himself by having violent sex with Hypodermic Sally, which he professes to remembers very little of, though Sally is having none of it: “You’re a goddamn liar. You remember everything you did. And it’s gonna happen again. And again, and again. And you can’t stop it. Because it’s our destiny. And you can’t fight destiny.”It seems Sally, who thus far has mostly acted as a tearful witness to everyone else’s drama, knows much more about Detective Lowe than she’s letting on. Could John actually be the Ten Commandments killer? Is that what earned him a place at Mr. March’s dinner party? Or do Sally and John have some sort of shared fate?Conflict is growing: Iris and Donovan have joined with Ramona to claim revenge on the Countess, Alex’s indiscretion with her young patient is sure to displease her new employer, and most worrisome of all, outside the Cortez, a horde of “infected” children have all gone home to their unsuspecting parents. And we’re only just halfway through the season.Advertisement