AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn ShattuckElection Day was Tuesday, you say, viewers? Not at Amazon Video, where you can help decide which pilots to develop without the agony of watching debates. Those who’d rather not exercise their streaming rights can partake of the mayhem known as “Larrymania” or navel gaze with the Norwegian writer Karl Ove Knausgaard. AMAZON PILOTS on Amazon Video. Get out the vote! It’s that time of year when Amazon gives viewers a say about which pilots to develop. (And it’s not mere frivolity: the five-Emmy-winning “Transparent” began this way.) On the ballot:Edge, with Max Martini as a Union soldier turned cowboy vigilante doling out savage justice in the West. (Image: Mr. Martini)Good Girls Revolt, with Genevieve Angelson and Anna Camp as magazine researchers longing for bylines, and Grace Gummer (making like her mama, Meryl Streep) as Nora Ephron.Highston, starring Lewis Pullman (he’s Bill’s son) as a 19-year-old with celebrity friends whom only he can see, and with Sacha Baron Cohen as an executive producer.One Mississippi, which follows the comedian Tig Notaro, who wrote it with Diablo Cody, back home to visit the only person who really got her: her dying mother. Patriot, with Michael Dorman as an undercover intelligence officer trying to keep Iran from going nuclear, who laments his bad luck in hilarious folk songs.Z, subtitled “The Beginning of Everything,” starring Christina Ricci as Zelda Sayre and Gavin Stenhouse as F. Scott Fitzgerald.THE BIG BANG THEORY 8 p.m. Eastern time on CBS. It’s parents’ night: Sheldon tries to keep his emotions bottled up during an interview for “For the Love of Spock,” Adam Nimoy’s documentary about his father. In “Mom,” at 9, Ellen Burstyn does a star turn as the mother who sent Bonnie to foster care as a child and now wants to be back in her life. And in “Elementary,” at 10, John Noble joins the cast as Sherlock’s estranged father, Morland Holmes. (Image: Simon Helberg and Melissa Rauch in “The Big Bang Theory”)BONES 8 p.m. on Fox. Did you hear the one about the sanitation cut-ups — Sal Vulcano and James Murray of “Impractical Jokers” — who found the shredded body of a senator in a street sweeper?GREY’S ANATOMY 8 p.m. on ABC. Or the one about the patient who accidentally sent his sex tape to his church congregation?LO MEJOR DE LARRY 9 p.m. on NBC Universo. The Mexican singer Larry Hernandez found fame crooning about the drug trade in passionate ballads called narcocorridos. So, naturally, he’s been turned into a reality show, “Larrymania.” Now we have five two-hour highlight reels, the first of which visits the Sinaloa town where Mr. Hernandez grew up. No word on whether his recent arrest on charges of kidnapping and assaulting a concert promoter over a money matter will be covered.THE LATE SHOW WITH STEPHEN COLBERT 11:35 p.m. on CBS. Bryan Cranston talks about playing Dalton Trumbo, the blacklisted screenwriter, in a new movie. Karl Ove Knausgaard chats about being honored at the New York Public Library’s Lions Gala. And Shamir performs. (Image: Shamir)Advertisement