Season 2, Episode 1: “Axis Mundi”The first season of “The Leftovers” habitually shifted the narrative ground beneath its viewers’ feet. Sometimes it unexpectedly broke from standard ensemble-drama protocol to devote a full hour to a single character. Sometimes it suddenly chose to spend an entire episode in flashback mode. Often it presented the experiences of Justin Theroux’s Kevin Garvey in a way that confused reality with wild hallucinations. Over and over, this show — about what happens after 2 percent of the world’s population suddenly vanishes on a single day — told its audience to be prepared for the unexpected.In the second season premiere, the narrative ground on “The Leftovers” continued to shift, this time with even greater force. (It also shifted quite literally.) Depending on your perspective, the opening minutes of the premiere — a dialogue-free prologue in which a pregnant woman, possibly from the Paleolithic era, experiences an earthquake, gives birth and then dies, leaving behind an infant who’s found by another primitive woman — were either the boldest thing “The Leftovers” has done so far, or the flat-out craziest. (Personally, I choose option C: bold and crazy.) Whether you were transfixed or momentarily convinced you’d accidentally stumbled on to a deleted scene from “Quest for Fire,” you can’t say the opening sequence had nothing to do with the rest of the episode. That lovely long camera pan — the one that slid across the rocky stream, transitioning from the time of the cave dwellers to present-day Jardin, Tex., where Evie Murphy and her girlfriends frolicked in the same waters — made it clear that there’s a link between what happened in this place centuries ago and what’s going on now. It was also clear that John (Kevin Carroll) and Erika Murphy (Regina King) know more about that link than they are willing to disclose.Yes, the members of the Murphy family — John, Erika and their teenage twins, Evie (Jasmin Savoy Brown) and Michael (Jovan Adepo) — were the focus of this Season 2 premiere. Even though they were introduced to the show for the first time, they immediately established themselves as characters that we should and do care about. That’s partly because of the thoroughly natural performances of all four actors, but also because the writers of this episode (Jacqueline Hoyt and the series co-creator Damon Lindelof) and the director Mimi Leder do such an expert job of drawing us into this family and their town, now renamed Miracle because it’s the only place on Earth where zero departures occurred. The scenes acquainting us with Miracle felt like something out of an old “Twilight Zone” episode. Everything looked so beautiful and perfect, as long as you didn’t notice the massive crack in the street trapped under glass, or the fact that half the town wants to make a buck off their own miraculousness, or the sacrificed goat bleeding out on the floor of the neighborhood diner. To quote an extremely meaningful line from “Bill and Ted’s Excellent Adventure”: “Strange things are afoot at the Circle K.”At the center of some of those strange things is John, a father obsessed with finding the cricket that’s hiding in his house and that, I assume, is named Jiminy since that telltale chirper is obviously a metaphor for John’s nagging conscience. John seems like a good man, but he does some bad things. We saw John, a firefighter, intentionally set ablaze the home of his old friend Isaac. We also heard him tell his next-door neighbor Kevin Garvey that he spent some time in jail for attempted murder. When Kevin asked what happened, John simply said, “I didn’t try hard enough.” I’m no etiquette expert, but I feel like that’s not something one should say when they’re trying to make new neighbors feel welcome.Even John’s decision to invite Kevin, Nora, Jill and baby Lily over for food had a hidden agenda. “You’re going to work on your birthday?” Erika asked when he suggested it. We know John’s a firefighter, but does he have some other job? I am guessing yes, and that it has something to do with controlling the population in Jardin. “We are the 9,261,” Michael said during church service. Perhaps they want to keep it that way.Speaking of church, this “Leftovers” hour was awash in biblical overtones. One could argue that a show about the aftermath of the Rapture has always been intertwined with the spiritual, but in this episode, that relationship to religion was much more overt.During Sunday services, as Michael read from First Thessalonians, a banner hanging behind him featured a quote from Acts 8:38: “And they both went down into the water.” That’s from a section of Acts in which Philip baptizes a eunuch, and, shortly after, is suddenly taken away by “the Spirit of the Lord.” (Sudden Departure, anyone?) The eunuch never sees Philip again, but the Bible says that Philip appears again at Azotus and continues to preach elsewhere. Which raises the question: Are the suddenly departed really gone, or are they just elsewhere. Like maybe in Mexico with Mark Linn-Baker?That particular Acts passage is also significant because of its reference to the healing power of water. There literally is something in the water, and possibly the soil, in Miracle. Actually Jardin — which sounds very close to Jordan, as in the River Jordan — might be a more appropriate name for the town after all. If this place doesn’t allow creatures to be born again, why else did Erika dig up what was, presumably at one time, a dead bird in a shoebox and discover it could fly again? Before the Rev. Massey cut him off, why did Matt Jamison seem eager to explain that his long-paralyzed wife is suddenly showing signs of recovery?If the idea of a place that can potentially repair a person in a wheelchair reminded you of “Lost,” then please, pull up a chair and come sit by me. Mr. Lindelof, who has been shamed almost as harshly as Cersei in the “Game of Thrones” finale for ending that marooned-on-an-island mystery in a way that many found unsatisfying, may not like this, but I’m going to say it anyway: a lot of things in this episode reminded me of “Lost.” In addition to the motif of a “sacred, healing powers of a mysterious place,” there were numerous nods to Australia, a significant continent in “Lost” lore. (Dr. Goodhart, the man collecting water in the beginning of this episode, had an Australian accent, and the bearded homeless guy who lives atop Miracle tower asked Michael to mail a letter to a Mr. David Burton in Sydney. Perhaps relevant, perhaps not: H. David Burton is a former Mormon leader who, early in his career, did missionary work in Australia.) Those with especially sharp “Lost” radar also may have noticed the number 108 framed within the window of an open bus door when the Miracle visitors pulled into town. That number is considered sacred in some religions, and also popped up over and over in “Lost.”So what does it all mean? I don’t know yet, and that’s what makes this moment, with the rest of “The Leftovers” second season still ahead of us, so delicious. We don’t know why Evie and her girlfriends disappeared right after that earthquake, though the fact that they were in the same spot where the cavewoman’s cohorts vanished is meaningful. We also don’t know why all the water in the stream drained away, leaving flopping fish in its wake. We don’t know, but we want to keep watching, because this episode so effectively raised the same question asked by Charlie Pace in the “Lost” pilot: “Guys, where are we?”