AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben RatliffCarla Morrison“Amor Supremo”(Cosmica)Prepare your head for the Mexican singer Carla Morrison’s new album, “Amor Supremo,” because it stays pretty close to one performed tempo (a bit below medium) and one portrayed state of consciousness (lucid dreaming). It’s an hour of reverbed-out ballads about intemperate love and the void.Her music hasn’t always been this single-minded. Ms. Morrison’s last record, “Déjenme Llorar,” from 2012 — which won Latin Grammy Awards for both alternative album and alternative song — had some immediacy. Its sound and arrangements were more direct, varied and acoustic; it transmitted despair, but could do it in a sweet, genial, small-scale way. Here, with the producer Alejandro Jimenez, she’s gone oceanic.The record is elegant and gauzy, done mostly with live drums and synthesizer, and dabs of guitar, piano and strings. An English-language point of comparison might be the last few records by Lana Del Rey, in the way both singers make words and phrases stretch and swoop, and how they perform romantic sadness as ritual. But Ms. Morrison’s voice is lighter and stronger, far more subtle, and she’s not playing with her public image nearly as much. These are reports from the inside of the head, love songs about the contents of one soul’s being decanted into another.Her narrators absorb love in every way possible, through ears and mouth and skin and mind. There are rarely other people mentioned in these songs. “You are my secret,” she sings in “Mi Secreto.” “I tell nobody about you.” And in “Un Beso”: “I want to touch you and follow you everywhere.” Repeatedly, she uses metaphors to describe a kind of love in which there is no separation, no independent will. “You were living in me,” she sings at one point, “and I was so, so happy.”There are songs of satisfaction and remorse, of love’s being born and dying, and they’re pretty much the same. The floating feeling pervading the music — the tolling chords, the long decays — suggests an absence of beginnings and ends. “It’s an addiction,” she sings about her love in “Mi Secreto,” in yet another metaphor. “It’s a process.”Advertisement