AdvertisementSupported byBy Nate ChinenLionel Loueke“Gaïa”(Blue Note)The centerpiece of the guitarist Lionel Loueke’s new album, “Gaïa,” is a captivating and deceptively simple ballad called “Forgiveness.” Built around a mere wisp of melody — seven notes drifting down a major scale, with a couple of adjustments — the song radiates springlike serenity with an effortless, gliding groove, up until the moment when the band drops out, and Mr. Loueke sets up a West African highlife beat for a punchy coda.It’s all brilliantly in character for Mr. Loueke, who hails from Benin and has spent the last decade or so finding mainstream avenues for his sinuous, effervescent style. His previous album on Blue Note, “Heritage,” from 2012, found him hardening his attack, with partners like the keyboardist Robert Glasper. “Gaïa” preserves that urgency while returning Mr. Loueke to the helm of a trio with Massimo Biolcati on bass and Ferenc Nemeth on drums.Subtlety has always been a hallmark of this band, and, in some respects, “Gaïa” — full of tripwire rhythmic intricacies that register as casual, even natural — underscores that strength. But the album, recorded live in the studio, also captures a sense of thrilling unrestraint, a willingness to push intuition past the point of comfort. Produced by Don Was, it has the rough spark of a bootleg, with better sound.It also has a conceptual framework, involving humankind’s poor stewardship of the environment. You can invest as much or as little into this as you like; Mr. Loueke’s compositions don’t belabor the point.His trio is adept at rounding corners and shifting gears, as it does on a brooding Afro-funk tune called “Sleepless Night.” Mr. Biolcati plays electric bass as well as acoustic on the album, and Mr. Loueke employs the odd delay or chorus effect (but none of his signature vocal percussion).A couple of tracks, like “Procession,” prowl toward post-Hendrix territory, which is nothing new. But others, like “Aziza Dance,” attest to a searching originality: No other band has quite this sound, and it hasn’t stopped evolving.videoAdvertisement