By JAMES R. OESTREICHNOV. 4, 2015
Should it matter if a Bach “Passion” is performed out of season? Handel’s “Messiah,” after all, which was also written for Eastertide, is performed far more often around Christmas.But at least the first part of “Messiah,” telling of Jesus’ birth, suits that season well. The performance of Bach’s “St. John Passion” at Alice Tully Hall on Tuesday, on the other hand, with Thomas Crawford conducting the American Classical Orchestra and Chorus, seemed a bit out of joint.Not that the performance was in any way inadequate, though it didn’t help that the intimate production was oddly conceived as a sort of star vehicle for the tenor Rufus Müller. Physically and spiritually, he was at the center, and the figure of Jesus, sung by Paul Max Tipton, barely stood out from the crowd of other soloists.Mr. Müller is, no question, one of the finest Evangelists singing today, but it is worth recalling that Bach’s Evangelists, Matthew and John, however hard-worked, are merely storytellers, relating a drama of which Jesus is at the heart. Perspectives may have become skewed in recent years, partly by staged versions of the works.In Jonathan Miller’s subtle and moving staging of the “St. Matthew Passion,” Mr. Müller himself sang the Evangelist, and Mark Padmore upped the ante last year in the showier Peter Sellars production of that work with the Berlin Philharmonic, singing gorgeously but acting as a sort of voodoo doll, grotesquely absorbing the blows Jesus receives in the text.In any case, Mr. Müller sang John beautifully here, as usual, and the other soloists were fine, especially Teresa Wakim, soprano; Daniel Bubeck, countertenor; Dann Coakwell, tenor; and Jesse Blumberg, baritone. The orchestra and chorus were strong, and Mr. Crawford moved things along at a crisp pace.A version of this review appears in print on November 5, 2015, on Page C2 of the New York edition with the headline: An Intimate, Unseasonal ‘Passion’.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.