By SIOBHAN BURKENOV. 4, 2015
Garth Fagan knows that mourning doesn’t need to be sorrowful. That attitude guides his latest dance, an ode to the prolific choreographer, performer, painter, director and designer — and Mr. Fagan’s friend — Geoffrey Holder, who died last year.Titled “Geoffrey Holder Life Fete … Bacchanal,” the work was one of six presented on Tuesday at the Joyce Theater, where Garth Fagan Dance is celebrating its 45th anniversary. Billed as a world premiere, the tribute has evolved since its more informal staging at Lincoln Center Out of Doors in August, with new lighting and an edited voice-over, drawn from a commemorative essay by Mr. Holder’s son, Leo. But its essence remains the same: to honor Mr. Holder with something more festive than somber. In Trinidad, where Mr. Holder was born, “Bacchanal” describes a good party, and for him it also describes Mr. Holder’s life.Robert Greenidge’s cheerful steel-pan score plays at full volume at the beginning and end, when bands of women and men cross the stage and intermingle, tossing up their arms and swinging their hips. The music lowers in the middle for a duet between Norwood Pennewell and Adriene Barber, stand-ins for Mr. Holder and his companion in art and life, the great dancer Carmen de Lavallade, who was in the audience. The voice-over, accompanying the duo, recalls Mr. Holder’s elegant gestures in his hospital bed. And while the recording sounds too stilted and grainy, its message comes through: “He died while he was fully alive.”That was just a sliver of the program, which at over two hours with two intermissions could have used some editing. But Mr. Fagan is not one to deprive his loyal audience. He’s also a creature of habit and started as he usually does, with “Prelude: Discipline Is Freedom,” an early-’80s rundown of his curvilinear technique. The leaps, isolations and balances here reappeared in “Passion Distanced” (1987), a steamy excerpt from “Griot New York” (1991) and “Thanks Forty (Five),” created in 2010 and revised this year.Another link among these pieces is the seasoned dancing of Mr. Pennewell, a company member since 1978 who, at 56, hasn’t reduced his workload. He also choreographed the night’s second premiere, “So You See.” The jazz-driven work, to music by Marc Cary and Vijay Iyer, highlights the company’s women, especially the serpentine grace of Sade Bully. The company has some phenomenal men, too. Should Mr. Pennewell want to pass down his roles, there are plenty of candidates.A dance review on Thursday about a performance by Garth Fagan Dance at the Joyce Theater, which included the work “Geoffrey Holder Life Fete Bacchanal,” a tribute to a friend of Mr. Fagan’s who died last year, misidentified Mr. Fagan’s birthplace. He was born in Jamaica, not Trinidad. (Mr. Holder was born in Trinidad.)Garth Fagan Dance continues performances through Sunday at the Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, Manhattan; 212-242-0800, joyce­.org.A version of this review appears in print on November 5, 2015, on Page C5 of the New York edition with the headline: A Festive Tribute, Sorrow-Free.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.