AdvertisementSupported byBy Corinna da Fonseca-WollheimEach year Carnegie Hall invites artists to curate concert series through its Perspectives series. Evgeny Kissin is using his to let New Yorkers see double.On Tuesday evening, this star pianist presented an uncommonly introspective solo recital built around Beethoven’s “Appassionata” Sonata and selections of Spanish music. On Friday he will repeat the program.Mr. Kissin is the first pianist at Carnegie since Vladimir Horowitz in 1979 to double up like this on a solo recital, and his ability to draw big crowds, with additional seats set up behind him onstage, proves the depth of the public’s craving for his blend of technical mastery and eloquent artistry.Still, a more imaginative take on his Perspectives mission might have offered a true shift in vantage points from one performance to the next. The Beethoven would have to stay — Mr. Kissin’s performance was breathtaking in its command of restraint and release — but he might have framed it with different works at the second concert. Or he could have repeated the program on a different piano, allowing listeners a rare chance to compare the much-debated characters of particular makes.On Tuesday Mr. Kissin opened with a poised performance of Mozart’s Piano Sonata in C (K. 330). His sound was limpid in the first movement’s genial exposition, growing a shade more diffuse in the development of the theme.There was a disciplined quality to his playing here that often bore fruit, to exhilarating effect, late in a movement. In Mozart’s Andante, it was a stuttering motif in the left hand that turned unexpectedly eloquent at the very end. In the “Appassionata,” Mr. Kissin patiently built up the tension across the full length of the sonata. The flare and falter of the opening Allegro felt both nervous and purposeful, containing the seeds of the stormy and brilliant music of the last movement, in which Mr. Kissin finally uncovered the full magnitude of his powerful, richly padded sound.Brahms described his Three Intermezzos (Op. 117) as “lullabies to my sorrows.” Mr. Kissin played them with deep empathy, allowing the notes of the first to cling to one another in a show of quiet, poignant reluctance. In “Granada,” from Albéniz’s “Suite Española,” Mr. Kissin echoed some of the same melancholy but transposed it into a warmer, more sensual sound world. Three other city portraits by Albéniz and the dazzling “Viva Navarra!” by Larregla followed, showcases for Mr. Kissin’s refined play of colors.Mr. Kissin will repeat the program on Friday at Carnegie Hall; 212-247-7800, carnegiehall­.org.Advertisement