This month may be your last chance to see Eero Saarinen’s T.W.A. Flight Center at Kennedy Airport in its current form before the building is redesigned as part of a hotel.The curvilinear terminal will be accessible on Oct. 18 from 11 a.m. to 3 p.m. during this year’s Open House New York festival — a rare opportunity to step inside this landmark since it was largely closed off to the public 14 years ago.Opened in 1962 at what would later be named John F. Kennedy International Airport, the structure heralded the Jet Age in New York City and is seen by many as a paragon of modern design. “It’s like walking inside of a huge sculpture. Its lines are flowing and converging, with these fallopian tubes that go off into infinity to the boarding gates,” said Alastair Gordon, author of “Naked Airport: A Cultural History of the World’s Most Revolutionary Structure.”“I’m not sure anything like it could be done today,” Mr. Gordon added, “I’m so pleased they didn’t knock that down, because it’s really an important building for the history of architecture.”A marvel when it was built, it eventually became unusable as the Boeing 707s it was designed to accommodate were replaced by larger airplanes. The design elements that put it in the vanguard of modern design also prevented it from being repurposed as a modern terminal. In 2001, after T.W.A. went out of business, the building largely sat empty.Recently, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo and the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey’s Board of Commissioners approved a 75-year lease to remake the T.W.A. Flight Center into a hotel, built by MCR Development and designed by Lubrano Ciavarra Architects in collaboration with Beyer Blinder Belle Architects and Planners. Construction on the hotel is scheduled to begin next year, with an opening targeted for 2018.The Open House New York festival is a weekend-long event offering tours and access to architecturally significant sites across New York City. A full schedule of events will be released on the organization’s website ohny.org on Oct. 6.A version of this article appears in print on 10/05/2015, on page C3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: A Rare Chance to Tour T.W.A. Flight Center.