By CORINNA da FONSECA-WOLLHEIMNOV. 4, 2015
In 1826, Beethoven sent the score of a new string quartet to his publisher with a flippant annotation: “Patched together from various bits filched here and there.” This work, the sprawling Opus 131, would come to be considered one of his boldest contributions to chamber music.It was perhaps only a matter of time until it, too, would be filched by others. Three years ago the composer John Adams worked fragments from it into “Absolute Jest,” a churning concerto for string quartet and orchestra. On Thursday at Zankel Hall, the St. Lawrence String Quartet included Beethoven’s Opus 131 in a high-energy performance alongside music by Haydn and a new string quartet by Mr. Adams that once again pilfers from Beethoven.For his Second Quartet, Mr. Adams tweezered out tiny snippets from Beethoven’s “Diabelli” Variations and his Piano Sonata in A flat (Op. 110). He then subjected them to intricate processes of repetition and harmonic alienation within a hard-driving, sometimes frantic score, which the St. Lawrence players performed with breathless intensity.But where “Absolute Jest” sails on a winning blend of irony and chutzpah, the Second Quartet, for all its kinetic virtuosity, feels barren. The flurry of Beethoven confetti never quite manages to obscure the dearth of ideas and emotional substance. If Mr. Adams’s intent was to remind us of the distance between Beethoven’s world and ours, and of the waning totemic power of his music in an age of mass reproduction and sound bites, he was depressingly successful.The St. Lawrence Quartet specializes in contemporary music, and it was interesting to hear its members apply their impressive rhythmic coordination and expansive color palette to standard repertory. In Haydn’s String Quartet in F Minor (Op. 20), their phrasing felt choppy. In the Menuetto, the group took such liberties with the tempo that the music shied and bolted along like a recalcitrant pony. But the Beethoven, with its idiosyncratic sequence of seven irregularly shaped movements, became a willing vehicle for the ensemble’s dynamic and flexible playing.An earlier version of the capsule summary with this review misspelled a composer’s surname. As the review correctly notes, he was Haydn, not Hayden.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.