By NINA SIEGALNOV. 4, 2015
Amsterdam — Artworks from the 1960s European avant-garde movement known as Zero led a sale of postwar and contemporary art at Christie’s auction house here on Tuesday night, confirming a growing interest in the anti-Expressionist works by artists who rejected color in painting.The top sellers of the 62 lots offered in the sale were pieces by the German founders of the Zero movement, Otto Piene, Heinz Mack and Günther Uecker, as well as by Jan Schoonhoven, leader of the Dutch counterpart movement, Nul. In total, the sale earned €6.23 million, or $6.83 million, for the auction house — significantly above the presale high estimate of €4.8 million. Ninety-five percent of the items sold, with 65 percent surpassing their high estimates.The highest price achieved at the sale was for Schoonhoven’s all-white 1969 relief “R69-32,” which sold for €474,000, including the seller’s premium. At least four bidders on telephones and in the room drove the hammer price up to €380,000, well above Christie’s €200,000-to-€300,000 presale estimate. Next was Mack’s 1959 “Dynamische Form, Schwarz,” a canvas covered with black oil and resin, which sold for €350,000, nearly doubling its estimate of €120,000 to €180,000.“We sold all the Zero pieces, most of them at or above the high estimate,” said Peter van de Graaf, head of the postwar and contemporary art department at Christie’s in Amsterdam. “This market is very much alive and there’s broad interest.”AdvertisementTwo of the three lots that failed to sell were by Karel Appel, leader of CoBrA, the  European postwar movement that employed rich colors and primitive forms. Mr. van de Graaf said Appel works are usually among the most sought-after at the Amsterdam auctions, which precede the blockbuster sales in New York and London beginning next week.“CoBrA is traditionally our core business,” Mr. van der Graaf said. But he added “that in this season the focus is on Zero.”Interest in Zero art has certainly been bolstered by the Guggenheim’s exhibition in New York, “ZERO: Countdown to Tomorrow, 1950s–60s” the first large-scale survey of the movement, which was jointly curated with the Zero Foundation in Germany and the Stedelijk Museum in Amsterdam, where it continues until Sunday. Those shows have attracted more buyers, Mr. van der Graaf said, and as a result Christie’s has focused more attention on securing artworks from the movement for sales, in Amsterdam as well as in New York and London.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The results on Tuesday night bear that out. “You see that there’s more interest from further than just Germany, Belgium and Holland,” he said. “We had a lot of interest from Italy this season, and also active bidding from American institutions and private buyers in the U.S. That proves that this is still growing. It feels like a healthy and very stable market.”AdvertisementPaul van Rosmalen, gallery director of Borzo Modern and Contemporary Art in Amsterdam, the chief European dealer of Schoonhoven’s work, said he was impressed that the market for Zero and Nul works was still strong, maybe stronger than last year.“I wouldn’t have been surprised if the prices would have calmed down a little bit because of lots of uncertainties in the political situation in the world and the financial markets right now,” he said. “But they didn’t.”As further evidence of interest in Zero art, at Frieze Masters in London last month, at least a half dozen works by Uecker were on offer in several gallery booths, including the Milan-based Cardi Gallery, which, according to artnet News, sold his “Weibe Spirale” for  €2 million.The Dominique Lévy gallery, which is based in New York and London and represents Uecker, had two of his works on offer at Frieze Masters as part of an exhibition of about 20 works by Zero and artists from the postwar Japanese Gutai group. The gallery declined to discuss sales results from Frieze, but Lock Kresler, senior director of Europe for Dominique Lévy in London, said, “It’s not unheard of to sell works in that range privately.” Mr. Kresler confirmed that the gallery sold a large installation of eight white paintings by Uecker at Art Basel  in June 2014 for $6.8 million.“With the growing popularity of Zero, it’s reached beyond just these smaller auction sale sites like Amsterdam,” Mr. Kresler said.A version of this article appears in print on November 5, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.