AdvertisementSupported bySpotlightBy Stephen HeymanThe Paris Review once described Roberto Calasso, 74, as a “literary institution of one.” The author of more than 12 books on everything from Kafka to Indian mythology, he’s also a translator, a rare book collector, and the majority owner and longtime publisher of Adelphi Edizioni, among Italy’s most esteemed, and unpredictable, publishing houses. Adelphi specializes in what others overlook, bringing together underappreciated literary titans like Robert Walser alongside fantasy novels, Tibetan religious texts and popular books on animal behavior. How a publishing house can unite such disparate things, and not go bankrupt, is the subject of Mr. Calasso’s new memoir, “The Art of the Publisher,” which comes out this week in Britain and the United States. By phone from Milan, Mr. Calasso said that Adelphi’s interests have long stumped its critics. “At the beginning,” he said, “we were considered rather eccentric and aristocratic. Then, when we started to have remarkable commercial successes, we were accused of being too populist. That was curious because we were publishing exactly the same books.”Q. Where does the idea of publishing as an art form come from?A. It starts with the greatest of publishers and printers, Aldus Manutius, who lived in the Renaissance. He was the first one who considered how books should be presented. He invented the form of the paperback. He called it libelli portatiles, a portable book. In the 20th century, the best example may be Kurt Wolff. He’s famous now because he was the first publisher of Kafka. But he published totally unknown writers who were very different from each other but who belonged, in some way, to the same literary landscape.Q. Starting in the 1970s, Adelphi championed a lot of Mitteleuropean authors like Joseph Roth and Arthur Schnitzler. Is it surprising to see how they have infiltrated popular culture?A. We had no idea these people would become so popular. At the time some were not even in print in Germany. The reason why we published them was not about a kind of geographical inclination. You cannot do without Vienna in a way. From Joseph Roth to Wittgenstein from Adolf Loos to Schiele, they are all essential figures of the 20th century. I remember, when I myself was translating Karl Kraus’s aphorisms, I met Erich Linder, who was maybe the greatest literary agent of those years. He told me, “Ya, that’s good that you’re doing Kraus. You’ll sell 20 copies.” By now Kraus is near his 20th printing. So a lot has changed.You write darkly about the implications of mass digitization programs like Google Books. You say that this kind of technology blurs the distinction between information and knowledge.A. Yes, and that is a problem with our entire world, not just the publishing industry. The word “information” suffers from a kind of verbal inflation, which has confused the minds of lots of people. And that is really worrying. Not the simple fact of digitization, which I’m not scared of, but that in the mind of some people, these two terms conflate. But they are opposites, sometimes.Q. Do you worry that Adelphi won’t find a new generation of Italian readers?A. One is never quite sure about that. Last year, we published “Seven Brief Lessons on Physics,” a book by a brilliant Italian physicist, Carlo Rovelli, which now has sold 300,000 copies. That is astonishing not only in Italy but anywhere. It’s a book by an author who is unknown to the general public, on physics which is not the easiest subject, and it obviously reached a huge public by only its pure force. So that is a very good sign.Q. Do you think publishers who follow your example are guaranteed some measure of commercial success?A. There are no guarantees at all. You can do very good things and go bankrupt. And you can do the same things or similar things and have success. One of the fascinating things about publishing is the risk is immensely high and you’re never sure of anything. When you meet someone who tells you with total certainty that something will be a great success or a great failure, he’s simply wrong. Stephen HeymanAdvertisement