By ROSLYN SULCASNOV. 4, 2015
PARIS — The encounter between the prophet Moses and his brother Aron takes place in a whited-out landscape that transforms human figures into ghosts. Black liquid pours like abundant blood or oil on the singers, and becomes a lake in which they are baptized and drowned. The golden calf is a one-and-a-half-ton Charolais bull. And God? As Moses sings in the opening scene, he is “unique, eternal, omnipresent, invisible, unrepresentable.”That’s the paradox of Arnold Schönberg’s rarely staged landmark opera “Moses und Aron,” which last month opened the Paris Opera’s 2015-16 season — and marked the start of Stéphane Lissner’s tenure as its director — in a visually dazzling, thrillingly radical production by the avant-garde Italian director Romeo Castellucci.If God is unrepresentable, as Schönberg and Moses have it, how to stage this opera, which is essentially a long argument between Moses and Aron about the clash between the purity of an idea — in this case, the revelation of a single God — and its corruption when it is put into words and images?Mr. Castellucci illustrates that paradox through a slow evolution from the formlessness of his bleached opening scenes, in which the white-robed chorus appears like part of a mist, to the superbly dramatic images that begin to emerge at the end of Act I and that permeate Act II. By the end of the opera — Schönberg planned a third act, but never wrote it — we are returned to the nothingness in which Moses makes his despairing final statement, “Oh word, word that I lack!”AdvertisementThe production, and the invitation to Mr. Castellucci, a famously provocative figure in the theater world, is a bold opening gambit for Mr. Lissner. Even dedicated opera buffs are unlikely to have seen many (or any) productions of “Moses und Aron,” which was originally written by Schönberg as an oratorio in the early 1920s and then transformed into an opera from 1930 to 1932. (Born Jewish in 1874 in Vienna, Schönberg converted to Protestantism at 18, but reclaimed his Jewish identity after confronting Nazi anti-Semitism. It seems likely that the composition of “Moses” was part of a personal confrontation with religious thought.)AdvertisementThere are several reasons for opera directors to steer clear of “Moses und Aron.” It was written using the 12-tone technique that Schönberg invented, together with the demanding form of speaking and singing that he called Sprechtstimme. The huge chorus (117 people, including 30 children, in this production) must whisper and shout, sing and speak. The effect is complex, dissonant and powerful, but without obvious melodic allure.The score’s complexity means extensive rehearsal time for the chorus. The Paris Opera’s music director, Philippe Jordan, wrote in a program essay that it took a year of work. The results — from Thomas Johannes Mayer as Moses and John Graham-Hall as Aron to the soloists and chorus — are remarkable.Perhaps most difficult for a director is the opera’s subject: a philosophical meditation upon the nature of God and a dialectical argument between Moses, who is inarticulate and mystical, and Aron, who is his mouthpiece and who is willing to offer the consolations of myth and ritual to the uncomprehending Israelites.But Mr. Castellucci, who has directed Wagner’s “Parsifal” and Berlioz’s “Orphée et Eurydice” at La Monnaie in Brussels in recent years, is above all a serious showman. Which is to say that he is both radical in vision and brilliantly seductive, able to reel in an audience with sure intent.This “Moses” starts slowly, almost sleepily, with an old-fashioned double tape reel spooling into the hands of Moses  as the wonderfully atmospheric opening chords and choral voices begin. The first act, in which the prophet tries to explain the vision of God to Aron  and enjoins him to convince the Israelites to abandon idolatry and follow him to the Promised Land, mostly takes place behind a white scrim, in a bleached landscape like a Doug Wheeler painting. The sound is primary, the visual almost inexistent.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But as Aron convinces the people to follow Moses by performing three miracles, Mr. Castellucci begins to layer the imagery, replacing the formless with form as Aron replaces the idealized, mystical oneness of Moses’s vision with representations of God’s power.Words begin to flash upon the scrim, sometimes seeming random, sometimes thematically connected (when Aron reveals the serpent, names of snakes scroll by; Moses’s leprous hand evokes names of diseases). The water of the Nile, shown in a long glass tube, appears to turn into blood, the stage is momentarily bathed in vivid red and blue, and an aperture opens at the back of the stage revealing naked, writhing bodies.In Act II, the images are even more astounding as the Israelites, who have escaped their Egyptian captors but wait in limbo in the desert, demand a God they can worship. Aron brings them the golden calf, which Mr. Castellucci depicts as a live (golden) bull that advances  down the stage and — like everyone else there — is eventually doused in black liquid. (The bull remained unperturbed. The French daily Le Monde reported that for six months, Schönberg’s music had been played for two hours daily in the bull’s stall so he would become accustomed to the sound.)An orgy and virgin sacrifices are enacted with stylized violence, given form in dances of knotty intertwining. (Cindy van Acker’s choreography is discreetly excellent.) Moses descends from the mountain, breaks the tablets and pursues his final argument with Aron. A black curtain falls, leaving us with Moses and his last desperate words.AdvertisementThe spectacle — in all senses — is over. But it remains unforgettable. You could quibble with specific ideas in Mr. Castellucci’s work, but the sweep and scale of his vision in this “Moses” is a path to Schönberg’s unforgiving, glorious opera.A version of this article appears in print on November 5, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.