By DANIEL McDERMONNOV. 4, 2015
It has been a banner year for the international art auction houses. Last November, the big fall auctions in New York saw sales at Christie’s and Sotheby’s top $2 billion in two weeks. In May, Christie’s sold $1 billion worth of art in just three days. Included in that total was a 1955 Picasso, “Les Femmes d’Alger (Version ‘O’),” which went for $179.4 million with fees — a record for any artwork at auction.So expectations are high going into this auction season in New York, which starts Wednesday night at Sotheby’s. Hundreds of Impressionist, Modern and contemporary artworks will be up for bid at Christie’s, Sotheby’s and Phillips, and about $2 billion worth of art could change hands, although some analysts have suggested that the market is overheated.Here’s what you need to know:Total sales in 2014 at Christie’s ($7.7 billion) outpaced Sotheby’s ($6 billion), and the two battle year-round for high-profile consignments of art, the best of which is sold during two weeks of auctions held in New York in May and November. (Both houses have major auctions in London and locations around the world.) A third house, Phillips, specializes in contemporary art, but at a smaller scale.In high-profile auctions, the houses frequently offer guarantees, promising the seller a certain price no matter where the bidding ends. Imagine a middling Picasso, guaranteed for $5 million. If bidding falls short of the guarantee at $4 million, the auction house pays the seller the agreed amount, and absorbs the $1 million loss. But the houses regularly reduce their own risk by bringing in a third-party guarantor, who agrees to buy a work at a certain price. Further complicating matters, these guarantors, whose identities are not known to other bidders, may also bid during the auction itself, creating a potential conflict, according to some observers.AdvertisementAuction houses go to great lengths to win over potential sellers, creating mock catalogs, pitching hypothetical advertising campaigns and promising to transport the work around the world for potential buyers to see it in person. For top-tier lots, which might draw more attention to an auction, the houses sometimes volunteer to forgo their own normal sources of profit, the seller’s commission and the buyer’s premium.AdvertisementIn the popular imagination, the auction room is where superrich buyers bump elbows as they raise bidding paddles; but most of the top lots are sold to people who are not in the room, bidding by telephone or through a representative like a dealer.Ten years ago, a consignor representing a Japanese corporate art collection decided which auction house to use through a game of rock, paper, scissors.For a more detailed look at the how these auctions are put together, see this article by Judith H. Dobrzynski.Here are the sales we’ll be watching closely. (One note: Estimates, unlike final prices, do not include buyer’s fees.)Sotheby’s gets things going with its initial offering of works from the collection of A. Alfred Taubman, a former Sotheby’s chairman and collector who died in April. This sale includes works by a host of famous names — Míro, Rothko and van Gogh among them. But three works on Wednesday’s list share the house’s highest estimate for the night, at $25 million to $35 million: Amedeo Modigliani’s “Portrait de Paulette Jourdain” (circa 1919); Pablo Picasso’s “Femme Assise sur une Chaise” (1938); and Willem de Kooning’s “Untitled XXI” (1976). The auction is the first in a series from Mr. Taubman’s estate, and is unusual in that Sotheby’s has guaranteed the Taubman family a minimum price of $500 million for the entire collection.Sotheby’s continues with a sale of 47 Impressionist and Modern works, including works by Kandinsky, Magritte and Cézanne. But the night’s likely top sellers are an 1889 van Gogh landscape, “Paysage Sous un Ciel Mouvementé,” estimated at $50 million to $70 million; or another Picasso, “La Gommeuse” (1901), a two-sided canvas that was bought at a London auction in 1984 by William I. Koch for 1.4 million pounds (roughly $6 million today). Its low estimate is $60 million.The evening sale at Phillips will include a few 20th-century works dating to the 1920s and ’30s, but the house’s focus is on contemporary art, including several works from the last five years. The highest estimate is for a 1977 de Kooning canvas, “Untitled XXVIII,” at $10 million to $15 million.As it did in May, Christie’s will concentrate its auction sales in a single week, opening with a thematic sale called “The Artist’s Muse.” The standout lot is expected to be Modigliani’s 1917 work “Nu Couché (Reclining Nude),” with an estimate topping $100 million. The house estimates at least seven other works at prices above $20 million.AdvertisementChristie’s postwar and contemporary sale may not have a work with a nine-figure estimate, but it does include more than 70 lots. Two notable works include a 1997 bronze by Louise Bourgeois, “Spider,” estimated at $25 million to $35 million, and a 1962 Warhol silk-screen, “Four Marilyns,” estimated at about $40 million.There are 57 lots on offer at Sotheby’s contemporary evening sale, including Jackson Pollock’s “Number 17, 1949,” estimated at $20 million to $30 million, and Cy Twombly’s 1968 “Untitled (New York City),” with an estimate around $60 million.New York’s fall auctions wind up on a (relatively) quieter note with Christie’s Impressionist and Modern evening sale, including 62 lots, among them Paul Cézanne’s “Pommes sur un linge” (circa 1885) and a Henry Moore sculpture, “Two Piece Reclining Figure: Points” (conceived in 1969-70 and cast before 1973), both estimated at $7 million to $10 million.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.