
The Knick By                     
 MIKE HALE
 
NOV. 6, 2015
Opal Edwards was up and Cornelia Showalter was down in this week’s episode of “The Knick,” in which Zaraah Abrahams, as Opal, Algernon Edwards’s heretofore secret wife, is quickly establishing herself as one of the show’s strongest characters.Cornelia Robertson Showalter was shown in three different scenes sitting at the end of a table, each time in agony. She was bored and distracted during a meeting of society ladies planning a dinner. She was shocked, hurt and jealous when she was summoned to the Robertson house to meet Opal over lunch. And she was apprehensive at the Showalters’ dinner table, where her husband, Phillip, announced that his father was sending him away on business for several weeks, leaving Cornelia to the not-so-tender mercies of her father-in-law.Opal, meanwhile, was making her mark. When Algy took her to his apartment, she shut him out of his own bedroom, announcing that there would be no “wonderful surprises” for him, at least not yet. At the Robertsons’ table she asked why Algy’s parents were serving the meal rather than partaking in it with their son, calling out the “progressive” white family for their patronizing chauvinism and making Captain Robertson very uncomfortable. And when Algy took her to a Harlem dance hall, you could see him falling in love with her all over again.The main thread of the episode, however, and its most moving moments involved John Thackery’s dangerous scheme to cure his former lover, Abigail, of her syphilis. When Abigail had a seizure, Thackery moved ahead with his plan to infect her with malaria, driving up her temperature. Edwards reluctantly assisted, arguing that they were cooking the woman’s brain. But just when he had persuaded his colleague to stop, Thackery had a brainstorm, shoving Abigail into one of the “fever cabinets” (purchased by Edwards) in order to drive up her temperature a few more degrees.AdvertisementIn the episode’s lovely final scene, Thackery dreamed of himself and a healthy Abigail on a sailboat, shot by Steven Soderbergh in the same brilliant blue and white hues as the scenes from the season premiere, in which Everett Gallinger held Thackery captive on his boat. Thackery heard his name being called and woke to find Abigail alive and conscious. He climbed onto the bed with her as the credits began.AdvertisementBest single moment of the episode? Two candidates: Thackery appearing in the frame, behind a pig, holding a very long thermometer. And the untimely death of the bumbling Dr. Mays, who, distracted by his attempts to flirt with a nurse, set himself on fire during an operation. It was a quick, horrifying, drolly macabre moment, and the end of an excellent performance by Ben Livingston.Elsewhere:● Henry Robertson, proud owner of a newfangled moving-picture camera, immediately put it to use shooting D.I.Y. stag films.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.● Bertie Chickering started the episode on a high note, making his first visit to a brothel, where a prostitute gave him an impromptu anatomy quiz. Later, though, he discovered that his mother had a tumor that both his father and his boss, Zinberg, considered untreatable. The increasingly emboldened Bertie was not so sure.● Thackery’s search for a cure to addiction was briefly touched on, with his failure to find anything significant in the bodies of overdose victims that would lead him to believe that the causes lie in the brain.● The oddly attenuated story of Jacob Speight’s murder was also briefly visited, with Cornelia going to his home in search of evidence.● Gallinger became more enthusiastic about the idea of eugenics — even discussing the possibility of forced sterilizations — after a gang of young immigrants from Italy frightened Eleanor on the street.● And finally, Tom Cleary found a way to free Sister Harriet. After he convened a group of uptown women who had benefited from the nun’s abortion services, and told them that she was likely to testify in open court to exactly what she’d done and to whom, the nasty anti-Catholic judge abruptly threw out her case.Let us know your thoughts about the fourth episode of this season of “The Knick” in the comments.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »