Broadway’s latest crossover star, T Bone Burnett, has made a career of hopping across genres.Mr. Burnett — who over the past 50 years has collected honors in the recording industry, as well as film and television — will now try his hand at Broadway by writing the music and lyrics for “Happy Trails,” a musical about the life of the cowboy celebrity Roy Rogers and his wife Dale Evans.“This story is about a time in the last century when we projected idealized versions of people up onto screens, while the person who was projected would cower behind the screen, knowing he could not measure up to that image and becoming further isolated from himself in the process,” Mr. Burnett said in an email.Mr. Burnett’s decades-long career has involved recording, performing and producing music, as well as composing for the screen. In 2010 he won an Academy Award for the song “The Weary Kind” in “Crazy Heart,” for which he also won a Golden Globe. His television credits include music for “True Detective” and “Nashville.” He has even dabbled in theater before, working with Sam Shepard on his “Tooth of Crime: Second Dance” Off Broadway in the 1990s.Previously, Alan Menken and the Glenn Slater were to write the music and lyrics. They backed out because of scheduling conflicts.Unlike other recent biographical musicals like “On Your Feet!” and “Beautiful: The Carole King Musical,” “Happy Trails” will feature all new music. Which is not to say it won’t be reflective of popular culture during Rogers’s life.“A lot of this happens in the 1930s, which is my favorite decade of music of the last century,” Mr. Burnett said. “The music is being drawn from all of that — country blues and jazz and folk music and some western-movie-type score.”“Happy Trails,” while Broadway bound, is still early in development. An opening date is yet to be announced, as is the cast. Among the expected characters are Bullet the Wonder Dog from “The Roy Rogers Show” and Trigger, the horse Rogers rode in his films.The creative team also includes Marshall Brickman, who won an Academy Award for co-writing the screenplay for “Annie Hall” and will write the book. Des McAnuff, a two-time Tony Award winner, will direct.A version of this article appears in print on 11/07/2015, on page C3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: T Bone Burnett to Joinu2018Happy Trailsu2019 Musical.