The rapper Busta Rhymes pleaded guilty to harassment in Manhattan Criminal Court on Friday morning in a deal with prosecutors to dispose of a complaint that he had hurled a bottle of Muscle Milk at a gym employee.The performer, whose real name is Trevor Smith, was arrested last summer and charged with second-degree assault, a felony. The police said that on the evening of Aug. 5, Mr. Smith had thrown a bottle of the protein shake at a worker in the Steel Gym on West 23rd Street in Chelsea, bruising the man’s head. The two had had a quarrel a minute earlier, and the worker had asked Mr. Smith to leave.Though the police charged Mr. Smith with a felony, the Manhattan district attorney’s office reduced the charge to misdemeanor assault. The prosecutors later agreed to let Mr. Smith plead guilty to harassment, which is a violation, on the condition he attend anger management classes.Mr. Smith, dressed in a sharp black suit and wearing diamond earrings, was all smiles as he left court with his lawyer, as a  bodyguard ran interference, blocking reporters. “You that aggressive with your man?” he said to one female reporter who tried to ask him a question. Then he stopped to hug a court officer who said he was a big fan. Mr. Smith was also recognized by another fan — a man in handcuffs who was being escorted in by the police. “That’s Busta! That’s Busta!” the man said, jumping up and down. “The criminal charges, especially charging him with a felony, was a bunch of bull,” Mr. Smith’s lawyer, Scott Leemon, said. “Busta and I are glad the district attorney’s office agreed to drop all the criminal charges.”In court, Danielle Coffey, an assistant district attorney, said the charges were reduced after “an extensive investigation, including interviewing witnesses, viewing the video and visiting the scene, and based on the limited nature of the injury.” She told the judge that Mr. Smith had already completed three days of counseling for anger management.Mr. Smith, 43, has been a major hip-hop recording artist, known for his intricate flow and technique, who got his start in the late 1980s and early 1990s as a member of Leaders of the New School before striking out on his own. His first hit single as a solo artist, “Woo Hah!! Got You All in Check,” was released in 1996. Some of his other hits include “Gimme Some More” and “Dangerous.”In 2006, Mr. Smith’s longtime bodyguard, Israel Ramirez, was shot and killed outside a warehouse in Brooklyn while the rapper was inside filming a music video for “Touch It,” along with a long list of other artists, including Mary J. Blige, 50 Cent, Missy Elliott and Lloyd Banks. Despite a street full of witnesses, the murder of Mr. Ramirez was never solved. One theory investigated by the police but never proven was that the shooting stemmed from an earlier dispute involving the G-Unit rapper, Tony Yayo, whose real name is Marvin Bernard. Both Mr. Bernard and Mr. Smith declined to cooperate with detectives looking into the case.Mr. Smith’s last brush with the law was in 2008, when he was sentenced to 10 days of community service and three years’ probation after he pleaded guilty to assaulting his former driver and a fan.A version of this article appears in print on 11/07/2015, on page C3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Busta Rhymes Pleads Guilty in Gym Incident.