Guangdong Dance Festival
Various venues.
Nov. 7-15.Since 2004, this festival has served as a showcase for both local and international talent. Companies taking part this year include the City Contemporary Dance Company of Hong Kong, which will show “Happy Birthday?,” a light piece that riffs on the ambivalence of the yearly celebrations; and the Guangzhou-based Ergao Dance Production Group, which will show its “DISCO-TECA,” about the emergence of disco in China since the 1980s. Some special events and installations will also be on view, like “Hyperchoreography,” a video artwork that responds to viewers’ movements.Hugo Boss Asia Art 2015
Rockbund Art Museum.
Through Jan. 3.Six Southeast Asian artists — Guan Xiao, Huang Po-Chih, Moe Satt, Maria Taniguchi, Vandy Rattana, and Yang Xinguang — feature in this exhibition, which is both a showcase for contemporary art from the region and a competition. Artworks are wide-ranging and include installation pieces, video and painting. The winner will be announced at the end of the month.The Women of Klimt, Schiele and Kokoschka
Lower Belvedere.
Through Feb. 28.The three artists on view in this exhibition worked in turn-of-the-century Vienna and helped change the prevailing dialogue on sex and sexuality with provocative works that challenged contemporary morals. This exhibition focuses on each artist’s portrayals of women — with sections dedicated to their portraiture, their depictions of mothers, their renderings of couples and their erotica. Works on view include a portrait of Eugenia Primavesi, a wealthy Viennese woman whose family Klimt painted multiple times. In the last years of his career, Klimt turned from fanciful nudes toward more conservative portraits of the city’s upper classes.Kolkata International Film Festival
Various venues.
Nov. 14-21.Around 150 films will screen at venues across Kolkata for this festival, which includes a competition for only the second year. Films nominated for the festival’s top prize, the Royal Bengal Trophy — which is reserved for female filmmakers — include the Colombian movie “Ella,” the Canadian film “Our Loved Ones,” and the Hungarian work “The Wednesday Child.”The Fiery Angel.
Teatro Colón.
Through Nov. 10.Prokofiev’s mid-century opera follows Renata, a woman who is in love with an angel, but possessed by a demon. (The opera ends with a failed exorcism and a burning at the stake.) It is generally seen as a difficult-to-stage work, brilliant at moments, with some erratic and unwieldy plot points. The Teatro opened a new production of the opera this week, directed by Florencia Sanguinetti, a mainstay at the opera house. It stars Elena Popovskaya as the possessed Renata, and Vladimir Baykov as Ruprecht, who falls in love with her, but whose love is unrequited. In December, the Teatro opens a new production of Wagner’s “Parsifal,” starring the British tenor Christopher Ventris.A selection of arts events taking place across the world in the coming week.Goya: The Portraits
National Gallery.
Through Jan. 10.Francisco Goya’s varied output included oil paintings, etchings, aquatints and cartoons, which were used as the basis for court tapestries (the artist disliked making the latter, though they were his lifeblood through much of his career). This exhibition focuses on Goya’s portraits, which usually depicted the members of Spain’s royal family and its political elite. The artist’s iconic portrait of the Duchess of Alba, which shows her pointing at an inscription in the ground that reads “Solo Goya,” (only Goya) is one of the 70 artworks by him on view.Le Nozze di Figaro
Staatsoper im Schiller Theater.
Nov. 7-21.The young superstar conductor Gustavo Dudamel — who hails from Venezuela and leads the Los Angeles Philharmonic — will take up residence in Berlin this month to conduct the Staatsoper’s new production of “Figaro.” The director of the new production is Jürgen Flimm, one of the inventors of the German Regietheater, which deconstructs theater and opera scripts and places the director’s vision centerstage.Musée Rodin Reopening
Musée Rodin.
Nov. 12.On Thursday, Rodin’s birthday, this museum, which has been shuttered since January for a major restoration, reopens its doors. The reimagined museum aims to evoke the world in which the artist worked (his studio was based in the palatial Left Bank building where the museum sits). It includes a trove of the artist’s sculptures, along with some of the works from his personal art collection. The museum has plans to expand its gardens and to renovate Rodin’s former home in nearby Meudon, France. (Read the story).