By ROBIN POGREBINNOV. 5, 2015
The stakes were higher than ever at Sotheby’s on Wednesday night, marking the start of a fall season of global art buying as well as one of the biggest gambles for the auction house, which had put $500 million behind a sale of A. Alfred Taubman’s collection.If the results from the first bumpy night of his four estate auctions are any indication, Sotheby’s may regret assuming so much risk in trying to sell the eclectic estate of its discredited chairman. Over all the sale brought $377 million with fees, just squeaking past the $375 million low estimate.“It’s a dismal feeling,” Christian Ogier, a Paris dealer who attended the sale, said. “They pushed the estimates. There is no action. I’m worried a bit for Sotheby’s people.”The art world was looking to the Sotheby’s sale as an important test of the overall market as three auction houses embark on 10 days of selling at least $2 billion worth of art.AdvertisementWould Sotheby’s post a loss on its “Masterworks” sale of Mr. Taubman’s collection, which the auction house had guaranteed for more than $500 million? Would the sale affirm concerns that demand at the top end of the art market may be cooling?“This is a genuine test of the art market,” the art collector Donald Marron said before the sale started. “This is the first time that Burchfield and de Kooning are in the same sale. What you’ll see is whether quality surfaces.”Sotheby’s “Masterworks” sale was also arguably a referendum on the aesthetic taste of Mr. Taubman, and the public’s ability to overlook his misdeeds. Sotheby’s hoped that the reputation of its former chief — who died in April at 91 — would be restored by a robust sale, despite his conviction for price-fixing in 2001.Financially, Sotheby’s was on the line, having committed to guarantee the sale in order to win the cache — ranging from old masters to Modernist painters — away from its archrival, Christie’s. By sale’s end, it seemed as if Sotheby’s had not off-loaded the risk onto third-party guarantors, leaving the auction house financially exposed.Tad Smith, Sotheby’s president and chief executive, also had a lot to prove; it was the biggest sale since he assumed the helm in March. He took the microphone before the auction, announcing that Mr. Taubman’s three children and his widow, Judy, were in the audience and that Sotheby’s had saved Mr. Taubman a seat.AdvertisementNinety percent of the works were sold, and Mr. Smith said he was “comfortable” with the night’s results. “With more than 400 works still to be sold over the next several months, we are on track to cover most of the total guarantee,” he said in a statement, adding that both the hammer and buyer’s premium count toward the guarantee.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Some things went for over the high estimate (like a Schiele watercolor), while others went for well below the low estimate (like a Lichtenstein). One Degas sold for $5.2 million, over the high estimate of $4 million, while another Degas failed to sell at all.A Modigliani portrait, “Paulette Jourdain,” that was expected to bring over $25 million sold for $42.8 million with fees (and had five bidders), while the Jasper Johns, estimated at $15 million to $20 million, failed to sell, as did seven other lots, including works by Balthus and Picasso.At the same time, a 10 percent “unsold ratio” was not bad in the scheme of things; analysts consider about 20 percent normal. “It’s very important to remember, art markets are about both supply and demand,” said David Schick, a managing director at Stifel Financial, a brokerage and investment banking firm, who follows Sotheby’s. “Keeping a bigger picture view is critical.”The Frank Stella, for example, sold for $13.7 million with fees. “It’s a lot of money,” Alex Rotter, the head of Sotheby’s New York Contemporary Art department, said of the total. “There were some moments that made me happy on the lots that were exceptional and then there were moments when the bidding was a little thinner than we were hoping for.”There were moments when the auctioneer, Oliver Barker, sounded beleaguered and seemed to be begging for bids. On Degas’s “Nude Woman Combing Her Hair,” for example, he said “11.5 million” at least 16 times in the hope of snagging a starting bid before having to mumble “pass” on the piece. When selling another Degas later in the evening, he said, “It’s been a long night.”As for Mr. Taubman, Mr. Rotter said he came out looking good. “It’s a credit to him that 90 percent of the works he bought over the last 60 years found buyers over two hours in one evening,” he said. “We put a lot of effort into it,” he added. “Would I have wished we made a billion dollars? Sure. But with 90 percent sold, it’s hard to be disappointed.”To some extent, some say, Sotheby’s was the guinea pig for a season that has yet to shake out. “We were the first ones to go,” Mr. Rotter said. “There’s a lot of art for sale. Collectors have a lot of choices to make. And that’s how the dice rolled out.”Reprinted from Thursday’s late editions. A version of this article appears in print on November 5, 2015, on Page A23 of the New York edition with the headline:  Tepid Bids at Sotheby’s Sale of Ex-Chief’s Works .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.