AdvertisementSupported byBy Joshua BaroneInformation on events for possible inclusion in Spare Times should be sent to weekend@nytimes.com by Friday at 5 p.m. for publication that week. Longer versions of Around Town and For Children listings are in a searchable guide at nytimes.com/events.American Museum of Natural History: ‘Countdown to Zero’ (continuing) Smallpox is the only human disease to have been eradicated, but what about Guinea worm, polio, malaria and others? This exhibition, presented in collaboration with the Carter Center, examines international efforts to control and wipe out infection. Daily from 10 a.m. to 5:45 p.m., Central Park West and 79th Street, 212-769-5200, amnh.org.Brookfield Place: ‘Canstruction’ (through Nov. 16) Architects, engineers and contractors came together for this charitable drive that doubles as a design competition. The results are large structures made entirely out of unopened cans of food, as if they were Lego blocks. While the artworks are on view, Brookfield will also host public programs, such as lessons from staff at the Institute of Culinary Education: From noon to 3 p.m. on Friday, Chad Pagano will demonstrate spherification with canned pumpkin. On view daily from 10 a.m. to 6 p.m., 230 Vesey Street, at West Street, Lower Manhattan, 212-417-2414, newyork.canstruction.org; free.Brooklyn Historical Society: ‘Brooklyn Americans: Hockey’s Forgotten Promise’ (through March 27) The New York Islanders may be new to Brooklyn, but the borough isn’t new to hockey. This exhibition tells the story of its first National Hockey League team, the Brooklyn Americans. The team wore red, white and blue jerseys and represented Kings County at the height of World War II and in the early days of the N.H.L. Still, as the exhibition shows, the team was unsuccessful and ultimately financially doomed. 128 Pierrepont Street, near Clinton Street, Brooklyn Heights, 718-222-4111, brooklynhistory.org.‘Global Citizen: The Architecture of Moshe Safdie’ (through Jan. 10) This touring exhibition, a retrospective of Mr. Safdie’s career of more than 50 years, makes its way to New York with new material based on the architect’s recent work related to dense urbanism in Asia. Donald Albrecht from the Museum of the City of New York organized the material in this show, which also explores Mr. Safdie’s design philosophy that buildings should be extensions of their physical, historical and cultural contexts. National Academy Museum, 1083 Fifth Avenue, at 89th Street, 212-369-4880, nationalacademy.org.Intrepid Sea, Air & Space Museum: ‘On the Line: Intrepid and the Vietnam War’ (through Sept. 1, 2016) Visitors familiar with this museum are likely well aware of its flight deck, perhaps even some of its wartime history. During the Vietnam War, the Intrepid served three tours overseas between 1966 and 1969. Now, in an exhibition set in the space where the crew lived and worked, the museum tells their stories with artifacts, film clips and photographs. Pier 86, 46th Street and 12th Avenue, Clinton, 877-957-7447, intrepidmuseum.org.Museum of Chinese in America: ‘Sub Urbanisms: Casino Urbanization, Chinatowns and the Contested American Landscape’ (through January) Stephen Fan, an architecture professor and curator, examines the trend of Chinese casino workers in Connecticut converting suburban homes into multifamily communities. This exhibition is both creative and historical; it takes the present to imagine the future of housing design while looking back on the events that created the trend of suburban migration. 215 Centre Street, between Howard and Grand Streets, Lower Manhattan, 212-619-4785, mocanyc.org.Museum of the City of New York: ‘The New York City Marathon: The Great Race’ (through March 8) At the beginning of the month, more than 50,000 runners made their way through all five boroughs of New York, starting on Staten Island and ending in Central Park. This annual race — a spectacle for anyone watching along the course — began modestly in 1970, with 127 people running laps around Central Park. City Museum’s timely exhibition tells the story of how the New York City Marathon became the world-class race it is today, including photos from amateurs and professionals on display. Fifth Avenue at 103rd Street, 212-534-1672, mcny.org.Museum of the Moving Image: ‘How Cats Took Over the Internet’ (through January) Even people who hate cats can’t easily get through an hour of browsing online without coming across some kind of feline clickbait. This exhibition takes a critical look at and tells the story of how we, as a society, got to this point. Yes, there are cat GIFs. 35th Avenue at 37th Street, Astoria, Queens, 718-784-0077, movingimage.us.National Museum of the American Indian: ‘Meryl McMaster: Second Self’ (through Dec. 11) Meryl McMaster, an artist from Canada and a Plains Cree member of the Siksika Nation, shows her “Second Self” photography series, which uses portraiture to explore the complex ways in which identity is constructed. 1 Bowling Green, Lower Manhattan, 212-514-3700, nmai.si.edu; free.New-York Historical Society: ‘Holiday Express: Toys and Trains From the Jerni Collection’ (through Feb. 28) Toys of yore are on view in a mountainous landscape for trains and scene-setting trinkets pegged to the holiday season. This massive display also incorporates theatrical lighting and soundscapes, including a multimedia installation designed to make it feel like the museum’s 77th Street entrance is in the midst of passing trains. 170 Central Park West, at 77th Street, 212-873-3400, nyhistory.org.New-York Historical Society: ‘Superheroes in Gotham’ (through Feb. 21) New York is safe as long as its long roster of comic-book heroes stick around. It’s been this way for nearly a century as these characters have defended the city in books, TV shows, movies, video games — even the Broadway stage. New-York Historical Society’s latest exhibition tells the story of how super heroes became a cultural staple for all ages and media. 170 Central Park West, at 77th Street, 212-873-3400, nyhistory.org.New York Transit Museum: ‘Bringing Back the City’ (ongoing) This new exhibition comes three years after Hurricane Sandy took a swipe at the city’s infrastructure. But what of the people who put the pieces back together? “Bringing Back the City” tells the stories of everyday services — like electricity and mass transit — that become extraordinary in times of crisis. Boerum Place, at Schermerhorn Street, Downtown Brooklyn, 718-694-1600, bringingbackthecity.com.‘Outside the Box’ Gallery Talk (Thursday) Dan Nadel, an author and curator, leads a tour and talk of the New Museum’s exhibition “Jim Shaw: The End Is Here” — a deranged mash-up of 20th-century movements like Surrealism and Pop Art. Mr. Nadel will discuss Mr. Shaw’s art and themes, with help from the works on the gallery wall and floor as examples. At 3:30 p.m., 235 Bowery, at Prince Street, Lower East Side, 212-219-1222, newmuseum.org; free.Rubin Museum of Art: ‘Sacred Spaces’ (through spring 2017) This exhibition’s premise is a question: What is a sacred space? It could be the museum’s Tibetan Buddhist Shrine Room, an immersive look at a traditional space for prayer and meditation. Or it could be a panoramic vista among the Himalayas. It could even be a video installation about Jain devotional rituals. All are on view in this exploration of veneration and its venues. 150 West 17th Street, Chelsea, 212-620-5000, rubinmuseum.org.‘Sea Level: Five Boroughs at Water’s Edge’ (through December) In its first pop-up exhibition for the Seaport Culture District, the American Institute of Architects presents a water’s eye view of the city through photos by Elizabeth Felicella and accompanying essays by Robert Sullivan. The panoramic view of New York starts at New York Harbor and makes its way along the East River, showing the shore of each borough along the way. Center @ the Seaport, 181 Front Street, South Street Seaport, Lower Manhattan, 212-683-0023, cfa.aiany.org.Trinity Wall Street: ‘Blood Mirror’ (through Dec. 1) After decades of banning gay and bisexual men from donating blood, the Food and Drug Administration updated its policy earlier this year to allow them to donate, but only after a year of celibacy, regardless of marital status. In response, the artist Jordan Eagles has gathered nine gay, bisexual and transgender men to donate a pint of blood each for this exhibit: a reflective, 7-foot-tall monolith that cases and preserves their blood in resin. Among the donors is the Rev. John Moody, who has been involved with Trinity for more than 40 years. Broadway at Wall Street, Lower Manhattan, 212-602-0800, trinitywallstreet.org/bloodmirror; free.America’s Parade (Wednesday) This annual celebration of Veterans Day begins at 10 a.m. with an opening ceremony at the Eternal Light Flagstaff in Madison Square Park, followed by a wreath-laying at 11 — the 11th hour of the 11th day of the 11th month. Around 11:25, the parade will begin at 26th Street and proceed make its way along Fifth Avenue to 52nd Street. To 3:30 p.m., americasparade.org.Artists’ Studios Series (Friday through Sunday) Five artists are inviting the public to see their work before it makes its way to gallery walls in the latest edition of this event, which is pegged to the International Art Festival (through Sunday at Highline Loft Gallery, 508 West 26th Street in Chelsea). Friday and Saturday from 2 to 6 p.m.; Sunday from noon to 6 p.m., West Chelsea Arts Building, 508-526 West 26th Street, Chelsea, 917-697-0844, westchelseaartists.com; free.‘Awakening in Ink’ (Friday) The Morris-Jumel Mansion presents its first commissioned play, drawn from the letters and ghost stories in its archives. Set and performed in the mansion, it follows a young woman’s first night as the house’s caretaker. At 8 p.m., 65 Jumel Terrace, between 160th and 162nd Streets, Washington Heights, 212-923-8008, morrisjumel.org; tickets are at awakeninginink.brownpapertickets.com.Bad Theater Fest (Friday and Saturday) Don’t worry: This isn’t a festival for theater that aims to be bad. The idea is that no theater — art in general, really — is universally loved. Writers may fear sharing their work because of its reception. Here, they can try out theater that hasn’t been seen by the public yet, or they can present discarded material that never made it to the stage. Multiple productions are put on each night; the schedule is at badtheaterfest.com. At various times, the Loft, 154 West 29th Street, Chelsea.BRIClab: Phillip Howze’s ‘The Children’ (Saturday) BRIClab, a program to commission emerging artists across disciplines, is hosting its latest residency with the playwright Phillip Howze. Here he is presenting his musical “The Children” as a work in progress. The show, about gay and transgender homeless youth, follows a teenager who leaves home for New York in search of community and finds a group of struggling, restless peers also looking for acceptance. Mr. Howze will discuss his work after the performance. At 7:30 p.m., BRIC House, 647 Fulton Street, at Rockwell Place, Fort Greene, Brooklyn, 718-683-5600, bricartsmedia.org.Festival Albertine (through Monday) Albertine, the French- and English-language bookstore inside the Payne Whitney mansion, experimented last year with hosting a festival about the French-American exchange of books and ideas; there’s still more conversation to be had. All events will be streamed at livestream.com/frenchembassy. More information is at albertine.com/festival-albertine-2015. At various times, 972 Fifth Avenue, at 79th Street, Manhattan, 212-650-0070; free.Latin American Cultural Week (Tuesday through Nov. 22) This festival, organized by Pan American Musical Art Research, is back for its 10th year with organizations across the city participating to spread awareness and appreciation of Latin American arts. Events — including dance, music, theater, film, visual art and readings — will take place at various venues in multiple boroughs. A schedule and more information is at lacw.net.Target First Saturdays at Brooklyn Museum (Saturday) “Connecting Cultures: A World in Brooklyn” is the theme of this monthly event’s latest installment. (An installation of the same name is currently on view in the museum’s Great Hall.) The evening’s programming begins with a concert by the Eastern European-jazz hybrid musician Ilusha Tsinadze, then continues with talks, readings and more performances. The schedule is at brooklynmuseum.org/visit/first_saturdays. From 5 to 11 p.m., 200 Eastern Parkway, at Prospect Park, Brooklyn, 718-638-5000, brooklynmuseum.org; free.Videology Presents Movie Trivia (Tuesday) Videology, the Brooklyn bar and cinema, hosts a free film-themed trivia contest every week. The game varies; you will want to know theme songs, facts, quotations (especially ones from Nicolas Cage) and more. The winning team receives a free round of drinks, and there are chances to win drinks each round. At 8:30 p.m., 308 Bedford Avenue, at South First Street, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, 718-782-3468, videologybarandcinema.com.Winter Village at Bryant Park (through March 6) The ice rink is back. Admission is free if you bring your own skates; if you don’t have any, they’re available for rent. Through Jan. 3, the park will also host an open-air market for holiday shopping with about 125 vendors. Avenue of the Americas, at 40th Street, 212-661-6640, wintervillage.org.‘Brooklyn: A Personal Memoir’ (Wednesday) There’s nothing unusual today about a writer saying: “I live in Brooklyn. By choice.” But those now-famous opening lines were far more provocative when Truman Capote wrote them in his 1959 essay “Brooklyn Heights: A Personal Memoir” for Holiday magazine. He lived at 70 Willow Street in a neighborhood that, back then, was in many ways as handsome as today but still a little rough around the edges. There, he worked on some of his most beloved books, like “Breakfast at Tiffany’s” and “In Cold Blood.”To accompany Capote’s essay, the magazine commissioned the photographer David Attie. He took film-noirish photos of Capote, including at the Willow Street house’s mesmerizing staircase and around the streets of Brooklyn Heights. Capote was the star, but the photo shoot was just as much a portrait of daily life in 1950s Brooklyn. Few photos ran in the magazine, though, and Attie’s negatives were lost to time.That is until Eli Attie, his son, came across them last year in his father’s Manhattan home, decades after his death. There were found in boxes in a manila envelope labeled “Holiday, Capote, A3/58.” Now, the photos and essay have been reunited in book form, under the slightly shorter title “Brooklyn: A Personal Memoir.” The coffee table-ready book is now out, and the celebration next week at Powerhouse Arena in Brooklyn will feature opening remarks by Eli Attie, as well as readings by the actress Mary-Louise Parker.At 7 p.m., 37 Main Street, near Water Street, Dumbo, Brooklyn, 718-666-3049, powerhousearena.com; free.‘City on a Grid: How New York Became New York’ (Tuesday) In New York, directions are most often given with intersections, not specific addresses. The city’s convenient grid system dates back to 1811, when it was developed to rein in the chaotic layout of Manhattan’s southern tip. As part of the Museum of the City of New York’s My City Book Club, the architecture historian Hilary Ballon talks with Gerard Koeppel, author of “City on a Grid,” about his study of the grid system and how it was implemented by reshaping Manhattan’s landscape. At 6:30 p.m., Fifth Avenue at 103rd Street, 212-534-1672, mcny.org.‘Class Acts: Stories From School’ (Tuesday) “School” is the theme at this evening of storytelling hosted by and benefiting the Urban Assembly School for Law and Justice. Guests include Kim Barker, a New York Times investigative reporter; Josh Gondelman, a writer for “Last Week Tonight With John Oliver”; the guitarist and producer Binky Griptite; A.J. Jacobs, a stunt journalist and author; Matt Taibbi, a writer for Rolling Stone; the artist Kameela Janan Rasheed; and Adam Sternbergh, a novelist and New York Magazine contributing editor. At 8 p.m., Hill Country Brooklyn, 345 Adams Street, between Fulton and Johnson Streets, Downtown Brooklyn, slj-asf.squarespace.com/events.McNally Jackson Live (Thursday) This SoHo bookstore’s variety show brings together writers, musicians, actors and more — often asking them to break out of their specialties. Among the guests are: the poet Rowan Ricardo Phillips discussing basketball; the novelist Michael Cunningham reading fairytales with musical accompanist; and the writers Adam Sternbergh and Michael Robbins figuring out what we, as a people, should do about Taylor Swift. At 7 p.m., 52 Prince Street, between Lafayette and Mulberry Streets, SoHo, 212-274-1160, mcnallyjackson.com; free.Mary-Louise Parker and Mary Karr (Monday) As part of the New York Public Library’s Live From the NYPL series, Ms. Karr, speaks with Ms. Parker, an award-winning actress, whose epistolary memoir, “Dear Mr. You,” comes out on Tuesday. Ms. Karr would know a thing or two about memoirs; in September she released her book-length exploration of the form, “The Art of the Memoir.” At 7 p.m., Stephen A. Schwarzman Building, 917-275-6975, nypl.org/locations/schwarzman.Race, Film and Comedy (Friday) Videology’s “Books on Film” series presents two authors who recently wrote works about race and comedy in America: Ashley Clark (“Facing Blackness: Media and Minstrelsy in Spike Lee’s ‘Bamboozled’ ”) and Jason Bailey (“Richard Pryor: American Id”). The discussion, moderated by Jamil Smith of The New Republic, will also include the film teacher and writer Brandon Harris. At 7 p.m., 308 Bedford Avenue, at South First Street, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, 718-782-3468, videologybarandcinema.com; free.Shonda Rhimes (Monday) Say “Yes,” she says. Ms. Rhimes — the woman behind the hit TV shows “Grey’s Anatomy,” “Scandal” and “How to Get Away With Murder” — once made a decision to say yes to every opportunity she was given. The results, she writes in her book “Year of Yes,” were life-changing. In this discussion with CNN’s Jake Tapper, she’ll share her optimistic take on juggling a growing television empire and raising three children. Tickets include a signed copy of Ms. Rhimes’s book. At 7:30 p.m., 92nd Street Y, 1395 Lexington Avenue, 212-415-5500, 92y.org.Long Island City Tours: Queens Cool Uncovered (Sunday) The idea behind this tour is that Queens is due for more attention, starting with Long Island City. The tour includes highlights of the neighborhood’s history and arts scene, with stops at galleries and crafts and food vendors. The meeting location is given at registration. At 1:30 p.m., 212-209-3370, bqetours.com.The Civil War in Manhattan (Sunday) Like the United States, New York wasn’t totally unified in its stance on the conflicts central to the Civil War. Family connections to the South complicated opinions and interests, as did economic worries about what the war could mean for commerce. Ultimately, New York sided with the Union; still, in Manhattan the war took its toll with escalating class and ethnic differences. This tour explores some of the sites and stories associated with the city’s involvement with war. At 1 p.m., beginning in front of Cooper Union Great Hall, Seventh Street, at Third Avenue, East Village, 212-242-5762, joycegoldhistorytours.com.Flatiron District Walking Tour (Sunday) This free tour meets at 11 a.m. on the southwest corner of Madison Square Park, at 23rd Street and Broadway, in front of the William Seward statue. Sponsored by the Flatiron/23rd Street Partnership; discoverflatiron.org.History of Wall Street Tour (weekdays) Stops on this tour, led by Wall Street Walks, include the New York Stock Exchange, Trinity Church, the Wall Street Bull, and ground zero and the Sept. 11 memorial. The tours last 90 minutes and begin at 11 a.m. and 1:30 p.m. (Also at 3 p.m. on Tuesdays and Fridays.) More details: wallstreetwalks.com.‘Revolutionary New York: Celebrating American History’ (Tuesday) This tour is a close look New York’s Revolutionary War-era history hidden amid Manhattan’s cityscape. Highlights include the graves of the war’s key players, the site of George Washington’s inaugural address and Fraunces Tavern. At 11 a.m.; beginning at Broadway and Murray Street (at the gate of City Hall Park), Financial District, 888-606-9255, bigonion.com.Save the Village (Saturday and Tuesday) Last year the Steven Kasher Gallery in Chelsea put on an exhibition with the photography of Fred W. McDarrah, who documented the changing scene of Greenwich Village since the 1960s. Now, the spirit of that show has taken the form of this walking tour, which includes stops at the places McDarrah captured on film: locales like Washington Square Park and the Stonewall Inn. At 10 a.m.; the tour meets at Christopher Park, Stonewall Place, at Seventh Avenue, West Village, savethevillagetours.com.Staten Island Landmarks by Rail (Saturday) This tour, hosted by the Preservation League of Staten Island, makes its stops at landmarks along the borough’s railway. Highlights include Staten Island’s borough hall — the only one to overlook New York Harbor — and the Nabisco sugar wafer inventor Gustave Mayer’s Italianate mansion. Bagged lunches will be provided. MetroCards are required. At 9 a.m., beginning at St. George Ferry Terminal, 1 Bay Street, St. George, Staten Island, preservestatenisland.org; R.S.V.P. at 718-980-1551.A Taste of Jewish New York: Borough Park Tour (Sunday) Participants in this tour will get an insider’s look at the customs of the Hasidic residents of Borough Park, Brooklyn. Highlights include a stop at a lively shopping area and the chance to try a variety of traditional foods. Modest attire is requested — no shorts, low necklines or sleeveless clothing. The tour meets at 9:45 a.m. at Fort Hamilton Parkway and 44th Street; 718-339-2302, timelinetouring.com.Union Square: Crossroads of New York (Saturday) Sponsored by the Union Square Partnership, this free year-round tour focuses on the area’s political and social histories. The walk, led by guides from Big Onion Walking Tours, meets at 2 p.m. by the statue of Lincoln in Union Square Park, near the 16th Street transverse. 212-517-1826, unionsquarenyc.org.Advertisement