AdvertisementSupported byBy Laurel GraeberWhat if a blue jay could also be a D.J.?Then that funky bird might sound a lot like Ben Mirin.Mr. Mirin, a.k.a. Ecotone, will demonstrate his talents in birdboxing — a combination of beatboxing and bird calling — at the New York Botanical Garden this weekend and next. His interactive performances, at noon and 2 p.m., will be among the highlights of Fall Forest Weekends, annual celebrations of the garden’s 50-acre Thain Family Forest, right.“I’ve been a bird-watcher since I was 3, and a beatboxer since I was 9,” said Mr. Mirin, 27, “and only now have I found a way of fusing these lifelong passions.”Mr. Mirin will have electronic equipment enabling him to layer and repeat loops of sound, but his only real instruments will be recorded birdcalls and his own voice. The result will be “a combination of hip-hop- and house-inspired beats made entirely from birds in New York,” he said. Mr. Mirin, who also appeared at the garden last year, has created a new work from the songs of native species including the northern cardinal, the mourning dove, the ruffed grouse, the blue jay, the Canada goose and the downy woodpecker.“All this music is designed to inspire kids to go find the birds themselves,” said Mr. Mirin, who will invite young visitors to join him at the D.J. booth for some hip-hop hooting and humming.But this won’t be their only opportunity to engage with the forest’s residents. Both weekends will offer birds of prey demonstrations at 1 and 3 p.m. in which wildlife experts will display the red-tailed hawk, the American kestrel and the Eastern screech owl, among other species. “People can get close up,” said Barbara Corcoran, the garden’s vice president for continuing and adult education. “They show the talons and the wingspans.”Families wanting to explore the Thain can travel through it on canoe trips with the Bronx River Alliance (first come first served) or go on themed discovery walks.On Sunday and on Nov. 15, arborists will also demonstrate tree climbing, and while little visitors won’t be able to shimmy up any branches themselves, they can stop by the Everett Children’s Adventure Garden for “Tree-rific Trees” (a separate program, through next Thursday), an investigation from roots to leaves.All these walks and talks “allow you to look more deeply,” Ms. Corcoran said. “It’s a Rachel Carson moment.”(Saturdays and Sundays through Nov. 15, 11 a.m. to 4 p.m., Bronx River Parkway, Exit 7W, and Fordham Road, Bedford Park, the Bronx, 718-817-8777, nybg.org.)Alex & the Kaleidoscope Alex is Alex Mitnick, and the Kaleidoscope is his group of musicians, which includes two female jazz vocalists. Together, they offer rock and pop with world-music influences — the target ages are 4 though 8 — and lots of opportunities for young listeners to be involved in the concert. At this free show, the songs will include introductions to natural history, like “Insect Tourists,” “Crocodile” and “Dino Dig.” At 1 p.m., Dweck Center, Brooklyn Central Library, Grand Army Plaza at Flatbush Avenue and Eastern Parkway, Prospect Park, Brooklyn, 718-230-2100, bklynlibrary.org/calendar.‘Alice in Wonderland’ (Saturday and Sunday) Literally Alive Theater, which adapts books into children’s productions, has followed the White Rabbit to Greenwich Village, where it has revived this musical — using video projections and over 30 instruments — based on Alice’s adventures. Written by Michael Sgouros and Brenda Bell, the show is preceded by a workshop in which young theatergoers learn about Lewis Carroll’s work and make a story-related craft to take home. (Through Nov. 15.) Saturday at 11 a.m. and 3 p.m.; Sunday at 11 a.m.; workshop one hour before the performance. Players Theater, 115 Macdougal Street, at Minetta Lane, 212-352-3101, literallyalive.com.‘Archaeology Zone: Discovering Treasures From Playgrounds to Palaces’ (Continuing) Children will step into the shoes of an explorer like Indiana Jones in this permanent exhibition at the Jewish Museum, but the adventures will be purely scholarly. Still, there is plenty of excitement in analyzing Middle Eastern artifacts like a jar handle, a clay jug and a bangle and figuring out the purpose behind ancient pieces like a Greek helmet and a bull-shaped vessel. This interactive show, for ages 3 to 10, also includes a recreated room from the Ottoman period (around 1900) where young archaeologists can dress in costume and portray early-20th-century immigrants to Palestine. 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92nd Street, 212-423-3200, thejewishmuseum.org.‘Brooklyn Sewers: What’s Up Down There?’ (Through May 29) When it comes to subterranean infrastructure projects, New York City’s subway system seems to get all the attention. But a group of teenage curators at the Brooklyn Historical Society would like to introduce you to another underground marvel: Brooklyn’s sewer system, one of the city’s oldest and most extensive infrastructure projects. This exhibition explores engineering conundrums and courtroom battles and tells the story of the sewer system through photographs, drawings and maps. 128 Pierrepont Street, near Clinton Street, Brooklyn Heights, 718-222-4111, brooklynhistory.org.‘Brigadoon’ (Friday through Sunday) Break out the bagpipes and the kilts. The St. Jean’s Players are reviving this 1947 family musical, the first big hit from the classic writing team of Alan Jay Lerner and Frederick Loewe. The plot revolves around the unexpected encounter of two 20th-century New Yorkers with Brigadoon, a wholesome 18th-century Scottish town that comes to life for just one day every 100 years. (Through Nov. 22) Fridays and Saturdays at 8 p.m.; Sundays at 3 p.m.; St. Jean Baptiste High School Auditorium, 167 East 75th Street, Manhattan, 212-868-4444, smarttix.com.‘Connected Worlds’ (continuing) Human choices and actions have an impact on the world’s ecosystems, but people usually can’t see the effects as they happen. That isn’t true in this new permanent exhibition in the renovated Great Hall of the New York Hall of Science. Consisting of huge screens (one is 38 feet tall), the show depicts six interconnected environments with a shared water supply. With the help of technology that responds to gestures, “Connected Worlds” allows children to use simple motions to plant, harvest, cut trees, create clouds and make other changes in the projected landscapes — and see how the native flora and fauna fare. 47-01 111th Street, Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, Queens, 718-699-0005, nysci.org.Family Day: Diwali Lights Up Asia Society (Saturday) Hanukkah isn’t the only festival of lights that families celebrate. The fall also brings Diwali, a South Asian holiday, which Asia Society will honor with a program filled with arts, crafts and traditional performances. Highlights will include live Indian music and a lesson in Kathak dance; the interactive creation of a rangoli, a floor design thought to bring luck; a workshop to make diyas, small clay lamps symbolizing the light of knowledge; and a chance to try out Bollywood dances and join in Indian folk songs. From 1 to 4 p.m., 725 Park Avenue, at 70th Street, 212-288-6400, asiasociety.org/nyc.‘Fantasia’ 75th Anniversary Screenings (Sunday and next Friday) What do you get when you combine cartoons with classical music? In 1940 this unusual marriage produced “Fantasia,” a much-loved film in which Walt Disney animators paired Stravinsky’s “The Rite of Spring” with the history of evolution and Ponchielli’s “Dance of the Hours” with a cinematic ballet enacted by wild animals. The most famous highlight, of course, is Mickey Mouse’s star turn as the title character in a dramatization of Paul Dukas’s “The Sorcerer’s Apprentice.” In honor of the movie’s 75th anniversary, Symphony Space is screening it along with a segment in which Yannik Nezet-Seguin, the music director of the Philadelphia Orchestra, leads that ensemble and discusses its participation in the film under the baton of Leopold Stokowski. Sunday at 3:30 and 7:30 p.m.; next Friday at 7 p.m.; Peter Jay Sharp Theater, 2537 Broadway, at 95th Street, 212-864-5400, symphonyspace.org.First Saturdays for Families: ‘Surreal Dreams’ (Saturday) Children ages 4 through 12 will be invited to make their dreams real — or at least achieve three-dimensional form — in this free program at the New Museum. Inspired by the exhibition “Jim Shaw: The End Is Here,” the workshop will explore Surrealism and how Mr. Shaw has translated his own dreams, obsessions and anxieties into artworks. Playing off his methods and the Surrealist game Exquisite Corpse, families will work together to make dream drawings and then dream sculptures from modeling clay and decorative materials. From 10 a.m. to noon, 235 Bowery, at Prince Street, Lower East Side, 212-219-1222, newmuseum.org; space is limited, first come first served.‘Frolic!’ at the Children’s Museum of Manhattan (Through Dec. 31) You’re never too young to rock — and this space proves it. A new pop-up installation at the museum, “Frolic!” uses rock music and a themed décor to stimulate sensory play and learning in visitors ages 5 and under. In addition to a stage, a pretend ticket booth and ’70s-style props — including a Volkswagen mini-van to climb into — the 1,500-square-foot area has programs of workshops and live performances to help little ones get into the groove. The Tisch Building, 212 West 83rd Street, 212-721-1223, cmom.org.‘The Gazillion Bubble Show: The Next Generation’ (Friday through Sunday) Children love bubbles, and this interactive show promises not just a gazillion but also some of the largest ever blown, along with light effects and lasers. The stars are the members of the Yang family: Fan and Ana Yang and their son Deni and others, who rotate as M.C.s for the production. Audience members may even find themselves in bubbles of their own. (The run is open-ended.) Fridays at 7 p.m.; Saturdays at 11 a.m. and 2 and 4:30 p.m.; Sundays at noon and 3 p.m.; 340 West 50th Street, Clinton, 212-239-6200, gazillionbubbleshow.com.‘The Hunger Games: The Exhibition’ (Through Jan. 3) What enterprising 12- or 13-year-old wouldn’t like to foment a little rebellion? Such a visitor can do so vicariously at this attraction at Discovery Times Square, stepping into the role of Katniss Everdeen, the teenage heroine of “The Hunger Games” and the ultimate leader of the resistance against her nation’s totalitarian government. Based on the Lionsgate film adaptations of Suzanne Collins’s novels, the show includes costumes and artifacts from the movies, as well as re-creations of Katniss’s journey and interactive, role-playing elements like a gamesmaker’s table and a chance to learn and practice stunt choreography. 226 West 44th Street, Manhattan, 866-987-9692, discoverytsx.com, thehungergamesexhibition.com.‘If You Lived Here, You’d Be Home’ (Through Jan. 17) Maps present facts, but they can also engage the imagination. This new exhibition at the Children’s Museum of the Arts explores the intersection of cartography and art, showing work that expands upon, redefines or simply refers to maps. Among the eight artists represented are Matthew Cusik, who makes collages from map fragments; Joyce Kosloff, who layers images and textured paint onto maps; Loren Munk, who adds plaques of color and information to street maps; and Nikki Rosato, who subtracts from maps, cutting away all but roads and rivers. In the museum’s Cynthia C. Wainwright Gallery, 103 Charlton Street, between Hudson and Greenwich Streets, South Village, 212-274-0986, cmany.org.‘Jean-Michel Cousteau’s Secret Ocean’ (Through Jan. 10) Ever encounter a goby or a blenny? How about a Christmas tree worm? These small marine species, often unnoticed and uncelebrated, are among the stars of this new Imax movie at the American Museum of Natural History. Filmed by Jean-Michel Cousteau, son of the ocean explorer Jacques Cousteau, and Holly Lohuis, a marine biologist, the film captures 30 species that are among the tiniest to inhabit the seas. Hourly from 10:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., with 2-D screenings at 11:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m.; all other screenings are 3-D. Central Park West and 79th Street, 212-769-5200, amnh.org.‘LARD: Life’s a Real Dream’ (Saturday) This show about LARD, the concept, has nothing to do with lard, the substance. An acronym for “Life’s a Real Dream,” “LARD” is the title of a rollicking musical production starring Lard Dog, who also happens not to be a dog. The alter ego of the multimedia artist Steven Erdman, Lard is a gregarious out-of-this-world character who has flown in from the planet Belopio on a giant pretzel. He and his Band of Shy perform this hourlong entertainment, which includes cartoon graphics and a pretzel toss. (Through Jan. 2.) Saturdays at 11 a.m., 13th Street Repertory Theater, 50 West 13th Street, Greenwich Village, houseoflard.com.‘The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe’ (Saturday) If the children of the Pevensie family could travel to the magical land of Narnia through something as simple as a wardrobe, why shouldn’t two hard-working actors be able to play them and all the characters found there? That’s what Chris Boerner and Erin Layton are attempting in the Off Broadway Family Theater’s first production, le Clanché du Rand’s adaptation of C. S. Lewis’s classic novel. (The run is open-ended and continues on Saturdays.) At 11 a.m., St. Luke’s Theater, 308 West 46th Street, Clinton, 212-239-6200, narniaoffbroadway.com.‘Mozart! Starting Small to Become Great’ (Saturday and Sunday) Hey, is that Wolfgang Amadeus himself heading across Central Park? This multimedia program from the Little Orchestra Society, part of LOS Kids, its new series for ages 3 through 7, features a video adventure involving what Mozart encounters as he hurries across Manhattan for the start of this concert. It also includes a bumbling professor M.C.; a script by Craig Shemin, a former writer for the Jim Henson Company; and an introduction to the works “The Marriage of Figaro,” “The Magic Flute” and “Eine Kleine Nachtmusik,” performed by the orchestra and by young guest musicians. Saturday at 10 and 11:30 a.m.; Sunday at 11:30 a.m. and 1 p.m.; Kaye Playhouse, Hunter College, 68th Street, between Lexington and Park Avenues, 212-772-4448, littleorchestra.org.Music in Motion (Saturday) That motion is the gentle rocking of a boat for this series of family neighborhood concerts presented by Bargemusic, the floating barge at the foot of the Brooklyn Bridge. As always, the material — announced just before the performance — is chamber music, but these programs differ in important ways from the regular Bargemusic fare: With unreserved seating, they last only an hour, include a post-show question-and-answer session with the musicians and are free. (Through Nov. 28) At 4 p.m. (doors open at 3:45), Fulton Ferry Landing, next to the Brooklyn Bridge, Brooklyn, 800-838-3006, bargemusic.org.‘NYC & Me: A Little Bite of the Big Apple’ (Through Jan. 18) There’s one place where little citizens can safely run loose on the streets of New York: the Children’s Museum of Manhattan. This new interactive 3,000-square-foot gallery is a city microcosm for small visitors, allowing them to pretend to be taxi drivers, bus drivers, construction workers, street performers and, most impressively, the mayor. Activities include directing traffic, erecting a skyscraper, “ice skating” in their socks and investigating urban tales on the steps of the New York Public Library. The Tisch Building, 212 West 83rd Street, 212-721-1223, cmom.org.Ralph’s World (Sunday) Parents may be alarmed to learn that Ralph Covert was once known in his native Chicago, the rest of the United States and even in Europe as a Bad Example. But not to worry: The Bad Examples were Mr. Covert’s rock band, and he’s still playing rock, but usually for a much younger audience. A Grammy-nominated artist, Mr. Covert and his group Ralph’s World will entertain children 3 to 8 in this concert. At 11:30 a.m., Jewish Museum, 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92nd Street, 212-423-3337, thejewishmuseum.org.Reading into History Family Book Club: ‘Courage Has No Color,’ by Tanya Lee Stone (Sunday) It took a long time for the United States military to recognize the truth of this book’s title. In this program, held in honor of Veterans Day and part of a series at the New-York Historical Society’s DiMenna Children’s History Museum, readers 9 to 12 and their families meet to discuss a book that illuminates the past. “Courage Has No Color, the True Story of the Triple Nickles: America’s First Black Paratroopers” investigates the 555th Parachute Infantry Battalion, a unit that began in World War II. Kenneth Smith, who belonged to the battalion, will answer questions, and Ms. Stone will talk about her work via Skype. After the discussion, children will examine artifacts related to black military service. At 2 p.m., 170 Central Park West, at 77th Street, 212-873-3400, nyhistory.org.‘Sleepy Hollow’ (Friday and Saturday) Ichabod Crane and the Headless Horseman are off and riding again in this musical revival from Be Bold! Productions. Inspired by Washington Irving’s “The Legend of Sleepy Hollow” and recommended for theatergoers older than 9, this show, by Michael Sgouros and Brenda Bell, focuses on the love triangle and the mystery inherent in Irving’s tale. Closing this weekend, it also explores a darkness beyond the story’s fearsome woods: that of the human heart. At 7 p.m., Players Theater, 115 Macdougal Street, at Minetta Lane, Greenwich Village, 866-811-4111, hollowthemusical.com.Frank Stella Family Day (Saturday) It’s time to think big — really big. This family celebration, held in conjunction with “Frank Stella: A Retrospective,” at the Whitney Museum of American Art, will encourage young visitors to go crazily creative with the artist McKendree Key as they build a giant marble run. They’ll be inspired by the huge scale and vibrant shapes of Mr. Stella’s works, which they can investigate in interactive gallery tours (until noon only), in art-making workshops or on their own with a kids’ activity or multimedia guide. Registration is not required, and from 9:30 to 10:30 a.m., the museum will be open just for families. From 9:30 a.m. to 3 p.m., 99 Gansevoort Street, at Washington Street, meatpacking district, 212-570-3600, whitney.org.Teen Night @MAD (Friday) MAD stands for the Museum of Arts and Design, but in this context, it also stands for a little creative madness, when the museum holds its annual Teen Night. The fun centers on Japanese popular culture, which is explored in the current exhibition “Japanese Kogei/Future Forward.” Artist-led activities for visitors ages 13 through 19, who will be admitted free with a student ID, include interactive emoji storytelling; making origami-inspired hats and other wearables; silkscreening; creating manga characters; and working with kintsugi, a pottery repair technique incorporating powdered metals. Music and snacks are included. From 5 to 8 p.m., 2 Columbus Circle, Manhattan, 212-299-7777, madmuseum.org/events.‘Theatresports’ (Sunday) It may involve actors, but it’s still a competitive event: The members of Freestyle Repertory Theater, an improv troupe, are once again thinking fast on their feet. They break into two teams and perform skits based on suggestions from the audience. Children will not only vote to determine the contest’s winner, but also participate onstage. At noon, Gallery Players Theater, 199 14th Street, Park Slope, Brooklyn, 718-595-0547, Ext. 6, galleryplayers.com.‘The Three Bears Holiday Bash’ (Tuesday through Dec. 30) There’s no word on whether Goldilocks is invited to this seasonal celebration, but Santa Claus definitely is. An annual production from the Swedish Cottage Marionette Theater, this puppet musical centers on a variety show put on by the Bears, in which Baby Bear asks Santa to star. The fun draws on Hanukkah and Kwanzaa, as well as on Christmas. Weekdays at 10:30 a.m. and noon, with an additional 2:30 p.m. performance on Wednesday, Weekends at 1 p.m. Swedish Cottage, 79th Street and the West Drive, Central Park, 212-988-9093, cityparksfoundation.org. Reservations required; some shows are sold out.Tinkerbell Theater (Saturday and Sunday) Despite the title, don’t expect to see Peter Pan. This double bill at the Workshop Theater consists of “Cinderella” and “The Tinderbox,” presented in repertory by Frog and Peach Theater Company. Both adaptations are written and directed by Lynnea Benson, who has reimagined these classic tales: Cinderella plays Crazy Eights and discusses ornithology with the Prince, and “The Tinderbox,” about a soldier who wins a princess’s heart with the help of the object of the title, has as much humor as drama. Soft puppets play the villains in both pieces, which include songs by Ted Zurkowski and are followed by a puppet-making workshop; each theatergoer should bring an old sock, or parents can buy an optional puppet kit for $10. (Through Nov. 15.) “Cinderella” at noon; “The Tinderbox” at 1 p.m.; 312 West 36th Street, fourth floor, Manhattan, 212-868-4444, frogandpeachtheatre.org.‘A Voyage Through Jewish History’ (Continuing) This journey involves not just miles, but years. In this permanent interactive exhibition at the Jewish Children’s Museum, young visitors can travel from Abraham and Sarah’s tent to the Western Wall in contemporary Jerusalem and beyond. Activities along the way include giving water to Rebecca’s camels, playing the strings on David’s harp (a high-tech version with beams of light that emit sounds when struck) and taking part in the exodus from Egypt. 792 Eastern Parkway, at Kingston Avenue, Crown Heights, Brooklyn, 718-907-8833, jcm.museum.Advertisement