LOS ANGELES — Enthusiastic critics, some lucky news from NASA and a well-executed marketing campaign pushed “The Martian” to the top of the weekend box office, while “The Walk” wobbled on the high wire of a limited Imax release and a handful of specialty films appeared to have an arduous road ahead.Starring Matt Damon and directed by Ridley Scott, “The Martian” took in a hefty $55 million at North American theaters, according to Rentrak, which compiles box office data. Lost-in-space films have connected with moviegoers in recent years. Last fall, “Interstellar” arrived to sales of $47.5 million, ultimately collecting $675 million worldwide; “Gravity” had a $55.8 million opening, going on to take in $723 million.“The Martian” benefited from higher-priced 3-D ticket sales, although not from Imax, which did not play the movie because of contracts with another studio. Released five days after NASA announced that it had found liquid water flowing on the surface of present-day Mars, “The Martian” cost 20th Century Fox roughly $108 million to make. Fox said the movie collected an additional $45.2 million from release in 49 international markets.“The Martian” was supposed to arrive nearer to Thanksgiving, but Fox moved up the release to avoid competition. Perhaps as a result, another 3-D film, “The Walk” (Sony Pictures Entertainment), had much of its initial thunder stolen. It took in a slight $1.6 million from 448 Imax theaters, for a total since arriving on Wednesday of $2 million. “The Walk” will expand nationwide on Friday.Sony spent a modest $35 million to make “The Walk,” which received strong reviews. Because the movie, directed by Robert Zemeckis, is a hard story to convey in marketing — it’s about the French aerialist who walked a tightrope between the towers of the World Trade Center in 1974 — Sony is counting on word of mouth to fill seats.In very limited release, the lesbian love story “Freeheld” (Lionsgate) and “He Named Me Malala,” the latest documentary from Davis Guggenheim, drew quiet responses. Fox Searchlight, the studio behind “Malala,” said it was “pleased” with its result, adding that documentaries “take a little time to find their largest audience.”A version of this article appears in print on 10/05/2015, on page C3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: u2018The Martianu2019 Is Tops at the Box Office.