AdvertisementSupported byFull reviews of recent dance performances: nytimes.com/dance. A searchable guide to these and other performances is at nytimes.com/events.★ Kyle Abraham (Tuesday through Nov. 15) Music is a generous muse for Mr. Abraham, who creates evocative contemporary work from sounds that span decades. He’s had a long and interesting dialogue with jazz, a recent highlight of which is “The Gettin’,” set to music by the Grammy winner Robert Glasper and inspired by Max Roach’s protest album “We Insist!” That work returns on a program that also includes “Absent Matter,” created with the jazz drummer Otis Brown III, and “The Quiet Dance,” a short quintet accompanied by jazz piano, played live. Tuesday and Wednesday at 7:30 p.m., Thursday and next Friday at 8 p.m., Nov. 14, at 2 and 8 p.m., Nov. 15 at 2 p.m., Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-242-0800, joyce.org. (Brian Schaefer)Arch Contemporary Ballet (Saturday) Arch Contemporary Ballet’s works, choreographed by the founder-director Sheena Annalise, are created initially without music; then a contemporary musician is invited to create a score. For the company’s latest work, “Chateau,” inspired by the magnificent 1,500-room Château de Fontainebleau outside Paris, the composer is Concetta Abbate, a New York-based violinist, vocalist and songwriter. Her music will be performed live by a string quartet integrated into the performance. At 7 p.m., Manhattan Movement & Arts Center, 248 West 60th Street, Manhattan, 212-787-1178, manhattanmovement.com. (Schaefer)BalletNext (through Saturday) Michele Wiles, a former dancer with American Ballet Theater and the founder of this adventurous company, continues to challenge ballet in new ways. The troupe’s run at New York Live Arts wraps up with a program including “Surmisable Units,” Brian Reeder’s work for six dancers; and Ms. Wiles’s “Apogee in 3,” featuring music by the Grammy-winning trumpeter Tom Harrell and his ensemble. Friday at 7:30 p.m., Saturday at 2 and 7:30 p.m., 219 West 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-924-0077, newyorklivearts.org. (Schaefer)Monica Bill Barnes(Wednesdays through Dec. 16) Karaoke night meets office party in “Happy Hour,” the latest concoction from Ms. Barnes and Anna Bass, best known these days as the dancers — alongside the radio personality Ira Glass — in the touring revue “Three Acts, Two Dancers, One Radio Host.” Their new weekly gig, in a Lower Manhattan dance studio, features the cheeky duo playing two guys playing their everyday selves, as Ms. Barnes continues her love affair with awkwardness, failure and physical comedy. The audience gets drinks, prizes and the chance to sing. At 6:30 p.m., Studio G, Gibney Dance: Agnes Varis Performing Arts Center, 280 Broadway, near Chambers Street, 646-837-6809, monicabillbarnes.com. (Siobhan Burke)BC Beat (Monday) It’s Broadway meets dance showcase meets casual club night. Established and aspiring choreographers working along the theatrical dance spectrum converge on Cielo’s dance floor to test out ideas in front of a rowdy, supportive crowd. Participants at this iteration of the semiannual event include Andy Blankenbuehler (the moves behind “Hamilton”), Sonya Tayeh and the event founder, Jennifer Jancuska, along with a number of performers currently cutting up the Broadway stages. At 7:30 p.m., Cielo, 18 Little West 12th Street, bcbeat.net. (Schaefer)★ Ronald K. Brown (Thursday through Nov. 14 and Nov. 19 through 22) For three decades, Ronald K. Brown and his company, Evidence, have been important contributors to American movement with their seamless blend of traditional African dance and modern dance. The result is always energetic, and often spiritual. To celebrate the company’s 30th anniversary, Mr. Brown presents two programs of work from the past 20 years, including “Why You Follow/Por Que Sigues,” originally created for the Malpaso Dance Company in Cuba and now part of Evidence’s repertory. At 8 p.m., BRIC House, 647 Fulton Street, at Rockwell Place, Fort Greene, Brooklyn, bricartsmedia.org. (Schaefer)Center for Performance Research (Thursday through Nov. 14) Fall Movement is a short festival featuring six choreographers whose work will each be seen twice over three nights. The group is split between those addressing identity politics and those interested in spatial relationships. They include Mirenka Cechova (the female body), Doug LeCours (the gay male body) and Johnnie Cruise Mercer (the Africanist aesthetic); and In Kyung Lee, Suzan D. Polat and Paul Singh. At 7:30 p.m., Center for Performance Research, 361 Manhattan Avenue, Brooklyn, 718-349-1210, cprnyc.org. (Schaefer)★ Company XIV(through Nov. 15) This flirtatious company, which combines ballet and contemporary dance with elements of baroque and burlesque, specializes in sexy, spicy, opulent interpretations of fairy-tale classics. This fall, the director and choreographer Austin McCormick introduces his take on “Cinderella,” which comes with a dash of opera and vaudeville. Because of titillating costumes and scenarios, and free-flowing libations, performances are for adults only. Tuesdays through Saturdays at 8 p.m., Sundays at 5 p.m., Minetta Lane Theater, 18 Minetta Lane, Greenwich Village, 800-745-3000, companyxiv.com. (Schaefer)Volmir Cordeiro (Friday and Saturday) Meet Inês: 57-years old and a mother of two. She wants to be famous. Basically, she’s a desperate, real housewife. She’s also the muse of Volmir Cordeiro, a Brazilian-born, Paris-based artist presenting the solo “Inês” as part of the performance art biennial Performa. Through this aggressive and vulnerable character, which Mr. Cordeiro portrays, he also examines the audience’s constant clamoring for new faces to consume. At 9 p.m., St. Mark’s Church, 131 East 10th Street, East Village, 866-811-4111, danspaceproject.org. (Schaefer)Dynasty Handbag and Nibia Pastrana Santiago (Wednesday through Nov. 14) In Gibney’s Double Plus series, established choreographers organize split-bill evenings of younger artists who intrigue them. This week, Jennifer Monson puts the spotlight on Jibz Cameron, a Los Angeles artist performing as Dynasty Handbag, a Hedwig-esque alter ego giving a concert retrospective called “I Never Were Again, A Concert.” Also receiving Ms. Monson’s blessing is the Puerto Rico-born, San Juan-based artist Nibia Pastrana Santiago, who looks at the politics of tourism and colonialism in choreography in her work “liquid.” At 7:30 p.m., Gibney Dance Performing Arts Center, 280 Broadway, 646-837-6809, gibneydance.org. (Schaefer)Garth Fagan Dance (through Sunday) In a new work, Mr. Fagan pays tribute to his friend — and a friend of many in the worlds of theater, dance and film — the multitalented Geoffrey Holder. Restructured since its summer premiere at Lincoln Center Out of Doors, the piece evokes the festive spirit of Mr. Holder’s work and life, as well as his 59-year marriage to the great dancer Carmen de Lavallade. The evening, saluting the company’s 45th anniversary, also includes some Fagan classics and a premiere by the longtime company member Norwood Pennewell. Friday at 8 p.m., Saturday at 2 and 8 p.m., Sunday at 2 and 7:30 p.m., Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-242-0800, joyce.org. (Burke)★ Neil Greenberg, Yvonne Meier and Jennifer Monson (through Saturday) In “together and separately,” these thoughtful, experienced experimentalists perform, well, together and separately, offering their own works and a brief collaboration. Ms. Monson revisits old ways of working in “Folkdances for an Untidy Cardinal”; Mr. Greenberg presents “this solo,” an outtake from his most recent evening-length work; and Ms. Meier makes some noise with sound-generating costumes and the drummer Chris Jager. At 8 p.m., Jack, 505½ Waverly Avenue, near Fulton Street, Clinton Hill, Brooklyn, jackny.org. (Burke)★ ‘Hagoromo’ (through Sunday) This highly collaborative new work, directed by the visual artist David Michalek and choreographed by David Neumann, reimagines a classic of Japanese Noh drama through opera, dance and puppetry. The sprawling cast and creative team includes members of the Brooklyn Youth Chorus, the musicians of International Contemporary Ensemble and, most centrally, the former New York City Ballet principals Jock Soto and Wendy Whelan, who inhabit the roles of a fisherman and a fallen angel. Friday and Saturday at 7:30 p.m., Sunday at 3 p.m., Harvey Theater, Brooklyn Academy of Music, 651 Fulton Street, Fort Greene, 718-636-4100, bam.org. (Burke)Niall Jones and Nico Brown(through Saturday) Gibney Dance brings back its DoublePlus series, in which well-known choreographers present the work of emerging and underexposed artists. First up this season, selected by Tere O’Connor, are two powerful dancers with smart ideas. Mr. Jones’s “Part II: Jean” explores loss and how the body holds onto it, while Mr. Brown’s “Miami Spice” takes formal inspiration from the wide-open landscapes of his rural upbringing. At 7:30 p.m., Gibney Dance: Agnes Varis Performing Arts Center, 280 Broadway, near Chambers Street, Lower Manhattan, 646-837-6809, gibneydance.org. (Burke)Peter Kyle Dance (Friday through Sunday) Dancers in Mr. Kyle’s work are often in conversation with objects, treating them with both suspicion and respect. In the new work “Vigilance,” three dancers engage with several elegant, pliable panels by the sculptor Caleb Nussear that create compelling architectural shapes. (Or, in one moment, rest on the arm like a feathered wing.) A percussionist supplies the sonic backdrop of this exploration into “immediacy, frailty, strength and the phenomenon of attention,” according to a publicity release. Friday and Saturday at 8 p.m., Sunday at 4 and 8 p.m., Triskelion Arts, Muriel Schulman Theater, 106 Calyer Street, Brooklyn, 718-389-3473, triskelionarts.org. (Schaefer)★ Ralph Lemon(through Tuesday) Mr. Lemon’s exquisitely interdisciplinary “Scaffold Room,” which some New Yorkers may have seen last fall at Bard College, comes to the Kitchen in an expanded format. Part installation (on view during gallery hours) and part performance — or what Mr. Lemon calls “a lecture-performance-musical” — the work engages deeply, sometimes violently, with ideas about the female artist in American contemporary art and pop culture. This iteration includes a Graphic Reading Room, where artists including Yvonne Rainer, Fred Moten and Miguel Gutierrez read explicit passages from works of literature on themes of power, identity and sexuality. At 8 p.m., with additional 2 p.m. performance on Tuesday, 512 West 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-255-5793, thekitchen.org; see website for Graphic Reading schedule. (Burke)Reverbdance(Friday through Sunday) Steps on Broadway is one of New York’s go-to studios for daily dance classes in a variety of styles. Steps Beyond is the organization’s foundation wing supporting dance artists, and the Reverbdance Festival is the foundation’s annual choreography showcase-competition. In its 10th year, Reverbdance welcomes 21 artists split over two programs. The artists hail from across the United States as well as from a few international locales. A prize goes to the audience’s favorite. Friday and Saturday at 8 p.m., Sunday at 3 and 7 p.m., Baruch Performing Arts Center, Nagelberg Theater, East 25th Street between Lexington & Third Avenues, 646-312-5073, baruch.cuny.edu/bpac. (Schaefer)360° Dance Company (Friday through Sunday) Comprising many former dancers of the Martha Graham Dance Company, this troupe presents vintage modern dances, as well as original choreography. In an evening entitled “huMAN,” the company’s founder, Martin Lofsnes, offers up “The Other Room,” a tribute to the modern dance pioneer Mary Anthony, as well as four other works created since 2013. The welcome artifact on the program is Jane Dudley’s still powerful “Time Is Money,” made in 1934, about industrial workers in Depression-era America. Friday and Saturday at 8 p.m., Sunday at 3 p.m., 92nd Street Y, 1395 Lexington Avenue, 212-415-5500, 92y.org. (Schaefer)Advertisement