AdvertisementSupported byBy Nate ChinenLast year, Orquesta Buena Vista Social Club began one long, final spin around the globe, under the banner of its official “Adiós Tour.” The operative word there is “adiós,” and it carries more than the usual implications of a band bidding its audience farewell. A feeling of departure weighed heavily, often dispiritingly, on the ensemble’s sold-out concert on Wednesday, its second of two nights at the Beacon Theater, and its last scheduled stop in the continental United States.“Buena Vista Social Club” was, of course, an album born of discovery and nostalgia. Named after a popular musicians’ haunt in Havana that had closed in the 1940s, it turned a spotlight on veteran Cuban musicians, some of them well into retirement, if not a faded obscurity. The album was produced by Ry Cooder, the American guitarist and roots-music polymath, and released in 1997 on World Circuit Records, eventually selling millions of copies worldwide, winning a Grammy Award, and inspiring a documentary film of the same name.Time and attrition have exacted a toll on the group, in ways that the concert took pains to honor, with unintentionally self-deflating results. Montages of archival photographs and concert footage periodically played on a screen behind the stage, in memorial tribute to former band members. This only sharpened the impression that Orquesta Buena Vista Social Club is, at this point, a shadow of an echo.Maybe that sounds harsh, but here are the names of those departed musicians, in the order by which they were honored on screen: the pianist Rubén González (1919-2003); the bassist Orlando López, known as Cachaíto (1933-2009); the singer Ibrahim Ferrer (1927-2005); the singer and guitarist Compay Segundo (1907-2003); and the singers Pío Leyva (1917-2006) and Mañuel Licea, known as Puntillita (1927-2000). None were expendable; none are replaceable.There are, to be clear, some fine musicians in the ranks. Rolando Luna’s piano playing was full of energy and clarity, though a bit overeager. And the trumpeter Luis Mirabal (known as Guajirito) did standout work in a section that also included his grandfather Luis Manuel Mirabal (known as Guajiro). Idania Valdés and Carlos Calunga made up a lean, likable vocal team.But Mr. Cooder is no longer involved with the project. Nor is the Cuban bandleader Juan de Marcos González, a catalyst for the original album who subsequently served as musical director, helping to turn an assemblage of musicians into an indivisible touring band.The current bandleader of Orquesta Buena Vista Social Club, the trombonist and singer Jesús Ramos, known as Aguaje, exuded an industrious pep, but it wasn’t often that he pulled the band into unforced high gear. One such moment came on “Black Chicken 37,” a soulful descarga originally recorded for the 2001 album “Cachaíto.” (It appears on a compilation called “Lost and Found,” released on World Circuit this spring.) Along with a burbling, percussive groove, it featured a typically thrilling laúd solo by Barbarito Torres, an original member of the group.Orquesta Buena Vista Social Club includes two other original members, and each had time to shine. Eliades Ochoa, whose soaring voice and rhythmic guitar playing were always a core feature of the group, began his mini-set with a signature original, “Estoy Como Nunca,” and followed it with “El Carretero.” Mr. Ochoa’s voice has lost some vibrancy and luster but none of its power — as he proved again later in the show, on a persuasively rousing “Chan Chan.”The other featured artist was the singer Omara Portuondo, who emerged to a standing ovation that she proceeded to justify with her performance. Ms. Portuondo recently turned 85, and frailty has caught up with her movements — but her voice was regal and her phrasing relaxed. She worked with a frisky, curling cadence on “Quizás, Quizás, Quizás,” and seemed to surprise the band when she took a detour from “20 Años” into “Bésame Mucho,” which elicited a singalong.But even in Ms. Portuondo’s triumph there were flickers of sadness. For an encore, she sang “Dos Gardenias,” a bolero famously sung by Mr. Ferrer. She has her own history with the song, and shared it here with the young Spanish jazz singer Andrea Motis, the concert’s opening act. But for anyone who had been missing Mr. Ferrer’s exquisite tenor like a phantom limb, the moment was a bittersweet reminder of farewells already made, as well as those yet to come.Advertisement