AdvertisementSupported byBy Anthony TommasiniThe grimly somber slow movement of Shostakovich’s String Quartet No. 8 might seem an unlikely musical backdrop for a troupe of acrobats. But the 14 members of the Australian ensemble Circa who performed “Opus” on Wednesday at the Brooklyn Academy of Music are more like acrobatic dancers. Or dancing acrobats. Either way, they are amazing.“Opus,” directed by Yaron Lifschitz, Circa’s artistic director, in collaboration with the Debussy String Quartet, is a 85-minute, uninterrupted work that combines three Shostakovich string quartets with Circa’s stunning, fearless yet poignantly vulnerable movements.The Eighth Quartet, written in 1960 and dedicated to victims of fascism and war, is the central work in “Opus,” presented as part of the academy’s Next Wave Festival. As this staging begins, we see the four barefoot members of the Debussy Quartet (the violinists Christophe Collette and Marc Vieillefon, violist Vincent Deprecq, cellist Cédric Conchon), in a row facing the audience, wearing black pants and white shirts. (They play the program from memory; the instruments are lightly amplified.)Eventually, members of Circa encircled the musicians, guided them to chairs and blindfolded them. During the furious second movement, a wild dance, two rows of barefoot acrobats — women in factory-gray dresses, men in black slacks and white shirts — march in stiff lines forward and back. Others emerge from the wings, leaping across the stage, tumbling, rolling over, jumping into one another’s arms, all trying, it would seem, to disrupt the distressing music.Later in the piece, after a bittersweet waltz, comes that wrenching slow movement, in which sustained droning lines mingle, punctuated by a recurring three-stroke figure, like an ominous pounding at your front door or within your head. During this episode, one male member of Circa lifted up the quartet’s first violinist by the waist and carried him to the rear of the stage as the others kept playing. A group of acrobats, lying facedown on the floor, gathered around the chair, clinging to it, seemingly desperate. Then one of them, a bare-chested man, balancing on the chair, performed a routine of hand stands and twisted gyrations. The choreography — and that’s what it was — seemed an elegy to the missing violinist.The program began with a kind of overture, a wistful Adagio that Shostakovich wrote as a student, during which the acrobats dangled from ropes and formed piles of bodies. During the String Quartet No. 11 (1966), a piece preoccupied with death, the Circa members formed pyramids, sometimes standing atop one another’s shoulders, three high. In the final work, the String Quartet No. 5 (1952), especially the rigorous neo-Classical first movement, the staging had playful stretches. Now in bathing suits, the acrobats looked like friends at the beach: excited yet wary, jogging in circles manically, lifting group members by their hands and feet and tossing them into a waiting mass of tangled arms.The idea of “Opus” may sound gimmicky. Yet I have seldom listened so attentively to these Shostakovich scores.“Opus” runs through Sunday at Howard Gilman Opera House, Brooklyn Academy of Music, 30 Lafayette Avenue; 718-722-7839, bam.org.Advertisement