AdvertisementSupported byBy David Allen“Perfection, revelation, incarnation, grace, redemption.” Those are just some of the qualities that two centuries of thinkers have associated with Mozart, writes the musicologist Scott Burnham in his book “Mozart’s Grace.”Because Mozart’s music contains all of those things and more, we might add another characteristic: its difficulty for a conductor. As Alan Gilbert writes in his program note for the New York Philharmonic’s latest subscription program, Mozart “looks simple on the page, but the number of decisions one has to make is astonishing.”In concert, diligent planning has to give way to a sense of spark, something that has been lacking in Mr. Gilbert’s Mozart. He has conducted a lot of this composer during his tenure as the Philharmonic’s music director, from piano concertos with Lang Lang, to religious Masses, to the supposed trilogy of final symphonies. Another all-Mozart outing on Wednesday evening at David Geffen Hall was a little more inventive: what should have been a delightful program of a divertimento, a horn concerto and the great serenade for 13 players, the “Gran Partita.”Yet delight flashed rarely. Most brightly it came from the clarinet of Anthony McGill, the orchestra’s principal on that instrument. In the “Gran Partita” (K. 361/370a), spontaneity was generally in short supply, with balances murky and phrasing stiff. But Mr. McGill was a beacon of sophistication, his tone suave and calm, then perky and rustic, all of which made for an intriguing tension with the oboist Liang Wang, who was more interested in rhythmic vibrancy and occasional embellishment.Mr. Gilbert’s brusque Classicism better suited the early Divertimento in D (K. 136). That string work neatly balanced the “Gran Partita,” and the Philharmonic’s instrumentalists were convincing, with an earthy tone and not a hint of prissiness. That verve evaporated in a sleepy shuffle through the Horn Concerto No. 2 (K. 417), in which the orchestra’s earnest principal hornist Philip Myers, though warmly applauded by his peers, could have brought more character and bounce to the solo line.This program runs through Saturday at David Geffen Hall, Lincoln Center; 212-875-5656, nyphil­.org.Advertisement