AdvertisementSupported byFull reviews of recent classical performances: nytimes.com/classical. A searchable guide to these and other performances is at nytimes.com/events.‘Iolanthe’ (Saturday and Sunday) For more than 40 years, under the founding artistic director, Albert Bergeret, the New York Gilbert & Sullivan Players has won a loyal audience for its broadly comic, often madcap productions of these canonical operettas. The group opens its New York season with a revival of “Iolanthe.” Saturday at 2 and 7:30 p.m., Sunday at 3 p.m., Skirball Center for the Performing Arts, 566 La Guardia Place, at Washington Square South, Greenwich Village, 212-998-4941, nyuskirball.org. (Anthony Tommasini)★ ‘Lulu’(Monday) The South African artist and director William Kentridge takes on Berg’s psychologically riveting portrait of this iconic femme fatale in a production that promises to be as chilling as his production of Shostakovich’s “Nose” was zany. The acclaimed soprano Marlis Petersen offers what she says is her last Lulu in a strong cast that also includes Susan Graham, Daniel Brenna and Johan Reuter. Lothar Koenigs conducts. At 7 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Corinna da Fonseca-Wollheim)★ ‘Rigoletto’ (Saturday and Tuesday) The luminous soprano Olga Peretyatko is a captivating Gilda opposite the bright-voiced tenor Stephen Costello as the Duke of Mantua in this fresh and confident revival of Michael Mayer’s production set in a Las Vegas casino. The baritone George Gagnidze marshals impressive depths in the title role; the bass Stefan Kocan and the mezzo Katarina Leoson make a fine pair as the assassin Sparafucile and his sister Maddalena. Pablo Heras-Casado conducts. Saturday at 8 p.m., Tuesday at 7:30 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)‘Tosca’(Friday and Wednesday) Luc Bondy’s grim-louche production has hosted a rotating cast of principals this fall. On Friday, the singer-conductor Plácido Domingo takes over the musical direction after an absence forced by illness (ceding the podium for one night to Joseph Colaneri on Wednesday.) The soprano Maria Guleghina and the tenor Marcello Giordani take on the lead roles with Scarpia sung by Zeljko Lucic on Friday and James Morris on Wednesday. Friday at 8 p.m. and Wednesday at 7.30 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)‘Turandot’(Saturday and Thursday) Two Turandots take the stage in this seemingly everlasting run of Puccini’s problematic classic: Lise Lindstrom on Saturday, and Jennifer Wilson on Thursday. Hibla Gerzmava returns as Liù this week, and Franco Zeffirelli’s immense production gains a new Calàf, Yusif Eyvazov. Saturday at 12:30 p.m., Thursday at 7:30 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (David Allen)★ Bach Collegium Japan (Friday) Since the eminent early music conductor Masaaki Suzuki founded the period-instrument Bach Collegium Japan in 1990, the ensemble has done essential and acclaimed work in its home country and on tour. Mr. Suzuki brings the group to Zankel Hall for a program of Bach, Vivaldi and Handel, including Bach’s Cantata No. 51, featuring the soprano Joanne Lunn. Friday at 7:30 p.m., Zankel Hall, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Tommasini)Julia Bullock(Tuesday) This fast-rising American soprano presents her Naumburg Foundation recital, accompanied by the pianist Renate Rohlfing. The invigoratingly idiosyncratic program draws a wide arc from John Cage to Kurt Weill, taking in well-known gems and rarities by American, French and Scandinavian composers along the way. At 7 p.m., Grace Rainey Rogers Auditorium, Metropolitan Museum of Art, 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org/tickets. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)Chamber Music Society(Tuesday, Thursday) Thursday’s CMS event is one of the most anticipated of the season: The outstanding Danish String Quartet gives the complete quartets of Carl Nielsen. On Tuesday, more usual fare spans British and French music, including Britten’s String Quartet No. 1 (the Amphion String Quartet), Fauré’s Piano Quintet No. 1 (with Anne-Marie McDermott) and the American premiere of Helen Grime’s “Aviary Sketches.” Tuesday at 7:30 p.m., Alice Tully Hall, Thursday at 7:30 p.m., Rose Studio, Lincoln Center, 212-875-5788, chambermusicsociety.org. (Allen)★ Christian Gerhaher(Tuesday) There is no more sublime singer than this baritone. He and Gerold Huber, his recital partner, return to the hall they opened in 2013 with songs by Haydn and Beethoven, Schoenberg and Berg. At 7:30 p.m., Board of Officers Room, Park Avenue Armory, 643 Park Avenue, at 67th Street, 212-933-5812, armoryonpark.org. (Allen)Juilliard Orchestra(Thursday) The conductor Pablo Heras-Casado, in residence at Juilliard, leads this energetic young ensemble in Prokofiev’s “Cinderella” Suite, Stravinsky’s Concerto in D (with the Juilliard violinist Bomsori Kim as soloist) and Rachmaninoff’s Symphonic Dances. At 7:30 p.m., Alice Tully Hall, Lincoln Center, 212-799-5000, events.juilliard.edu. (Vivien Schweitzer)★ Evgeny Kissin (Friday) The Russian virtuoso pianist Evgeny Kissin always plays to overflow crowds at Carnegie Hall. This season, as part of his Perspectives series at the hall, he is playing a demanding recital program twice in a single week, the first pianist to do so at Carnegie since Horowitz. The final one is on Friday. The program offers works by Mozart, Beethoven, Brahms, Albéniz and Larregla. Friday at 8 p.m., Isaac Stern Auditorium, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Tommasini)Isabel Leonard(Thursday) This expressive mezzo-soprano teams with the guitarist Sharon Isbin for a program of Spanish music, including works by Albéniz and Granados and an arrangement of Falla’s “Siete Canciones Populares Españolas.” The lineup also features the premiere of Richard Danielpour’s “Of Love and Longing.” At 7:30 p.m., Zankel Hall, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Schweitzer)★ New York Philharmonic(Friday through Nov. 17) One of the Philharmonic’s busiest weeks in recent times begins with two Contact! concerts at the Metropolitan Museum of Art (Friday and Saturday at 7 p.m.) that pair Thomas Adès’s “Chamber Symphony” with the collaborative “Wave Movements,” by Richard Reed Parry and Bryce Dessner. Over at David Geffen Hall, Alan Gilbert conducts an all-Mozart program (Friday and Saturday at 8 p.m.), before the orchestra’s Rachmaninoff festival gets underway with the star youngster Daniil Trifonov playing both the “Rhapsody on a Theme of Paganini” and the Piano Concerto No. 2 (Wednesday through Nov. 14 as well as Nov. 17). As part of that, the New York Festival of Song presents a program putting Rachmaninov’s songs in American context at the Kaufman Music Center (Tuesday at 8 p.m.). Full details are at 212-875-5656 and nyphil.org. (Allen)Orchestra of St. Luke’s(Thursday) This fine ensemble partners with the Saint Thomas Choir of Men and Boys for Mozart’s “Requiem” and Haydn’s “Nelson Mass.” Andrew Nethsingha conducts; soloists include the soprano Katharine Dain, the mezzo Brenda Patterson, the tenor Dann Coakwell and the bass Charles Perry Sprawls. At 7:30 p.m., St. Thomas Church, 1 West 53rd Street, at Fifth Avenue, 212-664-9360, oslmusic.org. (Schweitzer)Sonic Blossom(All week) “May I give you the gift of a song?” Don’t say no if you are accosted with this question at the Metropolitan Museum this weekend. Answer in the affirmative and you not only receive the gift of a Schubert song, sung by one of a roving team of young singers, but become part of the artist Lee Mingwei’s interactive performance work, “Sonic Blossom.” (Through Nov. 8) The Blanche and A. L. Levine Court (Friday and Saturday), the Arthur M. Sackler Gallery (Sunday through Thursday), during museum hours. Metropolitan Museum of Art, 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)Tactus Ensemble(Thursday) Jeffrey Milarsky conducts the Manhattan School of Music’s contemporary music ensemble in Louis Andriessen’s “Workers Union,” Earle Brown’s “Windsor Jambs” and Jacob Druckman’s “Come Round.” At 7:30 p.m. Greenfield Hall, Manhattan School of Music, 122nd Street and Broadway, Morningside Heights, 917-493-4428, msmnyc.edu. (Schweitzer)Jean-Yves Thibaudet(Wednesday) This sophisticated French pianist offers a colorful program of works by two composers who expanded the piano’s color palette. Schumann’s “Kinderszenen” and Piano Sonata No. 1 are juxtaposed with Ravel’s “Miroirs” and “Pavane pour une infante défunte.” At 8 p.m. Isaac Stern Auditorium, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)‘A Midsummer Night’s Dream’(through Sunday) Expect an explosion of high-energy drumming and powerful voices as the Isango Ensemble, a South African company that draws on the deep pool of vocal talent from the townships around Cape Town, takes on Britten’s opera with a dusting of African folklore. Friday at 7 p.m., Saturday at 2 and 7 p.m., Sunday at noon and 5 p.m., New Victory Theater, 209 West 42nd Street, Manhattan, 646-223-3010, newvictory.org. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)Advertisement