By HOLLAND COTTERNOV. 5, 2015
Two years ago, the New York artist R. H. Quaytman was invited to do a show at the Tel Aviv Museum of Art. She traveled to Israel to research themes for a new body of work, and found one in a piece of 20th-century Modernist art: Paul Klee’s 1920 monoprint “Angelus Novus,” a jewel in the collection of the Israel Museum in Jerusalem.Martin Luther is shown in this Quaytman painting from 2015.The image, of a large-headed, wide-eyed, birdlike figure with arms or wings raised as if in astonishment or alarm, has an extraordinary provenance. It was owned by the critic Walter Benjamin, who, when he fled Paris ahead of the Nazi arrival, entrusted it to the writer and philosopher Georges Bataille, from whom it passed to the social critic Theodor Adorno. What attracted Ms. Quaytman, though, was less the work’s history than its appearance, including what she suspected to be an older print underlying Klee’s.After two years of research, she determined that Klee had indeed mounted his image on a 19th-century print based on a portrait by Lucas Cranach (1472-1553) of Martin Luther, who, late in his life, gave voice to violent anti-Semitism. There’s no way of knowing whether Klee’s choice of the portrait was deliberate. Its presence certainly complicates one of Israel’s most treasured art objects, one that Benjamin took as the model for his famous “angel of history.”Ms. Quaytman, a subtle and intellectually scrupulous artist, spells out these complications and adds some of her own in this solo show of mostly recent paintings that take the visual interaction of the angel and Luther, one or the other always advancing or receding, as their theme. The result is an exhibition almost entirely about hiding and revealing, and hiding again. It’s as tight and expansive and emotionally rich as a book of interlocked poems.R. H. QuaytmanMiguel Abreu Gallery36 Orchard Street, Lower East SideThrough Nov. 15A version of this review appears in print on November 6, 2015, on Page C30 of the New York edition with the headline: R.H. Quaytman’s Variations on Klee’s Angel.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.