NOV. 5, 2015
Full reviews of recent jazz performances: nytimes.com/jazz. A searchable guide to these and other shows is at nytimes.com/events.Stanley Clarke (through Nov. 15) The bass virtuoso Stanley Clarke has a peppy recent album, “Up,” that makes a show of his breadth, ranging from chamber miniatures to fusion odysseys. He leads his working band this weekend, and next Thursday and Friday. On Tuesday and Wednesday he’ll work in an all-star trio with the pianist George Cables and the drummer Lenny White. Tuesdays through Sundays at 8 and 10:30 p.m., 131 West Third Street, Greenwich Village, 212-475-8592, bluenote.net. (Nate Chinen)Anat Cohen Quartet: Celebrando Brasil (Saturday) A clarinetist and tenor saxophonist of irresistible rhythmic aplomb, Ms. Cohen has a new album, “Luminosa,” that covers some of her key interests, notably the music of Brazilian composers like Milton Nascimento. She draws from the album here, with a buoyant, well-bonded band that includes Jason Lindner on piano, Gilad Hekselman and Cesar Garabini on guitars and Daniel Freedman on drums. At 8 p.m., Miller Theater, Broadway at 116th Street, Morningside Heights, 212-854-7799, millertheatre.com. (Chinen)★ Steve Coleman at the Vanguard (Tuesday through Nov. 15) The alto saxophonist and composer Steve Coleman has long been an indefatigable outlier in jazz, engaged in esoteric but vital work on the margins. Early in his career, he was a regular at the Village Vanguard, as a member of the Thad Jones/Mel Lewis Orchestra — but this will be his overdue debut as a bandleader. He’s bringing several interrelated projects, starting on Tuesday and Wednesday with Natal Eclipse, a chamber group whose ranks include the trumpeter Jonathan Finlayson, the violinist Kristin Lee, the pianist Crag Taborn and the vocalist Jen Shyu. On Thursday he leads his flagship band, Five Elements, which includes Mr. Finlayson and the guitarist Miles Okazaki. At 8:30 and 10:30 p.m., Village Vanguard, 178 Seventh Avenue South, at 11th Street, West Village, 212-255-4037, villagevanguard.com. (Chinen)AdvertisementHenry Grimes 80th Birthday Celebration (Friday) Mr. Grimes, a long-lost, load-bearing pillar of the 1960s avant-garde, just turned 80, and will celebrate with this gala concert and dinner. Joining him, mostly in improvised duos, is a range of musicians including the drummers Andrew Cyrille and Denardo Coleman; the pianist Connie Crothers; the guitarists Brandon Ross and Marc Ribot; and the saxophonists Antoine Roney and Andrew Lamb. From 7 to 10:30 p.m., Jan Hus Presbyterian Church & Neighborhood House, 351 East 74th Street, Manhattan, 212-841-0899, henrygrimes.com. (Chinen)David Hazeltine with George Mraz and Billy Drummond (Friday and Saturday) On “For All We Know,” his crisp recent album, the pianist David Hazeltine leads a sure-footed quartet in a post-bop vein. He’ll scale back just a little here, in a trio with Mr. Mraz, an impeccable bassist, and Mr. Drummond, a sensitive drummer. From 9:30 p.m. to midnight, Mezzrow, 163 West 10th Street, Greenwich Village, 646-476-4346, mezzrow.com. (Chinen)★ Vijay Iyer — ‘Holding It Down: The Veterans’ Dream Project’(Thursday) Mr. Iyer, a pianist and composer, has had a long-running collaboration with the poet Mike Ladd, and in “Holding It Down: The Veterans’ Dreams Project,” they find a potent channel for their sharp sociopolitical critique. Organized around a series of interviews with minority soldiers, it’s an engrossing multimedia work that explores the subconscious, national and personal identity, and the tensions between duty and conscience. At 7:30 p.m., Grace Rainey Rogers Auditorium, Metropolitan Museum of Art, 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org/tickets. (Chinen)AdvertisementDavid Kikoski Trio(Friday) A pianist of broad experience and even broader capability, Mr. Kikoski leads a nimble trio with Boris Kozlov on bass and Ari Hoenig on drums. At 8 and 10 p.m., Jazz at Kitano, 66 Park Avenue, at 38th Street, Manhattan, 212-885-7119, kitano.com. (Chinen)Russell Malone Quartet(Friday through Sunday) Mr. Malone has a recent album, “Love Looks Good on You,” that confirms his stature as a guitarist of taste and tradition. Joining him for this weekend stand, as on the album, are the pianist Rick Germanson, the bassist Gerald Cannon and the drummer Willie Jones III. At 7, 9 and 10:30 p.m., Smoke, 2751 Broadway, at 106th Street, Manhattan, 212-864-6662, smokejazz.com. (Chinen)Hugh Masekela and Larry Willis: ‘Best of Friends’(through Sunday) Mr. Masekela, the South African fluegelhorn player, is among the most statesmanlike of jazz musicians, a melodist forever aware of his transaction with an audience. He usually performs with a poplike band, but here — as on some similar recent engagements — he pares down to a duo format with Mr. Willis, a soulful American pianist with whom he has some history. At 7:30 and 9:30 p.m., Jazz Standard, 116 East 27th Street, Manhattan, 212-576-2232, jazzstandard.net. (Chinen)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mostly Other People Do the Killing(Wednesday) “Mauch Chunk” is the new album by this insurrectionist free-bop band, which has been whittled down from a quintet to a quartet. Its lineup, still led by the bassist Moppa Elliott, also features Jon Irabagon on saxophones, Ron Stabinsky on piano and Kevin Shea on drums. At 8 p.m., Cornelia Street Café, 29 Cornelia Street, Greenwich Village, 212-989-9319, corneliastreetcafe.com. (Chinen)N.E.A. Jazz Masters: The Music of Miles Davis & Cannonball Adderley(Friday) Every year the National Endowment for the Arts bestows the encomium of Jazz Master on a handful of accomplished musicians, and every year a few past honorees appear at Flushing Town Hall. This year’s concert features the saxophonist Jimmy Heath and the pianist Barry Harris, among others, in a tribute to two of their illustrious former peers. At 8 p.m., 137-35 Northern Boulevard, Flushing, Queens, 718-463-7700, flushingtownhall.org. (Chinen)★ Mario Pavone 75th Birthday Celebration(Saturday) Mr. Pavone, a resourcefully exploratory bassist and composer, has created a range of sturdy, scintillating work for trio, quartet and larger formats under the banner of Arc music. Here, in advance of his 75th birthday, he connects with Dave Ballou on trumpet, Oscar Noriega on clarinets and Devin Gray on drums. At 9 and 10:30 p.m., Cornelia Street Cafe, 29 Cornelia Street, Greenwich Village, 212 989-9319, corneliastreetcafe.com. (Chinen)★ Pérez, Patitucci, Blade(Tuesday through Nov. 15) Since the turn of this century, the pianist Danilo Pérez, the bassist John Patitucci and the drummer Brian Blade have been refining a sleek, ecstatic bond within the Wayne Shorter Quartet. They recently began working as a stand-alone trio, bringing an open-ended spirit of inquiry and deep reserves of collective intuition. They’ll draw here, loosely, from their new debut album, “Children of the Light.” At 7:30 and 9:30 p.m., Jazz Standard, 116 East 27th Street, Manhattan, 212-576-2232, jazzstandard.net. (Chinen)Lew Tabackin Quartet: Remembering Zoot(Saturday) Zoot Sims was a tenor saxophonist with a gruff tone but a well-developed tender streak, and an effortless technical command — qualities you might also apply to Mr. Tabackin, who pays tribute here. His experienced rhythm section consists of Don Friedman on piano, Bill Crow on bass and Mark Taylor on drums. At 8 and 10 p.m., Jazz at Kitano, 66 Park Avenue, at 38th Street, Manhattan, 212-885-7119, kitano.com. (Chinen)★ TD James Moody Jazz Festival(Saturday through Nov. 15) This festival in Newark, N.J., now in its fourth year, celebrates the legacy of James Moody, a saxophonist of wit and ebullience. Among the highlights are a free concert by the Oliver Lake Organ Quartet, at 7:30 p.m. on Saturday at Bethany Baptist Church, 275 West Market Street; a performance by the Gypsy guitarist Dorado Schmitt and the Django Festival Allstars, at 7:30 p.m. on Wednesday at New Jersey Performing Arts Center, 1 Center Street; and in the same hall, a two-night run by the eminent singer Tony Bennett, at 8 p.m. on Thursday and next Friday. More information is at njpac.org. (Chinen)★ Threadgill, Iyer and Prieto(Friday and Saturday) This special confab, presented as part of the Jazz Gallery’s 20th anniversary celebration, features several prominent composer-bandleaders with a flair for experiments in timbre and pulse. The multi-reedist Henry Threadgill, a charter member of the Association for the Advancement of Creative Musicians, is the elder statesman of the group, still fearlessly pushing; the drummer Dafnis Prieto, originally from Cuba, is a distinguished former sideman of his. And the pianist Vijay Iyer is a fount of rhythmic dynamism, capable of bringing hard gravity to even the most abstract group interactions. At 7:30 and 9:30 p.m., 1160 Broadway, fifth floor, at West 27th Street, 646-494-3625, jazzgallery.org. (Chinen)Advertisement★ John Zorn at the Vanguard(through Sunday) One of the least expected new staples at the Village Vanguard has been John Zorn, the avant-garde composer, alto saxophonist and provocateur. But this will be his third headlining engagement at the club in 18 months. On Friday he leads the Dreamers; for the early set on Saturday he presents a quartet with Wadada Leo Smith on trumpet, Bill Laswell on bass and Milford Graves on drums. He’ll preside over (but perhaps not perform in) a group called Asmodeus, which plays the late set on Saturday and the early set on Sunday. Closing out the run is Simulacrum, featuring the keyboardist John Medeski. At 8:30 and 10:30 p.m., Village Vanguard, 178 Seventh Avenue South, at 11th Street, West Village, 212-255-4037, villagevanguard.com. (Chinen)A version of this schedule appears in print on November 6, 2015, on Page C19 of the New York edition with the headline: The Listings: Jazz.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.