
Antiques By                     
EVE M. KAHN

NOV. 5, 2015
As soon as Charles Lindbergh completed his trans-Atlantic flight on May 21, 1927, souvenir hunters started tearing apart his plane and trailing after him. Manufacturers put his image on lingerie, crayon boxes, calendars, cigar wrappers, pocket mirrors, board games, tapestries and bookends.On Nov. 13, an exhibition opens at the Morven Museum & Garden in Princeton, N.J., with objects that testify to his fame as well as his political missteps, family tragedy and marital dysfunction.The show, “Charles and Anne Morrow Lindbergh: Couple of an Age,” juxtaposes portraits of Lindbergh and fragments of his planes with their likenesses on toys and cosmetics containers. There is also crime-scene evidence from 1932, when someone climbed a handmade ladder, entered the couple’s home near Hopewell, N.J., and kidnapped their 20-month-old son, Charles Jr. The boy was found dead nearby two months later. A miniature ladder in the exhibition, which later belonged to Maurice Sendak, was made locally and sold as a macabre souvenir during the trial of Richard Hauptmann, convicted of abducting and murdering the child.The museum has also gathered awards that Mr. Lindbergh received from Nazi leaders and printed materials from an anti-Semitic, isolationist movement that he supported. The galleries will cover Mrs. Lindbergh’s achievements as an author, pilot and explorer, and her husband’s fathering of at least seven children with at least three German women, two of them sisters.AdvertisementElizabeth Allan, the museum’s curator of collections and exhibitions, said that the show will explore how the intensity of celebrity overwhelmed the Lindberghs when they were still newlyweds. Before the kidnapping, the couple had settled with their toddler into the new house, complete with an airstrip.“It was hopefully their chance for a normal life together,” Ms. Allan said.James Davidson, 67, a Lindbergh artifacts collector who grew up in the area and lives near the couple’s former home (now a treatment center for girls with behavioral and substance abuse problems), is lending dozens of pieces to the Morven show. His family knew people who played roles in the Hauptmann trial. He has written and lectured widely on the subject, and he describes himself as “an obsessive-compulsive collector.”He has spent hundreds of dollars for pieces of Lindbergh material. “I’m trying not to let it take over my life,” he said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He regards Lindbergh as a complicated person, and says of Anne, “I feel sorry for her — she’s a tragic figure in history.”AdvertisementHe is writing a book about the throngs of people who descended on the nearby town of Flemington while the Hauptmann trial took place in a courthouse there. Hundreds of telephone and telegraph lines were installed to disseminate news reports. Starlets and prostitutes mingled with journalists on streets littered with shards of camera flashbulbs. Souvenir envelopes were printed with images of the handmade ladder. Members of the public, occasionally given access to the courtroom, tried to steal furniture, rummaged in the trash and carved their initials into the judge’s bench.The New Jersey State Police Museum is lending the museum evidence from the trial, including a sketch of a ladder that turned up in Hauptmann’s papers and a pair of black suede pumps that belonged to his wife, Anna.A relative of a lawyer who defended Hauptmann recently contacted Mr. Davidson about giving him a newly rediscovered trove of the lawyer’s papers.This week in New York, Heritage Auctions in Dallas offered two copies of Anne Lindbergh’s books about the couple’s aviation adventures (one sold, for $1,250). Both Lindberghs signed the volumes; one of them was inscribed in 1938, while they were living on Illiec, a rocky speck of an island along the northern coast of France that they bought as a family retreat.The books were dedicated to H. Norman Schwarzkopf Sr., New Jersey’s first state police superintendent (and father of the commander of the American-led forces in the 1991 Persian Gulf war); he oversaw the investigation into the Lindbergh child’s kidnapping and murder.A version of this article appears in print on November 6, 2015, on Page C32 of the New York edition with the headline: Triumph to Tragedy in Lindbergh Show.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »