By ROBERTA SMITHNOV. 5, 2015
From 1969 to 1976, the artist Jared Bark all but exhausted the aesthetic possibilities of the common photo booth.At the time, Mr. Bark was a young New York performance artist who had grown up in Palo Alto, Calif., aware of the motion photographs of Eadweard Muybridge. He initially used public booths, but soon acquired a secondhand one of his own, even as other artists preferred the newly released Sony Porta Pak video cameras.The 34 pieces of photo booth works at Southfirst — selected by Maika Pollack, an art historian and the gallery’s owner — form a museum-quality show that reveals a fascinatingly rich intersection of early-1970s art concerns.In the booth’s tiny space, Mr. Bark pursued body art, serial imagery, narrative work, Minimalist abstraction and early appropriation art. While Andy Warhol had based his portrait paintings on photo booth images, Mr. Bark stuck with the booth from start to end: Performance, documentation and finished artwork were synonymous. To form gridded fields, he had only to place side-by-side eight-inch strips of four images produced in the booth.Sometimes the images are discrete, as when the artist’s fingers on one hand count numbers with increasing erraticness, like Systems art unraveling. Sometimes each row is continuous, as when the artist’s navel seems to plot four horizontal graphs. Sometimes the strips form imposing black-and-white abstractions, achieved by holding a black stick in front of the booth’s lighted screen or by blocking all or part of it.Body and abstraction merge in a piece whose two triangles are actually the artist’s arms held up or down on the diagonal. One piece shows only the open spreads of a bodybuilding magazine. Mr. Bark was rephotographing photographs, like the vaunted Pictures Generation, only earlier.Jared Bark‘Photobooth Works, 1969-1976’Southfirst60 North Sixth Street, Williamsburg, BrooklynThrough Nov. 15A version of this review appears in print on November 6, 2015, on Page C31 of the New York edition with the headline: Jared Bark’s Black-and-White Photo Booth Creations.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.