By ALASTAIR MACAULAYNOV. 5, 2015
BalletCollective’s program “Invisible Divide” leaves a number of burning images in the mind, chiefly ones that revealingly illustrate modern masculinity. Thanks to the choreographer Troy Schumacher, the three male dancers — Harrison Coll (who has moments worthy of James Dean), David Prottas and Taylor Stanley — register with powerful individuality. The way they do so in the contexts both of women and of one another is arresting, fresh, exploratory.The excitement is heightened by live, new music. There are four scores, all commissioned for the company and all good, played at the Skirball Center at New York University for this two-night engagement by the 10 players of Hotel Elefant (the instrumentation of each score is especially fine) and composed by Ellis Ludwig-Leone and Mark Dancigers.And stronger than any one dancer is the sense of modern quasi-adolescent community, as in so many of the ballets of Jerome Robbins. The climate is often that of a youth club, with steps being passed around like wildfire. These young people don’t yet know who they are; phrases are all stops and starts; body language is informal; everything is an investigation.Mr. Schumacher and his seven dancers all belong to New York City Ballet, for which he has now also choreographed twice. The program takes its name, “Invisible Divide,” from one of Wednesday’s two world premieres, an ensemble featuring Mr. Coll. Another premiere, “The Last Time This Ended,” is a duet for Mr. Prottas and Mr. Stanley. The other two pieces were seen in BalletCollective’s 2014 season: “All That We See,” for five dancers, and “Dear and Blackbirds,” a male-female duet for Ashley Laracey and Mr. Coll. All the performers look marvelous; Vanessa Upson, the singer in “Invisible Divide,” makes an impression of appealing intensity.Advertisement“Dear and Blackbirds” is an amorous boy-girl encounter, but Mr. Coll (absent from its 2014 performances with an injury) brings a quality of wildness that transforms it. In “Invisible Divide,” where he’s isolated for most of the work, that quality becomes fervent. In one solo he’s impelled by raw private forces: energy sweeps his torso around in a powerful circle, hauntingly.The mood of the male duet “The Last Time This Ended” is contrastingly intimate. Mr. Prottas and Mr. Stanley behave as if discovering each other as colleagues and partners: they might be friends, lovers, or both. Mr. Prottas, a dancer of force and authority, is the most mature presence onstage, Mr. Stanley the most lyrically compelling; here they’re equals.AdvertisementThe program suggests that Mr. Schumacher loves ballet but not classicism. Nowhere here do we find firm structure or complexity of phrase; there’s no interest in ballerinadom. Often his shortness of phrase makes him like an author who at all costs avoids subordinate clauses. That steps-like-wildfire choreographic device is maddeningly overdone; you see the same jump or turn passing round the group onstage like a contagion — you also see the same few steps far too often. These limitations have nothing to do with the finest features of Mr. Schumacher’s work; but they bog down its poetry.A version of this review appears in print on November 6, 2015, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline: Youthful Wildness and Questioning in Partnerships Like Love.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.