AdvertisementSupported byInside ArtBy Robin PogrebinThose perusing catalogs for the coming art auctions may have done a double take when viewing Christie’s cover for its postwar and contemporary art sale on Tuesday, featuring Warhol’s 1962 acrylic and silk-screen “Four Marilyns.”Didn’t that quadruplicate painting of his muse, Marilyn Monroe, sell for $38.2 million at Phillips just two years ago?The hammer did come down on that work at Phillips in 2013 — and was the cover of one of that auction house’s catalogs — and the winning bidder was Gagosian Gallery, on behalf of a client on the phone who, it turns out, was the Russian collector Mikhail Fridman.But the sale did not last long; the painting was privately sold just eight months ago by Phillips to the collector Kemal Has Cingillioglu, son of the Turkish financier Halit Cingillioglu, for $44 million.And Mr. Cingillioglu has now flipped the work to sell at Christie’s, where it is estimated at $40 million to $60 million and has been guaranteed by the auction house.Why repeat the cover of a catalog? “It’s a great painting, and it was totally undersold the last time,” said Brett Gorvy, Christie’s worldwide chairman of postwar and contemporary art. He added that there are only three of the “four times-Marilyn” and that “this version is the best because it has the orange background.”Postscript: The Boston philanthropist Barbara Lee is the unnamed collector selling Roy Lichtenstein’s “Nurse” (1964) in Christie’s “The Artist’s Muse” sale on Monday, those with knowledge of the consignment say. Ms. Lee, who declined to be interviewed, has focused on the work of female artists and bought the painting in 1995 for $1.7 million. Its low estimate is $80 million.“I’m a prisoner of the ’80s,” said the artist Eric Fischl. “More specifically, I’m locked into this psychosexual suburban drama that had been ascribed to me in the ’80s. She, to some extent, is also a prisoner of the ’80s.”The “she” in question is the dealer Mary Boone, with whom Mr. Fischl has parted ways after 36 years. “We went as far as we could go together,” he said. “There were certain things I was wanting to see if I could make happen — she wasn’t able to do it for me — like recontextualize my work.”“I love Mary,” he added, “and I’m so grateful to have been connected to her.”Ms. Boone said, “Many times artists feel that changing galleries will change the perception of their work.”“Eric’s a great friend,” she added, “and I wish the best for him.”Mr. Fischl is moving to Per Skarstedt’s gallery, which will present a solo exhibition of his new paintings at its Upper East Side location in May. Mr. Skarstedt “has a different clientele base than Mary does, so he thinks that’ll be energizing,” Mr. Fischl said.Mr. Skarstedt said that he had long admired the artist’s work, adding that Mr. Fischl’s palette had “really changed in the new work.”Although still best known for his moody domestic scenes, Mr. Fischl said his work had evolved into other subjects, like bullfighting, India and art fairs. “People aren’t connecting that it’s me there who’s following threads and themes in my life,” he said, adding that he hoped people would begin to approach his work with a more open-minded curiosity, as in, “What’s he doing now?”Skarstedt is a comfortable place for Mr. Fischl to land, given that it already represents so-called midcareer artists in Mr. Fischl’s cohort, like the American painters David Salle and George Condo. Mr. Fischl said that he was wary of the category midcareer.“The middle is like purgatory,” he said. “It’s not eternal, but you have no idea whether it’s going to last or where you’re going to go once it’s over.”Even as the Norwegian artist Edvard Munch made a strong impact on his Austrian and German contemporaries in helping usher in 20th-century Expressionism, they in turn made an impact on him. In a show opening on Feb. 18, “Munch and Expressionism,” the Neue Galerie New York will explore that exchange.“While he began as an influence on younger artists, he also responded to them in their later work,” said Jill Lloyd, an Expressionist scholar and guest curator for this show, as well as the Neue’s 2007 exhibition, “Van Gogh and Expressionism.”Munch’s influence is particularly evident stylistically, Dr. Lloyd said, on artists like Ernst Ludwig Kirchner, Max Beckmann, Richard Gerstl and Erich Heckel — in the immediacy of the figurative style, the bright vibrant color, the surface patterning and the experimental brushwork.“Be it a woodcut, where you’re gouging directly into the wood, or working with a brush in a vigorous way,” she said, “there is a connection between the heart and the hand.”There are also strong themes running through the show, like adolescence — see Munch’s painting “Puberty” — that are taken up and reinvented by the Expressionists. “They transformed it into their own thing,” Dr. Lloyd said. “They often denied Munch’s influence — ‘We didn’t copy him’ — because they wanted to avoid that interpretation of their work.”“The Scream,” included in this exhibition, has become a potent cultural symbol, drawing crowds when it went on view for six months at the Museum of Modern Art in 2012.The show, organized with the Munch specialist Dr. Reinhold Heller, will feature about 35 paintings and 50 works on paper. Loans from private collections and the Munch Museum and the National Museum in Oslo include works that have never been seen in the United States.Advertisement