AdvertisementSupported byBy James PoniewozikIn the best episode of Netflix’s “Master of None” — I think, it’s hard to pick just one — Dev (Aziz Ansari) wants tacos, but doesn’t know where to go. So he whips out his laptop and smartphone, consults Google, Eater and Yelp, finds lists and reviews, dozens of them, New York City’s trendiest tortillas, dissected and annotated by social media. Finally he settles on a food truck said to have the most delicious tacos in the city.Only by now they’re sold out. Dev is exasperated. “What am I supposed to do now?” he complains. “Go eat the second-best taco?”“Master of None,” the year’s best comedy straight out of the gate, is a lot of things. It’s an adorable but mature rom-com. It’s an idea-packed bulletin on technology and social mores. It’s a showbiz satire. It’s a casually multicultural, multiracial comedy that’s also acutely conscious of how identity still matters.But above all it is about the tyranny of choice: how being blessed with every option that youth, technology and privilege offer can be paralyzing. A thousand tacos, a thousand dates, all available at a finger’s swipe, all of them presenting 999 avenues to close, 999 opportunities to choose wrongly.The 10-episode season, which goes live in full on Netflix on Friday, is a giant leap for Mr. Ansari. He has charmingly spoofed the modern consumer-bro, fixated on pop culture and thread counts, in his stand-up and as the hipster entrepreneur Tom Haverford on “Parks and Recreation.” (Mr. Ansari created “Master” with the “Parks” writer Alan Yang, and Michael Schur, a “Parks” co-creator, is an executive producer.)Dev — an aspiring actor whose career highlight is a Go-Gurt commercial — is a version of the same guy, but made more complicated and placed in the world of actual problems.The premiere introduces us to Dev’s maybe-girlfriend, Rachel (Noël Wells), and his pals Arnold (Eric Wareheim), Brian (Kelvin Yu) and Denise (Lena Waithe) as they notice others in their circle having kids — the ultimate permanent choice. If the series stayed in this mode, it would be a fine version of the kind of urban-singles hangout comedies that have multiplied like pour-over-coffee joints in Brooklyn.But in “Parents,” the second episode — which, I changed my mind, is actually the best — “Master of None” reveals greater scope and ambition. It flashes back to the immigrant stories of Dev’s parents (Mr. Ansari’s real-life mother and father, Fatima and Shoukath Ansari, scene stealers both), who left India, and Brian’s father (Clem Cheung), who left Taiwan. These parents came to America so their kids would have the options that now torment them. (Dev’s parents have an arranged marriage; he has Tinder.)Simply having this amount of diversity on screen allows nuances impossible in a typical culture-clash setup, which would show one family or the other in contrast to the dominant white culture. Here it’s all about the two families, East Asian and South Asian, teasing out their similarities and differences in a way we rarely get to see.“Master of None” satirizes the usual sitcom practice of ethnic casting in “Indians on TV,” the season’s best episode. (For real this time. My fingers were crossed before.) When Dev competes with a friend for the designated Indian-American role on a TV pilot — because, a network executive says, “There can’t be two” — it sets off an encyclopedic, hilarious look at Hollywood’s history of stereotypes, forced accents and brownface. (Another of Dev’s actor friends, crushed to learn that an Indian character in the movie “Short Circuit 2” was really played by Fisher Stevens, asks, “Is Mindy Kaling real?”)Mr. Ansari and Mr. Yang have built a show that’s both binge-worthy and graze-worthy, basing episodes on single, strong concepts, but structuring the season around the love-story arc. “Ladies and Gentlemen” (also excellent; may I change my mind again?) contrasts the everyday harassment women experience with the happy bubble that men occupy. (Dev and Rachel compare the Instagram comments they get for posting a picture of the same frittata; he gets “Yumtown! Population: Dev,” while she gets an NC-17 proposition from a stranger.) “Mornings,” which may be the season’s high point (I give up), condenses months of the couple’s relationship into a half-hour as passion cools into routine and doubt.“Master of None” is not like much else on TV, but it’s closest in spirit to Louis C. K.’s humanistic “Louie,” with its filmic look, rewardingly meandering storytelling and empathy for a broad range of other lives. Mr. Ansari’s show is less experimental, and his outlook more upbeat. But watching it recalls the thrill, in the first season of “Louie,” of seeing an already funny comic find a new gear and new depth.Mr. Ansari shows true acting range here, making Dev a 30-year-old lightweight with a soul, feeling and fighting the pull of maturity. And his commitment to building comedy on ideas — this year he published “Modern Romance,” a dating guide based in social-science data — pays off without showing off.One clear influence Mr. Ansari has cited is “The Paradox of Choice,” the Barry Schwartz book that argues that too many options lead to dissatisfaction. As for the five-star tasting menu that is “Master of None,” just dive in. There’s hardly a second-best taco in the bunch.Advertisement