By WILLIAM GRIMESNOV. 5, 2015
There are trillions of them, crawling on you, and in you. This is the disturbing news that comes early in “The Secret World Inside You,” an exhibition that opens on Saturday at the American Museum of Natural History. “Your body is teeming with bacteria, viruses and other microbes,” a small video screen announces. The screen stands near the entrance, in a cosmic sea of tiny suspended lights, as sonorous space music pours forth in a sonic ooze.Immediately, just as the shock is taking hold, a chipper postscript appears: “And that’s a good thing!”The twinkling lights are stand-ins for the hundreds of trillions of bacteria, viruses, fungi and other organisms that, taken together, constitute something known as the human microbiome. The microbes in the intestinal tract alone outnumber the stars in the Milky Way. It is pleasant to think of them as points of light, because in real life, when magnified, they are hideous. Their lifestyle leaves a lot to be desired, too. It is squalid.Take Propionibacterium acnes, one of many, many microbes living on the largest organ of the human body — skin. This particular individual is described as “rod shaped” but, let’s face it, closely resembles a pale yellow penis. It lurks deep in the pores, where skin oils supply it with energy and nutrients. It repays the favor by helping create zits.AdvertisementNot to worry. Benign microbes vastly outnumber bad actors like Propionibacterium acnes. This is one of the main messages of the exhibition. But they’re ugly, too, and, it must be said, the organizers of the exhibition — Robert DeSalle and Susan Perkins, curators in the museum’s division of invertebrate zoology and the Sackler Institute for Comparative Genomics — have taken full advantage of the gross-out bonanza that nature has offered them. Their information dossier has been given lurid visual expression by David Harvey, the museum’s senior vice president for exhibitions.AdvertisementThe exhibition takes the visitor along a fluid path through a sequence of biological systems. One of them is the immune system. A large sculpture shows a macrophage, or immune cell, on the attack against a swarm of disease-causing Staphylococcus bacteria. Artificially colored to make the parts easier to identify, the macrophage looks like a large piece of plastic vomit with tentacles. Ignoring the big cobalt-blue hot dogs within their grasp (harmless Bacillus bacteria), these pseudopods, to use the proper term, have clutched a cluster of bright-red balls — the Staphylococcus bacteria — and warded off infection. It is a safe bet that 6-year-olds will gaze on this model in horrified fascination for quite some time.They will have to tear themselves away from the foot-fungus display, though. It is interactive. In addition to showing how Bacillus subtilis fends off the green, branchlike fungus Trichophyton interdigitale by emitting toxic chemicals, it takes the opportunity to introduce Brevibacterium lines.  This seems to be in the spirit of “as long as we’re talking about feet.” The bacterium in question, found on the feet, converts the amino acids in sweat into methanethiol, which reeks, although not as much as Limburger cheese, another of its byproducts.To better understand this process, you are invited to lean over two receptacles — they are marked “Smell foot odor!” and “Compare it to cheese!”— slide open the covers and inhale deeply. At press time, the Limburger, which the museum failed to secure at Zabar’s, was still in the mail.The exhibition has a large lesson to impart. Moving along the sinuous path leading from the complex landscape of the skin, to the birth canal where humans get their first microbial endowment, to the mouth (more than 200 types of bacteria there) and onward to the digestive system, it becomes evident that the microbiome is a complex, unified field — an ecosystem. For microbes, the body is a vast continent comprising many environments: deserts, fertile riverbeds, alluvial plains, bayous and forests. There they compete, cooperate, live out their brief lives, and thrive or die. In large numbers. (A few years ago, scientists analyzed samples from 60 bellybuttons and, in a whimsically titled article, “A Jungle in There,” identified 2,368 kinds of bacteria.)Unlike virtually every exhibition at the museum, “The Secret World Inside You” offers no specimens in glass cases. It speaks of a world invisible to the naked eye, so getting the big messages across calls for ingenuity. The exhibition team, rising to the challenge, has come up with highly entertaining teaching games, quizzes, whiz-bang animation and compelling visual effects. Children and their parents can both have a good time — and learn a lot.A long table encases the giant image of a woman, stretched out as if on a doctor’s examining table. Touch one of the spinning animated discs arrayed all around her and a line reaches out to a point on her body. Then a plate-size circle appears, revealing the microbial drama inside the body. It’s a bit like the crystal ball that the Wicked Witch uses to spy on Dorothy.On four circular tables, each outfitted with a pinball-machine plunger, visitors are invited to build the human biome in three timed games: “Feed Your Gut!,” “Cure Your Infection!” and “Reboot Your Biome!”While younger visitors are blasting germs and tricking their friends into sniffing cheese, their parents may well be pondering the mysteries of the vagus nerve, which connects the digestive system and the brain in ways that scientists are only beginning to understand.AdvertisementMicrobes, it turns out, may play a critical role in appetite, mood and mental illness. A case in point: Toxoplasma gondii.  This single-cell protozoan, a parasite, reproduces only in the intestines of cats. To reach this destination it takes up residence in a mouse that has eaten food contaminated by the feces of infected cats. Then it sends messages to the mouse brain that there is nothing to fear from cats. When a cat feasts on a deluded mouse, it absorbs the parasite and passes it along through defecation to other warm-blooded animals, including humans.Recent studies suggest that men affected by the parasite behave more recklessly, break rules and become less aware of how others see them. Women become more sociable, trusting and image-conscious. Both sexes get into more car accidents. This is even stranger than cheese fungus.The exhibition sounds a hopeful note. As scientists learn more about the human microbiome, aided by technology that allows them to run genetic analyses of millions of microbes in the blink of an eye, they stand on the verge of thrilling medical breakthroughs. The current craze for probiotics rests on the insight that it makes sense to send in reinforcements to our friends among the microbes rather than slaughtering their enemies.To take one promising example, in a procedure known as a fecal transplant, researchers have found that they can defeat the Clostridium difficile bacterium, a cause of inflammatory bowel disease, by populating the colon with flora from a healthy subject.These and other topics get a further airing as visitors are disgorged into the brightly lit presentation room at the end of the exhibition. There, seated at long tables, they press buttons in response to questions about the wonderful world of microbes.And then comes the bellybutton moment, a bit of playacting in which an audience volunteer lets the museum lecturer harvest microbes by waving a swab across a small blue light that stands in for the subject’s navel. The result is displayed on a petri dish (a sample prepared in advance, since an actual specimen would take four days to bloom), and projected on a screen.It looks like a large pizza with popcorn topping. Mercifully, it comes without melted foot cheese.“The Secret World Inside You” opens on Saturday and runs through Aug. 16 at the American Museum of Natural History, Central Park West and 79th Street; 212-769-5100, amnh­.org.A version of this review appears in print on November 6, 2015, on Page C23 of the New York edition with the headline: What Makes a Happy Gut or Stinky Feet  .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.