By MATT WOLFNOV. 5, 2015
LONDON — Don’t be fooled by the title, “Husbands & Sons,” of the ravishing distillation of three D.H. Lawrence plays into one that has just opened at the National Theater’s Dorfman auditorium. Across the three compulsive hours of Marianne Elliott’s production, your eye is drawn again and again to the women, and not just because the promotional campaign for the play features the begrimed image of its terrific female lead, Anne-Marie Duff.Yes, the men in the 19-strong company grab many a chance to make their mark in Ben Power’s artful filleting of three Lawrence plays (“A Collier’s Friday Night,” “The Widowing of Mrs. Holroyd” and “The Daughter-in-Law”) into one neatly streamlined take on life in the English mining village of Eastwood, Lawrence’s hometown, in 1911.But as these laborers and family men go down into the mines or off to the pub — or in the case of the literature-minded Ernest Lambert (Johnny Gibbon) to better himself by learning Latin — the women tend to home, hearth and whatever equilibrium is possible amid hard-scrabble circumstances that place their often feckless, sometimes drunken husbands perilously close to death.The National would appear to be in capacious storytelling mode these days. “Husbands & Sons” follows swiftly on the heels of its co-production with the Bristol Old Vic of “Jane Eyre,” in which Charlotte Brontë’s vast novel is trimmed to a single evening somewhat overpacked with incident. Mr. Power’s refashioning of Lawrence — a co-production with the Royal Exchange in Manchester, where the play will be seen next year — manages to catch life easefully on the wing. You clock the infidelities, domestic fissures and fatalities as each advancement in the plot arrives, but just as theatrically urgent are those moments that find one or another of these wives and widows lost in thought. Or suddenly raising a pliant voice in song.AdvertisementA two-time Tony winner — most recently for “The Curious Incident of the Dog in the Night-Time” — Ms. Elliott here puts to one side the scenic dazzle that has marked out such successes as “War Horse.” She has collaborated once more with her “Curious Incident” designer, Bunny Christie, this time to suggest in visual terms the contrapuntal nature to life’s daily routine. The sizable playing space places the audience on four sides so as to make clear the simultaneous activity in the play’s three primary households, and the scenes most often emerge as fragments, one overlapping with or giving way seamlessly to the next.The large cast never once strikes a bum note in a production that suggests a symphony in theatrical form. You won’t find actual doors or windows during an evening that revels in realism only to retreat from it, as well. (The actors mime taking off their coats and the like.) But such is its hypnotic, undulating power that the minute “Husbands & Sons” ended, I wanted it to start again.Not to be outdone, at least in terms of ambition, the tiny Finborough Theater in southwest London is offering through Nov. 14 a play called “Treasure,” which boasts a company of 15 adults and 3 young boys — this in an auditorium that seats 50.AdvertisementHow does the ensemble avoid bumping into one another (and never mind the furniture)? With difficulty, even if the abiding liability rests with Rebecca Brower’s planked set, the uneven flooring a challenge to actor and spectator alike. It’s possible that a playhouse with greater resources might have dealt more fluently with the necessary traffic management and allowed more nuanced acting; as it is, one feels as if many of those involved have overdone their contribution so as not to get lost in the throng.As directed by Alice Malin, Colin Chambers’s new adaptation of David Pinski’s play amounts to a rather protracted parable about small-town avarice and greed set in the author’s native Russia in the early 1900s and featuring the sort of larger-than-life personages from which the Russian satirist Nikolai Gogol carved his career. (Pinski, the published script informs us, emigrated to the United States, where “Treasure” ran on Broadway in 1920, and then to Israel in the last decade of his life.)The plot’s grasping pivot is Tille (a hard-edged Olivia Bernstone), the luxury-minded daughter of a village gravedigger, Chone (James Pearse in the play’s standout performance), who isn’t going to sit idly by when her simpleton brother, Judke (a sweet-faced Sid Sagar), comes upon some gold coins in a local cemetery. Before long, our heroine is preferring bonbons to horseradish, while Ms. Bernstone forces the realization that acting shallow on stage can be tricky to do without seeming, well, shallow.The life lesson imparted by the play’s end gets delivered by a chorus of the dead, who rise from the grave to bring events to an admonitory conclusion, leaving the actors jostling for space as they take their bows.After two plays so teeming with personnel, the Trafalgar Studio 2 production of “Ticking” seems almost underpopulated with its cast of five. Not that there’s anything small about its central performance from the fast-rising actor Tom Hughes, here cast as a volatile and voluble young Briton, Simon, who is on death row in an unnamed Asian country. His crime: the murder of a prostitute. The situation is sufficiently momentous that his parents have flown in to lead the time-intensive appeal for a reprieve.Matters of innocence and guilt take something of a back seat to the opportunity that an animated Simon seizes to use what might be the final hour of his life to express the complicated love he feels for his teary mother (Niamh Cusack) and his unbridled fury at his stiff-backed father (Anthony Head). Dad reels under the filial vitriol, as Simon exposes the fault lines in his parents’ marriage and critiques their bourgeois middle-class Englishness. (If adventure in life meant facing execution, I suspect most of us would hunker down in the very suburbs that Simon reviles.)The writer and director is the filmmaker Paul Andrew Williams, whose credits include the 2012 movie “Song for Marion,” with Terence Stamp and Vanessa Redgrave, and who might have fared better on this occasion had he allowed the material to breathe more naturally and deeply. As it is, “Ticking,” at 85 minutes (no intermission), feels less like a ticking time bomb and more like a sustained contrivance in which multiple climaxes are manufactured on the way to a revelation-heavy finish.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.So decisive a fury is Simon in by that point that you start to wonder why his father, in particular, would want anything to do with him. Instead of bringing the family together, the unfolding crisis drives them irrevocably apart. I know thoughts like this aren’t supposed to cross one’s mind, but I doubt I was alone in wondering whether these parents might not be better off — or at least exist more peacefully — without this son.Husbands & Sons.  Directed by Marianne Elliott. National Theater/Dorfman. Through Feb. 10.Treasure.  Directed by Alice Malin. Finborough Theater. Through Nov. 14.Ticking.  Directed by Paul Andrew Williams. Trafalgar Studio 2. Through Saturday.A version of this review appears in print on November 6, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.