By JON CARAMANICANOV. 5, 2015
Every so often, country music wants to cleanse itself, to show that it is more than the sum of its hits, its routines, its tics. Nashville is a company town, but sometimes heart and humility are its most valuable commodities.At the 49th annual Country Music Association Awards, which were broadcast on ABC live from the Bridgestone Arena in Nashville on Wednesday night, that meant reducing a burly man with a wondrous beard and a wrinkled leather cowboy hat to tears.That was Chris Stapleton, who, after winning his third award of the night, for male vocalist of the year, gave a speech honoring his father, who died recently, and also the exceedingly polished people in the room whom he’d just bested, many of whom he’d written songs for — “people that have helped me support my family over the years,” he called them.Mr. Stapleton, 37, is a Nashville fixture but a relatively new frontman. “Traveller” (Mercury Nashville), which was released in May, is his first album, and perhaps it is churlish to note that it’s maybe half the album Mr. Stapleton’s voice deserves.AdvertisementHe has a grand, scraped howl capable of resonant grit and tough brooding. His victories at the awards — he also won new artist of the year and album of the year — were a collective acknowledgment by the industry of the superlative talent of one of its own. With that voice, he does a thing many of his colleagues simply cannot. But he also fails to do a thing many of the rest of the people he beat can, which is release hit country songs.AdvertisementMr. Stapleton has never had a song of his own in the top 40 of the Billboard country chart, but on this night, that was merely an inconvenient detail. In addition to his wins, he also had what was easily the night’s most rousing performance, a duet with Justin Timberlake that energetically spanned outlaw country and Memphis soul. (They were joined by Ms. Stapleton’s wife, Morgane, who is also the unsung hero of his album.)For a genre reeling both from a crisis about the undervaluing of its female artists — as seen in the “tomato” debacle this year — and from the narrowness of its male offerings, Mr. Stapleton’s victories were a sort of salve. But the night’s true indictment of country’s man problem was the dullness of the performances by male stars exponentially more famous than Mr. Stapleton: Zac Brown, undersinging on “Beautiful Drug”; Kenny Chesney’s lethargic turn on “Save It for a Rainy Day”; Blake Shelton mugging for the cameras on “Gonna,” Dierks Bentley needlessly stoic on “Riser.” Luke Bryan, who won entertainer of the year, the night’s marquee award, for the second year in a row, was slightly more engaged on “Strip It Down,” but only just.Apart from Mr. Stapleton, the night’s other unlikely big winner was Little Big Town’s “Girl Crush,” with lyrics that are, on the surface, about same-sex attraction, though the song is in truth heteronormative to the core. It won single of the year (for Little Big Town, who also won vocal group of the year) and song of the year, for its songwriters, Hillary Lindsey, Lori McKenna and Liz Rose, three of Nashville’s finest.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The wins for Mr. Stapleton and “Girl Crush” might be an indication that country’s mainstream is doing a more expedient job of assimilating its fringes. Or maybe the center of country is now the syndicated radio DJ Bobby Bones, a self-styled outsider and a heavy advocate for both Mr. Stapleton and “Girl Crush,” a fact he was eager to remind people about on Twitter during the show. On “Girl Crush”: “i now have a chapter of my book with the perfect ending. First one to play Girl Crush. Got in trouble for it for months.Wins all the awards.” And on Mr. Stapleton: “and now how the suits feel who told me to STOP PLAYING CHRIS STAPELTON. thats my boy!!!!!” accompanied by a GIF of a young boy holding his head in shame.Florida Georgia Line won vocal duo of the year, though largely for lack of competition, and while Kacey Musgraves was shut out, Maddie & Tae won best music video for “Girl in a Country Song,” their vicious dissent from the masculinist narratives that have lately dominated country.But this year, what didn’t win was as important as what did. Shut out of the major awards was the slick, not-quite outlaw Eric Church, though he did use the show to debut a new song, “Mr. Misunderstood,” the title track from a new album he surprise-released on Wednesday. (He did win, with Keith Urban, for music event of the year, for their duet “Raise ‘Em Up.”)Also leaving empty-handed was the young country-soul singer Sam Hunt, whose performance of “Take Your Time” was tactile, elegant R&B, and who was the butt of one of the better jokes in the opening routine by the hosts, Brad Paisley and Carrie Underwood, who needled him for his songs in which spoken sections erupt suddenly into singing and then recede.Most notably, the performer who didn’t win male vocalist of the year was Mr. Shelton, the ex-husband of Miranda Lambert. He lost to Mr. Stapleton, ending his five-year win streak. In a classy move, just before showtime, Mr. Shelton’s representative confirmed that he was now dating Gwen Stefani, his fellow coach on “The Voice.” (“Have you heard that duet that Blake did with Ashley Madison?” Mr. Paisley quipped in the opening bit.)Maybe that was why Ms. Lambert, when accepting her award for female vocalist of the year — her sixth in a row — told the crowd, “I needed a bright spot this year.” Or why she chose to perform “Bathroom Sink,” a devastating song about the hard work that goes into putting on a good face. It was a bracing performance, and in several places Ms. Lambert appeared to be on the verge of tears, a reminder of one commodity all the more valuable for being in short supply here: honesty.A version of this review appears in print on November 6, 2015, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline: A Night When Country Was Full of Surprises.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.