AdvertisementSupported byBy Dan BarryBALLYLEE, Ireland — In the County Galway parish of Kiltartan, in this bit of a place called Ballylee, a lichen-flecked tower rises from the wet ground to lord over cow and stream and the occasional otter. Its limestone walls shelter a protected species of bats, some field mice and a perpetual dampness evoking the must of the past.The tower also harbors a significant piece of the legacy of William Butler Yeats, whose birth 150 years ago has been cause for a year of celebration throughout Ireland and the world. The poet spent many summers in the tower he christened Thoor Ballylee, and it inspired some of his most enduring work.Over the years, though, the Norman tower has encountered natural challenges so daunting that the Irish government had to shut it down as a tourist site. The damaging floods of winter seemed to fulfill an oracular poem displayed on the tower’s face:I, the poet William Yeats,With old mill boards and sea-green slates,And smithy work from the Gort forge,Restored this tower for my wife George;And may these characters remainWhen all is ruin once again.But some determined local residents — among them a devoted neighbor, an erudite nun and a real estate agent with a useful resemblance to Yeats — have worked hard to forestall the prophesy. Their many efforts have been blessed by serendipity, including the sudden donation of a valuable item connected to that central Yeats obsession, the revolutionary and actress Maud Gonne.As a result of their diligence, Thoor Ballylee is once again a seasonal attraction, offering the inspiration of the poet’s faint presence to readings, seminars and musical events. He exists as well in passed-on memories of the tall, remote Yeats, wandering these narrow local roads as he mumbled words destined for the ages.Sister de Lourdes Fahy, 78, a respected historian and teacher who was raised on a nearby farm, said her father and uncle often recalled the lifts they gave Yeats in a pony-and-trap. What Yeats said was – well, what he said was nothing, not even a thank you, or so the story goes.“Their memory was, he would never speak to them,” she said.But there is charity, even an acceptance of genius’s burden overtaking common courtesy, in the Fahy family tale. As Sister de Lourdes put it, “He was totally engrossed in his work.”Yeats paid a very modest sum in 1917 for this remote tower beside a small river. Believed to have been built in either the 15th or 16th century, the structure was in considerable disrepair, a glorified cow shed. Still, it had long enchanted the middle-aged poet.The tower stood a healthy walk from Coole House, where his close friend Lady Gregory often gathered the writers and artists sparking the Irish Literary Revival. It was planted in the folklore-chocked rural west of Ireland, now fueling his imagination. And owning a tower — a castle, if you like – would satisfy what the literary critic T. R. Henn referred to as Yeats’s desire for “cultivated aristocracy.”Yeats and his new wife, George Hyde-Lees, worked with an architect to transform the tower into a sanctuary of inspiration, its walls and curtains awash in striking colors. The poet often wrote at a trestle-table that his wife adorned with wildflowers. The upstairs quarters, which included a study, a master bedroom and a guest room — also called a “stranger’s room” – were reached by a winding stairwell that Yeats used for both practical and metaphorical purpose.Much happened during Yeats’s time at Thoor Ballylee. He and his wife had two children. He was appointed to the Senate of the new Irish government. He won the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1923. And the civil war roiling Ireland in the early 1920s came to his tower’s doorstep.According to R. F. Foster, the author of an authoritative two-volume biography of Yeats, the Irish Republican Army arrived one day to announce that the bridge beside the tower was about to be blown up, and to suggest that Yeats’s wife take the children and maid upstairs for their safety.With the fuses ignited, George Yeats later recalled in a letter, an I.R.A. man stayed behind to say there would be two explosions, and thank you and good night. Then, she wrote: “After two minutes, two roars came & then a hail of falling masonry & gravel & then the same man shouted up ‘All right now’ & cleared off.”In 1928, Yeats published “The Tower,” an important collection that contains forever-anthologized poems like “Sailing to Byzantium” and “Among School Children.” Soon after, he abandoned his Ballylee castle for reasons of convenience and failing health, leaving it to the rhythms of the elements.A part of Yeats remained, though, through stories shared by neighbors he barely knew. John McAllen, a farmer and well-known set dancer in the area, would often tell of seeing the ramrod-straight poet coming down the road in suit and cravat. Hiding behind a stone wall, in work clothes flecked with hay, Mr. McAllen would listen to this blow-in poet muttering to himself.“He was getting the rhythm,” Mr. McAllen’s daughter Rena said. And yes, she added, her father “thought he was totally strange.”The empty tower became a place of faint danger and secret music, as teenagers would climb inside, navigate the broken floorboards of what had been Yeats’s study and hold a “session” — a dance party pulsing to the sounds of “Miss McLeod’s Reel,” perhaps, or “The Bucks of Oranmore.”And any visitor to Ballylee simply had to be shown the tower and the river beside it, in part because a few seconds of “The Quiet Man,” the John Ford film of 1952, were filmed there. Come see where the lovely Maureen O’Hara danced across the water.In the early 1960s, a local woman named Mary Hanley persuaded the government to restore Thoor Ballylee, once echoing with the words of the country’s greatest poet and now stained with river silt and cow dung. Opened in 1965, the centenary of Yeats’s birth, the tower operated as a tourist site for the next 44 years, until devastating floods in late 2009 forced the building’s closing.“The water almost came up to the thatch,” recalled Colm Farrell, a real estate agent, whose father, Matty, was once the full-time caretaker for Thoor Ballylee. The water eventually receded, leaving black muck and debris in its wake.The government paid for significant repairs but never reopened the tower — a decision that seemed wise after destructive floods returned in 2012. The tower key remained in the Galway City office of Ireland’s tourism department, 20 miles away.Its closure did not sit well. Locals wearied of turning away visitors to the tower, and besides: This was a Galway treasure that should be celebrated, not forgotten.A grass-roots group of residents and politicians, including Ms. McAllen; Mr. Farrell; Sister de Lourdes; and a senator, Fidelma Healy Eames, began to devise a plan. After addressing requirements of the tourism department, they managed to secure an annual lease for the tower for one euro. Mr. Farrell drove into Galway City and picked up the key in March.Once the muck had been cleared away, they focused on plumbing, electricity and everything else required to open the historic site. Donations were solicited, fund-raisers planned. Someone suggested an auction at which the tall and white-haired Mr. Farrell could pose as Yeats. He hammered a pair of square eyeglass frames into oblongs, hung a boot lace from one side, and voilà: your man the poet.The several dozen items available for auction included a candlelight dinner on the tower’s rooftop, a first-edition set of the works of J. M. Synge, two lambs, a goose and gander – but no showstoppers.That is, until a couple of days before the auction, when a woman in nearby Gort called to say she might have something of worth to donate: a signed copy of Maud Gonne’s autobiography that also contained a letter from Gonne to the woman’s aunt. As every English major knows, Yeats was infatuated with Gonne — his muse, his tormentor, the dark-haired beauty who rejected his many proposals of marriage.The auction brought in more than 10,000 euros (about $11,200). Other donations have also come in, including a €31,000 pledge from Joseph Hassett, an American lawyer and Yeats scholar, and a €5,000 check from a woman enchanted by the famous “winding stair.” Thanks to people from Ballylee and Gort and Peterswell, people whom Yeats might never have engaged in conversation, Thoor Ballylee reopened in the late spring.Few tangible items are on display. There is a suitcase bearing a WBY monogram, for example, and a bed once owned by Yeats that the Fahy family bought at an auction after the tower was vacated. (This allows one of the Fahy daughters – Sister de Lourdes, of the Sisters of Mercy – to joke that she once slept in Yeats’s bed.) Mostly, the tower offers that lingering presence:I declare this tower is my symbol; I declareThis winding, gyring, spiring treadmill is my ancestral stair…Various plans are now in the works. Gatherings of scholars. Development of a writers in residence schedule. Creation of a primary school program focusing on the arts. Exhibits, readings and music, including a visit by Yeats’s granddaughter the harpist Caitriona Yeats later this month.None of this, though, has been easy for the members of the Yeats Thoor Ballylee Society. There is the cleaning up after the lesser horseshoe bats, a protected species occupying the “stranger’s room.” There is the dearth of volunteers to help light the hearth fire and serve tea when the tower is open to the public in summer. And the threat of flooding remains a natural motif.But these sons and daughters of farmers continue to ward against Yeats’s prophesy of ruin for his stone muse. For all his aloofness, they still claim the blow-in poet as one of their own.Advertisement