By BRIAN SEIBERTNOV. 6, 2015
How do improvisations in a dance studio become theatrically coherent choreography? How is the style of a mature choreographer transferred to — or transformed by — the younger dancers in his or her employ? These perennial questions were bouncing off the aluminum-foil-covered walls of the Brooklyn performance space Jack on Thursday.The occasion was a mixed bill shared by the veteran choreographers Neil Greenberg, Jennifer Monson and Yvonne Meier. Mr. Greenberg’s contribution was addenda to his 2014 work “this”: a solo that was cut out of that piece and a trio that developed from it. Both derived from videotaped improvisations, culled, memorized and rearranged.The two works felt like studies or sketches, repeating sequences that didn’t really bear repeating. In “this solo,” Mr. Greenberg gathered a collection of movements (contractions, salutes) into a circular flow, contrasting internally focused moments with bursts of mock-spectacular bounding or of bucking as he lay on his back.In “This d’Occasion,” he was joined by Connor Voss and Molly Lieber. Moving for the most part independently, Mr. Voss was captivatingly serpentine and Ms. Lieber intensely concave, but more striking was an outbreak of jumps that were like falls, each short flight a preparation for a slammed-down landing.AdvertisementMr. Voss and Ms. Lieber are distinctive enough dancers to balance or even overshadow Mr. Greenberg. But the four young women who performed Ms. Monson’s “Folkdances for an Untidy Cardinal” seemed like students. Ms. Monson’s choreography here is ramshackle, mixing the hand-holding and communal formations of folk dance with monkey-like chanting. “Untidy” is accurate, but for that to look wild rather than just sloppy requires more demonic energy than these dancers could muster.Ms. Monson has that kind of energy, which she can channel with unmistakable authority. Although she was absent from “Folkdances,” she did participate in a final improvisation with Mr. Greenberg and Ms. Meier (whose earlier solo was not open for review). She was the instigator, going after the others, getting in their space, making things happen.AdvertisementTheir interactions were a kind of grown-up play, funny on the edge of cute, but Ms. Monson in motion is always serious business. When you can improvise as she can, who needs choreography?The program will be repeated Saturday at Jack, 505½ Waverly Avenue, Brooklyn; jackny­.org.A version of this review appears in print on November 7, 2015, on Page C6 of the New York edition with the headline: A Choreography Rooted in Improvisational Riffs.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.