AdvertisementSupported byBy Corinna da Fonseca-WollheimThe first notes Peter Evans produced on his trumpet at Roulette on Wednesday resembled tiny yelps and sobs. Soft, frayed and separated by inhospitable patches of silence, they announced themselves almost apologetically: aware, perhaps, of how short they fell of traditional expectations of how music — or a trumpet — should sound.Within moments, any bashfulness was swept aside as Mr. Evans unleashed a torrent of breathtaking, athletic and often disconcerting virtuosity that rushed by unbroken for close to an hour in a solo improvisation presented as part of his residency at this Brooklyn performance space. The sounds he squeezed, coaxed and bullied out of his instrument during that time often defied belief.Shoving the bell of his trumpet over a microphone, Mr. Evans produced cymbal-like crashes. Removing the mouthpiece and manipulating the angle between bell and mike allowed him to create richly layered textures, with high squeals and stutters above a dull-thudding bass line. One flurry of low arpeggios sounded like a full cello section.For a good 20 minutes Mr. Evans sustained a drone underneath a flutter of fast notes using circular breathing, sucking in air through his nose without interrupting the airflow through his trumpet. At this point his face was glistening with sweat and I found myself furtively glancing around the room for the CPR kit. Playing any brass instrument nonstop for this long is physically taxing; what Mr. Evans did seemed outright dangerous.That, of course, is part of the act. Mr. Evans’s solo improvisations leave the audience unmoored, adrift on a stream of sounds that constantly take on new and alien colors. Such free-form musical explorations can induce feelings of helplessness and frustration in the listener. Or they can create an intimate bond, with the audience sharing in both the creative exhilaration and physical suffering of the performer.On Wednesday Mr. Evans kept his distance. When he reached the last note of his mind-bending marathon performance he lowered the trumpet and said, “That’s it.” It took a few moments before the dazed audience began to applaud.Peter Evans returns on Dec. 16 with the hornist David Byrd-Marrow, the saxophonist Steve Lehman and the bass clarinetist Anthony Orji at Roulette, 509 Atlantic Avenue, Brooklyn; 917-267-0363, roulette.org.Advertisement