AdvertisementSupported byBy Scott ReyburnIs demand at the top end of the art market cooling?For next week’s auctions of big-ticket 20th- and 21st-century art in New York, expectations are certainly lower, lots fewer, and masterpieces further between than they were at the last big sales in May.Then, Sotheby’s and Christie’s evening sales raised an unprecedented $1.7 billion, with fees, from 180 lots. The equivalent three evening sales this time around, containing 161 lots, are estimated to take in at least $1.1 billion. They are being offered at a time when slowing growth in China has destabilized financial markets.“Lots of risks and instabilities have emerged over the past 12 to 18 months that affect the financial risk calculations of our clients,” said David Kusin, a consultant whose firm, Kusin & Company, measures and quantifies the risks of owning and trading art. He added, “Many of the Russians and Chinese who created froth at the top of the market have either lost their appetite or access to their cash.”Once again, Christie’s is presenting a themed auction of trophy works, intended to attract wealthy collectors of Modern as well as contemporary art. Called “The Artist’s Muse,” this Monday sale offers a $100 million Modigliani nude and an $80 million Roy Lichtenstein “Nurse.” In the 34-lot sale, which is expected to raise at least $443.9 million, the sellers of 17 works have been guaranteed minimum prices. About half the lots were also guaranteed in Christie’s similar “Looking Forward to the Past” sale in May, which carried a low estimate of $574.7 million for 35 works but took in $705.9 million.Christie’s has been more wary about pledging minimum prices at its twice-a-year New York auction of postwar and contemporary works. Fourteen of the 70 lots for this sale on Tuesday have been guaranteed; in May, it was 49 out of 82.Sotheby’s, which spent at least $500 million to secure this week’s sale of the collection of its former chairman, A. Alfred Taubman, has been more cautious about financing its mixed-owner contemporary art auction on Wednesday. The company has guaranteed just three lots — including a Warhol “Mao,” at $40 million — out of 57 works. In May, 16 works bore Sotheby’s guarantees.Though third parties could increase their guarantees before the sales, the two main auction houses seem less interested in maintaining the impression that the top end of the art market is “booming” by, in effect, prepurchasing works through guarantees.“There’s skepticism that the market can handle so much material,” said Morgan Long, director of investment at the Fine Art Fund Group in London. “And there’s skepticism that prices have been pushed too far.”Here are some of the highlights of the coming sales:Concerned by speculation in the market, some risk-averse collectors have shifted their focus from  young emerging artists to the blue-chip names of the 20th century. Phillips, which has specialized in art from the last 20 years, is — like Christie’s — now holding evening auctions that mix contemporary works with earlier Modernist fare. Phillips’s inaugural 20th Century & Contemporary Art sale in New York on Sunday includes prewar works by Giorgio de Chirico and Le Corbusier among its 52 lots. Le Corbusier’s 1932 painting “Femme rouge et pelote verte” is being sold by the Heidi Weber Museum in Zurich, and is estimated to earn at least $4 million.Phillips has guaranteed that sale with a third party. The auction is estimated to raise at least $64.6 million, with 22 of the lots carrying guarantees.Later in the week, on Tuesday, Phillips’s day sale will include the 2014 canvas “Newz!” by the Los Angeles artist Math Bass (born in 1981), who makes artworks influenced by the symbols of sign painting. A typically inscrutable gouache, combining the image of a cigarette with the open jaws of an alligator, “Newz!” is estimated at $25,000 to $35,000. Last month, Ms. Bass’s Los Angeles dealer Overduin & Company presented a sold-out booth of her paintings at the FIAC fair in Paris. The dealer wasn’t divulging prices to those joining the waiting list.It seems that if you have a painting worth at least $100 million, Christie’s will build an auction around it. Picasso’s $179.4 million “Les Femmes d’Alger (Version ‘O’)” was the first work to be entered into Christie’s “Looking Forward to the Past” sale in May; “Nu couché,” the sultry 1917-18 canvas by Modigliani, is the starting point for Monday’s “Artist’s Muse” auction.Sold by Laura Mattioli Rossi, the daughter of the Italian collector Gianni Mattioli, the Modigliani is guaranteed to bring at least $100 million, ensuring that it will beat the artist’s current auction high of $70.7 million, set in New York last November for his 1911-12 sculpture “Tête.”Over the last couple of years, there has been a surge of auction sales of Italian postwar art, partly driven by the desire of collectors and dealers to avoid a national law decreeing that all artworks in Italy more than 100 years old require export licenses to be sold abroad.The 1964 yellow canvas from Lucio Fontana’s coveted “Concetto Spaziale, La Fine di Dio” series is likely to post a new auction high for the artist when it appears at Christie’s on Tuesday night. Never offered at auction before, it is guaranteed to sell for a minimum of about $25 million. Last month in London, during Frieze Week, Sotheby’s and Christie’s raised a combined $127 million at their evening Italian sales, a 21 percent increase over 2014, according to the analysts ArtTactic in London.China’s economic slowdown, and its recent effect on commodities and stock markets, has created a gloomier financial background to these sales than was the case in May.But that won’t affect the sale of a 1972 Warhol “Mao” painting, which is one of three lots guaranteed by Sotheby’s in its Wednesday night auction of 57 contemporary works. Formerly belonging to François Pinault, the owner of Christie’s, it is estimated to sell for at least $40 million.This portrait of the father of Chinese Communism by Pop Art’s ultimate “brand” artist has obvious appeal to wealthy Asian buyers. But will bidders be willing to push beyond the $40 million guide price?“The odds are lower than they have been,” Mr. Kusin, the art consultant, said. “Warhol prices are unsustainable without frothy upward price pressure. Remaining wealthy Chinese are buying undervalued investments like commodities, not art.”Advertisement