AdvertisementSupported byBy James R. OestreichIt was good to see Zubin Mehta looking hale on Thursday evening as he conducted the Israel Philharmonic Orchestra at Carnegie Hall. Mr. Mehta, 79, who has been music director of that orchestra since 1977 and held the same position at the New York Philharmonic from 1978 to 1991, had knee surgery a few months ago, and pictures of him conducting while seated raised alarm among some not fully in the know.Mr. Mehta all but bounded to the Carnegie podium, in a program sponsored by the American Friends of the Israel Philharmonic Orchestra, to lead “The Star-Spangled Banner” and the Israeli anthem “Hatikva.” Then he returned to conduct a lone big work, Mahler’s “Resurrection” Symphony.He and the orchestra did themselves proud. Mr. Mehta’s tempos were brisk but not rushed. His interpretation was cleareyed but not without passion. The heaven-storming climaxes, in particular, did just that.The woodwinds showed good character in the flowing third movement, their flourishes sounding almost but not quite out of control, hinting at the explosion to come near the end. Brass choirs in the fourth and fifth movements were strong and well-balanced. The offstage episodes specified by Mahler were handled deftly.The mezzo-soprano Michelle DeYoung gave an appropriately dusky account of the “Urlicht” movement, and sang beautifully in the finale. The soprano Kristin Lewis also performed well in the finale, though her first, crucial entries could have been subtler as they rose out of the choral bed of sound. More’s the pity, for the large chorus, the MasterVoices (formerly the Collegiate Chorale) achieved an exquisite pianissimo in its entry.It was one of those nights when you had to fall in love with Carnegie Hall all over again, for the way it rendered the gamut of dynamics: from the thunderous climax before the recapitulation in the first movement down to that choral hush in the finale and back up to the full choral and orchestral outcry at the end.The program booklet provided singalong texts for the anthems, but alas, little hint of what was being sung in the last two movements.Advertisement