By BEN RATLIFFNOV. 6, 2015
There is a fantasy about tradition around extreme metal, and the fantasy is that the only kind of worthwhile tradition is natural, singular and binding. The palpitating drummers and corrosive screamers of black metal: This is who they are. They woke up like that. They’ll be like that tomorrow, too. They know what they play and they know what they think. The certainty has an absolute value.The San Francisco band Deafheaven may or may not be an extreme metal band, but let’s set that aside for a minute. Its records refer to the earthy, closed-off qualities of black metal, through blast beats and buzzing single-note riffs and the screaming of the singer George Clarke. But they also refer to airier and more open possibilities. “Sunbather,” one of the more impressive records of 2013, also used big, bright, slow melodies, an ecstatic tradition relating to shoegaze or post-rock bands like My Bloody Valentine and Mono. And “New Bermuda,” released last month by Anti-, moves in a third direction.Before the band started its first song at Webster Hall on Thursday night, its guitarists plugged in, tuned and checked levels. One of them, Kerry McCoy, played around with the introduction to the Smiths’ “This Charming Man.” There’s your third direction: sweet melodic romanticism.This is a referential band, with its own narratives about what they’re doing and why: its members haven’t been coy about the music that inspired them. (They’ve mentioned Oasis as another point of reference for the new album.)AdvertisementStill, it was a nicely disjunctive effect, hearing some warm-up Smiths at a more-or-less metal show. You heard more of it, by suggestion, in some of the new songs like “Baby Blue” and “Come Back”: strummy, melodic, harmonically rich sections, using completely different vocabularies of guitar tone and drum rhythm. Between that and black metal: different tradition, different disposition, different audience, different everything.AdvertisementThanks to Mr. Clarke, there’s a fair amount to watch in a Deafheaven show. He’s a peacock: a chest-pounder, hip-swaying dancer and crowd-embracer. His body language can suggest the metal singer Philip Anselmo (who, interestingly, has also publicly admired the Smiths), Dave Gahan of Depeche Mode, and any number of frontmen who plunge into the audience and ride outstretched on its sea of hands.But aside from Mr. Clarke’s nonmelodic vocals, which resolutely stay the same (and whose dark, imagistic lyrics keep to a pretty metal disposition), listening to Thursday’s set could be like switching among satellite-radio channels: black metal, ecstatic, romantic.Deafheaven’s new songs are long and suitelike, with abrupt stylistic shifts — sometimes a bit too abrupt. “Sunbather” felt integrated by comparison. The next refinement of a band that moves in three directions — or as many as it eventually will — might be to fuse those impulses not just within a single song, but within a single section of a song, or even a single bar.A version of this review appears in print on November 7, 2015, on Page C2 of the New York edition with the headline: Metal With Surges of Pop  .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.