AdvertisementSupported byBy Mike HaleThe one notable thing about “Agent X,” a new spy series that’s cheap and thin even by the standards of TNT (where it begins on Sunday), is that it stars Sharon Stone in her first full-time television role. (She’s done short arcs on shows like “The Practice” and “Law & Order: SVU.”)So the first thing to be said is that she looks stiff and uncomfortable as Natalie Maccabee, the vice president of the United States, who on Inauguration Day learns that she’s the handler of a secret superagent who cleans up messes too messy for the F.B.I. or the C.I.A. It’s why the vice president has virtually no duties, we’re told — the country’s founders wanted him or her free to go down to the bunker hidden behind the fireplace whenever the republic needed saving.And apparently Ms. Stone, who’s an executive producer of the show, was unable to get much of a production budget out of TNT. “Agent X” feels undernourished in every aspect, from production design to cinematography to the staging of its action sequences to its casting: Outside of a principal cast that includes Ms. Stone, Jamey Sheridan, Gerald McRaney and Mike Colter, it features some of the more mediocre performances and unconvincing accents that Vancouver (where the series is shot) has to offer.Jeff Hephner, formerly of “Chicago Fire,” plays John Case, the current iteration of Agent X, whose predecessors include Nathan Hale, the Revolutionary War spy. He’s perfectly adequate in the role of the trained killer with a twinkle in his eye and a nagging conscience, but in the early episodes, the stories (the first two screenplays are by the show’s creator, William Blake Herron) are so flat and unoriginal that Mr. Hephner and the other actors don’t have anything to work with. Mr. McRaney tries hard to bring some life to the vice president’s steward, a combination Miss Moneypenny and Alfred the Butler for Agent X.Without the jokey bravado (or high production values) of “Strike Back” or the charming wonkiness of “Warehouse 13,” the only claim “Agent X” has on our attention is Ms. Stone. Even that is tenuous — while her performance loosens up a bit across the first four episodes, her screen time appears to shrink. Maybe Agent X’s next assignment will be to find the disappearing vice president.Advertisement