By NEIL GENZLINGERNOV. 6, 2015
In the extended-care ward that is the setting for HBO’s series “Getting On,” some patients are entering the final phase of life. They’re generally sent off with a combination of dignity and abasement. That same seemingly contradictory combination will certainly mark the send-off for the series itself, which begins its third and final season on Sunday night.“Getting On” is one of those increasingly rare gems in the television landscape: a really good show that doesn’t get buzzed about and dissected so thoroughly that you resent it for its sheer popularity. You can still feel special for having found “Getting On,” and you can savor its audacious eccentricities without having them pointed out every time you check Twitter or stop by the water cooler.The show, a dark comedy based on a British series, is about life in the Billy Barnes Extended-Care Unit of a California hospital, where the patients, all women, are dealing with serious diseases or the infirmities of old age while the staff is dealing with a ridiculous array of personal insecurities and peccadilloes.The three actresses at the center of it all have been doing underappreciated, subtly brilliant work since the show began in 2013. Laurie Metcalf is Dr. Jenna James, a bundle of nerves who would rather be pursuing research (“We can no longer sweep female fecal incontinence under the rug!”) than administering the unit.AdvertisementAlex Borstein (the voice of Lois on “Family Guy”) plays a nurse named Dawn, who is as controlling as she is needy. And Niecy Nash, one of the busiest actresses around, is another nurse, DiDi, the sanest of the bunch. Ms. Nash, whose work garnered the show’s lone Emmy nomination, deserves a prize simply for keeping her characters straight. DiDi’s given name is Denise, which is also the first name of the character Ms. Nash plays on Fox’s “Scream Queens” (not to mention being Ms. Nash’s own middle name).Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In any given episode, all three of these actresses may be called upon for slapstick comedy (for Ms. Metcalf, in the season premiere, there’s an outlandish scene in a bathroom stall), deadpan humor and actual pathos, since their patients are often frail, facing dementia or outright dying. And they deliver with nuanced performances that turn quick glances or sighs into punch lines.If the show remains under the radar, it’s partly because of its unusually short seasons, just six episodes each. That also makes it easy to catch up on, and a binge watcher doing so in preparation for Sunday will surely be struck by a foul kinship between the first episodes of Seasons 1 and 3.AdvertisementThe series began with an episode that involved a “fecal deposit” left on a chair: who was going to clean it up, the proper procedures for doing so, etc. In Sunday’s season opener, vomit on the floor raises the same issues. While that small drama is consuming everyone, a patient dies in the most absurd manner imaginable; Dawn receives life-changing news; and the future of the unit itself is threatened. In “Getting On,” as in real life, minor messes and Big Questions exist side by side, each crying out for attention.A version of this article appears in print on November 7, 2015, on Page C6 of the New York edition with the headline: As the End Looms, Crudity and Grace (Like Always).  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.