AdvertisementSupported byBy George Gene Gustines“If I knew then, what I know now” is a familiar, wistful refrain. What would we tell our younger selves if we could? In “Uncanny X-Men” No. 600, which was published Wednesday by Marvel Entertainment, readers get to see the mutant hero Iceman have a conversation with his past self thanks to time travel (because, you know, comics). But it is the younger Iceman that forces the older to acknowledge a truth: He, Bobby Drake, is gay.The scene, drawn by Mahmud Asrar, comes in the middle of the issue, which marks the end of a four-year run writing the X-Men by Brian Michael Bendis, who is one of Marvel’s most popular creators. “I put all my energy into being a mutant and X-Men and putting my life in danger every 10 minutes for everyone else,” the older Bobby starts to explain. “Can I just have part of my life that I’m not being persecuted for?”It was a remarkable moment for a character who was part of the Marvel revolution of the early 1960s. Iceman first appeared in 1963 in the first issue of “The X-Men,” written by Stan Lee and drawn by Jack Kirby. The team reached the height of its popularity under Chris Claremont, who wrote the international, culturally and religiously diverse team — and drove home the mutants’ message of acceptance — for over 25 years.Axel Alonso, the editor in chief of Marvel, said Thursday that the talks about Iceman began about a year ago when Mr. Bendis submitted a script with the revelation. “There had been some casual conversations in the past about Iceman and his sexuality,” he said. “Why was he on the periphery of his own team?” They discussed clues that the hero might have a secret. Mr. Alonso and his editorial team felt it made sense to move ahead. “It not only explained Bobby, but it deepened his story and gave him an added dimension,” he said.In April, X-Men readers learned that the younger Iceman was gay thanks, in no small part, to the mental prying by Jean Grey, a telepathic teammate. (Not cool, Jean.) Once it was revealed, fans wondered about the implications: How could the younger Iceman, who had traveled to the present with the original X-Men, be gay but not his older self? As if time travel were not complicated enough.A thoughtful essay at comicsalliance.com pointed out the potential extremes: If the older Iceman were straight, it could be a story clue that the younger heroes were not who they seemed. If they were the same and the older Iceman remained straight, it would send a dangerous message that “a gay teenager can grow up to be straight.”That confusion was averted thanks to the older Iceman’s revelation. He and his younger self also agree on how impossibly handsome their teammate Angel is. (Besides his wings, his chiseled face and body give credence to his code name.)The question for fans now is whether this revelation will be followed up, especially in the wake of the departure of Mr. Bendis, who writes eloquently in his afterword about the X-Men’s mission for embracing diversity: “I am Jewish. I am the father of a multiracial household. I have felt the pain and struggle of being judged and shunned for being different.” Readers cannot help but wonder how he would have presented Iceman’s journey.But fandom can rest easy for now: Neither version of the hero is being forgotten. The older Iceman is part of “Extraordinary X-Men,” a new series that began on Wednesday, and the younger hero is part of “All-New X-Men,” which will begin next month.Mr. Alonso said the feedback has been largely positive. On one side are the lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender readers “who are looking to see their reflection in our characters,” he said. But there are also critics. “Some readers see this as opportunism, but I can assure you it is not,” he added.Comic books are no strangers to gay heroes. When the mutant hero Northstar came out in 1992, the news was praised in an editorial in The New York Times: “Comics have often explored new terrain, conferring hero status on groups that society in general had stereotyped in peripheral roles.” Since then, many more gay, lesbian and bisexual champions have been introduced.With this turn of events, Iceman may be the most high-profile gay hero, though that can be like debating who is stronger, Thor or Superman? DC Comics has a series starring Midnighter, a gay hero whose adventures include an active sex life, and Harley Quinn, a bisexual supervillain who has had relationships with the Joker and Poison Ivy.But those DC characters were introduced in the 1990s. Iceman’s first appearance was in 1963. “He is a perennial character,” Mr. Alonso said. And one with significant exposure outside of comics, including an animated series with Spider-Man and portrayal in the popular X-Men films.“This fulfilled our mandate to reflect the world outside the window,” Mr. Alonso said. “We wouldn’t have done it if it didn’t make sense.”Advertisement