AdvertisementSupported byCritic's NotebookBy Michael KimmelmanThe American Museum of Natural History recently came out with some good news — a museum expansion that for once seems as if it could work.A year ago, the museum announced plans for the $325 million, 218,000-square-foot Richard Gilder Center for Science, Education and Innovation. Jeanne Gang, founder of Studio Gang, the high-profile Chicago-based firm, won a competition to design it. She teamed with Reed Hilderbrand, the landscape architects from Cambridge, Mass.Because no new development ever goes unchallenged on the Upper West Side, protesters raised hell, even though architects were still hunched over their drawing boards. Facing west, toward Columbus Avenue, on what’s effectively the rear end of the museum, the project threatened a serendipitous corner of Theodore Roosevelt Park. Opponents feared the project would obliterate that area’s shady allée of trees and benches.Judith Heintz, a landscape architect, designed that spot some 15 years ago, when the museum last expanded, adding the Rose Center for Earth and Science to the north, and the Weston Pavilion, which Gilder will replace, at 79th Street. One neighborhood group, Defenders of Teddy Roosevelt Park, offered on its website a model of the current museum, with an ominous red line where the still-sight-unseen center would supposedly devour the allée.Well, now we know more or less what the actual project looks like. It bids to be the city’s next architectural spectacle.The museum’s trustees approved a conceptual design on Wednesday and released drawings and renderings. The project promises much more room for education, exhibitions, laboratories, the library, open storage and a live butterfly conservatory. It includes a new theater devoted to invisible worlds — meaning microscopic creatures, the human brain, the ocean depths and the edge of the universe. The proposed center also solves humdrum but critical layout problems, integrating dead-end galleries and bringing public spaces, classrooms and research together in a single, soaring, canyonlike, central hall, behind an undulating stone-and-glass facade.That’s the big move. With reinforced-concrete arches and balconies shaped like immense rocky outcroppings or glacial formations, the hall vies with the Theodore Roosevelt Rotunda, the museum’s towering entrance on the opposite side of the campus. It’s part Dr. Seuss, part Jurassic Park, part parametric extravaganza, adding a kind of naturalism to abstract, airborne forms associated with contemporary architecture at its most theatrical.Does it sound like Universal Studios? Maybe a little, but in a museum of dioramas and dinosaurs, with a full-size model of a blue whale and a virtual solar system doubling as a planetarium, it should fit in.And there’s function to the form. This is a museum in the business of wonderment and awe. A half-million schoolchildren visit each year. The institution trains thousands of teachers. It dispenses advanced degrees in science education and comparative biology. Ellen V. Futter, the president of the museum, talks about an urgent need to kindle children’s curiosity and develop a more science-literate public. This is not spin. An informed electorate and healthier environment depend on broadening public understanding of science, engineering and technology.What the center doesn’t do is occupy nearly as much parkland as critics feared. Mindful of neighborhood concerns, the museum clearly pulled the project back as much as possible from the park, consolidating on its existing footprint by knocking down three of its own buildings, claiming only 11,600 square feet, or a quarter acre, of parkland.I know this corner of the park well. I visit the museum almost every week with our younger son, using the Columbus Avenue entrance, watching spring come and autumn leaves fall from oak and elm trees now slated for the chain saw. During the past year I wondered, too, whether such a large new building was really necessary, and if alternatives might include moving some of Gilder’s programs elsewhere, even off site, or building higher instead of outward.The museum has a mixed expansion record, with a tangle of Romanesque, Victorian Gothic and modern glass buildings. The last expansion, swapping the beloved but pokey Art Deco Hayden Planetarium of 1935 for the Rose Center, by the New York firm then called Polshek Partnership, was a scientific leap forward. With its floating spheres and spectacular glass curtain wall, the building instantly became a tourist destination and symbol of the city’s new architectural ambitions.That said, try finding your way around it. Polshek also designed the Weston Pavilion, whose shortcomings have partly led to the Gilder Center.So I worried. But the museum seems to have learned from past mistakes. Building elsewhere, taller, or off site turns out not to make sense. Underground construction dooms the same trees, whether Gilder seizes that quarter acre or not.The facade of the new center, white-on-white, will pick up on the hall’s geological motif, presenting a cool modern face to Columbus Avenue, tying together what’s now a messy agglomeration of brick pavilions. Within the park, it aspires to be a kind of good new son-in-law, handsome yet accommodating. Only 11 percent of visitors use the Weston entrance on Columbus, according to museum officials, who predict that number could rise to 20 percent when Gilder opens. Skeptical neighbors who fear a stampede aren’t taking into account that half the museum’s five million attendees arrive by subway, along Central Park West. And that won’t change.The expansion plan next faces a gantlet of public reviews, including by the New York City Landmarks Commission, notwithstanding that city and state officials have already ponied up a total of nearly $50 million, and the local City Council representative, Helen Rosenthal, along with the Manhattan borough president, Gale A. Brewer, are on board.For years, my wife and I found a haven in the museum’s dark, carpeted, shopworn galleries for gems and minerals. We took our newborns every week. I still escape crowds with our 8-year-old in the Margaret Mead Hall of Pacific Peoples.The Gilder Center will force the renovation of those old galleries. I’ll be sorry to lose my favorite hideaways, as I will the trees in the park that have helped count off the passing years of our children’s lives.But Theodore Roosevelt Park has evolved. It occurred to me the other day that the museum shouldn’t just add more trees and benches in return for the quarter acre. It ought to propose that the Parks Department open an acre of longtime-gated green space along 77th Street, near Columbus Avenue. Crowds now beat a path around it from the museum’s south door to Columbus, where Shake Shack has become a de facto museum cafeteria. Opening that place would acknowledge a latent desire line.The museum could offer to pay for the landscaping and maintenance. Neighbors might balk, saying this has always been a peaceful, untrammeled patch of nature, a block from Central Park. But let them explain why public parkland should not be opened to the public.Sometimes change is good.Advertisement