AdvertisementSupported byBy Gia KourlasLive music is more of a luxury than a given in dance, but when Michele Wiles started BalletNext in 2011,  it was part of her mission. At her previous job, as a principal dancer with American Ballet Theater, it was a given.For her latest choreographic undertaking, “Apogee in 3,” part of BalletNext’s second program opening at New York Live Arts on Tuesday, Ms. Wiles has embraced improvisation and teamed up with Tom Harrell, the jazz trumpeter and fluegelhorn player. Between two of Mr. Harrell’s works — “Baroque Steps” and “Trances,” performed by his quintet — Ms. Wiles drifted onto the stage with open arms and fleet walked on point in a solo that had elements of wistfulness and pleasure, echoing the subtle, generative flow of the piano and the fluegelhorn.While her improvised response was sweet, it added little to a pleasantly lightweight dance that, at times, veered dangerously close to cute. Armed with jazz music — excellently played — Ms. Wiles, in “Apogee,” is all about unleashing abandon. Sharp kicks and exuberant spins, performed by six women in loose black tops and leggings, recall Audrey Hepburn in “Funny Face.”But such friskiness can wear thin, especially as Ms. Wiles relies heavily on repetitive unison formations that give her choreography a predictability that rarely rises to the music’s range and swing. Frequently, the dancers remain in contact by attaching their hands to their neighbors’ shoulders or by interlacing their arms overhead while standing on point, but such connections are ways of merely filling out the music rather than becoming it.Live music continues in Brian Reeder’s 2014 dance “Surmisable Units,” in which a pianist, Elliot Figg, plays, amazingly, Steve Reich’s rigorous “Piano Phase” on two grand pianos that form a V at the rear of the stage as his back faces us. Remounted for this performance — mercifully, the masks from last season are gone — this sharp dance is not unlike a machine, which starts with a solo for Ms. Wiles that demonstrates her clean, swirling power.For all of its intricate footwork, “Surmisable Units” also focuses on the dancers’ arms as they lie on their backs while raising and lowering them in serpentine patterns. But the heart of the work is the pairing of Ms. Wiles and Gracie Huber, a dancer of subtle fearlessness who seems to push past her own boundaries with every step she takes. In the dance’s final moment, she joins Mr. Figg on his piano bench and, after the last note is played, exhales deeply. It’s a satisfying touch, telling us how hard dancing is — especially when it looks easy.BalletNext continues through Saturday at New York Live Arts, 219 West 19th Street, Manhattan; 212-924-0077, balletnext.com.Advertisement