AdvertisementSupported byThe AffairBy Mike HaleIt was a tale of two custodies on “The Affair” on Sunday night, in an episode that departed from the show’s usual format. Instead of covering overlapping time periods from different points of view, the Helen and Noah chapters took place several weeks apart — before and after they resolved their battle over the custody of their four children.This was a juicy episode, written by the playwright David Henry Hwang, a consulting producer on the show, with flashes of dark humor in the second half (when Noah went to fetch Alison from the new-age retreat where she had been staying while exiled from Brooklyn). The fulcrum for the shift in the custody battle was emergency surgery for Martin, as the most grossly obvious misdiagnosis in television history was finally exposed. His stomach pains were not a psychosomatic reaction to the horrible actions of his sex addict father — as Helen’s mother, Margaret, maintained — but the result of a perforated bowel that finally caught up with him after two hot dogs at a Yankees game.[Related: Submit a question for Sarah Treem, the show runner of “The Affair.”]The emotional turmoil of Martin’s near-death experience convinced Helen that Noah was “an excellent father” and that she should give in on shared custody. If, like me, you were shaking your head in amazement a couple weeks ago when Noah didn’t take Martin to a doctor in the first place, this wasn’t all that persuasive. But writers do what they have to do to set up dramatic reversals. To that end, Mr. Hwang spent much of the Helen half of the episode making Margaret look as evil as possible — egging on Martin to say he hated his father, belittling Helen, turning Helen’s meeting with Gottlief into a shouting match with her own straying husband, Bruce. All of that was in preparation for the cathartic moment when Helen kicked her mother out of the house. This might have seemed a little extreme — Margaret has been taking care of the kids and is about to be divorced by Bruce — but Helen is on her last Park Slope nerve.Noah’s chapter began with his waking up in bed conspicuously alone, and we soon found out he was back in Helen’s house with his children, waiting for Martin to come home from the hospital. He and Helen appeared to be coexisting in a state of semi-happiness, despite some tense moments over homework and Whitney’s pre-emptory announcement that she wouldn’t visit him in his new apartment in Crown Heights, Brooklyn (the two-bedroom that Alison had found). Helen saved Noah from Whitney’s latest provocation, saying he could stay in the family home while she was visiting a friend — which raised the question of whether Alison could be in the house with the kids, too. Noah left, looking back at the front door and his family beyond, with a look that strongly hinted of regret for what he was giving up, particularly Helen.But on his way upstate to meet Alison, the goatlike smile returned to his face. The anticipatory joy was short-lived — Alison’s space-cadet mom was in residence at the Sousanna Institute, buff naked men were walking the grounds and Alison was spending a lot of time with Sebastian Junger (playing himself), a more accomplished writer than Noah. Worst of all, Alison was still angry six weeks after reading Noah’s descriptions of her (“No marriage could survive me”) in his new book.Trying to accommodate Alison’s desire to stay at the institute for a while longer, Noah made an attempt to work on his book, but was defeated by a comic sequence of distractions — gongs, chants, lectures, spiders, Sebastian Junger. His fanboy enthusiasm for Junger did get him to agree to a reiki session with Alison’s mom, however, and as Athena released his kundalini (there was no bodily contact) and urged him to give in to his darker side, he flashed on the dream we’ve seen flashes of throughout the season. This time it went to completion: We, and he, saw that the woman he runs down on a dark road is Alison.Shaken by his vision, Noah dragged Alison out of a yoga class and insisted on leaving immediately. When she resisted, he resolved the situation the way he always does, with sex, this time presumably releasing his kundalini as he pressed her against a tree. Suitably chastened, Alison told him she was pregnant (so it wasn’t just the book and Sebastian Junger that were putting her in a mood). Noah’s apparent reaction to that news neatly tied up a long-running plotline and added a frisson of violent apprehension to the end of the episode. Having just told Alison that his book ended happily, with them together, he redid it to suit his new mood and the wishes of his editor. “Descent” would now end with the main character running down his lover on a dark road.Let us know your thoughts on the sixth episode of the second season of “The Affair.” Would you let Alison in your house?Advertisement