
Homeland By                     
JUDITH WARNER

NOV. 8, 2015
This recap contains spoilers for Sunday’s episode of “Homeland.”This was a very strange episode, wasn’t it? The pacing off-kilter, the dialogue contrived, the background music oddly plaintive, and the characters both muted and, oddly, overdrawn — as though the regular actors had taken the night off and been replaced by a group of far less talented understudies.Carrie, Saul, Dar and Quinn all seemed like they were performing stereotyped versions of themselves. Carrie, in this episode, is the manipulative, whiny crazy lady I’ve seen depicted before in many viewers’ online reactions to the show; a vision I don’t normally share. Her “cry face” flickers on and off in nearly every scene. Wearing a black spy outfit, she runs from man to man looking for someone to save her, halfheartedly trying a bit of seduction in between her bouts of damsel in distress manipulation.She’s about to stage a real drama queen sort of exit — “I have to disappear … I bring down everyone around me. And I have this opportunity now to go away and bring the problems with me” — before, at last, Saul comes through and throws her anchor, in the form of the flash drive containing copies of the documents she’s convinced that the Russians don’t want her to see.Saul, meanwhile, is shape-shifting in this episode with dizzying rapidity. One moment, he’s Bad Saul from Season 5, asking Carrie why she would believe that the Russians should care whether she lives or dies. Next, he’s Wounded Old Man Saul from Season 4, his glasses off, somehow committing cyber-theft while typing in his laborious two-fingered tap-tap. Then, he’s the Good Saul of Seasons 1 through 3.AdvertisementIt all feels like some sort of quick-change acting exercise: like a character on a bad network TV drama who has multiple personality disorder and is prompted to produce alter ego after alter ego on the witness stand. The very obvious overacting isn’t helped by the who’s-on-first banter that Saul engages in with Dar when he realizes his old friend is having him followed:“You havin’ me tailed?”“Who told you that?”“You havin’ anyone else in this office tailed?”Advertisement“What do you mean?”“Do not give me one more of your [expletive] nonanswers, Dar, because I’m this close to taking your head off” “You are?”This particular scene, both amusing and somewhat distressing, is heavy-handed in its staging (both men shouting while Allison listens in from outside the closed door) brought me back to one of the questions I raised last week: Do Dar and Saul already suspect the Berlin station chief’s treachery? Are they actually working together to try to trap her? Does Saul seem so unlike himself, does Dar seem like a comic book rendition of himself, because, in fact, they are both playacting themselves in order to play her?Dar’s threat to give Saul a polygraph test certainly rings false. We know, from Season 1, that Saul is a useless lie detector test-taker. (He’s too much of a “nervous Nellie” to pass a polygraph, Homeland co-creator and show runner Alex Gansa told The Daily Beast in 2013).Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Quinn’s subplot in this episode is so bizarre, however, that it’s hard to come up with any sort of creative explanation. The man who saves his life in Berlin turns out to be an Iraqi doctor who came from Mosul after his wife was killed in the bombing of their medical clinic. Unable to practice medicine in Germany, he now manages a building (more on that in a moment), which happens to be home to a not-so-jolly band of jihadists who are a little too loud in their event planning.Their leader takes an instant dislike to Quinn, who during a bathroom break overhears the group’s plans for mass murder. But Quinn, though more or less dead (a “walking staph infection” by his own admission) is able to turn right around and kill the new enemy, his righteous anger fueled by the insult of having been punched in a bullet wound while he’s a “guest” in the jihadis’ house. (“He wasn’t a guest until you brought him here,” the group’s leader had complained to the doctor, in an observation remarkable for its banality.)I’m sure there are all sorts of meaningful messages being conveyed in this episode. Its title is, after all, “Parabiosis,” a term that the journal Nature defines as “a 150-year-old surgical technique that unites the vasculature of two living animals.” In recent years, the technique has been used to connect the bloodstreams of mice, and in aging experiments has actually used the blood of young mice to rejuvenate the organs of old mice.Clearly, something similar is meant to be going on between Quinn and his guardian angel. The doctor transfuses him with his own blood; they walk down the hallways as one body, joined at the hip. There’s much deep symbolism, many heavy-duty moral, ethical, geopolitical lessons to be learned, I am sure — but all I could think about, once I heard the doctor say the words “manage” and “building,” was “building manager.” All I could hear was the sudden return of Quinn’s oddly clipped, hyper-polite, quiet-desperation voice, which we haven’t heard since early last season. And all I could see was the actress Emily Walker, Quinn’s former landlady, whom he was sleeping with.In truth, is that association any more nonsensical than the notion that a group of jihadists would ask an errant American for advice in terror planning? (“Why doesn’t it make sense?” one of them asks Quinn about their plan.)Maybe the show’s writers were at wits ends trying to tie up loose ends this week so they could get Carrie, Quinn and Saul back together where they belong. Next week, they’ll get a do-over. And I hope they’ll start by showing us the “someone” whom Quinn said would take care of him. Carrie? Astrid? The nameless building manager back home in Virginia?Judith Warner, a contributing writer for The New York Times Magazine, is the author, most recently, of “We’ve Got Issues: Children and Parents in the Age of Medication.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »