AdvertisementSupported byThe Walking DeadBy Jeremy EgnerToward the end of this week’s “The Walking Dead,” Maggie, dejected and wandering through a sewer of waterlogged walkers and broken dreams, collapsed into an emotional heap of Glenn-grief, self-recrimination and anguished uncertainty.“I’m pregnant,” she told Aaron, explaining why she didn’t go with Glenn on his fateful expedition. “If I was with him, maybe I could have helped him. I don’t know if he’s alive.”“I don’t get to know what will happen,” she added. “I don’t get to know why it happened.”Right there with you, Maggie, aside from the pregnancy thing. (High-five to the commenters who called this, by the way.) Because I don’t know if he’s alive either, and all your show did on Sunday was toy with our emotions, just as fate is toying with yours.We’ll get to Glenn in a minute. The rest of this week’s installment — which wasn’t my favorite, just to put that out there — tracked the Alexandrians’ sputtering efforts to finally accept how the world is “now,” which was the episode’s title.Fresh off the terrifying assault from the Wolves, they found their subdivision surrounded by a thick blanket of zombies — the splinter group from the walker drive finally arrived at the walls, led by Rick. We wondered, after the cliffhanger ending a couple weeks ago, how Rick would make it out of that surrounded R.V. The answer, it seems, is that he just ran really fast.“The wall’s gonna hold together,” Rick told the assembled, in defiance of the many viewers who have complained that the wall’s supports are on the wrong side. “Can you?”At first it didn’t look good. Fatalism set in as the Alexandrians, lionhearted as always, mostly went to pieces. There was a run on the food bank, and Spencer got hammered and lashed out at his mom.But before long Jessie was killing a roamer (her first?) and doing a Rick-ian monologue about the Ways Things Are Now, and Deanna was emerging from her grief-fueled fugue state to sketch out a new plan for living. “Dolor hic tibi proderit olim,” it read on the blueprints, part of an Ovid quote that translates into: “Someday this pain will be useful to you.” (The full quote: “Be patient and tough; someday this pain will be useful to you.”)By the end even Spencer had sobered up enough to embrace responsibility and take a turn as lookout, which, since the walkers descended, has mostly amounted to scanning the horizon for a sign from Glenn.Maybe he’ll have better luck than the rest of us, including Maggie. “He would’ve shown me by now,” she told Aaron. “That’s what Michonne said.”O.K., two things: One, way to be there for a grieving pal, Michonne. And two, I’d argue that no sign is better than what viewers got from Sunday’s episode, which showed us one thing and then suggested another. And then maybe another. And then back to the first thing. Maybe. Or maybe not.No sooner had Rick told everyone that Glenn and Nicholas would be walking through the gate soon, then someone (Tara?) was painting their name on the Wall of the Dead. Aaron gazed meaningfully at Maggie as the names went up, but later acted surprised when she equivocated over Glenn’s fate. The aborted rescue mission and sewer breakdown ensued. But not long after, an Aaron pep talk ended with Maggie at the wall herself, erasing Glenn’s name.Assuming that no one knows anything, aside from the fact that Glenn and Nicholas haven’t shown up yet, why were the names there at all? I mean, besides to produce a catch in the breath, a spike of dread and otherwise jerk around the fans of the show?I know that people go through all sorts of emotional contortions when they’re coming to grips with a tragedy, or a possible tragedy. I know that uncertainty surrounding such matters is torture. I also know that in the world of “The Walking Dead,” characters who feel weak or tormented inside are called upon to buck up another’s spirits in the name of the greater good. (Presumably this is some of what Rick and Aaron were up to.)Perhaps Sunday’s episode was designed to make viewers feel some or all of that. But all it really did was make the show’s coyness about the question of Glenn’s fate — which amounts to, basically, were those his guts or not? — seem like a cheap way to manufacture a few episodes’ worth of melodrama. (And that doesn’t even get into the credibility problems that arise if he did somehow survive falling into a walker swarm.)The net result is, at this point I don’t really care if Glenn lives or not, and the old throw-in-a-baby trick, deployed once already on this show, doesn’t affect my feelings on the matter either.Bring him back, don’t bring him back, bring him back as a zombie. Whatever. Just get on with it.• Anyone else getting a bad feeling about Ron? His ineffectual rage has been a running subplot — on Sunday we saw a sort of handbags-at-dawn tussle with Carl — and suddenly he’s asking Rick to show him how to shoot a gun. “American Horror Story” did a tasteless riff on school shootings this week. “The Walking Dead” wouldn’t go down that road as well, would it?• “I wasn’t saying there wasn’t a future. There’s gotta be,” Jessie told Rick at the end of the episode. “Tell me there’s more.” Rick went in for the kiss — show, don’t tell, as we say in the writing game. I guess this thing’s back on.• Speaking of love connections, Denise decided to stop being afraid and make a move on Tara, who seemed to be into it. Didn’t see that coming. I wonder how Eugene will take it.• Little Sam grew up, huh? Was that the same actor who Carol threatened so memorably last season? I’d ask her but she was nowhere to be found on Sunday, which is always a bummer.• Also M.I.A.: Father Gabriel, who I guess is holed up in his chapel. Things have been pretty harrowing in Alexandria lately, and we all know he makes himself scarce when things get tight. Have you missed him? Yeah, me neither.Advertisement