
The Leftovers By                     
JEN CHANEY

NOV. 8, 2015
“The Leftovers” excels at many things, but its greatest strength may be its ability to convey so much narrative information so naturally. This week’s episode, “Lens” — which deftly explains a ton of back story and demystifies previously cryptic details — is a master class in how that’s done. By the end of the hour, we know why there are numerical markers on the streets of Miracle (they’re part of the audio tour); we know why Jerry keeps killing goats (because he killed one on that fateful Oct. 14, and many think that’s what made Miracle immune from departures); we know that Erika was planning to leave John; and we know why she buried that bird, and why (well, sort of) it emerged from that shoebox alive.During the episode’s signature scene, the intense, impeccably framed Department of Sudden Departure questionnaire session between Erika and Nora, Erika explains that her grandmother always said Miracle’s “chosen” status could be proven by burying a bird in a shoebox in the woods, returning three days later, making a wish, and opening the box, from which the bird would fly free. A previously skeptical Erika recently decided to try it after finding a badly injured sparrow near her car. (That the bird is a sparrow calls to mind the classic Gospel hymn, “His Eye Is on the Sparrow.”) Erika wished that after she left John, Evie would be O.K. without her. As we saw in “Axis Mundi,” the bird indeed flew out of the box, and a short time later, Evie departed. Now Erika feels responsible for her daughter’s absence. More to the point: She feels responsible because Evie’s departure was her punishment, as though God said, “Oh, you’re wishing for that? Sure, I’ll give that to you. Only: This way.”Nora, of all people, should understand. But instead of offering empathy, she questions Erika’s logic and says she’s moved beyond blaming her own behavior for what happened to her family. “I evolved,” Nora says, using a brilliantly condescending pair of words to deny God’s wrath.Regina King (Erika) — who really gets to show her acting stuff in this episode — and Carrie Coon (Nora) are simply magnificent in this ping-pong match of blame and denial. Ultimately, Erika gets the last word when she repeats one of those stock DSD queries back to Nora: “What were the last words they said to you, to the best of your recollection?” Nora quietly sobs, but doesn’t answer. She doesn’t have to. We know from Season 1’s “The Garveys at Their Best” that the last thing Nora Durst heard from her daughter was the sound of her crying, after Nora yelled at her for spilling orange juice on Nora’s cellphone. We know that just before her family lifted, Nora looked heavenward, as if she were wishing them away.AdvertisementAt the end of “Lens,” then, when Erika throws a rock through Nora’s window, she’s doing more than just getting back at Nora for doing the same thing to the Murphys earlier in the episode. She’s sending a message: Let he who is without sin cast the first stone.Advertisement“We are not spared,” Erika shouts during her meltdown at the fund-raiser for Evie, Taylor and Violet. Her spectacular outburst is prompted by the fact that Jerry is about to slay yet another goat, which will totally ruin the Rihanna song that accompanies the touching slide show tribute to the girls. Really, she’s fed up with the rituals in Miracle — rituals not unlike Matt’s “Groundhog Day” repetitiveness — that make everyone feel protected. In Jerry the goat killer, she sees a bit of her own, bird-resuscitating superstition, but she also knows that slicing into animals won’t save anybody. What Erika is grappling with — which comes through in the confrontation scene with Nora when Ms. King says, “The Good Lord is pretend,” but haltingly whispers the “is pretend” part — is the notion that maybe there really is a God, but contrary to the verse from the Book of Luke, he doesn’t consider every person more valuable than “a flock of sparrows.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Nora seeks comfort in logic. When she learns about lensing from George at the DSD (nice to see you again, Freddy Rumsen!), it is presented in scientific terms: a person gives off ultraviolet rays that cause other people to lift. George even says the phenomenon was covered in Scientific American. Nora starts to wonder if she might be a lens, the one responsible for Evie going poof. But when the doctor on the phone, voiced by Sonya Walger, a.k.a. Penny on “Lost”, finally admits that they believe Nora has the demon Azrael living inside her, Nora hangs up dismissively. Is lensing a scientific or a religious phenomenon? Or does that depend upon the lens through which one views it?Here’s another question: If there is a lens here, is it possible it’s someone other than Nora? The words “demons living inside” immediately remind me of Kevin Garvey, who admits to Nora that he keeps seeing Patti Levin, perhaps the Angel of Death dressed in Guilty Remnant white. He also tells Nora that Patti says he’s made “a big mistake” by admitting this, which sounds like something Azrael would say. Matt Jamison, professional sufferer and brother to Nora, also has lens potential. He was in Miracle for, what, three months before Evie and her friends lifted? Unexplainable phenomena seem to happen here after time passes in units of three: three months until a secondary departure, three days for the bird to fly away.• The phone call between Laurie and Nora was both awkward and heartbreaking. It confirms that Tommy is missing, though Kevin doesn’t know he’s missing. It also reminds us that the two women in Kevin’s life have now, under different circumstances, each lost their husband and two children.• Did you notice the way Nora hesitated when the woman at the fund-raiser asked if she had a PayPal account? That was a subtle flashback to Nora’s visit with Holy Wayne, when someone also asked for her PayPal information. Then, the request preceded healing and spiritual rebirth; this time, it comes before Nora steals the top-secret DSD questionnaire, the leak of which will presumably wreak havoc on the Department’s ability to properly assess departures going forward. Which is exactly what Nora wants. If the government can’t verify the departures, they don’t officially exist.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »