AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn ShattuckTuning in to the Sunday morning political chitchat is kind of a no-brainer, isn’t it? How about taking a chance on a new series like “Flesh and Bone” or “Agent X,” even if it promises more camp than quality? Or for some unadulterated fantasy before the reality of Monday morning strikes, travel the world with Julia Roberts in “Eat Pray Love”? Javier Bardem awaits you.FLESH AND BONE 8 p.m. Eastern time on Starz. A Pittsburgh ingénue flees her stalker brother to conquer the fictitious American Ballet Company in New York by day — and a clandestine strip club by night. Ethan Stiefel, the former American Ballet Theater star, choreographed this new series from Moira Walley-Beckett, who won a writing Emmy for an episode of “Breaking Bad.” It’s “Red Shoe Diaries” meets “Showgirls” crossed with a little “Black Swan” and “Flashdance,” Mike Hale wrote in The Times. It’s also “impossible to take seriously.” (Image: Sarah Hay and Ben Daniels)60 MINUTES 7:30 p.m. on CBS. Lin-Manuel Miranda talks to Charlie Rose about his Broadway smash “Hamilton” and testing it out on President Obama back in 2009.OPRAH’S MASTER CLASS 8 p.m. on OWN. Robert Duvall looks back at some of his greatest roles, including Boo Radley in “To Kill a Mockingbird,” Lt. Col. Bill Kilgore in “Apocalypse Now” and the Oscar-winning Mac Sledge in “Tender Mercies.”EAT PRAY LOVE (2010) 8:30 p.m. on CMT. Julia Roberts, standing in for the author Elizabeth Gilbert, sets out on a global journey of liberation. Javier Bardem is the expatriate at the end of the road, after she has eaten her way through Italy, meditated in India and apprenticed herself to a shaman in Bali. “Watch. Smile. Go home and dream of Brazilians in Bali,” A. O. Scott wrote in The Times. (Image: Ms. Roberts)AGENT X 9 p.m. on TNT. Sharon Stone gets her first meaty TV role as the vice president of the United States and handler of a superagent who mops up messes that the F.B.I. and C.I.A. can’t. Mike Hale, writing in The Times, called it “cheap and thin.” (Image: Ms. Stone)GETTING ON 10 p.m. on HBO. In their third and final season, the nurses in the Billy Barnes Extended-Care Unit prepare to do their own moving on. Writing in The Times, Neil Genzlinger said that the show’s three actresses — Laurie Metcalf, Alex Borstein and Niecy Nash — do “subtly brilliant work.” (Image: From left, Ms. Nash, Ms. Borstein and Lindsay Kraft)What’s Streaming NowBLACK SWAN on iTunes. Natalie Portman is Nina, a ballet dancer teetering on the verge of insanity as she tackles the good-bad twin lead of “Swan Lake.” Writing in The Times, Manohla Dargis called it “a witchy brew of madness and cunning.”Advertisement