AdvertisementSupported byBy Jon CaramanicaBack in March, during an off-week on his first season of “Saturday Night Live,” Pete Davidson flew to Los Angeles to perform at the Comedy Central roast of Justin Bieber.In a slim black suit and $1,200 Don C Air Jordan 2s, he took the stage first, casually decimating the host, Kevin Hart, and the guests Ludacris, Shaquille O’Neal and Hannibal Buress, before focusing his blowtorch on Mr. Bieber: “I lost my dad on 9/11, and I always regretted growing up without a dad … until I met your dad, Justin. Now I’m glad mine’s dead.”The weepy giggling in the room was cut with a palpable gasp, as if a few hundred people had all been simultaneously kicked in the sternum while being tickled.For Mr. Davidson, 21, that was an optimal result. On a recent night in his Brooklyn Heights apartment, in the middle of playing NBA 2K15 on his Xbox One with his friend Anthony and placing several orders from a local diner on Seamless, he talked about making people squirm just a bit.“I’m like, ‘Heyyyy, I just want to talk about this, that everybody’s uncomfortable about.’ I like doing that. I like making things that are dark, awkward, weird things that you don’t really find funny, funny.”In just a few years, Mr. Davidson has made this sort of shoulder-shrugging, post-trauma, post-trigger-warning comedy his calling card. His rise from cramped New York comedy clubs to TV and film has been rapid. On Saturday, Oct. 3, he’ll begin his second season as a featured player on “Saturday Night Live,” where he stood out last season for his deceptively plain-spoken, wide-eyed takes on young male immaturity.Mr. Davidson is 6-foot-3 and built like an ivy vine, slender and bendy. “You see him and you think, ‘This poor kid — I wanna buy him a sandwich,’ ” Dave Attell, one of his mentors, said. But while Mr. Davidson projects a slow-tempo innocence, it’s married to a profound, sad wisdom.It is an approach unlike that of anyone else on the current “S.N.L.” roster — there is something of Adam Sandler’s aw-shucks naïveté to him, and the “S.N.L.” founder Lorne Michaels likens his openness and warmth to Jimmy Fallon’s.How Mr. Davidson uses those tools, though, is wholly his own. He made his mark on the first episode of last season, during a Weekend Update segment in which, billed as the “Resident Young Person,” he did a bit derived from his stand-up routine about how much money it would take for him to perform certain sexual acts on another man (with, for good measure, a quick detour about his mother’s sexual practices).“The sexual politics of it were not highly evolved,” Mr. Michaels said. “People would have judged the same material from someone else much more harshly.”But Mr. Davidson has a way of nuzzling up to a difficult joke, unblinking but innocently. His stories move at a stroll. “He lives in the pauses,” Mr. Attell said.Mr. Davidson achieves a lot with small facial gestures: In one stand-up routine, the punch line to a joke about his sexual habits is just him widening his eyes. He is disarming, a teddy bear who’s seen too much.Mr. Davidson’s father, Scott, a firefighter with Ladder 118 in Brooklyn, was last seen at the Marriott World Trade Center hotel, which was destroyed when the twin towers collapsed. Mr. Davidson has 8418, his father’s badge number, tattooed on his left arm. In his apartment, on a low shelf under the television, not far from the unopened bottle of champagne from the “S.N.L.” 40th anniversary party and his unread copy of the “S.N.L.” oral history “Live From New York,” is a replica of his father’s firefighter helmet.“It was sad how sad he was growing up,” Mr. Davidson’s mother, Amy, said. In school, he would act out. At one point, he said, he ripped all his hair out until he was bald. He became a “lab rat” for doctors studying the children of Sept. 11 victims. “It was overwhelming,” he said.He attended three high schools, convinced that the kids at each were mean, but “then I was like, Oh! It’s me! ” he said. “Here’s how corny I was — my dad died in 9/11 and people still” were mean.Mr. Davidson began doing stand-up at 16; his mother would drive him to gigs in Manhattan from the Great Kills neighborhood of Staten Island. “He had a tough time growing up without a dad — I wanted him to be happy, and this made him really, really happy,” she said.In comedy clubs, with their gaggles of oddballs and cranks, he found friends. “I just blended in perfectly,” he said. “I feel very safe — you can say whatever you want.“I loved the power and the freedom — you gotta listen to what I have to say,” he added. “It was the first time I felt that way.”He ascended quickly: tours opening for Nick Cannon and Bob Levy, stints on the MTV shows “Guy Code” and “Wild ’n Out,” then a pilot for Fox, “Sober Companion,” that wasn’t picked up. Mr. Attell booked him on his Comedy Central show “Comedy Underground.”Amy Schumer, who cast Mr. Davidson in a small role in her recent movie “Trainwreck,” met him at the Comedy Cellar, the comfortably murky spot in Greenwich Village that has become a second home to Mr. Davidson. “All we do is trash each other — that’s how we connect, by joking too hard with each other,” Ms. Schumer said. “When he told me the story about his dad dying, I faked a phone call from my agent.” She added: “Some people do comedy, and you just feel they don’t have to. Like, ‘Why are you doing this?’ But we have to do this.”Mr. Davidson is less a character actor than a raconteur; most of his work on “Saturday Night Live” last season was drawn from his life, or was written for a character very similar to him.Even though his baby face might hide it, Mr. Davidson enjoys getting a rise from people. His is the gentlest, slickest form of envelope-pushing. Last year on “Jimmy Kimmel Live,” he joked: “I don’t even know what race I am. I’m all miscellaneous in the face. My mom tells me I’m white, but like, ‘I can see my lips from here.’ ” (Mr. Davidson is of Irish, German and Italian heritage.)In an age of liberal political correctness, Mr. Davidson tramps on eggshells. “I think he’s brave,” said Ms. Schumer. “There’s something kind of noble about it.”Mr. Davidson offered a simple explanation of his anti-method: “There’s nothing I won’t joke about, and I think it’s because of what happened to me. That’s the worst thing that could ever happen to somebody. Now it’s just like, ‘Who cares, man?’ ”He recently returned to therapy after a couple of years away, seeing the same person he saw after his father’s death. “I’m on antidepressants like everyone else,” he said with a shrug. He also has Crohn’s disease. Earlier in the day, he’d been treated with Remicade, which is administered through an IV drip.But Mr. Davidson is still, in some ways, a kid. His mother handles his bills for him. In his off hours, he plays video games. On a recent trip to California, he picked up a couple of Space Boards, the motorized hands-free scooters that are de rigueur rapper toys of the moment. His girlfriend, the comedian Carly Aquilino, recently left town for work, and told Mr. Davidson he couldn’t ride his Space Board in her apartment. When she returned, there was a chunk of wall missing.He’s prone to the occasional indulgence, like a new Mercedes G-class S.U.V. One recent night at the Comedy Cellar, Trevor Noah, the new host of “The Daily Show,” came over to say hello, talking to Mr. Davidson about his car while groaning about how he still rode a bike.Though both Mr. Davidson’s mother and Ms. Aquilino say that he is becoming more patient and calm, he occasionally picks a fight on Twitter: accusing the comedian Natasha Leggero of stealing a joke, or arguing with people who make unkind or absurd comments about Sept. 11. “I feel like every time I tweet, I lose money,” he said dryly.It’s here that his new peers protect him. “If he posts something stupid on Instagram or Twitter, we figuratively backhand him, like: ‘What are you doing? Take that down,’ ” Ms. Schumer said.He’s adapting quickly, though. “He’s very shrewd for that age,” said Bill Hader, who first recommended him to Mr. Michaels. “He told me, ‘I got a thing for this season — no weed jokes. I’ve done that.’ ”Or, as Mr. Michaels more bluntly put it, “Pete’s really focused for someone who mostly talks about how much pot he smokes.”Only four of the 11 minutes of material Mr. Davidson did at the Bieber roast made it to air. “My favorite joke was cut,” he said. “It was, ‘Kevin Hart is literally the biggest comedian in the world — according to Robin Williams’s suicide note.’“The crowd went ‘Oooh,’ ” — the bad kind, not the good kind, he said — “then I had to pop it back up.” What helped him turn it around wasn’t a joke about Paul Walker, but his Sept. 11 routine.“That brought it back,” Mr. Davidson said, satisfied. “It’s the only time 9/11 has ever saved the room!”Advertisement