Brooklyn Museum officials may have been taken by surprise last week when an artist circulated an open letter saying their decision to rent the museum to organizers of a real estate conference was promoting gentrification. But the museum responded Sunday with an acknowledgment of the criticism and a description of steps the institution was taking to address it.The conference, called the 6th Annual Brooklyn Real Estate Summit, which is scheduled for Nov. 17, will include more than 600  “top retail, condo, multifamily and office players in the Brooklyn market,” according to its website. It focuses on the theme of how these developments will shape the borough “into a place to live, work and play,”  addressing questions such as,  “What opportunities for value-add exist in the seemingly picked-over areas?”Critics of the conference, including Sarah Quinter, the author of the open letter, said they did not think a leading cultural institution should encourage practices that they contend prioritize speculation and profit over the stability of neighborhoods.In a Tumblr post dated Nov. 8, the museum’s director, Anne Pasternak, stated: “On Tuesday we learned that artists, community organizers and our neighbors were upset that the conference is happening at our museum and had banded together to express their concerns about affordable housing and work spaces and protest the event. Of course we wanted to be responsive, and I want to let you know what we have done.”The museum, she wrote, would examine policies for renting space to third parties and offered to hold a separate gathering there on affordable housing and workspaces.  Ms. Pasternak also wrote that she had contacted Ms. Quinter to “invite a conversation between the museum and the protest organizers,” adding that Green Pearl, the company holding the conference, had, at her suggestion, invited artists and organizers to speak at the conference.Ms. Quinter said on Sunday that she had received an email from Ms. Pasternak and that protest organizers were discussing whether to accept an invitation to meet with her. Fellow protesters said that Green Pearl had invited a single artist to speak to attendees, according to Ms. Quinter, but that critics of the conference had rejected the offer.  (Green Pearl did not immediately respond to an email requesting comment.)Members of one group protesting the conference, the Artist Studio Affordability Project, in an online petition addressed to Ms. Pasternak and the Brooklyn Museum’s board of trustees, wrote:  “The conference’s stated goal to derive higher profits from Brooklyn real estate will exacerbate the ongoing displacement of thousands of New Yorkers, and therefore we decline the offer to participate.”A version of this article appears in print on 11/09/2015, on page C2 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Museum Reaches Out to Conference Protesters.