Two plays exploring the relationships between young women competing in physical endeavors are the first recipients of a new play-writing award honoring Philip Seymour Hoffman.After assessing more than 2,000 submissions, the judges of the new honor,  the Relentless Award, were torn between “Dance Nation,” a play by Clare Barron about adolescent dancers, and “The Wolves,” a play by Sarah DeLappe about a girls indoor soccer team, so they decided to split the honor between the two works.“Each one of these plays does something that I haven’t seen before — there’s some technique used, some use of time, character, that is unusual,” said David Bar Katz, a screenwriter, playwright and friend of Mr. Hoffman, the film star and stage actor.The award has an unusual backstory. After Mr. Hoffman’s death of a drug overdose early last year, The National Enquirer published a false story about Mr. Hoffman and Mr. Katz; Mr. Katz sued, and the tabloid paid a settlement that he used to create the American Playwriting Foundation and its Relentless Award, which honors unproduced works of theater by American writers.“Phil loved playwrights and spent so much of his life dedicated to that,” Mr. Katz said.The winners will split a $45,000 prize. The playwrights will also be given a weeklong retreat with a director, dramaturg and actors at an organic farm in upstate New York, and the plays will be given staged readings, intended to help with their development, at regional theaters around the nation.“We had so many discussions over the years of how tough it is on playwrights, and how difficult to survive,” Mr. Katz said. “We’d sit and talk about it in Keens chophouse, and on the walls they have all those fliers from theaters in the 1800s, but playwrights couldn’t afford to come here now, and Phil said it would be nice if a playwright could afford a steak, and make a living.”The judges, who in addition to Mr. Katz included a group of writers and performers who knew Mr. Hoffman — Eric Bogosian, Thomas Bradshaw, Lynn Nottage, John Ortiz, Jonathan Marc Sherman and Lucy Thurber — also named two finalists: Jake Jeppson, for “#Bros” and Liza Birkenmeier, for “Radio Island.”A version of this article appears in print on 11/09/2015, on page C2 of the NewYork edition with the headline: 2 Share Prize Honoring Philip Seymour Hoffman.