By JOSEPH P. CERMATORINOV. 5, 2015
Early in the new opera “You Us We All,” two fashionable women of the 17th century, wearing elaborate wigs, gowns and corsets, sing about boredom while twilight gathers over modern-day Los Angeles. “I forgetith how glorious the sunset is at thy infinity pool,” one sings forlornly in pseudo-antique English, sipping a martini, her voice underscored by a Baroque ensemble.A work of 21st-century music theater written for 17th-century instruments, “You Us We All” mashes up references to infinity pools and Beyoncé into an ornate Baroque-style pageant of life and death. Opening on Wednesday, Nov. 11, and running through Saturday, Nov. 14, at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, it is a collaboration between two newcomers to opera, the singer-composer Shara Worden and the playwright-director Andrew Ondrejcak, and the Belgian ensemble Baroque Orchestration X.They are the latest in a recent flood of artists and institutions to have shown new interest in Baroque themes, conventions and materials: The list includes the Metropolitan Opera’s pastiche “The Enchanted Island,” Jonathan Dawe’s neo-Baroque opera “Cracked Orlando,” Max Richter’s “recomposed” versions of Vivaldi’s “Four Seasons,” the young director R. B. Schlather’s Handel cycle in Chinatown and Robert Wilson’s Monteverdi cycle in Milan.Rising singers, evincing less interest in Puccini and Gounod, increasingly tend to specialize in two periods: new music and the Baroque. Lighter in texture, but not lacking in nobility, complexity or passion, early music offers a welcome change of tone for listeners accustomed to Romantic Sturm und Drang. And the Baroque past has come to seem more and more contemporary — a world full of crises, uncertainties and forms of theatricality both unsettling and seductive.“You Us We All,” having its American premiere after performances in Hamburg, Germany; Antwerp, Belgium; and Amsterdam, takes this vogue for the Baroque in new directions. For its basic structure, it adapts the dramatic form of the masque, a genre full of lavish music and spectacle. In 17th-century England, the playwright Ben Jonson and the stage designer Inigo Jones used the form to depict monarchical magnificence and the glories of state power in allegorical terms. Scenes of rebellion would suddenly be resolved through the magical appearance of the Stuart kings or their families onstage, depicted as living embodiments of virtues like Beauty, Fame, and Honor.AdvertisementIn “You Us We All,” the masque becomes a chamber opera for four singers and 10 instrumentalists, blending a variety of sources and textures into a vibrant mix that defies simple categorization, much as Ms. Worden’s career has. Originally trained in opera, she achieved fame with her indie-rock band, My Brightest Diamond, often blurring the boundaries between pop songwriting and classical composition. Since her solo recording debut in 2006 with the album “Bring Me the Workhorse,” she has collaborated with both singer-songwriters like Sufjan Stevens and classical composers like David Lang, Sarah Kirkland Snider and Jonathan Bepler.AdvertisementAspects of all these various worlds enter into Ms. Worden’s new score, lovingly (and sometimes winkingly) braiding together musical citations from Baroque composers like Handel and Vivaldi. She and Mr. Ondrejcak, a frequent collaborator, had been discussing a possible opera project together since a festival of Baroque music at the Brooklyn Academy in 2010, when they attended a staging  of Purcell’s “The Fairy Queen.”Finding the production a bit goofy — especially its enormous, very frisky bunny rabbits — they left for sushi and a conversation that planted the seed for “You Us We All.” When Ms. Worden received a commission from Baroque Orchestration X, an ensemble of period instruments that focuses on contemporary music, and its artistic director, Pieter Theuns, she invited Mr. Ondrejcak to join her as librettist.“I wanted it to be a Baroque experience,” he recalled in a recent interview, “even if I didn’t really know what that meant yet.”At the time, Mr. Ondrejcak was studying with the playwright Mac Wellman, who suggested that he use the project to write a modern court masque. “It was an off-handed suggestion, but it made a great amount of sense when I started looking into it,” Mr. Ondrejcak said. “These court masques are full of bizarre spectacle, and they’re very experimental. For example, my characters tend not to have proper names: Instead I’ll have a King, a Fishmonger, a Concubine, a Cook. I create these very flat allegories and these little morality tales, so that aspect of the masque really resonates with me.”Working with his masque research, diary entries, notebooks and poems, he eventually focused on five allegorical characters: Love, Virtue, Hope, Time and Death. With various collaborators, including the acclaimed New York vocalist Helga Davis (who appears as Virtue), Ms. Worden sang improvised a cappella versions of the score for Mr. Ondrejcak, prompting him to make revisions where necessary.“The more I learned the instruments and trusted the players,” Ms. Worden recalled in an interview, “the more we could open up spaces for the sort of improvisatory moments you get in, say, Monteverdi.”Even with room for improvisation, Ms. Worden’s score is meticulously handled. With Baroque Orchestration X’s viols, winds and continuo accompaniment — and added percussion, some standard (vibraphone), some not (typewriter) — it creates a richly layered soundscape, at times radiating warmth and at others shrouded in gloom.AdvertisementIn performance, “You Us We All” unfolds as a courtly ballet in a glittering rainbow of clothing and light. (The costume designer Zane Pihlstrom and the lighting designer Lutz Deppe collaborated with Mr. Ondrejcak, along with the choreographer Seth Stewart Williams, whose dances are based on 17th-century prototypes.) Instead of the flat scenery characteristic of Baroque stage technology, the production offers screens of a different sort: the backdrop is a projection of Mr. Ondrejcak’s computer desktop, cluttered with open windows showing his production research files.Like Jonson’s masques, “You Us We All” develops through a series of enigmatic images and tableaux rather than a standard plot. Time (the downtown New York performance stalwart Carlos Soto) appears drunk, passed out on the floor. Hope (Ms. Worden) is plagued by melancholia. Virtue (Ms. Davis) suggests some naughty divertissements to cheer her up. Love (the baritone Martin Gerke) struggles to reciprocate Death’s amorous feelings for him. Death (the countertenor Bernhard Landauer) grieves his father’s passing. As the opera’s initial grandeur begins to fade and its characters are stripped of their allegorical finery, they mope about the stage lamenting, “It sucks being human.”It turns out that the dazzling surfaces of “You Us We All” mask an underlying abyss. In one emblematic scene, four of the characters appear as tipsy partygoers, while the fifth, Time, appears downstage as a beggar shaking a cup of coins and asking menacingly for “change” — calling up several senses of the word. Later, another character confesses that her “nature within/is a bottomless void.”These characters are gnawed by metaphysical doubts familiar to the Baroque world and our own. In one set of fantastical passages, Hope addresses fan letters to pop divas like Beyoncé and Whitney Houston. Ms. Worden gives expressive voice to the same anxieties that troubled 17th-century philosophers like René Descartes and Blaise Pascal, in music that alternates between ornamental prettiness and slow-raging panic: “If I can’t rely on my body, can I trust mine own pertheption?” she asks with an oddly childlike lisp, and “Does the soul remain/after the body dies?” The pop divinities make no reply.But amid the darkness, the presence of Hope as the opera’s largest role shows the creators’ emphasis on that elusive quality. A note at the beginning of the libretto describes the opera as “a rite for Humankind … in the Great Collective Progress towards Redemption.” And even the title “You Us We All,” while syntactically fragmented, suggests a desire for togetherness.“It touches upon these feelings of loneliness, death, loss and separation, but also connection,” Ms. Worden said of the opera in general, and specifically of its final scene, a hymn (improbably enough) to the Olsen twins. “It’s both about isolation and a sense of connection that is there for all of us. That’s very real for me.”A version of this article appears in print on November 8, 2015, on Page AR14 of the New York edition with the headline: Baroque for Our Time.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.