By ROSLYN SULCASNOV. 4, 2015
MILAN — “I am not nice,” the ballerina Sylvie Guillem said. Seated in her dressing room in the Teatro Arcimboldi here, Ms. Guillem burst out laughing. “That has gotten me into a lot of trouble.”Nice or not, the French-born Ms. Guillem — tall, skinny, pale, jaggedly cropped red hair — is good company and one of the most famous dancers in the world. Like Rudolf Nureyev and Mikhail Baryshnikov, her renown extends well beyond the ballet world. Since she burst on to the international scene in the late 1980s, her extraordinarily long, lean and flexible physicality has redefined expectations about the female aesthetic and technical prowess in ballet. And like Nureyev and Mr. Baryshnikov — but even more unusually as a woman — she has had a self-determined career, one that has helped forge a path for a generation of world-class dancers seeking similar independence.Now that career — an extraordinarily long one by dancer standards — is almost over. Ms. Guillem, 50, is retiring at the end of the year, after a nine-month around-the-world tour. She was recently here and will stop at New York City Center (Nov. 12-14). The tour program, “Life in Progress,” features works by Akram Khan, Russell Maliphant, William Forsythe and Mats Ek, and shows Ms. Guillem with almost spookily undimmed powers: Her famously tapering legs and cambered feet, supernaturally high extensions, wonderful coordination, musicality and control seem no different than those of the young dancer who amazed the world when she was made an étoile, or star dancer, at the Paris Opera Ballet at 19.But, Ms. Guillem (pronounced GHEE-lem) who speaks in fast, fluent English, said the fact that she was still dancing at a high level was the reason to stop. “I don’t want to push my luck,” she said. “You never know how long it will last. I don’t want to be obliged to stop because my body says no.”AdvertisementMs. Guillem likes to be in control of her destiny and has never shied away from tough decisions. For good and for ill, she has always followed her own path, often bringing accusations of divadom and willfulness upon her.“Even when she was young, Sylvie, without any arrogance, understood the value of her own skills,” said Mr. Forsythe, who first met Ms. Guillem when she was a shy 18-year-old, and established a new context — ballet as a part of the contemporary world — for her gifts in his groundbreaking “In the Middle, Somewhat Elevated” (1987). “It wasn’t about the leg height, the positions — it was her coordination, the quality of her motion, the way she internalized the ideas behind the work. She was never going to allow her career to be governed by other peoples’ decisions.”What seems normal today, as dancers like Diana Vishneva, Alina Cojocaru and Natalia Osipova dance with multiple companies, negotiate their own contracts, choose their repertory and commission work from choreographers, was almost unheard-of when Ms. Guillem stunned the dance world by leaving the Paris Opera Ballet in 1988, at 24.Advertisement“They didn’t believe I would do it, because no one ever had,” she said, explaining that matters came to a head when she asked for her schedule to be determined several months in advance so that she could accept invitations to dance elsewhere. Nureyev, who had supported and promoted her (“He changed my life,” Ms. Guillem said), understood the issue, but he was unable to change the administrative impasse. “I think he knew I would go,” she said.No one else did; when she left, it made front-page news and was a topic of discussion in France’s National Assembly. “It was no problem for me because I did not have that girlhood dream to become a ballerina,” she said. “I had no sense of having reached some goal because I was an étoile at the Paris Opera. My ambition, if you can call it that, was to discover and learn and be excited by what I was doing. If I didn’t have that, I would find it elsewhere.”Ms. Guillem soon found a somewhat unlikely home at the Royal Ballet in London, which offered her the freedom to determine her schedule and roles she would dance, as well as meaty acting roles in ballets by Frederick Ashton and Kenneth MacMillan. She fought with MacMillan and quickly incurred a reputation for intransigence. But she said that she had loved the theatricality and approach of the company and greatly appreciated Anthony Dowell, the artistic director. “I realize how patient he was with me and how much I looked up to him. He understood me, I think.” It was because of Mr. Dowell, she said, that she lasted 19 years, until 2007, at the Royal.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I can see now that I was” — she hesitated — “a little raw. I was young, I felt alone in the jungle, and sometimes you think you need to protect yourself. Maybe I was childish, maybe I didn’t want to show weakness. I knew what I wanted and didn’t want, and I hadn’t made difficult choices to then waste my time. But maybe I could have invited people for tea, and told them gently. Instead I would just say no.”Some critics adored Ms. Guillem’s interpretations of the great classical roles and the passion of her acting in the 20th-century repertory; some criticized her liberties with choreography and style. “Not everything is adaptable to every body,” Ms. Guillem said when asked about this.In 2005, Ms. Guillem, frustrated by the Royal’s reluctance to invite contemporary choreographers to create new work, collaborated with the Ballet Boyz and the choreographer Russell Maliphant, then with Mr. Maliphant alone on a full-evening production, “Push,” produced by Sadler’s Wells and performed around the world. The next year she joined Sadler’s Wells as an artistic associate, and has continued with a steady stream of collaborations: Akram Khan (“Sacred Monsters”) and Robert Lepage (“Eonnagata”), then Mr. Forsythe and Mats Ek in “6000 Miles Away.”“What she does looks easy to copy,” said Alistair Spalding, the director of Sadler’s Wells, “and people are always approaching me now with these ideas. But Sylvie has always had the necessary taste and judgment. She has been a role model not only for people coming to the end of their careers, but for younger performers who see that this is possible. It’s a new way of focusing on a particular talent.”The shift to more contemporary work happened quite naturally, Ms. Guillem said. “I always wanted to work with choreographers like this. You never know what the person will be like, what you can learn from them, and if you can inspire them. It’s a risk, but the rewards are very exciting.”Ms. Guillem has gone on taking risks on her farewell program, which includes new works by Mr. Khan and Mr. Maliphant, as well as Mr. Forsythe’s 1996 “Duo” (danced by Brigel Gjoka and Riley Watts) and Mr. Ek’s solo, the appropriately titled “Bye.”Does she regret the decision to stop? “Every day!” she said. “But I know what I need to do.” She has no commitments after Dec. 31; she plans to live in Switzerland with her husband, the photographer Gilles Tapie, and their dogs, and to pursue her interests in animal rights, gardening and ceramics.Advertisement“I think it’s going to be a big shock,” she said. “I don’t know who I am going to be without this.” Then she brightened, stimulated by another sort of challenge. “So — let’s just face it.”A version of this article appears in print on November 8, 2015, on Page AR13 of the New York edition with the headline: Winding Down While on Top.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.