By WILLIAM ROBINSEPT. 30, 2015
“To him for whom it was written” Johannes Brahms inscribed on the manuscript of his 1887 Double Concerto for violin, cello and orchestra. At first, the gesture appears perfunctory: concertos are often dedicated to their performers. But why, for a work for two soloists, “him” and not “them”?Deeper emotions lie within Brahms’s simple pronoun. “Him” was Joseph Joachim, one of the composer’s closest collaborators, for whom Brahms had written his Violin Concerto. Brahms had sided with Joachim’s wife in a bitter divorce dispute in 1884, tearing their friendship apart. The Double Concerto represented an attempt at rapprochement, with the dedication making explicit the composer’s act of contrition. Not for nothing did Brahms embed references to one of Joachim’s favorite pieces, a violin work by Giovanni Battista Viotti, in the themes of the first movement.The Double Concerto is underperformed, at least compared with the rest of Brahms’s orchestral output. And since the 19th century, concertos for multiple soloists are themselves an oddity, since the great thrill of the form is a single virtuoso at center stage. But the coming weeks contain two opportunities to hear duo concertos for violin and cello, one new and one old.On Oct. 15, the cellist Jan Vogler and the violinist Mira Wang will give the New York premiere of Wolfgang Rihm’s Duo Concerto with the Orpheus Chamber Orchestra at Carnegie Hall. And from Oct. 21 to 24, the violinist Lisa Batiashvili and the cellist Gautier Capuçon will play Brahms’s Double Concerto with the New York Philharmonic at David Geffen Hall. Each piece represents a distinct artistic response to the unusual challenge of writing for two soloists accompanied by orchestra. And each considers its performers both as instruments and as individuals, constructing a deeply personal web of musical relations.Advertisement“A double concerto is a bit of a complicated thing,” Ms. Batiashvili said in an interview. In concertos, she added, “you usually have one voice leading the orchestra. You have this symphonic part and one leading voice, and this very harmonious and homogenic sound. But then, when you have two instruments, basically you have to share this main role.”AdvertisementThe extroverted flair of the genre turns inward, toward the more private realm of chamber music. As Mr. Capuçon said in an interview: “You have to adapt to different things. You have to make this story, really, together — and be strong together. So you need to leave space for another person.”While Ms. Batiashvili has performed Brahms’s Double Concerto only a handful of times, Mr. Capuçon has kept the work in his repertory. After all, Brahms never wrote a cello concerto — a concern of the cellist Robert Hausmann, who had hounded the composer for a solo work with orchestra. The Double Concerto gave Brahms the opportunity to satisfy his colleague, a member of Joachim’s acclaimed string quartet, and to try to mend his broken friendship.“Could you think about trying the piece with Hausmann and with me at the piano, and eventually with the three of us with orchestra in some town or other?” Brahms wrote to Joachim. “I won’t say out loud and specifically what I quietly hope and wish.”Though the Double Concerto did bring Joachim and Brahms back together, its cool reception left the composer in doubt. Critics were disappointed that the pensive music did not reach the heights of his previous orchestral work, the magisterial Fourth Symphony; Eduard Hanslick called it “a drama in which all the characters are very clever and witty but there is never any action.” Brahms had drafted a second concerto for violin and cello, but abandoned it. The Double Concerto stands as his final statement for orchestra, an unexpected denouement for a composer whose music occupies such a central role in the symphonic canon.The work has maintained an odd-duck status in the repertory, typically trotted out when two famous soloists wish to collaborate or if an orchestra wants to highlight two of its principal players. But the piece is still gripping in its own way, with a granitic force that binds together violin, cello and orchestra. It opens with a forceful orchestral tutti followed by cadenzas for both soloists, fierce and wrenching exchanges that establish a tense group dynamic. A certain precariousness propels the concerto forward, the peculiar nature of the genre providing the constant threat of a conversation faltering; as it is passed between the soloists, the music feels continuously in danger of suddenly grinding to a halt.“You have to be at the same time a soloist, but really also a chamber musician,” Ms. Batiashvili said. “You have to also be able to switch on and off from your part, and give the main role to the other instrument — on a constant basis.”If Brahms doubled down on the 19th-century tradition of the concerto, granting virtuoso roles to each solo instrument, Mr. Rihm gazes further into the past for his Duo Concerto. In a fax — this pre-eminent German composer’s preferred medium for interviews — Mr. Rihm described the new work as guided by “a kind of Bachian ideal of integrated interweaving of polyphonic lines.” In recent years, Mr. Rihm has written several pieces for soloists and orchestra informed by what he called “a more vocal conception of the concerto; the ‘agonal’ or combative types of concertos interest me less.”Mr. Rihm’s score reveals a very different approach from that of Brahms. Dialogue becomes monologue: the cello and violin are intimately intertwined into a single voice, never playing alone as individuals for more than a few measures as the orchestra flickers around them. Conceived in a single, breathless movement, the Duo Concerto begins with the soloists emerging from a hushed waltz before turning toward torrid passagework and jagged counterpoint. Rihm’s reserved chamber orchestra lacks Brahms’s sweeping scope, mostly punctuating the soloists’ high-wire musical acrobatics. The concerto concludes unassumingly, as the two instruments trade angular phrases atop a muted ensemble and strangely pattering bass drum.Advertisement“We have hardly any pause, any bars to rest,” Ms. Wang said in a joint Skype interview with Mr. Vogler, who noted that “everything comes from the solo instruments. Hardly anything comes from the orchestra and reflects in the solo parts; most of it comes from the solo parts and reflects in the orchestra.”As Mr. Rihm described, “the constant polyphony is the greatest challenge. The interplay requires the solo voices and orchestra to listen to one another in a highly sensitive way, so that the breathing of the lines and formal sections are in perspective and transparent.”Just as Brahms’s Double Concerto evolved out of an attempted reunion of friends, Mr. Rihm’s Duo has a personal core. It is not insignificant to the new concerto that Mr. Vogler and Ms. Wang are married to each other. “Wolfgang says he writes his pieces for his friends, and for their personalities,” Mr. Vogler noted. “He knew us pretty well, our characters, also maybe even differences which we don’t see so clearly. So I do think it’s psychological — I think he’s something between a psychologist and a philosopher.”That touch of the personal might be vital for any successful duo concerto, whether famous pieces like Mozart’s Sinfonia Concertante for violin and viola and Bach’s Concerto for Two Violins, or obscurities like Delius’s lyrical Double Concerto for violin and cello, which seems to conceive of its soloists as rhapsodic partners in an opera duet. The form demands that virtuosos shed their egos to work together, an attitude perhaps easier in a chamber-music setting than a large hall in which an orchestra is also competing for attention.“It has to click,” Ms. Batiashvili said. “You can sometimes play with a great musician, but it might not be the best combination, because there are very different kinds of personalities.” Mr. Capuçon said: “When you’re onstage you need to be very confident and feeling well, because you’re going to share very intimate things, in a way. When you do that, you need someone very trustful.”Since his teenage years, Mr. Capuçon has performed the Brahms alongside his brother Renaud, a violinist. But working with Ms. Batiashvili, a longtime friend with whom he has only lately begun to collaborate, felt entirely natural. “We have different personalities and experience, which is absolutely great in this piece, because it adds a lot to the general feeling,” he said. “But the way we play together — the sound, the breathing and the musical direction together — is really quite incredible.”It was Brahms’s Double, in fact, that first helped the two Rihm soloists connect as musicians two decades ago. “Mira grew up in China then studied in America, I grew up in East Germany then studied in Europe,” Mr. Vogler said. The question, he added, was “Out of our two different schools and two different playing styles, how can we make something out of it which works, which makes sense? And the Brahms was the key.”In 1887, rehearsals for Brahms’s Double Concerto reunited composer and violinist, who resumed speaking to each other after several strained years. Clara Schumann called the piece a “Versöhnungswerk,” a work of reconciliation. Brahms himself remarked that “Now I know what it is that’s been missing in my life for the past few years … It was the sound of Joachim’s violin.” It is fitting, then, that when Ms. Wang debuts Mr. Rihm’s Duo Concerto with Mr. Vogler, she will perform on a Stradivarius once owned by Joseph Joachim.A picture caption with an article on Oct. 4 about Brahms’s 1887 Double Concerto for violin, cello and orchestra misidentified, using information from a publicist, Joseph Joachim in a 19th-century photograph of his quartet. Joachim, for whom Brahms wrote the concerto, is on the left, not the right.A version of this article appears in print on October 4, 2015, on Page AR10 of the New York edition with the headline: Classical Duets of a Singular Nature.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.