By NATE CHINENNOV. 4, 2015
(DANCE TO) THE EARLY MUSICThe trumpeter Nate Wooley can usually be found along the avant-garde spectrum, working with formal abstraction and extended technique. But he isn’t an ironist, something worth keeping in mind as it applies to his new release, “(Dance to) the Early Music” (Clean Feed). A spin through the early small-group repertory of Wynton Marsalis, it’s an album whose concept runs perilously close to prankish: Your gut reaction may depend on how you feel about white musicians rooting around in “Black Codes (From the Underground),” the sociopolitically charged album Mr. Marsalis made 30 years ago. But it’s clear Mr. Wooley has seriously engaged with this music as an earnest challenge. His quintet wisely features Josh Sinton on bass clarinet rather than tenor saxophone, and Matt Moran on vibraphone, instead of piano. (As for the drummer Harris Eisenstadt and the bassist Eivind Opsvik, they bring a light touch to a heavy assignment.) There are some atonal flare-ups, like the trumpet prologue on “Skain’s Domain,” but by and large, the band meets the music on its own terms, making an implicit point about the overstatement of a historical rift in jazz, and the unforeseen ways in which inspiration can flow.HEAVY BLUEAlicia Hall Moran is a mezzo-soprano whose classical training and Broadway credentials only begin to map her aesthetic breadth. Her debut album, “Heavy Blue,” runs less than 40 minutes but covers some ground, moving with purpose through an African-American spiritual, a Duke Ellington overture, a Renaissance lute song and a few emotionally potent originals. (It’s the first release on a new label owned by Ms. Hall Moran and her husband, the pianist Jason Moran, who served as producer and plays on two tracks.) The singing is deeply assured and pliable in its effect: Ms. Hall Moran has a bell-like tone and impeccable control, but she understands what a bit of ragged intensity can do. And she seeks out provocative partners, like the guitarists Mary Halvorson, who brings a gangly disquiet to the traditional lullaby “All the Pretty Little Horses,” and Brandon Ross, whose shimmery effects arrive only near the end of “Believe Me,” a quietly troubled art song that unfolds in the spirit of a beckoning postcard.THIS RECORD BELONGS TO ______There’s an ulterior motive behind “This Record Belongs To ___,” a new children’s compilation jointly released by Light in the Attic and Third Man Records. Weighted toward tracks recorded in the 1970s, mostly by singer-songwriters like Harry Nilsson, it’s meant to resonate with parents of a certain age, while imparting some post-hippie enlightenment to their offspring. Some selections are squarely canonical: Kermit the Frog crooning “Rainbow Connection,” Roger Miller’s “Oo-De-Lally,” from the Disney animated film “Robin Hood.” Others are cult-groove classics, like “Pinball Number Count,” by the Pointer Sisters; sweetly expressive set pieces, like “Daddy What If,” a Shel Silverstein song performed by Bobby Bare and a young Bobby Bare Jr.; or unheralded folkie gems, like “Pretty Trees Around the World,” by Ella Jenkins. Compiled by Zach Cowie, the album was expressly designed as an LP, with a frisky Side A; a calming Side B; and whimsical, original storybook art. (The album is also available on CD and MP3, and as a deluxe package, featuring a portable turntable with built-in speakers.)THE MIRACULOUSA Swedish singer, organist and songwriter drawn to dark gothic grandeur, Anna Von Hausswolff focuses on her strengths throughout “The Miraculous,” due out Friday, Nov. 13, on Other Music Recording Company. As with “Ceremony,” which she released on the same label in 2013, it’s an album of self-serious ritual catharsis, brooding and haunted. But Ms. Von Hausswolff recorded the new album on a colossal pipe organ in northern Sweden, and the instrument’s reverberant growl is a bracing, essential feature of the music. (She’ll have to make do with lesser horsepower when she appears at Saint Vitus in Brooklyn on Thursday, Nov. 12.) Her band knows how to bring a slow, crushing churn to a song like “Evocation,” which Ms. Von Hausswolff sings with silvery projection, like a drone-doom Stevie Nicks. She adopts more of a rolling spaghetti western dynamic on “Stranger” and draws elsewhere from liturgical traditions. The album’s obvious showpiece, “Come Wander With Me/Deliverance,” opens with churchly chords, adds an ethereal vocal melody and then swerves into black-metal territory, gathering heat and force.SELECTIVE AMNESIAThe tenor saxophonist Adam Larson is the sort of jazz musician who gets flagged early on as a promising talent and then hustles to meet every requirement for success. At 25, he’s still forming his identity as an artist, but his third album, “Selective Amnesia” (Inner Circle), suggests that he’s closing in on something perceptive and streamlined. He has a fine rhythm section, with Fabian Almazan on piano, Matthew Stevens on guitar, Matt Penman on bass and Jimmy Macbride on drums. And his compositions are thoughtful, with ample breathing room for any soloists. (They reciprocate with excellent work, especially Mr. Stevens on an anthemic ballad called “Gratitude.”) Mr. Larson’s own improvisations tend to be articulate and brisk, darting up and down his range. This album is a good marker for him, a sign of how far he has come and a new standard for him to beat.A version of this article appears in print on November 8, 2015, on Page AR22 of the New York edition with the headline: A Trumpet Challenge, Swedish Gothic Grandeur and the ’70s for Children.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.