AdvertisementSupported byBlindspotBy Neil GenzlingerCharacters on NBC’s “Blindspot” often remark on how prescient the tattoo artist or artists who inked up Jane were. “How did he/she/they know we would be in this specific place at this exact time and find this obscure clue?” Another sort of prescience took over Monday night’s episode: The tattoos are also freakishly good at steering the plot toward hot-button real-life issues.The story of the night involved the killings of several New York City police officers. At first the crimes seemed as if they might be an angry community’s retaliation for the shooting by a police officer of an unarmed black teenager, a wrinkle that of course called to mind the Ferguson, Mo., case and others.Then the investigation, which had what seemed a rather tenuous connection to one of Jane’s tattoos, radically changed directions and came to involve the blackmailing of a National Football League running back over photographs that showed him having sex with another man. Gay players in the N.F.L.? Another recent headline checked off. (Flippant aside: This particular N.F.L. running back couldn’t outrun some F.B.I. agents when the big chase scene came. There were, though, some references to his having wrecked his knee last season, so, never mind, I guess.)While all this was going on, we learned the details of the mysterious Daylight project that Mayfair has been keeping secret all season. It wasn’t much of a shocker — illegal data collection by the authorities — but it was another grasp at a current-events angle. The thread, much of which was seen in flashback, also gave us some of Mayfair’s back story, which involved a romance with another woman who eventually killed herself.There was something unsatisfying about this drive-by approach to working recent real-world events into the story. The data-collection thing already seems overused in the scripted-TV world. Weller seemed outraged by it, but the reaction it’s likely to draw from TV viewers at this point is more along the lines of, “Eh; so what.” And the other two recent headlines — police shootings; gay football players — seemed more as if they were being name-checked than seriously explored.The episode did make me realize that the show’s most interesting character lately has been David, the now-dumped boyfriend of Patterson. He was noticeable here by his absence. He turned up only late in the episode, as a text message during the girls’-night-out scene. I hope that means he’ll be back next week.Advertisement