AdvertisementSupported byFargoBy Scott TobiasChildren make mistakes. And as they get older, they still make mistakes — maybe not as many, but bigger and more dangerous ones. They rebel. They test their boundaries. They slip around (or smash through) the guardrails their parents have set up for their protection. For Charlie and Simone Gerhardt, the children of criminals, growing up comes with a deep moral confusion and a nefarious sense of duty. Will they be ready to run the family business? (Is that something they even want?) And what sort of twisted values are their elders instilling in them to prepare them for it?The battle for Charlie’s soul has been waged in secret between Bear and Dodd all season, though the boy’s affliction should have Bear believing that God has already ruled in his favor. Charlie seems to have a talent for numbers and his dad wants him to stay in school and figure out nonviolent ways to help the family. (Even Dodd concedes that the Gerhardts could use a lawyer. They have no Robert Duvall.) But shows of masculinity are a constant in the Gerhardt household and Charlie naturally feels that he needs to assert his manhood rather than heed his father’s orders to shrink away from the coming violence. He can shoot with one hand, after all, and that finally earned him Uncle Dodd’s long-sought approval.As for Simone, I had her wrongly pegged as a femme fatale, tricked by early signs that she had control of her sexuality and was playing both sides for sport. She’s never lacked for confidence — her sexual assertiveness with Mike Milligan was proof enough of that — but “The Gift of the Magi” exposes her as more of a garden-variety rebel, using her maturing body as a weapon to lash out at her awful father. Until now, the violence her betrayal might cause has been theoretical, so she’s blindsided and frightened by Mike’s threats in the hotel room. In a blink, she goes from naughty co-conspirator to helpless pawn — not the “Romeo and Juliet” she might have imagined, but the wedge Kansas City needs to break apart the Gerhardt family. Simone has never looked like a child until now.Charlie and Simone’s misadventures in “The Gift of the Magi” are about more than children making mistakes. They also clarify what the next generation of Gerhardts has inherited. Otto made certain his son Dodd could operate in the family business; we saw that in flashback last week, when the young whippersnapper jammed a blade into a gangster’s neck during a Ronald Reagan movie. Dodd would no doubt do likewise if he had a son, but Simone he either abuses or neglects, leaving her to create mischief on the sidelines. Bear at least imagines a more peaceful future for Charlie, but the Gerhardt household doesn’t accommodate weaklings and bookworms. Neither Charlie nor Simone is prepared for the horrors encountered in this episode, and it’s safe to say that neither will ever be prepared to carry the Gerhardts into the late 20th century and beyond. Even without Kansas City trying to set up shop, the family business has no future.Oh look, I’ve buried the lede! Bruce Campbell finally surfaces as Ronald Reagan, and having played Elvis in the cult favorite “Bubba Ho-Tep,” it’s remarkable how little he has to change about himself to slip into both roles. Mr. Campbell’s snake-oil charisma sells Reagan’s stump speech about America as “that shining city on a hill” and the empty conviction with which he tells Lou that Americans can overcome any challenge on God’s green earth. The one challenge Reagan himself couldn’t overcome in either 1980 or 1984? Winning Minnesota, but that doesn’t stop him from coming through a town like Luverne and shoring up Republican support outside Minneapolis/St. Paul.Bringing Reagan into the alien world of “Fargo” is an audacious choice — and a particularly risky one, given how much trouble Season Two has had in infusing late-70s politics and culture into its crime story. But the rhetorical battle between Jimmy Carter’s sober “malaise” moment and Reagan’s relentless optimism settles strangely on Luverne, as many political speeches do to ordinary people. Maybe they live in the America Carter describes and want to live in Reagan’s, as the standing ovation for the latter might indicate. Yet there’s also a degree to which the words of neither man apply, beyond serving as a barometer for how people are feeling (or wish to feel). Lou wants Reagan to deliver him to a more hopeful place, but the Gipper slips away before saying how. No matter who’s president, the people of Luverne are on their own. As Ed Blumquist tells Peggy, “We’ll figure it out. It’s what people do.”Still, the Blumquists can’t seem to get on the same page, as indicated by the episode title. Peggy remains the show’s toughest puzzle to solve, perhaps because even she doesn’t know what she wants. Though she shuffled Lou out the door last week, she heard him well enough to resolve to get out of town, which seems to suit her just fine, since she’s been yearning for some kind of change. Her impulsive decision to sell the car and stick things out with Ed is the first time she’s shown commitment to their marriage, but the timing is cruel, since Ed has just killed one or two more people and lost the butcher shop in a fire, and he wants them to split immediately. The two are at cross-purposes again in this desperate moment, with Ed forced to hold back all this shocking information while Peggy, oblivious to the blood spattered on his shirt, enthuses about selling the car, buying the shop and putting their roots down in Luverne, just like he wanted.“That’s great,” Ed says. “Thank you. But we gotta go.”• The wounded children theme of this week’s episode carries through even to Dodd, who’s about as skilled at lying to his mother as a 6-year-old. Now Floyd is supposed to believe that Rye was killed not by a butcher from Luverne, but by the “Butcher of Luverne,” a contract man out of Kansas City. Expect the lie about who really killed Rye to unravel in short order.• The gunfight in the woods is a terrific piece of staging, however questionable the plan to ambush the K.C. crew when they’re at their most heavily armed. Joe Bulo looks strikingly out of his element. He’s a pragmatist and negotiator, not a heavy — fearsome in the boardroom, but easy pickings for Hanzee.• More greatness from Nick Offerman on the Reagan tour: “I’m not shaking his hand. The man made a movie with a monkey. It wouldn’t be dignified.” (He then, of course, shakes Reagan’s hand and praises “Cattle Queen of Montana,” which is the greater indignity.)• A fun “Fargo” Easter egg: The song that’s playing when Peggy picks up the car is “Let’s Find Each Other Tonight” by José Feliciano, which Feliciano performs the night Steve Buscemi’s character in the film steps out with a call girl. “José Feliciano, you got no complaints.”• U.F.O. sighting: Betsy Solverson notices one hovering over a family scene that young Molly has sketched in crayon. Curious, that.Advertisement