The producers of “China Doll,” a new play written by David Mamet and starring Al Pacino, said on Monday that the play requires more work than they had expected and so they are delaying the official opening by two weeks.The play, bolstered by Mr. Pacino’s star power, has been selling very strongly at the box office, but there has been some skeptical early buzz about Mr. Mamet’s play and Mr. Pacino’s performance, and the delay will both lengthen the amount of time the team has to work on the project before critics weigh in, and reduce the effect of reviews because they will run later in the play’s limited run and after the traditionally lucrative Thanksgiving weekend. The play began previews on Oct. 21; it had been scheduled to open Nov. 19, but instead will now open Dec. 4. The final performance is still scheduled to be Jan. 31.“New material is going in this week and new material went in this past weekend,” Jeffrey Richards, the lead producer, said. “Considerable work has been accomplished on the production since its first performance, and the producing team is very pleased with the development of this very exciting new American play by a major American playwright.”Mr. Richards, along with his producing partners Jerry Frankel and Steve Traxler, are longtime champions of Mr. Mamet who have presented the writer’s plays on Broadway and in the West End nine times. Mr. Richards rejected questions, prompted by the criticism and failure of some of Mr. Mamet’s recent works, about whether Mr. Mamet remains as strong a writer as he once was. “David Mamet is among our best writers, period,” he said. “But any time David Mamet goes to bat, like any great playwright, he becomes a target — whether he is Eugene O’Neill, or Tennessee Williams, or Edward Albee, or David Mamet, he becomes a target.”Mr. Richards called “China Doll,” which is being directed by Pam MacKinnon, “one of David’s best plays” and said “the audience response has been very encouraging.” But he also said, “It’s always very difficult to begin a play in New York City that’s never been done anywhere before.”  He also said Mr. Pacino “is doing exemplary work,” and, responding to reports in The New York Post about his alleged reliance on prompters, said, “he has learned his lines.”Because the play is now opening on a Friday night — unusual on Broadway — many news organizations are likely to publish reviews online late Friday, and, for daily newspapers, in print on Saturday, when audiences are relatively low. But Mr. Richards said the opening scheduling was driven by other concerns — a reluctance to open over Thanksgiving weekend, when critics might not be free; a need to have several nights to accommodate all the theater media (as is done by every show), and and a decision to avoid opening at the same time as “School of Rock,” which is set for Dec. 6. But he said news publications could choose to run reviews “when they deem it appropriate” after the opening — Saturday, Sunday, Monday or Tuesday.