By SCOTT REYBURNNOV. 9, 2015
A new type of sale at Phillips on Sunday night began a week of big-ticket auctions of contemporary, modern and Impressionist art in New York that is projected to fetch at least $1.4 billion at three auction houses.Phillips’s inaugural sale of “20th Century & Contemporary Art” combined works by well-known living artists with pieces by some of Modernism’s canonical names. Containing some 24 works whose sellers were guaranteed minimum prices, either from Phillips or from third parties, the auction generated $66.9 million, including fees, against a low estimate of $64.4 million. Of the 51 lots offered on Sunday night, nine failed to sell.This new category of “crossover” sale, pioneered by Christie’s blockbuster “Looking Forward to the Past” auction in May, which took in $705.9 million, reflects an increased desire among certain art buyers to invest in blue-chip reputations, rather than speculate on emerging names. (Christie’s will seek to repeat its success with another themed sale, “The Artist’s Muse,” on Monday night.)“Last year, collectors were being asked to pay six-figure prices for works by artists in their 20s,” Wendy Goldsmith, an art adviser based in London. “When it reached that sort of level, no longer play money, clients took a breath and started to look around at what else they could buy in that range.”AdvertisementPhillips, which is owned by the Russian luxury-goods company Mercury Group, has a reputation for selling work by the market’s hottest emerging talent. On Sunday night, this gave way to historical works such as Le Corbusier’s guaranteed 1932 painting “Femme rouge et pelote verte,” which attracted one telephone bidder who bought it for $4.6 million, against an estimate of $4 million to $6 million. Another unusual sight at Phillips was the imposing 1928-29 painting of a quintet of male nudes, “Gladiateurs au repos,” by Giorgio de Chirico, a prominent Surrealist. The work sold for its low estimate of $4 million. It was one of some 15 lots solely guaranteed by Phillips, representing a total outlay of at least $20 million for the auction house.“We’re responding to the tastes of our collectors,” Edward Dolman, Phillips’s chairman and chief executive, said.“People do buy de Kooning and Wade Guyton,” Mr. Dolman, a former chairman of Christies, added. “And we now have the expertise to compete in a broader range, date-wise.”AdvertisementIn September, Phillips announced the hiring of two former Christie’s specialists, Hugues Joffre, who focuses on 20th-century art, and Jean-Paul Engelen, who heads the contemporary art department.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Phillips’s attempts to reposition itself as a seller of 20th-century as well as 21st-century art were reinforced on Sunday by a top sale price of $11.4 million (again, around the minimum guaranteed price) for the impressive 1977 Willem de Kooning canvas “Untitled XXVIII.” Estimated at $10 million to $15 million, this swirling composition had never been offered at auction before.The auction’s total sales were just above the low estimate (once auction house fees were added), and bidding was measured and selective. The proceeds were significantly lower than the $97.2 million at the Phillips contemporary evening auction in May. Profitability was also hurt because Phillips had to buy about half a dozen works whose minimum sale it guaranteed. These included John Chamberlain’s 1961 scrap-metal sculpture, “Bullwinkle,” which went unsold against a low estimate of $2.5 million.The sale’s carefully selected contemporary material tended to be works by established market favorites like Mr. Guyton. His 2005 inkjet-printed canvas, “Untitled,” featuring the letter “U” in flames, sold within estimate for $2.4 million. A similar composition sold at auction in May 2014 for $3.5 million.The Vietnamese-born Danh Vo has become a must-have name on the shopping lists of many international collectors, particularly now that there is a show of his work in the Danish pavilion at this year’s Venice Biennale (which ends on Nov. 22).In May, one of his “Alphabet” works, consisting of the letter “L” embossed on a flattened gold-plated cardboard box, sold for $700,000. On Sunday, “Alphabet (B)” was sold to a telephone bidder for $329,000, in line with the low estimate.A version of this article appears in print on November 9, 2015, on Page A17 of the New York edition with the headline: First ‘Crossover’ Sale at Phillips Yields $66.9 Million.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.