By KATHRYN SHATTUCKNOV. 9, 2015
It’s Monday, and in TV land that spells mobsters — from “The Departed,” Martin Scorsese’s Oscar-winning film, to “Umbre,” HBO Europe’s Romanian crime drama (think an Eastern European “Sopranos”), with a stop in the wintry war zone of “Fargo.” Meanwhile, “Jane the Virgin” dances with Britney Spears, and James Spader spanks Maggie Gyllenhaal in “Secretary.”THE DEPARTED (2006) 9 p.m. E.S.T. on HBO Signature. Moles in their midst: Martin Scorsese won his long-awaited Oscar for this tale about an Irish-American mobster’s protégé working undercover as a state police officer, and a state policeman who infiltrates the underworld and slowly loses his grip. Its dream cast — Jack Nicholson, Matt Damon, Leonardo DiCaprio, Alec Baldwin and Mark Wahlberg — prompted Manohla Dargis to write in The New York Times, “What really counts here, in the end, isn’t the film, but all its swaggering men.” (Image: Mr. DiCaprio)SUPERGIRL 8 p.m. on CBS. Reactron, one of Superman’s mortal enemies, shows up in National City and goes after Supergirl. Cat decides to run an exposé.JANE THE VIRGIN 9 p.m. on CW. Rogelio learns that his nemesis, Britney Spears, is staying at the Marbella and confronts her about their past. Then she asks Jane to dance to “Toxic.” (Image: Gina Rodriguez, left, and Ms. Spears)AdvertisementBLINDSPOT 10 p.m. on NBC. A police officer is killed, and Patterson decodes the tattoo that might have predicted his death — and could stop others.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.BARBARA WALTERS PRESENTS AMERICAN SCANDALS: O. J. SIMPSON 10 p.m. on Investigation Discovery. Kato Kaelin was famously staying in Mr. Simpson’s guesthouse 20 years ago when Nicole Simpson and Ron Goldman were stabbed to death in front of her Brentwood, Calif., condo. Here, Mr. Kaelin tells Ms. Walters what he recalls of that night, and why he thinks Mr. Simpson, who was found not guilty, was the murderer.AdvertisementFARGO 10 p.m. on FX. Floyd takes action. Peggy and Ed quarrel about what to do next, now that her Lifespring course has cost him the butcher shop. And Lou finds himself sidelined by Ronald Reagan’s presidential campaign.THE TONIGHT SHOW STARRING JIMMY FALLON 11:35 p.m. on NBC. Michael Keaton does his thing.SECRETARY (2002) 1:10 a.m. on HBO Signature. A typo? Take cover! Maggie Gyllenhaal is a repressed young office worker with masochistic tendencies. James Spader is the grim lawyer who spanks her and watches her blossom. Spelling errors require corporal punishment. In The Times, Stephen Holden called it “a wacky new-wave romantic comedy in which two lonely people locked inside their private fantasies discover a miraculous erotic harmony.” (Image: Ms. Gyllenhaal)What’s Streaming NowUMBRE on Acorn TV. A taxi driver with a secret occupation as a mobster’s debt collector finds his life unraveling after he accidentally kills a man. IMDB users rated this darkly comic Romanian crime drama from HBO Europe a 9.1 out of 10.A version of this schedule appears in print on November 9, 2015, on Page C8 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Monday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.