By VIVIEN SCHWEITZERNOV. 8, 2015
Thomas Adès’s quartet “Catch” seems like a parody of chamber dynamics, a mini-drama featuring an insecure musician, ego clashes and temporary defections. The humorous piece, written in 1991, when Mr. Adès was a student, is scored for piano, violin, cello and clarinet: The first three instruments cajole the clarinetist into joining the proceedings.In the performance on Thursday evening at Alice Tully Hall by members of Axiom, a Juilliard School new-music group, the drama seemed further off-kilter from the addition of a conductor, Jeffrey Milarsky, who presided over the quartet like a coach, urging its recalcitrant members to cooperate.“Catch” opened with the violinist (Clare Semes), cellist (Jennifer Choi) and pianist (Adria Ye) onstage, playing short declamatory gestures in Mr. Adès’s trademark extreme sonorities. The clarinetist (John Hong) was heard from offstage, interrupting the bluesy piano part with strident interjections. He strolled onstage with a naughty grin, then exited, leaving the trio to their rambunctious outbursts. The music then became more somber, like a desperate plea to a jittery colleague. Mr. Hong, who conveyed the work’s quirky theatrical and musical elements with aplomb, finally took his seat, the power struggle among the players continuing through a chorale whose lush contours were quickly shattered.The concert, led by Mr. Milarsky, opened with Mr. Adès’s “Origin of the Harp,” whose glittering surfaces were dulled to an ambiguous hue in this tentative reading. An early work inspired by a painting of the same name by the Irish artist Daniel Maclise, this enigmatic chamber tone poem is scored for clarinets, violas and cellos, instruments whose dark sonorities combine to luminous effect, along with percussion, including a rainstick.George Benjamin’s “Three Inventions for Chamber Orchestra,” a glistening, texturally rich work, fared better, its complexity revealed in clear detail here. Completed in 1995 as a tribute to Messiaen and Alexander Goehr, Mr. Benjamin’s mentors, it features colorful use of winds and brass (including contrabass clarinet, fluegelhorn and euphonium) and harp (an instrument conspicuously absent from Mr. Adès’s piece), with low rumbling sonorities and jittery fragments in the strings, punctuated by gongs.Oliver Knussen read 1,700 poems by Emily Dickinson before choosing texts for his “Requiem – Songs for Sue,” a memorial to his former wife, who died in 2003. The silvery-voiced soprano Angela Vallone was the excellent soloist in this enigmatic piece, which also includes texts by Antonio Machado and W. H. Auden. Her expressive voice soared as she sang “Sue – for evermore!”, the enigmatic descending cadence of the final syllable followed by an optimistic brass flourish.A version of this review appears in print on November 9, 2015, on Page C7 of the New York edition with the headline: A Display Ranging From Quirky to Somber.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.