By ZACHARY WOOLFENOV. 8, 2015
Like many, I’ve walked through Times Square and experienced something I can only properly call despair. But I tip my hat to the lady who was drifting, crouching, shrieking and generally existing just past the verge of a nervous breakdown between 42nd and 43rd Streets on Broadway early Saturday evening. Even at my worst, she had me beat.This was the potent soprano Carole Sidney Louis, singing the nameless, desperate Woman in Arnold Schoenberg’s 1909 monodrama “Erwartung” (“Expectation”). Or, rather, she was singing the nameless, desperate Woman in “Arnold Schönberg’s ‘Erwartung’: A Performance by Robin Rhode,” which is not quite the same thing.Mr. Rhode, a South African artist born in 1976, combines drawing, photography, video and performance — sometimes wittily, sometimes movingly, often both. In 2009 he created antic, haunting films to accompany the pianist Leif Ove Andsnes’s performance of Mussorgsky’s “Pictures at an Exhibition.” This summer, at the Drawing Center in SoHo, he showed photographs of himself lying on his back, his feet pressing a board against a Johannesburg wall, trying to “surf” an oceanic mural he had made with blue semicircles of paint.Public space was thereby transformed into a stage, as it was on a grander scale in his street opera reinterpretation of “Erwartung,” presented as part of the Performa 15 biennial. Sung on an oval playing space in the midst of vast milling crowds of tourists, the Woman’s forlorn remark that “thousands of people pass between us” had never seemed so plainly truthful.AdvertisementSchoenberg wrote that he intended in “Erwartung” to stretch a single second of “maximum spiritual excitement” to half an hour, and the result has hallucinatory intensity. A Woman wanders through a forest searching for her lover. She finally stumbles upon his dead body — it becomes increasingly likely that she killed him in a jealous rage — and eventually wanders off again.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Rhode gave this stark tale a different inflection: He wrote in a program note that he intended to reflect on women separated from their husbands “by the migrant labor system, political exile, activism and/or imprisonment.” So if the Woman’s lover was not quite dead here, neither was he quite living: An actor (Moses Leo), his face covered in a black stocking, walked slowly around the perimeter of the stage in a kind of suspended animation, the silent object of her frantic longing.Like him, Ms. Louis, her face powdered to a ghostly white, was dressed in crisp, boldly patterned red, black and white — colors associated with sangomas, South African traditional healers. The stage space was defined by dozens of posters printed with clusters of drawn ovals. Some of these were taped to the street; some were free to blow around and crumple. Under the acoustic circumstances — the amplification was necessarily a bit blaring — the Wet Ink Ensemble, conducted by Arturo Tamayo, played with forceful clarity.AdvertisementBut this was not an “Erwartung” that did justice to the sensitive side of Schönberg’s score. Like Times Square itself, Mr. Rhode’s work wasn’t quiet, making its impact more with brashness than subtlety. The work, full of lunar references, was here illuminated by stories-high billboards shining brighter than any full moon.A version of this review appears in print on November 9, 2015, on Page C6 of the New York edition with the headline: Loud Life of Desperation in a Milling Times Square.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.