By GIA KOURLASNOV. 8, 2015
Volmir Cordeiro, carefully placing one long leg in front of the other like a spindly supermodel, took deliberate steps to the front of the stage where he planted himself to talk about Inês, a 57-year-old with an all-too-common affliction: an insatiable need to be famous.“Inês longs for the day when she’ll be a part of that great show we call reality,” he says. “Can you imagine ‘Inês’ on everyone’s lips?”You know the franchise. But imagine a would-be player in a “Real Housewives” show, with no media outlet — other than a dance — and there you find Mr. Cordeiro’s rather hopeless character. In “Inês,” a lightweight evening-length solo presented at Danspace Project on Friday as a coproduction with Performa 15, Mr. Cordeiro, a Brazilian choreographer who lives in Paris, embodied his character while wrapped in a fabric — pieces of red, blue and gray sewn together — that enclosed his midriff like a cocoon. The inventive costume, elongating his legs and arms so much so that he appeared insectlike, is credited to Mr. Cordeiro and Sylvie Seguin.Though Mr. Cordeiro’s voice was strong and emphatic in this text-heavy piece, especially as he lingered on the letter “S” in words, his diction was murky in spots. When his narrative tapered off, his body slipped into awkwardness — hips thrust forward, limbs askew — as he urged, “Go, go, go, come on, look, look, look at her.”Pulling black tape from the depths of his costume, Mr. Cordeiro covered his eyes and passed from one side of the stage to the other in perpetual motion, hopping with a raised knee, swirling in sloppy pirouettes and gliding briskly by crossing his feet back and forth. He shadowboxed too, jabbing the air in front of him and taking hits, which made sense: Inês, as we learned from his monologues, is at war with her own reality.In a program note, Mr. Cordeiro writes about his desire to swallow his character whole: “How can I find the meaning of her existence in mine?” But this rendering of an all-too-stale subject — the cult of celebrity provoked, of course, by audiences keen for new objects of adoration — doesn’t go anywhere new. In watching Mr. Cordeiro’s rendering of Inês, it’s difficult not to think about the ferocious bite of Ivo Dimchev, a more experienced dance artist deeply skilled at swallowing his characters and exposing the foibles of the world. Mr. Cordeiro’s “Inês” is the made-for-television version of unleashing emotions in dance.A version of this review appears in print on November 9, 2015, on Page C6 of the New York edition with the headline: Assuming the Identity of an Aspiring Celebrity.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.