By STEPHEN HOLDENNOV. 8, 2015
Who is Eric Yves Garcia? This talented singer and pianist whose witty, hyper-verbal new show, “Pour Spirits,” opened at the Metropolitan Room on Thursday evening, is as mysterious as his program’s ambiguous title. Is it a tribute to “spirits,” as in alcohol? Is “pour” to be taken as a pun on “poor” to elicit sympathy?One of the show’s strongest selections, Kris Kristofferson’s “Sunday Morning Coming Down,” is a drunk’s down-and-out reflection the morning after a bender. But Mr. Garcia is the farthest thing from a scraggly-faced rambler chained to a bottle. He has the handsome, perfectly groomed face and suave manners of a big-city gigolo.In one of his monologues, he described how different alcoholic beverages affected a former girlfriend. The most dangerous was tequila. That embattled relationship was the focus of several autobiographical failed love stories. Mr. Garcia was cagey about his own consumption.The show, directed by Lauren Fox, with Ritt Henn on bass and Peter Calo on guitar, had the feel of an experiment in musical role-playing, with Mr. Garcia trying on various outfits. Some fit better than others. Songs associated with French chanson like Charles Trenet’s “L’Ame des Poetes” or Rod McKuen’s more distantly related “Love’s Been Good to Me” landed comfortably in the pocket. Others, like Bob Dylan and Taylor Goldsmith’s “Florida Key,” missed the boat. Because Mr. Garcia’s rather harsh vocal timbre doesn’t match the image of a smoothie, I had to recalibrate my perception.Throughout the show, Mr. Garcia kept his arms clamped to his sides and hardly moved, while his eyes darted in every direction. The way he used his features, especially his eyebrows, recalled how Peggy Lee employed such small gestures to devastating effect.All the contradictions gelled in Mr. Garcia’s rendition of “Blue Alert,” an obscure ballad written by Leonard Cohen and Anjani Thomas about the battle of sexes that uses the images of a terrorist attack to evoke the clash of lovers.“There’s perfume burning in the air/Bits of beauty everywhere/Shrapnel flying, soldier hit the dirt/Blue Alert.”Eric Yves Garcia performs Nov. 25, Feb. 5 and March 4, 2016, at the Metropolitan Room, 34 West 22nd Street, Manhattan; 212-206-0440, metropolitanroom­.com.A version of this review appears in print on November 9, 2015, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline: Characters in Their Cups, Reflecting on Liquor and Love.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.