By JOE COSCARELLINOV. 8, 2015
Even after eight years of contemplating Kurt Cobain for an authorized documentary, the writer and director Brett Morgen had trouble closing the vault.Following the premiere this year of “Kurt Cobain: Montage of Heck,” Mr. Morgen’s raw portrait of the tortured Nirvana singer that sought to examine the complicated man rather than the rock-martyr myth, the filmmaker decided the movie was not the end of the story he hoped to tell.“I was cleaning up my system and realized there was a tremendous amount of material that we were not able to incorporate into the film,” Mr. Morgen said.In 2007, Courtney Love, Mr. Cobain’s widow, had granted the director full access to her husband’s archives — most notably 108 untapped cassettes of home recordings that were initially vetted by Mr. Cobain’s sister, Kim. While some of that material made the film, including a spoken-word piece in which Mr. Cobain details his early suicidal thoughts and a cover of the Beatles’ “And I Love Her,” there were more than 200 hours of tape in all, and most of it remained unheard.AdvertisementMore selections from that lot are being released as a somewhat unorthodox soundtrack: “Montage of Heck: The Home Recordings,” coming out on Friday from Universal, consists of lo-fi song sketches, goofy skits and bedroom noodling. In addition to a 13-track CD version and a double LP on vinyl (out in December), a boxed set includes a 31-track deluxe edition, the film (on Blu-ray and DVD), a cassette of the soundtrack, a hardcover book, a puzzle (with collectible storage container), a poster, postcards and a bookmark.Manna from heaven for some completist superfans, the collection has been viewed less charitably by others, who question the holiday-season arrival of recordings that were never intended to see daylight. “Montage of Heck: Beginning to Skirt the Borders of Exploitation…?” asked the exhaustive fan site Nirvana Legacy. Another blog headline: “Don’t Trust The ‘New Kurt Cobain Album.’”“This home recordings album is going to do more to destroy Kurt Cobain’s legacy than build it,” one rock critic on Twitter wrote. “Imagine someone secretly taped you singing songs to your pets & then released it as a 2xCD.”AdvertisementIt is indeed an intimate collection — at one point, Mr. Cobain stops playing to answer a call and take a message for his girlfriend at the time.But Mr. Morgen, speaking by phone last month, bristled at any suggestion of exploitation, framing the project instead as necessary historical archiving. “I believe there is a tremendous public interest in exploring how great art is created,” he said. “We look at manuscripts, we explore how Leonardo da Vinci arrived at his final creations. I think Kurt is a profound and incredibly important artist.”He continued, “It’s a tribute to Kurt that his admirers and fans would feel protective of him.” However, “If you came across a sketch of ‘Guernica’ by Picasso, is there anyone saying we shouldn’t see it?” Mr. Morgen added.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Bruce Pavitt, the founder of Sub Pop, Nirvana’s first label, and the author of “Experiencing Nirvana: Grunge in Europe 1989,” said that posthumous releases are “part of the social contract” for well-known artists. “I think his creative moments are part of the public record,” Mr. Pavitt said. “I can see why the merchandising of that can rub people the wrong way. An alternative would be post it in a public forum and not charge.” But, he added, “Brett did the deepest research that anybody could really do, with the invitation of Cobain’s family.”Mr. Morgen, noting that he approached the entire “Montage of Heck” project with “a tremendous amount of empathy and sensitivity,” said it was ultimately Mr. Cobain’s daughter, Frances Bean Cobain, who had final say. (Ms. Cobain, 23, has held rights to her father’s name and likeness since 2010, and served as an executive producer on the film. The Cobain estate declined to comment for this article.)“Ultimately, in terms of his legacy and his heritage and what the world has access to, it’s up to her and his family,” Mr. Morgen said. “It is not up to me, and it is not up to a specific fan. And that’s how I think Kurt would have wanted it. That’s how he left it in his will.”The director added, “The first time I met Frances, I was convinced beyond any reasonable doubt that she was the best custodian of Kurt’s legacy.” He cited the “huge deals that they’ve shot down because they didn’t think it was the right image.”As for his role in the soundtrack, “I basically took the material that I thought was most relevant, put it on a USB and gave it to a trustee, who gave it to Frances and Courtney,” Mr. Morgen said. “I guess they made a deal with Universal.”Though the album is tied to his film’s DVD release, Mr. Morgen has said he has no financial stake in the soundtrack. “It’s my understanding that if the album is profitable, the beneficiary would be his family,” he said.Fans will benefit as well, Mr. Morgen said. “The album represents another side of Kurt’s artistic journey that didn’t have a form, per se, in a rock band like Nirvana,” he said. Playful yodeling and experimental sound collages can be heard amid demos of Nirvana songs like “Sappy” and “Frances Farmer Will Have Her Revenge on Seattle.”Advertisement“What this material captures is an unfiltered Kurt — he’s alone in a room and the listener is invited to sort of observe,” Mr. Morgen said. “Kurt was perceived as being so angst-ridden. It’s comforting, at least, to have access or insight into these moments when he was alone and he was truly content.”A version of this article appears in print on November 9, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: After Film on Cobain, a Soundtrack  .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.