AdvertisementSupported byBy Ralph Blumenthal and Tom MashbergHer laptop brims with satellite images pitted with thousands of black dots, evidence of excavations across Egypt where looters have tunneled in search of mummies, jewelry and other valuables prized by collectors, advertised in auction catalogs and trafficked on eBay, a criminal global black market estimated in the billions of dollars.“For the first time technology has gotten to the point where we can map looting,” said Sarah H. Parcak, a pioneering “satellite archaeologist,” founding director of the University of Alabama at Birmingham’s Laboratory for Global Observation and an associate professor there.Satellite eyes in the sky, which have transformed the worldwide search for buried archaeological treasures, are now being used to spy on the archenemies of cultural preservation: armies of looters who are increasingly pockmarking ancient sites with illicit digs and making off with priceless patrimony.Nowhere is the tracking effort more advanced than Egypt, where a program led by Dr. Parcak and funded by the National Science Foundation and National Geographic has targeted thievery that, experts say, worsened after the chaos of the 2011 revolution.And now, in a powerful endorsement of work that may bolster efforts to cripple looting across the Middle East and the rest of the world, TED, the nonprofit forum with the motto “ideas worth spreading,” is scheduled on Monday to announce that Dr. Parcak, 36, has won its most prestigious award — a $1 million prize to develop a project of her choice. Details of the project are to be revealed in a live broadcast of her talk at the TED conference in February in Vancouver, British Columbia.Looting and destruction in Iraq and Syria by the Islamic State, also known as ISIS, have drawn more attention in recent months. And cultural thievery remains a problem in Egypt, where last week the government seized 1,124 stolen artifacts at the port of Damietta. They were en route to Thailand, according to the Al Bawaba news service.“We have a major challenge so we are looking for an out-of-the box solution,” said Ali Ahmed, director general of the repatriation department of the Egyptian Ministry of Antiquities, “and Sarah’s work is part of that.”Dr. Parcak, a Yale graduate with a doctorate from Cambridge, is already teaming up with Egypt to train authorities there to thwart looters by involving community leaders in tourism activities connected to the ancient sites. That model was developed by the Sustainable Preservation Initiative in Peru, which also has a looting crisis.The scientist, who often works with her husband and fellow archaeologist, Gregory Mumford, has also assisted the Department of Homeland Security in undercover investigations, including Operation Mummy’s Curse, which this year repatriated dozens of smuggled artifacts to Egypt.The trade in stolen antiquities, often driven by economic desperation, has been flourishing since time immemorial, but now appears tied to other criminal activities, like drug trafficking and arms running, and may even be an income source for ISIS, Dr. Parcak said in an interview.“Is it funding terrorism?” she said. “The answer is yes, but we don’t know the scale.”Equally damaging to ancient sites, she said, is a rash of illegal construction, often for cemeteries.Barely 1 percent of the world’s likely archaeological sites have been identified or explored, Dr. Parcak said, so countless sites remain to be discovered by scientists or looters.The use of satellites to thwart looting joins a growing list of ways technology is serving archaeology. NASA last month made available detailed photographs by the satellite contractor DigitalGlobe, which showed colossal earthworks thousands of years old and recently spotted on the Kazakhstan steppe. Aircraft beam laser signals, called lidar, that penetrate ground cover to reveal buried cities. Poland has digitized information on the more than 63,000 objects stolen in that country and still missing since World War II. And social media platforms like Twitter are helping to quickly spread alarms of thievery.One of the most damaged sites Dr. Parcak has documented is Lisht, Egypt’s Middle Kingdom capital, which flourished roughly between 2030 and 1640 B.C. She said that the number of looting pits spotted from space rose to 690 in 2012 from 515 in 2011, with the affected area spreading to more than eight square kilometers from two square kilometers. In an expedition to the site in May, she said, she mapped 50 tombs, almost all of which had been looted.“The ones that stay open are the ones I worry about,” she said. “It’s like a supermarket.” Speaking of the looters, she added, “They tunnel in and stay secret and I can’t see what they’re doing.”But the problem extends far beyond Egypt. “You think looting is bad in Egypt, look at Peru,” she said. “India, China. I’ve been told in China there are over a quarter-million archaeological sites, and most have been looted. This is a global problem of massive proportions and we don’t know the scale.”The satellite images are taken from about 400 miles above Earth and provided principally by Google Earth, DigitalGlobe and NASA, which has an active space archaeology program. The images are archived, meaning that most are usually days, weeks or months old and so do not show looting as it is happening. For that, Dr. Parcak said, drones would be needed. “But getting permission to use a drone in Egypt was problematical,” she said.In a telephone interview from Cairo, Mr. Ahmed, in the Ministry of Antiquities, praised Dr. Parcak’s work “because it gives us a sense of the extent of the illicit digging — how the sites from five years ago, before the major looting, compare to the sites as they look today.” He added, “We can really see the extent of what we suffered as a result of the more recent looting.”It has been all but impossible to tie looted items for sale to any particular site using satellite images, Dr. Parcak said, although someday digitized data on soil composition might be able to authenticate such matches.However, Mr. Ahmed said: “Through the work of Sarah we try to record the looting sites on satellite imagery to support our inquiries. We have many examples of artifacts that were already saved and cataloged from right near the looted sites — so we know what kinds of artifacts are being looted, and we are starting to list them in a database.”But there are alarming signs that the bad guys may be going high-tech as well. “The looters are using Google Earth too,” Dr. Parcak said. “They’re coming in with metal detectors and geophysical equipment. Some ask me to confirm sites.”It’s a delicate issue. “We want to excite the world about what’s out there,” she said. “But we don’t want them to say, ‘Oh, there are lots of sites in Egypt — let’s loot.’”Advertisement