AdvertisementSupported byBy James PoniewozikIt’s been a running question of this year’s Republican primary cycle: Is Donald J. Trump a clown?Answer: Not nearly enough for “Saturday Night Live.”It would be unfair to blame Mr. Trump alone for the deadness of the Nov. 7 episode. It’s hardly the first time the show has worked with a host who struggled with comedy line readings (some were professional actors). The bigger problem was the anodyne material. Mr. Trump said he hosted the episode to show he could “take a joke,” but “S.N.L.” hardly threw any his way.Instead, having chased ratings by casting the controversial candidate, “S.N.L.” stuck with obvious, anemic political riffs and apolitical sketches that were cringeworthy all around. Mr. Trump himself had said that he had vetoed some material he found too risqué (a prerogative of hosts in the past), so maybe he killed better material that we’ll never see. But “S.N.L.,” having cast a boisterous figure whose political raison d’être is “winning,” delivered an episode that did nothing except play not to lose.Arguably the most exciting moment of the broadcast came during Mr. Trump’s brief monologue, when Larry David — on set to reprise his role as Senator Bernie Sanders — called out “You’re a racist!” from the wings. It was a clever move to co-opt the $5,000 bounty that protesters had offered to anyone willing to disrupt the live broadcast. But it was a clear setup; Mr. David delivered his lines half-smiling, and Mr. Trump’s prepared response (“As a businessman, I can fully respect that”) fell flat.That bit captured the problem with the episode: no one’s heart seemed to be in anything. “S.N.L.” is not obligated to take sides in the election — or not to take sides — but as a topical comedy show, it needs to have some point of view, an animating idea.Instead, the show used Mr. Trump, or the idea of Mr. Trump, in predictable ways, as in a sketch he introduced that mocked a limp restaurant gag with mean tweets. His most specifically political bit was the first full-length sketch, which imagined Mr. Trump in the Oval Office in 2018 after having defeated ISIS, gotten Mexico to pay for a border wall and made the Russian leader, Vladimir V. Putin, cry by insulting him.In theory, it was a sharp idea: just as Tina Fey lampooned Sarah Palin in 2008 using variations on her own words, the sketch presented Mr. Trump’s own grand, vaguely sketched campaign promises — “You will be bored of winning” — as their own parody. (Asked in the sketch how he had been so successful, he answered, “Well, you know what, I don’t have to get specific. With me, it just works, you know, it’s magic.”) But the segment fell lifeless and mostly laughless on the Oval Office carpet. Even a surprise cameo by Mr. Trump’s daughter Ivanka left the audience quiet.There is, it turns out, something worse than heckling: silence. The crowd seemed to check out early, creating an energy-sucking vicious cycle. (Some of Mr. Trump’s biggest applause came when he first introduced the musical guest, Sia. Maybe because it rhymed with, “See ya.”)The “Weekend Update” segment was more pointed, sending up Mr. Trump along with several other candidates. Without the host present, co-anchor Michael Che poked at Mr. Trump’s questioning of President Obama’s birth certificate and his promise to “make America great again.” (“Whenever rich old white guys start bringing up the good old days, my Negro senses start tingling.”)But the rest of the episode deployed Mr. Trump in sketches that played like parodies of late-episode “S.N.L.” filler material: he strummed a laser harp in a bar band, walked on to Vanessa Bayer and Cecily Strong’s “Former Porn Stars” endorsement of him, danced like a tax guy in a parody of Drake’s “Hotline Bling” video, played a sleazy record producer pitching demo recordings to amateurs.It’s not as if anyone could reasonably expect “S.N.L.” to blisteringly satirize its own host, any more than it did Hillary Rodham Clinton  when she guested on a generally charitable sketch earlier this season. Whatever one can say about Donald Trump, he’s shrewd about the TV business. He knows what pressures producers work under, he knows what he can deliver in ratings and he knows the leverage that gives him.He’s used all that to his advantage in the campaign. He’s not only availed himself of free media, he’s often set the terms — for instance, phoning into to news shows that usually prefer candidates to sit in person for questioning. He’s even used television savvy as a political point. In the most recent Republican debate, he said that he had pressured CNBC to limit the length of its debate to two hours and cited that as evidence of his skill as a negotiator.On a meta level, Mr. Trump probably left “S.N.L.” with another such victory. The episode is not likely to hurt him among any voting group. He can take credit for the high ratings — adding that he delivered for a network that recently had cut ties with him over his comments about Mexican immigrants — and lay any criticism on the writing staff.And what did “S.N.L.” and producer Lorne Michaels get? The ratings, but then again, any new viewers tuned in to see a joyless, unfunny show, which ended in a curtain call with Mr. Trump and the cast that played like a hostage video.In this bargain, Donald Trump won. And just like he’d warned us, it was boring.Advertisement