It had nothing to do with the seagull attack.The British pianist Paul Lewis, who is returning to New York to play at Lincoln Center’s White Light Festival on Saturday, said the emergency surgery that forced him to cancel many concerts this fall had stemmed from a burst appendix — and not, as some people had speculated, from a well-publicized seagull attack in June.His appendix troubles started in mid-September, he said in an interview Tuesday, as he was flying home from a tour in Australia.“About six hours before landing at Heathrow I started to get some stomach pains,” he said in a telephone interview. “That night it was awful. I went to hospital, and it was basically an appendicitis, but it got nasty.”Mr. Lewis’s appendix burst, he said, and he got peritonitis. But he considered himself fortunate: “Had it all happened even 12 hours earlier, I would have been somewhere on that 24-hour journey from Australia to London, so I’m lucky for that.”Mr. Lewis cleared much of his fall schedule, including concerts accompanying the tenor Mark Padmore in Schubert song cycles at the opening of the White Light Festival and with the Boston Symphony Orchestra in Boston and at Carnegie Hall. At the time he announced that he had undergone “emergency surgery” but did not say why.Speculation quickly turned to a well-publicized incident in June when Mr. Lewis was attacked by a seagull as he prepared to rehearse with the Royal Liverpool Philharmonic Orchestra, causing him to fall, sprain a finger, and withdraw from the concert.“As I was walking into the building, a seagull swooped down at me from behind and got me on the back of the head, and I was startled,” Mr. Lewis, a sought-after virtuoso, recalled. “But the finger’s fine now. And the whole seagull incident seems slightly like a comedy sort of memory now.”Mr. Lewis even bought a caricature of himself staring down an angry seagull that ran in BBC Music magazine. “It’s in my piano studio,’’ he said. “Where else?”This Saturday at Alice Tully Hall, Mr. Lewis will play Beethoven’s final piano sonatas, some of which were composed after a bout of serious illness. “I’m trying not to put too much of my own experience in that,” Mr. Lewis said.