
Jane the Virgin By                     
PILOT VIRUET

NOV. 10, 2015
“Jane the Virgin” has done a superb job navigating the love triangle, a common television plot device that is often done poorly, as when series allow it to overtake the main narrative or spend too long building multiple “will-they/won’t they-“ scenarios. Yet “Jane the Virgin” has deftly managed its triangle in a way that remains engaging and new, and doesn’t make viewers sick of the love between either Jane and Michael or Jane and Rafael.In fact, the series upped the stakes last week when Jane and Michael shared a passionate kiss that basically all but guaranteed the two would quickly get together (and upped the drama by having Rafael hear about the “epic” kiss through a baby monitor). This week, Jane has officially made her decision and chooses Michael (“Talk about feeling all the feels!” the narrator exclaims) but knows that it’s only right to first tell Rafael. But, again, Rafael already knows and is trying to avoid hearing the truth from Jane herself, so he spends most of the episode cutting conversations short when he knows she’s about to spill the beans. It’s tough to watch: Rafael wants a family and technically he has one with Jane and Mateo but now he must watch it slip away. At the same time, however, he has to remain in all of their lives and watch another man raise Rafael’s child with the woman Rafael loves.Yet “Chapter Twenty-Seven,” despite how close it seems to be inching toward a rekindling between Jane and Michael, instead subverts viewers’ expectations. But before that conclusion, the episode is once again packed with multiple plots. First, there is Petra who has agreed to marry Milos in a for-taxes-only arrangement, leading Jane and Rafael to wonder what exactly is the real reason for their quick engagement and marriage — meaning, what exactly does Milos have on Petra? The plot also conveniently gives Rafael a way to keep Jane busy rather than have a serious talk. The story line works because of how quickly it manages to throw in so much — Jane visits Magda in prison; Jane tells Petra about Milos’s Internet scams as a way to have leverage over Milos; Petra finds out Milos has bugged her; the wedding occurs; a bomb-filled cliffhanger — but it’s all deployed in a way that’s clear, concise and interestingAlba gets some always-welcome screentime as she begins her journey to become a legal citizen. Though I tend to love everything in this show, it’s this particular arc that I’m most invested in right now. It’s one of the current best examples of why television needs to continue to aggressively pursue diverse casts, writers and narratives. These are stories that are rarely told but should be told as a way both to educate those who don’t know much about the pursuit of citizenship and to normalize this process. The series is not subtle when the characters talk about immigration laws. During a meeting with an immigration attorney, Alba learns that she might not be able to become a citizen because her sponsor, Xo, has a felony conviction on her record. Thankfully, that’s cleared up pretty quickly, but the application is still only the first step.That brings us to the most overtly comical story line of the night: Rogelio vs. Britney Spears. Britney, guest starring as herself in a much meatier role than Kesha had a few weeks ago (I would’ve preferred the opposite), is booked to perform at Petra’s wedding. It turns out that Rogelio considers Britney his nemesis, providing the episode with much-needed comic relief. Rogelio and Britney’s former friendship (back when he was still C-list) came to a quick halt when he betrayed her by tipping off the paparazzi — an event that he conveniently forgot when confronting her. Everything is pretty funny (though Spears’s acting skills still leave much to be desired), including dream dance sequences, a choreographed entourage and the requisite song references.However, with all due respect to Britney, the most talked-about moment of the night will be Jane’s love triangle decision. After Michael and Rafael come to blows that result in baby Mateo getting hurt, Jane realizes that she has to put her son before everything, including relationships. It’s another subversion: Jane chooses herself, not any of the men, and spends her night bonding with her mother and grandmother. This decision could open the door for Rafael to swoop back in (especially since Michael gets fired and kidnapped at the end of the episode) or it could mean Jane is putting her love life on the back burner for a bit. Either way, it’s going to be interesting.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »