By KATHRYN SHATTUCKNOV. 10, 2015
A cup of joe or a glass of blaufränkisch? The choice is yours, thirsty viewers, as two competitions — one for baristas, the other for sommeliers — showcase the commitment and quirks of those who aspire to become masters of their domains. Or sit back with your beverage of choice while John Stamos and Dave Coulier evoke their “Full House” days on “Grandfathered,” and Ric Burns pays tribute to disabled veterans throughout American history.BARISTA (2015) on iTunes. A bacon-fat mocha, anyone? The director Rock Baijnauth, who has described this documentary as “Sideways” meets “Best in Show,” follows five coffee aficionados as they grind, brew, froth, adorn and fret over the signature drinks that could lead to one of them being crowned the country’s best barista. (Image: Charles Babinski, one of the competitors)What’s On TV TuesdayTHE MUPPETS 8 p.m. E.S.T. on ABC. A stressed-out Kermit runs into a tightly wound Jason Bateman at a yoga retreat. In “Fresh Off the Boat,” at 8:30, Eddie plans his 12th  birthday party and doesn’t invite his family.GRANDFATHERED 8 p.m. on Fox. Jimmy wants his own Amal Clooney, so Sara sets him up with a colleague. Gerald and Vanessa decide to become friends with benefits. And Dave Coulier of “Full House” does a guest turn. In “The Grinder,” at 8:30, Ethan decides to step out of the shadows and audition for the school play instead of following in Stewart’s footsteps by joining the tech crew. And in “Scream Queens,” at 9, Grace and Chanel discover that they have more in common than they thought. And Dean Munsch goes psycho. (Image: From left, Lea Michele, Billie Lourd, Abigail Breslin, Emma Roberts and Niecy Nash)AdvertisementIWO JIMA: FROM COMBAT TO COMRADES 8 p.m. on PBS. Four veterans — three of them American and one Japanese — return to this World War II battlefield in a ceremony of peace and remembrance. Ryan Phillippe narrates. In “Debt of Honor: Disabled Veterans in American History,” at 9, Ric Burns examines the ways we have regarded those wounded in battle, from the Revolutionary War to the present day. (Image: Marines in 1945)MANHATTAN 10 p.m. on WGN. A reporter questions Frank, Crosley and Fritz about the events of the last six months.UNCORKED 10 p.m. on Esquire. Swish, spit, repeat: Master sommeliers, of which there are only 230 worldwide, must ace wine theory, cater to persnickety palates and, from taste alone, determine the year, grape variety and region of a wine, down exactly to where the fruit was grown. Six New Yorkers try to pass the test.AdvertisementDONNY! 10:30 p.m. on USA. On his daytime talk show, Donny Deutsch (or a fictional single-dad-surrounded-by-women version of himself) seems to have all the answers. But off camera, he struggles just like everyone else. His first fumble: sexting a picture that goes viral. (Image: Mr. Deutsch)A version of this schedule appears in print on November 10, 2015, on Page C7 of the New York edition with the headline: What On TV Tuesday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.