
NOV. 9, 2015

A painting by Amedeo Modigliani, “Nu Couché,” sold on Monday night for $170,405,000, placing it among the most expensive artworks ever purchased at auction. The sale, at Christie’s in New York, saw 34 works change hands for a total of $491 million, including fees. But auctions can be unpredictable. See how you match up below.
A painting by Amedeo Modigliani, “Nu Couché,” sold on Monday night for $170,405,000, placing it among the most expensive artworks ever purchased at auction. The sale, at Christie’s in New York, saw 34 works change hands for a total of $491 million, including fees. But auctions can be unpredictable. See how you match up below. RELATED ARTICLE
                Works from Picasso’s blue period, like these, are uncommon at auction. Before it was sold on Thursday at Sotheby’s, the double-sided canvas “La Gommeuse” (1901) last traded hands at a 1984 London auction, when William I. Koch bought it for 1.4 million pounds (roughly $6 million today). The pastel work “Nu aux Jambes Croisées,” from 1903, fell a few million short of the highest auction price for a Picasso work on paper.
            
                Ms. Kusama began her series of Infinity Net works in 1958. Mr. Hirst’s spot paintings have also been produced in a long-running series, since the 1980s, when the artist himself painted them. (Subsequent works were produced under his supervision.) As of 2013, there were 1,365 spot paintings.
            
                Both of these works come from the collection of the former Sotheby’s chairman A. Alfred Taubman, who often purchased works that did not meet auction reserves. The more abstract Arp work is one of an edition of four; the Moore is one of an edition of 10, and an artist’s proof.
            
                Prices for Rothko’s paintings at auction have ranged widely, based on the year of production, the work’s history, condition and the appeal of the colors. A large 1962 work, “Orange, Red, Yellow,” brought nearly $87 million at auction in 2012.
            
                Mr. Cattelan’s impish sculpture has attracted plenty of buyers in its 13 years, and seen its share of ups and downs. In 2010 it sold at Christie’s in London for $1.5 million; three years later at Christie’s in New York it went for $965,000. By contrast, prior to its sale on Sunday, “Leaning Fork with Meatball & Spaghetti III” had been owned by its original buyer for two decades.
            
                Two similarly sized works from 1964 can have wildly different values at auction. Both works were displayed at a 1969 Lichtenstein show at the Guggenheim. But “Crying Girl” is the fourth from an edition of five; there’s only one “Nurse.”
            
                Bidding for Freud’s portrait of his daughter Bella reached $19 million on Monday night at Christie’s, $1 million under its low estimate, but it did not sell.
            You correctly bid on $N out of SEVEN auctions.  For more coverage, read this article.Note: Listed sale prices include auction fees.Image credits: Pablo Picasso, “La Gommeuse”: Estate of Pablo Picasso / Artists Rights Society (ARS), New York, via Sotheby’s; “Nu aux Jambes Croisées”: Estate of Pablo Picasso / Artists Rights Society (ARS), New York; Yayoi Kusama: Yayoi Kusama; Damien Hirst: Damien Hirst and Science Ltd. All rights reserved / DACS, London / ARS, NY 2015; Henry Moore: Via Sotheby’s; Jean Arp: 2015 Artists Rights Society (ARS), New York / VG Bild-Kunst, Bonn; Mark Rothko, “No. 6 / Sienna, Orange on Wine” and “Untitled (Lavender and Green)”: 1998 Kate Rothko Prizel & Christopher Rothko / Artists Rights Society (ARS), New York; Claes Oldenburg and Coosje van Bruggen: 1994, Claes Oldenburg and Coosje van Bruggen; Maurizio Cattelan: Maurizio Cattelan; Roy Lichtenstein, “Crying Girl” and “Nurse”: Estate of Roy Lichtenstein; Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec: Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec; Lucian Freud: Via Christie'sProduced by Jon Huang, Alicia DeSantis, Laura O’Neill, Cornelius SchmidAdvertisement