AdvertisementSupported byBy Alastair MacaulayFarewells Doesn’t the number of dance farewells this year seem unusually large? Five ballerinas have left American companies: Carla Körbes (Pacific Northwest Ballet), Paloma Herrera, Julie Kent and Xiomara Reyes (American Ballet Theater) and Jennie Somogyi (New York City Ballet). This week, two of the late 20th century’s most historic dancers make their farewells to New York: Michael Flatley and Sylvie Guillem. Neither has been a favorite of mine, yet each has changed the art.Michael Flatley In 1989, Mr. Flatley, a Chicago-born American step dancer of Irish descent, set the Guinness World Records record for taps per second (28); in 1998, he topped that with 35. In 1994 he choreographed and led the colossally successful Irish dance show “Riverdance”; his later productions include “Warlords,” “Lord of the Dance,” “Feet of Flames” and “Celtic Tiger.” Along the way, he won two more Guinness World Records entries: most highly paid dancer ($1.6 million per week in 1999) and most heavily insured legs ($42 million in 2000).Mr. Flatley’s great achievement was the huge wave of enthusiasm he created for step dancing. . The vehicle for his New York farewell is “Lord of the Dance: Dangerous Games”; opening on Tuesday, it runs to Jan. 3.Sylvie GuillemMs. Guillem also shot to fame in the 1980s, as the most phenomenal of several young étoiles of the Paris Opera Ballet under the artistic direction of Rudolf Nureyev. Her legs went higher and her feet were more arched than those of almost all others; her range was from the 19th-century classics to the latest modernities.Between 1988 and 2006, she was a principal guest artist with the Royal Ballet, where she became a leading exponent of several works by Frederick Ashton and Kenneth MacMillan but also earned the nickname Mademoiselle Non for her refusal to do things the established way. She took steps higher; she removed her tights for certain scenes of beloved ballets, she demanded roles; she quarreled with authorities. (Thanks to an intercom, her furious row with MacMillan was heard all over the Royal Opera House.)She also exuded a particularly French combination of charm and intelligence. For me, the problem was not the gymnastic sensationalism of her dancing, but its textureless quality. You saw it; you didn’t feel it. But she created a wave. “For me, Sylvie’s been nothing but good,” the young British ballerina Darcey Bussell said in 1994. “Whenever I ask for a role that had previously belonged to short dancers, I can just say, ‘But Sylvie dances it, and she’s half an inch taller than me.’” And Ms. Bussell (whose farewell to the Royal Ballet was in 2007) combined the new hyperextended style with fullness of tone and gleaming line: You could feel the beauty of her dancing, viscerally.By 2006, Ms. Guillem had become the world’s foremost crossover ballerina, specializing in modern dance, and an associate artist at Sadler’s Wells Theater — the powerhouse dance institution that is presenting her farewell around the world. Her collaborations with William Forsythe (for whom she first danced in her Paris Opera days), Mats Ek, Akram Khan and Russell Maliphant have conferred chic upon experimentalism. Work by all four men will be part of her City Center farewell season, “Sylvie Guillem — Life in Progress.”Kyle Abraham in MotionHow good is the choreographer Kyle Abraham? I know nobody who thinks his work is bad. Still, it was a surprise to many when he won a MacArthur Fellowship in 2013; and his 2013-15 collaboration with Wendy Whelan in her “Restless Creature” had strong moments without making a strong overall impression. This week he presents a season at the Joyce Theater, “Abraham. In. Motion.” Welcome news is that it’s all to live music. There are three pieces: “The Quiet Dance,” “Absent Matter” and “The Gettin’.”Rhythm and CubaIf a history of rhythm could be written, surely Cuba would be shown as one of the chief creators of rhythmic invention over the last 150 years. The Lizt Alfonso dance company from Havana comes to the New Victory Theater for two weeks, from Friday to Nov. 29; the blurb for its show “Cuba Vibra!” says it combines “ballet, flamenco, cha-cha, rumba, conga, bolero and salsa.” That could mean merely that each of those genres becomes diluted by being mixed. But since there’ll be an onstage big band and “Afro-Cuban beats,” there’s reason to hope for a meeting of music and dance both energetic and insidious.Advertisement