By BRIAN SEIBERTNOV. 9, 2015
How would you like to be in a show called “Ballet”? No training is necessary, though some is allowed. The choreographer is a famous Frenchman, but he won’t help you with your technique, only give you some basic instructions, expecting you to be yourself. An audience of art connoisseurs will watch and judge. Interested?At the Marian Goodman Gallery in Midtown on Friday, 13 men and women who answered yes to that question performed in Jérôme Bel’s “Ballet (New York).” Mostly amateurs as dancers, they formed a collective portrait of New York diversity. Some were young. Some were old. One was in a motorized wheelchair. All were asked to perform the same tasks.One by one, they crossed and recrossed the gallery’s concrete floor, assigned a different task for each trip. First, while ballet music played (a Chopin prelude used in “Les Sylphides,” the grand pas de deux music from “Don Quixote”), each did his or her idea of pirouettes and a grand jeté. Then they waltzed to Strauss’s “Blue Danube,” grabbing one partner for their first pass and switching to another for the way back. For five minutes, they all improvised at once, and then, one by one again, everyone attempted Michael Jackson’s moonwalk to the accompaniment of “Billie Jean.”The exercise was leveling. Megan LeCrone, a soloist with New York City Ballet, executed the ballet steps most correctly, though in this context that didn’t make her the best. Her moonwalk in point shoes was more impressive and more in the spirit of trying something outside her realm of expertise.Being impressive wasn’t the point anyway. If “Ballet (New York)” has a point, it is to let the participants, who do not speak or introduce themselves, reveal themselves through the tasks. There were weak glimpses of this on Friday in endearing awkwardness and odd-couple rapport. But while Mr. Bel’s direction could be felt as a potentially liberating absence of judgment, it could also be sensed, from the casting onward, as a restraining hand, a nudge toward the ordinary.“Ballet (New York)” repeats this weekend at the Martha Graham Studio and next Thursday in the theater of El Museo del Barrio. At the Goodman Gallery, the work might have been in conversation with the meticulously staged photographs of Jeff Wall currently on display. But “Ballet (New York)” just doesn’t have that much to say.“Ballet (New York)” continues Saturday and Sunday at the Martha Graham Studio Theater, 55 Bethune Street, Manhattan, and Nov. 19 at El Museo del Barrio, 1230 Fifth Avenue; 212-680-0569, 15.performa-arts­.org.A version of this review appears in print on November 10, 2015, on Page C6 of the New York edition with the headline: Forget Technique (Choreographer’s Orders) and Just Be Yourself.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.