By NEIL GENZLINGERNOV. 9, 2015
Don’t watch “Donny!” because it might make you laugh. Then you’ll hate yourself for liking a sitcom that stars an advertising executive, and a moderately annoying one at that.“Donny!,” which begins Tuesday night on USA, features Donny Deutsch, who made a name (and apparently a fortune) for himself as head of the Deutsch advertising agency. Then he transitioned into nonfiction television, most notably as host of “The Big Idea With Donny Deutsch,” a CNBC talk show that dealt with various examples of and ideas about success.But “Donny!” is no talk show. It’s a scripted comedy (with dashes of improvisation) about a talk show whose host, Donny Deutsch, is played by Mr. Deutsch. Yes, this rips off “The Larry Sanders Show” and to some extent “Curb Your Enthusiasm,” and it’s not nearly as good as either of those. But it has a certain crass, infuriating charm.Mr. Deutsch is somewhere between Fox News’s Gretchen Carlson (don’t ever rent “Persecuted”) and Oprah Winfrey (Oscar-nominated) on the spectrum of talk-show or news personalities who have tried acting. In other words, though he’s no actor, he’s good enough for the premise.AdvertisementPartly this is because he is asked to do little more than be an obnoxious, cocky version of his somewhat less obnoxious, cocky self. His character is a Rat Pack personality transplanted to the Internet age: He thinks that he’s much cooler than he is and that he “gets it” — whatever the “it” of a given episode is — much more than he does.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In the premiere, for instance, he does an exploitative, scolding interview on his TV show with a woman burned by sexting, yet off the air he indulges in his own version of sexting, which he doesn’t recognize as sexting. “Some people sext,” he tells his assistants. “I send a suggestive pic.”AdvertisementSpeaking of those assistants, Donny’s self-image requires that he be surrounded by attractive women, including his executive producer (Emily Tarver) and three, count ’em, three young aides (Jessica Renee Russell, Meera Rohit Kumbhani and Hailey Giles). All of them spend most of their time trying to keep him from imploding, with only limited success.It’s hard to know where the real Donny Deutsch leaves off and the fictional one begins. Mr. Deutsch seems to spend a lot of time shirtless — is that real Donny showing off his physique, which is pretty good for a guy in his late 50s, or fake Donny being an egomaniac?But that vacillating line is the very point of the show. The meta thing isn’t as fresh as it once was, but there are some decent laughs here. (Those three assistants are quite funny.) But be warned that they are decidedly lowbrow laughs, at least in the early going. Episode 2, in which Donny makes an effort to date “age-appropriate” women (Christie Brinkley guest stars) and the subject of manscaping comes up, may leave you with mental images that require removal by a professional therapist. Come on, Donny; aim higher.A version of this review appears in print on November 10, 2015, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline: A Rat Pack Persona in the Digital Age  .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.