By JEN CHANEYNOV. 9, 2015
This post contains spoilers about “Lens,” this week’s episode of “The Leftovers.”When she signed on to play Erika Murphy in Season 2 of “The Leftovers,” Regina King knew that information about her character would be conveyed slowly, and not just for the audience.She was “finding things out script by script,” Ms. King says. “There aren’t even bread crumbs as to where your character is going to go or what’s going to happen to your family.”Sunday night’s episode revealed some significant information about the hard-of-hearing doctor and mother of two children, one of whom recently vanished into thin air. Among other things, viewers learn that Erika had been planning to leave her husband before Evie, her daughter, disappeared; that tensions between Erika and her next-door neighbor, Nora Durst are higher than ever; and that Erika will, under no circumstances, tolerate the sacrifice of a live goat during a fund-raiser for her daughter and her two missing friends. Ms. King recently discussed Erika, what it’s like to act opposite a goat and some back story about a milestone in her own life: her Emmy win this year for her supporting role in the limited series “American Crime.” These are edited excerpts from the conversation.Q. Since you find out what’s happening script by script, is that challenging as an actor? In this week’s episode, Erika says she’d been planning to leave John and I wondered if you were able to throw hints about that in earlier episodes.AdvertisementA. I had no idea about that until that episode came. This is the thing: as an actor you feel like, “Oh gosh, I wish I had known that because maybe I might have done something differently in previous scenes.” But the reality is that the director knows, the creator knows, and if there was a bad choice you might have been making, it would have been corrected.AdvertisementIn a lot of instances in this season — and I don’t think they really had the luxury of doing this the first season because it was the book from beginning to end — Damon [Lindelof] said as we were shooting, that it informed him how he was going to wrap things up for the season. So I think some things, he and [“The Leftovers” author] Tom [Perrotta] didn’t discover until maybe four or five episodes in.Q. The fund-raiser scene, when Jerry brings in the goat, that’s a big, emotional moment for your character and one that unfolded in front of what appeared to be a lot of extras. What do you remember about shooting that?A. That by the end of the day, my voice was gone. That’s probably the first thing I remember. The audience was very supportive. It was kind of like being onstage in a lot of regards, because you are doing this monologue in front of 50 extras. And you’re doing it over and over again.Q. Was the goat always standing there?A. No, that’s one of the things I remember. By the third take, the goat was like, “Let’s get me the heck out of here.” He just started kind of running toward the door. Like: “Get her away from me!”Q. How would you characterize the Erika/Nora relationship at this point? Early in this episode, Nora throws a rock through Erika’s window and at the end, after their big confrontation scene, Erika throws a rock through Nora’s. Clearly, it’s become much more adversarial.A. You know, I’m sure those people that watch “The Leftovers” will come up with so many different reasons why Nora might have thrown the rock through the window. Damon might have his own reasons why Nora threw the rock through her window. But to me, I felt like there was something special about Nora being the one person in their town who’s lost her entire family. Then they move away and here they are next door to these people that, now their daughter is missing. Some of that specialness that Nora felt that she had — Erika has taken a little bit of that shine. As sick as it may sound, that’s what I put in my head.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Q. I feel like on another show, that confrontation scene would have ended with the two of them bonding over the fact that they’ve both lost children.A. But not in the world of “The Leftovers.”Q. No. Instead it completely divides them.A. Right, which is shocking as far as the audience [goes] because, like you said, you expect them at the end to be friends. But there’s a part of you that doesn’t mind that [the show] is not doing the typical.AdvertisementQ. Do you think Evie actually departed?A. You know, I think that where Erika is, she really doesn’t know. To think that her daughter’s been kidnapped and no longer here and — I hate to say it this way, but — murdered, is almost an easier pill to swallow than that she’s disappeared. So I just feel like she’s in this purgatory almost.Q. That’s such a charged word to use on a show from the guy who made “Lost.”A. [Laughs] Yeah. But you know, to believe one or the other fully is too much. So I think she doesn’t even know what she’s hoping for.Q. I wanted to congratulate you on your recent Emmy win. You seemed surprised when Taraji P. Henson announced your name. What do you remember about that moment?A. I think the most special thing was just being there with Ian, my son. He was with me when I found out I was nominated and he was with me when I won. So it was just one of those full-circle moments that, I wouldn’t have wanted to share it with anybody else. I mean, don’t get me wrong, it’s something I share with the entire “American Crime” cast and crew. But as far as whose right hand is right there in the moment, his face and looking in his eyes and just the excitement — sharing that with him was pretty singular.Q. What was your reaction to Viola Davis’s speech? Obviously it was a big night for African-American women and her speech was pretty powerful.A. She’s a powerful woman. Her speech matches the performances and the art that she’s shared with us over this time period, even before “How to Get Away With Murder.”I think it was a win for TV, a win for black women, a win for black people — it was a win and a special night all around. History was made. It was one of those moments like: We all kind of got it right today. And I’m still smiling that I’m a part of it.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.