By GIA KOURLASNOV. 11, 2015
Who was that lithe, bewigged doppelgänger dancing next to Sia on “Saturday Night Live” this past weekend? In “Alive,” she was a karate-kicking warrior; in “Bird Set Free,” she escaped from a sheath of fabric, writhing on the floor and rising to discover her dancing voice. She wasn’t, as Rolling Stone described, a “young martial artist,” but the Butoh-trained Japanese dancer Mina Nishimura, an important presence on New York’s downtown dance scene who is still in shock about the experience of performing on television. She sees herself, she said, as a “quirky starfish, which draws attention from only a few certain people.”Sia has unexpected, eclectic taste. In past performances and videos featuring the young dancer Maddie Ziegler, she has celebrated the beauty of awkward, eccentric movement over the sexualized choreography we are accustomed to seeing in music videos. In Ms. Nishimura, perhaps it’s a similar maniacal energy — sweet, even girlish on the surface, but dark underneath — that Sia was drawn to. Ms. Nishimura spoke by phone about working with Sia. Here are edited excerpts.Q. Did you know Sia before this?A. No. She happened to see me dancing in Neil Greenberg’s piece at New York Live Arts last year. That’s surprising, too! Sia wrote me directly after that show and asked me if I was interested in dancing for her. I knew her song, but her name just didn’t click. I Googled her and realized that she was kind of a superstar. That was almost a year ago and I forgot about it and when Sia got a gig on “S.N.L.,” I think she thought of me dancing with her. Everything was so quick. We rehearsed only four hours.Q. Did you rehearse with her just on Saturday?A. No, on Thursday and Friday. But I had gotten a video from her choreographer, Ryan Heffington, so I learned it and showed him my version of it. I was so relieved after talking to him. I didn’t know what the expectations were. I’m not, like, a cool, commercial dancer at all. If it was a really cool hip-hop choreographer from L.A., I wouldn’t have been able to do anything.AdvertisementQ. The choreography is somewhat set, but did it also come from you?A. Yes. The choreography carried a story, almost. It was not like Ryan gave me specific movements, but he gave me specific staging and ideas and emotional direction and he kept pushing that I should go more extreme. He told me that if I wasn’t emotionally really charged, the viewer could lose the connection. Usually, I don’t dance so emotionally in most of the productions I do. People don’t ask me to dance that way.Q. Because it isn’t fashionable?A. Yes. People avoid that. I really had to put my emotions out, and that was very liberating for me.Q. Have you watched yourself? What do you think?A. I feel so strange. I don’t know. I fell in love with Sia so much.AdvertisementQ. Why?A. I think she’s a true artist. She really doesn’t compromise, so it was not about just being on TV for her, but she really wanted to deliver something to the world. I feel like there is no hierarchy in her world. Usually there is a star and there is a backup dancer, but I feel I was very equal to her — I mean obviously not, but that’s how she treated me. I felt like we were kind of one. We were on the same plane.Q. What was the experience of performing?A. Her voice penetrated my body. I still feel like her voice is in my body. So powerful. She usually doesn’t move much when she sings. Her voice is very much like dance. She is so internally charged. I felt a kind of vital force from her, just from her voice, and that vital force almost transferred to my body. It was not like I was dancing to her pop song. It was really dreamlike for me. I woke up yesterday and was like, wait — was it a dream?Q. Did you meet Donald Trump?A. Yes. During rehearsal he was watching me dancing. That was the most scary moment. Sia said, “I want to watch Mina dance,” and so Donald joined Sia and they were just standing in front of me. I was like, “O.K., I’m going to try my best.” He gave me such compliments. He said, “Oh my God, you’re so excellent and wonderful.” He seemed like a very generous person. Surprisingly. He was very tired, which I felt bad for him.Q. You just presented “The Celery of Everything” at Danspace Project. How does your “S.N.L.” performance sit with that?A. This was so new for me. Sia might be a celebrity, but she doesn’t act that way. She acts artist to artist, and that helped me to feel that the TV appearance was not that special for me. It was, but I was still doing what I’ve been doing.Q. And you were still yourself?A. Exactly. Maybe in a slightly different way. But it didn’t change me at all.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.