By ZACHARY WOOLFENOV. 11, 2015
Good morning, classical listeners!A Baroque for the Modern WorldWhat happens when you mash up Beyoncé and the Baroque? You get the new opera “You Us We All,” which has its American premiere at the Brooklyn Academy of Music on Wednesday night and runs through Saturday.“A work of 21st-century music theater written for 17th-century instruments,” Joseph P. Cermatori wrote in The New York Times of the work and its creators, Shara Worden and Andrew Ondrejcak.And it’s easy to prepare for the performances: A recording of the work is streaming, free of charge, on Bandcamp.A Conservatory’s “Workers Union”On Thursday, Tactus, a contemporary music group at the Manhattan School of Music, takes on Louis Andriessen’s driving “Workers Union” (1975), scored “for any loud-sounding group of instruments.”The piece has precisely fixed rhythms but leeway when it comes to pitch, an intriguing mixture of restriction and freedom. “It is difficult to play in an ensemble and to remain in step,” Mr. Andriessen once wrote, “sort of thing like organizing and carrying on political action.”AdvertisementCancellation Not Caused by Sea GullsPaul Lewis, the eminent British pianist, assures Michael Cooper in an interview that he did not cancel several performances this fall, including three Schubert song cycles with Mark Padmore at Lincoln Center, because of — no kidding — a sea gull attack that left him with a sprained finger in June.AdvertisementNo, the culprit was appendicitis. But he returns to New York on Saturday for a scheduled recital of Beethoven’s three final piano sonatas.A Rachmaninoff Festival BeginsAnother pianist, the young Russian Daniil Trifonov, gets a major stage in the city starting on Wednesday: three weeks with the New York Philharmonic playing Rachmaninoff.Don’t stay away. When Mr. Trifonov played Rachmaninoff’s First Concerto with the Philharmonic last year, I wrote, “The great solo melody near the start of the slow second movement had a wandering if attentive feel, as if it were an impromptu, and Mr. Trifonov’s sound took on a calm lucidity but without a hint of chill. In the finale, he gave his tone silky diaphanousness, keeping a quality of roundedness even in Rachmaninoff’s most pounding runs.”Happy Birthday, Leonie!There is no diva dearer to opera lovers than the Austrian soprano Leonie Rysanek, born on Nov. 14, 1926. A ferocious stage animal, she continued performing until 1996, less than two years before her death.Her voice poured out with a touching tremor of vulnerability, as in one signature part, Chrysothemis in Strauss’s Elektra:She endowed even Lady Macbeth’s early arias in Verdi’s “Macbeth” with premonitions of the character’s eventual madness:Audio of a 1974 Salzburg Festival performance of Strauss’s “Die Frau ohne Schatten,” in which she plays the Empress, one of her most celebrated roles, has been posted on Parterre Box.Brava! Let me know if you have any other Leonie memories, in the comments, by email at zach.woolfe@nytimes.com or on Twitter (@zwoolfe).We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.