By NINA SIEGALNOV. 11, 2015
ROTTERDAM — Five hundred years ago, a cheeky Roman Catholic artist from the Dutch town of ’s-Hertogenbosch revolutionized the triptych, the three-panel altarpiece form traditionally used for scenes of virgins, cherubs and saints.In his “Haywain Triptych” of 1515, Hieronymus Bosch instead painted in ordinary sinners — murderers, whores, quacks and errant clergymen — being escorted toward Hell by a weird parade of rodent-faced demons and fish-shaped devils. It is among the most popular works of early Renaissance art still around today.The painting was sold to a Spanish king in 1570, when he ruled that part of Europe, and has remained in Spain ever since. Since 1914, it has been on permanent exhibition at the Museo Nacional del Prado in Madrid, where it is a star attraction.Now it is enjoying its first “homecoming” to the Netherlands in nearly 450 years, as a result of some innovative curatorial wrangling by two Dutch museums. It will remain in the Netherlands for six months, first at the Museum Boijmans Van Beuningen in Rotterdam and next year at the Noordbrabants Museum in Bosch’s hometown.Advertisement“The Haywain” is the centerpiece of “From Bosch to Bruegel: Uncovering Everyday Life” at the Boijmans, an exhibition of 16th-century Dutch and Flemish art running until Jan. 17 that focuses on the crude and often comedic aspects of daily life in the late Middle Ages and early Renaissance.AdvertisementIn February, it becomes part of “Hieronymus Bosch: Visions of Genius,” at the much smaller Noordbrabants in ’s-Hertogenbosch, often called simply Den Bosch, which considers Hieronymus its most famous son. The show there is being billed as the largest Bosch retrospective ever staged, with 20 of his 25 known panel paintings along with 19 drawings. Once the exhibition ends on May 8, all of the works will move to the Prado, which will host its own major Bosch exhibition from May 31 to Sept. 11.“For our exhibition, this was the most important painting,” Friso Lammertse, co-curator of “Bosch to Bruegel” at the Boijmans, said in front of “Haywain Triptych.” The painting holds pride of place in the 80-work exhibition, which includes paintings and prints. Peter van der Coelen, the exhibition’s co-curator, added: “This is such an important starting point for us — something that shows us how it all began.”The “Haywain” — or hay wagon — was an important turning point in the secularization of religious art, Mr. Lammertse said. “Triptychs were always for altarpieces and then always for religious themes, and on the back side you had scenes of saints,” he continued. “You never, never had an everyday life scene. He’s the first who does it and that’s really a revolution.”Plans for the Boijmans show began taking shape about three years ago, said Mr. Lammertse, but the Noordbrabants Museum had already been working to obtain Bosch panels for its retrospective.Charles de Mooij, director of the Noordbrabants, played a key role in securing the painting for the Netherlands. In 2007, city officials in Den Bosch asked him to try and mount a significant Bosch retrospective, but his small, little-known museum had not a single Bosch work of its own to lend in return, and therefore no leverage for any barters.Mr. de Mooij came up with a plan to instigate a large-scale research project that would include Bosch paintings around the world, and persuaded his municipality and philanthropic organizations to donate the money to support it. In 2010, they established the Bosch Research and Conservation Project, which ultimately raised 3 million euros, about $3.3 million, from Den Bosch, the Foundation Jheronimus Bosch 500, the Gieskes-Strijbis Foundation and the Getty Foundation to study, preserve, document and restore Bosch paintings in museums around the world.“We said to the municipality, when you consider Bosch as your most important son,” Mr. de Mooij said, “you have to invest in his legacy and the conservation of that work.”AdvertisementToday, there are thought to be about 25 authenticated Bosch paintings extant in the world and an additional 20 drawings, though those numbers tend to vary as scholarship changes. Just last week, the Bosch Research and Conservation Project announced that two works in the Prado, “Christ Carrying the Cross” and “The Seven Deadly Sins,” were probably not produced by Bosch’s hand, but by members of his studio. At the same time, research revealed that another work in private hands, known as “Hell Landscape,” which had been attributed to his studio, is probably a work by Bosch himself.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.About half of his oeuvre is in Spain, where the royal family and other collectors have cherished “El Bosco” as their own painter since the 16th century, when Spanish kings ruled Den Bosch.Bosch’s masterpieces in the Prado, which include the “Haywain” and the much larger and even more famous “Garden of Earthly Delights,” have almost never traveled. Now, they are engaged in a tug-of-war between two Spanish museums: The new Museum of Royal Collections in Madrid has demanded that the Prado surrender its two Bosch triptychs to its new baroque palace; the Prado has refused.Outside of Spain, Bosch works are scattered across two continents, 10 countries, 18 cities and 20 collections, according to the research project. Since 2010, it has conducted studies of Bosch paintings at 20 institutions across the world, to explore aspects of his working process and materials and to check authenticity with expensive modern technologies. It has also helped restore two badly damaged triptychs in Venice and partly paid for the restoration of Bosch’s “St. Christopher” in the Boijmans collection.Because of these efforts, the institutions that participated and benefited were far more willing to loan the works to the Noordbrabants in Den Bosch, and to lend the “Haywain Triptych” to the Boijmans as well. For its part, the Boijmans will lend “St. Christopher” and another Bosch, “The Wayfarer,” a fragment of a lost triptych, to both Den Bosch and Madrid. Since the museum purchased the work in 1931, it has loaned the painting only once, in 1967, also to the Noordbrabants Museum.“Panel paintings from this period are extremely fragile,” Mr. Lammertse said. “When I started 20 years ago as a curator, no one loaned these works at all. But now with advances in humidity control and trucks, things have become a bit easier.”“The Wayfarer” depicts a vagabond  possibly leaving a house of ill repute or possibly choosing to pass it by. The figure is remarkably similar to the traveler pictured on the outside of the “Haywain” when its panels are closed, showing the “Path of Life” painting. It features an almost identically clad vagabond, forced to choose between the narrow, virtuous path before him, or the ranks of the various sinners depicted behind him.“The Wayfarer” will be part of all the shows, and visitors to all three museums will have the opportunity to see them in the same space. And for the first time since the 1960s, there will be many more Bosch paintings to compare and contrast, in both the Netherlands and Spain.“We call it the harvest of nine years,” said Mr. de Mooij of the Noordbrabants. “It’s beautiful, because it really feels as if these works are coming back to the place where they originated.”A version of this article appears in print on November 11, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.