By JAMES PONIEWOZIKNOV. 11, 2015
The first question going into Fox Business Network’s Republican debate in Milwaukee: Would the moderators learn the lessons of last month’s CNBC debate? The second: Which ones?If you asked the candidates — actually, they were happy to tell you, anyway — that debate was a disaster because the moderators were insulting and fixated on asking trivial questions. But there were other issues: The panel often seemed unprepared and lost control of the proceedings, turning the debate into a free-for-all.The Fox Business debate, moderated by Maria Bartiromo, Neil Cavuto and the Wall Street Journal editor Gerard Baker, was a definite improvement on CNBC’s, insofar as it was not bad in the same ways.There was no candidate insurrection on stage. The questions — largely, though not entirely, focused on the economy — were unshowy. Candidates were allowed a bit more time to speak, which cut down on squabbles over the clock. There were few gimmicks like an on-screen Twitter feed. And as opposed the last outing, when candidates like Jeb Bush practically vanished onstage, the panel assiduously spread the questions around.AdvertisementLess bad, though, does not mean great. True, the moderators did not become the story this time. (In case you missed that, Mr. Cavuto closed the debate saying pointedly, “It wasn’t about us, it’s about them,” which of course is a pretty good way of making it about you.)AdvertisementBut they also did not do a tremendous amount of moderating. They asked questions, often good ones begging for specifics, then frequently receded while the eight primary candidates instead delivered parts of their stump speeches or answered the questions they preferred to be asked.Occasionally, they would press and follow up: asking Senator Ted Cruz to clarify if he would allow Bank of America to fail and Ben Carson if he supported eliminating the home mortgage tax deduction. But more often, it was up to the candidates to self-police, to decide if they wanted to challenge each other or point out evasions.
       The Republican presidential candidates clashed sharply over immigration and other policies at their debate on Tuesday.
    Sometimes they did, spiritedly. Donald J. Trump, Gov. John Kasich and Mr. Bush sparred on immigration, Senator Marco Rubio and Senator Rand Paul on the military budget. Definite fissures emerged onstage: activist foreign policy vs. isolationism. But often it seemed as if each candidate existed in his or her own debate, setting his or her own tone and addressing his or her own niches.No one should blame them, of course. That is what candidates do — it is their job to pursue their strategy and deliver their message. Their objective is to survive the primary, control their narrative and not self-immolate. In that sense, a lot of candidates probably had the debate they wanted to have.The moderators’ job, on the other hand, is a tricky one. During the primary campaigns, they need to let each party air the issues important to its voters. But they also need to help those voters choose a nominee for a general presidential election in which he or she will be strongly challenged by an opponent who does not accept his or her premises.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Given the fallout from the last debate, maybe that was never likely this time, with candidates and supporters alike on a hair trigger. (At one point, the crowd began to grumble simply because Ms. Bartiromo said that Hillary Rodham Clinton had an extensive résumé.)But Fox Business probably had more leeway to keep the candidates more firmly on topic. It was easier, after all, for candidates to attack the CNBC moderators from the stage because of the media allegiances of their base. You do not lose many conservative votes bashing a network with “NBC” in its name.A network with “Fox” in its name is a different story; few candidates or their handlers want to alienate the Republican king-making factory. This dynamic allowed Fox News to run the toughest debate of the cycle, with hardly a peep from anyone except Mr. Trump, who operates by his own media rules.Maybe everyone was ready for a duller debate this time around. The campaigns seemed to be. And Fox Business seemed most of all to want to brand itself against competitor CNBC. (Throughout the night, candidates and conservative guests told Fox Business anchors how happy they were with the network.)AdvertisementBut now that Fox Business has gotten the favorable comparison to CNBC that it wanted, we can go back to drawing out comparisons between the candidates.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.