By KATHRYN SHATTUCKNOV. 11, 2015
On Veterans Day, stream a couple of heartbreaking films about World War II. Or, on television, watch the Lyons grow their individual empires, and South Park get politically correct.SAVING PRIVATE RYAN (1998) on iTunes. Steven Spielberg’s harrowing opening scene — the storming of Omaha Beach on June 6, 1944 — has been praised by historians and veterans as one of the most realistic portrayals of war on film. The story: Tom Hanks is a World War II squad leader sent to find a soldier, played by Matt Damon, lost somewhere in Normandy, whose brothers have all died in combat. Writing in The New York Times, Janet Maslin called this Oscar winner “soberly magnificent.” (Image: Forces storming the beach)LETTERS FROM IWO JIMA (2006) on iTunes. Using illustrated letters by Lt. Gen. Tadamichi Kuribayashi to his wife and child, Clint Eastwood chronicles the World War II battle in which an estimated 20,000 Japanese infantrymen fought — and only 1,083 survived — from their perspective. Ken Watanabe plays Kuribayashi in a performance “all the more heartbreaking for his crisp, unsentimental dignity,” A. O. Scott wrote in The Times. Mr. Eastwood’s “Flags of Our Father,” also on iTunes, tells the other side of that story. (Image: Kazunari Ninomiya as a soldier)EMPIRE 9 p.m. on Fox. Lucious has visions of record-label grandeur and works with Mimi to partner with a music-streaming company. Cookie puts her Lyon Dynasty label on display for charity. (Image: Terrence Howard and Marisa Tomei)AdvertisementMODERN FAMILY 9 p.m. on ABC. It’s bad enough when Luke drives without a license and is arrested. Then Claire and Phil catch Alex sneaking out of a liquor store. In “black-ish,” at 9:30, Dre gets pharmaceutical relief from his fear of flying when he and Bow take Zoey to visit Brown. (Image: Anthony Anderson and Tracee Ellis Ross in “black-ish”)STRANGE INHERITANCE 9 p.m. on Fox Business. Jamie Colby helps people who’ve been bequeathed 240 military vehicles and a wallet owned by George Washington.AdvertisementMEN WOMEN WILD 10 p.m. on Discovery. Three survivalist couples are dropped into three of the world’s harshest environments (the high-desert mountains of Morocco, the frozen fjords of Norway and the jungle of southern Mexico) with only the clothes they’re wearing, some gear and each other. They’ll have three weeks to make it back to civilization — and presumably decide whether they’re stronger together or better off apart.SOUTH PARK 10 p.m. on Comedy Central. A terrorist organization notices Kenny’s leadership skills while he’s playing Ninja Warriors. Meanwhile, South Park decides that it no longer needs a police force and celebrates its political correctness with a carnival.THE TONIGHT SHOW STARRING JIMMY FALLON 11:35 p.m. on NBC. Sam Smith, whose “Writing’s on the Wall” is the first James Bond theme song to hit No. 1 on British charts, performs.A version of this schedule appears in print on November 11, 2015, on Page C7 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Wednesday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.