AdvertisementSupported byCritic’s NotebookBy Jon CaramanicaEric Church is the sort of singer who sings earnestly about other singers, whose songs posit music as a magical sun shower to bathe in blissfully. In his songs, music is fuel for love, for anguish and, naturally, for other music.The ghosts of Mr. Church’s taste are all over “Mr. Misunderstood” (EMI Nashville), his fifth studio album, which he released last week in a fashion more inventive than that of any other artist who has surprise-released an album since Beyoncé did in late 2013: He mailed free copies to members of his fan club. Which is to say, he gave a gift to people who feel about Eric Church the way Eric Church feels about Stevie Wonder or Elvis Costello or Waylon Jennings or anyone who committed music to vinyl in the 1970s. (Definitely vinyl — do not get Mr. Church started on audio compression.)The album, a love letter to his influences, is the gentlest of Mr. Church’s releases, the one that least wears his rowdy tendencies on its sleeve. There are shades of the Allman Brothers and the scraped-up Southern rock that has always been essential to Mr. Church’s country antagonism here, but also bluesy country gospel on “Chattanooga Lucy” and meditative electric blues on “Mistress Named Music.”Mostly, though, Mr. Church’s obsessions come through in the lyrics. “I still remember Miss Bessie singing/Black, wrinkled fingers on ivory keys,” he sings at the beginning of “Mistress Named Music.” On “Holdin’ My Own,” he describes playing music as an escape from the eruptions he gleefully causes.“Record Year,” in which Mr. Church buries a dead relationship in a stack of vinyl, draws the parallels most plainly: “I usually make it through side A sober/All bets are off when I flip her over.” On the title track, he likens his own rocky path through, and ultimately around, Nashville’s center to the plight of the high school outcast, for whom rebellion apparently constitutes having his father’s taste in music: “You love your daddy’s vinyl and old time rock n’ roll/Elvis Costello, Ray Waylie Hubbard/And think Jeff Tweedy is one bad mother.”Mr. Church continues to paint himself as a Nashville outsider, an identity that’s seemingly essential to his self-presentation and self-perception. But that denies him at least some of his charms. On songs like “Round Here Buzz” and “Mixed Drinks About Feelings,” he’s utterly conventional, and utterly devastating. And Mr. Church is exceptional at nostalgia-thick small-town vignettes that are less about boosterism or whimsy than they are about the calluses and scars accrued from years of neglect — he’s got some Mellencamp in him.That said, Mr. Church is as given to the maudlin as any of the great mainstream country singers of the 2000s. It’s seen here on dim, thematically driven songs like “Kill a Word,” about words he’d like to kill, or “Three Year Old,” about things you can learn from a child. Even the sneering tremors in his voice can’t elevate the treacle.Given Mr. Church’s frictive relationship with the genre, there was a sublime irony to his releasing this album just before last week’s Country Music Association Awards. Country music — especially the sound of male country singers — is in a bit of a holding pattern. Over the last five years, the bros were streamlined into gentlemen; Mr. Church remained at a remove throughout. (He has been celebrated before: In 2012, he won the C.M.A. for album of the year for “Chief.”)That the C.M.A.s chose to rain accolades on an outsider this year was heartening, but it wasn’t Mr. Church. Instead it was Chris Stapleton, a vintage howler with an exceedingly genial spirit. Mr. Church is an agitator, and proud of it. The newly lauded Mr. Stapleton, a longtime songwriter who just released his debut album, is a collaborator. Maybe the takeaway from last week’s ceremony is that Mr. Church is right to feel alienated from his peers. At least his vinyl friends will never desert him.Advertisement