By ELISE CZAJKOWSKINOV. 10, 2015
It’s a maxim that stand-up comedy, like many artistic pursuits, is a marathon, not a sprint: There aren’t many lightning victories, just one long slog. But after taking part in the New York’s Funniest Stand-Up semifinals last month, Randy Syphax seemed to think that the competition gave comics an incentive to pick up the pace. “Nights like this definitely feel like someone shot a gun,” he said.New York’s Funniest Stand-Up — started in 2008 as part of the annual New York Comedy Festival, whose 12th iteration began on Tuesday — has become a way for up-and-comers to measure their success, which can be hard in the comedy field. Held at Carolines on Broadway in Times Square, the competition started with auditions, which drew nearly 160 people to an open call in August. The group was winnowed to 20 semifinalists who competed on Oct. 20, then pared to 10 finalists who are to vie on Sunday.For the participants, performing at Carolines as part of the New York Comedy Festival is far more of an incentive than the $500 prize. An added bonus this year is that the comedians’ sets are being filmed for SeeSo, NBC Universal’s forthcoming comedy video-on-demand service, which means reaching an audience that is far bigger than the one that will squeeze into Carolines’ 400-seat showroom.Young comedians generally consider these contests to be résumé builders, something to list before they start racking up television credits. But New York’s Funniest, with a roster of successful winners that includes Michael Che of “Saturday Night Live” and Ricky Velez of “The Nightly Show With Larry Wilmore,” has a special status. That the contest is spotlighted at the festival is another plus: The festival headliners this year include Margaret Cho, Kathy Griffin, Trevor Noah, Bill Burr and Sarah Silverman, and New York favorites like Chris Gethard, Bonnie McFarlane and the sketch group Good Cop Great Cop will appear as well.AdvertisementMr. Syphax, 31, who has been doing stand-up for four years and has a talent for voices, said the competition had a certain cachet that others lacked. “I get caught up in labels,” he joked. “I like Nike.”AdvertisementIn addition to Mr. Syphax, this year’s finalists are Sara Armour, Michael Briskin, Anthony DeVito, Charles Gould, Nick Mullen, Nimesh Patel, Matt Pavich, Doug Smith and Evan Williams. Most have been doing stand-up for four to eight years, and all regularly perform around the city. After the contest, many will be looking to take the next step and start headlining at clubs across the country.They represent a range of comedic styles: Some have a knack for deploying sharp one-liners, and others are looser, more absurdist storytellers. The judges consider each performer’s originality, material, delivery and stage presence, as well as overall humor.“If we’re given a choice, I don’t think we would do competitions,” said Harrison Greenbaum, one of the semifinalists. “But it’s a way to get our set out there.” In the semifinals, there were “very different voices,” he added, “and I don’t envy the judges at all in terms of having to decide between all that.”Mr. Velez agrees that contests aren’t ideal for stand-up, but said that he found the competition “an amazing platform.” “Even better” than the contest, he added, is the role played by the club itself, and its owner, Caroline Hirsch, in finding and developing talent.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In an interview, Ms. Hirsch said the competition was a draw for industry insiders. “If you’re looking for anybody, you should be here,” she said. Mr. Velez became a contributor on Larry Wilmore’s “Nightly Show” two months after he won; Mr. Wilmore had seen him perform elsewhere at the comedy festival.Ms. Armour, 28, also spoke of the benefits of competing. “It feels great to be considered,” she said after her semifinal heat. “I feel like I’m a part of the conversation now, and I didn’t feel that way before.”So far, all of the winners of New York’s Funniest Stand-Up have been men. This year Ms. Armour was the only woman to make it to the finals; of the 20 semifinalists, only three were women.The underrepresentation of women is striking, given the vast array of young female comedians performing in New York. Of the nearly 160 people who showed up to audition this year, however, only 10 to 15 were women, according to Louis Faranda, the competition’s founder, and the judges were somewhat underwhelmed by their performances.AdvertisementBut Mr. Faranda, who also books performers at Carolines, called Ms. Armour an unusual talent who’s “ready to bud.” He also mentioned Yamaneika Saunders and Emma Willmann as promising comedians who could not compete for logistical reasons. “There’s a lot of funny women out there today,” he said, adding, “I wish there were more” in the contest.The finals are to be hosted by Mr. Che. Adding to the pressures on the competitors, they will not be allowed to reuse the material that got them there; the judges want new jokes.Mr. Syphax has another factor to worry about. “I think it might be the first time my dad’s ever seen me do stand-up,” he said. “I don’t want to let him down.”The New York’s Funniest Stand-Up finals are on Sunday at Carolines on Broadway, 1626 Broadway; carolines­.com. The New York Comedy Festival runs through Sunday at various locations; nycomedyfestival­.com.A version of this article appears in print on November 11, 2015, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline: 10 Comics, Still Standing, Gear Up for a Serious Smackdown.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.