By MICHAEL COOPERNOV. 10, 2015
WASHINGTON — Each new chapter of American history has a way of casting what came before it in a different light. So when the composer Philip Glass and the playwright Christopher Hampton decided to revive “Appomattox,” the opera about the Civil War that they wrote a decade ago, they found that the changing civil rights landscape cried out for a rewrite.“We were writing it in 2005 and 6,” Mr. Glass said in an interview. “But it never occurred to me that the Supreme Court would gut the Voting Rights Act.”Since the first version of “Appomattox” had its premiere in 2007 at the San Francisco Opera, many states have passed laws making it harder to vote, and, in 2013, the Supreme Court effectively struck down the heart of the Voting Rights Act of 1965. So Mr. Glass and Mr. Hampton significantly revised the opera and made voting rights a central theme.When the reimagined work has its premiere at the Kennedy Center here on Saturday, presented by the Washington National Opera, audiences will see how Mr. Glass, perhaps the most prominent American composer of his generation, weighs in on a pressing issue in the nation’s capital — where many of the scenes he is depicting took place and where, if history is any guide, there are likely to be policy makers and a Supreme Court justice or two in the audience.Advertisement“We are now in very interesting territory, where the artists are trying to catch up,” Mr. Glass, 78, said at the Kennedy Center before a recent rehearsal. “It’s not art imitating life; it’s art trying to catch up with life. Because life is changing in front of us.”The rethought opera harks back to the days before texts were considered sacrosanct, when composers like Handel, Verdi and Puccini continued to tinker with and transform their finished works over the years. The new “Appomattox,” even though its subject is history, can feel as timely as a Twitter feed, with its explorations of race, police violence, civil rights and voting rights. And it is joining a long operatic tradition of using historical subjects to resonate with contemporary issues — from the way Verdi’s “Va Pensiero” chorus in the biblical epic “Nabucco” came to be heard as an Italian nationalist anthem to how his “Don Carlo” used Spanish history to weigh in on realpolitik and the Roman Catholic Church.Now the tradition is being updated with “Appomattox.” The original version of the opera portrayed the final days of the Civil War, and dramatized Gen. Robert E. Lee’s surrender to Gen. Ulysses S. Grant in the village of Appomattox Court House, Va., before flashing forward to brief scenes from Reconstruction and the civil rights movement of the 1960s. While the first act of the new, expanded “Appomattox” is still set in the 19th century, the second is now devoted to civil and voting rights.AdvertisementThe revised opera opens with Frederick Douglass visiting the White House in 1865 and telling Abraham Lincoln he would like to see “voting rights for all free men of color.” In the second act, a century later, the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. visits the White House to press President Lyndon B. Johnson on the Voting Rights Act.Mounting an opera about voting rights in the nation’s capital is “so fitting and appropriate,” said Representative John Lewis, a Democrat from Georgia, whose skull was fractured by a state trooper during the 1965 march in Selma, Ala., that became known as Bloody Sunday, and who said he had been surprised to learn that he was a character in the opera.“There’s a great deal of discussion going on in the country about what the Supreme Court did when it put a dagger in the heart of the Voting Rights Act that was passed and signed into law 50 years ago,” Mr. Lewis said in a telephone interview. “The issue is so present right now.”Soloman Howard, a rising young bass who is singing the roles of Douglass and King, said that it was difficult not to hear contemporary echoes in the voting rights scenes — and noted the recent uproar over Alabama’s move to close offices that issue drivers’ licenses, including in predominantly black neighborhoods, after moving to require people to show photo identification to vote. “It’s still very much alive,” he said of the issue.One dramatic thread that has been expanded in the revised opera seems especially timely in the age of the Black Lives Matter movement: the killing of Jimmie Lee Jackson, the 26-year-old civil rights marcher whose death in 1965 at the hands of a state trooper led to the historic marches in Selma. Three years after the opera’s San Francisco premiere, a former state trooper named James Bonard Fowler pleaded guilty to a misdemeanor charge of manslaughter in the shooting and was sentenced to six months in prison. Mr. Fowler, who died in July  at 81, now has a scene in the opera.The changes to the opera were brought about by a confluence of events. In 2012 the Guthrie Theater in Minneapolis devoted a season to works by Mr. Hampton, the British playwright who wrote “Les Liaisons Dangereuses,” among other plays, and asked him for a new piece. He turned his “Appomattox” libretto into a more sweeping drama that delved more deeply into the civil rights era and its contemporary resonances.“I wanted to write a giant play about race in America,” he said in a telephone interview from England. “When you think about it, when you break it down, the root cause of the Civil War was race. And all the racial issues that still exist are grandchildren of those original causes of the Civil War.”Mr. Glass said that as soon as he saw the play, he told Mr. Hampton, “My God, we’ve got to rewrite the opera.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Then Francesca Zambello became the artistic director of Washington National Opera in 2013 and, she recalled, was “shocked” to discover that the company had never staged an opera by Mr. Glass. She said that she found the idea of mounting “Appomattox” appealing, but worried that the original version felt “unfinished.” Soon she had enlisted Mr. Glass and Mr. Hampton to rework and expand it, and Tazewell Thompson to direct.Advertisement“Opera in many ways was a social machine — that’s what Verdi was doing, that’s what Mozart was doing in ‘The Marriage of Figaro,’” Ms. Zambello said over coffee in a cafeteria on the top floor of the Kennedy Center, which has views of the Lincoln Memorial. “I don’t always think that opera is a political tool, but it can be. And so I hope that this, in a way, reawakens that 19th-century morality that opera served.”Mr. Glass clearly relishes the thought of bringing a political opera to Washington. “One of the things I really like is we can write operas and plays and make movies and we don’t get arrested,” he said, before turning to his interviewer. “And you, as a journalist, you’re not arrested. I mean, if we were in Iran or in Russia or in so many countries in the world, and we were writing this, first of all I would be arrested and you would be arrested for conspiring with me to overturn the government or something. I marvel at the freedom that we have.”Given the fast pace of change in the United States, Mr. Glass added that he wondered if this version of “Appomattox” would be the last.“I can easily imagine,” he said, “saying we have to write a new third act.”A version of this article appears in print on November 11, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: Even Opera Isn’t Spared When History Outpaces Art.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.