
Empire By                     
CRAIG JENKINS

NOV. 12, 2015
In an “Empire” season that has drawn its strength from the dizzying unpredictability of its moves, Episode 7 felt like a bit of a come down. Everyone mostly stayed put this week, and it was unnerving. The show’s sole constant is deceiving appearances. In a week light on kidnapping, theft, murder and backstabbing, is the calm just a temporary comfort to snatch out from under us later?With the show’s midseason finale looming at the end of the month, Wednesday’s episode was chess-like buildup. Andre’s pastor finally started shelling out the terrible advice we knew he had in him, as Lucious asks his son to get rid of a gang injunction hampering growth for his protégé Freda Gatz, who Andre despises as a new hire with expensive legal problems. Typically worming out of litigations of this nature involves a trip to the Mayor’s office to romance his assistant Raquel, but as a reformed, religious man, Andre is advised to opt for blackmail instead of adultery. As Rhonda feared early on in the season, Andre’s pastor knows too much, and won’t be long before he, too, tries to burn the family.Cookie and Laz are growing closer, and while it still seems implausible that the preternaturally shrewd Lyon matriarch wouldn’t realize she’s in bed with a crook, literally and figuratively, a romantic staycation, like the one the couple shared in New York, can do wonders for one’s judgment. Cookie begins planning a Lyon Dynasty festival (garishly called “Cookie’s Cookout”), and while scouting locations that would give the event a suitable hip-hop flair, she’s convinced by Laz to choose Rock Steady Park. The spot on Manhattan’s Upper West Side is, unsurprisingly, run by the gang boss Big Heavy, whose cronies kidnapped Hakeem.Laz is playing Lyon Dynasty and Big Heavy off each other for his own gain, but the shakier his allegiances seem, the deeper the character becomes. As for Cookie, this park jam seems like a terrible idea when the label in question appears to only have two artists on its roster, and the event security has a history of physical harming one of them. It’s time for Cookie and Hakeem to wrap up the Lyon Dynasty sham. Hakeem’s better off soaking up hand-me-down career opportunities from his dad, and Mirage à Trois’s dime-store Pussycat Dolls act is wearing thin.Speaking of which, here are two sidesplittingly absurd musical performances from Episode 7:● The Mirage à Trois leader Laura’s confidence-building public performance of “Yo Viviré,” the Spanish-language version of Gloria Gaynor’s disco classic “I Will Survive,” respectably advances “Empire”’s continuing campaign to bring Latin viewers into the fold and stretch the show’s focus beyond hip-hop. But when you start singing in a crowded business thoroughfare in the middle of the workweek, you are usually ignored. “Empire” has generally avoided kitschy musical theater tropes in its performance segments, but Laura serenading a crowded plaza, backed by an invisible band, and winning the hearts of felt like a scene out of “Glee.”● Lucious has been workshopping his single, “Boom Boom Boom Boom,” for weeks now, seeking the advice of industry experts and restlessly tinkering with instrumentation. Last night things got dark: he decided that what was missing was a dollop of sitar and trigger clicks from the gun his mother may or may not have used to commit suicide. The thing is, the song is bad. The production is a dated, late ‘90s Dr. Dre homage and the harder “Empire” tries to sell Terrence Howard as a rapper, the less believable he gets. When he’s succeeded as a performer on the show, he’s done so by embracing the humor of the enterprise — see, for example, Lucious assembling a band of felons and recording a hit single in a penitentiary utility closet earlier this season. “Boom Boom Boom Boom” falls flat because it expects you to take it seriously.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »