
American Horror Story By                     
E. A. HANKS

NOV. 12, 2015
What does it mean to fall in love in the world of “American Horror Story”? When the body count is this high, is there any room for such sentiment?Yes, actually. There is.There has been a consistent theme throughout this series of the real sacrifice and renunciation that marks true love. It’s always served as a welcome antidote to the show’s campiness. The message is not quite: “Love is patient, love is kind. It does not envy or boast.” But the show has taken pains to portray a sort of love that is selfless, if also troubled and compromised.Only on “American Horror Story” can there be high romance between an undead, murderous frat brother and a witch with whom coitus causes brain hemorrhage, as was the case in Season 3. Kyle (Evan Peters) may have been seriously damaged after being rebuilt from various boy parts and brought back from the dead, but his declaration of love to Zoe (Taissa Farmiga), “This road goes two ways,” might have been the most pure expression of love on a season built around the ties that bind.The first time the pair played star-crossed lovers, it was the ghost of Tate, the gunman in a school shooting, who declared to young Violet of Season 1, “If you love someone, you should never, ever hurt them.” He continued, “I care about your feelings more than my own.” In the fourth season, “Freak Show,” Dot (Sarah Paulson) one of a set of conjoined twins, schooled the charlatan Maggie (Emma Roberts), “When you love someone, they come first.”AdvertisementThese declarations have come out of relationships fans watched grow over entire seasons, so they meant something to the audience. We rooted for Kyle and Zoe; we were disturbed by Tate and Violet; and brokenhearted for Dot’s unrequited love.AdvertisementUnlike the love story presented to us in this week’s episode of “Hotel.”Liz Taylor and the Countess’s latest boy toy, Tristan, have not said more than of handful of lines to each other thus far, yet in this episode we see them so desperately in love with each other, they are willing to tempt the Countess’s wrath. Even Denis O’Hare’s lovely acting can’t save this plotline that ends as quickly as it begins. “I don’t share,” announces the Countess, newly returned from Paris with Will Drake, (remember him?) before promptly slitting Tristan’s throat.What should be as equally devastating for the audience as it is for Liz instead reads only as a blip, much like a Naomi Campbell cameo: all signs point to the idea that this should mean something, but it’s over so quickly, and leaves no emotional aftertaste, no meaning is inferred — other than that Liz should really think about quitting her job.(Unless Ms. Taylor will stick around to continue her affaire de coeur with the ghostly apparition of Tristan?)Introducing and dismissing such a slight impersonation of love is demoralizing enough, but this week’s episode also featured more graphic sex than previous episodes of any season of “American Horror Story.” While it’s refreshing to see different sexualities presented in similar, if lurid, imagery as heteronormative sex, the complacency in the presentation pushes the episode beyond titillation and into vapidity.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Take, for instance, a bloody threesome between John Lowe and the two Swedish women from Episode 1, now ghosts doomed to the Cortez forever. Forget that Alex is trying to drive her husband insane, in a plot taken directly from Season 1, or that we haven’t seen these ghosts since their introduction in the season opener, or the mystery of how Alex knows these women are dead and seems completely unphased by them or the butchered businessman they’re responsible for killing with an ice pick.While the two nude women are gyrating on top of Lowe, grabbing their breasts and spilling blood and intestines over him, even the rote camera work in the scene tells viewers, “This is nothing special.” Stanley Kubrick could make the simple act of forcing the audience to look down a hotel hallway deeply unsettling; terrifying even. Watching two dead women attempt to drive a man insane through sex and disembowelment should at least be uncomfortable, but I’m not even sure what the scene was meant to be taken as: Scary? Sexy? Both? Funny? All of these tones could be possible, and yet none of them strike me as evident.I couldn’t help but think of a moment in Season 1, “Murder House,” (the house itself seen in this episode when the Countess gets an illegal abortion from the ether addict Dr. Montgomery). It was a post-sex scene, nothing graphic, the ghost Tate in bed with the still-alive (we assume) Violet. With the camera slightly out of focus, moving woozily around Violet’s dark, womblike room, there’s a mood of intimacy tinged with claustrophobia — the young lovers are trapped. The scene is unsettling: Is Violet a victim of Tate’s manipulation, or does he really love her? It seems like Tate and Violet have always been moving toward this moment, but is that romance or helplessness? The quiet intimacy of the scene makes it more than sexy; it’s a potent mix of foreboding and sensuality. You feel that something is not right.Perhaps I am missing the point. “Hotel,” until now, has had little interest in emotions (Liz and Iris notwithstanding) over sensation, so perhaps I am naïve. “Just fluff him up a bit for me,” the Countess says of Will. Maybe this season is supposed to be about fluff — gory, violent fluff that titillates without gratification.AdvertisementTo what end?It doesn’t have to be this way! Sensationalism does not necessarily exclude the emotional. Think of the last 10 minutes of “The Cabin in the Woods,” Joss Whedon’s postmodern horror flick that was every bit as genuine as it was bombastic, or any episode of AMC’s ridiculously successful zombie horror series “The Walking Dead,” pound for undead pound, as rich emotionally as it is chock-full of the truly gruesome.No, it doesn’t have to be this way. But if that is the case, I wish the show would stop pretending it were about anything actually substantive — motherhood, AIDS, fame, love. These sloppy gestures make the season truly cynical where previous seasons have been, if not optimistic, at least interested in giving viewers more than just fresh intestines and shapely bare bottoms.The question remains: what is “Hotel” really about? For a show with a whole lot of innards, this one has yet to show its guts.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »