AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn ShattuckAs we slide toward the weekend, how about a little escapism — with a Shonda Rhimes night, pixie fashionistas or music from Hozier, Miguel or Sia? You choose. What’s on TVPROJECT RUNWAY JUNIOR 9 p.m. E.S.T. on Lifetime. Make it work! Tim Gunn dreams up a new catch phrase — but keeps the same tough love — as he mentors a dozen fledgling designers, ages 13 to 17 and eager to prove themselves. Hannah Davis, the Sports Illustrated swimsuit edition cover girl and Derek Jeter’s fiancée, takes over the Heidi Klum role. The fashionista Kelly Osbourne; the designer Christian Siriano; and Aya Kanai, executive fashion editor at Cosmopolitan and Seventeen, are the judges. The winners get to create a design for … Lands’ End. (Image: Ms. Davis and Mr. Gunn)BONES 8 p.m. on Fox. An escape artist with some less-than-magical behavioral traits is discovered dead in the woods.GREY’S ANATOMY 8 p.m. on ABC. Tension abounds on Shonda Rhimes’s night: The doctors get snappish while working on a patient. In “Scandal,” at 9, Olivia learns some juicy intel, while Fitz negotiates a peace agreement. And in “How to Get Away With Murder,” at 10, Annalise has to watch her back.THE SALT OF THE EARTH (2014) 8:05 p.m. on Starz Cinema. The Brazilian photographer Sebastião Salgado has transformed some of the worst horrors of the modern world — starvation, war, poverty, displacement — into dramatic visual artifacts. Here, the director Wim Wenders turns his admiring lens on Mr. Salgado. The film “leaves no doubt about Mr. Salgado’s talent or decency, and the chance to spend time in his company is a reason for gratitude,” A. O. Scott wrote in The New York Times. And yet his pictures deserve a “more robustly critical look.”VH1 BIG MUSIC IN 2015: YOU OUGHTA KNOW 9 p.m. on VH1. Artists you’ve probably never heard of, and a few you definitely have, perform at the Armory Foundation in Manhattan. The lineup includes Hozier, Ella Henderson, George Ezra, Tori Kelly, Rachel Platten, Elle King, Miguel and X Ambassadors. (Image: Hozier)CHRONICLE (2012) 11 p.m. on FX Movie Channel. Three teenagers acquire fantastic powers after entering a large hole in the ground in Josh Trank’s sci-fi fairy tale. One of them — the shutterbug son of a raging alcoholic and a dying mother, played by Dane DeHaan — shoots the highlights. “The superhero stuff is all fine and good enough, but it’s this vision of a lonely boy with his swooping, dipping, flying Tinker Bell of a camera that truly lifts the movie,” Manohla Dargis wrote in The Times.What’s Streaming NowSIA: LIVE AT THE RED BULL SOUND SPACE 4 p.m. on Red Bull TV. Fresh off her “S.N.L.” stint alongside Donald Trump, the Australian Grammy nominee performs singles like “Alive” and “Bird Set Free.” (Image: Sia, at the mike)Advertisement