AdvertisementSupported byBy Robin Pogrebin and Scott ReyburnIf art buyers were feeling a bit of auction fatigue going into Sotheby’s contemporary art evening sale on Wednesday — the sixth auction in seven days — they did not show it in their bidding for several major works.A 1972 Warhol “Mao” silk-screen painting that Sotheby’s had guaranteed at $40 million sold for $47.5 million including fees to a telephone bidder, countering Tuesday night’s deflating Warhol performance at Christie’s, where one of his popular “Flower” paintings — along with three other pieces by the artist — failed to sell.Still, the mood was upbeat after Wednesday’s sale, given that 54 works brought $294.85 million on a low estimate of $254 million, with 81.5 percent of the lots sold.“It’s good stuff, so it’s exciting,” said the dealer Tony Shafrazi, who was the winning bidder on a Christopher Wool enamel on canvas for $3.9 million, just under its high estimate.At the post-sale news conference, Alexander Rotter, the co-head of the Sotheby’s New York contemporary art department, sounded relieved. “I was nervous about tonight,” he said after the sale. “We had a lot of auctions this week — more than I’ve ever seen — so you’re going through an emotional roller coaster and you’re double-reading signs.”He added, “Tonight showed there is a healthy art market, if you don’t push prices.”Indeed, the pieces that sold under estimate or did not sell at all in part reflected misguided pricing, art experts said. “Those works that are not priced well won’t sell,” the collector Larry Warsh said.Basquiat’s 1982 “Hannibal,” for example, which failed to sell at a low estimate of $8 million, “was a very good painting,” added Mr. Warsh, one of the earliest collectors of that artist, “but it was priced too high.” Basquiat’s “Untitled” from 1987, by contrast, sold for more than three times its high estimate, bringing $8.3 million with fees, despite being what many described as inferior.Sotheby’s had reason to be relieved by Wednesday’s results, given its steady declining stock price over the last six months. On Friday, the stock was at $34.09. On Monday the company released its third-quarter results, showing that commissions from Sotheby’s auction sales during the period were $56 million, a decrease of 12 percent from the same period in 2014, according to documents used by the auction house.At the close of trading on Wednesday the stock stood at $28.71, having lost almost 16 percent of its value since Friday.The auction house’s struggles seem attributable to several factors, including Christie’s continuing domination at the top end of the art market. Last year, the company posted about $7.7 billion of sales, $1 billion more than Sotheby’s. Recently, concerns have been raised that the $515 million that Sotheby’s guaranteed to the family of A. Alfred Taubman, its former chairman, to secure his collection might have been excessive.“Sotheby’s stock price reflects the general slowdown in the global economy,” said Steve Blitz, the director and chief economist at ITG Investment Research Inc. “The stock has been hurt by their earnings from their main auction business, which are weak.”Mr. Blitz and other analysts are also concerned about the rapid expansion of Sotheby’s art finance business, which provides loans to clients secured by the value of their art collections.Several financial analysts pointed out that Christie’s, a privately held company owned by the French luxury goods magnate Francois Pinault, has the freedom to pursue market share without being accountable to shareholders.Tuesday night, for example, at Christie’s $331.8 million comparable auction of contemporary material, sellers of 10 of the 53 lots were guaranteed minimum prices, with financing from the auction house itself.Art auctions can be unpredictable. See how you match up in this interactive quiz.Shareholder-owned Sotheby’s has been more cautious.Just five out of Wednesday night’s 54 lots were guaranteed, with the risk shared by third parties, including the “Mao” owned by the billionaire hedge fund manager Steven A. Cohen. He had acquired the painting in 2007 from Mr. Pinault in a private transaction, for $17 million, according to a person with knowledge of the transaction.One night earlier at Christie’s, Mr. Cohen made a profit of about $12 million on his $29.2 million sale of a Lucio Fontana painting. His guarantee on the “Mao” was about $45 million, including fees; it sold for $47.5 million. Mr. Cohen therefore made about $41 million from the sale of these two lots — which helps explain why so many hedge-fund managers have become art collectors.The evening’s other highlights included a Cy Twombly “blackboard” painting from 1968, a gray abstract with white chalky loops, which sold Wednesday for $70.5 million — a new high for the artist at auction — against an estimate of over $60 million.And Jackson Pollock’s drawing “Number 17, 1949,” which sold at Sotheby’s in 2003 to a telephone bidder for $5.3 million, went for $22.9 million with fees, over its low estimate of $20 million.But some said the repetition of artists in this week’s sales was dispiriting. “It’s the same stuff — Bourgeois, Warhol,” Thierry Geoffroy, the founder of the Copenhagen Biennale, said. “It’s a bit more expensive than posters in a pizza bar.”Advertisement