By JAMES R. OESTREICHNOV. 11, 2015
“Channel Crossing,” the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center called its program at Alice Tully Hall on Tuesday evening, and the society’s artistic directors, David Finckel and Wu Han, supplied information about the English Channel in an introductory note. At its narrowest, the channel is some 20 miles wide, they wrote; for the hardiest, it’s a seven-hour swim.Not that any of this was pertinent to a program that simply offered English music on one half and French on the other. The forced title almost made you yearn for the days when programs were just slapped together, with little concern for a theme.Oh, there were small connections here. The first half opened with a Purcell Chacony in G minor, arranged for string quartet by Britten, followed by Britten’s First String Quartet (which, to beat a dead horse, was written in America, far from the English Channel).The second half consisted of Ravel’s “Berceuse sur le Nom de Gabriel Fauré” for violin and piano and Fauré’s First Piano Quintet. Tucked in before intermission was Helen Grime’s “Aviary Sketches (After Joseph Cornell),” commissioned by the society and Wigmore Hall in London, where it received its premiere in May, by the same performers: Arnaud Sussmann, violinist; Matthew Lipman, violist; and Mr. Finckel, cellist.AdvertisementMs. Grime’s five brief movements are colorfully scored and cogently developed, but it was hard to relate them to titles like “Untitled (Habitat),” “Deserted Perch” and “Forgotten Game” without seeing images of the Cornell works that inspired them. Even postage-stamp-sized black-and-white photographs would have helped.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The performance was excellent, as were those the rest of the evening, mostly featuring the young players of the Amphion String Quartet: Katie Hyun and David Southorn, violinists; Wei-Yang Andy Lin, violist; and Mihai Marica, cellist. The Purcell and Britten works satisfied completely.Not so the Fauré quintet, for all the best efforts of the Amphion players and the estimable pianist Anne-Marie McDermott. This is a long 30 minutes of music, lovely on the surface but ultimately of little consequence, notwithstanding the claim in the program notes that the main theme of the finale “is a distant descendant of Beethoven’s ‘Ode to Joy.’”AdvertisementThat is a distance you couldn’t swim in seven hours.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.