AdvertisementSupported byBy Nate Chinen“Aria”(Impulse!)There’s an oddly familiar glow to “Aria,” the auspicious debut album by the pianist Sullivan Fortner. If your memory of brightly swinging major-label jazz recordings extends back at least 20 years (honestly, the last time there was infrastructure for such a thing), you might recognize some parallels, like the ratio of originals to standards, and the air of crisp assurance.Don’t hold any of this against Mr. Fortner, who at 28 has worked broadly and persuasively in bands led by the vibraphonist Stefon Harris and the trumpeters Roy Hargrove and Etienne Charles, among others. In March, he won the Cole Porter Fellowship in Jazz, a prestigious piano competition judged by a panel of his elders. His fundamentals as a player could hardly be stronger, and his instincts as a composer and bandleader are almost startlingly mature.His quartet on “Aria” features Tivon Pennicott on tenor and soprano saxophones, Aidan Carroll on bass and Joe Dyson on drums. (They’ll play next Wednesday at the Jazz Standard.) The rhythmic brio and harmonic insight in the band can be heard all over the album, but especially on “Passepied” and “Parade,” two of Mr. Fortner’s more intricate compositions, which variously draw from Baroque forms and the processional cadence of New Orleans, his hometown.Mr. Fortner bookends “Aria” with its title track and a piece titled “Finale,” both adapted from a suite commissioned by the Jazz Gallery. He offers a syncopated funk arrangement of “I Mean You,” by Thelonious Monk, and a chiming reharmonization of “You Are Special,” a waltz from the children’s show “Mister Rogers’ Neighborhood.” What’s missing are the swelling rock dynamics and hip-hop beat-geekery that have become their own form of orthodoxy among heralded young musicians in the modern jazz mainstream. That isn’t a bad thing.Still, the album feels buttoned-up, which may be a byproduct of the three veteran producers who helped in its creation. Mr. Fortner could do a lot worse than to make an album that evokes predecessors like Rodney Kendrick and Eric Reed. But there’s evidence here of an artist with his own distinct style.Advertisement