AdvertisementSupported byBy Jon Caramanica“Free TC”(Atlantic)A slow, breezy track about the joys and heartbreaks of Los Angeles street life that swells into a storm of fervid strings. An acoustic-soul collaboration with Babyface full of mean-mugging talk. An up-tempo motivational speech with Kanye West and Diddy. A song that, rather than merely sampling the Jagged Edge classic “Let’s Get Married,” unravels its core strands and weaves it into a new tapestry. A series of jailhouse phone calls.These are just some of the savvy plays on “Free TC,” the debut major label album by the R&B polymath Ty Dolla Sign. “Free TC” — often exceptional, and easily one of the best R&B albums of this year — is elaborate in conception and execution but still feels off the cuff.Ty Dolla Sign is one of the most intuitive songwriters working today, with a fluent blend of baroque and vernacular. And though he’s capable of more, he sings in cool staccato phrases, preferring to pepper a smooth track rather than smear himself atop it. Those skills give this album rigor, from the sinuous “Only Right” to the woozy hit “Blasé” (featuring Future and Rae Sremmurd) to the wistful, salacious “Horses in the Stable” to “Saved,” essentially a sequel to E-40’s “Captain Save a Hoe,” featuring E-40 himself.Ty Dolla Sign serves much the same function that R. Kelly did in his mid-1990s to mid-2000s peak, making hip-hop carnality and attitude central to R&B (which is already plenty moist without him). But Mr. Kelly was vital — in that era, R&B wasn’t yet a hip-hop footnote. Ty Dolla Sign is in part a victim of his time. His years of collaboration have led him to perhaps think too hard about how he plays with others, and there are moments on this album where he moves himself to the fringes of his own songs.He manages to outmaneuver Fetty Wap on the brash “When I See Ya,” and on “Know Ya,” he keeps the thirsty Trey Songz at bay. But the most meaningful collaborations here are with TC, Ty Dolla Sign’s younger brother and this album’s namesake, who is incarcerated. That’s him on those jailhouse phone calls, and that’s him singing on “Miracle/Wherever,” an earnest eight-minute homily that arrives halfway through this album. It’s a lavish, unexpected gesture on a record full of them.Advertisement