By CORINNA da FONSECA-WOLLHEIMNOV. 11, 2015
Schoenberg’s “The Book of Hanging Gardens” is an atonal song cycle based on poems by Stefan George that obsessively dissect a love affair in 15 feverish, labile verses. The German baritone Christian Gerhaher, who gave a vulnerable and intense performance of the work in the Park Avenue Armory’s Board of Officers Room on Tuesday, has said that the cycle is “like Christmas, 15 times over.” In a book of conversations published in Germany earlier this year, Mr. Gerhaher notes how Schoenberg creates an entirely new set of colors for every emotional nuance, likening each stanza to a gift to the listener.Mr. Gerhaher’s embrace of this prickly outlier of the song repertory may surprise some of his fans: Together with Gerold Huber, his longtime ally at the piano, he has built a reputation on exquisite readings of the 19th-century standards, with a particular emphasis on Schubert and Schumann. But Tuesday’s recital of works by Haydn, Beethoven, Schoenberg and Berg sought the kinship between the Classical and the Modern.Mr. Gerhaher opened with an entrancing rendition of Beethoven’s “An die Ferne Geliebte,” which showed off his exceptional clarity of diction and careful shadings. In a single line, “Und sein letzter Strahl verglühet” (“And the last ray dies”), he inflected the word “letzter” with quiet longing, added golden brilliance to “Strahl” and allowed “verglühet” to ember softly. In this cycle, nature becomes a sympathetic go-between for two lovers separated by distance, with the forest, clouds and streams carrying the poet’s missives. By contrast, Schoenberg’s “The Book of Hanging Gardens” is situated in a monstrously fertile landscape in which every luscious plant and sinuous animal conspires to heighten the poet’s erotic agony. In both cases, it’s the piano part that charts the topography, and Mr. Huber’s warm and attentive playing brought each to life.Mr. Huber also stole some of the spotlight in Berg’s “Five Orchestral Songs on Postcard Texts by Peter Altenberg,” in which the poet looks “beyond the borders of the universe” for consolation. The piano arrangement maintains much of the watercolor delicacy of the original orchestral score, allowing Mr. Gerhaher’s clear, sometimes painfully fragile voice to skirt the border between singing and speaking.AdvertisementHaydn might seem an unlikely companion for Berg. But in five English songs, Mr. Gerhaher found words, like the alabaster “patience” in “She Never Told Her Love,” that demanded a similar dissolution of the singer’s ego into the very bones of the text.There were plenty of occasions for Mr. Gerhaher’s robust and smooth baritone to shine fully. He brought an outdoorsy vigor bordering on brashness to Haydn’s “Sailor’s Song,” and a plush and supple tone to Beethoven’s “Adelaide.” A single encore, Mozart’s inward “Abendempfindung,” was Mr. Gerhaher’s parting gift.AdvertisementChristian Gerhaher and Gerold Huber repeat the same program on Sunday in Milan and Tuesday in Vienna; christiangerhaher­.com. A version of this review appears in print on November 12, 2015, on Page C2 of the New York edition with the headline: Dissecting a Poetic Love Affair, Feverishly.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.