By JON PARELESNOV. 11, 2015
“Aquaria”(Columbia)Catastrophe and death loom throughout “Aquaria,” the debut album by Boots, a.k.a. the songwriter, singer, rapper, instrumentalist and producer Jordy Asher. Its songs have titles like “Bombs Away,” “Earthquake,” “Gallows” and “Dead Come Running” and lyrics full of rubble, tombs and broken glass. The first words Boots offers on the album, in “Brooklyn Gamma,” are “It ain’t as good as it gets/if you got holes all over your chest.”His music, mostly his own instruments, provides a post-apocalyptic soundscape that’s simultaneously desolate and pressured. In something like a half-remembered, chromatically deformed doo-wop ballad, “Only” (one of two songs that also appeared on his “Motorcycle Jesus” EP this year), the tune might almost be consoling if Boots weren’t singing, “I am the only one alive.”Boots has produced and written songs with Beyoncé and FKA twigs. The beats he builds are low and asymmetrical. But his own songs lean less toward R&B than a broadly defined rock that holds glimpses of the Beatles, Can, Nine Inch Nails, Public Image Ltd. and Radiohead alongside P-Funk, Prince and Outkast. He delivers rhymes as haggard chants, then rises above them to sing in a voice that sounds sleepless and anxious, constantly looking over his shoulder.As a producer, Boots set himself a rigorous limitation on “Aquaria.” There are no more than three instruments heard simultaneously anywhere in the album (though he freely overdubs vocal harmonies). That’s usually a beat, a riff and something for texture: a guitar or a keyboard that drops out when something else arrives. Yet with distortion and reverb applied, three instruments are more than enough to make each song tense and saturated, as if the music is constantly closing in on the singer. The narratives of each song are fractured and inconclusive, but “Aquaria” elapses as an album with a sustained atmosphere of dread, determination and experiment. In the album’s closing song, Boots asks, “Don’t you want to lose it all?”A version of this review appears in print on November 12, 2015, on Page C4 of the New York edition with the headline: Review: ‘Aquaria,’ a Dark Debut Album by Boots.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.