By NATE CHINENSEPT. 30, 2015
SPAREIt’s not all that common to encounter a deep working relationship — an association somehow mutually defining — between a visual artist and a recording artist. Probably the most famous would be Raymond Pettibon and Black Flag, but that was mostly contained within a single decade. The saxophonist-composer Tim Berne and the designer-illustrator Steve Byram have been inextricable since their first collaboration, at Columbia Records, almost 30 years ago. They now share the credit for “Spare,” an expressionist objet d’art, in an edition of 500, available through Mr. Berne’s label, Screwgun (at screwgunrecords.com). The centerpiece is a 100-page spiral-bound book, full of stark letterpress images by Mr. Byram (scribbly, abstract-figurative, surreal) and color digital prints by Mr. Berne (blurry, off-center, shot on the fly). The side dish and complement is a live recording of Mr. Berne’s band, Snakeoil, stretching out in fearless form. With three long tracks, this CD has compositions both recent (“Lamé”) and less so (“Spare Parts”), along with a thrashing long-form opus with a typically wry title, “Deadbeat Beyoncé.”10000So much about the Montreal indie-folk act Emilie & Ogden scans as affectedly twee: the whispery, cotton-candy quality of Emilie Kahn’s singing; the gilded lacework of her harp playing; the fact that Ogden is the model name of her harp. (If you know Emilie & Ogden from an intimate cover of Taylor Swift’s “Style,” from this summer, you can add that to the list.) But “10000,” just out on Secret City, has a steel spine beneath its twinkly exterior. A candy box of poison-pen recriminations, it’s an album whose first lyric, on a track called “Blame,” is: “We were both born in a godless time.” On “What Happened,” Ms. Kahn gets more to the point: “Shaking like a leaf, you’re so afraid/I might find out what you’re made of.” She’ll probably always suffer comparisons to Joanna Newsom, another singing harpist with an album out this month. Ms. Kahn, 24, is less of an obscurantist, and less compelling. But she has a clear point of view, and whatever else happens here — the album’s producer, Jesse Mac Cormack, contributes banjo, guitar, bass and synthesizer — it always boils down to her voice and her instrument, a relationship that’s anything but fickle.A NEW KIND OF DANCEThe Chicago drummer Mike Reed formed People Places & Things eight years ago to mine the midcentury hard-bop heritage of his hometown. That mission held for several albums, before the focus began expanding. “A New Kind of Dance” (482) shows just how broad that view has become, while preserving a band sound. The album’s featured guests, on different tracks, are the pianist Matthew Shipp, a stalwart of the avant-garde, and the trumpeter Marquis Hill, a Chicagoan in the contemporary mainstream. And apart from Mr. Reed’s typically spry originals, the repertory runs from a Bulgarian folk dance to a vintage track by the rapper formerly known as Mos Def to an admiring emulation of South African kwela. Still, the earthy, driving intelligence of Mr. Reed and his crew — notably Greg Ward and Tim Haldeman, who form a saxophonic front line — points back to Chicago jazz culture, which sees no contradiction in heady abstraction with a bodily groove.THE FUTURE SUGARDiego Solórzano of the Mexico City synth-rock band Rey Pila likes to keep his voice at a low, talky simmer with the odd eruptive outburst, as if to make you lean forward before knocking you back. He’s a charismatic frontman who clicks neatly into the band’s grid of shimmering synthesizers, motorik beats and chirpy guitars. “The Future Sugar,” released on Cult Records — the label run by Julian Casablancas, who also joined Chris Coady as producer on the album — positions Rey Pila as a muscle car on the electropop raceway: sleek, rude, precision-tuned. The title track has a New Wave sound and vague lyrics about waiting and withholding, before reaching a blunt, screamed chorus: “Stay away!/Away from me!” Elsewhere the songs dwell modishly on systems of power — two of the peppier tunes are “Surveillance Camera” and “Order Police” — while framing each struggle in personal terms. “All these conversations make me want to go mad,” Mr. Solórzano mutters on “Alexander,” which was first released as a single in 2013. “And go wild,” he clarifies, “For a while.”LOST AT LASTJon Stickley is a guitarist based in Asheville, N.C., and rooted in the flatpicking bluegrass tradition, the quicksilver dialect of Tony Rice and Norman Blake. But in the Jon Stickley Trio, with the fiddler Lyndsay Pruett and the drummer Patrick Armitage, he also bounces around in Gypsy jazz, folk-punk and jam-band territory, tracing a fidgety continuity of style. “Lost at Last,” the trio’s crowd-funded, self-released new album, due out on Tuesday, Oct. 6, has the garrulous flamboyance of some jazz-fusion benchmarks and a slight overeagerness of intent. But there’s hardy cohesion among the players — no less on the Gypsy standard “Valse de Wasso” than on “Darth Radar,” a turbocharged original with a ska upbeat and a shredding melody. And when Mr. Stickley and friends turn to bluegrass, as on “The High Road,” by Tim O’Brien, they sound both respectful and free.A version of this article appears in print on October 4, 2015, on Page AR19 of the New York edition with the headline: Indie-Folk, Folk-Punk and Synth-Rock Pushing Limits.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.