AdvertisementSupported byBy James PoniewozikThe great television resurrection machine has been busy lately. Fox is bringing back “The X-Files” next year. Showtime is reviving “Twin Peaks.” Netflix brought back “Arrested Development,” is making a sequel to the family comedy “Full House” and is reportedly planning the return of “Gilmore Girls.” Death, for a TV show, is an increasingly temporary state, as long as enough mourners are lighting the candles.“Mr. Show With Bob and David,” a cult series throughout its alt-comedy heyday on HBO from 1995 to 1998, might seem an unlikely candidate for revival. But the sketch series had influence much bigger than its audience. It lifted the careers not only of its stars Bob Odenkirk and David Cross but also of the supporting players including Mary Lynn Rajskub and Jack Black. Its intricate absurdist humor now has echoes from prime time to “Portlandia” to Adult Swim. Like Nirvana — if less commercially successful — “Mr. Show” was one of those ’90s artifacts that made alt the default.“W/ Bob & David,” all four episodes of which debut on Netflix on Friday, brings back the series’ hand-tooled comedy (and its title), abbreviated but still bizarrely funny.The opening sketch acknowledges that we’ve all gotten older. Mr. Odenkirk (who since “Mr. Show” has appeared in “Breaking Bad” and “Better Call Saul”) and Mr. Cross (“Arrested Development”) are shown in 1998, finishing their previous show and climbing into a “real-time machine,” which transports them 17 years into the future (and takes 17 years to do it).The duo’s comedy (abetted by returning cast members including John Ennis and Brian Posehn) has aged just fine on the trip. The basic “Mr. Show” structure has survived — each sketch connects with the last through repeated themes or characters, and the end of an episode will sometimes cycle to the beginning, Moebius-strip-style.The series’ new, upgraded title credits have a psychedelic feel, with images of Mr. Odenkirk and Mr. Cross multiplying grotesquely, growing additional heads and limbs. It captures the feeling of their comedy, which is a throwback not just to the 1990s but to the 1960s and ’70s, a blend of surrealism and iconoclasm that resembles an American “Monty Python’s Flying Circus.”Without spoiling the brief season, I found the new sketches polished, if unsurprisingly hit and miss. A variation on a “most dangerous game” human-hunting scenario, like some of the pair’s better sketches, starts with familiarity, then barrels through ridiculousness on the way to brilliance. But a segment with Mr. Cross as the director of a film rationalizing slavery — he prefers “helperism” — drags on uncomfortably long.If the new series feels a bit less distinctive, it’s only in the way of so many ultimately vindicated pioneers: By now, it’s inspired many successors operating on many platforms. The starkest example of how the business of comedy has changed since 1998: You may well have already seen one of the funniest new sketches, a police-harassment tutorial with Mr. Cross and Keegan-Michael Key, on YouTube.Still, if sketch comedy now has more tributaries and more ways to stream, it’s no less fun, in “W/ Bob & David,” to paddle back to the source.Advertisement