AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael CooperIf the death of New York City Opera was tragic, attempts to revive it have sometimes entered the farcical territory of opera buffa: a bidding contest for its name that yielded no sale, a legal battle and a skirmish over a bequest from a patron who died just as the company did.But now, a group that wants to revive the company is trying a different approach: staging an opera. The group, NYCO Renaissance, announced Wednesday that it would mount Puccini’s “Tosca” — the first production City Opera ever did, back in 1944 — Jan. 20-24 at the Rose Theater at Jazz at Lincoln Center, which is in the Time Warner Center at Columbus Circle.“In a tribute to the history of City Opera, it was my idea from the very beginning that the relaunch of City Opera should be with ‘Tosca,’” Michael Capasso, the nascent company’s general director, said in an interview. His concept has changed a bit: The group originally hoped to mount a lavish production by Franco Zeffirelli but now plans to use a historical, more economical one based on the designs Adolf Hohenstein created for the opera’s premiere in 1900 in Rome.The group said that it would field two casts with a mixture of young and more established singers, including the tenor James Valenti and the baritone Carlo Guelfi, for its inaugural production. And it said it was committed to “Tosca” regardless of what happens in bankruptcy court, where it is battling with another group, New Vision for NYC Opera, which also wants to revive City Opera.City Opera shut down and filed for bankruptcy in 2013 and sold off its assets, including musical instruments. Then the two groups began vying to buy its name. The New Vision group, backed by Gene Kaufman, an architect, bid more money, but the board for the bankrupt City Opera said that it favored the bid by NYCO Renaissance, which is backed financially by Roy G. Niederhoffer, an investment manager who had previously served on the City Opera board.This summer the board withdrew its motion to sell the company’s name, saying that it preferred to see the company reorganized, which could make it eligible to receive a multimillion-dollar bequest from Pierre DeMenasce, who died in 2013, just weeks before its bankruptcy.Both suitors come with some baggage. Mr. Capasso’s old opera company, Dicapo Opera Theater, faltered, lost its nonprofit status and still owes money to its musicians — debts Mr. Capasso said he was still paying off. And some of Mr. Kaufman’s proposals were criticized for exaggerating the support he claimed from prominent groups in the opera world.There are potential complications ahead for the “Tosca.” While the Renaissance group’s plan to reorganize the company has the support of the official creditors’ committee, representing people who are owed money in the bankruptcy case, and many musicians in the City Opera orchestra, it does not have the backing of the American Guild of Musical Artists, a union that represents choristers, stage directors, soloists and others. That union supports the New Vision proposal, which calls for performing operas at City Center under the leadership of Robert Lyall, the general and artistic director of New Orleans Opera.Alan S. Gordon, the executive director of the guild, said that he did not intend to enter into a labor agreement with either group until the court decides between them — raising the possibility that Mr. Capasso’s “Tosca” would not have a deal with the union.“We’ll decide at a later point in time whether him producing a nonunion opera endangers our members enough to warrant picketing,” Mr. Gordon said in an interview.The Renaissance group does not plan to do only war horses: It says it will present the premiere of a piece that David Hertzberg, a young composer, wrote for Gotham Chamber Opera — only to see Gotham run out of money this fall and shut down before it paid him his full commission or gave his work its promised premiere. The Renaissance group said that after reading of his troubles, it decided to perform the work — a setting of Wallace Stevens’s “Sunday Morning” for soprano, string nonet and harp — in the late winter or spring.Mr. Hertzberg said in an email that he was excited that his work would be heard in New York after all, calling it “an unexpected and wonderful twist of musical fate.”Mr. Niederhoffer, the chairman of the Renaissance group’s board, said that the group had decided to go ahead with performances even though the court case is pending but held out hope that the case would be settled before the “Tosca” performances in January.“Our board and I believe that there is a need for a second opera company in New York City, that there is a niche — especially with the sad closing of Gotham — because there is no one in between the very small companies that are producing locally and the Metropolitan Opera,” he said. “And there is so much repertoire that needs to be produced, that the audience, we believe, will want to see. And as a result we decided to move forward regardless.”Advertisement