By BRIAN SEIBERTNOV. 11, 2015
The main reason to see Michael Flatley’s “Lord of the Dance: Dangerous Games,” which opened on Tuesday at the Lyric Theater, is to watch Michael Flatley dancing. It’s your last chance. This Irish-American step-dancing star, now 57, has announced that he will retire from performing at the end of this eight-week run. The trouble is, to see Michael Flatley dancing, you have sit through a Michael Flatley show.This has been the problem for 20 years, since he transformed traditional Irish dance into souped-up spectacles. First came “Riverdance,” followed by the original “Lord of the Dance,” productions that conquered the world and sold out stadiums. The current “Lord of the Dance” (created, produced, directed and choreographed by Mr. Flatley) begins with a self-promotional video about defying naysayers to create “the biggest-selling dance show of all times.”Only at the very end of the production does Mr. Flatley briefly appear in person, and that makes for a long wait. But even if he were starring, there would still be a lot to endure. The production is flooded with stock-image videos of unicorns, rainbows, waterfalls and white stallions. There are flaming torches, dry-ice fog banks and explosions.Buried within all that and spread across some 30 numbers is a feint toward drama. The ostensible hero, the Lord of the Dance, loses his prize belt to a cyborg-like Dark Lord and wins it back with the help of a Little Spirit, a small and irritating gymnast who looks as if she were drizzled with glue and then rolled in sequins. A blond good girl fights with a brunette seductress for the hero’s affections, but don’t expect the virgin-whore dichotomy to hold. A distinguishing feature of Mr. Flatley’s universe of clichés is that the good always win by removing more clothing.All of this is indicative of Mr. Flatley’s decades-old rebellion against the prudishness, rules and restraint of traditional Irish dance. He took a genre of ethnic-pride competitions and small spaces (Irish dance lore is full of stories of dancing on doors taken down off their hinges or even on plates), and he blew it up and gave it mass appeal.AdvertisementThe positive side of that transformation is evident from the first entrance of the Lord of the Dance, the handsome James Keegan, bounding across the stage in the Flatley fashion. His terrific footwork, tripling the beat and slipping in extra sounds on the fly, is undeniably exciting. And the mass effect of martial lines of men hammering the floor in unison gives a thrill.AdvertisementBut it’s the same thrill over and over. Every number has the same accelerating shape, the same applause-button ending. Good and bad may face off, but they all dance the same way. Gerard Fahy’s music matches the décor, generally stomping on the beauties of Irish music with over-amplification and crude borrowings from pop power ballads or manipulative movie scores.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Even in the show’s story, technology is both the enemy and the solution. (The Dark Lord is part machine, but there are good robots, too.) There’s little in “Lord of the Dance” that feels truly live. You might as well be watching it on TV.The best dancing, in fact, comes in a video, the one that starts the encore. It’s Mr. Flatley multiplied, three images of him challenge-dancing one another. The sequence could almost be from a Fred Astaire or Gene Kelly movie, and if Mr. Flatley doesn’t approach their imagination and artistry, his charisma is comparable, especially to Kelly’s, selling his dance with self-love. His solo dancing has more variety than the rest of the choreography in the show, more fun. With his feet of world-record-setting speed, he grabs steps from tap dancing, flamenco, whatever he likes — he’s Michael Flatley.Appearing onstage in front of his cast, he does much less, but he presides with a happy, Elvis-in-Vegas swagger. Kissing the girls, shadowboxing, cheerleading and occasionally joining in the dance, he’s a proud paterfamilias, directing attention to the dancers who will continue to populate his productions and follow the career path that he created. “Lord of the Dance” will live on after the Lord of the Dance retires, but something essential will be missing. Elvis will have left the building.“Lord of the Dance: Dangerous Games” continues through Jan. 3 at the Lyric Theater, 213 West 42nd Street; 800-745-3000, ticketmaster.com.A version of this review appears in print on November 12, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: Robots! Unicorns! Rainbows! and Dance.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.