AdvertisementSupported byBy the NumbersBy Stephen HeymanChurches are the original skyscrapers. Their creators were just as obsessed with vertical one-upmanship as the architects of today’s glass and steel monoliths. The cathedral at Ulm, Germany, dates from the Gothic period, but it achieved its current distinction as the world’s tallest church only in 1890, when its spire was extended by 14 feet just so it would outdo the previous title holder, the cathedral in Cologne.Setting a height record probably wasn’t the chief concern of Antoni Gaudí when he began work on his gloriously idiosyncratic masterpiece, the Sagrada Familia, in 1883. Nevertheless, when its tallest tower is finally completed in 2026, for the centennial of Gaudí’s death, the basilica will become the tallest religious structure in Europe, the tallest building in Barcelona and the tallest church in the world.The basilica’s current architect, Jordi Faulí, said late last month that over the next decade the Sagrada Familia would add six new towers and nearly double in height, transforming one of Barcelona’s marquee tourist attractions. Each tower is dedicated to a different religious figure; the highest, “The Tower of Jesus Christ,” will rise 558 feet, or 170 meters, above ground.The extent to which this and previous additions to the Sagrada Familia reflect Gaudí’s original intent has been a matter of dispute. Gaudí spent four decades working on his magnum opus, eventually moving into the unfinished building and begging in the street to help finance its construction. When he died in 1926 only one facade was near completion. Many of Gaudí’s original sketches and models were destroyed in the Spanish Civil War. In the 1950s, architects including Le Corbusier and Mies van der Rohe published a manifesto demanding that construction stop and the unfinished building be turned into a monument.But work has continued, however slowly, and the cranes and scaffolding surrounding the Sagrada Familia have become as much a feature of the basilica as the structure itself . In the 1970s, the so-called Passion towers were added. In 2010, the central nave was completed — before that, the Sagrada Familia didn’t have a functioning roof. Admission fees from more than three million annual visitors are helping to offset construction costs, which Mr. Faulí said had run to €25 million a year. If completed as hoped in 2030, the building will have taken nearly 150 years to finish.Gaudí had always suspected the construction might outlast him. When asked about the time frame, he remarked, “My client is in no hurry.” Advertisement