AdvertisementSupported byBy Farah NayeriLONDON — Shimmying on stage in a slinky banana skirt, the black American performer Josephine Baker enthralled many in the Paris of the 1920s and ’30s. None was more riveted than her fellow expatriate Alexander Calder. He crafted wire sculptures of the chanteuse, with sinuous limbs and spiraling, circular breasts.One such work is “Aztec Josephine Baker” from 1930, a suspended figure that sways gently when approached. It is among the highlights of “Alexander Calder: Performing Sculpture” that opened on Wednesday and runs through April 3 at Tate Modern in London. The largest Calder show ever staged in Britain, it consists of about 100 works spread across 11 galleries. Roughly half have been borrowed from the Calder Foundation in New York, which is run by the artist’s grandson, Alexander S.C. Rower.Tate sees the exhibition as a chance to reconnect people with an artist who, at his death in 1976 at age 78, had come to be critically underappreciated. Calder’s mobiles and stabiles proliferated in public spaces and office blocks, and his colorful designs even appeared on jet planes (Braniff Airways) and race cars (the first BMW “art car”) in the 1970s.As a result, said Achim Borchardt-Hume, Tate’s director of exhibitions who was a co-curator of the show, Calder’s work “didn’t carry a lot of cachet anymore,” and “didn’t feel like it was communicating anything meaningful.”Tate Modern’s ambition is to demonstrate that nearly four decades after his death Calder is an artist in sync with the times. The museum has been hosting performance art on its premises since 2012 in a program sponsored by BMW, and as it prepares to expand next year and devote new spaces to live and performance art, it is presenting Calder as the natural companion to those cutting-edge disciplines.“We work more and more with live art,” Mr. Borchardt-Hume said, “a type of spectatorship where it’s important that viewers are seeing something together in real time. You can only see it that one time, while you’re there, and it’s a shared experience."Calder’s art replicates that experience, Mr. Borchardt-Hume said: “He is the artist who totally embraces the notion that you make the work and it will change its appearance.” Once you’ve seen the mobiles, he added, “you will never see them quite the same way again.”Calder produced a staggering 22,000 documented pieces: wire sculptures, mobiles and stabiles, monumental outdoor sculptures, paintings, works on paper, toys, jewelry, and domestic objects. In documentary films made of him in the 1950s and ’60s, he came across as chirpy and jolly. Mr. Rower, who started the Calder Foundation with the Calder family in 1987 and who has played a key role in the Tate show, remembers a different reality.“My grandfather was a grumpy and surly and very dedicated and very focused person,” Mr. Rower said. “He enjoyed his life and he enjoyed himself, but he wasn’t a fun-loving, goofy kind of person at all.”Calder was born into art. His father, a sculptor, and his mother, a painter, gave him tools as a boy, with which he made toy animals and jewelry for his sister’s dolls. He went on to study mechanical engineering as a young man, but switched to art, publishing a drawing manual (“Animal Sketching”) and producing circus illustrations for a magazine.In 1926, at 28, he moved to Paris, where he was based for seven years. This was an exhilarating time for the artist, as the Tate show demonstrates. Besides crafting miniature animals and circus acrobats — which he animated in his famous performance work “Cirque Calder” (1926-31) — he produced the wire portraits of Baker and of artists in his circle, such as Joan Miró and Fernand Léger.On a 1930 visit to Piet Mondrian’s Paris studio, Calder was so fascinated by the unframed colored rectangles pinned on the wall that he made a leap into abstraction. The Tate exhibition illustrates that dramatic jump, as wire figures suddenly make way for abstract sculptures featuring lines, circles and spheres.Calder then set out on a quest to introduce motion in art. He produced a series of motorized sculptures which Marcel Duchamp promptly dubbed “mobiles.” Several are in the exhibition (though their mechanisms are too fragile to be turned on; small video monitors show them in action). Elsewhere, he suspended moveable elements in front of colored panels to create kinetic paintings. The show presents a roomful of that work.Before long, he transitioned to creating motorless moving sculptures — the mobiles that he is best known for. Tate has a huge room of them, dangling delicately from the ceiling.In a nearby gallery, it also has the towering “Black Widow” (1948), a 3.5-meter mega-mobile that Calder made for the Institute of Architects of Brazil and which has left São Paulo for the first time. The show ends in the early 1950s, when Calder started making motionless sculptures, a strand of his art that the Tate has deliberately ignored because of the exhibition’s emphasis on movement and performance. (A notable absence is “Cirque Calder.” It cannot travel and is on permanent view at the Whitney Museum of American Art in New York.)According to his grandson, Calder worked seven days a week throughout his career. After morning coffee and a soft-boiled egg, he headed straight for his studio, whether in Roxbury, Connecticut or in Saché in France’s Loire Valley. It was “a very silent place, like a sanctuary,” with no music and not a single assistant, Mr. Rower said.The Whitney curator Barbara Haskell said Calder “did do monumental pieces that are ubiquitous all over America in malls and buildings, but the reputation has definitely survived all of that.”“There’s something totally joyous and unpretentious about the work which communicates to people,” she added. “He’s one of the few artists who can sit in both camps: the public and the elite world.” Ms. Haskell credited the Calder Foundation for helping keep the Calder flame alive. “Everyone that does anything with Calder has to go through the foundation,” she said.The foundation is supported predominantly through funds from the family, said Mr. Rower, who is the biggest donor. It has 1,300 works in its collection, 1,100 of which were donated by Calder’s daughter (Mr. Rower’s mother) at her death three years ago. The foundation does sell works on occasion — it sold one this year, Mr. Rower said, for “a couple of million dollars” to a collector whose entire Calder collection is about to go to a museum. (Mr. Rower declined to identify the buyer.) But it does not require art sales to keep it afloat, he said. In addition to making its holdings available to scholars and for exhibitions, the foundation also co-sponsors an artist residency program at Calder’s former house and studio in Saché.Some of those residents were Marina Abramovic, Jaume Plensa and Abraham Cruzvillegas — who has a horticultural installation at Tate Modern as this year’s commissioned artist for the Turbine Hall. Mr. Cruzvillegas said he was a little boy in Mexico City when he discovered Calder’s giant red stabile “The Red Sun” outside Aztec Stadium. He said he learned “playfulness” from the artist, and “transformation — it’s never the same sculpture.”As for Calder’s loss of popularity in the 1970s, Mr. Cruzvillegas said, “it happens to all artists.” He added: “It’s kind of a cycle. Sometimes you are up, and sometimes you are down.”Consequently, he said, “There is no need to rescue Calder. He’s a very big artist.”Advertisement