AdvertisementSupported byThe KnickBy Mike HaleIf the small staff of the Knickerbocker Hospital has its way, there won’t be any diseases left for us to worry about a century later. In Friday night’s episode of “The Knick” alone, John Thackery was zeroing in on the causes of addiction while the former (and presumably future) Knick surgeon Bertie Chickering was about to use radiation to treat his mother’s cancer (based on a tip from Algernon Edwards). In the same spirit of constant innovation, Thackery rigged a telephone for use as a metal detector to find shrapnel in the body of a subway worker — a nurse held the receiver to her ear and when she heard static, Thackery pulled out a nail from deep within the man’s body.The episode also showed us the flip side of that progress: Everett Gallinger’s interest in eugenics, spurred by his hatred of Edwards, was put into practice when he began giving vasectomies to the young Jewish inmates of what its own warden referred to as “the idiot house,” a hospital for “morons.” And Thackery’s search for a cure to addiction went grossly awry, leading him to effectively lobotomize a research subject. (One thing that’s still decidedly premodern: patients’ rights.)The possible pitfalls of rapid modernization and untrammeled capitalism were the subject of the episode’s most dramatic sequence, the aftermath of an explosion at a construction site for the new subway in which Henry Robertson has invested a big chunk of his family’s money, unbeknown to his father. (“I bet you’d feel the prize booby today if I had let you invest in that subway scheme,” Captain Robertson gloated to his son.) The injured were rushed to the Knick, where Thackery, Edwards and Gallinger performed heroics in the operating room — Steven Soderbergh putting two or three patients in the frame at once so that we could see the choreography of doctors and nurses and orderlies. Outside, Lucy Elkins performed triage, proving again that she’s as capable as the surgeons. Edwards, paternalistic despite his own struggles with prejudice, thought that he rather than a nurse should be meeting the patients, but Thackery, the one character never blinded by the times he lives in, told him Elkins was perfectly qualified and ordered him inside.Lucy also pursued her new role as de facto doctor to Ping Wu’s prostitutes, and one of the episode’s more memorable images was a cut to Elkins sitting on a stool, her head hiding Lin-Lin’s crotch from the camera. Discussing her trade, Lin-Lin told the nurse: “When he’s in my hand, I control him. That’s when I can get anything I want.” The line resonated with several other story lines. Herman Barrow’s wife humiliated herself by dressing in lingerie to try to seduce him (telling him, “I know men have needs — for hygienic purposes”) only to have him leave on “business,” which was negotiating his favorite prostitute, Junia, out of her contract with Wu. Henry Robertson, while showing off his new stag film to his friends, continued his more chaste courtship of Elkins.Elsewhere:● Cleary cooked up a scheme to pay other ambulance drivers out of his own pocket for bringing subway victims to the Knick, giving them a below-market rate and profiting later when the hospital paid him in full. He was suckered by Henry Robertson’s guilt and public-relations acumen, however, when Robertson, the subway investor, decided not to charge for any care related to the explosion.● Thackery continued to check up on Abigail as she recovered from his radical treatment of her syphilis, and as he left her house he kissed her, saying, “Sorry, old habit.”● In television’s slowest-moving mystery, Cornelia Robertson finally figured out that the murdered health inspector Speight had been on to cases of bubonic plague.● Opal Edwards made a short appearance, attending a lecture on African-American history and solidarity with an uncomfortable Algernon.● In the episode’s most moving scene, Chickering’s new romantic interest, the journalist Genevieve Everidge, came to dinner at his family’s home, charming his parents (despite her Jewishness) and sitting with his mother, who asked to see the contents of Everidge’s large reporter’s handbag. Linda Emond, in her small role as Mrs. Chickering, has brought the show a large measure of grace and emotion this season.Advertisement