Four women who have accused Bill Cosby of sexually assaulting them, but cannot sue him on grounds directly related to the assault accusations because of the statute of limitations, are suing him for defamation, contending he wrongly allowed his representatives to brand their accounts as fiction.The women, Barbara Bowman, Joan Tarshis, Louisa Moritz and Angela Leslie, on Friday joined a federal defamation lawsuit already brought by three other women in Massachusetts, according to a lawyer in the case, Joseph Cammarata, who filed the amended complaint.  In a separate defamation case, in California, Mr. Cosby won a reprieve when an appellate panel ruled that he does not have to face questioning under oath this month, as had been ordered by a lower court.Mr. Cammarata said the Massachusetts case is based on statements by several of Mr. Cosby’s representatives within the past year, including his former lawyer Martin D. Singer.“This is a way for the women to get their day in court on the sexual abuse issues and attempt to clear their names,” he said. “They opened up a door for the women to go into court that otherwise was closed.”Mr. Cosby, 78, has been accused by dozens of women of sexual assault. With the four women joining the case, he faces allegations of defamation from 10 women in total, in four cases, including one each in California and Pennsylvania, and a second case in Massachusetts that was filed this week. Mr. Cosby has denied all wrongdoing and has never been charged with a crime.The California case was brought by the former supermodel Janice Dickinson who said Mr. Cosby drugged and raped her in 1982. A judge in that case, Debre K. Weintraub of Los Angeles County Superior Court, ruled this month that Mr. Cosby and Mr. Singer could be questioned under oath.But she limited the questioning to whether Mr. Cosby and Mr. Singer knew or should have known that the statements made in Mr. Cosby’s defense were false. Mr. Singer would also have been able to assert objections based on attorney-client privilege.On Thursday an appellate panel granted Mr. Cosby’s request to hold off on the depositions until the matter could be considered further. The court gave no reason for the stay.“Neither Mr. Cosby nor his former counsel will be deposed this month,” said Monique Pressley, a lawyer for Mr. Cosby. Mr. Cosby has also yet to be deposed in the Massachusetts defamation case that the four women have joined. His  lawyers tried to dismiss the suit this fall arguing that, among other things, his representatives were only speaking in his defense when they denied the women’s accusations of assault.But in October the judge in United States District Court for the District of Massachusetts, Mark G. Mastroianni, said the case could go forward. New accusations and lawsuits against Mr. Cosby have surfaced since July, when excerpts from a deposition the entertainer gave in a separate 2005 civil case were made public. That deposition was made in a case brought by Andrea Constand, a Temple University basketball manager who said Mr. Cosby had drugged and molested her.