AdvertisementSupported bySnapshotBy Kathryn ShattuckTalk about fast work. Alexander Fehling went from meeting Claire Danes to moving in with her in just 10 days.“I tested with Claire, just one or two short scenes, but we got along quite well,” Mr. Fehling said. “I was committed to other projects, but I thought, Wow, this is ‘Homeland.’ I’m going there.”As Season 5 begins Sunday on Showtime, two years have passed since Carrie (Ms. Danes) and Quinn (Rupert Friend) caused a collective sigh by locking lips. Fast-forward to Berlin, where, post-C.I.A., she’s living in apparent domestic bliss with her daughter and Jonas Happich (Mr. Fehling), legal counsel to a German philanthropist whose foundation she works for as the head of security. “Everything seems to be good for a short amount of time,” Mr. Fehling said, chuckling. How short? “Pretty short.”The East Berlin-born Mr. Fehling, 34, is perhaps best known to Americans as Master Sergeant Wilhelm, the Wehrmacht soldier and new father in the barroom shootout in Quentin Tarantino’s “Inglourious Basterds.” “Labyrinth of Lies,” the German Oscar contender, which opened here in late September, finds Mr. Fehling as a 1960s Frankfurt prosecutor intent on bringing 22 former Auschwitz officials to trial.How does he feel about having a moment in the United States? “Only the moment knows,” he said in a call from Los Angeles, where he’d come from Berlin to promote the film. These are excerpts from the conversation.Q. So, were you a “Homeland” fan?A.I’d watched until the beginning of the fourth season, and when I got the job I planned to watch the rest. Then I thought, This will be no good for you. As the audience you’re watching from outside, and I had to prepare myself for the opposite, actually — to be inside this.“Homeland” is also your first major television role. How is that?The arc of the characters is something you take for granted in a feature film, because you have the script in front of you. In “Homeland,” I only get a script two or three weeks in advance, so it’s nerve-racking. I never know where Jonas is going to end up. I must be hanging around for a while, because we’re shooting Episode 10 when I get back to Berlin. But I don’t know the outcome of the season — except that it’s pretty weird as we go along.You studied at the prestigious Ernst Busch Academy of Dramatic Arts. Did you slide right in?You’ve got to imagine — they are taking between 20 and 25 students, and sometimes 1,000 people are auditioning. I didn’t get in, which was terrible. Later I realized that when I was on the stage, I was concentrating on showing [everything that] I can do. And this is not interesting. It took me a year to change my perspective on the purpose of an actor. Then it worked out.Do you remember your audition for “Inglourious Basterds”?I was preparing for one scene, but it was a huge script, over 200 pages, and Tarantino said, “Mmm, I can imagine this and this with you” — and he put his finger somewhere and said, “Let’s try this.” And I thought, Oh my God, this is not going well. I didn’t know which scene, which character. It was horrible. But I said to myself, Just do something and show him that you’re not afraid to fail. [Laughs] And that’s what I did. I failed terribly.But you got the part.He was reading opposite me, and finally he said, “Now we’re going to do the scene you prepared.” In the end, he shook my hand and said, “You’re a very talented young actor.” I was flying out of the room.Advertisement