Homeground
Sydney Opera House.
Nov. 21-22.The weekend festival focuses on aboriginal dance and performance from across the world. Several groups, like the Malu Kiai Mura Buai from the Torres Strait Islands off Australia’s north coast, will perform traditional dance. But the contemporary group A Tribe Called Red, from Ottawa, Ontario, specializes in a genre called electric powwow.Tosca
New National Theater.
Nov. 17-29.Puccini’s epic tragedy weaves together the political history of Rome in a love story that centers on the beautiful and doomed singer Tosca. The director Antonello Madau Diaz’s production hews closely to Puccini’s original early 19th-century setting. Elvind Gullberg Jensen of Norway conducts. Maria José Siri plays the title role and Jorge de León plays her lover, Cavaradossi.Jakarta Biennale
Various venues.
Nov. 15-Jan. 17.Around 70 artists and groups from Indonesia and beyond will participate this year. The lineup includes a central exhibition and offshoots around the city. Some of the works on view have a political slant: The group Post-Museum from Singapore will bring the latest installment of its Really Really Free Market series, in which it creates an open-air market offering goods at no cost. Some of the local participants include Jakarta Wasted Artists, a collective that creates video installations that draw on Indonesian pop culture, and the photographer Evelyn Pritt.Alexander Calder: Performing Sculpture
Tate Modern.
Nov. 11- April 3.Alexander Calder (1898-1976) began his career as a portrait artist. A visit to the artist Piet Mondrian’s studio in 1930 changed all that, encouraging him to explore abstraction in his work. This exhibition brings together many of Calder’s major works, with a particular focus on his mobiles, the lightweight, hanging metal sculptures that spin in the air. The show includes about 100 sculptures in all.Bluebeard’s Castle/La Voix Humaine
Palais Garnier.
Nov. 20-Dec. 12.Bela Bartok’s “Bluebeard’s Castle,” a short opera about a murderous nobleman, and Francis Poulenc’s “La Voix Humaine,” a monologue set to music by the filmmaker Jean Cocteau, are appearing together here. The Polish director Krzysztof Warlikowski — known for injecting traditional operas with an edgy, eerie sense of the surreal — directed both productions. Esa-Pekka Salonen of Finland conducts.
Who’s Afraid of Women Photographers?
Musée de l’Orangerie and Musée d’Orsay.
Both through Jan. 24.The two-pronged exhibition explores the history of photography from its beginnings to the middle of the 1900s, especially the role women played in the art form’s early years. The exhibition at the Orangerie focuses on the years 1839 to 1919. The exhibition at the Orsay focuses on the years 1918 to 1945 and includes major figures like Margaret Bourke-White and Dorothea Lange.Various exhibitions
Asian Civilizations Museum.
Ongoing from Nov. 14.This museum dedicated to Asian art and artifacts from antiquity to the present was set to unveil two new wings on Saturday and several permanent and long-term shows are helping to mark the occasion. “Tang Shipwreck” features artifacts from an Arabian dhow that sank in the Java Sea more than 1200 years ago and that was discovered by fishermen in 1998. “The Scholar in Chinese Culture,” meanwhile, uses paintings and engraved artifacts to explore how the academic represented an ideal. Other galleries are presenting exhibitions of contemporary and Islamic art.A selection of arts events taking place across the world in the coming week.Under the Same Sun: Art From Latin America Today
Museo Jumex.
Nov. 19-Feb. 7.Around 40 Latin American artists are on view in this exhibition, which opened in 2014 at the Guggenheim Museum in New York and travels next year to the South London Gallery. Those showing their work include the Cuban conceptual artist Tania Bruguera, whose passport was revoked after she held a protest in a square in Havana (it was returned in July); Carlos Motta, a Colombian artist living in New York whose installations explore the history of sex and gender; and Mariana Castillo Deball, who lives in Berlin and makes installations that incorporate natural materials.Mattia Preti: A Young Man in Post-Caravaggio Rome
Galleria Nazionale d’Arte Antica in Palazzo Corsini.
Through Jan. 18.The painter Mattia Preti, born in 1613 in Taverna, Italy, began his career painting brooding, richly colored secular portraits before turning late in life to religious artwork and frescos. This exhibition focuses on his early work and on his relationship with the work of Caravaggio, who died shortly before Preti was born. The exhibition sets work by other artists, including Caravaggio, alongside Preti’s, offering a look at how his compared with his contemporaries’.International Film Festival of India
Various venues.
Nov. 20-30.“Priyamanasam,” a movie about a Sanskrit poet performed entirely in Sanksrit, will open the Panorama section of this festival. Other Indian movies being screened include “Court,” about a folk singer who must go to court when one of his songs is accused of inspiring a suicide; and “Tender is the Sight,” about a young blind boy who uses sound to navigate the world. Movies from Germany, Israel, Indonesia and beyond will compete for the festival’s top award.