AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn Shattuck Tonight, dear viewer, you can watch superhuman feats: time traveling, pumping endless iron and evicting llamas. Or you can lap up the goo in Daniel Radcliffe and Zoe Kazan’s sugar bomb of a rom-com.What’s Streaming NowW/ BOB & DAVID on Netflix. Bob Odenkirk (“Breaking Bad”) and David Cross (“Arrested Development”) travel 17 years into the future to build on “Mr. Show With Bob and David,” their 1990s HBO cult series, with four new episodes. Topics include human-hunting, and a police-harassment tutorial with Mr. Cross and Keegan-Michael Key that is making the rounds on YouTube. James Poniewozik wrote in The New York Times, “The duo’s comedy (abetted by returning cast members including John Ennis and Brian Posehn) has aged just fine on the trip.” (Image: Mr. Odenkirk)SHAUN THE SHEEP: THE FARMER’S LLAMAS on Amazon. Shaun has come a long way since his supporting bit in Nick Park’s “A Close Shave.” In this half-hour special, Shaun, who also got his own movie last summer, persuades the farmer to buy three llamas at the county fair. But when the newcomers get a little too comfy at Mossy Bottom Farm, it’s up to Shaun to evict them.LIVE FROM LINCOLN CENTER: ACT ONE 9 p.m. on PBS. James Lapine chronicles the life of the playwright Moss Hart, from poor Bronx kid to lion of Broadway. Tony Shalhoub and Santino Fontana share the role, in performances that Ben Brantley, writing in The Times, called “shimmering.”GENERATION IRON (2013) 9 p.m. on ESPN Classic. This documentary follows bodybuilders hoping to win the Mr. Olympia title. Appearances by Arnold Schwarzenegger and Lou Ferrigno recall “Pumping Iron.” Mickey Rourke narrates.WHAT IF (2014) 9 p.m. on Showtime. Daniel Radcliffe is Wallace, a medical school dropout festering in his parents’ attic until Chantry, a whimsical animator (Zoe Kazan), crosses his path. Together they fall in love with “The Princess Bride,” and Wallace thinks they could fall for each other — if only he could extract himself from the friend zone. Adam Driver and Mackenzie Davis play the acidic sidekicks in this sugar bomb of a rom-com. (Image: Mr. Radcliffe)THE KNICK 10 p.m. on Cinemax. A subway explosion fills the Knickerbocker to overflowing capacity. Thackery stumbles into an ideal test case for his latest addiction theory. (Image: Clive Owen, right)REAL TIME WITH BILL MAHER 10 p.m. on HBO. Paul Reiser is a guest. His new film, “Concussion,” deals with football brain injuries. Jay Leno holds court at the round table.Advertisement