AdvertisementSupported byBy Vivien SchweitzerLike other ostensibly “simple” piano works, such as Mozart sonatas and Bach’s two-part inventions, Schumann’s “Kinderszenen” (“Scenes From Childhood”) reveals much in terms of technique and expression. But when Jean-Yves Thibaudet performed it at Carnegie Hall on Wednesday evening, it sounded more like a reminiscence of a humdrum day at the office than a set of tenderly emotive miniatures.The evocations of anxiety and joy in the work reflect Schumann’s tumultuous inner life, the movements conveying childhood whimsy tinged with adult regret. Mr. Thibaudet’s routine performance lacked the sense of yearning and nostalgia that render intimate sections like “Träumerei” (“Dreaming”) and “Der Dichter spricht” (“The Poet Speaks”) so moving, as well as the energy integral to lively movements like “Wichtige Begebenheit” (“An Important Event”).Schumann composed “Kinderszenen” while infatuated with the young pianist and composer Clara Wieck, whom he married in 1840.  He called his turbulent Piano Sonata No. 1 in F-sharp minor, which quotes one of her dances and is full of longing, “a cry from my heart to yours.” Here again, Mr. Thibaudet’s playing seemed detached, his few technical mishaps far less significant than his emotional austerity.As a colorist Mr. Thibaudet proved far more convincing, his deft interpretation of Ravel’s five-piece set “Miroirs” satisfying for its range of hues. In “Oiseaux tristes” (“Sad Birds”) the motifs in the right hand unfolded with graceful nuance; the arpeggios of “Une barque sur l’océan” (“A Ship at Sea”) were imbued with gentle agitation. Mr. Thibaudet switched the order of the final two sections, concluding with the Spanish dance rhythms of “Alborada del gracioso” (“Morning Song of the Jester”) instead of the tonal mist of “La vallée des cloches” (“The Valley of Bells”).The most exquisite moments came in the encores, first an insightful rendition of Brahms’s Intermezzo in A (Op. 118, No. 2) and best of all an introspective reading of Strauss’s arrangement of Schubert’s Waltz in G-flat that concluded the evening with a tenderness absent earlier.Advertisement