AdvertisementSupported byBy Katie RogersNathaniel Marston, a television actor who played two characters in succession on the long-running soap opera “One Life to Live,” the second role after fans waged a write-in campaign to bring him back, died on Tuesday from injuries he sustained in a truck accident in October. He was 40.His mother, Elizabeth Jackson, confirmed his death on Facebook, saying he had been on a ventilator.Mr. Marston was driving near Reno, Nev., on Oct. 30 when his truck drifted across a lane and flipped several times. He was ejected from the vehicle and taken to a hospital. No others were involved in the crash.Mr. Marston gained his widest attention as the character Al Holden on “One Life to Live.” The character, a recovering drug addict who falls in love with a hospital receptionist, Marcie Walsh, was so popular that fans organized a write-in campaign to bring the character (and Mr. Marston) back after he was killed off.Mr. Marston re-emerged, first as Al’s spirit, then as Dr. Michael McBain (who also falls in love with Marcie). He appeared on the show from 2001 to 2007.Earlier he had a prominent role on another soap opera perennial, “As the World Turns,” as Eddie Silva, a troubled figure who discovers that his girlfriend killed his father.In 2007, Mr. Marston was charged with assault and resisting arrest after attacking three men with a crate in a Midtown Manhattan gas station, The Associated Press reported. He pleaded guilty and was ordered to undergo anger-management counseling. After the arrest, ABC replaced him on “One Life to Live.”Mr. Marston was born on July 9, 1975, in Torrington, Conn. According to a biography on his website, he was working at a bakery in Beverly Hills when he was discovered by a talent agent, and went on to find work on the short-lived 1996 television series “Matt Waters” before landing small roles in the films “The Craft” and “Love Is All There Is.”Besides his mother, survivors include his wife, Rita Bias; his stepfather, Ali Martin Birtodaso; a brother and four half-siblings.Advertisement