By MIKE HALENOV. 12, 2015
“Into the Badlands,” a futuristic martial-arts saga beginning on Sunday night, is a perfectly average television show. But it’s on AMC, the cable trendsetter, where average has not been the norm. So it will be judged as the most ordinary drama the channel has picked up, and the most lightweight since the days of “Remember WENN” almost 20 years ago.With “The Walking Dead,” AMC took comic-book material and elevated it, stretched its narrative and thematic limits, for better and for worse. It’s done a similar thing with genre shows like “Rubicon” and “Hell on Wheels.” “Into the Badlands” is a different and more common beast — it’s an original drama conceived in comic-book terms, like most of the shows on channels like TNT or Syfy.And of course it should be taken on its own merits, no matter how out of place it might look on AMC. Created by Al Gough and Miles Millar, who wrote the two episodes available for review, the show is a retro-post-apocalyptic fantasy in which America has returned to a not-quite-preindustrial state. (There’s a family resemblance to the recent NBC show “Revolution.”) The production design incorporates antique cars and phonographs and ornate opium pipes, and despite an agrarian economy — the aristocratic family at the center of the story lives in an old plantation mansion and farms opium poppies — characters wear mod leather jerkins and creamy silk robes that look as if they were bought on Melrose Avenue.The show’s structure is the kind of schematic sci-fi contrivance that requires a glossary. Seven “barons” control the country, employing warriors called “clippers” to protect them from the other barons and from marauding bands of “nomads.” The show’s hero, Sunny (Daniel Wu), is a clipper for a baron named Quinn (Marton Csokas) but is disillusioned after years of service and more than 400 kills. He dreams of escaping to a mythical city outside the Badlands, and an encounter in the pilot with a supernaturally gifted boy may open the door.Advertisement“Into the Badlands” is said to be very loosely based on the classic Chinese tale “Journey to the West,” but its more obvious inspiration is the 1970s TV series “Kung Fu,” about a Chinese monk wandering the Old West. Mr. Millar, in an interview with The New York Times, called the selection of the white actor David Carradine to play the monk “a travesty,” and the casting of Mr. Wu in “Into the Badlands” is in part a redress of that old injustice.What becomes lost in that conversation is that Mr. Carradine was a charismatic actor, whether or not his ethnicity lined up with his character. Mr. Wu, an American actor who has worked mostly in Hong Kong, is likable and projects a wry, self-effacing intelligence, especially in the infrequent moments when the script inches toward humor. He’s not very expressive, though — he moves between troubled and puzzled, without many stops in between. (He’s fine in the elaborate and brutal fight scenes, which are the high points of the show, though the camerawork and editing leave it a little too clear when a double is subbing for him in the more taxing sequences.)AdvertisementIt’s a common problem of post-apocalyptic, scorched-earth series that no one seems quite as fierce or deadly as you would expect them to be. One exception in “Into the Badlands” is the teenage Tilda (Ally Ioannides), a baron’s daughter with a talent for climbing on top of men and snapping their necks. If they made the show about her, I’d definitely stick around.A version of this review appears in print on November 13, 2015, on Page C15 of the New York edition with the headline: Everybody’s Kung Fu Fighting After the Apocalypse Descends.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.