By JOSHUA BARONENOV. 12, 2015
Holiday Train Shows  New York doesn’t take its toy train exhibitions lightly. Three shows provide a chance to immerse yourself in a miniature landscape with vintage locomotives as classic as a Norman Rockwell holiday scene.Already open is the New-York Historical Society’s show, “Holiday Express: Toys and Trains From the Jerni Collection.” Along with toys of yore in a mountainous landscape for trains, the massive display also includes a multimedia installation designed to replicate the feeling of passing trains. Through Feb. 28. 170 Central Park West, at 77th Street, 212-873-3400, nyhistory.org.The New York Transit Museum Annex Gallery opens its annual show at Grand Central Terminal on Saturday. In a winter cityscape about 34 feet long, trains travel through tunnels and subway stops, and past landmarks familiar to tourists and local residents alike. (Above, a view of the 2014 show.) Through Feb. 21. 212-878-0106, web.mta.info/mta/museum; free.The largest of all local train shows opens Nov. 21 at the New York Botanical Garden, with a multisensory finale and 3,000 square feet of exhibition space added this year. Trains make their way through multiple rooms and past New York landmarks (left, a miniature version of the garden) made from natural materials like twigs and pine cones. Through Jan. 18. Bronx River Parkway (Exit 7W) and Fordham Road, the Bronx, 718-817-8700, nybg.org.AdvertisementAmerican Museum of Natural History: ‘Countdown to Zero’ (continuing) Smallpox is the only human disease to have been eradicated, but what about Guinea worm, polio, malaria and others? This exhibition, presented in collaboration with the Carter Center, examines international efforts to control and wipe out infection. Daily from 10 a.m. to 5:45 p.m., Central Park West and 79th Street, 212-769-5200, amnh.org.AdvertisementAmerican Museum of Natural History: ‘The Secret World Inside You’ (continuing) In recent years, the microbiome — the roughly 100 trillion bacteria living inside and on human bodies — has been a popular talking point for science journalism. With ever-evolving research into this mysterious area of study, there’s still plenty left to explore. Now, it’s getting the exhibition treatment in this look at what scientists are learning about the role bacteria plays in health. Central Park West and 79th Street, 212-769-5200, amnh.org.Brookfield Place: ‘Canstruction’ (through Monday) Architects, engineers and contractors came together for this charitable drive that doubles as a design competition. The results are large structures made entirely out of unopened cans of food, as if they were Lego blocks. On view daily from 10 a.m. to 6 p.m., 230 Vesey Street, at West Street, Lower Manhattan, 212-417-2414, newyork.canstruction.org; free.Brooklyn Historical Society: ‘Brooklyn Americans: Hockey’s Forgotten Promise’ (through March 27) The New York Islanders may be new to Brooklyn, but the borough isn’t new to hockey. This exhibition tells the story of its first National Hockey League team, the Brooklyn Americans. The team wore red, white and blue jerseys and represented Kings County at the height of World War II and in the early days of the N.H.L. Still, as the exhibition shows, the team was unsuccessful and ultimately financially doomed. 128 Pierrepont Street, near Clinton Street, Brooklyn Heights, 718-222-4111, brooklynhistory.org.Center for Jewish History: ‘After the War: Recovery, Relief, and Return, 1945-1949’ (through Jan. 15) This exhibition commemorates the 70th anniversary of World War II’s end with a look at its bleak aftermath. Photographs from the International Center of Photography’s Roman Vishniac Archive, as well as artifacts from the American Jewish Historical Society and Leo Baeck Institute, tell the story of how the war led to mass destruction and displacement, and how Europe and the United States moved on toward revitalization. 15 West 16th Street, Flatiron district, 212-294-8301, cjh.org.‘Global Citizen: The Architecture of Moshe Safdie’ (through Jan. 10) This touring exhibition, a retrospective of Mr. Safdie’s career of more than 50 years, makes its way to New York with new material based on the architect’s recent work related to dense urbanism in Asia. Donald Albrecht from the Museum of the City of New York organized the material in this show, which also explores Mr. Safdie’s design philosophy that buildings should be extensions of their physical, historical and cultural contexts. National Academy Museum, 1083 Fifth Avenue, at 89th Street, 212-369-4880, nationalacademy.org.Intrepid Sea, Air & Space Museum: ‘On the Line: Intrepid and the Vietnam War’ (continuing) Visitors familiar with this museum are likely well aware of its flight deck, perhaps even some of its wartime history. During the Vietnam War, the Intrepid served three tours overseas between 1966 and 1969. Now, in an exhibition set in the space where the crew lived and worked, the museum tells their stories with artifacts, film clips and photographs. Pier 86, 46th Street and 12th Avenue, Clinton, 877-957-7447, intrepidmuseum.org.Museum of Chinese in America: ‘Sub Urbanisms: Casino Urbanization, Chinatowns and the Contested American Landscape’ (through Jan. 31) Stephen Fan, an architecture professor and curator, examines the trend of Chinese casino workers in Connecticut converting suburban homes into multifamily communities. This exhibition is both creative and historical; it takes the present to imagine the future of housing design while looking back on the events that created the trend of suburban migration. 215 Centre Street, between Howard and Grand Streets, Lower Manhattan, 212-619-4785, mocanyc.org.AdvertisementMuseum of the City of New York: ‘The New York City Marathon: The Great Race’ (through March 8) At the beginning of the month, more than 50,000 runners made their way through all five boroughs of New York, starting on Staten Island and ending in Central Park. This annual race — a spectacle for anyone watching along the course — began modestly in 1970, with 127 people running laps around Central Park. City Museum’s timely exhibition tells the story of how the New York City Marathon became the world-class race it is today, including photos from amateurs and professionals on display. Fifth Avenue at 103rd Street, 212-534-1672, mcny.org.Museum of the Moving Image: ‘How Cats Took Over the Internet’ (through Jan. 31) Even people who hate cats can’t easily get through an hour of browsing online without coming across some kind of feline clickbait. This exhibition takes a critical look at and tells the story of how we, as a society, got to this point. Yes, there are cat GIFs. 35th Avenue at 37th Street, Astoria, Queens, 718-784-0077, movingimage.us.National Museum of the American Indian: ‘Meryl McMaster: Second Self’ (through Dec. 11) Meryl McMaster, an artist from Canada and a Plains Cree member of the Siksika Nation, shows her “Second Self” photography series, which uses portraiture to explore the complex ways in which identity is constructed. 1 Bowling Green, Lower Manhattan, 212-514-3700, nmai.si.edu; free.New-York Historical Society: ‘Holiday Express: Toys and Trains From the Jerni Collection’ (through Feb. 28) Toys of yore are on view in a mountainous landscape for trains and scene-setting trinkets pegged to the holiday season. This massive display also incorporates theatrical lighting and soundscapes, including a multimedia installation designed to make it feel like the museum’s 77th Street entrance is in the midst of passing trains. 170 Central Park West, at 77th Street, 212-873-3400, nyhistory.org.New-York Historical Society: ‘Superheroes in Gotham’ (through Feb. 21) New York is safe as long as its long roster of comic-book heroes stick around. It’s been this way for nearly a century as these characters have defended the city in books, TV shows, movies, video games — even the Broadway stage. New-York Historical Society’s latest exhibition tells the story of how super heroes became a cultural staple for all ages and media. 170 Central Park West, at 77th Street, 212-873-3400, nyhistory.org.New York Transit Museum: ‘Bringing Back the City’ (continuing) This new exhibition comes three years after Hurricane Sandy took a swipe at the city’s infrastructure. But what of the people who put the pieces back together? “Bringing Back the City” tells the stories of everyday services — like electricity and mass transit — that become extraordinary in times of crisis. Boerum Place, at Schermerhorn Street, Downtown Brooklyn, 718-694-1600, bringingbackthecity.com.Rubin Museum of Art: ‘Sacred Spaces’ (continuing) This exhibition’s premise is a question: What is a sacred space? It could be the museum’s Tibetan Buddhism Shrine Room, an immersive look at a traditional space for prayer and meditation. Or it could be a panoramic vista among the Himalayas. It could even be a video installation about Jain devotional rituals. All are on view in this exploration of veneration and its venues. 150 West 17th Street, Chelsea, 212-620-5000, rubinmuseum.org.‘Sea Level: Five Boroughs at Water’s Edge’ (through Dec. 31) In its first pop-up exhibition for the Seaport Culture District, the American Institute of Architects presents a water’s eye view of the city through photos by Elizabeth Felicella and accompanying essays by Robert Sullivan. The panoramic view of New York starts at New York Harbor and makes its way along the East River, showing the shore of each borough along the way. Center @ the Seaport, 181 Front Street, South Street Seaport, Lower Manhattan, 212-683-0023, cfa.aiany.org.AdvertisementTrinity Wall Street: ‘Blood Mirror’ (through Dec. 1) After decades of banning gay and bisexual men from donating blood, the Food and Drug Administration updated its policy earlier this year to allow them to donate, but only after a year of celibacy, regardless of marital status. In response, the artist Jordan Eagles has gathered nine gay, bisexual and transgender men to donate a pint of blood each for this exhibit: a reflective, 7-foot-tall monolith that cases and preserves their blood in resin. Among the donors is the Rev. John Moody, who has been involved with Trinity for more than 40 years. Broadway at Wall Street, Lower Manhattan, 212-602-0800, trinitywallstreet.org/bloodmirror; free.Barnes & Noble All-American Art Unwind (Saturday) Does this mark the peak of adult coloring books’ popularity? For one day, every Barnes & Noble in the country will host free activities to let adults color their way to relaxation. For example, participants can color Hallmark greeting cards, or take part in creating a digital art mosaic. From noon to 5 p.m., more information is at bnartunwind.com; store locations can be found at stores.barnesandnoble.com; free.Citizen Science at the Garden (Saturday and Sunday) Here’s a chance to get better acquainted with the trees in the New York Botanical Garden’s forest. As part of Fall Forest Weekends, visitors can learn how to identify trees and plants. The goal is to enlist more volunteers for the garden’s Citizen Science program, which tracks the effects of climate change on local trees. From 11 a.m. to 4 p.m., Bronx River Parkway (Exit 7W) and Fordham Road, the Bronx, 718-817-8700, nybg.org.Concerts at One (Thursday) This lunch-hour friendly concert series features Trinity Church’s contemporary music orchestra, Novus NY, and the Sandbox percussion quartet. On the program: John Luther Adams’s “Strange and Sacred Noise,” a program-length work in nine movements that reflect a panorama of Mr. Adams’s native Alaska. The performance also will be streamed on the church’s website. At 1 p.m., Broadway at Wall Street, Lower Manhattan, 212-602-0800, trinitywallstreet.org; free.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Latin American Cultural Week (through Nov. 22) This festival, organized by Pan American Musical Art Research, is back for its 10th year with organizations across the city participating to spread awareness and appreciation of Latin American arts. Events — including dance, music, theater, film, visual art and readings — will take place at various venues in multiple boroughs. A schedule and more information are at lacw.net.‘100 Monologues’ (Monday and Tuesday) This benefit for Performance Space 122 features two nights of selections from Eric Bogosian’s series of monologues, directed by Jo Bonney. The guests actors include Gaby Hoffmann (Amazon’s “Transparent”), Matthew Maher (the play “The Flick”) and Dylan Baker (CBS’s “The Good Wife”); Mr. Bogosian will also perform each night. Videos of the monologues will be posted online following the event. At 8 p.m., The Players Club, 16 Gramercy Park South, at Irving Place, Manhattan, 212-352-3101, ps122.org/100-monologues.Renegade Craft Fair (Saturday and Sunday) Think of this as a real-life Etsy store. More than 225 vendors will get together for this forward-looking holiday market that has a wide array of offerings, including jewelry, decorations and clothing. Food options include lobster mac and cheese, stuffed pretzels and, because of the season, the obligatory spiced cider. From 11 a.m. to 6 p.m., Metropolitan Pavilion, 125 West 18th Street, Chelsea, renegadecraft.com/newyork.Union Square Holiday Market (Thursday through Dec. 24) If you can brave the nearly constant crowd, this can be a one-stop shop for holiday gifting, recognizable by the red- and white-striped tents that take over the park. The pop-up shops include craft vendors, as well as established stores like Strand Book Store. Food (and wintry drink) vendors, like Momofuku’s Milk Bar, are scattered throughout the market grounds as well. East 14th to East 17th Street, Broadway to Fourth Avenue, urbanspacenyc.com/union-square-holiday-market.Videology Presents Movie Trivia (Tuesday) Videology, the Brooklyn bar and cinema, hosts a free film-themed trivia contest every week. The game varies; you will want to know theme songs, facts, quotations (especially ones from Nicolas Cage) and more. The winning team receives a free round of drinks, and there are chances to win drinks each round. At 8:30 p.m., 308 Bedford Avenue, at South First Street, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, 718-782-3468, videologybarandcinema.com.AdvertisementWinter Village at Bryant Park (through March 6) The ice rink is back. Admission is free if you bring your own skates; if you don’t have any, they’re available for rent. Through Jan. 3, the park will also host an open-air market for holiday shopping with about 125 vendors. Avenue of the Americas, at 40th Street, 212-661-6640, wintervillage.org.Celebrating Alvin Ailey (Tuesday) Nearly 60 years ago, Alvin Ailey undeniably changed the landscape of American dance with the birth of his own company and the premiere of the ballet “Blues Suite.” Ahead of the company’s season at New York City Center next month — and the first premiere from the artistic director, Robert Battle, since he took over in 2011 — key players in its history will discuss Ailey’s past and future. Panelists include Mr. Battle; Matthew Rushing, rehearsal director and guest artist; Rachael McLaren, a dancer; and Judith Jamison, the artistic director emeritus, who is celebrating 50 years with the Ailey company this year. After the talk, Mr. Battle will sign copies of his recently published children’s book, “My Story, My Dance: Robert Battle’s Journey to Alvin Ailey.” At 8:15 p.m., 92nd Street Y, 1395 Lexington Avenue, 212-415-5500, 92y.org.Michael Cunningham (Saturday) Michael Cunningham won a Pulitzer Prize for his devastatingly realistic fantasia “The Hours.” His latest work, “In A Wild Swan and Other Tales,” is a collection that includes mythic characters and talismans in fictional worlds. He’ll read from the book as part of the Brooklyn Public Library’s series Gotham: New York City’s Best Writers. At 4 p.m., Dweck Center, Brooklyn Public Library, Grand Army Plaza at Flatbush Avenue and Eastern Parkway, Prospect Park, Brooklyn, 718-230-2198, brooklynpubliclibrary.org/dweck; free.‘Keepin’ It 100: An Evening With Larry Wilmore and the Creative Team of “The Nightly Show” ' (Saturday) Presented as part of the New York Comedy Festival, this panel discussion dives into one of Comedy Central’s newest series, “The Nightly Show,” created by Jon Stewart and hosted by Mr. Wilmore. The talk includes the show’s executive producer, Rory Albanese; the head writer, Robin Thede; and three contributors. At 4 p.m., Paley Center for Media, 25 West 52nd Street, Manhattan, 212-621-6800, paleycenter.org.'“Moby-Dick”: A Marathon Reading’ (Friday and Saturday) As part of its exhibition “Frank Stella: A Retrospective,” the Whitney Museum of American Art presents a full reading of Herman Melville’s classic, which inspired a series of paintings by Stella. Over two days, bold face names in art and entertainment will read the novel in 10-minute shifts. Readers include the comedian Jo Firestone (4:10 p.m. Friday), the novelist Salman Rushdie (11 a.m. Saturday) and the New York Philharmonic’s music director, Alan Gilbert (6:30 p.m. Saturday). Friday from 11 a.m. to 10 p.m., Saturday from 11 a.m. to finish; 99 Gansevoort Street, at Washington Street, 212-570-3600, whitney.org.Out by Ten (Friday) The latest installment in this performance series, produced by the writer Susan Seliger, brings together storytelling and music — all wrapped up before 10 p.m. Guests include three winners of the Moth’s storytelling GrandSlam: Jeff Simmermon, Sandi Marx and Drew Prochaska. Music comes from Walter Parks, a former guitarist for Richie Havens. At 8 p.m., John Strasberg Studios, 555 Eighth Avenue, at 38th Street, Midtown West, outbyten.com.Pushcart Prize 40th Anniversary (Friday) To celebrate this prize’s 40th anniversary and the release of the collection “Pushcart Prize XL: Best of the Small Presses 2016,” literary heavyweights are getting together for an evening of readings. Among the guests are the novelists Zadie Smith, Colum McCann and Ben Marcus; and the poets Mary Karr, also famous as a memoirist, and Sharon Olds. At 7 p.m., Village Community School, 272 West 10th Street, between Greenwich and Washington Streets, West Village, writerstudio.com.Brian Seibert (Thursday) Mr. Seibert, a freelance dance critic for The New York Times, celebrates his first book, “What the Eye Hears: A History of Tap Dancing.” The title speaks for the premise: a rich timeline of this American dance style, from a hybrid of jig and clog dancing brought to North America by African slaves to present-day associations with Broadway and Hollywood. The history of tap, the book argues, is central to the history of American popular culture. At 7 p.m., Powerhouse Arena, 37 Main Street, near Water Street, Dumbo, Brooklyn, 718-666-3049, powerhousearena.com.AdvertisementSelected Shorts (Wednesday) The 150th-anniversary celebrations for “Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland” are not over yet. The latest installment in the festivities, as well as the Selected Shorts series, is this collection of readings from — or inspired by — Lewis Carroll’s classic story. Hosted by the actor B.D. Wong, the evening includes guests like the novelist Joyce Carol Oates, Dan Stevens (“Downton Abbey”), Ari Graynor (“Whip It”) and Linda Lavin (“Alice”). At 7:30 p.m., Symphony Space, 2537 Broadway, at 95th Street, 212-864-5400, symphonyspace.org.Long Island City Tours: Queens Cool Uncovered (Sunday) The idea behind this tour is that Queens is due for more attention, starting with Long Island City. The tour includes highlights of the neighborhood’s history and arts scene, with stops at galleries and crafts and food vendors. The meeting location is given at registration. At 1:30 p.m., 212-209-3370, bqetours.com.America’s Museum: Art and History of the Metropolitan (Saturday) Art history doctoral candidates lead this tour of one of the country’s most popular, prestigious museums. Highlights include classic artworks, as well as anecdotes from New York’s cultural history — and the story of the museum’s only benefactor to have been eaten by cannibals. At 11 a.m., meeting in front of the Duke Semans Mansion, 1009 Fifth Avenue, at East 82nd Street, Upper East Side, 888-606-9255, bigonion.com.Flatiron District Walking Tour (Sunday) This free tour meets at 11 a.m. on the southwest corner of Madison Square Park, at 23rd Street and Broadway, in front of the William Seward statue. Sponsored by the Flatiron/23rd Street Partnership; discoverflatiron.org.History of Wall Street Tour (weekdays) Stops on this tour, led by Wall Street Walks, include the New York Stock Exchange, Trinity Church, the Wall Street Bull, and ground zero and the Sept. 11 memorial. The tours last 90 minutes and begin at 11 a.m. and 1:30 p.m. (Also at 3 p.m. on Tuesdays and Fridays.) More details: wallstreetwalks.com.Kosher Williamsburg (Sunday) This walking tour promises snacks that won’t fall into clichés of Williamsburg hispterdom. Rather, it highlights the food and traditions of the neighborhood: chocolates, kugel, blintzes, to name a few. The tour meets at noon in front of L’Chaim Kosher Wines and Spirits, 348 Roebling Street, between South Ninth Street and Division Avenue in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, 212-222-2243, noshwalks.com.Mark Twain’s New York (Saturday) Peter Salwen, a writer and Mark Twain expert, leads this 90-minute tour of the author’s downtown haunts. Highlights include Twain’s early 20th-century homes in Greenwich Village and the places that fit into key moments of his biography, such as where he met his wife in 1867 and where he lived when he published his first novel. At 1 p.m., beginning at 500 Broadway, between Broome and Spring Streets, SoHo, 917-620-5371, marktwainsnewyork.com. (Rain date is on Sunday.)Save the Village (Saturday and Tuesday) Last year the Steven Kasher Gallery in Chelsea put on an exhibition with the photography of Fred W. McDarrah, who documented the changing scene of Greenwich Village since the 1960s. Now, the spirit of that show has taken the form of this walking tour, which includes stops at the places McDarrah captured on film: locales like Washington Square Park and the Stonewall Inn. At 10 a.m.; the tour meets at Christopher Park, Stonewall Place, at Seventh Avenue, West Village, savethevillagetours.com.A Taste of Jewish New York: Borough Park Tour (Sunday) Participants in this tour will get an insider’s look at the customs of the Hasidic residents of Borough Park, Brooklyn. Highlights include a stop at a lively shopping area and the chance to try a variety of traditional foods. Modest attire is requested — no shorts, low necklines or sleeveless clothing. The tour meets at 9:45 a.m. at Fort Hamilton Parkway and 44th Street; 718-339-2302, timelinetouring.com.AdvertisementUnion Square: Crossroads of New York (Saturday) Sponsored by the Union Square Partnership, this free year-round tour focuses on the area’s political and social histories. The walk, led by guides from Big Onion Walking Tours, meets at 2 p.m. by the statue of Lincoln in Union Square Park, near the 16th Street transverse. 212-517-1826, unionsquarenyc.org.Information on events for possible inclusion in Spare Times should be sent to weekend@nytimes­.com by Friday at 5 p.m. for publication that week. Longer versions of Around Town and For Children listings are in a searchable guide at nytimes­.com­/events.A version of this schedule appears in print on November 13, 2015, on Page C32 of the New York edition with the headline: The Listings: Spare Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.