By LAUREL GRAEBERNOV. 12, 2015
You can meet all kinds of people at a book festival. Just consider Roy Sullivan and Mary Fields.Mr. Sullivan, a park ranger who was struck by lightning seven separate times (and survived) and Miss Fields, a.k.a. Stagecoach Mary, the first African-American woman to carry mail in the United States (she did it in the Wild West), are in “Extraordinary People: A Semi-Comprehensive Guide to Some of the World’s Most Fascinating Individuals,” one of the titles to be highlighted at the Children’s Book Fair on Saturday at the Brooklyn Museum. While you can’t say hello to either — they’re dead — you can come face to face with Michael Hearst, the author who, with the illustrator Aaron Scamihorn, has brought them to life on the page and will do so again at the fair.He “told us he could bring some music to his sharing of his title,” said Sallie Stutz, the fair’s founder. So Mr. Hearst will arrive with a guitar and original — and, it is hoped, extraordinary — songs based on his subjects.Interacting with the people behind the books is the purpose of the annual fair (above, past visitors), which focuses exclusively on Brooklyn authors and illustrators and strives for what Ms. Stutz, the museum’s vice director for merchandising, called a “sense of intimacy.”“I think when it gets too big, it loses some of its friendliness,” said Ms. Stutz, who wants children to be able to stop at the tables of all the participants — this year, about 35 — where they’ll often find related activities and crafts.AdvertisementIn addition to Mr. Hearst, whose new book is for tweens, the fair will offer readings for younger children by the authors Julia Sarcone-Roach (“The Bear Ate Your Sandwich”), Abby Hanlon (“Dory and the Real True Friend”) and Scott Menchin (“Grandma in Blue With Red Hat”).This year the fair will also feature demonstrations focused primarily on drawing. Tad Hills, creator of the Duck & Goose books, and Aaron Meshon, who recently published “Tools Rule!,” are both author-illustrators. They may invite children to work with them at their easels, “and they’re also going to provide some blank printouts of their illustrations in a large format that children can color,” Ms. Stutz said.She added that while she enjoyed seeing young readers take home books, “I think it’s so much more valuable for them to see who wrote the book and who drew the picture that they love. That’s what amazes me.”Advertisement(Noon to 4 p.m., Rubin Pavilion, 200 Eastern Parkway, at Prospect Park, 718-638-5000, brooklynmuseum.org.)‘Alice in Wonderland’ (Saturday and Sunday) Literally Alive Theater, which adapts books into children’s productions, has followed the White Rabbit to Greenwich Village, where it has revived this musical — using video projections and over 30 instruments — based on Alice’s adventures. Written by Michael Sgouros and Brenda Bell, the show, closing this weekend, is preceded by a workshop in which young theatergoers learn about Lewis Carroll’s work and make a story-related craft to take home. Saturday at 11 a.m. and 3 p.m.; Sunday at 11 a.m.; workshop one hour before the performance. Players Theater, 115 Macdougal Street, at Minetta Lane, 212-352-3101, literallyalive.com.‘Alvin and the Chipmunks: The Musical’ (Saturday) Those little rodent falsettos never performed at Woodstock, but that doesn’t prevent them from devoting their all to saving the site of that famous event. This new interactive stage musical pits them against a villainous former music executive who has his own designs on the property. Including a food fight and a pillow fight that are said to engage the audience, this touring show will feature the Chipmunks and the Chipettes performing hits by stars that include Carly Rae Jepsen, One Direction, Maroon 5 and Elvis Presley. At 2:30 p.m. (doors open at 1:30), Kings Theater, 1027 Flatbush Avenue, near Tilden Avenue, Flatbush, Brooklyn, 800-745-3000, kingstheatre.com.‘Archaeology Zone: Discovering Treasures From Playgrounds to Palaces’ (Continuing) Children will step into the shoes of an explorer like Indiana Jones in this permanent exhibition at the Jewish Museum, but the adventures will be purely scholarly. Still, there is plenty of excitement in analyzing Middle Eastern artifacts like a jar handle, a clay jug and a bangle and figuring out the purpose behind ancient pieces like a Greek helmet and a bull-shaped vessel. This interactive show, for ages 3 to 10, also includes a recreated room from the Ottoman period (around 1900) where young archaeologists can dress in costume and portray early-20th-century immigrants to Palestine. 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92nd Street, 212-423-3200, thejewishmuseum.org.‘The Berenstain Bears Live In Family Matters the Musical’ (Saturday) The most famous bears since the three in the Goldilocks story are onstage in this adaptation of three titles in the long-running children’s book series by Stan and Jan Berenstain. The show, by Michael Borton and Michael Slade, which has been playing for years, now comes to the TriBeCa Performing Arts Center, where it offers a pleasant hour for small theatergoers, with a pop-flavored score. But like the books, it’s rather tame and tidy; after this many years of a formula, even the Berenstain cubs are starting to show their age. At 1:30 p.m., Borough of Manhattan Community College, 199 Chambers Street, near Greenwich Street, 212-220-1460, tribecapac.org.Black Violin (Saturday) Imagine a hip-hop adaptation of Bach’s “Brandenburg” Concerto No. 3. Wilner Baptiste, known as Wil B, a violist, and Kevin Marcus Sylvester, a.k.a. Kev Marcus, a violinist, have. Calling their duo Black Violin, these classically trained musicians combine the brashness and beats of hip-hop with the soaring lines and fleet finger work of orchestral virtuosos. Recommended for ages 8 and older, this family concert may forever change your mind about musical categories. At 2 p.m., Brooklyn Center for the Performing Arts, Brooklyn College, Flatbush and Nostrand Avenues, Flatbush, Brooklyn, 718-951-4500, brooklyncenter.org.‘Brooklyn Sewers: What’s Up Down There?’ (Through May 29) When it comes to subterranean infrastructure projects, New York City’s subway system seems to get all the attention. But a group of teenage curators at the Brooklyn Historical Society would like to introduce you to another underground marvel: Brooklyn’s sewer system, one of the city’s oldest and most extensive infrastructure projects. This exhibition explores engineering conundrums and courtroom battles and tells the story of the sewer system through photographs, drawings and maps. 128 Pierrepont Street, near Clinton Street, Brooklyn Heights, 718-222-4111, brooklynhistory.org.‘Brigadoon’ (Friday through Sunday) Break out the bagpipes and the kilts. The St. Jean’s Players are reviving this 1947 family musical, the first big hit from the classic writing team of Alan Jay Lerner and Frederick Loewe. The plot revolves around the unexpected encounter of two 20th-century New Yorkers with Brigadoon, a wholesome 18th-century Scottish town that comes to life for just one day every 100 years. (Through Nov. 22) Fridays and Saturdays at 8 p.m.; Sundays at 3 p.m.; St. Jean Baptiste High School Auditorium, 167 East 75th Street, Manhattan, 212-868-4444, smarttix.com.Advertisement‘Connected Worlds’ (continuing) Human choices and actions have an impact on the world’s ecosystems, but people usually can’t see the effects as they happen. That isn’t true in this new permanent exhibition in the renovated Great Hall of the New York Hall of Science. Consisting of huge screens (one is 38 feet tall), the show depicts six interconnected environments with a shared water supply. With the help of technology that responds to gestures, “Connected Worlds” allows children to use simple motions to plant, harvest, cut trees, create clouds and make other changes in the projected landscapes — and see how the native flora and fauna fare. 47-01 111th Street, Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, Queens, 718-699-0005, nysci.org.‘Disney on Ice Celebrates 100 Years of Magic’ (Friday through Sunday) What better place to enjoy the characters of “Frozen” than on an ice rink? But Anna, Elsa and Olaf aren’t the only Disney folk now gliding across the arena at the Barclays Center. This skating extravaganza also features scenes from movies like “Toy Story,” “The Lion King,” “Finding Nemo” and “Beauty and the Beast,” along with more than 30 songs that young audience members can join in on. (The show also plays at the Prudential Center in Newark from Wednesday through Nov. 22.) Friday at 7 p.m.; Saturday at 11 a.m. and 3 and 7 p.m.; Sunday at 1 and 5 p.m.; Barclays Center, 620 Atlantic Avenue, at Flatbush Avenue, Brooklyn, 800-745-3000, barclayscenter.com; ticketmaster.com.‘Fantasia’ 75th Anniversary Screenings (Friday) What do you get when you combine cartoons with classical music? In 1940 this unusual marriage produced “Fantasia,” a much-loved film in which Walt Disney animators paired Stravinsky’s “The Rite of Spring” with the history of evolution and Ponchielli’s “Dance of the Hours” with a cinematic ballet enacted by wild animals. The most famous highlight, of course, is Mickey Mouse’s star turn as the title character in a dramatization of Paul Dukas’s “The Sorcerer’s Apprentice.” In honor of the movie’s 75th anniversary, Symphony Space is screening it along with a segment in which Yannik Nezet-Seguin, the music director of the Philadelphia Orchestra, leads that ensemble and discusses its participation in the film under the baton of Leopold Stokowski. At 7 p.m., Peter Jay Sharp Theater, 2537 Broadway, at 95th Street, 212-864-5400, symphonyspace.org.‘Flight School the Musical’ (Sunday) If you want to fly, and you’re a bird, you should be all set, right? Well, not if you happen to be a penguin. That’s the challenge confronting the little hero of this new musical from Vital Theater Company, adapted from “Flight School,” a picture book by Lita Judge. With a script by Cara Lustik, lyrics by Joshua H. Cohen and a score by David Mallamud, the show is reopening at a new theater. Recommended for ages 2 through 7, it chronicles Penguin’s determination to remove the technical obstacles between him and the sky. (Through Dec. 6.) At 11 a.m., Theater at Blessed Sacrament, 152 West 71st Street, Manhattan, 212-579-0528, vitaltheatre.org.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.‘Frolic!’ at the Children’s Museum of Manhattan (Through Dec. 31) You’re never too young to rock — and this space proves it. A new pop-up installation at the museum, “Frolic!” uses rock music and a themed décor to stimulate sensory play and learning in visitors ages 5 and under. In addition to a stage, a pretend ticket booth and ’70s-style props — including a Volkswagen mini-van to climb into — the 1,500-square-foot area has programs of workshops and live performances to help little ones get into the groove. The Tisch Building, 212 West 83rd Street, 212-721-1223, cmom.org.‘The Gazillion Bubble Show: The Next Generation’ (Friday through Sunday) Children love bubbles, and this interactive show promises not just a gazillion but also some of the largest ever blown, along with light effects and lasers. The stars are the members of the Yang family: Fan and Ana Yang and their son Deni and others, who rotate as M.C.s for the production. Audience members may even find themselves in bubbles of their own. (The run is open-ended.) Fridays at 7 p.m.; Saturdays at 11 a.m. and 2 and 4:30 p.m.; Sundays at noon and 3 p.m.; 340 West 50th Street, Clinton, 212-239-6200, gazillionbubbleshow.com.‘The Hunger Games: The Exhibition’ (Through Jan. 3) What enterprising 12- or 13-year-old wouldn’t like to foment a little rebellion? Such a visitor can do so vicariously at this attraction at Discovery Times Square, stepping into the role of Katniss Everdeen, the teenage heroine of “The Hunger Games” and the ultimate leader of the resistance against her nation’s totalitarian government. Based on the Lionsgate film adaptations of Suzanne Collins’s novels, the show includes costumes and artifacts from the movies, as well as re-creations of Katniss’s journey and interactive, role-playing elements like a gamesmaker’s table and a chance to learn and practice stunt choreography. 226 West 44th Street, Manhattan, 866-987-9692, discoverytsx.com, thehungergamesexhibition.com.‘If You Lived Here, You’d Be Home’ (Through Jan. 17) Maps present facts, but they can also engage the imagination. This new exhibition at the Children’s Museum of the Arts explores the intersection of cartography and art, showing work that expands upon, redefines or simply refers to maps. Among the eight artists represented are Matthew Cusik, who makes collages from map fragments; Joyce Kosloff, who layers images and textured paint onto maps; Loren Munk, who adds plaques of color and information to street maps; and Nikki Rosato, who subtracts from maps, cutting away all but roads and rivers. In the museum’s Cynthia C. Wainwright Gallery, 103 Charlton Street, between Hudson and Greenwich Streets, South Village, 212-274-0986, cmany.org.‘Jean-Michel Cousteau’s Secret Ocean’ (Through Jan. 10) Ever encounter a goby or a blenny? How about a Christmas tree worm? These small marine species, often unnoticed and uncelebrated, are among the stars of this new Imax movie at the American Museum of Natural History. Filmed by Jean-Michel Cousteau, son of the ocean explorer Jacques Cousteau, and Holly Lohuis, a marine biologist, the film captures 30 species that are among the tiniest to inhabit the seas. Hourly from 10:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., with 2-D screenings at 11:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m.; all other screenings are 3-D. Central Park West and 79th Street, 212-769-5200, amnh.org.Advertisement‘The King of Chelm’ (Saturday and Sunday) What happens when you cross the comic-book universe with the shtetls of Jewish folklore? In this musical from the National Yiddish Theater Folksbiene and Lost & Found Project, a boy named Aaron, who longs to be a superhero, wakes up one day in Chelm, the fictional Polish village known for its foolishness. Written by Boris Zilberman, with music by Dmitri Slepovitch, and based on the work of the Soviet poet Ovsey Driz, the show charts Aaron’s investigation of what it means to be a hero. Each performance is followed by a 30-minute audience workshop. Saturday, Sunday, Nov. 21 and Nov. 29 at 1 p.m., Kraine Theater, 85 East Fourth Street, East Village, eventbrite.com or mjhnyc.org/chelm. (Sunday’s show is sold out.)‘LARD: Life’s a Real Dream’ (Saturday) This show about LARD, the concept, has nothing to do with lard, the substance. An acronym for “Life’s a Real Dream,” “LARD” is the title of a rollicking musical production starring Lard Dog, who also happens not to be a dog. The alter ego of the multimedia artist Steven Erdman, Lard is a gregarious out-of-this-world character who has flown in from the planet Belopio on a giant pretzel. He and his Band of Shy perform this hourlong entertainment, which includes cartoon graphics and a pretzel toss. (Through Jan. 2) Saturdays at 11 a.m., 13th Street Repertory Theater, 50 West 13th Street, Greenwich Village, houseoflard.com.‘The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe’ (Saturday) If the children of the Pevensie family could travel to the magical land of Narnia through something as simple as a wardrobe, why shouldn’t two hard-working actors be able to play them and all the characters found there? That’s what Chris Boerner and Erin Layton are attempting in the Off Broadway Family Theater’s first production, le Clanché du Rand’s adaptation of C. S. Lewis’s classic novel. (The run is open-ended and continues on Saturdays.) At 11 a.m., St. Luke’s Theater, 308 West 46th Street, Clinton, 212-239-6200, narniaoffbroadway.com.‘The Magical World of Strega Nona’: Tomie dePaola in Conversation With Maria Russo (Saturday) Strega Nona’s caldron may bubble and bubble, but she never devotes toil and trouble to anything evil. In fact, she’s probably just boiling pasta. An elderly Italian sorceress invented by the award-winning author and illustrator Tomie dePaola, Strega Nona uses her magical powers only for good. At this event at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, which celebrates the 40th anniversary of the first Strega Nona book, Mr. dePaola, 81, will discuss the character and his own ingredients for success with Maria Russo, children’s books editor of The New York Times Book Review. He will also read a Strega Nona story and sign books for young fans. At 1 p.m., BAMcafé, 30 Lafayette Avenue, at Ashland Place, Fort Greene, 718-636-4100, bam.org.Music in Motion (Saturday) That motion is the gentle rocking of a boat for this series of family neighborhood concerts presented by Bargemusic, the floating barge at the foot of the Brooklyn Bridge. As always, the material — announced just before the performance — is chamber music, but these programs differ in important ways from the regular Bargemusic fare: With unreserved seating, they last only an hour, include a post-show question-and-answer session with the musicians and are free. (Through Nov. 28) At 4 p.m. (doors open at 3:45), Fulton Ferry Landing, next to the Brooklyn Bridge, Brooklyn, 800-838-3006, bargemusic.org.‘NYC & Me: A Little Bite of the Big Apple’ (Through Jan. 18) There’s one place where little citizens can safely run loose on the streets of New York: the Children’s Museum of Manhattan. This new interactive 3,000-square-foot gallery is a city microcosm for small visitors, allowing them to pretend to be taxi drivers, bus drivers, construction workers, street performers and, most impressively, the mayor. Activities include directing traffic, erecting a skyscraper, “ice skating” in their socks and investigating urban tales on the steps of the New York Public Library. The Tisch Building, 212 West 83rd Street, 212-721-1223, cmom.org.‘The Power of Pictures’ Family Day (Sunday) Fun will come with a Russian accent in this program at the Jewish Museum, held in conjunction with the exhibition “The Power of Pictures: Early Soviet Photography, Early Soviet Film.” Families can take spotlight tours of the show — in either Russian or English — that focus on the powerful imagery often used as Communist propaganda. Art workshops inspired by the exhibition will include making collage posters, pop-up books and found-object sun prints. Children can also enjoy two concerts by Lyagushki, a band that performs both classic Russian songs and original pop. From noon to 4 p.m., 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92nd Street, 212-423-3337, thejewishmuseum.org.Justin Roberts … Unplugged! (Saturday) Mr. Roberts, once the leader of the indie band Pimentos for Gus, as well as a former Montessori preschool teacher, is now putting his professional talents to use by performing music for the youngest rockers — work that has earned him two Grammy Award nominations. This concert, part of the Just Kidding series at Symphony Space, will feature him and just two members of his band — the Not Ready for Naptime Players — performing acoustical arrangements of their hits. At 11 a.m., Peter Jay Sharp Theater, 2537 Broadway, at 95th Street, 212-864-5400, symphonyspace.org.Advertisement‘A Taste of Magic’ (Saturday) Would you like a side of sleight of hand with that burger? This show, developed by Magnets, a collective of local magicians, brings wizardry to the dinner table. Taking place at various restaurants, the presentation includes acts like mind reading and card tricks, which professionals perform close-up for guests; there’s also a cabaret-style show. And the admission price includes a full meal. (Through Dec. 19) At 8 p.m., Ben & Jack’s Steakhouse, 225 Fifth Avenue, between 28th and 29th Streets, atasteofmagicnyc.com.‘The Three Bears Holiday Bash’ (Friday through Thursday) There’s no word on whether Goldilocks is invited to this seasonal celebration, but Santa Claus definitely is. An annual production from the Swedish Cottage Marionette Theater, this puppet musical centers on a variety show put on by the Bears, in which Baby Bear asks Santa to star. (Through Dec. 30.) The fun draws on Hanukkah and Kwanzaa, as well as on Christmas. Weekdays at 10:30 a.m. and noon, with an additional 2:30 p.m. performance on Wednesday; weekends at 1 p.m.; Swedish Cottage, 79th Street and the West Drive, Central Park, 212-988-9093, cityparksfoundation.org. Reservations required; some shows are sold out.Tinkerbell Theater (Saturday and Sunday) Despite the title, don’t expect to see Peter Pan. This double bill at the Workshop Theater, closing this weekend, consists of “Cinderella” and “The Tinderbox,” presented in repertory by Frog and Peach Theater Company. Both adaptations are written and directed by Lynnea Benson, who has reimagined these classic tales: Cinderella plays Crazy Eights and discusses ornithology with the Prince, and “The Tinderbox,” about a soldier who wins a princess’s heart with the help of the object of the title, has as much humor as drama. Soft puppets play the villains in both pieces, which include songs by Ted Zurkowski and are followed by a puppet-making workshop; each theatergoer should bring an old sock, or parents can buy an optional puppet kit for $10. “Cinderella” at noon; “The Tinderbox” at 1 p.m.; 312 West 36th Street, fourth floor, Manhattan, 212-868-4444, frogandpeachtheatre.org.‘A Voyage Through Jewish History’ (Continuing) This journey involves not just miles, but years. In this permanent interactive exhibition at the Jewish Children’s Museum, young visitors can travel from Abraham and Sarah’s tent to the Western Wall in contemporary Jerusalem and beyond. Activities along the way include giving water to Rebecca’s camels, playing the strings on David’s harp (a high-tech version with beams of light that emit sounds when struck) and taking part in the exodus from Egypt. This Sunday also includes a Syrian art workshop in which children, inspired by the metalwork in the current exhibition “The Lost Art of Damascus,” will make lanterns patterned after those created by artisans in Damascus’s Jewish community. 792 Eastern Parkway, at Kingston Avenue, Crown Heights, Brooklyn, 718-907-8833, jcm.museum.Wallpaper Family Day (Sunday) Wallpaper can tell a story as much as any other picture. The artist Talia Greene has used the motifs on the walls of the Morris-Jumel Mansion, Manhattan’s oldest house (1765), to create “Passage,” a wallpaper and cut-paper installation there that weaves her own tale about the borough’s urbanization. At this celebration, children will draw inspiration from her work and create their own vibrant, fall-patterned wallpaper prints. From 11 a.m. to 1 p.m., 65 Jumel Terrace, between 160th and 162nd Streets, Washington Heights, 212-923-8008, morrisjumel.org. Registration is required via phone or an email to marketing@morrisjumel.org.A version of this schedule appears in print on November 13, 2015, on Page C32 of the New York edition with the headline: The Listings: For Children.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.