AdvertisementSupported byFull reviews of recent dance performances: nytimes.com/dance. A searchable guide to these and other performances is at nytimes.com/events.★ Kyle Abraham (through Sunday) Music is a generous muse for Mr. Abraham, who creates evocative contemporary work from sounds that span decades. He’s had a long and interesting dialogue with jazz, a recent highlight of which is “The Gettin’,” set to music by the Grammy winner Robert Glasper and inspired by Max Roach’s protest album “We Insist!” That work returns on a program that also includes “Absent Matter,” created with the jazz drummer Otis Brown III, and “The Quiet Dance,” a short quintet accompanied by jazz piano, played live. Friday at 8 p.m., Saturday at 2 and 8 p.m., Sunday at 2 p.m., Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-242-0800, joyce.org. (Brian Schaefer)Lizt Alfonso Dance Cuba (Friday through Nov. 29) Dance exports from Cuba tend to portray the island in cheerful, apolitical terms, and Ms. Alfonso’s “Cuba Vibra,” performed by her company of two dozen musicians and dancers, is no exception. This energetic show at the family-oriented New Victory Theater, appropriate for ages 6 and up, packs five decades of Cuban dance history into 95 minutes. The synchronized precision of the Rockettes meets the flair of flamenco and salsa. Friday at 7 p.m., Saturday at 2 and 7 p.m., Sunday at noon and 5 p.m., with an additional 2 p.m. performance Nov. 27, 209 West 42nd Street, 10th floor, Manhattan, 646-223-3010, newvictory.org. (Siobhan Burke)Monica Bill Barnes (Wednesdays through Dec. 16) Karaoke night meets office party in “Happy Hour,” the latest concoction from Ms. Barnes and Anna Bass, best known these days as the dancers — alongside the radio personality Ira Glass — in the touring revue “Three Acts, Two Dancers, One Radio Host.” Their new weekly gig, in a Lower Manhattan dance studio, features the cheeky duo playing two guys playing their everyday selves, as Ms. Barnes continues her love affair with awkwardness, failure and physical comedy. The audience gets drinks, prizes and the chance to sing. At 6:30 p.m., Studio G, Gibney Dance: Agnes Varis Performing Arts Center, 280 Broadway, near Chambers Street, 646-837-6809, monicabillbarnes.com. (Burke)★ Ronald K. Brown (Friday and Saturday, Thursday through Nov. 22) For three decades, Mr. Brown and his company, Evidence, have been important contributors to American movement with their seamless blend of traditional African dance and modern dance. The result is usually energetic, and often spiritual. To celebrate the company’s 30th anniversary, Mr. Brown presents two programs of work from the past 20 years, including “Why You Follow/Por Que Sigues,” originally created for the Malpaso Dance Company in Cuba and now part of Evidence’s repertory. At 8 p.m., BRIC House, 647 Fulton Street, at Rockwell Place, Fort Greene, Brooklyn, bricartsmedia.org. (Schaefer)★ Jean Butler (Tuesday, Thursday through Nov. 21) Steeped in Irish dance from a young age, Ms. Butler has had a fascinating journey, from the original starlet of “Riverdance” in the mid-1990s to a choreographer working on a much smaller, more experimental scale. In “This Is an Irish dance,” a new duet with the cellist Neil Martin, she continues exploring the form and her relationship to it, with a focus on the interplay between dancer and musician. At 8 p.m., Danspace Project, St. Mark’s Church, 131 East 10th Street, East Village, 866-811-4111, danspaceproject.org. (Burke)Center for Performance Research (through Saturday) Fall Movement is a short festival featuring six choreographers whose work will each be seen twice over three nights. The group is split between those addressing identity politics and those interested in spatial relationships. They include Mirenka Cechova (the female body), Doug LeCours (the gay male body) and Johnnie Cruise Mercer (the Africanist aesthetic); and In Kyung Lee, Suzan D. Polat and Paul Singh. At 7:30 p.m., Center for Performance Research, 361 Manhattan Avenue, Brooklyn, 718-349-1210, cprnyc.org. (Schaefer)★ Company XIV (through Sunday) This flirtatious company, which combines ballet and contemporary dance with elements of baroque and burlesque, specializes in sexy, spicy, opulent interpretations of fairy-tale classics. This fall, the director and choreographer Austin McCormick introduces his take on “Cinderella,” which comes with a dash of opera and vaudeville. Because of titillating costumes and scenarios, and free-flowing libations, performances are for adults only. Friday and Saturday at 8 p.m., Sunday at 5 p.m., Minetta Lane Theater, 18 Minetta Lane, Greenwich Village, 800-745-3000, companyxiv.com. (Schaefer)Complexions Contemporary Ballet (Tuesday through Nov. 29) Having relocated to Atlanta after 20 years in New York, Complexions returns to its native city for a busy season at the Joyce Theater. Its two-week run includes new works set to Metallica, Bach and the jazz singer Jimmy Scott, as well as a tribute to Maya Angelou and a premiere by the company’s co-director Dwight Rhoden, an extension of his 2009 ensemble work “Mercy.” Tuesdays through Thursdays at 7:30 p.m. (no performance on Thanksgiving), Fridays at 8 p.m., Saturdays at 2 and 8 p.m., Sundays at 2 and 7:30 p.m., 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-242-0800, joyce.org. (Burke)Dynasty Handbag and Nibia Pastrana Santiago (through Saturday) In Gibney’s Double Plus series, established choreographers organize split-bill evenings of younger artists who intrigue them. This week, Jennifer Monson puts the spotlight on Jibz Cameron, a Los Angeles artist performing as Dynasty Handbag, a Hedwig-esque alter ego giving a retrospective called “I Never Were Again, A Concert.” Also receiving Ms. Monson’s blessing is the Puerto Rico-born, San Juan-based artist Nibia Pastrana Santiago, who looks at the politics of tourism and colonialism in choreography in her work “liquid.” At 7:30 p.m., Gibney Dance Performing Arts Center, 280 Broadway, 646-837-6809, gibneydance.org. (Schaefer)Heidi Latsky Dance and AXIS Dance (Sunday) Honoring the 25th anniversary of the Americans With Disabilities Act, these companies, both featuring disabled and non-disabled dancers, join forces for one night at the Skirball Center for the Performing Arts. AXIS, visiting from California, performs Marc Brew’s “Divide” and Joe Goode’s “to go again.” Ms. Latsky’s troupe offers “On Display,” a movement installation tailored to the theater lobby, as well as the New York City premiere of “Somewhere” (2015) and an excerpt from her 2013 “Solo Countersolo.” At 7 p.m., 566 La Guardia Place, at Washington Square South, Greenwich Village, 866-811-4111, nyuskirball.org. (Burke)Shuji Onodera (Friday and Saturday) A graduate of the Mime Institute of Japan in Tokyo, Mr. Onodera comes to Japan Society with the North American premiere of “Spectator,” a multimedia work inspired by his experience working with deaf students. From a foundation of everyday movement and objects, he adds layers of choreography, animation, text and live video to uncover the bizarre in the ordinary. At 7:30 p.m., Japan Society, 333 East 47th Street, Manhattan, 212-832-1155, japansociety.org. (Burke)Will Rawls (Wednesday and Thursday) In “Personal Effects,” Mr. Rawls, an artist as skilled with language as he is with movement, reflects on the intersection of his past, present and future selves. A meeting of images, actions and words, the work is part of Performa, the citywide biennial straddling worlds of performance and visual art. At 7 p.m., Westbeth, 55 Bethune Street, 11th Floor, 15.performa-arts.org. (Burke)Jacob Slominski (Friday and Saturday) Contemporary performance often aims to unsettle, but Mr. Slominski swings in the opposite direction with his latest work, “Welcome to the Show.” Part of Dance Under the Influence, a series at the Museum of Arts and Design, the solo explores just how comfortable an audience can get, making theater from the rituals of going to the theater. The curator Jack Ferver, sure to be an entertaining moderator, leads a discussion after Friday’s show. At 7:30 p.m., 2 Columbus Circle, Manhattan, 800-838-3006, madmuseum.org. (Burke)Twyla Tharp (Tuesday through Nov. 22) Celebrating 50 years of making dances, Ms. Tharp concludes her 10-week cross-country tour at Lincoln Center. An offsite presentation of the Joyce Theater, the bill includes two golden-anniversary premieres: “Preludes and Fugues,” set to Bach’s “The Well-Tempered Clavier,” and “Yowzie,” to selections from the American jazz music compilation “Viper’s Drag.” Tuesday through Thursday at 7:30 p.m., next Friday at 8 p.m, Nov. 21 at 2 and 8 p.m., Nov. 22 at 2 p.m., David H. Koch Theater, 212-496-0600, davidhkochtheater.com. (Burke)U-Theater (Thursday through Nov. 21) This Taiwanese dance and music group returns to the Brooklyn Academy of Music with “Beyond Time,” billed as “a visual and auditory spectacle that reflects on man’s relationship to the universe.” The troupe approaches that big theme through many means, from Tibetan throat singing and taiko drumming to martial arts and video projections. At 7:30 p.m., Howard Gilman Opera House, 30 Lafayette Avenue, at Ashland Place, Fort Greene, 718-636-4100, bam.org. (Burke)Works & Process at the Guggenheim (Saturday and Sunday) This edifying series continues with two unrelated programs on consecutive nights. On Saturday, the founder of the residency program Broadway Dance Lab, Josh Prince, presents the results of the lab’s most recent session, including his own work and that of Marcelo Gomes and Camille A. Brown. On Sunday, dancers from the Juilliard School offer a preview of their winter concert, with contributions from Helen Simoneau, Aszure Barton, Zvi Gotheiner and Kyle Abraham. Both events include conversations with the artists. At 7 p.m., 1071 Fifth Avenue, at 89th Street, 212-423-3575, worksandprocess.org. (Burke)Nami Yamamoto and Manami Fukuoka (Wednesday through Nov. 21) In Gibney Dance’s DoublePlus series, established choreographers present the work of less widely known colleagues. The second edition continues with selections by Yasuko Yokoshi. Ms. Yamamoto offers “Headless Wolf,” a meditation on life’s painful and pleasurable transitions that she began in 2010. Manami Fukuoka, whom dancegoers may recognize from Ms. Yokoshi’s striking “Zero One,” draws from Japanese movement traditions including Butoh and Noh theater in “Dance of a Trio.” At 7:30 p.m., Gibney Dance Performing Arts Center, 280 Broadway, 646-837-6809, gibneydance.org. (Burke)Advertisement