NOV. 12, 2015
Full reviews of recent jazz performances: nytimes.com/jazz. A searchable guide to these and other shows is at nytimes.com/events.Claudia Acuña (Friday and Thursday) Ms. Acuña is a jazz vocalist of strength and subtlety, originally from Chile but a force in New York for the last 20 years. On Friday she appears with a quartet featuring Pablo Vergara on piano. On Thursday her pianist will be Samora Pinderhughes, by way of the Jazz Gallery’s mentor series; among the others in the group are the bassist John Benitez and the guitarist Juancho Herrera. Friday at 8 and 10 p.m., Jazz at Kitano, 66 Park Avenue, at 38th Street, 212-885-7119, kitano.com. Thursday at 7:30 and 9:30 p.m., the Jazz Gallery, 1160 Broadway, fifth floor, Flatiron district, 646-494-3625, jazzgallery.org. (Nate Chinen)★ Darcy James Argue’s ‘Real Enemies’ (Wednesday through Nov. 22) Conspiracy theories and American postwar paranoia form the broad subject matter for this new multimedia opus by Mr. Argue, a serious-minded young composer. Featuring his Secret Society big band, it’s a stylish collaboration with the writer-director Isaac Butler and the filmmaker Peter Nigrini — presented as part of the Brooklyn Academy of Music’s Next Wave festival, which also commissioned Mr. Argue’s previous work, “Brooklyn Babylon.” Wednesday through Nov. 21 at 7:30 p.m., Nov. 22 at 3 p.m., BAM Harvey Theater, 651 Fulton Street, Fort Greene, 718-636-4100, bam.org. (Chinen)Jamie Baum Septet (Friday) Ms. Baum, a flutist and composer, typically draws from multiple sources of inspiration when she writes for this ensemble. For her concert at the Rubin Museum of Art, which specializes in traditional art from the Himalayas, she presents “Honoring Nepal,” a new piece inspired by her interaction with Nepali music, especially resonant in light of the devastating earthquake there this year. At 7 p.m., Rubin Museum of Art, 150 West 17th Street, Chelsea, 212-620-5000, rubinmuseum.org. (Chinen)AdvertisementStanley Clarke (through Sunday) The bass virtuoso Stanley Clarke has a peppy recent album, “Up,” that makes a show of his breadth, ranging from chamber miniatures to fusion odysseys. He leads his working band on Friday, and augments it on Saturday and Sunday with a special guest: the pianist McCoy Tyner. Tuesdays through Sundays at 8 and 10:30 p.m., 131 West Third Street, Greenwich Village, 212-475-8592, bluenote.net. (Chinen)★ Steve Coleman & Five Elements (through Sunday) Mr. Coleman, an alto saxophonist and composer, has long been an indefatigable outlier in jazz, engaged in esoteric but vital work on the margins. Early in his career, he was a regular at the Village Vanguard as a member of the Thad Jones/Mel Lewis Orchestra — but this weekend he’s making his overdue debut there as a bandleader. He leads his flagship band, which includes the trumpeter Jonathan Finlayson, the guitarist Miles Okazaki, the bassist Anthony Tidd and two drummers, Sean Rickman and Marcus Gilmore. At 8:30 and 10:30 p.m., Village Vanguard, 178 Seventh Avenue South, at 11th Street, West Village, 212-255-4037, villagevanguard.com. (Chinen)★ Dave Douglas Quintet (Thursday through Nov. 22) The trumpeter-composer Dave Douglas and this dynamic quintet have released three fine albums, the newest of which is “Brazen Heart,” his focus here. As on the album, he’ll feature original compositions tailored to the considerable strengths of his personnel: the saxophonist Jon Irabagon, the pianist Matt Mitchell, the bassist Linda Oh and the drummer Rudy Royston. At 7:30 and 9:30 p.m., Jazz Standard, 116 East 27th Street, Manhattan, 212-576-2232, jazzstandard.net. (Chinen)AdvertisementDominick Farinacci: ‘Short Stories’ (Tuesday) A trumpeter of abundant poise, Mr. Farinacci draws from a new album, “Short Stories,” with partners including the vocalist Gregory Generet, the pianist Orrin Evans and the drummer Quincy Phillips. At 7:30 and 9:30 p.m., Dizzy’s Club Coca-Cola, Frederick P. Rose Hall, Jazz at Lincoln Center, 60th Street and Broadway, 212-258-9595, jazz.org/dizzys. (Chinen)Sullivan Fortner Quartet (Wednesday) Sullivan Fortner Jr. is a tasteful young pianist from New Orleans, best known until recently as a sideman to the trumpeters Roy Hargrove and Christian Scott. His respectable new debut album, “Aria,” on the Impulse! label, breaks no ground but shows that he has both feet planted in the modern-jazz firmament. And it reflects well on this band, featuring Tivon Pennicott on tenor and soprano saxophones, Aidan Carroll on bass and Joe Dyson on drums. At 7:30 and 9:30 p.m., Jazz Standard, 116 East 27th Street, Manhattan, 212-576-2232, jazzstandard.net. (Chinen)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Satoko Fujii’s Tobira (Tuesday) The pianist-composer Satoko Fujii recently formed a quartet called Tobira (it translates to “door” in English, with full metaphorical intention) and released an insistent, restive album, “Yamiyo Ni Karasu.” Appearing here as part of a northeast tour, the band features Todd Nicholson on bass, Yoshi Shutto on drums, and Kappa Maki — a pseudonym for Natsuki Tamura, Ms. Fujii’s husband — on trumpet. At 8:30 p.m., IBeam, 168 Seventh Street, Brooklyn, ibeambrooklyn.com. (Chinen)Kate McGarry and the Tough Get Growing Ensemble (Thursday) Ms. McGarry is a thoughtful jazz singer with a strong feeling for folk inflection, and she has been a scarcer presence here since moving to North Carolina several years ago. “The Crack (What to Wear in the Dark)” is a multimedia piece she conceived for this performance at National Sawdust, a mix of originals and pop covers (by the likes of Leonard Cohen and Paul Simon) with arrangements chiefly by her husband, the guitarist Keith Ganz. Joining them are James Shipp on vibraphone and percussion, Al Strong on trumpet, Todd Sickafoose on bass and Allison Miller on drums. At 7 p.m., 80 North Sixth Street, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, 646-779-8455, nationalsawdust.org. (Chinen)Pangea Jazz Fest (Sunday) This festival of so-called “world jazz” takes the form of a 12-hour marathon, with roughly hourlong sets by a dozen acts. Among the highlights are the guitarist Prasanna (at 3 p.m.); a collaboration between the Swiss harmonica virtuoso Grégoire Maret and the Colombian harpist Edmar Castañeda (at 8 p.m.); Michele Rosewoman’s New Yor-Uba, a tradition-expanding Afro-Cuban large ensemble (at 10 p.m.); and Slavic Soul Party, putting its Balkanized spin on Duke Ellington’s “Far East Suite” (at 11 p.m.). From 2 p.m. to 2 a.m. at Drom, 85 Avenue A, East Village, pangeajazzfest.com. (Chinen)★ Pérez, Patitucci, Blade (through Sunday) Since the turn of this century, the pianist Danilo Pérez, the bassist John Patitucci and the drummer Brian Blade have been refining a sleek, ecstatic bond within the Wayne Shorter Quartet. They recently began working as a stand-alone trio, bringing an open-ended spirit of inquiry and deep reserves of collective intuition. They’ll draw here, loosely, from their new debut album, “Children of the Light.” At 7:30 and 9:30 p.m., Jazz Standard, 116 East 27th Street, Manhattan, 212-576-2232, jazzstandard.net. (Chinen)Matthew Shipp Duo (Friday) The pianist Matthew Shipp has a new album, “The Conduct of Jazz,” that smartly ducks in and around the mainstream conventions of the post-bop piano trio. He’ll appear here in a duo with the alert bassist from the album, Michael Bisio. (Sharing the bill is a trio led by the guitarist Ken Silverman.) At 8 p.m., St. John’s Christopher Street, 81 Christopher Street, West Village, 212-242-5737, stjohnsnyc.org. (Chinen)★ Tyshawn Sorey Trio (Tuesday through Nov. 22) Mr. Sorey, a powerfully inventive drummer who has applied most of his recent focus toward composition, presents the trio found on his most recent album, “Alloy.” Featuring the pianist Cory Smythe and the bassist Christopher Tordini, it’s a chamberesque unit that works as much with new-music protocols as with any jazz dialect — and it counts as an unexpected booking at the Village Vanguard, one worth bolstering with a show of support. At 8:30 and 10:30 p.m., 178 Seventh Avenue South, at 11th Street, West Village, 212-255-4037, villagevanguard.com. (Chinen)★ Luciana Souza: ‘Speaking in Tongues’ (Thursday) The Brazilian jazz vocalist Luciana Souza has carved a special niche out of lilting duologue, working one by one with a small stable of revered acoustic guitarists. But on her new album, “Speaking in Tongues,” she’s at the center of a changeable and frisky band; its guitarist is Lionel Loueke, who has a taste for polyrhythmic density, and its star soloist is the harmonica whiz Grégoire Maret. Both rejoin her here, along with Massimo Biolcati on bass and Kendrick Scott on drums. At 8 p.m., 92nd Street Y, 1395 Lexington Avenue, 212-415-5500, 92Y.org. (Chinen)★ Cecil Taylor: From the Five Spot to the World (Tuesday) At 86, the pianist Cecil Taylor is a matchless eminence in the jazz avant-garde, and a figure of increasingly rare public exposure. This gala concert, a benefit for Harlem Stage, will feature the pianists Jason Moran and Geri Allen, two of his many grateful heirs, with generous interpolations of poetry and dance. It also promises some form of performance by Mr. Taylor, whose most recent appearance in this setting, in 2012, was an illuminating triumph. At 7:30 p.m., Harlem Stage Gatehouse, 150 Convent Avenue, at 135th Street, 212-281-9240, harlemstage.org. (Chinen)A jazz entry in the Listings pages on Friday about a performance by Kate McGarry and the Tough Get Growing Ensemble at National Sawdust in Brooklyn scheduled for Thursday night included an outdated starting time. It has been changed to 7 p.m. from 8 p.m. The entry also referred incompletely to the musical arrangements. While James Shipp assisted with a few, most are by Keith Ganz.A version of this schedule appears in print on November 13, 2015, on Page C19 of the New York edition with the headline: The Listings: Jazz.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.