By ANN MAHMAY 3, 2017
Like many immigrants to the United States, Alexander Hamilton reinvented himself in New York City. His haunts in and around Manhattan were the backdrop to his spectacular triumphs, trials — and death. Here are some of the addresses he frequented:This spot was the first Capitol building of the United States, where George Washington took the oath of office as the nation’s first president, observed by a crowd of 10,000. Hamilton watched the ceremony from the balcony of his home at 58 (now 57) Wall Street, several yards away. The original hall was destroyed in 1812; the current structure was built in 1842.The Hamiltons resided for 10 years at 58 Wall Street. But Hamilton also had law offices at 69 Stone Street, 12 Garden Street (today Exchange Place), 63 Pine Street, and 58 Partition Street (now Fulton Street) — though none of the structures remain. After he and his wife, Eliza, built their family estate in northern Manhattan, Hamilton kept a townhouse at 54 Cedar Street. He spent his last night there.On the site of the Bank of New York, which was founded by Hamilton, this museum is devoted to American finance and financial history. On display are documents signed by Hamilton, copies of his published works, and replicas of the dueling pistols that Aaron Burr fatally fired at him. (Hamilton’s pistols are on private display at the JPMorgan Chase building in Manhattan.)Named after his father’s ancestral estate in Scotland and also, perhaps, the St. Croix plantation of his mother’s sister, this gracious yellow house is the only surviving Hamilton residence. He lived here for only two years before his death. The house, which has twice been moved a few blocks, is today a national historic monument.AdvertisementOne of the oldest structures in Manhattan, this museum and restaurant was a thriving tavern during the Revolutionary War — and served as a headquarters for the Continental Army. On July 4, 1804, Hamilton and Burr both attended an event here for the Society of the Cincinnati. It was the last time they met before their fateful duel.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Hamilton and Burr chose to meet here on July 11, 1804, as New York’s laws against dueling were severe. Today, it’s surrounded by Hamilton Park, which offers views of the Manhattan skyline. A commemorative plaque indicates the site of the dueling grounds.Hamilton spent his final hours at the home of his friend William Bayard, director of the Bank of New York. He received visits from friends and relatives before dying on July 12. Despite the commemorative plaque, the house may actually have been slightly north.AdvertisementHamilton’s funeral procession on July 14, 1804, wound through Lower Manhattan, ending at Trinity Church. He is buried in the graveyard south of the church, with Eliza by his side — a final resting spot in the heart of the city he loved.A version of this article appears in print on May 7, 2017, on Page TR6 of the New York edition with the headline: New York Haunts.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.