AdvertisementSupported byNo need to stay overnight. Just reserve and dip your toes in.By Shivani VoraWith the dog days of summer in New York City come seemingly inescapable hot and humid weather that only a dip in a swimming pool could cure. A pool, though, is amenity that few can afford. Fortunately for the rest of us, a handful of hotels supply a cool and stylish respite with swimming pools open to non-guests who buy a day pass or book a spa appointment. Here are five of them. All pool-goers at this rooftop pool with expansive views of the city skyline can use a chaise longue and get bottled water, unlimited towels, one alcoholic drink such as a frozen Moscow mule or frozen rosé wine; a day pass also includes Popsicles in three flavors — rosé, orange Pinot Gris and sangria. Cost: $200; open to non-guests from Monday through Thursday. Reserve at Gansevoort Meatpacking by calling 212 206 6700 or emailing res@gansevoortmeatpacking.com.This hotel in Chelsea has a recently renovated rooftop restaurant and bar, La Piscine, complete with a 22-foot long pool. Chaise longues and cabanas can be reserved, and towels are included with admission, which is free on some days. Those who enjoy a good party may want to consider “Splash Friday,” a weekly pool party with live music that kicks into full gear after 6 p.m. Cost: $40 during the week; free on Saturdays and Sundays from noon to 7 p.m. Reserve at Hôtel Americano by calling 212-216-0000 or emailing lapiscine@hotel-americano.com. The rooftop pool area at this Meatpacking District property is called the beach, and it’s easy to see why: It’s a sprawling 4,800 square-foot expanse and has a glass bottom that looks into the lobby. Private cabanas are available for rent and chaises lounges are available on a first-come, first-served basis. Groups can order from a menu of large scale cocktails such as a ten-pound Moscow Mule. Cost: $65; open to non-guests on weekdays only. Reserve at the Beach at Dream Downtown by calling 212-229-2336 or emailing dreambeachres@taogroup.com.This Williamsburg hotel has a ground floor backyard with a 40-foot long pool in a vibrant setting that includes music courtesy of local D.J.’s, oversized floats on the water itself and a changing rotation of street art by Brooklynites. Day beds and cabanas can be reserved for an added fee. Cost: $55 from Monday through Thursday; $65 from Friday through Sunday. Reserve by calling 718-218-7500 or emailing info@mccarrenhotel.com. Consider a spa treatment and pool day in one: Those who book the new 30-minute Relax massage at this Midtown Manhattan hotel’s Spa Nalai will gain access to the 61-foot long glass enclosed pool as well as the adjoining fitness center and eucalyptus steam room. The massage can take place poolside or in one of the spa’s treatment rooms (each has its own shower). Snacks such as nuts, chocolate and fruit are included in the price. Cost: $150, including a 30-minute massage. Reserve at the Park Hyatt by calling 646-774-1234.Advertisement