

      By CHRISTOPHER SOLOMON

AUG. 3, 2017

The dramatic location of this sprawling Alaskan city, between mountains and saltwater, means adventure is always nearby.
Related Article
Anchorage sits between mountains and saltwater in a setting that is hard to improve upon. “And they haven’t,” a cynic might say of the state’s largest city. True, this municipality of 300,000 (its sprawling boundaries make it nearly four-fifths the size of Delaware) will not win any urban-planning contests. But you do not come all this way for architecture tours or adventures in molecular gastronomy. You come to Anchorage for Alaska, and to meet the welcoming Alaskans: both are sui generis, outsize and unforgettable. Home to the railroad, a ship terminal and what may be the world’s largest seaplane base, Anchorage is a great place to settle in for a weekend and to use as a jumping-off point for adventures near and far.
Explore the map and find things to do in Anchorage.
The Anchorage Museum ($15, adults), with its cool, white-sheathed building, is a mixed bag. Tools and clothing of Alaska’s native populations — everything from fishing floats to woven grass socks — are amazingly crafted, but there’s not enough detailed context for visitors. More moving is “I Am Inuit,” a photo exhibit by Brian Adams, that documents the Inuit people of the far north, and their stories (on display through Sept. 3). A planned expansion will add 25,000 square feet of gallery space to the existing 170,000, and will most likely bolster the museum as a place to linger. (Tip: In addition to the gift shop, there are very impressive crafts at the Alaska Native Medical Center shop, where native Alaskans sell their works. Call ahead for hours, 907-729-1122.)The menu at South is all over the map, offering everything from tapas ($4 to $18) to the “butter burger” ($14), which is what it sounds like. You usually cannot go wrong with Alaskan staples like seared salmon ($29) with roasted local potatoes. South takes pride in its “Barcelona-style” gin and tonics ($13.50), enhanced by herbs and berries. The Amalfi Coast tweaks the classic gin and tonic with cilantro, lemon, cubeb berries, chile threads and orange bitters. Reservations are a good idea.It’s neither new nor hidden, but even longtime Anchorage residents say they take visiting friends for a drink at the Crow’s Nest, on the 20th floor of the Hotel Captain Cook. The service is excellent, as are the views of the water and mountains. Situated in the center of the restaurant, the bar is elevated several feet, so you get an unobstructed view over diners while you sip your Sazerac and drink in the view under the lingering northern sun. Reservations recommended for dinner.Head to the Spenard neighborhood and grab a cappuccino at Kaladi Brothers Coffee, the excellent local coffee roasters. Then wander a few doors down to Middle Way Café. The popular local joint in a strip mall often features seasonal local ingredients and offers vegan and gluten-free items (a vegan Reuben sandwich, for instance, is $12). There is something here for everyone, though, including avocado toast topped with meats like Alaskan reindeer sausage ($12).The eastern backdrop of Anchorage, the Chugach Mountains, hold many hiking options, from the steep-and-gorgeous Bird Ridge to the fun scramble of O’Malley Peak. If you want to take a quick hike to amazing views, and don’t mind crowds, head to Flattop Mountain, among the most popular hikes in the state. The summit requires a 200-foot scramble. But you don’t need to do that to enjoy views of Denali and the mountains, with the waters of Turnagain Arm and the city laid at your feet (not to mention feasts of dwarf blueberries in late summer). Want a guide to provide commentary or to calm your bear-anoia? Try Ascending Path.“First-timers get a cookie,” said the young woman behind the counter at Fire Island Rustic Bakeshop, presenting a pretty great chocolate chip. You like this place even before ordering the porchetta sandwich with its cracklings and orange zest ($11), or the bread pudding studded with golden raisins ($4.50). This year, the James Beard Foundation tapped the head baker, Carlyle Watt, as a semifinalist for outstanding baker. His skill is evident in a range of items, like organic croissants, which have a touch of whole wheat ($3.50), and sourdough breads. “What really keeps people coming here, though, are the scones and chocolate-chip cookies,” Mr. Watt said.Outside is where Anchorage shines. Even if you have only an hour or two, the best, quickest escape is to hop on the Tony Knowles Coastal Trail, a beloved public trail that winds along the waters of Knik Arm and Cook Inlet for 11 miles. Rent a bike at Pablo’s Bicycle Rentals downtown ($10 to $15 an hour), catch the paved trail a block away and start pedaling toward wooded Kincaid Park (itself home to about 15 miles of single-track mountain-bike trails). The mostly flat trail soon enters glades of ferns and birch where you might see a moose. On a recent ride I saw a black bear and her cubs. The tide flats over your shoulder are your constant companion. So is the smell of alder. It is the smell of Alaska.Anchorage rarely gets hot — the average high temperature in August is 64 degrees. But that is warm enough for ice cream. Drop by Wild Scoops, where Elissa Brown serves up her small-batch ice cream. Fear not: the line moves fast, as Ms. Brown scoops out flavors that often feature local ingredients, like blueberries from Talkeetna, and Alaskan birch syrup for the zingy birch-chipotle nuts. A scoop of the Alaska spruce tip ($4, but a buck more will get you a waffle cone scented with cinnamon and star anise, and, really, why not?) will transport you to a stroll through a damp spring forest.The Bubbly Mermaid could feel right at home in Brooklyn or Seattle. It hits the mark between trendy and twee. The centerpiece of the tiny space is the bar, formed from a chunk of a former fishing boat. Ask the blue-eyed mermaid standing in the bow to pour you a sparkling wine from almost a dozen open bottles (most around $12 to $30 a glass). Study the wall for the nearly three dozen hot and cold oyster offerings like the warm St. Jacques (with a scallop, shiitake and Mornay) or the cold Hipster shooter (with kale, sriracha and Pabst Blue Ribbon beer). But the place also serves oysters plain, from sweet British Columbia Kusshis to Hump Islands from Ketchikan that taste like a gulp of fresh saltwater. The house-made mignonettes that accompany the plain ones are flavorful. But don’t use them. For all the fun experiments on the wall, a great oyster needs no clothes.You may think Google Maps has steered you wrong as your search for the best seafood in town ends at a strip mall near the airport. But Anchorage is a city of strip malls that occasionally harbor surprises. Beyond the parking lot lies an oddly quiet, candlelit space that serves great seafood: Kincaid Grill. You will pay for that excellence: The fresh-caught halibut special on a recent visit was $44. The half-dozen Kodiak Island scallops on a bed of risotto ($30) don’t disappoint, and neither does the wine list, with two dozen pours by the glass. Dinner only; reservations recommended.There’s a saying here: “Alaska is 30 minutes outside of Anchorage.” Grab a coffee and drive 40 miles southeast along the Alaska Scenic Byway that skirts Turnagain Arm, to the resort village of Girdwood, home of Alyeska Resort. Housed in a Swiss-feeling chalet at the bottom of the ski hill, with sunlight and reggae music filtering down through the blond rafters, Jack Sprat (motto: “fat and lean world cuisine”) serves an inspired brunch with a menu that skips around the globe. Items include bibimbap and chia muesli with almond milk, also house-made ($9).The drive along Turnagain Arm deserves a spot as one of the most spectacular in the United States. Drive 11 more miles to the end of the arm until you reach another Alaskan must-see: animals. The Alaska Wildlife Conservation Center ($15) is a sanctuary of more than 200 acres that takes in injured wild animals that cannot be returned to nature — creatures such as Venetie, an orphaned lynx found as a kitten after a wildfire. The nonprofit facility has animals in large enclosures, from musk oxen to brown bears. Signs are full of smart, gee-whiz factoids. (Musk oxen qiviut, or underwool, is, apparently, the warmest fiber on earth.) Behind-the-scenes tours and other programs are available by reservation.With 546 rooms (including more than 90 suites) in three towers, a dozen shops and several dining spots on multiple decks, the Hotel Captain Cook feels a bit like one of the big cruise ships whose passengers stay here upon reaching Alaska. Though the hotel is more than 50 years old, it has been updated comfortably, and the murals everywhere of Captain Cook’s journeys feel charmingly retro. Rooms often have great views toward mountains or water — and some have both. 939 West Fifth Avenue; rooms with two double beds or a king bed from $310 during high season, until Sept. 15; $185 off-season.Not far from downtown and very close to the airport, the Lakefront Anchorage sits on the shore of the busy seaplane base of Lake Hood. You can relax on the deck of the 248-room, lodge-style hotel, have a local beer and watch the floatplanes motor up for adventures around the state. 4800 Spenard Road; rooms with two queen beds start at $219.Flight and Hotel information provided by Google.Prices represent a snapshot of low fares and rates for weekend trips.Advertisement