AdvertisementSupported byBitesBy Dionne SearceyA few years ago, Pierre Thiam packed up his two restaurants in Brooklyn and headed to his home continent where he hoped to elevate West African street food to gourmet status. The result is Nok by Alara in Lagos, Nigeria, a restaurant whose celebratory feel is informed by both its hip ambience and its new takes on regional staples.Mr. Thiam, who is from Senegal, clearly enjoys bringing West African tastes to the rest of the world. “I was hoping to show that African food can be elevated and presented in a contemporary setting without losing its identity,” he said about the food at Nok, which is best described as familiar tastes, but with refreshing twists.Too often, restaurants in West Africa cater to an upscale clientele by recreating American or European favorites — and offering the same single dish or two that hints at their own region’s specialties. Sometimes the local fare is neglected altogether.Nok, which opened in late 2015, is in the city’s posh Victoria Island area, tucked behind a furniture store full of chairs, tables and other objects from African designers, mostly from the shop. Reni Folawiyo, who owns both Nok and the store, envisioned an integrated shop and restaurant that amount to a greatest hits of food and designs from across the region.A rare cool and cloudy evening lured my friends and me outside to a garden area where we sat under the glow of funky, colored lamps in handmade thatched chairs and ordered from a tapas-style menu.First came cocktails, which at Nok involve baobab juice and beets — both Senegalese drink staples. The palm wine served in a hollowed-out gourd has an unusually delicious hint of fermentation, one of Mr. Thiam’s flavoring specialties.The outdoor menu portions were small but ample enough for sharing: wara cheese, a local specialty made with curd milk and served with hibiscus jam; scrumptious goat sliders with smashed avocado; lamb braai pie that looked like little meaty Pop-Tarts; spicy pepper dips and sauces with a subtle fishy flavor, ready for smearing across puffy mini-mounds of naan.The ribs were a bit too fatty for my taste, but the grilled plantains coated in crunchy nuts were a hit. For dessert we tried the pof pof, spongy doughnut holes typically sold in street-side canteens but here drizzled in a chocolate and baobab sauce.A fast blast of wind was all the warning we had before a downpour chased everyone inside the small dining room. The vibe turned into a sopping wet party of grateful diners who hovered while waiters reseated guests and rushed to haul in their unfinished plates — clearly a practiced routine.With its background music, soft lighting and loud chatter, the cramped indoor dining area was transformed into what could have been mistaken for a New York restaurant on a raucous weekend night.That kind of scene in Lagos — or anywhere in the region — is hard to find. Nok is a rare gem.Nok by Alara, 12A Akin Olugbade Street, Victoria Island; 234-908-561-4815; nokbyalara.com. The average price of a meal for two, without drinks or tip, is 18,000 naira, about $52.Advertisement