
Where to Go Now By                     
SHIVANI VORA

APRIL 26, 2016
The America’s Cup sailing races will be held in New York City, for the first time since 1920, on Saturday, May 7 and Sunday, May 8. Officially called the Louis Vuitton America’s Cup World Series, the event is a preliminary competition among the six countries — the United States, Britain, France, Japan, New Zealand and Sweden — competing in the 35th America’s Cup, held every four years, in Bermuda next June; the teams race on boats that are about 45 feet long and have a 70-foot-high mast, according to the America’s Cup commercial commissioner, Harvey Schiller. “Watching these vessels speed through the water is quite a spectacle,” he said.No tickets are necessary to view the races. They take place rain or shine and will be held from 2 to 3:30 p.m. on both Saturday and Sunday on the Hudson River. Spectators can take in most of the action in areas in and around Battery Park City.Where to WatchOn Land-The Brookfield Place Waterfront Plaza in downtown Manhattan is the heart of the race festivities and an ideal vantage point.-On the New York City side of the Hudson River, the races will be viewable as far south as Pier A and as far north as Pier 25, both on Manhattan’s West Side. Spectators can watch from several waterfront areas along the river.Advertisement-On the New Jersey side, the races can be seen from Liberty State Park up to the Jersey City waterfront.Advertisement-Ellis Island and the Statue of Liberty are also good viewing points, according to Mr. Schiller.-Several large screens along the waterfront, including a few in parks — the exact parks are still being determined — where families are encouraged to picnic while they watch, will provide an up-close view of the action.On WaterRacegoers can also watch from their own boats on the Hudson River; there’s no fee to do so. For more details and to register, visit www.americascup.com/en/spectator-boats.html. Hundreds of boats have already registered to watch.Event VillageBesides being an ideal location to see the races, the Brookfield Place plaza will host a free outdoor event village on Saturday and Sunday from 11 a.m. to 6 p.m.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Highlights in the village include five stores selling team gear and sailing accessories, a Moet Champagne bar, a bar from the liquor brand Gosling’s, which is known for its rum, and a booth from the Bermuda Tourism Authority with a lounge area facing the river where the public can relax and watch the races.For those looking for a luxurious way to take in the America’s Cup, the hospitality company Quint Events has packages ranging from day-only insider access to two-night stays at Downtown hotels. These all include unlimited food and open bar and a private viewing area near the racecourse. From $599. For more information, visit http://bit.ly/1TMBwHM.What Hotels Are DoingSome hotels in Manhattan are getting into the sailing spirit with packages and themed drinks.The Maritime Hotel, the nautical-themed hotel in West Chelsea, has teamed with Sperry, the official footwear partner of America’s Cup, on a promotion. Guests who book a two-night stay at the hotel using the code Sperrytime receive a rate of $355 a night as well as a Sperry backpack, bracelet and a gift card for 50 percent off footwear and apparel at Sperry’s store in the Flatiron district. Available from May 5 to 10. To book, call the hotel at 212-242-4300 or reserve online using the code Sperrytime.The Quin in Midtown Manhattan has secured availability for guests aboard the Tall Ship Clipper City for viewing of the races from the water. Guests receive accommodations for a night, limo transportation to and from North Cove Marina, where the boat departs, and a signed copy of the Rizzoli book “Hinckley Yachts: An American Icon” by Nick Voulgaris III. Price from $895 for two.W New York - Downtown will offer a nautical cocktail menu May 5 to 8;the drinks include the All Hands on Deck (tequila, Cointreau, Aperol, lime juice and simple syrup) and the Skipper Sour (bourbon, lychee and simple syrups, lemon juice and a basil leaf), are priced from $13 to $15 and are available from 5 p.m. to closing.AdvertisementGansevoort Meatpacking NYC has created the Queen’s Cup cocktail in celebration of the America’s Cup. The drink, named after the former race title in the 1800s, includes rum, orange juice, lemon juice, St. Germain and Cristal Champagne. It’s available at a regal price tag of $190 a glass.An earlier version of this article misstated the phone number of the Maritime Hotel. It is 212-242-4300.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »