
Cultured Traveler By                     
PATRICK HARRINGTON

APRIL 11, 2016
At the end of each 52-year cycle that governed their calendar, the Aztecs would put out all the fires they burned for everyday use, and as night descended, priests would use a friction rod to ignite a new blaze atop a sacred volcano that soared over the surrounding shimmering lakes. The event involved the burning of a human sacrifice and culminated in runners carrying torches lit by the fire back down the mountain to relight hearths in temples and in every home.That volcano, though not the ritual, can still be found amid Mexico City’s sprawl. The Cerro de la Estrella, or the Hill of the Star, is now an oasis of trees in Iztapalapa, the capital’s most populous borough. The Aztecs last officially performed what has become known as the New Fire ceremony in 1507, before the arrival of Spanish conquistadors led by Hernán Cortés in 1519. Now, according to local news reports, violence comes much more often than every 52 years: Tales of tortured bodies dumped on the sidewalk and killer packs of wild dogs tend to scare away tourists.Such notoriety is stunning for a place whose history earned it a national park designation in 1938 and so inspired the poet Octavio Paz that he called it the spot where the world was created and where time itself is “reflected and satiated.” Its location gave it strategic military importance. And it is, simply, one of the most important religious sites near Tenochtitlan, the Aztec capital now mostly buried under Mexico City, according to David Stuart, who directs the Mesoamerica Center at the University of Texas at Austin. “It’s off the normal route people take despite being the greatest of all cosmological sites in the Aztec world,” Dr. Stuart told me by phone.I wanted to stand where a million people along the lakes had focused their eyes in the night as they prayed for life. I wanted to look upon the concrete leprosy of the slums and imagine what it was like a thousand years ago, with snow-capped volcanoes visible through clean air and lakes gleaming in the sun.So I made three trips to the Hill of the Star during a visit to Mexico City late last summer.For the first one, I unintentionally went under armed escort. I had asked Rafael López, then Iztapalapa’s head of public security, about the safety of going to the hill.AdvertisementMr. López, wearing camouflage pants and combat boots, greeted me in person a few days later at his office on the borough plaza, where bottle rockets, launched to draw attention to markets and festivals, exploded in puffs of white smoke above the square. An officer with a submachine gun stood outside in the grass.AdvertisementMr. López told me that since 2012, 15 officers patrolled the Hill of the Star during the day and more did so at night. And, in the wake of dog attacks that killed four, animal roundups were widely reported.“I am a fanatic about El Cerro,” he told me after handing me a book on the Hill of the Star written by a local historian. “When I no longer work in Iztapalapa, I will return to protect it as a volunteer.”Mexico CityCalzada Ermita-IztapalapaMuseo Arqueológico del Fuego NuevoIztapalapaCave of the DevilCerro de la EstrellaCerro de la EstrellaParque NacionalMexico Cerro de la EstrellaIztaccihuatlMexico City115Popocatépetl10 milesAPRIL 14, 2016
When we left for the tour, Mr. López rode ahead in a white pickup and I followed in a white van filled with borough workers and a reporter and photographer from a Mexico City newspaper. We made our first stop at the orange museum built in the shape of a pyramid on the Hill of the Star’s northern flanks, the New Fire Museum.After a brief tour of the museum’s mural, dioramas depicting the New Fire ceremony and explanations of the 52-year calendar cycle, Mr. López led us up the road to a fenced-off cave near the summit called the Cave of the Devil.“It’s filled in with dirt,” Mr. López explained, pointing out a metal post supporting one of four security cameras on the hill.Across the road from the Cave of the Devil, a narrow stairway led to the ruins, where a broad pyramid base provides views of downtown skyscrapers, majestic boulevards and planes landing at the airport. If you’re lucky, and when I went I wasn’t, wind will have cleansed the capital of pollution and you will be able to see the big volcanoes of Popocatépetl and Iztaccíhuatl in the distance.Mr. López bounded back down the trail, leading us through another cave with rooms once inhabited by pre-Hispanic residents and past petroglyphs of faces and stars carved in the rock.AdvertisementAt the bottom of the hill, in a small park near a major road, Mr. López and his helpers distributed helmets, kneepads and surgical masks. Then we walked through an opening in a fence and stepped down over volcanic rocks and bags reeking of trash into an opening that leads beneath Mexico City. The darkness of caverns swallowed the beam from Mr. López’s flashlight as he explained that the Aztecs believed such caves provided passage to Mictlan, the underworld. He said local geologists are still mapping the volcano’s labyrinth of more than 100 caves.“We don’t know how deep it goes,” he said.A few days later, I met Jesús Sánchez, the archaeologist who studied the Hill of the Star from 2002 through 2008 for Mexico’s National Institute of Anthropology and History, at a restaurant in the south of Mexico City.The New Fire ceremony is only part of what distinguished the Hill of the Star, Mr. Sánchez, wearing a blue Tennessee Titans sweatshirt, told me over a beer. The volcano formed a peninsula that narrowed the passage along the surrounding lakes, and it divided sources of salt water from fresh water. That made controlling it essential for both military dominance and agricultural production.“Whoever occupied El Cerro practically dominated the whole Valley of Mexico,” he said. Mr. Sánchez said he and his crew partly excavated a pyramid built in the year 500 by the Teotihuacan, who predated the arrival of the Aztecs. Work on those ruins remains unfinished for lack of funds, and the annual passion play that attracts more than a million people to the Hill of the Star each Holy Week has complicated efforts to preserve them. The organizers of that event have traditionally reenacted the crucifixion of Christ right on top of the ruins without knowing it.“We are very afraid that archaeological evidence that still survives on El Cerro and that is so important for Mexican history will be lost within 10 years,” he said. “To lose El Cerro is to lose the foundation of our Mexican identity.”I went back to the Hill of the Star again on public transportation on a Sunday morning — 23 minutes on the metro and then 10 minutes on a sputtering bus through graffiti-covered streets — but the most memorable trip came in the darkness, when I returned a week later.My driver cruised through stoplights at 5:45 a.m. and floated across lanes on San Antonio Abad, a major thoroughfare with a metro line running down the middle built on top of the Aztec road across Lake Texcoco. We navigated through narrow, graffiti-lined alleyways by cellphone until we found the museum. We parked in front of the Cave of the Devil.A storm that had scrubbed the sky of pollution had passed, and we looked out over the lights of the city filling the lowlands as the lakes once had. The volcanoes took shape against the horizon growing blue and orange. When the sun became molten over the hills, I noticed a man at the corner of the pyramid base kneeling in prayer. A group of four women in jogging clothes raised their arms to the light.I thought about all the people who had been so aware that the world was fragile and that it might end, as they looked up from the lake toward the Hill of the Star.AdvertisementI thought about what it must have been like to see that first spark of light in the darkness.A version of this article appears in print on April 17, 2016, on Page TR9 of the New York edition with the headline: Layers of History on a Sacred Volcano.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »