AdvertisementSupported byCompiled by Justin SablichWhether you own one or not, dogs can enrich the travel experience, or make it more stressful than you’d like. With National Dog Day on Saturday, Aug. 26, here are a few ways our canine friends (and enemies) put their paw prints on our travel plans. When booking a room, it may not occur to travelers to ask whether a hotel has pets. Yet interaction with animals can improve mental health, and has been shown to ease depression. Some hotels are luring customers with mascots — not just dogs, but also birds, cats, tortoises and even donkeys.Few events in life can be as stressful as moving. Add pets into the mix, and everyone’s blood pressure, including your dog’s, will most likely rise. But there are ways to make it work. Here is how one couple got their golden retriever, Harley, from upstate New York to London with minimal heartache. Since the 9/11 terrorist attacks, the federal government has spent billions on technologies to emulate the nose and brain of a trained bomb dog, which can detect minute traces of explosives. And while researchers have made progress, when it comes to accuracy, nothing quite beats the nose of a dog.About 10 percent of the United States population suffers from pet allergies, and while cats are twice as allergy-causing as dogs, people tend to travel more often with dogs. About 39 percent of dog owners take their pets when traveling for two nights or more, versus 11 percent of cat people. Thankfully, travelers with allergies have options. Melissa Halliburton’s inspiration for creating a global resource for travelers with pets in tow came from personal experience. After graduating from college, she settled on a petite Jack Russell-Chihuahua mix called Rocco. But taking him on the road proved to be a challenge in the Boston metropolitan area where she lived. Her solution was BringFido.com, a site with detailed information on hotels, restaurants and events across over 14,000 cities in 91 countries.Advertisement