By JESSICA COLLEY CLARKEAPRIL 11, 2017
Prices and crowds swell during summer, but travelers willing to trade higher temperatures for lower rates can save on popular destinations this spring.Nightly rates at the Nantucket Hotel & Resort in Massachusetts start at $625 in July and August, but rooms are available starting at $195 in April and May. Beating summer crowds can offer a relaxed experience, with more availability at restaurants and less planning required. Guests may want to bring a bathing suit for a spring trip. The all-season resort has an outdoor hot tub.In Stone Harbor, N.J., rates at the Reeds at Shelter Haven start at $549 a night during high season (from Memorial Day to Labor Day), but spring specials begin at $159 a night. The bayside property offers several ways to fill a traveler’s days beyond the beach, including yoga classes and a dinner pairing series. A whiskey pairing dinner will be on April 28.Cape Arundel Inn & Resort in Kennebunkport, Me., opened for the season in March and is offering savings through May 18. The Cape Escape package includes welcome cocktails and a two-night stay for $99 a night (weekdays) and $165 a night (weekends). In July and August, rates are $249 a night (weekdays) and $299 a night (weekends). Relaxed evenings could include time spent on the large front porch with a book from the on-site library.Spring deals are also available beyond the northeastern United States. Travelers thinking about presummer international trips will find savings in popular European destinations, including Italy. Il Salviatino, a 15th-century villa in the Tuscan hills outside Florence, is offering 20 percent savings this spring on two-night minimum stays. Through June 21, rooms are available starting at 380 euros ($402) a night. Rooms are 500 euros ($529) a night in the summer.A version of this article appears in print on April 16, 2017, on Page TR2 of the New York edition with the headline: Spring Hotel Savings.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »