
                Travel Tips            By                     
SHIVANI VORA

AUG. 15, 2017
Forget room service, spa treatments and other for-charge amenities available at most upscale hotels — these properties have plenty of free amenities that many guests don’t take advantage of and may not even know about, said Lisa Holladay, the global brand leader for the Ritz-Carlton, St. Regis and Bulgari hotels.“You’re spending your valuable money to stay at a nice hotel, so why not enhance that stay by taking advantage of all the property has to offer?” she said.Here, Ms. Holladay’s advice on tapping into a hotel’s free amenities.GO TO HAPPY HOUR Many high-end hotels offer free alcoholic beverages to their guests in the evening. The drinks vary: Most St. Regis hotels, for example, saber a bottle of Champagne every evening in their lobby bars and offer a glass to guests who are present for the ritual, while some Ritz-Carltons serve locally influenced cocktails in their lobbies. Also, all Kimpton hotels have a wine hour every evening, when guests are served wine and beer. Ask your hotel’s concierge staff about the free drinks the property may offer.HITCH A RIDE Luxury hotels often have a house car to shuttle guests to restaurants, museums and other attractions around town for free. These cars are usually stylish: The house car at the St. Regis New York, for example, is a Bentley, while the three 1 Hotels — Central Park and Brooklyn Bridge Park, in New York City, and South Beach, in Miami — have Teslas. Keep in mind, Ms. Holladay said, that house cars are typically available on a first-come-first-served basis. In addition to having house cars, a growing number of hotels today also lend guests bikes for no charge.AdvertisementDON’T PACK TOO MANY TOILETRIES Your hotel room’s bathroom is stocked with standard grooming products, such as shampoo and soap, but Ms. Holladay said that many high-end hotels have additional products available upon request through housekeeping. Ms. Holladay always relies on her hotel’s dental kit, which usually comprises a toothbrush, floss and mouthwash. Other items your property may have on hand include hypoallergenic skin products, deodorant and a nail kit with clippers. Also, most resorts provide free sunscreen by their pools or at the entrance to their beaches.Another tip: Hotel spas often offer free samples of the pricey skin care lines they sell and even have a makeup area in their retail section where guests can try out sample cosmetics.AdvertisementMAKE TIME TO WORK OUT Don’t be quick to dismiss your hotel’s gym in favor of a workout at a local exercise studio, Ms. Holladay said. Classes at these studios are often expensive, and your property’s gym may have an equally enticing lineup of classes. “Hotels are increasingly recognizing that fitness is a top priority for their guests and are investing money bringing in top instructors from popular spin, Pilates, yoga and boot camp studios,” she said. Also, your hotel’s gym is likely to offer free bottled water and fruit; some gyms even have free juices and trail mixes.A version of this article appears in print on August 20, 2017, on Page TR2 of the New York edition with the headline: Want Something for Nothing? Ask the Concierge.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »