By ELAINE GLUSACMARCH 16, 2017
The cold nights and warming days of March and early April trigger maple sap flows and sugaring season deals across the Northeast.In Vermont, the Inn at Manchester is offering a Maple Getaway package through April 15. It includes a tour of a sugar shack, a quart of maple syrup, a half-pound of buttermilk pancake mix, overnight accommodations and breakfast from $195.Nearby, Merck Forest and Farmland Center will hold a celebration with tapping demonstrations and a pancake breakfast on March 25 and 26. Throughout the sugaring season, the Kimpton Taconic hotel in Manchester is offering a menu featuring dishes like maple mustard scallops and maple-glazed chicken. Rooms start at $150.In New Hampshire, the Snowvillage Inn near Mount Washington is offering a maple sugaring weekend, March 24 to 26, that includes a three-course dinner for two, two nights’ accommodations, two pints of syrup and a sugarhouse tour and pancake breakfast. The package starts at $619 for two.AdvertisementThe tree-to-table tour offered most weekends in March by the Inn at Pleasant Lake in New London, N.H., starts on the inn’s property with the tapping of its maple trees. It then visits a sugar shack, where the sap is turned into syrup. Rooms start at $225, with a two-night minimum, and include a five-course dinner and a chef’s demonstration on cooking with syrup.In Cooperstown, N.Y., the Farmers’ Museum offers demonstrations of syrup making along with tastings and breakfast every Sunday in March. The season coincides with winter rates at the Cooper Inn, which are 30 percent off and start at $99 a night, including breakfast and a bottle of wine.AdvertisementA culinary program held the weekend of March 24 to 26 in the Finger Lakes region of New York includes a visit to a maple syrup farm as well as optional craft brewery tours, a lesson in crepe-making and a wine mixing session with a vintner. The Meet the Finger Lakes Tastemakers weekends include two nights at the Inn on the Lake Waterfront Resort and Conference Center in Canandaigua or the Ramada Geneva Lakefront in Geneva and $150 in dining vouchers. The package starts at $495.A version of this article appears in print on March 19, 2017, on Page TR2 of the New York edition with the headline: One Sweet Trip.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.