

      By NELL MCSHANE WULFHART

FEB. 23, 2017

This tiny melting pot serves up an exhilarating array of food, culture and night life.
Related Article
Compared with its Caribbean neighbors, Trinidad gets few tourists except during its vibrant February carnival. This means that this tiny melting pot of a country — which shares nationhood with neighboring Tobago, and has a rich Indian-Creole-African-Chinese-British heritage — feels welcoming and authentic. Skyscrapers don’t exist; instead there are captivating gingerbread-style houses with fanciful latticework. The local cuisine, which reflects its hodgepodge of cultures, is intriguing and delicious but not fancy: The best meals are eaten on the street and at cafeteria-style counters, not in high-end restaurants, which tend to be Europeanized. Spend Friday in the capital, Port of Spain, then use Saturday for excursions north to the beach and south to explore the calm waterways and wild birds of the Caroni Swamp.
Explore street view, find things to do in Trinidad and sign in to your Google account to save your map.
One of the coolest new additions to Port of Spain’s food scene is a stationary food truck called G-Spot on Maraval Road. Here you’ll find what’s quite possibly the healthiest and most contemporary food on the whole island: grain bowls made with a blend of brown and red jasmine rice, topped with grilled vegetables, tamarind sauce and chutney; crepes stuffed with handmade pork and beef sausage from the local producer Del Mano, and sides of dasheen (taro) mashed with butter, milk and fresh herbs. Try the Trinitella for dessert: a sweet crepe filled with a spread made from hazelnuts and Trini chocolate. G-Spot closes at 4 p.m. but has occasional evening “cheat nights”; check the Facebook page for details. A short walk from G-Spot is a striking house with elaborate wooden fittings designed by the architect-turned-chocolatier Isabel Brash. This is where Ms. Brash creates Cocobel, exquisite chocolates produced with world-class cocoa beans from her family’s estate in southern Trinidad, and flavored with local ingredients like mango, Scotch bonnet peppers, passion fruit and honey. Stock up on chocolate bars, barks and nibs, then walk down the spiral staircase to the Medulla Art Gallery, which focuses on contemporary Trinidadian and Caribbean art and the work of the Caribbean diaspora. The sprawling Queen’s Park Savannah is the heart of the city, with amateur cricketers playing on the park’s green lawns on weekends, and food stalls serving up some of the best casual dining in town after dusk. Head for the cluster of white tents, bright lights and music and stroll through, picking up corn soup flavored with vinegar and studded with chunks of carrots and corn on the cob, pholourie (dumplings, lightly fried and served with a sweet dipping sauce), chicken feet and cow heels pickled with slices of cucumber (called souse). Then finish with a bag of the sweet and savory “chow”: slices of peeled fruit, often underripe mango, salted and doused with a peppery garlic sauce. Dinner for two, around 100 Trinidad/Tobago dollars, or about $15. Vendors on the perimeter of the park will open a fresh coconut for 10 dollars. One of the most cosmopolitan venues in Trinidad, the Big Black Box hosts events Friday evenings — from sets by EDM (electronic dance music) DJ.s to plays by local writers. Just off Ariapita Avenue (known as “the Avenue”), the Box is a sophisticated yet friendly place where hip young Trinis come for something different. The open-air venue has a bar, basic seating and a stage. Check its Facebook page to see what’s on. Explore the outdoorsy parts of Trinidad that are within easy reach of Port of Spain. Begin at the Green Market Santa Cruz, a farmers’ market set in a garden a 20-minute drive from the city on the road to Maracas Bay. It is part of a working farm; vendors sell organic produce, mango chutneys and jars of chadon beni sauce (made from a cilantrolike herb), flowers and crafts, as well as snacks like Venezuelan arepas and the uniquely Trini “doubles,” the version here made with pigeon peas instead of chickpeas, well spiced and sandwiched between two pieces of fried bread. Add a cup of cocoa tea, a sweet local drink made from ground cocoa beans and spices. 