
                Travel Tips            By                     
SHIVANI VORA

NOV. 17, 2017
A babymoon — a vacation couples take in the months before they become parents — is a chance to relax, spend quality time with your partner and indulge in some fun before your new arrival, said Sherry Alvarado, the experiences coordinator at Rosewood Bermuda. Ms. Alvarado has planned more than 100 babymoons over the last several years for couples who have stayed at the resort and has plenty of tips on how to make this last pre-parent hurrah a trip to remember. Here, she shares some tips on making the most of yours.Minimize Travel Time Traveling can be especially exhausting for pregnant women, so Ms. Alvarado advised choosing a babymoon destination which is easy to reach. If you’re flying, avoid a destination that requires a layover, and try to limit in-flight time to three hours or less. For those who reside on the East Coast, direct flights are available to appealing getaway spots like Bermuda, Maine, South Carolina, Georgia and Florida. West Coasters can consider Southern California, Colorado, New Mexico and Arizona, and couples who live in the Midwest are near vacation destinations like Aspen and Cabo San Lucas.Before you go, Ms. Alvarado said to make sure that you research the closest hospital to your hotel before your trip, in case you need to see a doctor. You should also carry a document that outlines anything specific a doctor should know about your pregnancy.Book a Babymoon Package Some properties, especially resorts, offer babymoon packages with inclusions like early check-in, daily nonalcoholic cocktails and prenatal spa treatments. These packages, Ms. Alvarado said, are usually attractively priced and can be a great way to save money on your getaway because they include several services and amenities for a minimal additional cost. Make sure to inquire about packages in advance.AdvertisementAlso, regardless of whether or not you book a babymoon package, let your hotel know in advance of your stay that you’re coming to celebrate your impending arrival — Ms. Alvarado said that some properties offer babymooners free room upgrades and tailored amenities such as a bib and onesie for your future childPlease verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Be Indulgent Babymooners should take every opportunity they can on their trip for self-care. “Your life will soon be dedicated to taking care of someone else, and now is your chance to indulge yourself without guilt,” Ms. Alvarado said. Consider, for example, booking a half- or full-day spa package with multiple treatments — particularly ones geared toward pregnant women. Enjoy several multicourse meals at upscale restaurants. Also, let your hotel’s concierge make your restaurant reservations and book your excursions, and take advantage of any free services your hotel may offer such as unpacking and packing; some properties will even have a selection of your favorite books waiting for you in your room upon arrival, if you relay a list to your hotel’s concierge before your trip.Most importantly, since sleep may become a precious commodity once you become a parent, use your babymoon to get in as many winks as you can: sleep in, take an afternoon nap and call it an early night.AdvertisementDon’t Forget the Romance It can be challenging for new parents to give their romantic relationship the same attention they did before they entered parenthood, and Ms. Alvarado advised packing in a babymoon with couple-orientated activities. Consider a private dinner on the beach, an afternoon picnic in a secluded spot, a couples massage or a night when you sleep under the stars.A version of this article appears in print on November 26, 2017, on Page TR2 of the New York edition with the headline: A Child Is Coming, but Not on This Trip.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »