

      By HANNAH SELIGSON

FEB. 4, 2016

A winter wonderland that combines the wilderness experience with skiing, snowboarding, shopping and dining, that can be enjoyed without breaking the bank.
Related Article
Aspen emphatically lives up to its reputation as a winter playground for the jet-set crowd — but it’s more than that. It’s a multifaceted gem with acres of surrounding wilderness — the official term for a place where man does not remain — that lends this former mining town a certain mystique. Spend as many of the precious daylight hours you can  exploring and tramping. But there is also plenty to do outside of the wilderness experience: shopping, trying out a few excellent restaurants, and, yes, even sampling culture with the new Aspen Art Museum. While this is the land of the $50 entree, there are fantastic dining, recreation and even lodging options that won’t break the bank. Don’t waste your time and money or risk your safety trying to keep up with the billionaires from Brazil or the daredevils from Australia. With some strategic choices you can experience this sublime and compact winter wonderland in comfort and style without a credit-card hangover.Start your weekend atop Aspen Mountain, which the locals refer to as Ajax, with a snowshoe tour led by the Aspen Center for Environmental Studies (ACES). At over 11,000 feet, you’ll orient yourself to the stunning surroundings: Highland Bowl, Hayden Peak and Smuggler Mountain. Our extremely knowledgeable guide pointed out animal tracks, gave minihistory lessons and supplied cookies and hot chocolate. No reservations necessary; $58 per adult, including lift ticket. Daily tours at 10 a.m. and 1 p.m. Après ski (or simply après) is to Aspen what teatime is to England: an indispensable daily ritual that is taken seriously. The sacred window between the closing of the ski lifts (generally from 3 to 3:30 p.m.) in most cases and nightfall is a time for drinking and noshing. Chair 9 at the Little Nell, the five-star hotel at the foot of Aspen Mountain, is a reasonably priced establishment devoted to this pastime. Order a draft beer ($6) or a glass of bubbly (prosecco, $8) and toast to your first day at altitude while nibbling on some Parmesan fries and Colorado lamb empanadas. Live music or a D.J. every day. Opened in 2014, the Aspen Art Museum designed by Shigeru Ban is as much a work of art as its contents. A variety of rotating multimedia exhibitions are presented, by artists who have included Yves Klein and Miranda July. Don’t miss the sculpture garden on the top floor facing Aspen Mountain. Free. A welcome and needed addition to the sometimes stuffy Aspen dining scene, Meat & Cheese is the hipster casual spot that serves boards of (you guessed it) top-notch meat and cheese. Start with a cheese board (let your server do the picking; there are no bad cheeses here) and then move onto the succulent and juicy local rotisserie chicken board. Dinner for two, including alcohol (try the Face Down Brown Ale, $6), is around $100. The aptly named and conveniently situated Main Street Bakery starts serving at 7 a.m. Grab a quick breakfast here before heading up the mountain. Carbo-load on a homemade bagel and grab a mini doughnut or three (they are $1.01 apiece) for later. Buy a ski pass at the ticket booth in the plaza at South Hunter Street and East Durant Avenue (one-day adult pass is $139), which you can use at four mountains — Highlands, Buttermilk, Aspen or Snowmass — and ride the gondola up Aspen Mountain. Then stretch out and limber up on the sun deck with a yoga class geared toward skiers and snowboarders. Get there early for the 9:30 a.m. start to grab a spot in the front of the airy room with the best views of the mountains. The class (also offered on Tuesday and Thursday, in addition to Saturday) is one hour and costs $5. Free yoga mats provided. Hit the slopes. More confident skiers can stay on Aspen Mountain, which has no green trails and is dominated by advanced skiers. Make good use of the secondary lifts because the gondola (from the foot of the mountain) takes 14 minutes to get to the top. For families with children just learning and those looking for more manageable terrain, take the free public bus about 10 minutes to Buttermilk Mountain, which is three miles from downtown Aspen. In the words of a local, “There is no better place to cruise around on groomers.” But even experienced skiers can have fun on the mountain’s challenging blue trails. Both Aspen and Buttermilk Mountains run Ambassador Programs — free tours that orient skiers and snowboarders to the mountains. Tours meet and leave from the Guest Services Cabin on both mountains. Those who make a sport of après say that the 39 Degrees Lounge at the trendy Sky Hotel is the most popular place in town for postskiing eating and drinking. The crowd is young and hip at this sleek, yet cozy, watering hole with a fireplace. And the tuna tacos ($19) and soft pretzel sticks with white Cheddar fondue ($9) hit the spot. Wash it down with a Champagne supernova, a perfectly sweet, fizzy concoction ($17). Aspen has a hedonistic streak, so splurge with a massage at the Remède  Spa at the St. Regis, which has a lot of practice working out the kinks and tight spots, inevitable byproducts of winter sports. Go early or stay longer to take advantage of the spa’s oxygen room, hot tub, cold plunge and sauna. A 60-minute massage is $195.   La Creperie du Village is a cozy bistro that opened in 2011. Here you will find a French alpine bistro known for its fondue, crepes and raclette, a dish of melted cheese, boiled potatoes, cornichons and cured meat. The dish is served with a tabletop grill and is the main draw, along with the fondue, which comes in a cheese and beef variation. Save room for the Pure Love Crepe (homemade) with butter, lemon and sugar. Dinner for two, with drinks, about $120. Bootsy Bellows, which had  a $1 million renovation in summer 2014, is the home of Aspen’s new night life. The swanky club — one of the few structures without an architectural nod to the West or the frontier, it would fit in in Beverly Hills or Berlin — is partly owned by the actor David Arquette, who named  it for his late mother, a burlesque performer. The space has a ’70s glamour vibe. The party really starts after 11.
Explore street view, find things to do in Aspen and sign in to your Google account to save your map.
Caffeinate and fortify with coffee and quiche (spinach and cheese, $3.50) at Paradise Bakery and Cafe before heading out for a cross-country ski outing. If you thought you would only enjoy Aspen vertically, you were mistaken. The sleeper, and most budget-conscious among Aspen’s outdoor activities, the Aspen Cross Country Center is easily reached on the free public bus to Buttermilk (Truscott stop — make sure to tell your bus driver to stop). The “XC Center,” situated  on Aspen’s public golf course, has stunning views of the snowcapped Rockies and can be enjoyed by beginners and experts alike. The Aspen Snowmass Nordic Trail System’s 90 kilometers of free trails, set between Aspen and Snowmass, are accessible from the center, but a one-hour, five-kilometer loop is more than enough to get one’s heart rate going. Ski equipment rentals are available on-site starting at $24.99 a person for a full day; instruction and tours also for hire. Many Aspen stores can be found in other major cities, so focus on what isn’t easy to find back home. Kemo Sabe, for instance, is a cowboy store that sells its trademark boots for  $550 to $1,850. Elegant python cuffs, which are made locally, start at $195. Check out the belt buckles, which are made by the same buckle maker who made them for “The Lone Ranger.” Next up is Anna Trzebinski, which sells handmade wares from Nairobi that are tribal-meets-Western, like cow horn bangles (which run from $80 to $100). Many items run in the four figures. Dash a few doors down for a quick look in Stefan Kaelin Ski & Golf for runway-worthy ski outfits that are both pricey and beautiful. Last stop is Silverpeak Apothecary, impeccably professional and the most high-end of the cannabis stores in Aspen, a growing part of the town’s retail offerings. Hotel Aspen (110 Main Street, 877-675-3025) is a cozy, no-frills option with a great location in the center of the town. Service is friendly and there is free breakfast and a daily wine reception. Just don’t expect a bellman to carry your bags. From $300 per night. The St. Regis Aspen Resort (315 East Dean Street, www.stregisaspen.com) is close to the base of Aspen Mountain, and is a haven of luxury. The rooms are chic and spacious. Free unlimited bottled water to jugs of hot chocolate in the lobby appear just as guest sare getting back from a day on the slopes, and champagne daily at 4:45 p.m. Lowest rates in the peak season, which runs end of December to March, seem to start around $599 per night.Advertisement