

      By NELL MCSHANE WULFHART

JAN. 21, 2016

More than simply a base for the beaches, this energetic city combines a vibrant night life with graceful, centuries-old buildings.
The only thing many sun-seeking tourists see of Santo Domingo is the airport. Often bypassed in favor of beach resorts like Punta Cana or Puerto Plata, Santo Domingo is a city that deserves more attention than it gets. Its energetic night life — complete with nonstop bachata music — and idyllic location on the Caribbean are just two of the highlights. The stunning centuries-old  buildings and trendy boutiques of the Zona Colonial, a new swath of upscale restaurants and the welcoming attitude of the capitaleños (the city’s residents) are also reasons to make the city more than a transit stop on the way to the beach.Start in the sprawling Plaza de la Cultura. Skip the Museo de Historia Natural, with its dusty taxidermy installations and the occasional living, but apparently depressed, snake. Two other museums on the Plaza deserve a visit, especially the semi-decaying Museo del Hombre Dominicano. It may look as if it hasn’t seen a visitor since it opened its doors in the 1970s, but it’s worth hiking up to the fourth floor — if the elevator is broken — for the colorful exhibits on the Taino (the indigenous culture wiped out by the Spanish), the slave trade, Criollo culture and the kitschy wooden signs. The colorful, elaborate masks and costumes from the annual Carnaval are a particular highlight. The livelier Museo de Arte Moderno has changing exhibitions and impressive new work from Dominican artists. Bring change for the entry tickets (50 pesos, or $1.15 at 43 pesos to the dollar, per museum). If there’s a “new Dominican cuisine,” then you’ll find it at Travesías in the chic Naco neighborhood, where many restaurants are setting up shop. While the beachy cafe décor, complete with porch, wouldn’t look out of place in Cape May, the menu offers traditional Dominican ingredients assembled into new combinations and modular shapes. Try the torrecitas de mangú (295 pesos), towers of mashed plantain topped with egg and drizzled with sauces of an almost neon hue, and the milhojas de concón (445 pesos), starring the crispy rice that clings to the bottom of the pot. Hop on a stool at the counter of Barra Payán, a 1950s diner crossed with a Dominican sandwich spot, for  a late-night snack. The chain has locations around the city, but this one, dating from  1956,  was the first. Order the completo Danés, a pressed, toasted sandwich of cheese, ham, tomato, mayo and shredded pork, and wash it down with one of the delectable fresh tropical juices, which can be ordered either “natural,” con leche or blended with condensed milk (try the tamarind shake). 
Explore street view, find things to do in Santo Domingo and sign in to your Google account to save your map.
Join the queue of people ordering from the servers chopping up chicken and deep-fried pork belly behind the counter at the longtime local favorite Villar Hermanos. Beans and rice (100 pesos), stewed beef (170 pesos), eggplant cooked with coconut milk (35 pesos): This is the place to try all the Dominican classics. The waiters, in bow ties, will bring your order to the table, and don’t forget the delectable tres leches cake topped with whipped cream (80 pesos). Travel in a private car repurposed as a public vehicle. Conchos lack both air-conditioning and seatbelts, but they’re the most fun, if reckless,  way to get around. Flag one down on Avenida Independencia, pay the driver around 25 pesos and get out at Parque Independencia, the entrance to the gorgeous Zona Colonial, where the city’s oldest sights and trendiest shops sit side by side. Rent a teal bicycle (300 pesos per hour) from Zona Bici, and pedal your way to the Alcázar de Colón (100 pesos, audio guide included), the beautifully restored home of Diego Colón, son of Christopher Columbus. From here, cycle south to the Catedral Primada de América (40 pesos), with its mix of Gothic and Baroque styles and modern stained-glass windows. Finally, stop in at the Museo Memorial de La Resistancia Dominicana (150 pesos). The English audio guide provides basic information; the photos and documentation of the resistance and eventual overthrow of the 30-year dictatorship of Rafael Trujillo are riveting. New shops and cafes are rapidly making the Zona Colonial the coolest part of the city. First stop, La Alpargatería, a hip shoe shop where young artisans construct colorful, modern espadrilles. The store connects to a laid-back cafe with local art on the walls, plenty of nooks for lounging and a patio, where you can pause for a fresh mango juice (115 pesos) or coffee (60 pesos). Three blocks south on Calle Padre Bellini is Casa Alfarera, an artisanal ceramics shop. To the west lies Casa Quien, a modern art gallery and boutique that displays contemporary art from local and international artists and sells unusual prints, jewelry and housewares. If you cycle down El Conde, a lively pedestrian street, keep an eye out for one of the few remaining manhole covers stamped with “C. Trujillo” (“C” for “ciudad,” or city). These are a leftover from when the dictator renamed the city (and plenty of other things) after himself. In the Dominican Republic there’s nowhere you can’t start a party. Stop into any colmado (these convenience stores sell everything from toilet paper to shots of rum, and you’ll find one on almost every street) that’s playing music.  Pull up a plastic chair and ask the owner to “Dame una cerveza vestida de novia” (“Give me a beer dressed like a bride,” meaning a beer so cold it’s covered in frost). The one across the street from Casa Quien is convenient: Settle in with the locals and enjoy a convenient predinner drink. One of a crop of creative new restaurants in Santo Domingo, Lulú has a menu of small plates and cocktails in a chic building that sits on one of the Zona Colonial’s most picturesque squares (dinner for two, with drinks, around 3,000 pesos). Sit on the terrace for old-town atmosphere and warm breezes, inside at the bar for air-conditioning. The presentation of the food can be quirky (goat croquettes arrive in a kid’s size Converse All Star), but the service is excellent and the food, especially the tuna tacos stuffed with raw tuna and guacamole, and the octopus carpaccio, is very good. Stroll up Calle Hostos to Lucia 203, an atmospheric events space with a bar and open-air courtyard that hosts an enormous band on Thursday and Saturday nights. Live son and classic merengue tunes mean a dance floor bursting with energy. Test out your skills or order a glass of sangria (214 pesos) and grab a table with a view in the courtyard, where fans create a breeze. Sunday is when locals hit the beach. Start with breakfast at La Dolcerie, a chic bistro and bakery in moneyed Piantini. Fortify yourself with eggs Benedict and house-made churros with dulce de leche (breakfast for two, around 700 pesos); then head south toward Najayo (rent a car or take a taxi, around 2,700 pesos). Make a stop at Ingenio Boca de Nigua, the preserved remains of a sugar plantation, now populated solely by cows and the odd horse, that was the site of a landmark slave rebellion in 1796. It’s depicted in the moving mural that graces one wall. Twenty minutes from Boca de Nigua is Najayo, a section of coast jam-packed with crowded restaurants serving fish and jumbo bottles of Presidente. The sea is full of people swimming in the section fenced off by Trujillo, who used to vacation here with his mistresses — you can spot his house on the hill. Bachata plays in every restaurant, local families and groups of friends bring bottles of rum to mix with Coke, and vendors amble by selling everything from sunglasses to fresh coconuts to corn on the cob. Boca Chica, the much-touristed beach east of Santo Domingo, draws far more tourists, but its hustlers and underage prostitutes make Najayo a much more palatable option. If you’re still in town, the ruins of a 16th-century monastery are brought back to life each week by Grupo Bonyé, a band that plays animated merengue, using traditional instruments like the güira, to a crowd of hundreds at the Monasterio de San Francisco. The live music might not get going until 7 p.m. or so, but the party starts at 5, with couples getting their groove on to recorded tunes. Sit on the grass or the steps of the ruins, or pay a small fee for a plastic chair. Servers will bring you a cold Presidente or a frozen margarita (made with locally produced Brugal rum, of course). The welcoming El Beaterio (Duarte 8; elbeaterio.com; doubles from $100) was a convent back in the 16th century, and it now houses 11 small but comfortable rooms surrounding a courtyard. For the friendly service and the stellar location in the Zona Colonial, it’s excellent value.The 36 Hours column last Sunday, about Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic, misspelled the name of a museum. It is the Museo Memorial de La Resistencia Dominicana (not Resistancia). And the column misspelled a street recommended for shopping. It is Calle Padre Billini (not Bellini).Advertisement