AdvertisementSupported byCheck InBy Cheryl Lu-Lien TanStandard rooms start at £79 (about $115).Village the Hotel Club Edinburgh is something like that oddly hyper stranger you meet at a bar whom you just can’t shake — a little pushy (your key card holder suggests, “Get a room”) and just a smidgen too chipper (during my stay, notepads bore the header “v. happy thoughts”). Upbeat labeling is inescapable in this £21 million, five-story hotel with 120 rooms that opened in January 2015. But perhaps there is a reason that the British-based Village the Hotel Club brand, which began its foray into Scotland in December 2014 with a hotel opening in Aberdeen, saw fit to take the quirky charm of boutique hotels and amp it up on steroids. In a rather sterile swath of northern Edinburgh, not far from the city center, the property is surrounded by industrial-park-style buildings.Just north of the city center, the hotel is an easy 10-minute bus, car or taxi ride from the art museums and Princes Street shops in the heart of Edinburgh.My standard double — the basic room — felt a bit like a spartan cell, with its dull gray, brown and pale mauve walls, industrial light fixtures and cream furnishings. Throw pillows bearing phrases like “v. hungry” and a several-foot-wide iron wall clock festooned with colorful license plates from Texas and California did their best to add some life to the setting. A large flat-screen TV, ironing board and small drinks station (labeled “v. thirsty”) packed with a kettle, instant coffee and PG Tips tea rounded things out. The hanging door sign for housekeepers announced “v. messy” on one side and “v. sleepy” on the other.With its granite and cream tiles and bare walls, the room exuded an austere aesthetic. The Grohe rainshower in the snug, glass-walled stall was a plus, though the towel warmer didn’t work. Amenities were in-house labels — a “v. handy” liquid soap and a “v. bouncy” shampoo.An on-site restaurant, Verve Grill, was a cavernous affair divided into a boisterous bar area (the Public House) with several TVs and a more staid dining section. The décor was industrial chic — exposed ceilings, metal and glass motifs. Dinner included steaks, burgers and specials such as chicken Kiev (dry, tasteless), salads and fillet steak stroganoff. The breakfast buffet, included in the room rate, featured a delicious haggis in addition to the usual fare of baked beans, eggs, sausage, bacon, cereals, fruit and pastries.Besides free Wi-Fi, ample free parking, a Starbucks in the lobby and room service, the hotel provides free access to a spacious on-site gym featuring more than 30 running/StairMaster machines, a big weights section, classes and a wall full of brochures that answer burning questions like “Kettlebells — what are they?” A 20-meter lap pool, Jacuzzi tub and spa (£70 facials and £55 massages) were also available. While the hotel has several conference rooms, it had no business center for basic photocopying or scanning. The receptionist kindly offered to print something out for me, though.Industrial-chic, modern and spare lodgings with a boutique sensibility on speed.Village the Hotel Club Edinburgh, 140 Crewe Road South, 44-131-297-7111; village-hotels­.co.uk/hotels­/edinburgh.Advertisement