AdvertisementSupported byBitesBy Rose Maura LorrePull up to the curb outside Sundial St. Pete, a shopping, dining and entertainment megaplex that crash-landed, Wizard of Oz style, in quaint downtown St. Petersburg. Bypass its beckoning entranceway for the adjacent door to Locale Market, a sprawling two-story emporium that makes Zabar’s look like a walk-in closet. Pass the glossy hillocks of organic honeycrisp apples, find your way upstairs and, voilà!, you have arrived at FarmTable Kitchen, the celebrity chef Michael Mina’s fresh take on New American fare that’s as polished-yet-playful as its name is generic.In 2014, Mr. Mina opened Locale Market, one of Sundial’s anchor stores, with a tiny wine bar featuring a small-plates menu couched amid its second-floor retail displays. Diners quickly voiced their desire for more space, an expanded menu and — surprisingly, for a coastal Florida city — more formality, including the ability to make reservations. Mr. Mina’s reply, FarmTable Kitchen, debuted in September and was an instant hit; on a Monday night in November, the now 10,000-square-foot restaurant was almost full.With a professed emphasis on “farm-and-Gulf-to-table” cooking and many ingredients taken straight from Locale’s shelves, the menu is crowd-pleasing and borders on overly ambitious. I was tickled by the Key West pink shrimp toast — a creamy mélange of crustacean meat, guacamole and shrimp Louie dressing — as well as a perfectly textured appetizer of clams and crumbled house-made Italian sausage bathed in a luscious and flavorful tomato broth.Equally praiseworthy was Michael’s Mother’s Falafel, with fava beans and English peas imparting a nifty shade of green to the crispy falafel’s interior, although I wished its accompanying roasted carrot hummus packed a more robust punch.Among nearly 20 main-course options, my dining partner chose a Kansas City strip that had been dry-aged one floor below us. On a when-in-Rome whim, I ordered grilled Gulf-caught black grouper. While the steak struck us as a notch below stellar, the grouper, plated on a bed of quinoa and cauliflower purée, was exquisitely clean-tasting, the platonic ideal of grilled fish.FarmTable’s cocktail menu changes with every new exhibition at St. Petersburg’s acclaimed Salvador Dalí Museum; when I visited, the drinks were inspired by a showing of M. C. Escher’s works. The restaurant lacks a full liquor license, so those tipples are mixed mostly with vermouths and amari. Like the restaurant’s long menu, cumbrous name and odd location, it’s another example of everything verging on overconceptualization. But the drinks were splendid, and once again, FarmTable’s expert execution saved the day.FarmTable Kitchen,  179 Second Avenue North; 727-523-6300; localegourmetmarket­.com­/farmtable­-kitchen. Average meal for two, without drinks or tip, about $100.Advertisement