AdvertisementSupported byTravel TipsBy Shivani VoraFrance can be a notoriously expensive vacation destination — particularly if you have got your sights set on Paris or the French Riviera. Are luxury seekers on a limited budget out of luck? Not at all, said Joelle Kolich, the director of See Travel, a Bordeaux-based company selling luxury trips to the country.Here are some of Ms. Kolich’s tips for a luxurious but budget-friendly vacation in France:Ditch That Rental Car and Take the Train Forget renting a car (or, worse, relying on a private driver to get around), said Ms. Kolich. Instead, use the TGV, the country’s high-speed train system. “The TGV has lots of routes and is affordable and clean,” she said, “whereas the cost of a car, even a rental, adds up fast.” Ms. Kolich regularly books the TGV for her clients at favorable prices — for example, 45 euros (about $54) from Paris to Bordeaux.Don’t Limit Yourself to Michelin-Starred Restaurants France’s many Michelin-starred restaurants aren’t the only places to enjoy high-quality, multicourse meals. “Wherever you go in France, you’ll find small restaurants where up-and-coming, talented chefs serve inventive cuisine,” Ms. Kolich said. One example is Racines, in Bordeaux. It’s a favorite of Ms. Kolich’s, and a three-course dinner showcasing seasonal produce starts at 29 euros a person.Avoid July and August The French escape to the country during these summer months, which means that prices and crowds swell everywhere. Visit any other time, and expect rates for hotels and private tour guides to drop by 30 percent or more.When in Paris … There are several ways to save money on a stay. For one, forget taxis and use the Metro to get around — but buy an unlimited day pass, which is less expensive than individual tickets. If your itinerary includes visiting multiple museums and monuments, buy a Paris Museum Pass, which allows for entry into more than 50 such sites; you can both avoid ticket lines and individual tickets, which can add up to be far pricier than the pass. Also, stay in hotels and dine at restaurants in lesser-known neighborhoods like the Bastille; Ms. Kolich said that they’re more affordable than ones in the city’s touristy areas.Visit Cities Besides Paris While Paris is undeniably alluring, other cities in France offer as much appeal when it comes to scenery, history and architecture. However, their restaurants and hotels are up to 30 percent less expensive than ones in Paris. Ms. Kolich’s top picks include Bordeaux; Lyon; Strasbourg, in the Alsace region; Rennes, in Brittany; and Lille, in French Flanders, where a meal of mussels, fries and beer is unbeatable.Ditch the Hotel Breakfast A simple hotel breakfast in France, said Ms. Kolich, can easily run $40 a person. Head to a local cafe instead. “You’ll enjoy a coffee and croissant for a few euros, which is a typical French breakfast experience,” Ms. Kolich said.Advertisement