AdvertisementSupported byDisney tries to recreate Pandora, the world depicted in the genre-defining 3-D film “Avatar.” Here’s how the company did it.By Mekado MurphyThe first time I saw the 2009 film “Avatar,” I was pulled into its world. The gorgeous habitat of the moon of Pandora was rich and alive onscreen in a way that made me feel as if I were there, able to touch its floating mountains. Disney’s Animal Kingdom aspires to recreate that experience, a tall order. There is an inherent challenge of transporting the world to a theme park: The movie’s Na’vi inhabitants had to contend with viperwolves in the forest, while visitors to Pandora: The World of Avatar mostly have to contend with crowds and lines. But the world aims to give fans of the film (and young fans in the making) the same jaw-dropping, immersive experience that they came away with after watching the movie the first time. Did they pull it off? The answer is a resounding yes. When I visited the park in the spring, I was as wowed as I was the first time I donned those 3-D glasses to catch it on the big screen. A team of Imagineers — employees of Walt Disney Imagineering, which handles design and development — worked closely with the film’s director, James Cameron, and its producer, Jon Landau, to transport guests to the place where the mountains are floating and the flowers are glowing. This Pandora is set a generation after the events of the first film and its coming sequels. The bad guys from the Resources Development Administration, the movie’s eco-unfriendly mining group, have left Pandora’s Valley of Mo’ara. What’s left is sustained nature and Na’vi in communion with it. That includes, of course, some of the most memorable touchstones: the floating mountains, the bioluminescent forests and the flying banshees. Below is a look at how the park incorporated those, and much more.The first thing likely to catch a visitor’s eye is the cluster of floating mountains that hovers over the land’s center. Waterfalls cascade from them, and their peaks hold mystery. Twenty-two of these mountains are scattered about, and each is unique. A group of more than 60 artists worked on hand-carving the rock on the mountains and connecting them with greenery in a way to give the impression that they’re defying gravity. Walkways give you different angles to approach them and walk right under them as well. There’s water everywhere too, an overwhelming gush of nature pouring out.Even the world’s most knowledgeable botanists won’t be able to name many of the plants on Pandora. In their attention to vivid detail, Imagineers invented 20 main species of plants and dozens more subspecies. So explorers of the area will come across dapophet, which looks like aloe vera, or goblin thistle, which has a twisted trunk and bluish leaves, among many more. Some invented plants sit next to real ones, and it is sometimes difficult to tell which is which. They have rich colors during the day, but at night they are illuminated. The plants are also interwoven with one another, so the light emanating from them, as well as from the ground beneath visitors, all communicates in a warm glow.If you won’t be around the park at night but still want to see some plants glow, the Na’vi River Journey ride is the best bet. Imagineers wanted to make Pandora seem like a real place, not a theme park, so they didn’t put up garish ride signs. Instead, the entrance to the ride has a Na’vi totem in front of it guiding guests to the entrance. In this dark ride, passengers hop in a reed boat that takes them on a bioluminescent rain forest expedition that is both thrilling and a little trippy. The plants shine in bright neon colors, and then riders come in contact with the animatronic figure the Na’vi Shaman of Songs. Joe Rohde, a senior executive with Walt Disney Imagineering, said that it is one of the most advanced examples of robotics to be found on a theme park ride. “It is absolutely cutting-edge in terms of the emotive illusory capacity to appear to be a living being,” he said.More state-of-the-art thrills can be found on the ride Avatar Flight of Passage, which takes viewers on a simulated ride on a banshee, the aerial predator that the Na’vi bond with. The ride uses a swerving seat and 3-D glasses to make you feel as if you’re really there. Weta, the New Zealand effects company responsible for many of the original feature’s eye-popping visuals, did the animation. As you fly through the air, wind blows into your face. Deeper in the forest, that distinct smell of damp soil is pumped into the air. And when your banshee gets near water, drops of it hit you. The machine beneath your seat and between your legs expands and contracts to give the impression that the banshee is breathing underneath you. These details help make this simulation successful in transporting you there. This area is called Swotu Wayä, a sacred place of song for the Na’vi. The instruments are built into a tree’s root structure, creating resonant chambers. It allows guests to communicate through song with Eywa, the goddess of the Na’vi. When they play the drums, they get a response back from her. Also during the day, a trio of local performers plays on the drums and showcases what the instruments are capable of doing.Advertisement