AdvertisementSupported byBitesBy Rebecca Flint MarxThere are fish sandwiches, and then there is the fish and chips sandwich at the Boathouse, an all-day counter service spot tucked into an actual former boathouse at the Suttle Lodge, a magisterial 1930s-era property located in central Oregon’s Deschutes National Forest. A brawny trout filet is encrusted in pulverized Kettle brand potato chips, fried golden brown, and crammed into a squishy potato bun like a linebacker into a tutu. Accompanied by tartar sauce, pickles and iceberg lettuce, it’s less a sandwich than a piping-hot mess of pleasure.Perched on the edge of Suttle Lake, a 20-minute drive from the tiny town of Sisters, the lodge was renovated last year by some of the team behind the Ace Hotel in Portland; the result, which reopened late last summer, emanates a sort of Wes Anderson Goes Glamping vibe.The Boathouse also sports a cool-kid pedigree: its menu was designed by Joshua McFadden, the executive chef at and co-owner of Ava Gene’s and a founding partner at Tusk, two of Portland’s buzziest restaurants. “It would be so easy to put a world-class restaurant in that location, but for me it would feel like such an injustice,” Mr. McFadden said of the Suttle Lodge. Instead, he continued, his guiding principle was “let’s do the basics and do them really, really well.”That translates to a compendium of expertly executed grown-up camp food: burgers, hot dogs, sandwiches, salads and a Left Coast chowder stocked with chunks of trout and salmon. Indeed, the Boathouse is a haven for trout enthusiasts: you can also add it to the aptly named simple leaf salad or, at breakfast, to a pleasingly gooey egg sandwich.I did both when I visited twice in mid-July; I also ordered the bean-on-bean sandwich, a dish that sounds like a gastrointestinal threat but turned out to be a harmonious compilation of mashed borlotti beans, pickled jalapeños, red onion, sour cream, and judicious blobs of feta, all packed onto a potato bun.The Boathouse’s ambience is as stripped down as its menu: whitewashed walls, slatted Douglas fir benches and a concrete floor. There’s also a jukebox playing classic rock; for an exercise in cognitive dissonance, you can’t beat eating a borlotti bean sandwich while listening to Poison’s “Every Rose Has Its Thorn.”If the Boathouse has any thorns, they are its occasionally slow service and choice of seating: those benches shudder mightily under the weight of anyone over six months old. But it’s all easy to forgive when you find yourself sitting at one of the restaurant’s dockside tables on a sunny morning, inhaling a stack of fluffy buttermilk pancakes as dogs fling themselves ecstatically into the lake. If there’s a happier path to satiety, I have yet to find it.The Boathouse at the Suttle Lodge, 13300 US-20; 541-638-7001; thesuttlelodge.com. An average dinner for two, without drinks or tip, is $40. (The restaurant is open until it gets snowed in, so call ahead in winter; they are currently serving breakfast and lunch, probably through December.)videoAdvertisement