
Bites By                     
ADAM H. GRAHAM

FEB. 21, 2017
In Switzerland, melted cheese is a religion — but there are, of course, rules about how to eat it.Raclette, the gooey dish that is scraped from a “loaf” of roasted cheese and glopped over potatoes, is usually served at ski huts, festivals, Christmas markets, or just at home; it’s rarely seen in Zurich restaurants. Nevertheless, Raclette Factory opened in December, offering the dish in a few new ways, in a casual setting.“There are pizza, kebab, bratwurst and burger fast-food spots, but no raclette,” said Rolf Suter, the restaurant’s owner. “We offer a unique experience by crossing tradition with modernism: Swiss heritage at a fast pace.”On a recent snowy Friday, I visited the restaurant, in Zurich’s cobblestoned old town, with three Swiss friends. Starters were straightforward: salads, soups and flammkuchen, an Alsatian pizza topped with crème fraîche and speck. “Only an auslander” — a foreigner — “would eat that before a raclette,” one of my friends said.The main menu was a matrix of confusing options, even to my Swiss companions. The classic main dish is offered in a choice of plain, garlic, chile, peppercorn or smoked versions, all made with Swiss cow’s milk cheese and sold by weight. It is served three different ways: pre-melted, self-cooked on the table over a painfully slow candlelit grill, or on an electric grill. Diners can choose a base of boiled potatoes, bread cubes or mashed potatoes. There is a raclette à discrétion, an all-you-can-eat concept popular for après-ski, and even a raclette takeout. (The menu will soon expand to include sides like pears, honey, polenta, pomegranate and sardines.)AdvertisementFor a few extra francs, you can splurge on unusual raclettes made from sheep or goat’s milk, sweet port wine, or a pungent blue cheese called blauer schalk (“blue scoundrel”). Our favorite was a raclette made with raw milk cheese and white Tuscan truffles.Typically, hot tea or white wine are encouraged so that the melted cheese doesn’t harden in your stomach, but the menu here also included beer, soda and cocktails. We settled on a white merlot from Canton Ticino. For dessert: meringue boats floating in a melted Gruyère double cream and shots of summery hay schnapps from Hasliberg.AdvertisementThe décor — plywood walls decorated with vintage skis and antlers — felt a bit tired, and the combination of a 1980s-heavy soundtrack and a bunch of empty tables left us feeling old. Still, the idea of a permanent raclette restaurant is a welcome one, even if the execution is a little, um, cheesy.Raclette Factory, Rindermarkt 1; 41-44-261-0410; raclette-factory.ch. Average dinner for two, without drinks or tip, is about 60 Swiss francs (about the same in dollars).A version of this article appears in print on February 26, 2017, on Page TR8 of the New York edition with the headline: A Warm and Gooey Dish Steps Up.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »