AdvertisementSupported byIn TransitBy Shivani VoraTravelers can live the celebrated sweet — and authentic — Italian life by taking a half- or full-day tour on a Vespa, the popular two-wheeled Italian motor scooter that many locals rely on to get around. Several companies offer excursions on the scooters; with most, tourists ride as passengers while the driver is their guide, but a few tours give visitors the chance to drive the bikes themselves.“To ride a Vespa is to see Italy through the eyes of Italians,” said Uri Harash, the founder of the Italian private tour company Perfetto Traveler. “You get intimate with the streets and the area you’re visiting in a way that’s totally unique.”Mr. Harash has created a three-hour Vespa tour of Rome in which a driver takes clients to lesser-known and famous sights such as the Trevi Fountain and to residential neighborhoods like Testaccio. Prices from $330 a person.Also in Rome, Bici & Baci has a four-hour tour called Rome Movie Sets in which a driver takes passengers to places in the city where “Roman Holiday,” “Ben-Hur” and, of course, “La Dolce Vita” were shot. One stop is Via Margutta, the street near the Spanish Steps where Joe Bradley, played by the actor Gregory Peck, lived in the film “Roman Holiday.” Prices from 145 euros, about $155 at $1.05 to the euro, a person.In Tuscany, Tuscany Cycle has a seven-hour small group trip of the Chianti region, where travelers ride their own Vespas. They’re picked up in Florence by a guide who takes them to Castello di Trebbio, a 12th-century castle a half-hour away. After a lesson in Vespa driving, they have a chance to practice their skills on lightly trafficked, winding roads. A wine tasting and lunch follows. Prices from 120 euros a person.IC Bellagio has private Vespa trips, all with drivers, throughout the country, including in Milan and Puglia. The company’s six-hour Amalfi Coast option is among the most popular. Travelers ride on the back of a vintage Vespa along the curvy coastline and stop in the towns of Sorrento, Positano and Ravello. Prices from 450 euros a person with lunch.Another option from the company is a four-hour tour of Lake Como with stops at the villages of Lezzeno and Bellagio. Prices from 250 euros a person.Advertisement