By ANN MAHSEPT. 24, 2016
Looking for a different way to visit Europe? An unpaid volunteer experience — at a farm or winery or archaeological site — can offer an insider’s view of local culture. Here is a selection.1. Les vendanges, the annual French wine harvest that takes place at summer’s end, can be an ideal vacation for the budget traveler. Many small wineries offer volunteers meals, wine and lodging in exchange for unpaid help picking grapes. Though the work is physically taxing, the camaraderie, breathtaking vineyard views and rare glimpse of French culture can almost make the backaches disappear — and the free-flowing wine doesn’t hurt either. Because of rigid French labor laws, arranging a volunteer vendange experience can require some persistence, but opportunities do exist, particularly among small, family-owned wineries. Frequent your local wine shop to connect with independent winemakers, or search websites like World Wide Opportunities on Organic Farms (WWOOF) and Workaway, which connect volunteers with agricultural hosts. (Read more on volunteering for the vendange here.) Other current opportunities include working with a rare breed of horses in Greece, creating a garden in the Faroe Islands, or helping on a dairy farm in Ireland. The sites require a small membership fee to search listings. Hosts usually provide room and board in exchange for about five hours of work a day.2. In Iceland, Seeds is a nonprofit organization that has hosted over 8,000 volunteers. Projects change annually, but they have included maintaining hiking paths in the Fjallabak Nature Reserve, working in Reykjavik’s Botanical Garden and organizing a cultural festival in the western fjords. Accommodations and food are provided, and the application fee ranges from 200 to 250 euros (about $223 to $280).3. Fans of medieval architecture can wield axes and dabble in wattle-and-daub plaster at Guédelon, a new castle that’s being constructed using only the techniques and materials that were available during the Middle Ages. Located in Burgundy, the volunteer project is open approximately from mid-March to early November, and welcomes carpenters of any level, from amateur to professional. Room and board are not provided, but the organizers offer suggestions for low-cost meals and accommodation in the area. Applications are available on the website; some French is required.4. With three field stations in Croatia, the Adriatic Dolphin Project focuses on the research and conservation of large marine vertebrates, including a local population of bottlenose dolphins. Eco-volunteers are welcomed from May to September; they pay about €900 for a 12-day session with room and board. There are daily outings on a low-noise sea craft to observe the dolphins and collect data. Other tasks include office work and helping in the marine educational center.5. Prestigious — and pricey — excursions are available through Earthwatch Institute, which pairs volunteers with top scientists and scholars to help work on research projects around the world. Current projects in Europe include digging at an archaeological excavation in Tuscany and tracking beavers along the Rhine in Germany. Programs usually last for a week to 10 days, and prices can range from $2,500 to $3,500 (depending on the length), including room, board and related research costs.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.