

      By JANE BLACKBURN BORNEMEIER

JULY 13, 2017

Between the North and South Forks of Long Island, a peaceful summer refuge, and loads of history.
Related Article
Shelter Island, in the language of its original inhabitants, the Manhansets, meant “an island protected by islands.” It lies between the North and South Forks of Long Island, which was declared a peninsula after a court fight in 1985. But geological particulars aside, the sentiment and the feeling of protection from overcrowding and rough seas remains to this day. Its recorded history dates to the 17th century and the Caribbean sugar trade. It is reachable only by ferries, from Greenport on the North Fork and North Haven on the South Fork, private boats and seaplanes. The island — about 12.5 square miles of wetlands, forests, beaches, golf courses, marinas and homes ranging from modest cottages to the grandest of mansions — is home to about 2,400 year-round residents, according to the 2010 census — a number that grows to 12,000 by various estimates in the summer. Still, with one-third of the island set aside as a nature preserve, it remains a bucolic place beloved by long-timers and newcomers alike.
Explore the map and find things to do on Shelter Island.
If you take the eight-minute North Ferry ride ($2 on foot, $11 one way for cars) from Greenport, head up the hill to Stars Café for a snack, then immerse yourself in history with a stroll through Shelter Island Heights, the most charming nook on the island. Originally named Prospect by the landowner Frederick Chase in the early 19th century, the area later became the site of camp meetings for the Methodist Episcopal Church. Since 1993 it has been listed on both the United States and New York State Register of Historic Places. Its current design dates to about 1872 and was conceived by, among others, Frederick Law Olmsted, the designer of Central Park in New York, and the landscape architect Robert Morris Copeland. The centerpiece of the Heights, the Union Chapel, was built in 1875.Find a seat on the porch of the Shelter Island Country Club and enjoy views of Peconic River and Dering Harbor from one of the island’s highest points. The country club, also known as Goat Hill, is a public nine-hole golf course established in 1901 ($25 for nine holes, weekends). The restaurant, now renamed the Flying Goat, and bar are favorite gathering places for locals.As you head back down the hill, you’ll see the historic Chequit Hotel (pronounced CHEE-quit). Its new restaurant, Red Maple, offers a raw bar, flatbreads and fish, and has outdoor seating overlooking the water and the North Fork. Like the Heights itself, the Chequit (recently renovated) dates to about 1872 and the church camp era.It’s time for dinner at Shelter Island House’s restaurant, the Tavern. (The Shelter Island Taxi, known as the Go’fors, can be reached at 631-749-4252. It is operated by John and Anu Kaasik who also own the Azalea House Bed and Breakfast.) With its cozy bar, dining near a fireplace on chilly nights and outside dining by the swimming pool, the Tavern is a year-round favorite. The menu includes luscious burgers, “Montauk” beer-battered fish and chips, pasta and steak. Expect dinner with an appetizer and entree plus wine or a cocktail to cost about $50 a person. Its outdoor fire pit is encircled by Adirondack chairs, and bocce courts, lit by strings of white lights, offer entertainment before or after dinner.Visit the outdoor farmers’ market at the Shelter Island Historical Society on Route 114 for local produce, flowers, herbs, fish, breads, pies, cheeses, olive oil and more. It’s a great place to mingle with residents and learn about the agricultural history of the island and the North and South Forks. The society’s main building is closed for renovation, but the gift shop, which features handiwork from local artists, remains open.Rent a bike ($25 a day, $20 a half day or $15 an hour) at Piccozzi’s Bike Shop and ride through Dering Harbor. On Winthrop Road you will pass Dering Harbor Inn, with its tennis courts and a fitness center that has yoga, spinning and Zumba classes. (Daily and weekend passes are $25 and $50, respectively.) Cross a fishing bridge between the harbor and Gardiner’s Creek. The harbor is full of grand sailboats in summer, while the stately homes along the way are among the island’s most elegant. Last year, Dering Harbor turned 100. When it was founded it had the distinction of being the smallest municipality in New York State.For some, the lovely, protected beaches are the real reason to come here. Pick up sandwiches at the Marie Eiffel market across from Piccozzi’s Bike Shop and head to Wades Beach on the south side of the island. Shelter Island Kayak, which has been operated by Jay and Patti Damuck for 25 years, offers two-hour kayak tours from Coecles Harbor through nearby waterways ($60 for adults). They will also transport kayaks and paddleboards to the beach of your choice with a little advance notice. (Kayak rentals are $30 for a two-hour minimum; paddleboards, $30 an hour.) Wades, with picnic tables, lifeguards and a restroom, is a family favorite. The adjoining Dickerson Creek is a treasured spot for clamming at low tide and watching the tiny fiddler crabs burrow into the sand. (If you want to dig for edible clams, you’ll need a shellfish permit from the town hall.) Across the way is a hook of land known as Shell Beach, accessible by water or by the narrow, sandy Oak Tree Lane.Speaking of beaches, it would be wrong to miss what some people think is the loveliest stretch: Hay Beach on Menhaden Lane. It has no services, and a sign declares it is not a bathing beach. It does have nesting areas for piping plovers and mesmerizing views of Gardiner’s Bay, the lighthouse known as Bug Light, and the meandering coastline leading to Orient Point on the North Fork.Head back toward the North Ferry and prepare yourself for the only real nighttime scene on the island, along Shore Road and Crescent Beach. Start with dinner at the 1920s-era Pridwin Hotel. Entrees like lobster roll, slow-cooked salmon and local striped bass are under $30. (The hotel’s front lawn is the scene of all-you-can-eat cookouts on summer Wednesdays.) The upstairs balcony facing Greenport has one of the best dining views on the island.Take in a concert at the Perlman Music Program. The center — on land that was once Dr. Pettit’s Camps and then the Peconic Lodge — was created in 1994 by Toby Perlman, the wife of the violinist Itzhak Perlman. It provides a summer of intensive musical training for talented, young string musicians. Evening performances of classical music are popular among locals and visitors alike. Mr. Perlman himself makes occasional appearances. Most of the events are free or a small donation is suggested.For many visitors, the two-story party scene at Sunset Beach, the hotel and restaurant on Shore Road, is not to be missed. Some arrive by boat — or more accurately, by yacht — from the Hamptons, anchoring off the beach for late-night mingling over food and drinks. During the day, under colorful umbrellas, hotel or restaurant guests can order drinks, play beach volleyball or get a massage on the beach. For information on seaplane flights from Manhattan, visit shorelineaviation.com.Take a hike at Mashomack Preserve, which is protected from development by the Nature Conservancy. The preserve has more than 2,000 acres of forests and wetlands, threaded with trails that range from 1.5 miles long to nearly 11. There is a renovated manor house, scene of social events in the summer, and a variety of environmental programs for adults and children.Ram’s Head Inn, on the island’s picturesque eastern end, sits on a promontory overlooking Coecles Harbor on one side and Gardiner’s Bay on the other. Narrow causeways connect two islands — Little Ram Island and Ram Island (also known as Big Ram) to the rest of Shelter Island. Brunch entrees at the inn include deep-fried burrata with prosciutto, brioche French toast and duck confit hash with poached eggs and hollandaise ($16 to $18). Then stroll down the luxurious lawn and sit in an Adirondack chair or make your way to the little private beach (kayaks, small sailboats and paddleboards are free for hotel guests). There you can plan your next trip to Shelter Island.The Chequit’s imposing location at the top of a hill, in easy walking distance of the North Ferry (thanks to a new sidewalk), makes it a popular choice. Past guests were said to have included Marilyn Monroe and Arthur Miller and various members of the Kennedy family, who occasionally sailed down from Cape Cod. Rates start at around $245 for a double room; thechequit.com.Seven, a bed-and-breakfast, is just up the hill from Crescent Beach at 7 Stearns Point Road. Once a farmhouse, built in 1902, it features kinetic sculptures and a contemporary art collection. Double rooms start at about $355 a night during the summer season; sevenonshelter.com.Flight and Hotel information provided by Google.Prices represent a snapshot of low fares and rates for weekend trips.A 36 Hours column last Sunday, about Shelter Island, N.Y., misstated part of the name of a music center there. It is the Perlman Music Program, not the Perlman Music Center. The error was repeated on an accompanying map. Advertisement