AdvertisementSupported by5 PLACESBy Casey Hatfield-ChiottiIn San Diego, residents have long heard the charge that their fair city is a place where people put more stock in sunny weather and surfing than in art, architecture and cuisine. But Barrio Logan is challenging that outdated perception. The neighborhood, southeast of downtown, is among its oldest and most diverse. It also has long been a center of Latino culture. Today, a new crop of locally owned art galleries, breweries and restaurants, mostly along Logan Avenue, are popping up alongside the auto body shops and fruterías.The owner of ¡Salud! tacos, Ernie Becerra, turned his taco-catering company into a brick and mortar space in 2015. The dinerlike interior evokes the lowrider lifestyle with a tattoo-inspired mural and a pinstripe car hood. The place features tacos like the Barrio, a meat and vegetable stew served on a flour tortilla topped with nopales, avocado and sour cream.2196 Logan Avenue; 619-255-3856; saludsd.comSan Diego’s first brewery wholly owned by Latinos moved two years ago to this larger space with a tin ceiling and an outdoor beer garden. The brewery is known for infusing staples of Mexican drinks like hibiscus, agave and whole cinnamon into its award-winning beers, including the crimson-hued Blood Saison and the sour-style Saladito, flavored with salt and coriander.2181 Logan Avenue; 619-501-0503; borderxbrewing.comThis Airbnb accommodation is in the National, a building whose tenants include an art gallery. The 500-square-foot studio is furnished with vintage rugs, midcentury modern furniture and upcycled art. Guests have access to the National’s backyard, an outdoor event space featuring shipping containers, a mural and succulents.2626 National Avenue; 858-790-2865; onebunk.com/sd/index.htmlThis shop specializes in soul and jazz vinyl, artists like Gil Scott-Heron and Roy Ayers as well as collectibles such as “Turner Bros. Act 1.” The space also hosts live music by, say, the funk musicians Shiro Schwarz. Bonus point: The San Diego Vintage Company, owned by Karlos Paez of the B-Side Players, is just behind it.2148 Logan Avenue; 614-747-1112; facebook.com/BeatBoxRecordStorePaul Basile, a designer, and Chris Martino, an artist, opened two galleries in one in June 2016 in a former Mexican food market. White brick walls and steel doors repurposed from another Basile project provide an uncluttered backdrop for exhibitions about subjects like guns, dictators and the junk food epidemic in Mexico.2070 Logan Avenue; 858-361-9052; basile-ie.comAdvertisement