

      By DAN SALTZSTEIN

MARCH 29, 2017

The Times Travel section is looking for your stories about the intersection of love and travel. That could mean a romantic encounter, a breakup or friendships or relationships made or challenged. The only requirements are that you were traveling when it happened. We’re particularly interested in moments: markers in a relationship that occurred away from home. How did the trip end? How did you leave things?As an example, I’ll offer up a moment — O.K., really a week — of my own. Seven years ago, my wife and I headed to the Isle of Skye, off the western coast of Scotland, so I could report on the seafood scene there. (Tough gig, I know.) It was mid-July, the one time of the year when this area of Scotland was supposed to be relatively dry. Needless to say, it rained the entire five days we were there; we had a cumulative four or five hours of dry weather. Our plan went from eating and hiking to eating and driving — on the left side of the road (my first time trying that, and I did not enjoy it), when those road weren’t single lane.My wife and I have a great time traveling together, but eight to 10 hours in a car together — with occasional stops here and there for meals or to run out, snap a photo of the gorgeous landscape and duck back into the car, soaking wet — was rough. Tensions ran high. One particularly expensive meal (made far more expensive by the awful pound/dollar exchange rate) began — and ended — with an argument over whether the meal was worth even having. A hike to the famous Old Man of Storr ended before it began when a couple at our B&B; told us they had tried it the day before and headed back halfway, soaked and miserable. We sulked all the way to the car and set out once again.We made it out alive — bellies full of (stunningly good) seafood. But we’ll probably never do that much driving in a week again. And now we have a 4-year-old — just one more incentive to aim for more temperate climes.Share your stories below.Advertisement