By ELAINE GLUSACMAY 18, 2016
In recorded announcements at airports passengers are frequently reminded to report any “suspicious activity.” But what qualifies as suspicious isn’t always clear, as an incident earlier this month illustrates, calling into question the effectiveness of citizen vigilance.On May 5, aboard a plane about to fly from Philadelphia to Syracuse, a passenger, apparently alarmed by math equations her seatmate was working on, caused its departure to be delayed when she suggested he might be a terrorist. The man turned out to be Guido Menzio, a University of Pennsylvania economics professor working on a differential equation.The crew of the flight, operated by Air Wisconsin for American Airlines, apparently followed protocol when the woman notified the flight attendant that she was too sick to fly. As she left the plane, according to American Airlines, she mentioned her concerns about her seatmate to a crew member who then met with the captain, an airline security officer and eventually Mr. Menzio. The captain determined that he was not a security risk and the flight departed. The woman was rebooked on a later flight with no fee penalty.“Anytime we have a dispute or a disagreement or concerns expressed by one passenger about another about safety, the flight crew will do their best to resolve the matter peacefully and quickly,” said Casey Norton, director of corporate communications for American Airlines. Options include reseating the passengers so they are no longer neighbors, moderating a conversation between them or, as in this case, rebooking on another flight.AdvertisementThe Department of Homeland Security urges awareness of potential threats through a program, begun in 2010, called “If You See Something, Say Something.” It defines suspicious activity as packages or luggage left unattended; an unusual circumstance, like an open door that is usually closed; a person seeking in-depth information on a building’s purpose, security procedures or shift changes; and anyone loitering around a building, taking notes, sketches, photographs or measurements.AdvertisementOn its website, the department notes, “Factors such as race, ethnicity, and/or religious affiliation are not suspicious.” Yet ethnic profiling has resulted in several incidents, including one in which a Southwest Airlines passenger was taken off a flight in April for speaking Arabic.“This seems to be a case of ‘see something, say something’ getting out of control,” wrote George Hobica, founder of Airfarewatchdog.com, in an email. “If too many passengers cry ‘terrorist’ every time someone looks ‘Middle Eastern’ or has curly hair or is merely having a phone conversation in Arabic and wears a beard, it may lessen the effectiveness of ‘citizen vigilance’ efforts.”Every Saturday, get travel tips, destination coverage, photos from all over the world and more.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Some fliers have been successful in spotting suspicious behavior and defusing dangerous situations, including passengers who tackled the “shoe bomber,” Richard Reid, on a flight from Paris in 2001, and another who subdued the “underwear bomber,” Umar Farouk Abdulmutallab, on a trans-Atlantic flight to Detroit in 2009. On 9/11, when United Flight 93 was hijacked by terrorists, it was a group of brave passengers who managed to divert its course from Washington to rural Pennsylvania, where it crashed, killing everyone on board.In each of these situations, the passengers reacted to an immediate and evident threat, including smoke and fire in the first two cases. Short of that, the gray area is vast, and subject to biases about appearance, speech and religion. Some experts recommend discreetly informing the crew of any suspicions. Others say a casual conversation can quell fears of the unknown flier.“The challenge is, just like policing’s Neighborhood Watch program, a certain percent of suspicious calls turn out to be nothing,” said Jeffrey C. Price, professor of aviation management at Metropolitan State University of Denver.The March bombing of the Brussels airport may be contributing to a climate of greater intolerance, although the moods of fliers may also reflect their air travel experience.“These issues have grown in the last decade as air travel as gotten less fun and more stressful,” Mr. Price said. “Passengers on planes are more on edge. They’ve been standing in line for possibly hours and now they’re crammed into a seat with no leg room and given no food. All of this is just a recipe for someone who is already upset and won’t take much more to tip into an argument.”A version of this article appears in print on May 22, 2016, on Page TR3 of the New York edition with the headline: Vigilance Gone Awry.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.