By SHIVANI VORAAPRIL 25, 2016
A walking getaway is a popular pick for an active vacation, but for travelers who want to make sightseeing by foot only part of their trip and not the entire focus of it, tour companies around the world are now offering full- and half-day walking excursions.1. Perfetto Traveler in Italy recently introduced a six-hour, seven-mile walk along the Italian Riviera beginning in the fishing village of Portofino and ending with an exploration of Camogli, a beach town known for its network of narrow alleys; $1,100 for two people including a multicourse lunch with wine.2. Trip4Real, based in Barcelona, has a full-day five-mile excursion zigzagging up and down Lisbon’s seven hills; $45 a person.3. TourPlan Israel has several options for hikes in the Negev Desert in southern Israel like the Ramon Crater Hiking Trail, a four-hour guided walk exploring the geology of the crater. Prices from $84 a person.Advertisement4. Cotswold Journeys has a half-dozen new daylong walks in the Cotswolds, about a two-hour drive west of London. The seven-mile Snowshill, Stanway and Stanton loop through farm fields, woodlands, country paths and picturesque 17th-century villages is one option. Prices from $400 for two people.Advertisement5. Dehouche, which specializes in South America, has a half-day moderately challenging hike up Sugarloaf Mountain in Rio de Janeiro; $90 a person.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.6. Bangkok Walking Tours has an eight-mile Sundown Tour that begins with an early evening stroll in the city’s Lumpini Park and includes stops at Patpong Night Market and Chinatown; about $78 a person.7. Cazenov & Loyd has a six-hour hike of the Mizik Pass in Morocco, an hour south of Marrakesh. Participants trek through juniper forests and past Berber dwellings and end up in the foothills of the High Atlas Mountains; $200 a person.8. Brisbane Greeters Tour in Brisbane, Australia, has the four-hour Greeter’s Choice tour where local volunteer guides take travelers to their favorite spots in the city; though each excursion varies, they usually involve three to six miles of walking; free.These walking tours give travelers flexibility, said Susan Sparks, an active travel specialist with Points of Interest Travel in Aspen, Colo. “People who want to stay active on their vacations but don’t want a walking-only trip now have a low commitment way to do so,” she said.A version of this list appears in print on May 1, 2016, on Page TR2 of the New York edition with the headline: Tours That Offer a Little, or a Lot, of Walking.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.