
Personal Journeys By                     
ROY HOFFMAN

APRIL 13, 2016
We started through narrow alleys at 5 a.m., moving past somnolent cows curled against doorways and gaunt dogs on steps and women in saris moving toward us through the gloom, a motorbike vrooming in the distance.“Watch where you walk,” said our guide, nicknamed A.K. — a native of this ancient city of nearly 1.2 million in northeast India, a short, sturdy man distinguished by his white cap with Reebok logo — leading us toward our dawn boat ride on the Ganges. “Organic land mines,” he warned us as we hopscotched over the cow patties and turned into an alley slightly wider than the first.A.K. knew what patter worked with Westerners, how to put at ease first-timers to India like us, now at one of the holiest places in Hindu lore. “The Ganges flows east and west,” A.K. said, part of his practiced routine, “but here it flows north and south, so it can touch Varanasi.”In India we had been captivated by polished temples both Hindu and Sikh, grand mosques, and countless stories from Indians we’d met, in Jaipur even invited to a traditional wedding party at our hotel. As tourists we’d also been mindful of risks — intestinal bugs, malarial mosquitoes, pickpockets, hawkers with fake gemstones and silks. But no one warned us about the traffic: Indian motorbikes, Japanese cars, lumbering buses, three-wheeled taxis called tuk-tuks, battered rickshaws, squeaky bicycles, pushcarts, all crowding in, vying for space, turning one lane to two, two to four, coursing around cows and water buffalo, few stoplights to be seen.My wife, Nancy, and I had strolled New York, Buenos Aires, Barcelona and Paris on trips during our long marriage, but “pedestrian” was no longer in our lexicon here. My right calf was still smarting from a neighborhood stroll we tried to take in Delhi, where the rear wheel of a tuk-tuk caught the back of my leg, nearly sending me to the hospital as the next stop on our itinerary instead of the Taj Mahal.AdvertisementA horn blared as a motorcycle, headlight looming, pinned us in the alley before twisting away. Calmly, A.K. waved us on.AdvertisementMeeting up with our driver, we were taken a gridlocked mile to a blockaded street (though motorcycles zigzagged through) and, my camera at the ready now, we stepped out into a stream of people passing kiosks selling firecrackers, chewing tobacco, incense, plastic figurines of Vishnu and Ganesh, and swamis with painted faces offering to pose for 50 rupees, about 75 cents, toward broad steps of the ghat, a word derived from the Sanskrit term for embankment.Hailing from the Gulf Coast of the United States, I understood how public piers attract tapestries of people. A ghat in Varanasi is far more — a series of wide stone platforms descending to the Ganges, hectic with spiritual seekers and morning bathers and boatmen reaching out to help visitors aboard dinghies. A.K. led us to a lean boatman with sinewy arms who gave us a hand. Nancy and I sat astern, A.K. on a gunwale, as the boatman took his position in the bow and began to pull his oars.Next to the street clamor, the Ganges was deeply quiet, the swish of oars a ghostly whisper on the meandering river. More boats pushed out, some with tourists, others with Indians, saris gathering color as the sun edged up from the East. From one boat, then another, rose hypnotic Hindu songs.A.K. told us the story of the goddess Ganga, whose river was brought down from heaven to this earth, so powerful that only Lord Shiva’s hair could hold the currents. Soon its purifying waters coursed through the land, bringing the devout to its banks to wash away sins.The ghat became as bright and startling as an Indian miniature painting as the sun combed the landing. The backdrop rose, too — centuries-old Hindu temples and weathered four-story residences deep red and yellow with high balconies and steps down to the river. Monkeys traced the rooftops, keeping us in their gaze.As a traveler I want to lose myself in a faraway place, to slough off the familiar and be transported by what’s strikingly foreign, to forget my name and learn that of others. In the spirit of discovery we typically make up our own journeys, but advice from veteran travelers to India persuaded us to have a travel agency secure guides and drivers and arrange other details. Otherwise, we’d have been confounded.The boatsman handed us little bowls with marigolds, lighted a candle on each, and motioned for us to put them in the water. A.K. said to make our prayers to the Ganges. I did so, adding Hebrew from my own tradition just in case.AdvertisementThe riverfront became crowded with hundreds of the penitent, men stripping down to underwear, women in full dress, stepping into the water’s edge, looking eastward, hands pressed together. One man lifted a bowl of river water and sluiced it over his head, another plunged under, another dipped in a cup and drank heartily.I wanted to be enveloped in the moment.My eye behind a lens, I recorded this ritual of purification. We arrived at another ghat where women slapped their laundry against the rocks. “And you complained about our old washing machine,” I joked to Nancy.Two women held opposite ends of a wet sheet, pulled it taut, set it on rocks to dry.“Could I swim in the Ganges?” I asked A.K. “Is it clean?”He rolled his head, side to side, “What is your opinion?”I looked down at the murky water.A.K. took over from the boatman, pulled the oars, then I signaled to him. “Can I?” He moved aside.I took my place at the bow, grabbed the handles and started to pull. “Take my picture,” I asked Nancy, and she readied the camera, happy to defer to me as the ham in the family.“Laugh like Buddha,” A.K. suggested, having told us of the Buddha of happiness. Buddha had traveled these parts, too, having preached his first sermon at Sarnath, a half-hour’s drive from here. I leaned back and, joined by the men, laughed loudly, freely, as buoyed up as our little vessel. I laughed in gratitude, in joy. The digital camera was clicking.I lost my grip on one of the paddles and it slipped through the oarlock, floating away. I reached for it, leaning far out, but the boatman intervened, latching onto the end of it before it could sweep downriver. These men earn their tips.There was shouting — a naked man in long beard and matted hair ran from three men in street clothes, who yelled and waved at him to hurry away. “Some sadhus are very aggressive,” A.K. explained. Sadhus are the holy men who dwell along the river, outside of society, extreme ascetics. Many are gentle, otherworldly in their fashion. Some, A.K. said, are not.AdvertisementFinally the sadhu took his place high on the ghat, alone behind a turret, hands pressed together. I zoomed in for a close-up.As we headed the other way, the boatman at the helm again, the ghat was teeming with men selling religious figures, others wrapping themselves in towels, women bending and talking, food sellers, enormous parasols that look stitched from a dozen fabrics angled against the strengthening sun, wandering cows, brahma bulls, goats, an old woman washing her hair, a man scrubbing his shoulders.I saw smoke in the distance.In Agra, before traveling to Varanasi, we had seen the magnificent Islamic expression of remembering the dead — the Taj Mahal, the mausoleum vast and seemingly delicate, built by the Mughal emperor Shah Jahan for his favorite queen. Its white marble, with its iconic dome and minarets, looked like spun sugar as we approached it, a confectionary that might rise up. The miracle of its workmanship, the gemstones set into the marble, the intricate geometric shapes belied the fact that, in the end, nothing wards off our final breath.Here in Varanasi, though, there was a different kind of memorial.As we approached the smoke blackening the sky, A.K., who told us he was Hindu, said, “Take your last photo.”Was he joking?“No more pictures,” he said, gravely.As the boat moved farther on I saw the shoreline more closely — a funeral pyre, a cremation sending up flames and smoke. When he glanced away I was tempted to snap one more, but an eerie feeling held me back. I turned off my camera, put away my notepad, and just looked. We were in someone else’s sacred space.I wondered who was there. An elderly shopkeeper whose body was carried through the streets here this morning? A youth felled by high fever? A professor from the nearby university who taught medical sciences? A grandmother, a child? Their ashes, soon scattered in the river, would join those of millions of others, ashes of loved ones brought by Hindus from around the country to be tossed onto the mystical waters.The Ganges was dark, as if it had swallowed the light, its murkiness a quality, I realized, that made it different from other waters under a blast of sunlight. We were borne on a river of souls. They carried us, passing mortals, like water bugs skittering along the surface of time. There was no scrim between me and the burning fires — no camera, notebook, guidebook, only the waver of flames. On this river I had no name.Our dinghy bumped against the dock and we filed off, followed A.K. up this new ghat, where fresh cords of wood awaited us, past a man squatting next to another shaving his whiskers, a cow before a restaurant nosing into the door, narrow streets with private altars of Shiva behind iron gates.“OK,” he said, waving us onward. “Take pictures.”A version of this article appears in print on April 17, 2016, on Page TR10 of the New York edition with the headline: Entranced by a River of Souls.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »