AdvertisementSupported byNext StopBy Danielle PergamentIn the summer, Sicily is the color of flax. The valleys, the hillsides, the horizon all bear the same overexposed quality, the burned-out yellow of haystacks. But if you fly into Palermo and head east by car, the hues slowly start to change, getting deeper and greener with altitude. Roll down the windows and, as you approach the mountain, the oppressive heat of the island’s parched interior gives way to the shady, dank feeling of a forest. And once you see foreboding black rocks dotting the landscape of ominous volcanic soil, you will know you have arrived.“If you go to the top of Mount Etna it will feel like northern Europe,” said Bernardo Scammacca del Murgo, one of eight brothers who own Tenuta San Michele, a vineyard and agriturismo on the eastern side of the mountain. “When you are at the bottom, it is summer in the desert.”Mount Etna, the 10,922-foot-high active volcano that claims a vast chunk of the eastern side of Sicily, has a storied past. It was immortalized by Virgil in “The Aeneid.” Some of its most famous eruptions, such as in 1669, have actually reconfigured the coastline. In more recent times, it has exploded almost regularly — with notable eruptions in 1981 and 2002 sending rivers of lava down its slopes. And the people who live in the ancient towns that surround the volcano — Randazzo and Zafferana Etnea, Trecastagni and Bronte — have a special connection to the mountain.“I have a love-hate relationship with Etna,” one local woman told me. “It’s beautiful. But the other night it was glowing red. This scared me.”Sicily is known for a few things — its vast orange groves, its beach culture, its North African-tinged cuisine. But up on the flanks of this sometimes-fiery green giant, it’s a different world. The views, the wine, the food, the towns made almost entirely of black volcanic rock — these are the reasons to come to Mount Etna. And for some, to never leave.“My family has been here since … I don’t know,” Mr. Scammacca del Murgo said. “Let’s say 1,400 years. Approximately.”Spend enough time on this island, and you will be told that Sicily is not Italy. Spend enough time on the volcano, and you will start to hear that Mount Etna is not Sicily. For me, it happened almost as soon as I arrived.“This is a microclima,” said Michele Scammacca del Murgo, the brother in charge of wine production at Tenuta San Michele. “Etna soil has a unique minerality. It is something very special here that you cannot find anywhere else.”There were six of us on the terrace that evening: my travel companions, Lisa and Raffaele; the vintner; his brother; the oenologist Vito Giovinco and me.Under a muslin tarp, the warm evening air seeping through, we watched the last sunlight of the day painting the peaks of Mount Etna a dreamy, golden color. The journey here — the thousands of miles on a plane, the many hours in a car, the weariness, the exhaustion — quietly melted away. We nibbled on salty aged parmigiano and sweet sun-dried tomatoes as we worked our way through the vineyard’s lineup: the Murgo brut, the Etna white, the Etna red, and somewhere in there, the Murgo brut rosé.Inevitably, jet lag found us. Once we had finished off a platter of penne alla Norma — with its earthy tang of tomatoes, salty slivers of ricotta and meaty slices of eggplant — we strolled up the hill to our rooms. The smell of burning ash and the ribbons of steam drifting out of the crater served as a reminder that Etna had erupted only a few days earlier. Walking up the side of the volcano in the dusky evening had an ethereal feeling — as if we were walking closer to history.The next day we headed to the town of Zafferana Etnea, close to the top. Zafferana has been damaged by lava streams off the eastern crater of Mount Etna, and as recently as 2013, was covered in a layer of ash.But on that crisp spring day, sitting in Piazza Umberto I, all I could see was green above and clouds below. By late morning, the piazza was bursting with life. The flag of Sicily — called the Trinacria, with its image of Medusa’s head and three disembodied legs — was whipping in the air. Church bells rang, a young bride and groom were having their picture taken, and elderly Sicilian women with small dogs were gossiping on a bench.It’s almost impossible not to be swept up in Mount Etna’s romance. As we drove away from Zafferana, I was concocting ways to persuade my husband to uproot our family and move here. That’s when I saw graffiti painted on a hillside boulder: “NO MAFIA”. Organized crime, Cosa Nostra, is a constant threat even if the tourists can’t see it.Scratch the surface, ask about the Mafia, and one of two things will happen: People will clam up and walk away or get really angry.“This area is very interesting to the Mafia,” said one farmer, who asked not to be identified for fear of retribution. “The Mafia will set the price of the crops; there is nothing you can do. It’s invisible control. The moment that you do something they don’t like they cut down your trees. They steal your tractors, they take your unripe crops and leave them in the sun to rot. They don’t look like Mafia from Hollywood movies. They look like regular people.”Organized crime may be the only thing that Etna has in common with the rest of the island. The flavors, colors and landscapes of the volcano vary even from one slope to another.“The main misunderstanding is thinking of Etna as a unity,” said Giuseppe Catalano di Melilli, an architect who runs a family citrus farm called San Giovanni, outside Catania. “There are as many Etnas as the ever-changing soil, climate, landscape and historical events have generated.”Wake up early enough on Mount Etna and something magical happens. It was 6 in the morning, and I threw open the shutters of my hotel room on the eastern slope. In every direction, everything below my window was enveloped in a fluffy white cloud. It was as if the volcano and I were tucked in together under the same silent, thick blanket of mist.Of course, by midmorning the scorching Sicilian sun had burned off every last wisp. And for the rest of the day, I would be nostalgic for my quiet, intimate moment with the mountain.Lisa, Raffaele and I piled into the car and headed toward Bronte. We had a meeting with a pistachio farmer named Vincenzo Pecorino. You know what happens when you arrive at a Sicilian farmer’s house at lunchtime? You get a seat at the table alongside his wife and daughter. And when that farmer is a pistachio farmer? Lunch is green — pale, dusty, pistachio green. There was a plate of raw pistachios, platters of farfalle pesto di pistachio, a bowl of ground pistachio to sprinkle on top, pistachio cake and, finally, pistachio candy.“Our main competitor is Turkey, but really there is no competition — this is the best place for pistachios,” Mr. Vincenzo said, adding, “Pistachios put bread on our table.”Over lunch, Mr. Pecorino illustrated the depth to which his town honors tradition.“The families have nicknames,” he said. “People know us as Tramontane, not Pecorino. Tramontane is the name of the northern wind. There is another family — Perdere Le Scarpe, the family of Losing Shoes. And there is Balla Calzette, the family of the Dancing Socks. I don’t know why this started, but it has always been.”When I complimented the meal, Mr. Vincenzo, who grows a variety of fruits and vegetables and owns a market in Bronte called Primizia e Delizie, was clearly proud. Until his wife corrected him.“It’s not you,” she scolded him. “The volcano makes the fruit.”A short while later, stuffed with pistachios, we were back on the road, hugging the curves of the mountain.After almost a week in Sicily, I had come to think of Etna as a benevolent maternal figure watching over her island. She provides almost all of the greenery here. The fruit, the minerals, the wine, the soil, the history, the legends, the fertility of the island are hers to give. As I stood on her western flank, Sicily spread out before me like a faraway ocean, a dusty, roiling sea that was motionless, vistas and waves that faded slowly to the end of the earth.This is the hazy sunlit filter that Etna will reward you with. As with any strong mother, if you respect her she will take care of you. She will love you. Underestimate her, take her for granted, ignore her — and she has the power to make the earth tremble.We drove past orange groves, plots of olive trees, terraced hills of vines — farms that grow the good life. And we arrived in Randazzo — billed as the most beautiful of the volcano’s villages — in the early evening.“Randazzo is the most Etna of the Etna towns, and I’m not saying that because I’m the mayor,” said Michele Mangione, sitting in a hotel lobby in his town. “This is the gateway to Messina and Palermo. The road to Palermo has passed through here since the dawn of time.”Strolling through Randazzo, it’s impossible to forget you’re on a volcano. The town — buildings, piazzas, churches — is constructed largely out of volcanic stone. It has a beautiful, haunting aura that is quickly belied by young families strolling with their babies, teenage boys with architectural hair styles, and little children with rivulets of gelato running down their chins.We stood at the (black) wall at the edge of town and there she was. Heavy rain clouds on one side, sunlight streaming down on the other. It was hard to predict which way the weather would swing.“Well, this is Mount Etna,” Raffaele said. “I think anything is possible.”Agriturismo Tenuta San Michele (Via Zafferana, 13; 39-095-950-520;tenutasanmichele.it/enna) is on the eastern slope of Mount Etna, so you can wake up next to the steaming volcano itself. Be sure to book a wine tasting.Romano House (Via Giovanni Di Prima 20, Catania; 39-095-352-0611), in the heart of Catania, has smartly appointed rooms and all the creature comforts you could want — in a 17th-century palazzo.Il Castello Di Bacco (Piazza Umberto 25, Zafferana Etnea; 39-095-709-3009) has views, a pistachio-rich menu and plenty of people-watching, as long as you sit outside.Have a glass of vino rosso at Enoteca Agora (Via Francesco Fisauli 7, Randazzo; 39-349-862-2715) and grab a table under the archway — it’s as close as you can get to feeling as if you’re in the Middle Ages.On the northern side of the volcano, Vino Di Anna (Via Crasa 1,Solicchiata; 44-785-735-2339; vinodianna.com), an organic vineyard with an impressive selection of reds, is run by Australian and French expats.Danielle Pergament is the executive editor at Allure and a frequent contributor to the Travel section.Advertisement