
Where to Go Now By                     
SHIVANI VORA

AUG. 24, 2016
It’s billed as the most attended annual sporting event in the world, and it’s back: The United States Open tennis tournament, with more than 700,000 ticket buyers each year, will take place from Monday, Aug. 29, through Sunday, Sept. 11, at the Billie Jean King National Tennis Center in Flushing Meadows-Corona Park in Flushing, N.Y.Though the championship began 135 years ago in Newport, R.I., as a men’s competition (the women’s event started six years later in Philadelphia), it wasn’t called the United States Open until 1968 and didn’t move to Flushing until 1978.Tennis fans can buy tickets for the games, but attending a match isn’t the only way to get into the United States Open spirit: the United States Tennis Association, the organization that operates the tournament, has two tennis-related events before the official games start, and bars, restaurants and hotels around New York City are doing their bit with packages and themed drinks and food.“The fans attending the U.S. Open certainly get that experience first hand, but what is even more is amazing is how the city of New York embraces it wholeheartedly, and you are able to feel that excitement and energy without ever stepping on the grounds of the U.S.T.A. Billie Jean King National Tennis Center,” said the U.S.T.A. chairwoman Katrina M. Adams.AdvertisementTickets for the 2016 United States Open can be purchased three ways: at USOpen.org, by calling Ticketmaster at 866-673-6849 and at all Ticketmaster outlets — there are several in New York City, and locations are listed on ticketmaster.com. Prices begin at $35.AdvertisementThe tournament will have day sessions beginning at 11 a.m. and night sessions beginning at 7 p.m. from Aug. 29 through the quarterfinals on Sept. 7. The women’s singles semifinals are scheduled for 7 p.m. on Sept. 8, and the men’s singles semifinals for 3 p.m. on Sept. 9. The women’s singles final is scheduled for 4 p.m. on Saturday, Sept. 10, with the men’s singles final at 4 p.m. on Sept. 11.See the live matches free, no strings attached. On Sept. 8, the U.S.T.A. is hosting its second United States Open Community Day from noon to 6 p.m. when admission to the Billie Jean King National Tennis Center is free, and fans will be able to watch both the men’s and women’s doubles semifinals as well as the Champions Invitational where former Grand Slam tournament champions such as John McEnroe and Martina Navratilova play.Children can get a flavor of the tennis scene at the 2016 Arthur Ashe Kids’ Day on Saturday, Aug. 27, held at the Billie Jean King National Tennis Center from 9:30 a.m. to 4 p.m. From 9:30 a.m. to 12:30 p.m., families have the chance to participate in free tennis activities geared toward kids such as playing tennis on mini-courts with the help of pros; attendees can also listen to a free concert where up-and-coming singers will perform.Then, from 1 to 3 p.m., there will be a ticketed event inside Arthur Ashe Stadium where the 14-time Grand Slam champion Rafael Nadal and Novak Djokovic, ranked as the world’s No. 1 male tennis player, will play exhibition matches; ticket buyers will also hear musical performances from Flo Rida, the teenage Swedish singer Zara Larsson and other popular artists.Tickets for the show are on sale through Ticketmaster (866-673-6849), usopen.org and at the Billie Jean King National Tennis Center box office. Prices from $10.From Tuesday, Aug. 23, to Friday, Aug. 26, the U.S.T.A. will host the United States Open Qualifying Tournament where up-and-coming players and veterans will compete for a chance to play in the United States Open. More than 200 matches are played over the course of these four days. “These matches are played on the outer courts of the tennis center where there are fewer seats and more intimacy so spectators are able to get incredibly close to the action,” said Brendan McIntyre, United States Open spokesman. Admission is free and open to the public.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Taste of Tennis Now in its 17th year, Taste of Tennis is an event that brings together tennis and food and will take place on Thursday, Aug. 25, from 7 to 10 p.m. at the W New York Hotel in Midtown Manhattan. Ticket buyers will be able to sample food prepared by notable chefs such as Jonathan Waxman and Floyd Cardoz and meet tennis players like Billie Jean King and Simona Halep from Romania, who is competing in the 2016 Open. A highlight will undoubtedly be the culinary demonstration by the James Beard Award-winning Chef Marcus Samuelsson and Mr. Nadal. Olive Oils from Spain, which promotes the country’s olive oil, is the evening’s sponsor, and the duo’s demo will highlight these oils in dishes like blackened catfish and couscous with a tomato vinaigrette. Prices from $275.Several bars and restaurants in the city are hosting United States Open viewing parties and serving special drinks and food. Below is a sampling:Bottle & Bine, a New American restaurant in Midtown East, is serving a U.S. Open Combo Special throughout the tournament. It includes the Match Point cocktail, made of gin, violet cream, lemon juice and simple syrup, and a Maine lobster salad; the price for both is $26. The restaurant also has two large televisions in its bar area where the games will be on view.AdvertisementWarren 77, a sports bar in TriBeCa, has a U.S. Open Happy Hour on weekdays throughout the tournament from noon to 6 p.m.; selected draft beer and wines are $6 and chicken wings are $1 each. The bar has nine televisions, which will show the matches.The Vine, a lounge in Chelsea, will be playing the United States Open on a big screen on its outdoor patio and is also offering a cocktail created for the games called the Cucumber Courtside, made of gin and cucumber-mint water; it is $16.Riverpark, a farm-to-table restaurant in Kips Bay, is serving a United States-Open-inspired cocktail menu. The selection of drinks includes a John McEnroe, with watermelon and jalapeño-infused tequila, watermelon, cherry liqueur and lime. Drinks are $16.Salvation Taco, in Kips Bay, is celebrating the United States Open finals, from Sept. 9 to 11; it will by show the matches and offer grilled corn topped with chile mayonnaise, cotija cheese and lime along with a can of the Mexican beer Modelo Especial for $10.New York City Vacation Packages, a travel company selling trips to New York City, is offering a U.S. Open Package. Included are a two-night stay in one of about 30 hotels in Midtown Manhattan such as the Sheraton New York Times Square Hotel; tickets to a match on Sept. 3; a $25 credit toward food and souvenirs at the tennis center; a round-trip MetroCard to use to take the subway back and forth from the tennis center; and free admission to attractions like the Empire State Building and the American Museum of Natural History. From $434.50 per person. Reserve by calling 877-692-8747.The Carlyle, A Rosewood Hotel on Manhattan’s Upper East Side, has “The U.S. Open Experience,” which includes two nights in a deluxe suite, breakfast, two tickets to a match, prematch cocktails in Bemelmans Bar and transportation to the tennis center. From $10,000. Reserve by calling 212-744-1600.The Baccarat Hotel New York, in Midtown Manhattan, offers the “Premiere U.S. Open Package”; it includes two nights of accommodations, breakfast, two courtside seats to a match, V.I.P. entrance to the tennis center, access to a hospitality suite at the tennis center and round-trip transportation to the center. From $12,830. Reserve by calling 212-790-8829.The Quin, in Midtown West, is offering the U.S. Open Tennis Experience: a two-night stay in a suite, two prime tickets to a match and breakfast. From $1,995 a night. Reserve at 855-447-7846.A version of this article appears in print on August 28, 2016, on Page TR2 of the New York edition with the headline: The U.S. Open, on and Off the Courts.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »