By SHIVANI VORANOV. 9, 2016
She may have first become famous as an actress, but these days, Jessica Alba, 35, is equally well known as a founder of the Honest Company, a Los Angeles-based brand selling nontoxic personal care and household products. Now the company, which some retail analysts have valued at $1.7 billion, is expanding its range of products in travel-friendly sizes — there are more than 50 options in the line, and more are in the works — and is also planning to sell them at kiosks in airports in the United States.The initiatives are personal for Ms. Alba, who says she is on the road several times a month, sometimes with her two young daughters in tow, and appreciates the convenience of products in travel sizes.Below are edited excerpts from an interview with her.Q. In 2015, Honest introduced nine automated kiosks in a handful of airports in the United States that sold some of the company’s travel-size products, but these kiosks are now gone. Can you tell us about your plans to bring them back? A. We tested the kiosks last year as a new retail strategy and worked with a third-party vendor to launch them. They were very well received, and we are working on a strategy to roll them out at airports nationally.AdvertisementHonest is a brand focused on healthy living. Is living a healthier lifestyle harder when you’re traveling?AdvertisementAbsolutely, because you’re not in your routine, and it’s harder to squeeze in a workout or make the right food choices. You’re at the mercy of what’s available at your destination, and your immune system can wear down if you’re not taking care of yourself. I try to stay healthy when I travel by staying hydrated — I drink a lot of coconut water and regular water. I also decompress by taking a bath and meditating.You have two daughters, Honor, 8, and Haven, 5, who often travel with you. What are the biggest challenges when traveling with children?Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Jet lag is a big one. We spent nine days in New York recently, and I kept them on West Coast time because it was easier. They went to bed at 10 p.m. and woke up at 10 a.m. instead of 7 p.m and 7 a.m. It’s harder when we go to Europe or Asia, but I usually keep them awake the first day, and by nighttime they’re tired enough to sleep.Do you worry about their being exposed to germs when traveling?Not really. I think some amount of germs is good for kids, but if we’re in countries where the food and water aren’t always sanitary, I don’t let them eat undercooked food and make sure they drink bottled water. Other than that, I encourage them to be curious and try different foods and explore.Any tips for a successful family trip?Keeping kids entertained is key. Both of my girls love to draw and read, so I always pack art supplies and books. But the point is for them to engage with whatever destination we’re in, so I try to keep them entertained doing that.Do you have any favorite family-friendly vacation destinations? We have been going to Hawaii a lot, which has been nice because I have never really vacationed there. It has a distinct sense of culture and a big Asian influence.Also, I think Paris is great with its playgrounds and museums. The Rodin Museum there is the best because it’s indoors and outdoors, and the kids can wander around and get ice cream. It’s not so precious.Is there anything you always bring  home from your travels?I’m not really into souvenirs like T-shirts, but I do like buying local products a destination is known for, like sake when I was in Japan. And, when I’m traveling internationally and don’t have my kids with me, I buy them [the candy] Kinder Eggs, which they are obsessed with.A version of this article appears in print on November 13, 2016, on Page TR2 of the New York edition with the headline: Jessica Alba on Her Line, Her Kids and Hydration.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.