AdvertisementSupported byLODGINGBy Elaine GlusacSometimes a hotel is just a place to sleep. Other times, it’s a destination. The following hotel openings, scheduled from late 2016 to late 2017, belong to the latter category: worthy of trips in their own right.Six Senses BhutanFive new lodges known collectively as Six Senses Bhutan are expected to open in August, offering inn-to-inn circuits. With 82 rooms in total, the lodges will reside in five areas: the capital of Thimphu; the rice farming region of Punakha; Gangtey, where black-necked cranes migrate; Bumthang, known for its monasteries; and Paro, near the dramatic cliffside Tiger’s Nest monastery. Rates to be announced; sixsenses.com.Palácio Tangará, São PauloIn April, the European-based Oetker Collection of luxury hotels plans to open its first location in South America with the Palácio Tangará in São Paulo. The 141-room hotel next to Burle Marx Park aims to be an urban resort with a swimming pool and spa. The chef Jean-Georges Vongerichten will oversee the restaurant and several bars. Rates from $450; palaciotangara.com.Parq Vancouver, VancouverOpening next fall beside BC Place stadium, the development known as Parq Vancouver straddles a convention destination and an entertainment center, including a casino, outdoor rooftop park, five restaurants and a spa. Its two hotels include the upscale 329-room JW Marriott Parq Vancouver and the more intimate Douglas hotel with 188 rooms and an organic theme. Rooms from 429 Canadian dollars (about $321); parqvancouver.com.The Ned, LondonThis 252-room combo private club and hotel, set to open in the spring, gets its name from the designer of the 1930s-era bank that houses it: Sir Edwin Lutyens, known as Ned. A joint venture between Soho House & Company and the Sydell Group, the Ned will have pools on the rooftop and in the basement, nine restaurants — seven in the original banking hall — and a Cowshed spa. Rates from £250 (about $311); thened.com.Kokomo IslandJust 21 rooms share the private 140-acre Kokomo Island, a Small Luxury Hotel opening in March. The Great Astrolabe Reef encircles the isle and an on-site dive center will equip undersea explorers. Each villa has its own plunge pool, and amenities include two restaurants and a tennis court. Arrive by helicopter or float plane from Nadi International Airport. Rooms from $1799; slh.com/kokomo.com.Hoshinoya Bali, Ubud, BaliInspired by traditional villages in the rice-terraced region of Ubud, the Japanese-owned Hoshinoya Bali will open this month. Villas, each with its own plunge pool, line canal-like swimming pools that reference area irrigation systems. The spa will offer twice-daily yoga classes, the restaurant will prepare Balinese-Japanese fare, and guests can meditate in terraces elevated amid the palm canopy. Rooms from 9,000,000 Indonesian rupiah (about $671); hoshinoyabali.com.Alila Fort Bishangarh, JaipurIt’s hard to find a more dramatic setting for a hotel than the towering Fort Bishangarh near Jaipur, a hilltop-walled fortress with gun turrets and six-foot-thick walls offering panoramic views of the Rajasthani region. Fifty-nine suites were added onto and around the 18th-century fort, which will house two restaurants and a spa when the Alila Fort Bishangarh opens in early 2017. Rooms from $280; alilahotels.com/fortbishangarh.Il Castelfalfi, TuscanyA medieval village, now filled with shops and restaurants, anchors the 2,700-acre Toscana Resort Castelfalfi resort. In April, it will add the 120-room Il Castelfalfi hotel, built to be energy efficient with biomass heating and water and food waste recycling. The new hotel will have a spa and restaurant, and guests will have access to the existing golf course, cooking school and winery. Rooms from 300 euros (about $312); castelfalfi.com.The Silo, Cape TownThe new 28-room Silo hotel, built atop a series of former grain silos on the Victoria & Alfred Waterfront in Cape Town, will open in March. Designed by the architect Thomas Heatherwick, the hotel, its rooftop bar, pool and restaurant will precede the opening of the Zeitz Museum of Contemporary Art Africa in the lower portion of the building, expected in September. Rooms from 12,000 rand (about $853); theroyalportfolio.com/the-silo.Park Hyatt St. Kitts, St. GeorgeIn summer, the Park Hyatt St. Kitts will open overlooking the southern strait that separates it from its sibling island of Nevis. The Caribbean property will check in with 126 breezy rooms and suites, the latter with rooftop pools. Expect three restaurants, including an adults-only option in a stone barn, two swimming pools, a rum bar in the plantation-style great house, a spa and, nearby, golf. Rooms from $380; stkitts.park.hyatt.com.At Six, StockholmThe first Preferred Hotels & Resorts member in Sweden, the design-focused At Six will open in March in central Brunkebergstorg Square. The 343-room hotel puts art at the center of the experience with curated exhibitions. The two-story rooftop restaurant Tak will serve food from the chef Frida Ronge, known for her Nordic-Japanese style. Rooms from $230; hotelatsix.com.Bürgenstock Resort Lake LucerneOn a mountain ridge above Lake Lucerne, the Bürgenstock Resort Lake Lucerne will replace three aging hotels with a 21st-century health resort set on 148 acres. Two of four new or rebuilt properties will open in spring along with 13 restaurants and bars, a golf course, three tennis courts and 43 miles of trails. By year end, expect two more hotels, including a 160-room doctor-staffed wellness lodge. Guests can reach the car-free resort by funicular. Rooms from 150 Swiss francs (about $146); buergenstock.ch.1 Hotel Brooklyn Bridge, Brooklyn, N.Y.Is this the hotel that lures the tourists from Manhattan? When it opens in February, the 194-room 1 Hotel Brooklyn Bridge on Pier 1 will frame postcard views of the nearby bridge and skyline. The 11th-story rooftop will hold a pool lounge and fire pits, while a glassed-in cocktail lounge one floor below enables year-round swilling. The chef Seamus Mullen will handle food service. Rooms from $350; 1hotels.com/Brooklyn-bridge.21c Museum Hotel NashvilleThe art-focused minichain 21c Museum Hotels will head to Nashville in May, transforming the Gray & Dudley Building downtown, a former hardware warehouse, into the 124-room boutique 21c Museum Hotel Nashville. The property will house a 10,500-square-foot contemporary art exhibition space with rotating shows and a restaurant from the chef Levon Wallace. Rooms from $299; 21cmuseumhotels.com/Nashville.Las Alcobas, a Luxury Collection Hotel, St. Helena, Calif.Spy the vineyards just outside your balcony at Las Alcobas, a new resort in Napa Valley that is scheduled to open this month. Six of the property’s 68 rooms reside in the 1905-vintage Acacia House, a former residence, along with a seasonally focused restaurant from the chef Chris Cosentino. There is also a five-treatment-room spa, and wineries are within walking distance. Rooms from $695; lasalcobasnapavalley.com.MGM National Harbor, Oxon Hill, Md.MGM Resorts imported Las Vegas east with the December opening of the 308-room MGM National Harbor overlooking the Potomac River just south of Washington. In addition to the 125,000-square-foot casino, amenities include a 3,000-seat theater (coming acts include Sting and Kings of Leon); celebrity-chef-run restaurants by Marcus Samuelsson and José Andrés; a clothing boutique from Sarah Jessica Parker; and a metal sculpture by Bob Dylan. Rooms from $299; mgmnationalharbor.com.The Exchange Hotel, CardiffThe 19th-century Coal Exchange building in Cardiff was badly deteriorated before the hotel developer Signature Living stepped in, saving the former regal headquarters of the coal industry and turning it into a 200-room hotel. Scheduled to open in March, the Exchange Hotel will also include a memorial dedicated to World War I. Rates from £89 (about $110); exchangehotelcardiff.co.uk.Advertisement