By ELAINE GLUSACOCT. 18, 2016
This article is part of a series aimed at helping you navigate life’s opportunities and challenges. What else should we write about? Contact us: smarterliving@nytimes.com.Solo travel, among other benefits, means never having to compromise your plans. But some destinations — by virtue of language, ease of transportation, expense or level of hospitality — offer easier going than others. Here are five spots around the globe that fit the bill.Riviera Maya, MexicoIf you’re looking for a beach adventure, look past the honeymoon- and family-focused all-inclusive resorts that line the Caribbean coast of the Yucatán Peninsula, a.k.a. the Riviera Maya, and make your base the bustling town of Playa del Carmen. It has its own beach, of course, but also offers quick trips via ferry to Cozumel to snorkel the Mesoamerican Reef.By night, Playa, as it is called, offers loads of entertainment including open-air restaurants, beachfront dance clubs and shops lining the pedestrian-only Quinta Avenida that stay open late.AdvertisementAccommodations run from thrifty off-the-beach inns to grand beachfront resorts. Travelers bound for the Riviera Maya fly through Cancun, where the average ticket from the United States is down 36 percent this month to $339 round-trip, according to the airfare prediction app Hopper.Advertisement(Related: How to get your U.S. passport in order)DublinIn about the same time it takes to fly from New York to Los Angeles, you could be tipping a Guinness in Ireland instead.“Dublin is perfect for first-time solo travelers,” Robert Firpo-Cappiello, editor in chief of Budget Travel, a digital magazine, said in an email. “It is a quick flight, English is spoken everywhere, the city is easily navigable and the locals are incredibly welcoming and helpful.”The Irish famously love their pubs, and no one will look sideways at a single traveler at Davy Byrnes, where the fictional Leopold Bloom of James Joyce’s “Ulysses” drank. Tours abound; see the city the sporty way with Sight Jogging Dublin Tours.ThailandIt’s far and the language is indecipherable to many, but Thailand bundles unique culture, beautiful beaches and great value.In Southeast Asia in general, Mr. Firpo-Cappiello said, “the travel infrastructure is very solid, and many of our readers have reported that they had an easy time getting around, meeting other solo travelers, and that English was spoken widely.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Bangkok is a natural starting point and the gateway to the beaches south or hill country north. The nation’s affordability is a big draw.“It is really inexpensive, so you can stay in luxury hotels for less than $50 a night as well as bungalows on the beach,” Lisa Imogen Eldridge, who blogs about solo travel at GirlabouttheGlobe, said in an email. “Street food is fantastic and is less than $2 for fresh pad thai.”Vancouver, British ColumbiaThe favorable exchange rate against the U.S. dollar — $1 currently gets you $1.31 Canadian — is a strong argument for Canada in general. With its relaxed West Coast vibe, diverse population, temperate climate and accessibility to natural attractions, Vancouver might be the country’s most solo-friendly city.For sporty types, Vancouver has its own temperate rain forest within city limits in Stanley Park. Or you can hike the Grouse Grind path up nearby Grouse Mountain.AdvertisementThe city’s food scene draws on the bounty of the Pacific Ocean and the province’s eastern Okanagan wine country. Do a D.I.Y. progressive feast at the Granville Island Public Market, or hit trendy Yaletown and emerging Gastown for everything from oyster bars to a First Nations teahouse.IcelandFor adventure travelers, Iceland offers rugged mountain hikes, thermal pools and whale watching. While Reykjavik can be expensive, getting there is not. Wow Air, an Iceland-based carrier, offers free stopovers on flights between North America and Europe, so you can combine it with a Dublin trip for around $400 from Boston.“Iceland is one of my favorite countries for solo travelers,” Matt Kepnes, who blogs about travel at Nomadic Matt, said in an email. “The locals are really friendly and welcoming to outsiders” and, he added, “it’s the safest country in the world so you don’t have to worry about crime.”Bonus Suggestion: Group Tours for Single AdventurersSome trips — an African safari, for example, or the Inca Trail in Peru — are harder to do on your own. Geckos Adventures is now offering guided tours for 18-to-29-year-olds in exotic locales at relatively affordable prices. A nine-day safari in Zimbabwe and South Africa, for example, starts at $915. The company says most of its guests are solo travelers, and it commonly pairs them with same-sex roommates; if you require a single room, expect to pay a single supplement ($170 in the case of the African safari).Want more? You might also like:• The best tricks to save on airfare• How to eat on a budget while traveling• Tips for the solo, younger female travelerWe’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »