AdvertisementSupported byCheck InBy Andrew FerrenDoubles start at 288 euros ($306).Jordi Serra, a local businessman, travels the world collecting ideas for the perfect hotel and then spends a year and 15 million euros creating his dream hotel between Barcelona’s historic Gothic Quarter and the city’s picturesque marina. In a renovated building that housed Picasso’s first studio in 1896, this five-star hotel offers 30 spacious guest rooms; gorgeous interiors by the designer Eva Martínez, based in Barcelona; and a rooftop pool and an expanded bar named El Sueño. The hotel provides an oasis in the heart of tourist bustle that has quickly become home base for the city’s in-the-know (and wealthy) visitors.Though the hotel faces the city’s marina, its entrance on the Passeig de Colom was not exactly a prestige address when the hotel opened in mid-2015, as it’s one of the main thoroughfares traversed by trucks and buses as well as pedestrians filtering out of the Gothic Quarter toward the beaches and marina. But other stylish hotels are now coming to the area as the proximity to the sea is a definite plus in warm weather when the beaches beckon. Key tourist sites like the city’s Cathedral and the Picasso Museum, as well as shopping in the trendy El Born neighborhood, are a short stroll away.My Grande Deluxe room (the lowest category) was very spacious and smartly designed with high ceilings, two closets and a small balcony. A 40-inch TV was unobtrusively mounted on the wall over the small but serviceable desk. Double-glazed windows handle the noise from the street and the beds were comfortable. A signature design feature in the rooms are the geometrically patterned tile headboards, which combine a decorative element of traditional Barcelona homes updated with a modern op-art twist perfectly suited for Instagram.Once again, size matters and the Serras delivers with roomy and sensibly organized bathrooms (two sinks, ample shower and separate toilet), man-sized robes and plenty of plush, oversize towels. Toiletries by Malin & Goetz are provided.The hotel offers free Wi-Fi and international newspapers. Besides the rooftop pool and bar serving cocktails and snacks, there is another bar, Le Nine, in a cozy mezzanine above the lobby and open 24 hours.Opening onto the lobby is the restaurant Informal with a seasonal menu by Marc Gascons, who has a Michelin star at another restaurant. Breakfast, which was included in my room rate, might be the hotel’s weak spot. Served in the restaurant, the buffet includes fresh carrot, apple-lime and watermelon juices; cheeses and charcuterie; crusty breads; and various sweets. Egg dishes, crepes and sandwiches are prepared to order. Unfortunately, while the food itself is appetizing, the space allotted to the buffet is not large, and some of the high-style serving utensils are more like chic little sculptures than functional knives and forks. I ordered one of the specialty hot sandwiches from the menu, but the kitchen staff, already switching over to lunch, never bothered to make it despite assurances from waitresses that it would be coming.Barcelona has no shortage of stylish luxury hotels, but the Serras definitely hits the spot for smart luxury with things like extra space, quality linens, comfortable seating and exceptional service — assuming the restaurant was having an off day — that can really make a difference in a hotel stay.The Serras, Passeig de Colom 9, Barcelona; 34-93-169-1868; hoteltheserrasbarcelona.comAdvertisement