

      By INGRID K. WILLIAMS

APRIL 27, 2017

This sprawling megalopolis can be dizzying, but a selection of neighborhoods offers just the right balance of art, nightlife and cuisine.
Related Article
Contemplating the physical sprawl of Tokyo is dizzying. The Japanese megalopolis has no discernible center, and clusters of skyscrapers miles apart defy the idea of a downtown core. The busiest areas — from Shibuya in the west to Ginza in the east — are electrifying hives of activity. But when time is limited, don’t be distracted by the hypnotic, multistory video screens. Instead, focus on a diverse cross-section of neighborhoods, from peaceful Nakameguro to eclectic Koenji, for a taste of this capital that will leave you hungry for more.
Explore street view and find things to do in Tokyo.
There are two reasons to begin in Aoyama. The first is to witness Tokyo’s recent boom of luxury boutiques with fancy facades designed by architecture’s stars, such as Herzog & de Meuron’s Prada and Miu Miu stores. The second is to visit the Nezu Museum. Housed in a harmonious new building by the Japanese architect Kengo Kuma, the expanded museum has six galleries displaying pre-modern Japanese and East Asian art, from delicate Edo-era gold-foil paintings to moody 15th-century splashed-ink landscapes. In the adjoining garden, stone walkways and a carp-filled pond frame seasonal tableaus of crimson maples in autumn and blooming irises in spring. Regular admission, 1,100 Japanese yen (about $10). The epicure who wants to engage in mindful drinking will find enlightenment on one of the eight seats in the spartan, Zen-like cocktail den Gen Yamamoto. The bar itself is a slab of Japanese oak behind which the eponymous bartender, clad in a crisp white jacket, mixes his creations with precision. The cocktails, in exquisite glassware, balance spirits with fresh seasonal ingredients, including kumquats from Kagawa or fava beans from Kagoshima. A four-cocktail tasting menu is 4,500 yen. Wander through the narrow lanes of Nakameguro, a laid-back neighborhood bisected by the leafy canal of the Meguro River, to dinner at Nakameguro Iguchi, a stylish second-floor yakitori restaurant. A single bonsai serves as décor behind the 10-seat bar, where the friendly chef twirls skewers over the charcoal grill. The set menu, nearly two-dozen courses, recently included the usual chicken bits — tail, heart, wing — and creative offerings like grilled caciocavallo cheese from Hokkaido and refreshing chawanmushi (egg custard) with avocado, seasonal asparagus and lemon peel. Dinner for two, about 15,000 yen. Leave the neon frenzy of Shibuya to the teeny-boppers and instead seek out night life in Shimokitazawa, two miles to the west. This cool indie neighborhood is home to many small music spots, called “live houses,” that host shows ranging from avant-garde pop to punk. At Shelter, a former bomb shelter, watch up-and-coming local rock bands on the checkerboard stage. Avoid Roppongi after dark when its rowdy clubs fill with inebriated expats, and instead visit the neighborhood when the sun shines on its cultural institutions. Start at the National Art Center, one of the largest exhibition halls in Asia. Beyond the curving glass-and-steel facade, find world-class collections, including the current Yayoi Kusama show (through May 22; admission varies). Then walk to 21_21 Design Sight, a bunkerlike museum with underground galleries that was created by the designer Issey Miyake and the architect Tadao Ando. Exhibitions delve into how design informs everyday life (admission, 1,100 yen). Dinners at Tokyo’s top sushi bars typically end with bills printed with an immodest number of zeros, but you can fulfill your sushi dreams for a fraction of the price by eating at midday. Reserve a spot at Sushi Rin, a hushed second-story space in Kagurazaka with about a dozen seats around a blond-wood bar. At lunchtime, the omakase meal (4,000 yen) features fewer courses but the same craftsmanship and top-notch products, from a spoonful of salty roe atop vinegared rice to a parade of nigiri including red snapper, silvery kohada fish and rich tuna belly brushed with soy sauce. Equally memorable is the artful presentation on beautiful plates beside crimson cut-glass sake sets. Browse Tokyo’s retail options at two shopping complexes on opposite ends of the style spectrum. Start in Kagurazaka at La Kagu, a former book warehouse that reopened in 2014 as a shop, cafe and bookstore reached via snaking timber-and-steel staircases designed by Kengo Kuma. The airy two-story space stocks fashions and housewares, from tailored silk trousers and teak Danish bar carts to tiny wooden hand-carved creamers. Then head west to Koenji’s Kitakore building, a riotous, ramshackle warren of closet-size shops overflowing with customized clothing and labels you won’t find anywhere else. Looking for a lace-trimmed ’80s-era Mickey Mouse sweatshirt? Or a purple motorcycle jacket with sparkly studs, mirrors and a gorilla hologram? This is the spot. Take the train one stop east to Nakano, a neighborhood favored by otaku (young pop-culture fanatics), to find a pair of drinking spots worth obsessing over. Hidden amid the manga stores and costume shops in a labyrinthine subculture shopping complex is Bar Zingaro, a cafe that fuses Norwegian exports — midcentury Scandinavian furnishings, Fuglen coffee — with the colorful art of Takashi Murakami. Tucked down a nearby alley, Nakano Beer Kobo is a tiny bar that feels like a treehouse with particleboard walls and lofts that you can climb into with plates of fried chicken thighs and mugs of cold beer brewed on site. Karaoke is the clichéd Japanese entertainment experience, but the Snapchat era calls for a new activity: purikura. These sophisticated photo booths let you pose with friends, decorate the images with scribbles and stamps, and mutate your features — bigger eyes, different hair — to mimic a Disney character. For the widest selection, go to Purikura Shop Noa, a basement-level spot in Harajuku with booths for creating personalized only-in-Japan souvenirs. For dinner, join local residents swarming the Ebisu Yokocho, a covered passageway crammed with food stalls that roar to life after dark. Grab the first seats you see — they’re a commodity — and prepare to feast on okonomiyaki (savory pancakes) or kushikatsu (deep-fried skewers, like lotus root or shishito peppers). Then head to Bar Tram, a polished cocktail bar that mixes absinthe into libations like the frothy, flaming Blanche Neige (G’Vine gin, vermouth, apple syrup and lemon; 1,300 yen). End the night at Bar Track, a low-key music bar where D.J.s spin a range of music, including Miles Davis and Prince B-sides on vinyl, while bartenders mix whiskey highballs. In a city filled with excellent coffee spots, the one worth a detour is Onibus Coffee Nakameguro. Opened last year by a beloved local roaster, the shop occupies a stucco microhouse beside a park. The best spot to savor a velvety double-shot latte (500 yen) is on the small patio, near the Diedrich roaster, which periodically releases an intoxicatingly toasty aroma.Follow fashionable Tokyoites toward trendy Daikanyama and its streets peppered with cool shops. Delve into Daikanyama T-Site, whose three interconnected buildings sheathed in white lattice might constitute the world’s most beautiful bookstore. The complex has areas for design, travel, music, movies, photography and more. Then head to Harcoza, a glitter-doused boutique where you can model puff-sleeve blouses and asymmetric fuchsia skirts on the fitting room’s fairy-tale stage.In Japanese baseball, the rules are the same (mostly), but the experience for fans is not. Snag tickets at the Tokyo Dome, the home stadium of the Yomiuri Giants, to encounter concession-stand takoyaki (octopus balls), coordinated cheering (and a ban on booing), and beer poured by salesgirls with kegs strapped to their backs. In the off-season, visit the stadium’s Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum, which explores America’s pastime on the other side of the Pacific. Then check out the adjacent Edo-era park Koishikawa Korakuen Gardens (300 yen).The Andaz Tokyo Toranomon Hills (1-23-4 Toranomon, Minato-ku; 81-3-6830-1234; tokyo.andaz.hyatt.com; from about 45,000 yen) opened in 2014 on the top six floors of a new 52-story skyscraper. Expect Zen-like interiors and up-in-the-clouds views everywhere from the spa with multiple pools and the open-air rooftop bar to the 164 rooms and suites with wall-to-wall windows.After a complete overhaul, the Capitol Hotel Tokyu (2-10-3 Nagata-cho, Chiyoda-ku; 81-3-3503-0109; www.capitolhoteltokyu.com; from about 35,000 yen) reopened in 2010 in a 29-story, latticed-steel tower designed by the architect Kengo Kuma. The landmark property has three restaurants, a multilane lap pool and 251 rooms with rice-paper screens and views of the neighboring Imperial Palace or Akasaka skyline.Flight and Hotel information provided by Google.Prices represent a snapshot of low fares and rates for weekend trips.Advertisement