By SHIVANI VORASEPT. 1, 2017
The popularity of vacation home rentals in London has surged following last summer’s Brexit referendum: Existing companies with an international presence, such as Airbnb, Onefinestay and Oasis have all reported a significant jump in rentals, while a handful of new players offering rentals only in London, such as the Plum Guide and Cuckooz, have seen their businesses grow rapidly.Oasis, with properties for rent in 20 cities worldwide, for example, has had a 450 percent increase in its London rentals for the first half of 2017, compared with the same period last year, according to the founder and chief executive, Parker Stanberry. The company has around 90 London properties available to rent. The Plum Guide, which launched early last year, has grown to 800 listings from 150 in the last 12 months, and revenue has increased 1,000 percent in that same time period, said the co-founder, Doron Meyassed.What’s the connection between Brexit and a spike in vacation home rentals? Nicola Butler, the owner of NoteWorthy, a London travel company specializing in luxury trips around Britain, says that London has become a more affordable vacation destination since Brexit, giving travelers an incentive to plan longer getaways to the city. “Since the value of the pound has dropped, people can afford to spend more time in London, and a home rental is an appealing and flexible way to do that,” she said.On a recent trip to London, I tested the Plum Guide, and experienced the many advantages and odd mishap of booking accommodations with the brand.AdvertisementThe BasicsEvery home rental company touts a distinguishing feature. The Plum Guide’s is the stringent testing process that a hospitality expert conducts on each home before that property is accepted to the site. Mr. Meyassed said that only one in a 100 pass the 150 different criteria set forth by the company — every property, for example, must be located in a desirable neighborhood and have three places for breakfast within a five-minute walk. Other musts include rooms with plenty of natural light, ample spaces for socializing, bedrooms quiet enough to sleep in, showers with strong water pressure and speedy Wi-Fi. “We look at all the factors that we think make for a dream stay in London and choose our homes accordingly,” Mr. Meyassed said.AdvertisementThe company has a diverse range of listings in the London area, chosen from the best-reviewed properties on more than 25 different rental sites, including Airbnb and Onefinestay. Options include a houseboat in Hackney, a loft in Islington, an apartment in Chelsea and a townhouse in Notting Hill. Nightly rates are between 98 and 4,000 pounds, but the average price is 200 pounds per bedroom per night; the average three-bedroom home, for example, is 600 pounds a night. Mr. Meyassed describes the brand as “affordable luxury.”My HomeI needed a home spacious enough to accommodate my husband and me, as well as our two young children. We were keen on a central location close to popular attractions and the Tube, and wanted an upscale property that was reasonably priced. I found several dozen options matching our needs and chose the Pembrokes, a four-level townhouse with three bedrooms and two-and-a-half bathrooms in the chic Kensington neighborhood. The home had a spacious kitchen with a lovely dining room, a small and leafy green backyard, a living room with a reading nook and three airy bedrooms — two on the top floor and a master suite on the third floor. We were on a picturesque residential block, a stone’s throw from a pub and several cafes; Kensington Palace and High Street Kensington, lined with restaurants and shops, were a 10-minute walk away, and two Tube stations were within a 15-minute walk. The property rents for around 810 pounds a night.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The StayThe Plum Guide operates on a host model: Once guests book their accommodations, the company puts them in touch with their host, who either owns or manages that property. Although the company’s in-house concierge is available to help renters with any needs, the host is their primary point of contact in advance of and throughout their stay.Our host, who manages several properties in London for their owners, offered to arrange our airport transfers and also asked if we wanted housekeeping during our stay and the kitchen stocked with any groceries before we arrived; these services are an additional fee, but are available to anyone who rents with the Plum Guide.Upon our arrival, we were greeted by our convivial host, a spotless home and a refrigerator full of the essentials we had requested. After a quick tour of the home and a briefing about the neighborhood, our host emphasized that we could call or text him with anything in regard to the rental. Then he left us to ourselves.As it turned out, our need to contact him came later that evening when we realized that we had no hot water. Our host called a plumber who declared that the home’s boiler was broken; it was a weekend, and replacing it would take another day.With the prospect of no hot shower for almost two days, my instinct was to flee, but we didn’t. We loved the home and appreciated the Plum Guide’s gracious response to the situation, offering us alternative accommodations either at another property or at an upscale hotel. The hot water was restored the next day, and we ended up immensely enjoying our time at the Pembrokes.The Bottom LineIn an increasingly crowded market of vacation home rental companies, the Plum Guide stands out for its selective list of properties and high standards of service. The swift response to rectify the glitch with the broken boiler is a prime example of the latter. On another trip to London, I would most certainly use the company again.A version of this article appears in print on September 10, 2017, on Page TR3 of the New York edition with the headline: Standing Out in London’s Crowded Rental Market.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »