AdvertisementSupported byBy Talya MinsbergMany Houston residents who were out of town when Hurricane Harvey made landfall are stuck between home and somewhere else.More than 9,300 flights have been canceled to and from Houston’s major airports — George Bush Intercontinental Airport, the city’s largest, and William P. Hobby Airport — since the storm made landfall on Friday, according to FlightAware. As of Thursday afternoon, both airports are open, but with only very limited operations. Passengers are still asked to check in with their airline carriers before going to the airports.The uncertain situation has left many Houston residents away from home longer than expected, on what some are calling an unwanted and unexpected “hurrication.”The luckiest found their way to the homes of family or friends, while others are paying for more nights in hotels (or getting a few extra days on a cruise ship).Jillian Goltzman, a Houston resident, is one of those stuck in between. Ms. Goltzman was in Los Angeles for a conference when Harvey made landfall. She was supposed to return Saturday. To the surprise of some flight attendants in Los Angeles, the flight to Houston took off. That plane did not land in Texas though, to the dismay of passengers. Instead, after hovering over Dallas, it was diverted to Oklahoma City.“There was a bit of a ruckus on the plane. People really, really wanted to be home,” she said. “There was an uproar when the captain said ‘we’re taking you to Oklahoma City. Someone yelled, ‘Can’t we go to Austin?’ ”Ms. Goltzman managed to stay with family, traveling from Oklahoma City to Fort Lauderdale. Since Sunday, she has rebooked her flight on Southwest daily; each flight has been subsequently canceled.Harvey has had an impact on 50 counties in southeast and lower central Texas, home to 11 million people. The storm made a second landfall in southwest Louisiana on Wednesday. More than 47 inches of rain has fallen in some areas.Major airlines have amended their rebooking policies as the storm has shifted course and severity. In the first days of the storm, airlines gave passengers the standard rebooking period of a few days. Now, many airlines are allowing passengers flying through southeast Texas and southwest Louisiana to rebook their tickets through late September.Marshall Shaffer was on vacation in London when Harvey hit his hometown. “I was monitoring the storm here and there and eventually saw that there would be no airport in Houston for me to come home to,” he said. “Being so far away and not being able to provide time and resources to help with recovery efforts has been really hard.”Mr. Shaffer considers himself one of the lucky ones. His home and family in Houston are safe, and after paying a fare difference fee with Delta, he was able to change his ticket to take him to Baltimore, where he is staying with friends.But for some, this unwanted “hurrication” can cause a financial burden.Emily Paul of Houston was watching the storm from Seattle, where she was attending a friend’s wedding.“Logistically, it’s definitely been a bit of a game,” Ms. Paul said. After multiple canceled flights, she and her fiancé are now scheduled to return to Houston on Alaska Airlines on Sunday, seven days after their initial scheduled return. “We tried staying in Seattle, but the bouncing from hotel to hotel was exhausting and expensive.”“We don’t know the Seattle area at all, we don’t have the financial padding for this kind of emergency hurrication and then to watch and hear the terrifying stories coming out of our community, has been dizzying,” she said.The couple decided it would be better financially and emotionally to be with family, so the two rented a car and are now in the Portland area until they are able to return home.Some in Texas’s travel industry have extended a helping hand to those evacuating closer to home. A handful of hotels in Texas are offering discounts for those evacuating from Harvey, and Airbnb has deployed their disaster response program, in which hosts around San Antonio, Austin, Dallas and Houston can open up their homes to evacuees for free.As Harvey shifted, Airbnb expanded the program to areas of Louisiana, and extended the dates through Sept. 25. More than 500 homes have been offered in Texas through the program so far, and the company expects that number to grow.On Thursday, Houston’s major airports have slowly starting to resume operations, though it may not be until this weekend that fliers see the resemblance of normalcy.Then again, getting to and from the airport to residential areas of Houston may be another struggle for some. According to the Texas Department of Transportation, more than 400 Texas roads remain flooded as of Thursday morning.When the airports are open and the roads are clear, Mr. Shaffer knows exactly where he’s going first. “I’m headed to the convention center or wherever will take me to volunteer.”Advertisement