
In Transit By                     
ELAINE GLUSAC

JAN. 29, 2016
A KIMPTON IN AMSTERDAM The boutique chain Kimpton Hotels has announced its first location beyond North America, set to open in Amsterdam in the second quarter of 2017. Kimpton plans to renovate the current Crowne Plaza Amsterdam City Center. The resulting 270-room hotel will include a restaurant, bar, gym and meeting spaces and is designed, like most Kimptons, to appeal to both business and leisure travelers.“We think Amsterdam is a great city for its art and its culture,” said the chief executive Mike DeFrino, who compared the city’s culinary and cultural appeal to San Francisco, where the brand was created by the founder Bill Kimpton to evoke small, individualized hotels he had experienced in Europe. “Amsterdam is also a great mix of leisure and business travel, which is straight down the middle for Kimpton hotels,” he said.IHG announced its acquisition of Kimpton about a year ago with the intention of growing it internationally. The property will be Kimpton’s second international location; a new hotel on Grand Cayman in the Caribbean is expected to open in November.AT BERKELEY, A NEW ART AND FILM MUSEUMThe University of California, Berkeley Art Museum and Pacific Film Archive (BAMPFA) will open Saturday in a new building by the architects Diller Scofidio + Renfro, who recently unveiled the Broad museum in Los Angeles. The new 83,000-square-foot center will house 25,000 square feet of gallery space as well as two film theaters with 232 and 33 seats respectively, with an outdoor viewing plaza and LED screen. An expansion of an existing printing plant, BAMPFA, which will screen 450 films annually, is located where the Cal campus meets downtown, and a block from the BART station that links it to San Francisco and the broader Bay Area.AdvertisementHOTEL DRAMA, BROADWAY STYLEThe Langham Place, New York, Fifth Avenue will welcome an unusual tenant to its room 505 next month, a stage production of the play “Insignificance,” set to run Feb. 19 to March 20. Produced by the Britain-based theater company Defibrillator, the play is set in a hotel, thus inspiring the location. In it, Albert Einstein, Marilyn Monroe, Joe DiMaggio and Sen. Joseph McCarthy gather to debate power, sex and politics, among other topics. The venue can accommodate 52 audience members per show, most of them seated, although some tickets are for standing room. Ticket prices start at $45 for standing room and $79 for seats. The hotel is offering a package that includes a room and two seats at the show from $755.AdvertisementA GUIDEBOOK APP FROM LONELY PLANETLonely Planet, the popular guidebook series for budget-wise travelers, has launched a free app, Guides, featuring guides to 38 cities around the world, including major destinations such as London, New York, Paris and Rome, as well as Cape Town, Kyoto and Vienna. Each of the Guides features an average of about 1,000 entries including sights, hotels, restaurants and shops as well as maps. The app is available for both iOS and Android operating systems. The publisher still produces books and e-books, and offers much of its content online.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.ANGUILLA ADDS A RESORTThe new 70-room Zemi Beach House resort on Anguilla, opening Feb. 1, represents the first newly built hotel to open on the island’s East End in six years. Accommodations include guest rooms, suites that range up to three bedrooms with plunge pools, and three-bedroom penthouses with kitchens and rooftop plunge pools. The resort spa is lodged in a 300-year-old wooden house imported from Thailand and spreads over 15,000 square feet indoors and outdoors, with private spa villas, a juice bar and a meditation garden. Five food and beverage options are planned for the resort, including a beachfront restaurant and a rum bar stocked with more than 100 small-batch rums. There will also be a kids club, two pools with cabanas, tennis courts and nonmotorized water sports including stand-up paddle boarding. Rooms from $699.NEW FESTIVALS IN BALTIMORE ...Featuring 28 art installations along a 1.5-mile stretch of waterfront, the inaugural Light City Baltimore is set for March 28 to April 3. Like light festivals in Sydney and Amsterdam, Baltimore’s will feature projections onto canopies and buildings as well as other more sculptural illuminated art pieces, including a project that will float 350 lighted paper boats in the harbor. All events, including 50 concerts taking place on two stages, are free. A concurrent conference focused on innovation requires ticketed entry. The festival is designed to showcase Baltimore’s artists and tech entrepreneurs. “We wanted to have them come together to collaborate on a festival that would let us shine a light on the cool people who live and work here in Baltimore,” said Kathy Hornig, the festival director.... AND ST. MARTINThe Caribbean island of St. Martin plans to hold its first SXMusic Festival March 9 to 13. The name is a play on the island’s airport code (SXM) and features D.J.-spun electronic music from the likes of Guy Gerber, Jamie Jones, Lee Burridge, DJ Tennis and Dubfire among the more than 80 acts scheduled. Unlike most electronic festivals, St. Martin’s will take place at seven distinct locations, including a beach, resorts and beach bars and clubs. Individual event tickets start at 75 euros ($80) and five-day festival passes that remain start at 250 euros ($264).VAIL FOR KIDS ...Keystone Resort, one of Vail Resorts’ most family-friendly Colorado ski areas, plans to introduce the Kidtopia Experience, Feb. 19 to 21. The culmination of the Presidents’ Day week, typically one of the most popular weeks in the ski season, Kidtopia features a slate of family entertainment including scavenger hunts, fireworks, stargazing and all-ages concerts by the Okee Dokee Brothers and others. The events are free, and Keystone offers one-bedroom condos from $199 a night.... AND FOR THE MIDWESTVail Resorts has acquired Wilmot Mountain in southern Wisconsin, roughly 65 miles north of Chicago, and 50 miles southwest of Milwaukee. For Midwestern skiers and snowboarders, the addition adds value to the company’s Epic Pass, which covers its eight mountain resorts in Colorado, Utah and Lake Tahoe as well as its now three Midwestern resorts, including one near Minneapolis and another near Detroit.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »