
In Transit By                     
ELAINE GLUSAC

MARCH 21, 2016
RETRACING SHACKLETON’S ROUTE In May 1916, the British explorer Sir Ernest Shackleton crossed the South Georgia ice field seeking help for the stranded sailors of his ship, the Endurance, which had been crushed by ice in Antarctica. Marking the centennial of the event, Ice Tracks Expeditions is offering a south polar cruise this fall with the opportunity for 12 passengers to make a four-day overland crossing of the ice field for the ultimate Antarctic shore excursion. The 22-day expedition cruise, Oct. 30 to Nov. 20, departs from Buenos Aires on the 114-passenger Hebridean Sky, visiting the Falkland Islands, Elephant Island and the South Shetland Islands en route to the Antarctic peninsula. Those participating in the ice field expedition will cover roughly 30 miles picking their way around crevasses retracing Shackleton’s route. Rates for the cruises start at $13,885 a person, and the mountaineering expedition is an additional $5,250.DELTA EXPANDS ITS NETWORKAiming to offer easier connections from North America to India, Delta Air Lines has joined a codeshare agreement with Amsterdam-based KLM Royal Dutch Airlines and Jet Airways of India. Beginning March 27, Jet Airways will offer daily nonstop flights from its hubs in Mumbai and New Delhi to Amsterdam, and a flight from Amsterdam to Toronto. The codeshare allows the partners to sell tickets on the reciprocal carriers and align their schedules to suit them. Delta said it has more than 11,000 fliers traveling daily between the United States and India, and that the new agreement would allow its fliers to earn miles and gain perks, such as lounge access for premium fliers, abroad.NEW THEME CRUISES FROM SILVERSEA (OPERA INCLUDED)From Russian ballet to upscale dining, Silversea has announced new theme cruises designed to bring insider access onto the ship. The new “Exclusively Yours – Enriched Voyages” include opera performances from the Accademia Teatro alla Scala in Milan, ballets by members of Academic Bolshoi Theater of Russia and meals made by chefs from the Relais & Chateaux group of luxury hotels. Soloists from the opera will perform aboard Mediterranean and Adriatic cruises in August, September and October. The Bolshoi dancers Daria Khokhlova and Artemy Belyakov will join the Silver Spirit’s Aug. 31 Mediterreanean cruise from Athens to Monte Carlo, offering three performances over the nine-day trip. Two trips, one from Istanbul to Athens Oct. 1 and the other from New York to Barbados Oct. 24, will feature award-winning chefs including David Chauvac of Le Candille in Provence, France, and Jason Joseph of Camelot Restaurant at Cobblers Cove in Barbados, respectively. These and other chefs will offer cooking demonstrations and gourmet dinners.AMTRAK EXPANDS PET PROGRAMAllowing up to five animals per train, Amtrak has expanded its pet tolerance from a pilot program to a permanent policy on most trains along the Eastern corridor. It has also made its long-distance trains and its Amtrak Cascades trains in the West pet friendly, and through mid-June it is testing a weekend-only pet program on the Acela Express between New York and Washington, D.C. Both the pet and the carrier must weigh no more than 20 pounds, and the fee is $25 with a limit of one pet per passenger. Since October, when the trial period began, more than 4,600 pets have taken an Amtrak train.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »