AdvertisementSupported byIn TransitBy Shivani VoraEXPLORING THE CULTURE OF PORTUGAL, PAST AND PRESENT Portugal’s rich culture is the focus of a new private trip to the country from the travel company Made for Spain. Called “Cultural Highlights of Portugal,” the seven-night itinerary begins in Porto and ends in Évora, a Unesco-designated World Heritage site, with a stay in a 15th-century convent. Activities include a tasting of traditional Portuguese appetizers, called petiscos, and visits to small port producers in Porto; a walking tour of Guimarães, the city known as the birthplace of the Portuguese nationality; a hike in Pedras Salgadas Park in northern Portugal; a boat trip in the Douro Valley; and a visit to an artisan tile workshop in Lisbon where travelers can decorate their own tiles. Prices from 9,000 euros (about $9,444) for two people inclusive of accommodations, breakfast, some meals, all activities, transfers and taxes.ACTION! TOUR IN JORDAN HAS A FILM FOCUSA new tour to Petra and Wadi Rum in Jordan from the travel company Petra from Israel is inspired by the Oscars. Two films nominated for the awards this year — “The Martian” starring Matt Damon and “Theeb,” a contender from Jordan in the Best Foreign Language Film category — were filmed in the country, and on the three-day trip, travelers can see where they were shot and also visit sites where other popular movies were filmed. In Petra, an archaeological site in the southwestern desert that moviegoers may recognize from “Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade” and “Transformers: Revenge of the Fallen,” guests take a guided tour of the areas where the movies were filmed. In Wadi Rum, the largest valley in Jordan, they stay at the same Bedouin camp Mr. Damon resided in during the filming of “The Martian” and take a tour of the surrounding desert where “Theeb,” “The Martian” and “Lawrence of Arabia” were filmed. Prices from $650 a person inclusive of accommodations, most meals, entrance fees to sites and tours.CELEBRATING CUISINE (AND WINE) IN CARMELA long weekend of good eating and drinking is coming to Carmel-by-the-Sea, Calif., from Feb. 25 to 28 with the third annual Relais & Châteaux GourmetFest, an extravaganza of 18 events featuring cuisine by renowned chefs and wine from highly regarded winemakers. Four three-star Michelin chefs are headliners of the event: David Kinch of Manresa in Los Gatos, Calif.; Joshua Skenes of Saison in San Francisco; Michel Troisgros of La Maison Troisgros in Roanne, France; and Hiroshi Nakamichi of Restaurant Molière in Sapporo, Japan. Highlights over the four days include a 10-course dinner prepared by Mr. Kinch, Mr. Skenes and Mr. Troisgros and paired with rare wines such as Château Latour; a tasting of wines from Domaine Leflaive, a well-known Grand Cru winery in Burgundy; and a hunt for wild mushrooms through the 20,000-acre Santa Lucia Preserve in Carmel Valley with a team of mycologists followed by a wild mushroom lunch. Prices from $125. Tickets may be purchased at gourmetfestcarmel.com.PASSOVER IN JERUSALEMThe Inbal Hotel in Jerusalem is offering a Passover package ranging from four to 10 nights for travelers who will be in Israel for the holiday, celebrated this year from April 22 to 30. It includes a lavish buffet breakfast daily and all Shabbat meals; those who book before Feb. 10 will receive a 10 percent discount. Prices from $2,530 for four nights.VIRGIN HOTELS PLANS A PALM SPRINGS LOCATIONVirgin Hotels, the hotel brand from the Virgin Group founder Sir Richard Branson, will open its first West Coast property, Virgin Hotels Palm Springs, in 2019. Located in the heart of downtown Palm Springs, the hotel will have 150 rooms, multiple dining and drinking outlets and a rooftop terrace and pool overlooking a new outdoor amphitheater designed by Zaha Hadid called the Palm. Virgin Hotels has a property in Chicago, while locations in Nashville, Dallas and New York City are scheduled to open within the next two years.Advertisement