AdvertisementSupported byIn TransitBy Shivani VoraEurope for Memorial Day?In a bid to attract travelers still considering getaway options for the late-May holiday, hotels around the Continent are offering attractive packages. These deals tied to the fast-approaching three-day weekend are part of a growing trend of last-minute European vacations, according to Misty Belles, the director of global public relations for the luxury travel network Virtuoso.“Our research shows that travelers are planning in advance when it comes to far-flung places such as Asia but are increasingly looking at Europe as an opportunity to partake in spur-of-the moment quick trips,” she said. “Hotels are catching on to this and creating incentives to get people to book.”Here are 10 deals:-Room Mate Hotels has a 15 percent discount on all 16 of its European properties over Memorial Day weekend. The price includes early check-in, late checkout and free Wi-Fi. Examples are a starting rate of $262 at Room Mate Giulia in Milan, $137 at Room Mate Aitana in Amsterdam and $83 at Room Mate Kerem in Istanbul. Reservations can be made online or via phone using the code MemorialMate. Offer valid for travel dates between May 27 and May 30. Reservations must be booked between April 12 and May 27.-The hospitality company Paris Perfect has a deal for Memorial Day weekend at the newly opened 25 Place Dauphine on Île de la Cité, an island on the Seine. It includes three nights in a one-bedroom apartment; a refrigerator stocked with French cheeses, wine, meats and dips; a welcome basket of fresh cookies and baguettes, coffees and teas; a tour of the Île de la Cité; and a cruise on the Seine. The price is $1,335.-The Conservatorium in Amsterdam offers the Memorial Day in Amsterdam package; it includes a three-night stay in a deluxe room, daily breakfast for two, one spa treatment per person and a four-course dinner for two with wine at the in-house Asian-inspired restaurant, Taiko. The price is $2,500. Must be booked by May 20.- The Langham, London has a Join the Club promotion on Memorial Day weekend in which guests get a free upgrade to a Club Room or Club Suite. Access to the new Club Lounge comes with a stay in these rooms, and amenities included in the lounge include breakfast, cocktail hour and afternoon tea. Prices from 288 pounds, about $410, a night.-Also in London, Café Royal has a three-night package for two guests available from May 27 to May 30 that includes breakfast, a bottle of Champagne, high tea and a three-course dinner at its restaurant, Ten Room. Prices from 1,549 pounds.-Lakes in Switzerland and Italy are on the agenda with Hotel Eden Roc’s Memorial Day Lake Getaway package. Guests stay two nights at the Hotel Eden Roc on Lake Maggiore in southern Switzerland and another two nights at its partner resort, Casta Diva Resort on Lake Como in Italy. Daily breakfast is included in both; in Switzerland, guests get two 50-minute massages at the property’s spa and dinner for two at one of its five restaurants, and in Italy, they get a six-course dinner at the hotel’s two-Michelin-starred restaurant, Orangerie, and two 50-minute facials. Prices from $2,254 a person for four nights.-Baur au Lac in Zurich has a Memorial Day Escape offer; it includes three nights’ accommodation, daily buffet breakfast, a three-course meal at the in-house restaurant Rive Gauche, a five-course meal at the in-house Michelin-starred restaurant Pavillon and a free minibar. Prices from 3,629 Swiss francs, about $3,777.-The Jumeirah in Frankfurt has the Stay 3 Pay 2 Deal over Memorial Day weekend. Guests who book three nights in any category of room get the third night free; the package also includes breakfast and an 80 euro (about $91) credit for the property’s restaurant, Max on One, or at its Ember Bar & Lounge. Prices from $288 a night before the discount.-The Pousada de Lisboa in the heart of Lisbon has a three-night offer over Memorial Day weekend that includes accommodations, a half-day walking tour of the city, a wine tasting and a class on tile painting. Prices from 1,500 euros, about $1,700.-Also in Portugal, Martinhal Cascais, on the coast west of Lisbon, has the Early Summer Celebration for Memorial Day deal of a five-night stay with breakfast. Prices from 175 euros a night.Advertisement