
In Transit By                     
SHIVANI VORA

JAN. 28, 2016
The travel industry is beginning to react as vacationers rethink their trips amid growing concern over the Zika virus, the mosquito-borne disease that experts say is possibly linked to microcephaly in babies. The spread of the virus has led the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention to warn pregnant women and those planning to become pregnant against travel to affected areas, including popular Caribbean tourist destinations like Puerto Rico, the United States Virgin Islands and Barbados, as well as Mexico, Brazil and Panama.United Airlines said that customers who hold tickets to regions that the C.D.C. says are affected by the virus can postpone their trips or receive full refunds.American Airlines said that pregnant women with tickets to Panama City, Guatemala City, Tegucigalpa and San Pedro Sula in Honduras, and San Salvador in El Salvador will receive a refund if they provide a doctor’s note stating that they are unable to travel because of their pregnancy.JetBlue will allow customers who have concerns about traveling to Zika-affected areas a refund or rebooking, a spokeswoman said.AdvertisementVirgin America will let travelers who have tickets to any Mexican destinations — Cancún, Puerto Vallarta and Los Cabos — get a refund or change their flight free of charge, a spokesman said.AdvertisementCruise lines are also working with travelers who want to change their plans. A spokeswoman for Princess Cruises said that pregnant women who are on itineraries visiting Zika-affected countries can cancel their cruises and get a credit for future cruises.A spokesman for Royal Caribbean said that pregnant women who do not feel comfortable sailing to countries affected by the Zika virus can choose an alternative itinerary or get a credit for a future cruise, valid for two years.Norwegian Cruise Lines is also making accommodations for pregnant women by allowing them to reschedule their cruise for a future date or change their itinerary to nonaffected destinations, a spokeswoman said.Hotels in the affected regions are largely not offering refunds. While some are taking precautionary measures to prevent the spread of the disease, they have not implemented specific cancellation policies for guests who want to change their plans.Hilton Worldwide, with 109 properties across its 13 brands in the affected areas, as well as Hyatt hotels and Four Seasons Hotels and Resorts, are considering waivers for cancellations on a case-by-case basis.Some tour providers, meanwhile, especially in Brazil, where it is peak tourist season, report that they are fielding inquiries from concerned clients who have vacations planned in the country in the coming weeks.Blue Parallel and Dehouche, both custom trip companies in Rio de Janeiro, haven’t received any cancellation requests for coming trips because of the virus, they said, but clients with booked itineraries are asking questions about the disease.Advertisement“Many of our clients have asked,” said Paul Irvine, the founder of Dehouche. “Most are unaware that any travel warnings are directed at pregnant women.”The executive director of the Puerto Rico Tourism Company, Ingrid I. Rivera Rocafort, said: “None of our tourism operators are in despair. We have health protocols in place as always and keep a watchful eye on developments.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Our experience is that virus epidemics do not scare visitors away inasmuch as they feel that health protocols and timely advisories are in place,” she said. “We predict a record 9.5 million visitors this season as opposed to 7.9 million in 2013.”Stephanie Loibl of Maywood, N.J., said she and her husband, Mike, will visit Puerto Rico this year despite the advisories.“I am not pregnant, nor will be, so I’m safe,” she said by email. “We do have some concerns but not enough to give up a trip without kids in a warm destination. I have absolutely no concerns regarding health or sanitation. Ebola scares me, a mild virus from a mosquito doesn’t.” She plans to stay at a coastal resort near Fajardo later this month.“Tourists keep coming,” said Enrique Obaldía, the secretary of tourism for the Guna Yala Congress in that province of Panama, the region formerly known as San Blas, with more than 300 islands. The archipelago offers excellent snorkeling. “The media alarms but the impact of Zika virus in the communities isn’t so much,” Mr. Obaldía said.In Guatemala, Kendra McLaughlin, the owner and manager of Mesón Panza Verde, an elegant boutique hotel and restaurant in the town of Antigua, said that the property had “only had one cancellation, and that vacancy was filled by the following morning.”But Kristen Korey Pike, who owns KK Travel Worldwide in Atlanta, said that she has had 10 cancellations for trips booked to the Caribbean. Most were babymoons, vacations that some couples take before the arrival of a baby. “My clients are alarmed,” she said.Jack Ezon, the president of the New York travel company Ovation Vacations, has had more than 50 cancellations for trips to the Caribbean and Mexico.Advertisement“I have a lot of clients who are pregnant or trying to get pregnant, so they’re scared and are halting their travel plans altogether or rebooking to travel within the U.S. instead,” he said.Some hotels are offering refunds for these clients, according to Mr. Ezon, while others are not or are giving credits for a future stay. “It’s a negotiation every time, but in some instances, my clients are losing thousands of dollars,” he said.What can travelers do to protect themselves from taking a financial hit on a prepaid vacation that they no longer want to take because of Zika? Ms. Pike and Mr. Ezon recommend buying travel insurance. Stan Sandberg, a founder of TravelInsurance.com, an insurance comparison site, said that most insurance plans are treating the virus as any other illness in the policy’s terms and conditions. That means that if travelers contract the virus while traveling, they would be covered for emergency care, medical evacuation and trip interruption benefits under most plans.“It’s still important to note that none of the travel insurance providers are considering the C.D.C. warning a reason to cancel a trip to an affected country,” he said.For travelers to an affected country who want an option to cancel, Mr. Sandberg recommends a plan with a Cancel for Any Reason (CFAR) option; RoamRight and Travel Insured International are two companies that offer such plans.Nic Wirtz contributed reporting from Guatemala; Rafael Matos from San Juan, P.R.; and Sol Lauria from Panama.A version of this article appears in print on February 7, 2016, on Page TR3 of the New York edition with the headline: As Zika Concerns Grow, the Travel Industry Reacts.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »