
5 Places By                     
JULIE O’SHEA

SEPT. 22, 2016
Once defined by its rundown Communist-style housing blocks, uneven sidewalks and graffiti-laced storefronts, Prague’s Vrsovice district has transformed into one of the capital’s “it” neighborhoods. Over the last decade, stylish cafes, craft beer pubs and boutique retailers have moved in, tucked among its colorful rowhouses. With its popular biannual street festivals and vibrant night life, this former blue-collar neighborhood has now become something of a cultural melting pot with a breezy bohemian vibe, attracting an international crowd.Bad Flash, which has long collaborated with top Czech microbreweries to produce lagers under its own label, opened a brick-and-mortar pub last fall to much fanfare. With 12 taps and more than 300 bottled beers on offer — including the delectable Schneider Weisse and the hard-to-come-by Matuska — this expansive and sparsely decorated corner establishment quickly gained a loyal following.Krymska 2; 420-273-134-609; facebook.com/BadFlashBarOpened in 2013 by Petra Hulova, a well-known Czech novelist, and Lukas Havlena, a photographer, as a funky cafe-cum-community forum, Zenit has since shifted gears. Now more of an offbeat bar with peeling paint, mismatched chairs and a disco ball, its local D.J.s cater to Krymska Street’s late-night, hard-partying crowd.Krymska 24; 420-267-314-903; zenitcafe.czFollowing the wild success of his bakery-cafe combo in the Vinohrady neighborhood, Antonin Kokes opened a second location right at the Vrsovicke Namesti tram stop in early March. The big draw here is the bread, modeled after Germany’s trademark Brotchen rolls and baked on-site.AdvertisementMoskevska 38; 420-733-593-925; antoninovopekarstvi.czDuring the weekend brunch rush, it’s next to impossible to get a seat at this fanciful little basement nook without a reservation. This welcoming spot, opened in 2013 by Hanka Bojdova and Dominika Fajtova, has tasty offerings inspired by the young proprietors’ Moravian roots and love of experimental baking. Their homemade delights range from quiches and sandwiches to a rotating selection of cheesecakes, cookies and banana bread.AdvertisementKodanska 37, 420-604-329-904, cafejen.czThe Slovak designer Patricia Madarova has created an elegant display of vintage clothing, jewelry and other one-of-a-kind knickknacks in her Boho shop. The cozy two-room storefront, which opened three years ago, will have you feeling as if you’ve stumbled upon an intimate retro fashion sanctuary.Francouzska 76, 420-733-206-929, boho.czA version of this article appears in print on September 25, 2016, on Page TR3 of the New York edition with the headline: Cool Cafes, Pubs and Boutiques Transform a Once-Bleak District.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »