AdvertisementSupported byFORAGINGBy Shivani VoraThe Vesterbro neighborhood of Copenhagen was once a seedy part of town that was full of brothels and was not to be ventured into at night. But in the last several years, it has become home to both fledgling and established entrepreneurs who are opening quirky boutiques with interesting back stories. Many of the locally owned shops are on or near a busy thoroughfare called Istedgade, and what they sell varies from children’s clothes to home goods. Once a brothel, this space now sells organic and vegan hair and body products. It was opened in 2012 by a native Texan, Sundra Essien, and her Danish husband, Lasse Mulvad, offering traditional bar soaps, face cleansers, hair oils and shaving soaps, with ingredients such as olive oil, shea butter and essential oils sourced from both Danish farmers and destinations further afield, like Palestine and Ghana. Ms. Essien makes the products on-site by hand, while Mr. Mulvad designs the understated packaging. Flensborggade 22; isangs.com; 45-5015-1520A loyal clientele frequents this tiny boutique for jewelry in muted colors and Nordic home accessories like mugs, blankets and plates. While 40 to 50 brands are represented in the space, the owner, Tina Eiersoe, intentionally carries just a few of each item so she can quickly make room for new pieces. Istedgade 99; girliehurly.dk; 45-3324-2241This spacious multibrand boutique has attire for men and women that you are unlikely to find elsewhere. Items by small Scandinavian designers make up most of the inventory, but a few big names such as Missoni are mixed in. Whatever the label, the comfortable shirts, pants and dresses are meant for everyday wear. Istedgade 95; kyoto.dk; 45-3331-6636Here is a men’s clothing shop and art gallery in a small space with gleaming light wood floors. Prints of scanned drawings by the owner, Alfred Riis, hang on the walls. The tops, pants and jeans on the shelves and racks are mainly by Danish designers such as Elsk, a brand started by two former surfers. Their black organic cotton T-shirt with a wave pattern across the chest was recently for sale. Istedgade 83; 45-6091-8628Stylish but casual children’s clothes are sold with a charitable mission here: Proceeds go to Settlementet, a nonprofit focused on social causes in Vesterbro. The selection, for newborns up to 12-year-olds, includes 10 to 15 Danish brands. New items are from previous seasons, and are marked down. For even lower prices, shoppers can peruse the secondhand section.Istedgade 85; heidiogbjarne.dk; 45-6015-4502Advertisement