AdvertisementSupported by5 PLACESBy Cate HugueletHome to hip drinking and dining dens like the Michelin-anointed gastro pub Longman & Eagle and the tiki hot spot Lost Lake, Logan Square in Chicago has for years been touted as one of the Midwest’s coolest night-life quarters. But over on a stretch of Armitage Avenue that traces the neighborhood’s southwest reaches, long a scruffy miscellany of machine shops, beauty salons and storefront churches, lights were out after dark until recently. Lately, though, new dining and drinking spots are attracting local nighthawks seeking a low-key alternative to the relentless trendiness of the neighborhood’s northern end.This corner tavern, opened in 2015, strikes an inviting note via friendly bartenders, scads of dark wood paneling, and easy-breezy classic tunes. Elevated tasty bites from the bar’s chef, Steven LoTempio, include crispy-edged pierogi stuffed with ramp kimchi and funky “pig face” fritters over German potato salad. 3281 West Armitage Avenue; 312-818-1254; bestintentionschicago.comThis cozy upscale fish spot, now two years old, favors casual (and modestly priced) seafood shack classics like clam strips and fried shrimp baskets, along with kitschy fishbowl cocktails made for sharing. 3213 West Armitage Avenue; 773-486-7465; sinkswimchicago.comThis snug, year-old charmer (the award-winning chef Jason Vincent is one of the owners) owes its name in part to “Me and My Giant”; a large-format print of the poem by the Logan Square native Shel Silverstein hangs inside. The eclectic menu showcases simple ingredients (beautifully textured pastas and bright veggie-anchored small plates) without taking itself too seriously — see the buttery-sweet fried uni (sea urchin) shooters, a runaway crowd favorite from day one. 3209 West Armitage Avenue; 773-252-0997; giantrestaurant.comSome would say you haven’t gotten the real Chicago bar experience until you’ve slugged cheap beer beneath fluorescent light at its combination taproom/liquor shops, otherwise known as packaged goods stores. This one, opened in 1952, now features 24 draft lines. 3219 West Armitage Avenue; 773-227-4052; gotavern.comA self-proclaimed oasis in an erstwhile coffee desert, this year-old bar housed in a former hair salon anchors its menu with beans from a homegrown roaster, Halfwit, while featuring pour-overs from a different roaster each month. A communal table and plenty of stools encourage lingering. 3317 West Armitage Avenue; 773-904-7051; damnfinechicago.comAdvertisement