By THE NEW YORK TIMESMARCH 3, 2016
Last week In Transit posted an article about a boy and his parents who were asked to leave their Allegiant Air flight after the boy developed an allergic reaction to a dog, a service animal. More than 350 readers posted comments about the incident — and about animals, service and otherwise, on planes. Here is a sampling.On my last trip, two flights on small planes, there were dogs onboard both times. One even right behind me. I had just experienced days of wheezing from dog allergy. Fortunately I had my puffer with me. As a frequent flyer, a physician, and a person with dog allergy asthma, I have to ask the obvious question: so why is the allergic person to reschedule to a different flight, rather than the person with the dog? Is there a difference between dog allergy and cigarette smoke allergy? Airplanes are all for decades non smoking. Are we becoming a bit too dog-centric?— Mark Merkens, Portland, Ore.I’ve been on two flights recently where passengers have brought “emotional support” dogs onboard. These animals were not in carriers and sat on their owner’s lap throughout the flight. The flight attendants were well aware, so I assume the airlines allow this now. In addition to allergy concerns, I wonder about the safety of unrestrained dogs in case of emergency — for example, if there’s a sudden drop in altitude, the pet goes flying and now there’s a panicked dog running around the cabin.— Debra Thomas, DenverNot to be cruel, but anyone who has life-threatening allergies has to be prepared for more than a dog in their airplane. Allergens can be found everywhere, every store, restaurant, hotel, train station etc. While I sympathize mightily with the family in this instance, in no way can they rationally expect allergen-free environments outside of their own home. Public transportation is just that ... public and therefore with attendant risks.Every Saturday, get travel tips, destination coverage, photos from all over the world and more.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.— David, VirginiaHow about banning animals from the flight? Or having the person with the animal give up his seat if someone is allergic? When did animals obtain rights over people with allergies?Advertisement— Becky, New YorkI have a severe, lifelong allergy to cat dander. I like them, but they don’t like me, you could say. If I was unfortunate enough to be seated next to some twit with a Persian on a long flight, after a while I could well go into some kind of bronchial crisis, probably asthmatic in nature; a severe enough attack could constitute a medical emergency and might even force a landing. I suppose it would be all my fault for being born this way. The clear message here is that the airlines are far more interested in accommodating pet owners than those of us with these afflictions. In other words, like it or lump it. Another symptom of the age of massive self-indulgence we’re unfortunate enough to live in ...Advertisement— GmgwatI have traveled with my cat and I’ve traveled without my cat. I can just about guarantee that I contributed as much cat dander either way! Meanwhile, when I traveled next to a passenger with a service dog I was asked — before the woman and dog were seated — if I had a problem with being seated next to a dog. I had no problem at all. But I wasn’t similarly asked about a fellow passenger who reeked of perfume, which I am allergic to, nor (alas) did I expect to be. It’s a public space — we cannot police for allergens.— Adina, OhioOfficially qualified service dogs for a person with a genuine physical limitation/disability such as blindness or wheelchair-bound — yes, all aboard. Otherwise, there is NO need — none! — for people to fly hither and yon with their pet. That’s what kennels and teenage neighbors are for. And if they still wish to bring them along on vacation, work, whatever — well, that is what the (properly controlled & temperate) cargo hold is for. The end. A few hours’ separation hurts neither pet nor owner, and an airline standing ground on a firm policy would end this ridiculous non-issue for good.— Mary, Knoxville, Tenn.Why on earth do the airlines not improve the old “pressurized compartment” where pets can be safely if not pleasantly kept for the duration of a flight? Our pets flew in them and I admit they were traumatized by the experience, but at least their presence in the cabin didn’t traumatize the human passengers. The airlines’ advice to “keep your epinephrine on hand” is stunningly callous and ignorant.— JB, ColoradoWe’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.