By MIKE SEELYOCT. 20, 2017
Like travel agencies, department stores and shoeshine stands, the concierge profession is one that has been brutishly hammerlocked by modernization. But in Chicago, one former luxury concierge has marshaled the energy and expertise of her battered colleagues to take an “if you can’t beat ‘em, join ‘em” approach.Aggressively networking via her LinkedIn account, Krista Krauss Miller secured financial backing from Tim Huelskamp, a veteran of the private equity industry, to start When in Roam, an online concierge service that launched in 22 major American cities and two Hawaiian islands (Maui and Oahu) earlier this year. In each of these places, at least one living, breathing concierge is contracted by When in Roam to provide itineraries that are customized based on an online questionnaire. When in Roam is also the official virtual concierge for Hotel Chicago in that city, putting it in the ring with in-house digital concierge services created by brands like Ritz-Carlton and Hyatt.But to use the services those large hotel chains offer, you have to be a guest, just as you have to book a trip through Expedia to make use of its digital concierge, Expedia Local Expert. Then there’s Your Local Cousin, which pairs intrepid global travelers with “vetted local experts” who can point them to the most authentic area haunts and even create personalized itineraries of up to 11 days for a fee of $60. Unlike When in Roam, none of Your Local Cousin’s contractors are professional concierges. (Your Local Cousin is also in the process of launching partnerships with a handful of New York City hotels wherein it will “curate unique tours and experiences” that will be accessible through a widget on a given hotel’s website, says the co-founder Aarti Kanodia.)Do you prefer crowds to serenity? Big ol’ burgers to kale salad? Blending in with the locals to sticking out like a sore tourist with a girthy fanny pack weighing down your waist? These are the sorts of preferences that When in Roam’s users make known in an online questionnaire so that the responding concierge can tidily tailor a client’s experience.AdvertisementWhen in Roam is still in its infancy: Its concierges currently provide just a couple itineraries a week, as well as answering a follow-up question should clients want their interaction to last a bit longer. (Anything beyond that will cost more; a contractor’s take is $12 per $29 itinerary.)But in attempting to whisk her profession into the Digital Age, might Ms. Miller be inadvertently cannibalizing it, byte by byte?“For the most part, we’re trying to reach users who don’t have access to a [physical] concierge,” she said. “This might be someone staying in an Airbnb or with family or friends, or hotels without services. At a time when concierges are more important than ever, hotels are eliminating positions. We can both Google ‘best restaurants in Chicago’ and get the same answers. But is your best restaurant my best restaurant? No. It takes the concierge to qualify that.”AdvertisementHerein, Ms. Miller acknowledges Airbnb, the hotel industry’s arch enemy. Somewhat ironically, Airbnb recently launched an initiative to have its hosts act more like hospitality experts, replete with recommended activities, cucumber water and maybe a mint on the pillow for good measure.All of this strikes Robert Marks, the chief concierge of San Diego’s Omni Hotel, as cockamamie. Mr. Marks is president of the American chapter of Les Clefs d’Or, a concierge society whose members must display profound expertise to gain entry. To him, if you aren’t staying in a hotel, you may as well pitch a tent in the parking lot.While he acknowledges that When in Roam “is an option” for people who choose not to stay at full-service hotels, he said he feels that the service is “cold and non-interactive.”“It’s no better than something that you could find online,” he said. “One of the great joys of having a concierge is you build this wonderful relationship with them. They get to know your life and share their expertise. That face time is so valuable.”Colin Perceful said he wouldn’t necessarily disagree with the latter half of that statement. He’s a concierge at the Four Seasons, one of downtown Seattle’s more opulent hotels, and also one of the contractors who might wind up filling out your itinerary should you choose to patronize When in Roam.“That’s kind of where the concierge profession is trending,” he says of his auxiliary gig’s virtual bent.Besides the beer money that When in Roam currently provides for him, Mr. Perceful says his involvement with Ms. Miller’s company forces him to stay engaged with parts of the city far from the downtown core.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“There’s very little variance among customers in a five-star hotel, whereas with When in Roam, you’ll get bachelorette parties staying at an Airbnb on Capitol Hill or someone staying with their grandmother in Fremont,” he said, referring to two of Seattle’s more happening neighborhoods.When I requested an itinerary from When in Roam, I asked for destinations and activities in and around West Seattle, a peninsula that’s accessible by either passenger ferry or bridge from mainland Seattle. Coincidentally, Mr. Perceful was the one who snapped up my request, and nimbly pointed me to such hyper-local haunts as Mashiko (sustainable sushi), Sisters and Brothers (hot chicken) and La Rustica, a family-owned Italian restaurant with a location so obscure that you’d have to crash your bicycle into it if someone didn’t tell you where it was.“The restaurant doesn’t even have a web page,” Mr. Perceful noted in his summary.That’s true, but the stove sure works.A version of this article appears in print on October 29, 2017, on Page TR3 of the New York edition with the headline: The Digital Concierge Tries to Make It Personal.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.