AdvertisementSupported byIn TransitBy The New York TimesMalibu and the areas surrounding it are home to a handful of renowned but challenging weight-loss retreats where guests hike for several hours a day and stick to a low-calorie, vegetarian diet. Aja Malibu, opening June 20, wants to offer health-seekers a less aggressive way to achieve their goals. Nestled on a 23-acre knoll in the Santa Monica Mountains, the property accommodates just seven people at a time.Guests begin their day with a smoothie and a 90-minute hike, and throughout the day, they take part in nutrition workshops, classes on healthy cooking using produce and herbs grown in the expansive gardens, meditation sessions and treatments in a spa adorned with healing crystals. They can also use a sound-healing room and a swimming pool filled with filtered, chlorine-free water. The meals, shakes and snacks are all plant-based and gluten- and dairy-free, but the portions are generous, and there is no calorie counting. “We believe that transformation, including weight loss, can happen with our holistic approach,” said Airrion Copeland, the general manager. Prices from $10,000 for seven nights, all inclusive.SHIVANI VORAUntil now, choosing a tour operator has been the hardest part of traveling to Bhutan, a country where independent travel isn’t possible and a $200 to $250 daily minimum tour package is required. After receiving an official endorsement from Prince Jigyel Ugyen Wangchuck, MyBhutan (mybhutan.com), a new one-stop travel portal, hopes to help usher the country into an era of tech-savvy efficiency. “MyBhutan will allow you to create your own intimate experience in Bhutan,” said the founder, Matthew DeSantis.The site features 350 registered local agencies, videos of 150 guides and hundreds of accommodations, restaurants and new activities, like rafting the Dangme Chhu. Visitors to the site can create their own “wish list,” then pick guides and associated operators. The site also plans to add a rating system and exclusive tours. Some of the proceeds will fund the Tarayana Foundation, a local organization that assists vulnerable communities. “By creating an avenue for tourism to support traditional industries, we preserve culture,” Mr. DeSantis said.ERIN LEVIAdvertisement