AdvertisementSupported byBy The New York TimesWe recently wrote about some of the special events happening in the San Francisco Bay Area for Super Bowl 50, with tips from The Times’s Benjamin Hoffman, who will be covering his seventh Super Bowl this week and who knows the area better than most.Whether you are traveling to the Bay Area for Super Bowl activities, or already live there and are curious about what is happening this week, here are nine things to keep in mind.1. Super Bowl City. The Super Bowl 50 Host Committee’s “free-to-the-public fan village “ will be set up at the base of Market Street, near the waterfront, and will run through Feb. 7. The centerpiece is the Fan Energy Zone, which will include the 40-foot-tall Fan Dome, which allows those interested to play interactive games as digital avatars displayed on giant screens.2. Dinner on the pier. Finding good food in San Francisco will not be difficult, but consider Hard Water, a New Orleans-inspired whiskey bar and restaurant that opened on Pier 3, or the Spanish cuisine of Coqueta on Pier 5, as recommended by Bonnie Tsui in our recent 36 Hours feature on the city.3. Pro Football Hall of Fame exhibit. The Triton Museum of Art in Santa Clara is hosting Gridiron Glory: The Best of the Pro Football Hall of Fame, a must-see (and free) activity for any hard-core football fan.4. Free concerts. Check out who is playing at the City Stage, which is part of Super Bowl City, and will be featuring free concerts all week long, including Alicia Keys on Saturday.5. A good burrito. Mr. Hoffman recommended El Farolito in the Mission District, but added “if you find any taqueria in the Mission you’re doing well.”6. N.B.A. action. Maybe football is not your sport. The first-place Golden State Warriors are hosting the Oklahoma City Thunder on Saturday night. The Warriors play at Oracle Arena in Oakland, which is roughly a 30-minute train ride from downtown San Francisco.7. Fortune cookie factory. Maybe not what you initially had in mind, but Mr. Hoffman insists you stop by the Golden State Fortune Cookie Factory in Chinatown. “You would not believe this, but a fresh fortune cookie tastes considerably better than a not-fresh fortune cookie,” Mr. Hoffman said.8. Bowling. If you’re near the Mission District, consider another highlight from our 36 Hours itinerary: the friendly and intimate atmosphere of a classic bowling alley, “but with really good food,” at Mission Bowling Club.9. Watch the game. You don’t need a ticket, just a good sports bar, and San Francisco has plenty of them. Travel & Leisure recommends the San Francisco Athletic Club, Public House and the Brick Yard, among others.Advertisement