

      By SETH SHERWOOD

SEPT. 15, 2016

Show up hungry in Burgundy, and not just for boeuf Bourguignon. Appetites for art and design will be sated, too.
Satisfaction for nearly every appetite awaits in Burgundy. Food? The venerable aristocratic city of Dijon and the nearby medieval town of Beaune both reap the region’s bounty, which features numerous icons of French gastronomy. Under their spires and towers, you can start with asparagus and escargots, follow with Charolais beef — best sampled in a classic boeuf Bourguignon — dab on some Dijon mustard and wrap up with a cheese course of Brillat-Savarin and Époisses. Drink? Kick off with a Kir — a mix of local white wine and black currant liqueur named for a former Dijon mayor — and follow with wines from Burgundy’s legendary vineyards, which won Unesco World Heritage status last year. Art? Stroll the halls of contemporary galleries and venerable fine-arts institutions. Acquisition? Dijon’s covered produce market, antiques boutiques and contemporary design showrooms should sate the shopping urge. Whatever your pleasure, all you have to do is show up hungry.
Explore street view, find things to do in Burgundy and sign in to you Google account to save your map.
You can scarcely kick a grape down Beaune’s cobbled streets without hitting a wine merchant, vineyard office, tasting cellar (notably that of the venerable Patriarche winemaker), retail emporium or wine bar — to say nothing of the Musée du Vin wine museum. In a former medieval church, Beaune’s Marché aux Vins (wine market) is a key stop for oenophiles eager to worship local history and vintages, thanks to tasting tours. The guides will explain why you should bring coffee to a tasting, which Burgundy wine is the most prized in the world and other facts — mainly pertaining to Burgundy’s many subregions, microclimates, grape-growing techniques and wine styles — as you swirl, sniff and sip from four to 11 local wines, depending on your type of tour. Tours are held daily at 10:30 a.m., 3 p.m. and 5 p.m. and cost 9 to 27 euros (about $13 to $30).Suffering from spasms? Try beaver powder. Gout? Take silver nitrate. And syphilis? Mix mercury drops, almond oil and mutton fat, of course. Such are the “cures” offered in an 18th-century medical tome found in the Hospices de Beaune — a.k.a. Musée de l’Hôtel-Dieu — a medieval hospital of exquisite Gothic architecture and interiors. Besides the pharmacy, highlights include the ornately decorated hangar-like treatment hall, an art gallery featuring Rogier van der Weyden’s apocalyptic 15th-century multipanel painting of the Last Judgment and a shop selling much-sought wines from the institution’s vineyards. Entry, 7.50 euros.What pairs well with wine? More or less everything at Ma Cuisine, an airy, white, chapel-like haven of regional gastronomy. And if you don’t have 18,900 euros for that 1959 bottle of Romanée-Conti, never fear: The wine list, organized by price, starts with a 24-euro white aligoté. Whatever you quaff, the comfortable and unpretentious restaurant provides ace takes on appetizers like escargots and oeufs en meurette, runny-soft poached eggs turned purple from a rich wine sauce loaded with onions, shallots and bacon morsels. The farmhouse fare continues with grilled duck breast, steaks or a textbook boeuf Bourguignon whose long-simmered boulders of plump beef fall into stringy and succulent shards under the fork. Époisses — creamy, pungent and pleasingly bitter — comes next. A three-course dinner (without wine) for two costs around 100 euros. Reserve.Dijon’s historical core is a buffet of architectural styles from the medieval, Renaissance, Baroque and 19th-century periods. Built during the 1870s, the structure known as Les Halles is a cathedral-like expanse of finely wrought glass and iron that houses another sumptuous buffet: the city’s produce market. At the north end, La Ferme Ligny sells goat cheese, butter and cream from its own farm, as well as famous Burgundy cheeses like Abbaye de Cîteaux. Along the west side, La Vie Gourmande sweetens your shopping basket with homemade local spice bread, crème de cassis and fruit jams. The dozens of other stands fill in the gaps with everything from cured ham to Iranian spices. The house cocktail at Restaurant So, made of local sparkling wine and a dash of yuzu liqueur, is an apt microcosm of this pleasant, bright, cheerful little restaurant. A veteran of the superchef Joël Robuchon’s gastronomic palace in Tokyo, the 30-something chef So Takahashi cooks precise, light, market-fresh French food with occasional nods to his native Japan. The short lunch menu, which changes multiple times weekly, might start with a cold, unctuous pea soup — accented with pungent Parmesan shards and chilled chorizo purée as soft as cream cheese — followed by a plump chicken breast with forest vegetables and basmati rice. The extensive Burgundy wine list is scrawled on a chalkboard covering a whole wall, like gourmet graffiti. The prix fixe three-course lunch is 17.50 euros. Reserve. Since 2013, Dijon’s former municipal baths have been home to F.R.A.C. Bourgogne, one of many government-run exhibition sites around the country for the French state’s extensive and ever-expanding collection of international contemporary art. A large, menacing yellow enamel wasp clad in black mesh — a creation of the Portuguese artist Joana Vasconcelos — welcomes you to the sprawl of white rooms, which hold rotating exhibitions. Even grander and more ambitious, Le Consortium occupies a former cassis liqueur factory with an annex by the Pritzker Prize-winning architect Shigeru Ban. Cindy Sherman, Jenny Holzer, César, Donald Judd, Frank Stella and Richard Serra are among the marquee names who have exhibited at the institution over the years. Regular concerts, from experimental noise to world beat to electro, push the musical envelope too. If you have wondered how you might look wearing lace-up Depression-era grandma boots, a white dinner jacket and a pith helmet — accessorized with a vintage pistol and carved African mask — the answer awaits at Maison Gossot. The dusty, musty cabinet of curiosities is one of the many antiques shops and modern home-décor showrooms in the streets north of the ducal palace. If you prefer modern metal-rib ceiling lamps inspired by cowboy hats (by the French brand Petite Friture) and trays embossed with monkeys and birds in aristocratic 19th-century British clothing (from the French label Ibride), head straight to Une Vie de Rêve, an emporium of contemporary design. Industrial metal stools by Tolix — based in Burgundy — and chairs by the French brothers Ronan and Erwan Bouroullec complete your fully French furniture set. Were they not frozen in stone, the mysterious human figures carved into the ornate Renaissance facade of the Maison des Cariatides would almost certainly be downstairs eating the multicourse tasting menu (62 euros) of Dijon’s most recent Michelin star. There’s no à la carte menu inside the simple, elemental space, where autumnal hues mix with wooden beams, plank floors and candlelight. After two amuse-bouches, out come the plates, which might hold nuggets of raw French salmon with charred leak and ginger cream, suckling Pyrenees lamb in a thick reduction alongside citric carrot-orange purée, an extensive cheese course or a dessert of white cheese sorbet with lemon soufflé. If you’re feeling flabby afterward, do bicep curls with the dense wine book, which features some good-value half-bottles. If you can stand more wine — and if you can still stand, period — cross the street to Bruno, a cozy and rustic bar frequented by many local restaurateurs and winemakers. Amid hanging ham hocks, the voluble and affable proprietor — Bruno — mans the semicircular bar, dispensing counsel and pouring glasses from the roughly 850 wines in stock. For a break from grapes, follow the 20- and 30-somethings who pack Alchimia, a nearby clubhouse where D.J.s summon clicking, throbbing beats until the wee hours. Mac Malden, a smooth, light Scottish whiskey aged in Burgundy wine barrels, can be chased with local Elixkir IPA. Dijon mostly dozes on Sunday — must be the wine — but you can shrug off sleep and perhaps a couple of pounds by strolling the grounds and interior of the Palace of the Dukes and States General of Burgundy. The amalgam of majestic buildings, chapels, towers and courtyards was built between the 1300s and 1800s, partly by Jacques Gabriel, a key architect of Versailles. Housed in the palace, the Musée des Beaux-Arts is mostly under renovation, though about a dozen rooms remain open. A network of great halls and exhibition galleries, it contains a mix of mostly medieval weaponry, stained glass and religious paintings: emaciated greenish Christs, baleful saints in rich robes, and a particularly haunting wood-panel painting of St. Fridolin shaking hands with the skeleton of a man he resurrected. Free.Dijon’s five-star, 88-room Grand Hôtel La Cloche completed a full renovation last year, infusing the 19th-century grande dame with impeccable contemporary style, from the manicured garden to the greenhouselike restaurant. From 129 euros.More affordable, Le Jacquemart is a quaint Dijon option whose 31 rooms often show the influence of the surrounding antiques district — wooden armoires, marble fireplaces, ornate metal clocks, gilt-edged mirrors. From 38 euros.Built partly from a 16th-century convent, Beaune’s Hôtel Athanor blends rusticity and modernity. From 76.50 euros.Flight and Hotel information provided by Google.Prices represent a snapshot of low fares and rates for weekend trips.Advertisement