AdvertisementSupported byChasing the DealBy Shivani VoraWhether you’re a Democrat, a Republican or an independent, or just looking to get away from anything related to the presidential election, hotels around the country have you covered with special packages. Some offers are valid only for election night, Nov. 8, while others are also available for a few days before and after the event or up until Inauguration Day, Jan. 20.“The election is on everyone’s minds, and hotels are using the event as a clever marketing tool to bring in business,” said Ignacio Maza, the executive vice president of the Signature Travel Network.Below is a selection of packages with an election theme.Kimpton Hotels & Restaurants has 10 hotels in Washington, and from now through Nov. 9, the brand is offering a Race to the White House package at all of them. Included are accommodations, two cocktails, an in-room massage and a running map of routes that pass the White House and other landmarks. Prices from $289 a night. Rooms can be booked online with the code RACE or at 1-800-546-7866 with a mention of the rate.The Dupont Circle in Washington gives guests the chance to pick between a Democratic- or Republican-themed stay with its package, Slice of the City: Your Vote, Your Stay,  available through Jan. 21.The Democratic party experience includes lunch for two at the hotel’s Bar Dupont, a $150 gift card to Brooks Brothers, two tickets to the Spy Museum, a private tour of the Verizon Center, and the movie “Casablanca,” known to be one of President Obama’s favorites.The Republican party experience includes two hand-rolled cigars, a $150 Brooks Brothers gift card, vouchers for oysters and beer at Bar Dupont, a round of golf and the movie “Knute Rockne, All American,” one of President Reagan’s favorites. Prices from $629 a night. A two-night minimum stay is required.The Ritz-Carlton Tysons Corner in McLean, Va., has the Commander in Chief package, valid for election night. Guests get a stay in the recently renovated presidential suite, dinner in the suite prepared by the hotel’s executive chef, politically themed chocolates and a facial and massage for two at the hotel’s spa. $15,000.For those looking to get away from election coverage, the Hotel Commonwealth in Boston has the Election Escape package. All news channels on the in-room television will be blocked, and the election coverage sections from newspapers will be removed before they’re delivered. Available from Nov. 3 through 13. Prices from $359 a night.Advertisement