
Check In By                     
LYNN FREEHILL-MAYE

JUNE 24, 2016
Rooms from $239.Against a cool gray backdrop, bright contemporary artwork pops at Le Méridien Columbus, the Joseph. The Pizzuti Companies, founded by the local developer Ron Pizzuti, opened the 135-room boutique hotel in early 2015. It is the 17th location in the United States for the expanding Starwood-owned Le Méridien line. An art lover, Mr. Pizzuti stocked the Columbus edition with pieces from the collection he and his wife, Ann, have built over decades. Neon canvases by the former graffiti artist KAWS illuminate the lobby staircase. On one side of the three-story atrium, a craft spirits bar, Soul, encourages socializing.The hotel is well placed for walking Columbus’s energetic Short North neighborhood, where the North Market and Jeni’s Splendid Ice Creams draw lines of people, and tasteful restaurants, boutiques and patio bars are bustling with business. The Greater Columbus Convention Center is one block away. The downtown state capitol stands a mile away, and the free shuttle bus to downtown, CBUS, picks up across the street. Ohio State University is less than two miles away.The deluxe room where my husband and I stayed was spare but pleasant. The lobby’s gray tones continued here, setting off dark furniture, abstract art and a retro clock. The midcentury-style bed and desk were white oak made locally by Amish craftsmen. But the room’s centerpiece was the bed frame, which extended up the wall and across the ceiling, providing the sheltering feeling of a canopy without the confinement.An oversize shower with white subway tiles and a rainfall shower head invited extended bathing. Toiletries are by Malin + Goetz.AdvertisementHotel guests receive free admission (otherwise typically $10) to the nearby Pizzuti Collection, a museum showcasing more of the Pizzutis’ art and special exhibitions. Wi-Fi is usually $10 a day, but free for guests who book online through Starwood. The in-room Illy pod coffee maker made quality espresso. Minibars, generic when we visited, now include Dean & DeLuca snacks, along with local beer, wine and craft spirit selections, hotel managers said. The third-floor gym is notably bright and airy, with views of stylish, pedestrian-packed High Street and a sliver of Goodale Park, a popular green space with fountains and swans. The gym was adequately equipped with cardio machines, weights and an Everlast heavy bag. Service was prompt and warm: My husband called the check-in the friendliest hotel welcome he’d ever received — enthusiastic without being over-the-top, hospitable but not intrusive.At the downstairs restaurant, the Guild House, reservations were booked up until 10:30 p.m. during our stay, and the scene was still hopping when we were seated at nearly 11 p.m. Although the restaurant describes itself as “farm-to-table,” the menu didn’t specify where individual ingredients were sourced. Our server blinked when asked about the chicken’s provenance. “It’s nothing organic, free-range or special,” he said. “What I can say is we try to source locally whenever possible.” The scallops ($29) and prime rib cap ($16) we ordered were each perfectly cooked. The Guild House also provides 24-hour room service, which was promptly delivered 20 minutes after our breakfast order was placed.AdvertisementWith its colorful artwork and convenient location, this hotel offers a sophisticated choice for exploring Ohio’s capital city.Le Méridien Columbus, the Joseph, 620 North High Street; 614-227-0100; lemeridiencolumbus.com.A version of this article appears in print on June 26, 2016, on Page TR3 of the New York edition with the headline: Friendly, Stylish and Filled With Art.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »