AdvertisementSupported byIn TransitBy Shivani VoraTourism in Turkey could suffer following the terrorist attack in Istanbul on Jan. 12 in the heart of the city’s historic district near the famous Blue Mosque. The explosion — the work of an Islamic State operative — killed 10 tourists and came just a few months after the Oct. 10 terrorist bombings in the capital city of Ankara where more than 100 people were killed.Turkey travel specialists report that, given last year’s attacks and the country’s shared border with Syria, travelers were already skittish about visiting, and ’the events of earlier this month will only compound their concerns.Karen Fedorko Sefer, the owner of the Istanbul-based Turkey tour outfitter Sea Song Tours, said that several of her clients who have trips scheduled in the next few months have canceled. “Bookings were already slow for 2016 because of a combination of what’s going on in the region and the attacks in Paris last year, but now, I expect them to be at a standstill,” she said.Also, a rebound won’t happen anytime soon, she said. “While France is a familiar destination and may be more appealing for people to go to, Turkey is considered somewhat exotic so people aren’t going to immediately rush here,” she said.Earl Starkey, the owner of Sophisticated-Travel, a New York City agency that specializes in private trips to Turkey, says that his business had already dipped last year because of terrorism in the region, and he expects more of an impact after what happened this month. “The attack was specifically targeted to tourists so, of course, my clients are concerned,” he said.Some companies offering group trips to Turkey, meanwhile, haven’t yet had any cancellations, but clients still have time to change their mind because most of these itineraries run between March and October, the country’s peak tourist season.The Melbourne-based Intrepid Travel has 16 group trips to Turkey during that time period, and a company spokesman, Michael Sadowski, said that travelers scheduled on an Intrepid itinerary to any destination are entitled to a full refund if they cancel 30 days before departure. “People might be waiting to see if they still want to go depending on what the situation in Turkey will be like over the next several weeks,” he said.Abercrombie & Kent, a luxury tour outfitter based in Chicago, has eight scheduled departures to Turkey between April and October and no cancellations thus far, according to a company spokeswoman, Pamela Lassers. “Typically, payment is due several months before a trip, but travelers can always choose to use that money toward another trip with us if they don’t want to take the one they initially booked,” she said.The impact on tourism to Turkey may not be immediate, said Albert Herrera, the senior vice president of global product partnerships at the luxury travel network Virtuoso. “Some people will find it difficult to alter their plans on short notice, so won’t. It’s in the weeks following that we may see bookings to Turkey slow down,” he said.But while the future of Turkey’s tourism market is unclear, the number of U.S. travelers there has increased in the last five years: According to the Turkish Culture and Tourism Office in New York City, 562,000 Americans visited Istanbul in 2015 compared with 300,000 in 2010. Maintaining this growth is the best way for travelers to help the country, said Murat Karakus, the director of the office. “It’s a sensitive period in Turkey right now, but to support us means that people need to keep going,” he said.And from a safety perspective, there’s no reason they shouldn’t, according to Nick Doyle, a terrorism expert and managing director of the security risk management practice at Kroll. He said that the country isn’t at a higher risk for another attack compared with anywhere else in the world. “Terrorism is striking many destinations, and we can’t give into it by not traveling,” he said. “I would go to Turkey tomorrow and allow my family to as well.”Advertisement