
Next Stop By                     
SANJAY SURANA

SEPT. 28, 2016
I never imagined I’d experience the sensation of floating in the sky while on a river, but in Vang Vieng in central Laos, I did. Arching my back on an inner tube while lifting my feet out of the silky Nam Song, the air still and the day quiet, I looked up into a cloudless sky and felt as if I were hovering in midair, completely weightless.Right then I wondered why tubing is so underappreciated in the pantheon of water activities: It’s cheap, meditative and arguably more connected to its environment than kayaking or rafting, for the tuber must submit to the will of the current.What’s more, tubing is why Vang Vieng emerged on the international tourist map. This small town between the capital, Vientiane, and the Unesco Heritage town of Luang Prabang was little more than a farming settlement two decades ago, set in a valley bordered by striking karst formations. Most houses didn’t receive electricity until the late 1990s, and the roads were largely mud tracks.Tubing, according to local lore, took off when Thanongsi Sorangkoun, the founder of the riverside Organic Farm Vang Vieng north of town, gave a volunteer a tube to go down the river (Mr. T., as most people call him, neither denied nor confirmed the story when I asked him). Entrepreneurs saw an opportunity, and by 2001 a small industry had blossomed, with half a dozen operators offering tubes that adventurers could ride down about five miles of river.AdvertisementIn time, bars opened, eventually more than 20, some adding crudely cobbled-together swings, slides and zip lines, entertainment to attract tubers and keep them occupied between drinks. Marijuana and opium became available, but alcohol remained the drug of choice, and news of Vang Vieng’s hedonistic river party scene quickly spread among the backpacking fraternity. “It was sad, because something lovely became vulgar, crass and horrible, then degenerated,” said Chris Perkins, an Englishman who ran a guesthouse in Vang Vieng from 2010 to 2014.After the rise came the downfall. “There was one concrete slide we called the Slide of Death for obvious reasons,” Mr. Perkins said. A spate of fatalities occurred on the river in 2011 — between a dozen and 27 or more, depending on whom you ask — mostly young men made foolish and fearless by alcohol, diving head first into a river, or falling off poorly built equipment, hitting their head on rocks never to regain consciousness. Among them were a number of Australians, prompting the Australian news program “60 Minutes” to run a segment in March 2012 morbidly titled “Death in Paradise.”AdvertisementThe Lao government sensed international pressure and sent the police from Vientiane to Vang Vieng to close all the bars in August 2012. “It changed the development of tourism. Now we get old people here,” Joseph Foley, an Irishman who has lived here for 15 years and runs Maylyn Guest House, said.The traditional crowd hasn’t entirely disappeared. “Backpackers still come but not as many and they’re not as drunk,” Mr. Perkins added. “With things like the unregulated zip lines stopped, there are fewer opportunities to be completely absurd,” he said. “There were 20 to 30 people drunk on the streets in town every night at 2 a.m.; not anymore. The deaths were tragic but the villagers are glad for the change.”The river is quieter these days. Twelve bars have come back, but their hours are restricted; only three can open each day along the 2.5-mile tubing stretch. The slides and swings are closed, though remnants are still visible. Partying backpackers ply the river, but their numbers are a fraction of days past. “We used to rent 500 tubes a day,” an employee who didn’t want to be named at the sole tubing outfit in Vang Vieng said. “And people would also come just to party. Now we only rent about 150, a bit more in high season.”Vang Vieng now attracts visitors who tend to be more professional, affluent, and older, drawn by the area’s limestone formations and agricultural tableaus. Even the sort of backpacker seems to be changing; Para Pascoe, a 22-year-old from Southern Australia, came “to swim in the Blue Lagoon and for the tubing, not the partying,” she said. “I’d heard about problems but just thought it was people being irresponsible.”Some businesses, including the tubing operation, are actively promoting change, displaying signs asking tourists to respect Lao people and not be shirtless or in bikinis on streets. Other individuals are more forthright in their message: Outside a multistory riverside hotel and shopping complex under construction when I was there, the red tin fencing bears the spray-painted message “Go Home Tourists!”But over all the changes are positive. “For the past two years we have been experiencing the Korean wave,” Philippe Selbe, the operations manager at Riverside Boutique Resort at the time of my visit, said one misty morning. The boom was attributed to episodes of the Korean reality show “Youth Over Flowers,” which was shot in Vang Vieng and broadcast at the end of 2014. “We’ve typically had a mix of customers, but now 50 percent of our clients are Korean. And there is no low season.”AdvertisementThe Riverside Boutique opened in 2012 when the French and Lao owners sensed the town was turning a corner. It is, by some stretch, the plushest hotel in Vang Vieng, with 31 rooms in buildings arranged around an infinity pool, views of hulking rock formations across the river, and a spa that opened last month. (I stayed at the more basic Vinutda Guesthouse around the corner).The town retains an easygoing, transitory vibe, with tourists languidly wandering the streets, and ubiquitous street stalls where white signboards advertise fruit shakes, banana Nutella pancakes, chicken sandwiches, beef bacon burgers and more. Snippets of party-town Vang Vieng still surface: Around 6 p.m., when tubers must return their equipment to avoid a fine, backpackers fresh off the river in bikinis and board shorts wobble down the streets in various states of inebriation.At night they pack into the few bars still open in town, the rowdiest of them Sakura, where by 11 p.m. Korean, European, North American and Australian revelers shimmy together on table tops in a scenario that could serve as a poster for the United Nations or Benetton. And when the bars close at midnight, they pile into the one after-hours club, dancing until 3 a.m., picking their poison from the Happy Menu that, in addition to alcohol, also includes marijuana, opium and magic mushrooms, all technically illegal in Laos. But the partying seems incidental rather than intrinsic to the town’s identity, and at night, with its location on a plain surrounded by peaks, the vast majority of Vang Vieng feels like a dusty hamlet on the edge of the earth.“The party scene is still there,” said Lavone Thipsady — he is known and refers to himself as Mr. Vone — who was born and raised in Vang Vieng and owns VLT Natural Tours, one of the largest travel agencies in town. But, he added, “the local government is much stricter controlling things. Tourists have a specific time to party. The river bars have to close at 6 p.m., and tuk-tuks have to bring the people back.“Before, people in bright body paint used to walk around, but that’s not sold in stores anymore. Town bars have to stop their music at 11:30 p.m., and drinking is over at midnight. Now people come less for the partying, more for the good weather, the river, to enjoy the outdoors.”These days, as prevalent as backpackers are Korean couples in straw sun hats, designer Lycra leggings, golf shirts and Adidas sneakers, tugging shiny silver rolling suitcases behind them; tour groups of middle-age Chinese here to see pastoral beauty akin to that of Guilin; and well-heeled Europeans touring Laos with a private guide.Whatever is going on in town, it’s easy to escape. North of town, the Organic Farm accepts volunteers willing to pay their own room and board so they can tend the plants and livestock. I spoke to a Frenchwoman who would identify herself only as Audrey. She had been there for six months looking after the goats. “I like goats. I like Laos,” she told me plainly, though she detested the music from the neighboring Viva Vang Vieng bar, the launching point for river tubing trips.West of Vang Vieng, near the Blue Lagoon tourist attraction, the nonprofit Sae Lao sustainable development project was set up with the goals of education, employment and environmental awareness. The project started in 2008 with a restaurant and classes for teaching locals English, and now has 257 students, workshops on natural building and permaculture, a small farm, training projects for local female entrepreneurs, eight full-time staff, up to 20 volunteers, and a biogas system that fuels the restaurant’s kitchen.Outside of town, the true beauty of Vang Vieng reveals itself, and many activities allow visitors to enjoy the landscape.AdvertisementI took a half-day tour with Green Discovery, one of the town’s better-known tour operators, to hike and explore caves. Our group of five traveled by Jeep past rice fields full of golden sheaves in the process of being harvested. The guide, Bud, led us over bouncy, narrow wooden suspension bridges and around teak, linseed and gooseberry trees, some populated by termites. We entered caves where people hid during the First Indochina War and where giant stalactite formations resembled pumpkins, owls, octopuses and turtles.The following morning I rose early to bike south of town to Tham Jang cave. The interior of the hillside cave, reached by a steep stairwell, was brightly lit and a little too polished for my liking, but the views of Vang Vieng from sections where it opened up were startling. Near the bottom of the cave stairwell, I slid into a small lagoon and into a skinny water tunnel that I had all to myself — moments of gratifying solitude.That afternoon I scrambled up Pha Poak, a jagged limestone peak that rises above the rice paddies west of town, offering views as wondrous as those that morning. The clear, crisp light gave the contours of the landscape the precision and sharpness of an architectural drawing.Of course there is the river, the town’s raison d’être. My first trip down it, at 11 a.m. on a Tuesday, took place before the hordes descended on the water, around 1 p.m. I was alone most of the time, drifting past sheer drop-offs, walls of sharp limestone shards, old ropes hanging off trees. Two teenage boys at Mr. Lao Best Beer bar beckoned me with “Hello, relax, come, have a drink,” and were perplexed when I declined.The only company I had was fleeting: speedy Korean kayakers singing folk songs; at least that’s what the lilting melodies sounded like. Those two hours on the river were the most tranquil I’ve had in years.I returned to the river two days later midafternoon, a time when the partying was supposed to be at full tilt. Apart from the crush of 20-somethings drinking and laughing at one bar (the two others open that day were empty), I barely encountered anyone. The river was deserted and I relived my experience from days earlier, drinking in the sublime scenery that, truth be told, should always have been the reason to visit, and remember, this town.Because of an editing error, an article last Sunday about tubing in Laos referred incorrectly to an Australian backpacker. Para Pascoe is a woman.A version of this article appears in print on October 2, 2016, on Page TR8 of the New York edition with the headline: A River Town Embraces Its Tamer Side.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »