

      By ELAINE GLUSAC

MARCH 16, 2016

A trip to the Canadian Arctic, cuisine by high-profile chefs, and a water slide with a 100-foot drop on the industry’s largest ship — there’s variety in the voyages.
Big, small and river-going, the choice of cruise ships is expanding in every direction — geographic and psychographic — this spring. Variety and status are the defining trends, specifically in cruising styles that vary from taking the family on a European river cruise to circumnavigating the Falkland Islands. Among the following cruise ship introductions this season, status-seeking ships have hired celebrity chefs and Broadway talents to increase their appeal, and in the thriller genre, a 10-story water slide is set to sail.Note: All prices quoted are per person.Big Royal Caribbean International will launch the industry’s largest ship, the 5,497-passenger Harmony of the Seas, in May in the Mediterranean. A vast ship-top water park will hold a spiraling slide with a 100-foot fall from deck 16 to 6. The ship will also feature robotic bartenders, a full-length version of the musical “Grease” and the new Royal Suite Class of cabins, which include butler service. Carnival Cruises will introduce the 3,954-passenger Carnival Vista in April in Europe, with family staterooms, a suspended cycling ride that guests propel by pedaling, an IMAX theater and an onboard brewery. Also debuting in April, Holland America’s 2,650-passenger Koningsdam will feature the line’s first newly built family and single staterooms, Lincoln Center Stage, a mostly classical concert venue in cooperation with the Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts in New York, and Blend, a make-your-own wine bar from Chateau Ste. Michelle Winery in Woodinville, Wash. Its Culinary Arts Center will grow its own microgreens. Medium Making its debut this summer from Regent Seven Seas Cruises, Regent Seven Seas Explorer will hold 750 passengers, a Canyon Ranch spa, a culinary center for hands-on cooking classes and three restaurants including an Asian option, a steakhouse and a refined French restaurant. Fittingly, the ship will introduce Gourmet Explorer Tours in the Mediterranean led by a ship chef to visit cheesemakers, wine-tasting caves and markets. Viking Ocean Cruises’ second ship, the 930-passenger Viking Sea, will sail in April. Special features include a veranda on every stateroom, an infinity pool cantilevered off the stern and a Nordic spa with real snow in a cold room. Small In June, Alaskan Dream Cruises will introduce the 74-passenger Chichagof Dream sailing eight to 11-day trips that emphasize the Alaskan wilderness, with opportunities for kayaking, hiking and wildlife watching, over standard port calls. Grand Circle Cruise Line will launch the 89-passenger MV Clio in the spring, sailing a new European route along the coast of England, Wales, Ireland and Scotland in the summer, and from Lisbon to Barcelona in the fall. Lindblad Expeditions recently bought the Via Australis ship, based in Patagonia, and, after a $10 million refurbishment, plans to reposition it in the Galápagos Islands this fall, carrying 96 passengers as well as Zodiacs and kayaks for off-ship excursions. The Greece-based Variety Cruises has added the 34-passenger Callisto, with a swimming platform off the stern, outdoor dining and a glass-walled library. It will ply the Greek Islands from May to October and move to Costa Rica and Panama from December through April 2017. River The biggest among river cruising companies, Viking River Cruises continues to expand with seven new ships in March, including six Viking Longships with heated bathroom floors in their 95 cabins, and sun decks with lawn games and herb gardens. The trips will be on the Rhine and  Danube and on rivers in France. A new smaller version, at 53 staterooms, was built for the Douro River in Portugal. Crystal Cruises aims to enter river cruising with the first of five planned river ships, the 160-passenger Crystal Mozart, set to sail 10- to 13-night trips on the Danube, beginning in July. Wider than most, it will include a promenade encircling the ship, a spa and indoor pool. AmaWaterways is newly staking a claim to family river cruisers. In partnership with Adventures by Disney, the 158-passenger AmaViola, being launched in April in Holland, includes three- and four-person staterooms and adjoining cabins that connect via internal doors, a pool with a swim-up bar and several dining choices. Offering 10 family departures in 2016, Tauck River Cruising plans to double those to 20 next year. This year it will launch the ms Grace in April on the Rhine, and the  Joy in June, on the Danube, each with a capacity for 130 passengers, and each spacious enough to offer a second restaurant. Also in Europe, Avalon Waterways will introduce two ships in March, the 166-guest Avalon Passion and the 128-passenger Avalon Imagery II, both with floor-to-ceiling cabin windows that retract to make guests feel as if  they are sitting outside. Among the more exotic newcomers, Pandaw plans to add the Yunnan Pandaw in September. The 12-cabin cruiser will sail on the Upper Mekong River between Vientiane, Laos and Jinghong, in the Yunnan Province in China, with visits to Chinese tea plantations, temples in Myanmar and museums in Thailand. Haimark Limited introduced its 56-passenger RV Ganges II in January on India’s great river. Seven-night cruises from Kolkata visit temples, bazaars and small villages. Catch a round at the British Open, a Mardi Gras parade in New Orleans or the fanfare of the Cannes film festival with Celebrity Cruises’s expanded Signature Event Sailing program, which builds itineraries around major events in port.Set to cross  the Panama Canal weekly, the 62-passenger Safari Voyager from Un-Cruise Adventures will move to Central America beginning in the fall, offering weeklong, nature-focused cruises of Panama and Costa Rica from October to April (from $4,395).Lovers of spontaneity will appreciate the new mystery trip in May from Hapag-Lloyd Cruises. The only fixed ports are those of departure at Istanbul and of arrival at Athens, but passengers of the 516-passenger Europa 2 can choose among 20 prospective calls on the 10-day trip (from $5,750).Celebrity Cruises is updating two of its ships, the Celebrity Infinity and Celebrity Summit, to include the company’s first rooftop terraces with a movie screen for outdoor shows under the stars. Its new Taste of Film program will pair a popular movie with food.Pepper, a four-foot-high rolling robot equipped to hear and answer questions from guests, will join the crew of the new 1,643-cabin AIDAprima launching in April from the German cruise line Aida. Aida and Costa Cruise  plan to deploy 10 Peppers on each ship in their fleets.In November, Norwegian Cruise Line is to  open a  private island,  Harvest Caye, in Belize, which will include a pool with rental cabanas; a lagoon for kayaking, paddle boarding and manatee-spotting; a walking trail; and multiple drinking and dining options.While shipboard chefs still do the heavy lifting in the kitchens, most cruise lines are eager to team up with status-conferring chefs.The chef and TV personality Curtis Stone is behind the new restaurant,  Share, with food served family style, on three Princess Cruises ships, the Ruby Princess, Emerald Princess and, in April, the Sun Princess. The line also worked with Ernesto Uchimura, a founding chef of the Umami Burger chain, on the Salty Dog Gastropub on the Crown Princess. The chocolatier Norman Love has designed dessert and wine pairings available on all 18 Princess ships.Seabourn now offers dishes by the celebrated chef Thomas Keller, and will inaugurate  a restaurant designed by him aboard its three ships beginning this spring. Holland America has hired the mixologist Dale DeGroff to design a menu of cocktails featured on the Eurodam and expanding fleetwide this spring. MSC Cruises has teamed with the chocolatier and pastry chef Jean-Philippe Maury to introduce his treats across the fleet.The cruise ship showroom is similarly getting a name-brand upgrade. In addition to the premiere of the musical “Grease” at sea on Harmony of the Seas from Royal Caribbean, the 4,200-passenger Norwegian Escape from Norwegian Cruise Line, which was launched last fall, offers the Broadway musical “After Midnight.” The Norwegian Getaway will open “Million Dollar Quartet” in May.Princess Cruises is working with Stephen Schwartz, the composer and songwriter of “Wicked” and “Pippin,” on the first of four musicals, “Magic to Do,” featuring his existing songs and one original number. The musical is running on the Crown Princess, Emerald Princess and Ruby Princess. The new stage offerings are not restricted to adult theatergoers; included is  a musical adaptation of the film “Tangled” aboard Disney Magic from  the Disney Cruise Line sailing in the Caribbean and the Bahamas.This year, the Canadian line One Ocean Expeditions is introducing shorter seven- and eight-night trips in the Canadian Arctic to spot polar bears and migratory birds (from $5,195).Operating a 70-foot wooden schooner carrying up to eight guests, the British Columbia-based Outer Shore Expeditions is adding a nine-day itinerary exploring Great Bear Sea in Canada, where whale sightings are common, with access to the Great Bear Rain Forest, known for its grizzly bears and the white bears known as spirit bears (about $4,100).­Lindblad Expeditions is planning two voyages that circumnavigate the Falkland Islands. The 102-guest National Geographic Orion will make the 13-day trips departing Oct. 19 and 28 (from $10,850) with opportunities to visit penguin colonies, bull elephant seals and the world’s largest colony of black-browed albatrosses.Forever battling its indulgent  image, the cruise industry remains on a health kick. MSC Cruises has announced its “Wellness Experience,” which includes a precruise questionnaire on wellness goals, onboard consultations with a trainer and a doctor, group fitness classes and shore excursions that focus on activities like  jogging in Athens or biking in Copenhagen. The program will begin in April 2017.On its 120-guest Silver Discoverer, Silversea Cruises has introduced wellness voyages in exotic destinations like Indonesia that include free  yoga and Pilates classes, sometimes held in port; personal training sessions; a free massage per person and daily lectures and cooking demonstrations covering health and nutrition.AmaWaterways joined with the active travel company Backroads to introduce biking, walking and hiking excursions on Danube sailings last year and will expand them to the Rhine, Rhone, Seine, Douro, Garonne and Mekong Rivers this year.Celebrity is also offering more fitness-focused shore excursions including stand-up paddle board yoga, hydrobiking, cycling and canoeing. For every hobby it seems there is a cruise. American Queen Steamboat Company, which operates a 436-passenger paddle-wheeler on the Mississippi River, will offer two new “Music of America” trips, one from New Orleans to Memphis focused on the Delta blues March 27 to April 4 and another from Nashville to Memphis channeling blues country music, from Oct. 23 to 31 (both from $2,249).Lindblad Expeditions carries National Geographic photographers on every trip aboard its Orion and Explorer ships and certified photography instructors on all others. Similarly, Adventure Canada, which runs cruises in northern waters, has collaborated  with Nikon Canada to supply free  Nikon equipment and onboard instruction on the 198-passenger ship Ocean Endeavor, which will visit the Arctic, Greenland and Newfoundland among its destinations this summer. Abercrombie & Kent will introduce an itinerary focused on art and architecture on the Rhine this summer (from $6,195).An article last Sunday about new cruise options misstated when in 2016 Lindblad Expeditions will begin cruises to the Galápagos Islands on a refurbished Via Australia ship. They begin in the fall, not in the summer.Advertisement