AdvertisementSupported byHeads UpBy Catherine M. AllchinBuilding on Seattle’s history of farmers’ markets and a strong food culture, new marketplaces are showcasing the local and unique, offering many choices for shopping, eating and connecting. For residents and tourists alike, these vibrant markets have become destinations all their own.The continued influx of high-tech workers and foot traffic has helped pave the way for the urban marketplaces, which are finding success by offering food and goods in one place.Just east of downtown in the cool Capitol Hill neighborhood, preservation-minded developers transformed century-old auto parts buildings with old-meets-new design. These spaces, with their original facades, house restaurants and shops that buzz from morning to night with diners who might grab the kitchen’s signature spice rub or house-made jam on the way out.“There’s a synergy by having places play off each other,” said Jerry Everard, the developer who renovated the Central Agency Building on 10th Avenue and Seneca Street. The structure, a 1917 auto parts shop, now houses three John Sundstrom restaurants as well as a branch of Vancouver’s popular sandwich shop Meat & Bread. Mr. Sundstrom moved his successful Lark Restaurant (larkseattle.com) to the new space in December 2014, showcasing Northwest artisans and farmers, and opened a raw bar on the mezzanine, Bitter/Raw, as well as a deli on the ground floor called Slab Sandwiches & Pie.The variety offered gives customers more options. “People can get something to go for dinner or a picnic, or stop in and grab a nice piece of cheese or some nice salami,” Mr. Sundstrom said.Nearby, the highly anticipated Chophouse Row opened last summer. Formerly an auto body shop, the 1924 building later became known as the Chophouse, a rehearsal space for aspiring bands. With housing and office space above, the ground floor is home to a handful of restaurants and tiny shops built around a pedestrian alley that leads to a courtyard. Part of the appeal — as in cities like London and Paris — lies in discovering what’s tucked away.For sit-down dining, Chop Shop Cafe & Bar (chopshopseattle.com), from the chef Ericka Burke, is open for lunch, dinner and weekend brunch. Like Mr. Sundstrom, Ms. Burke has an adjacent takeout shop, Chop Shop Juice & Provisions, for grab-and-go juices, salads and her own jams and jellies.Also in Chophouse Row, the award-winning Seattle chef Matt Dillon recently opened Upper Bar Ferdinand (barferdinandseattle.com), a wine bar and bottle shop dedicated to small family producers and “the absolute simplicity” of wine and cider. “We strictly limit where the wines come from and where the food comes from,” Mr. Dillon said. The daily menu highlights featured wines and Mr. Dillon’s passion for cooking with wood.In the alley, NicheOutside, a garden lifestyle boutique, sells treasures like copper trowels and handmade soaps. Sharing a wall is Kurt Farm Shop, dishing out ice cream and cheeses made from Jersey cows on nearby Vashon Island. These shops are tiny jewels, less than 300 square feet each.“Here each vendor is doing what they do incredibly well,” said Liz Dunn of Dunn & Hobbes, the Chophouse Row developer. “It’s very specialized, and that provides a lot of value to the customer. People love the individual personalities of the vendors.”In downtown Seattle, the upscale Via6 apartment complex opened in 2013, anticipating the influx of thousands of employees from Amazon’s new corporate buildings just steps away. On the ground floor stands the attractive Assembly Hall (assemblyhallseattle.com), a 10,000-square-foot complex with tall windows and an open floor plan that is a tribute to the Tom Douglas restaurant empire. Godzilla Bar at TanakaSan serves American-Asian cuisine by Eric Tanaka. Next to it is Home Remedy, a deli/grocery, with made-to-order rice bowls, craft beer and cider, and curated items from Mr. Douglas’s many restaurants. Wine tastings are held on Friday evenings.At the juice and coffee bar Assembly Hall: Breakfast Lunch and Dinner, people enjoy an all-day selection of delicious egg sandwiches, burgers, coffee and the popular Clean Green juices. On the mezzanine, a mix of customers and Via6 residents can be found drinking beer and playing shuffleboard.“The developer wanted to create a sense of community and conviviality in the public spaces,” said Pamela Hinckley, chief executive of Tom Douglas Restaurants. “It has that diversity of what appeals in different parts of the day and different seasons,” she said. “There are so many options, from grab-and-go to savory sit-down dining.”All three of these markets offer specialty shops and hyper-local food. It’s no coincidence that they opened in the city that claims the oldest continuously operated public farmers’ markets in the country: Pike Place Market started in 1907 and is still at the heart of Seattle, where locals and tourists eat, shop and connect.Advertisement