
In Transit By                     
ELAINE GLUSAC

JAN. 20, 2016
PROPOSED AIRLINE AGREEMENT COULD EXPAND SERVICE TO SOUTH AMERICAAmerican Airlines and LATAM Airlines Group are seeking regulatory approval to enter into a joint business agreement that could potentially add more direct service routes between North and South America and more scheduled flights on existing routes. If the deal is approved, the airlines, already part of the Oneworld alliance and operating with a code-share agreement, could work together to schedule, sell and share revenue on flights between the United States and Canada and six South American countries: Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Paraguay, Peru and Uruguay. American has joint business arrangements with several partners, including British Airways, between North America and Europe, and Japan Airlines on Pacific routes.A SITE THAT MATCHES PASSENGERS AND CRUISESIf the explosion of new cruise ships and emerging destinations like Cuba have you scratching your head over sailing options, the new website ShermansCruise.com has a matchmaking feature pitched to you. Run by ShermansTravel Media, a publisher specializing in travel deals and advice, the new site’s Navigatr tool reveals potential passenger-to-cruise matches based on the answers to eight questions, covering qualifiers such as budget; style (active, for example, versus low-key, sophisticated, academic and others); aesthetics (“Las Vegas flash” or traditional, among choices); and itinerary (educational, party or remote, among others). Once users submit their emails, the results are returned based on several but not all preferences; on a recent test, the site suggested Royal Caribbean’s Allure of the Seas, one of the biggest cruise ships sailing, based on a preference for cocktail lounges and couples, ignoring the preference for low-key style. The site also sells cruises, identifies top deals and publishes news stories, videos and social media posts of cruisers.ON AQUA SHIPS, CHIEF EXECUTIVE AND CHEFS ON BOARDThe boutique cruise line Aqua Expeditions, which operates two small ships on the Amazon River in Peru and one on the Mekong River in Asia, plans to offer cruises with its chief executive and, separately, its well-known consulting chefs over several 2016 departures. Aqua’s founder and chief executive Francesco Galli Zugaro will join departures, including going on shore excursions and joining guests for cocktails, on the Mekong from Aug. 26 to Sept. 2, and on the Amazon Nov. 19 to 26. The chef David Thompson, who has earned Michelin recognition for his Thai restaurants in London and Bangkok and is the consulting chef for the Aqua Mekong, will sail on the ship April 22 to 29 and May 13 to 20. Pedro Miguel Schiaffino, who runs the restaurant Malabar in Lima and is consulting chef on the Aqua Amazon, will join the ship March 29 to April 2 and Nov. 26 to Dec. 3. The chefs will offer cooking classes and market visits. Departures range from three to seven nights, and start at $3,165 a person, double occupancy, including excursions.A FAMILY CRUISE TO ANTARCTICAThe luxury tour operator Abercrombie & Kent has added a new family departure on its 17-day Antarctica, South Georgia & the Falkland Islands sailing. Departing Dec. 19 and open to guests as young as age 7, the itinerary includes visits to colonies of Southern elephant seals and gentoo and king penguins, a scientific research station and the grave of the explorer Ernest Shackleton. The trip’s Young Explorers program includes hands-on workshops in marine mammal identification, squid biology and navigational charting as well as photography competitions organized by the ship’s resident photography coach. The trip normally costs $18,995 a person, double occupancy, but is selling for $15,995 until March 31.AdvertisementNORTH AMERICANS  WEIGH IN AS HEAVIEST IN THE SKY A new survey by the nonprofit Airline Passenger Experience Association, or APEX, has found that nearly one quarter of North Americans weigh over 200 pounds, making North America the heaviest region in the world. Asia accounted for the lightest fliers with 71 percent less than 150 pounds. Weight seems to correlate with satisfaction in the air; Asians reported significantly higher rates of passenger satisfaction, according to the report, than North Americans.The results may not be news to carriers, which already use average weight per flier when calculating an airplane’s load, according to George Hobica, founder of Airfarewatchdog.com. “Airlines charge by the pound for cargo, but they don’t charge people by the pound,” he said.AdvertisementThe study found 70 percent of all fliers named cabin comfort the most important contributor to satisfaction, beating out in-flight entertainment, service and food and beverage combined. Perhaps that explains why first-class passengers are more social than economy fliers; 75 percent of those in the front of the plane reported talking to other passengers in flight versus just over a half of those in economy.A version of this article appears in print on January 31, 2016, on Page TR3 of the New York edition with the headline: Cruises; A Family Trip to Antarctica.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »