By STEPHANIE ROSENBLOOMJAN. 22, 2016
After weeks of unusually warm, occasionally downright balmy, weather, a blizzard watch is in effect for the tri-state area from Saturday morning through Sunday afternoon. The National Weather Service, which issued the alert, is predicting “extremely dangerous travel” because of heavy snowfall and strong winds. If you’ve planning to fly this weekend, take a moment now to refresh your memory about what you’re entitled to — a hotel room? food vouchers? — should your flight be canceled.In general, an airline will rebook you on its next available flight to your destination, provided there are empty seats, according to the U.S. Department of Transportation.If the next available flight isn’t for several hours, you can ask to be rebooked on another carrier. It doesn’t hurt to request a meal voucher either. Or a discount code for a hotel room. But take heed: The airline does not have to fork over anything. There are no federal requirements for what airlines must do for passengers when their flights are delayed or canceled, according the department. Compensation is legally required only when you’re bumped from an oversold flight. Each airline has its own policy, though they tend to be most stingy when it comes to delays and cancellations caused by bad weather (force majeure).You can find your airline’s canceled and delayed flights policy on its website in what’s typically known as the contract (or conditions) of carriage. Delta’s, for example, can be found here. You’ll see, some 40 pages in, that for delays between 10 p.m. and 6 a.m., the airline may offer a room if there is one available at a Delta-contracted hotel, as well as transportation to the hotel. If rooms are not available, Delta will offer a voucher for up to $100.AdvertisementHere are links to some of the leading United States carriers’ contracts:American Airlines.Frontier Airlines.JetBlue.Southwest Airlines.Spirit Airlines. United Airlines.For travel rights regarding delays and cancellations in the European Union, visit this site.If you’re planning to head to the airport this weekend, take a moment to familiarize yourself with your carrier’s compensation offerings — or lack thereof. And be sure that you’ve signed up for flight alerts through your airline’s website or app, or a third-party app such as TripIt Pro.AdvertisementBetter yet, call the airline now and ask if it will rebook your flight for a future date and waive the change fee. Carriers often offer to do this when a significant storm is approaching. While it means you’ll likely spend another day or two on the ground, you won’t be spending it at the airport. In fact, you might be able to enjoy, at long last, the first big New York City snowfall this winter.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.