By SHIVANI VORASEPT. 9, 2016
Provence is a destination that has captivated travelers even before Peter Mayle’s 1989 best seller “A Year in Provence” immortalized its charms. Now, the new book “Markets of Provence,” by the travel writer Marjorie R. Williams, 57, along with Dixon Long (her co-author on “Markets of Paris”), explores an often-overlooked reason to visit: the abundance of markets.Although the region has close to 500 markets with vendors selling food, antiques and crafts, Ms. Williams’s book is a guide to the 30 she found most appealing during the several months she spent in the area for her research.Below are edited excerpts from a conversation with her.Q. How do you think Provence’s markets give an insight into Provençal culture?A. These markets are untouched by time. They’re in the same location and serving the same purpose as they’ve been doing since the Middle Ages. And they’re gathering spots for villagers who come not only to shop but also to see friends. And so, travelers who structure their itinerary around market days will see the towns spring to life, and by going, they are participating in an authentic tradition, enjoy beautiful scenery and get a sense of the local community.AdvertisementDo the markets sell goods worth buying?Without a doubt. In fact, they are where tourists should shop because there’s no better place to buy items that will remind you of the colors and smells of your trip.Food is a big draw. You can sample in-season produce such as plump cherries and melons in the summer, the sweetest strawberries and purple asparagus come spring, mushrooms in the fall, and black truffles and heirloom carrots in the winter. The vendors are usually more than happy to give you a taste of what’s good. Then there are specialties such as goat cheeses, wines, olive oils, olives and nougat candy made from local honey and almonds. Eating your way through these markets is a fun way to pass a morning or afternoon.AdvertisementWhat about nonculinary finds?There are plenty. You’ll find lavender sachets using the lavender that grows in the area and all kinds of perfumed soap, again using local ingredients such as honeysuckle and lemon verbena. You can also pick up fantastic herbs for cooking like herbes de Provence, handcrafted jewelry and pottery. And then there are specialty markets for antiques, truffles and crafts.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In your book, you talk about how rotisserie chicken is one of your favorite things to buy at a Provençal market. Why?Because it’s the best chicken you’ll ever have. The birds are succulent and flavorful and basted in herbs. They turn all day on spits with their juices dripping over chunks of potatoes, and when you buy a chicken, it usually comes with these heavenly potatoes. I suggest picking one up along with some cheese, olives, a loaf of crusty bread and a bottle of wine, all of which you’ll get at a market, and you have a perfect and affordable French picnic.The peak tourist season in Provence is the summer, but you’ve spent time there in all seasons. Do you suggest going when it’s not so touristy?Summer is undoubtedly a beautiful time in Provence, but it may actually be better to visit off-season. One of the pleasures of Provence is outdoor pursuits such as biking and walking, but since summers can be quite hot, it’s much more comfortable to be physically active in the spring and fall and even in the winter, which can be mild.Also, the markets, although smaller, are still active, and you’ll have more opportunity to engage with the vendors since there are fewer people around.A version of this article appears in print on September 11, 2016, on Page TR2 of the New York edition with the headline: Marjorie Williams and Provençal Markets.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.