
Bites By                     
DIANE DANIEL

JUNE 10, 2016
Every morning, an electric-powered vehicle owned by the nonprofit restaurant Instock crisscrosses Amsterdam to pick up food that would otherwise be tossed, including produce, meat, fish, tofu and chocolate. Some items might be overstocked, while others have aesthetic flaws or are nearing expiration. By noon, the chef Lucas Jeffries and his staff have pulled together a three-course menu that is posted several hours later on a chalkboard.On our visit, an enthusiastic server told us how the restaurant was started as a pop-up in 2014 by four workers at the Dutch supermarket chain Albert Heijn, an attempt to combat the food waste they witnessed. With support from the grocer, it became a restaurant last year, serving breakfast, lunch and dinner in a cheery setting.We started with delicious day-old brown bread, olive oil (one of the few items Instock buys, along with dairy) and a plate of perfectly pickled beets. The rotating wine list comes from discontinued lines or bottles with damaged labels, while beer made with bread is bought from a Belgian brewery.Our soup combined a sweet-and-sour orange base with add-ons of raw radish and brussels sprouts leaves, and a topping of the best onion rings I’ve tasted — small, crisp and not greasy.AdvertisementMy friend Erik and my wife, Selina, ordered the meatloaf, served with white beans in a roasted pepper sauce, and chunky potato chips, roasted broccoli and pickled cucumber. Erik thought the loaf was brick-like, and I agreed, but Selina loved it. My veggie version swapped meat for cheese-covered leeks, which were soft and flavorful, but rendered the beans a less-appealing companion.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.We all raved over dessert — baked apple with a rich caramel sauce served with ice cream topped with a cinnamon crumble.AdvertisementThe next day I spoke with Freke van Nimwegen, one of the founders, apologizing for our mixed reactions, but saying we’d love to revisit (or at least two of us would).“Of course I’m disappointed, but every day is different, and we do have a lot of regulars,” she said. “We’re really happy to take food waste mainstream. If everyone has knowledge, they’ll waste less.”So what does Instock do with its leftovers? It either goes to make biogas, is used in staff meals or is donated.The Bites column last Sunday, about the Amsterdam restaurant Instock, using information from a founder, referred incorrectly to its leftover food. The food either goes to make biogas, is used in staff meals or is donated; none of it is thrown away.Instock, Czaar Peterstraat 21; 31-20-363-5765; instock.nl/en. Three-course dinner for two, including service, 45 euros (about $50).A version of this article appears in print on June 12, 2016, on Page TR3 of the New York edition with the headline: From Wasted to Tasted.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »