
Cultured Traveler By                     
ANNA WINGER

JUNE 1, 2016
On a sunny Sunday afternoon in early spring, my younger daughter, Rosie, climbed up inside an airplane, out the hatch on top, and out onto the wing, where she waved to catch my attention. “Think I can do it, Mama?” She didn’t wait for my answer before jumping off, six feet down, into the sand pit below. Then she climbed up and did it again.We live in Berlin, near the former Tempelhof Airport, in a neighborhood of colorful rowhouses called the Fliegerviertel, Flyers’ Quarter. Our local playground is on theme. Year-round, children climb in, up, over and out of its handcrafted wooden airplanes and helicopters. But our Fliegerspielplatz is just the playground around the corner. There are about 1,850 public playgrounds in Berlin, a city of nearly four million inhabitants, of which about half a million are under 18. Statistically, this is a great ratio, especially compared with other more densely populated European cities. But sheer quantity is not what makes Berlin a playground paradise.Guided by what most German parents consider a healthy chance for children to mitigate risk in the interest of developing selbstständigkeit, self-sufficiency — or what some American parents might deem a total lack of concern for child safety — playgrounds here are physically challenging and ambitious in design. And they spring up where you least expect them, like wildflowers, in empty lots all over the city. To uninitiated adults, some of the best ones might even seem a little scary, but to kids? Pure fun. A tour provides a window into local parenting attitudes — and Berlin culture.
CreditAndreas Meichsner for The New York Times        I have two girls, ages 6 and 12. On our regular beat: the witches playground in Schöneberg, a hip neighborhood in old West Berlin, which features a teetering tower with no safety net and a long, dramatic zip-line; the Pippi Longstocking playground, built in the colorful style of the Villa Villekulla; a huge wooden pirate ship with freestyle rope bridges; a climbing structure carved into boulders in a park; and our best-kept secret, tucked behind the busy urban marketplace at Winterfeldtplatz: a massive, three-story jungle gym made up entirely of black rubber flaps and metal springs.AdvertisementSaturdays, we take picnics to Gleisdreieck, an old train yard spread across elevated tracks in the middle of the city that has recently been turned into a huge park, a kind of High Line on steroids. There is dappled sunshine underneath the trees there and a rambling postmodern playground made of repurposed rail ties. And if we have the time for a proper adventure? We take the S-bahn, the overground subway, to the end of the Wannsee line. Then we take a small ferry across the Havel river to a suburban neighborhood called Kladow, where the Räuberspielplatz, with its curling slides and long, crooked balance beams, is built right into the riverbank. Or we head north to the Kletterwald, a climbing forest worthy of Robinson Crusoe, in Jungfernheide, a large park. There, we pay a small fee for the children to be strapped into harnesses and play on a network of zip-lines and balance beams stretched high up in the trees.AdvertisementBut the mother of all Berlin playgrounds is the Abenteuerlicher Bauspielplatz Kolle 37 in Prenzlauer Berg, hipster parents’ central in former East Berlin. It’s a work in progress built by children themselves, and no parent is allowed inside the gates. We leave a cellphone number and go for a walk while our children pick up hammers and nails and contribute to an ever-expanding wooden structure that would not be out of place in the recent “Mad Max” remake. Splinters, be damned. Sometimes the adult volunteers who run the place offer special projects, like making mud bricks by hand, or constructing a windmill. Sometimes the children roast stockbrot, bread on a stick, over an open bonfire. Mostly they just do as they please. Isn’t that the whole idea?Public space in Germany is not held hostage by liability lawsuits; Berlin playgrounds are not designed by lawyers. Thus they offer an opportunity for exploration that is, well — playful. It’s enough to make some of my American visitors, many who admit to being helicopter parents (one friend giddily describes herself as a Black Hawk) — weak at the knees.When my older daughter, Bella, was Rosie’s age, she spent hours playing house with her friends at the Snow White village playground around the corner from our old place. (It bears mentioning that house is still called Mutter-Vater-Kind in German, even though this is 2016 and kids play the game with variable configurations of mothers, fathers and children.) Rosie is less interested in fantasy games. Her thing is to dominate the zip-line, flying along with her feet off the ground, or to climb the highest possible slide and then speed down it backward, on her stomach, cross-legged, or singing “Lass Jetzt Los” — “Let It Go,” from the movie “Frozen” — at the top of her lungs.Every child is different, but in the United States, the sameness of playgrounds is striking. Rubber composite surfaces have generally replaced the mulch of my childhood, and the smooth metal jungle gyms often seem to have been forged in a single factory. Once when we were visiting my parents in Massachusetts, my daughters complained of boredom until they discovered an enormous spider web climbing structure on a Cambridge side street. They were soon halfway up it. Then a woman came by and warned me that a child had recently fallen off, and since then the neighborhood had abandoned the place. After she was gone, I noticed the plaque on the lower rungs of the spider web: Made in Berlin.Accidents can happen anywhere. Staff members at my local emergency room admitted that they see injuries each summer from a slippery granite area at one nearby playground. Certainly, German parents would agree with American ones that the world can be a scary place. But the prevailing wisdom here is that overprotecting children only makes it more, not less, dangerous for them; they need to learn to protect themselves. This extends beyond the playground. Six-year-olds are regularly sent to pick up breakfast rolls at the bakery on their own. Most children walk themselves to their neighborhood school.This relaxed attitude toward child-rearing runs counter to the stereotype of Germans as uptight, but it’s true across the board. Children learn to read in first grade in Germany, and parents are not inclined to teach them earlier. Pressure is a dirty word. Playtime is key. Fresh air is everything. Playgrounds are full of children come rain or shine, even in winter, when the snowsuits are out in full force. And you will not see Berlin parents hovering over their little ones. No, they will be drinking coffee and reading the newspaper on a bench. That said, if a child does get hurt in a local playground, any nearby parent will rush to help. There is still, at least in my view, a strong collective sense of responsibility for children in German public spaces.I have lived in this city now for 13 years. I’m no Black Hawk mom, but I have my moments. For example, it wasn’t easy for me to allow Bella to make her own way to school on public transportation when she was 10, halfway through fifth grade. I would have been perfectly happy for her to stay on the school bus until high school graduation, but she begged. To my German husband, it was about time. I insisted on a cellphone, a buddy system and regular texts. In the end, Bella was proud to master the subway — and I was proud of her for doing so.On hot summer afternoons we head to the playground inside the Britzer Garten, an extravagant park located, like an oasis, in gritty Neukölln. The playground there is a sprawling expanse of waterways and pressure-sensitive fountains. Another warm-weather favorite is the spray park by Nordbahnhof, in Mitte, not far from the Brandenburg Gate, where children climb up on colorful fish and slide down their wet tails. Lucky for my two, each of our key playgrounds has a great ice cream shop nearby. Hokey Pokey, Vanille & Marille, Berlin Homemade, Die Eismacher and Fräulein Frost all provide maximum pleasure on warm afternoons. (I’m from Boston, so I know what I’m talking about.) Did I mention that a single cone in Berlin costs only about 1.20 euros (about $1.35), including sprinkles?AdvertisementWhen my girls were very little, we lived in leafy Charlottenburg, and I spent a great deal of time at one particular playground on a residential street called Knesebeckstrasse. It had a knight’s castle, a big sandbox, a couple of swings and a zip-line. After a few months of hanging out on a bench there with my coffee, I suddenly noticed the obvious: The zip-line is stretched between two buildings, and the whole playground is built into a bombed-out space between them, where once a third building must have stood. Having noticed this there, I noticed it everywhere. So many playgrounds in Berlin occupy the empty spaces left behind after the destruction of homes during World War II. Sometimes you can even see where the bomb must have fallen and track the path of the fire.The conversion of blighted places into space to play speaks to the special resilience of this postwar, postwall city. Berlin might not be traditionally beautiful, like Paris and Rome, or generally upscale like London, but the visibility of its complicated history is unique, layers of urban archaeology laid bare. In so many other European capitals there is no room to play at all.This past year, at least 80,000 refugees have settled in Berlin, shifting the city’s character again. Camps have been set up in almost every neighborhood. The biggest one is near us, so new families are discovering the wooden airplanes at the Fliegerspielplatz every day. Sometimes I feel I’m watching history being made in real time, but my children just take it in stride. When Bella came home recently with a dance routine she’d learned from a new Syrian girl in her class, I asked what language they had used to communicate. “Mama,” she laughed. ”You don’t need to speak the same language to talk about dancing!”So things are evolving quickly in Berlin; children from all over the world are filling up the empty spaces now. They are making mischief in the Villa Villekulla and swinging from the bows of pirate ships. They are testing their limits and taking in the fresh air.The Senate Department for Urban Development and the Environment provides an overview of Berlin playgrounds, in English. on its website: Stadtentwicklung.berlin.de/umwelt/stadtgruen/kinderspielplaetze/index_en.shtml.For day trip planning, the following German websites offer descriptions, photographs and street addresses for playgrounds pinned on interactive maps of the city: Ihrspielplatz.de or Spielplatztreff.de/spielplaetze/berlin.A couple of my favorite playgrounds have their own websites:The adventure playground in Prenzlauer Berg: Kolle37.de.The climbing forest in Charlottenburg: Waldhochseilgarten-jungfernheide.de/english.html.Our local beat is the area north and west of the old Tempelhof airport field. In addition to the playgrounds mentioned in the article, our children love one on the south side of Victoria Park. Enter through a biergarten called Golgatha, at Dudenstrasse 40-64. Also, another at Chamissoplatz, where there is a lovely organic market on Saturday mornings. Both are in Kreuzberg.AdvertisementNo summer trip to the playground is complete without ice cream, and Berlin is having a boom in excellent homemade flavors. Consult this list, organized by neighborhood, before you set out: Stilinberlin.de/2014/06/berlins-best-ice-cream-guide.html.An article on June 5 about Berlin playgrounds misidentified the location of a local playground. It is behind the marketplace at Winterfeldtplatz, a square — not at Wittenbergplatz, anothersquare where there is no playground.Anna Winger is a novelist and creator of the German television espionage series Deutschland83, now available on Hulu. She has lived in Berlin with her family since 2002.A version of this article appears in print on June 5, 2016, on Page TR6 of the New York edition with the headline: From Empty Spaces, Enchanted Places.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »