

 Lucas Peterson
 

FRUGAL TRAVELER
AUG. 31, 2016
We stepped out into a drizzly London evening on St. Martin’s Lane in the heart of the city’s West End. I had decided to treat my mom, an obsessive “Game of Thrones” watcher, to an afternoon performance of “Doctor Faustus” at the Duke of York’s Theater, starring the inveterate heartthrob Kit Harington.Mr. Harington, who plays the sullen Jon Snow on the HBO series, spends much of “Doctor Faustus” running around in his underwear. Legions of fans wait for him at the side-door entrance, and they had actually started lining up before the performance even began. My mom looked at them, then me, and slapped me on the shoulder. “Well,” she said, “Thanks for the man candy.”That about summed it up. We agreed that this production of “Faustus” was more flash than substance, but that Mr. Harington was good and that the experience was worth the £28.50 (about $37) per ticket. Near-nudity aside, the electricity and sense of excitement that comes from seeing a celebrity in a live performance was palpable in the crowded theater.It was one of seven performances I crammed into a long weekend in London — a reminder that one of the city’s best features is its incredible theater scene. Even better: It is cheaper than you may think and comes with plenty of opportunities to see a recognizable face or two.AdvertisementYou can, of course, spend as much as you’d like on London theater, but there are also bargains. The most reliable theater deal in town is Shakespeare’s Globe on the south side of the Thames, near the Tate Modern. There are seated gallery tickets that run as high as £45, but the frugal among us know where the real deal is: standing in the yard, with the rest of the groundlings. There are 700 standing tickets available for £5 each at every performance, and you can maneuver your way right up to the lip of the stage if you’d like. Fair warning: Wear comfortable shoes. Shakespeare wasn’t known for his brevity, and even his shortest play, “Macbeth” (the play I saw), runs well over the two-hour mark.The bard is ubiquitous in London, and every season presents new takes. I caught a few Shakespeare performances during my theater crawl, including a sleek new “Romeo and Juliet” at the Garrick Theater, directed by Kenneth Branagh and starring Lily James, who played Lady Rose on “Downton Abbey.” Ms. James’s understudy was onstage the night I was there, but fortunately that absence was more than compensated for by the presence of one of my favorite stage actors, Derek Jacobi. In a testament to the versatility of Mr. Jacobi, who played King Lear in a 2011 BAM production, he wonderfully portrayed Romeo’s hotheaded sidekick, Mercutio. How many actors are good enough to play those two roles in reverse chronological order?“Romeo and Juliet” wasn’t an easy ticket to get. The show was sold out on the theater’s website, and calls to the box office proved unhelpful. I used the help of StubHub instead, landing a pair of very acceptable last-minute tickets in the front row of the grand circle (balcony) for £30, a good savings on the £47.50 face value.AdvertisementThird-party sites can be useful when you try to attend sold-out performances. I used three different ones and found them all reliable: StubHub, Lovetheatre and TodayTix. They are all good sites (with accompanying apps) that I used to land discounted or hard-to-get tickets. But be aware if you’re making last-minute purchases: You may have to print your own tickets ahead of showtime, or travel to a separate location to pick up hard copies, as was the case with StubHub.Sometimes, though, you just have to get tickets the old-fashioned way. “Richard III” was the play I really had my eye on. It starred the Oscar winner Ralph Fiennes, and I was determined to get into the show. It was, of course, sold out. Undeterred, I went to the Almeida Theater early — almost three hours before showtime — to wait for returns. As I was waiting in the attached cafe for my name to be called, who happened to walk in? None other than Mr. Fiennes. I couldn’t help but surreptitiously snap a photo.Minutes later, I heard my name being called from the box office. I purchased a ticket for a mere £10 in the main orchestra section with a slightly obstructed view (I had to occasionally lean to one side during some of the action). Mr. Fiennes was, as expected, excellent in his portrayal of the demonic duke of Gloucester.When considering accommodations for a potential London theater crawl, a good location is essential. If you want to be in the center of the action, stay near Covent Garden. I landed a stunningly cheap $83-per-night room through Hotels.com UK at the Strand Palace Hotel, a venerable 1909 institution that is surprisingly modern. The room was small but clean, and the price was a steal.Nearby food options are easy, and the proximity to the West End means pretheater menus galore. Côte Bistro offers a three- or two-course prix fixe option for £13.95 and £12.50, respectively, but I went with the slightly more frugal option and headed around the corner to Sagar Indian. I enjoyed a Mysore masala dosa — a thin pancake made from fermented batter, wrapped around a mash of potatoes, chili, turmeric and other spices. It cost only £7.95, and was more than enough for my dinner.My room at the Strand Palace was a quick walk across Waterloo Bridge from one of my favorite London theaters, the National Theater — a state-sponsored complex overlooking the Thames. During the 50-plus years that it’s been around, everyone from Peter O’Toole to Helen Mirren to Daniel Day Lewis has graced the stage. I stumbled upon a dark comedy called “The Suicide,” a modern, urban retelling of a banned 1928 Stalin-era drama. My £15 ticket put me squarely in the front row.Then there’s the Barbican Center, an enormous performing arts complex that is roughly a 30-minute bus ride from where I was staying. It is one of the largest performing arts centers in Europe and showcases performances from around the world. I love the architecture of the place, with its concrete-heavy Brutalist style that gives it a somewhat dystopian and foreboding feel.It can be tough to find your destination within the main building. I handed the usher my £12 ticket to “The Shadow King” just as the lights were dimming. A fascinating retelling of “King Lear,” the Australia-based Malthouse Theater sets the family tragedy within a dysfunctional Aboriginal clan. Weaving native music and Kriol dialect through the original English gave the play a depth I had never appreciated.Theater in London is not merely confined to the indoors — it truly pervades the city. I stepped out one afternoon to see a workshop sponsored by Simon McBurney’s well-regarded company, Complicite. At the end of a street in Notting Hill were roughly a dozen performers in elaborate masks. They proceeded to give a free show in the broad, commedia dell’arte style. Lone pedestrians stopped, as did a young family. A group of young children stared, slack-jawed, at this group of adults in sequined and feathered masks shouting in the street and undulating in exaggerated movements.AdvertisementIn my few days crammed with London theater, I thought I’d truly seen it all. That is, until I saw that Harold Pinter’s “No Man’s Land,” with Ian McKellen and Patrick Stewart, would be running this fall at Wyndham’s Theater. I may have to make a return trip.The Frugal Traveler column on Sept. 4, about London theater, misstated the surname of the actress who starred in “Romeo and Juliet” at the Garrick Theater. She is Lily James, not King. (Lilly King is the name of a United States Olympic swimmer.)A version of this article appears in print on September 4, 2016, on Page TR3 of the New York edition with the headline: On the Cheap in London, Where All the City’s a Stage.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »