By ELAINE GLUSACNOV. 22, 2016
Three new ships launching within one year on the Mississippi River will more than double the market for cruises in Mark Twain territory.In October, the new French America Line launched its first ship, the 150-passenger Louisiane. Based in New Orleans, it features French cuisine and a French Quarter Lounge devoted to jazz.Last spring, American Cruise Lines, which already operates the Queen of the Mississippi, launched the paddle wheel ship America, offering 185 passengers free shore excursions, nightly musical entertainment and an onboard historian.Next spring, the American Queen Steamboat Company will introduce the 166-passenger American Duchess on the river. It will incorporate two-story “loft suites” and two restaurants serving regional fare.Advertisement“We were starved for capacity,” said Ted Sykes, president of the American Queen Steamboat Company, citing 95 percent occupancy on its present Mississippi paddle-wheeler, the American Queen.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.With the new launches, operators aim to attract new travelers. The American Duchess will offer shorter itineraries out of Nashville and New Orleans designed to appeal to working professionals, and introduce journeys in and out of the Chicago area.“We’re seeing a transition in travel styles of people who are starting to be interested in the Mississippi,” said Carolyn Spencer Brown, editor in chief of CruiseCritic.com.AdvertisementThe Mississippi could roil again when and if Viking Cruises, the biggest European river operator, enters the market. In 2015, it announced its intention to begin Mississippi cruises, only to retract its launch date. Viking wouldn’t comment on its delay, though observers tie it to domestic construction capacity. By law, operators on American rivers must build their boats in the United States.A version of this article appears in print on November 27, 2016, on Page TR2 of the New York edition with the headline: More Mississippi Cruises.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.