
Next Stop By                     
SANDRA E. GARCIA

MARCH 2, 2017
All roads in the Dominican town of Miches lead to the ocean.One ends at Esmeralda, a white sand beach with clear blue water under which sits a coral reef visible from the shore. When you stand there, it feels as if you’ve leapt into a Caribbean travel poster — for a getaway to a place unspoiled by tourists.That poster is going to get much more crowded. The Four Seasons is planning to open a 10-complex resort in 2019 called Tropicalia, its first in the Dominican Republic. The company is bypassing an already crowded market in Punta Cana and Puerto Plata for the chance for a foothold near Esmeralda Beach. The concept is a grand resort in a pristine setting. Miches, though, is best seen in its natural, unmanicured light, close to the humble people who have cultivated the area.Miches is a town of 30,000, largely farmers and fishermen. The rhythms of the day are dictated by subsistence within this natural bounty. Most Micheros wake early and head out to fish. They also tend to plantains, yucca, chickens and the huge pigs they raise for their Christmas feasts.“A Michero never starves,” said Yonattan Mercado, who was born there and works for the ministry of the environment. “They always have a crop, a chicken, something, and if they don’t, their neighbor does.”AdvertisementThe feeling of being at a remove is easy to come by in the community of modest homes and farms, where children chase chickens in front yards. But that is only part of the draw. Miches also has an abundance of natural attractions that make it an Instagram gold mine.Atlantic OceanhaitiDominicanRepublicSanto DomingoCaribbean Sea100 milesAtlantic OceanMichesMt. RedondaDominican RepublicHato Mayor del ReyEl SieboSalto de la Jalda5 milesMARCH 3, 2017
I explored two of the standouts, Montaña Redonda and Salto de la Jalda, the tallest waterfall in the Caribbean, last fall.AdvertisementThe first, Montaña Redonda, is a mountain with breathtaking views of the city of El Seibo and the ocean.The road leading to the top of the mountain is unpaved, rocky and winding. Farmers make their way up the mountain on their horses, mostly looking after their rice and plantain crops. While getting up the mountain is not easy by horse or car, the reward is beautiful and sobering.“Making it to the top of the mountain was very scary because of the road,” said Marlene Sanchez, who was visiting from the capital, Santo Domingo. “I could not bring myself to look out the window or check anything. I thought the van would go backward.”Ms. Sanchez made it to the top despite her fear, and soon you could hear her screams. She was swinging.At the top of Montaña Redonda, there are swings that send you soaring over the top of the mountain and back. Depending on which side you are on, you can soar over the ocean or what seems like the never-ending province of Seibo. There are also benches that provide a perfect perch to watch the sunset.Ms. Sanchez’s screams quickly subsided, and soon she was asking her mother to get on the swing.“Everything erases from my mind here,” Ms. Sanchez’s mother, Miledys Herrera, said. “The swings are a little scary. You get a little bit of fear and a little bit of fun.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.There is also a home-style kitchen where you can have local fish with fried plantains, accompanied by an ice-cold Presidente beer.Advertisement“The feeling is indescribable when you are up there,” Ms. Herrera said. “You’re reminded of magic; it makes you feel like a child again.”Montaña Redonda is enchanting, but more gratifying is the reward that comes after hiking to Salto La Jalda, the Caribbean’s tallest waterfall. The breathtaking falls lie at the end of eight miles of trees, small rivers, rocks and mud. The hike is not easy, and many do not finish it. But young local residents like Jonas Mota, 17, say they can do one leg in an hour and a half while wearing slippers. For visitors, it can take about four long, grueling hours each way. Some visitors arrange to go up by helicopter, but that is not as much fun.“I come here to stay out of trouble,” said Mr. Mota, who grew up in Hato Mayor Province, which is right below the falls. “I’ve been coming here since I was 12. I come here, swim, take a nap, and sometimes we bring pineapple wine.”Avocados, oranges, limonsillos and coconuts grow in the area. The cacao fruit was ripe in September, sweet and pulpy. The oranges were tart but juicy, the avocados so ripe they could be peeled by hand.After the first half of the hike, you reach a small camp in a three-story house seemingly in the middle of nowhere. A Dominican flag soars high until nightfall, when it is folded and taken inside. There is no drinking water here, but it is a great rest stop. At this point of the hike every direction you look in is lush green. There are no buildings, no cars — nothing but tropical forest.The second half of the hike is a greater challenge. The way up is narrow, the incline steep. By now you can see the waterfall, misting at the top, the water’s full force pushing into a river. At that point, there is still an hour and a half of hiking left.The trees help you pull yourself up and through small spaces. After climbing up a steep incline, you reach a small landing. There you can smell the sweet water from the falls. You have made it.La Jalda induces amnesia — you will forget the mosquito bites, all of the times you fell on your hands, and the pain in your feet as soon as you see it.For a moment, you have arrived at a sacred space in a fairy tale, a twin peak of Narnia.A version of this article appears in print on March 5, 2017, on Page TR4 of the New York edition with the headline: Sights to See Before the Tourists Check In.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »