

 Lucas Peterson
 

FRUGAL TRAVELER
MARCH 23, 2016
When I exited my Megabus a few weeks ago in Milwaukee, Wis., saying goodbye to my fellow passengers and ending what had been an extremely eventful, harrowing trip, I had a sinking feeling that the events of the day would quickly be glossed over and forgotten. The bus I was on had erupted into a ball of fire on the Interstate, endangering our lives and destroying the bus and most of my fellow passengers’ baggage (I did not lose any property). Thankfully, we all managed to get away unharmed. But while my tweetstorm garnered attention, I knew that because there were no injuries, Megabus would very likely not be taken to task for the incident, beyond some bad P.R.Let me be clear: We were all grateful and fortunate to have escaped without injury. There have been several high-profile Megabus accidents in the last decade, including a Philadelphia-to-Toronto coach that slammed into a railroad bridge in 2010; four passengers were killed and one seriously injured. What many passengers on my Megabus have encountered, however, is a lack of recourse to collect compensation on thousands of dollars in lost property.“I called a lawyer in Chicago and they said, ‘We’re not touching it,’ ” Michelle Grant said. “They basically hung up the phone in my face.” Ms. Grant, who estimates the value of her destroyed property at about $1,500, said she was offered “four or five hundred dollars” by Megabus’s liability administrator, Sedgwick CMS. (The adjuster I spoke to would not comment for this article.) Ms. Grant, who works for a textbook distributor, says she’s missed days of work and lost sleep because of emotional distress. More than that, though, she feels betrayed by the claims process. “The person at Sedgwick told me that even with receipts, I’m not going to get the full amount,” Ms. Grant added. “It’s a no-win situation.”Jared Jaskot, a partner at Burke & Jaskot, a law firm in Baltimore that specializes in civil litigation and which is not involved in this case, acknowledged the professional quandary of taking cases dealing with a couple of thousand dollars in damages. “We can’t take them because the legal fees would outstrip the value of the case,” Mr. Jaskot said. He said that the effort to prepare even a simple case against a large company like Megabus could easily rack up $10,000 in fees. “I can sometimes refer people to Legal Aid,” he added, “but they’re completely overworked.”AdvertisementThe result, then, is that passengers who have lost possessions, especially those in dire financial circumstances, can feel compelled to take whatever they are offered. Darnell McKinney, who was moving from St. Louis and who said he lost most of his belongings, worth thousands, in the fire said he would most likely accept the $500 offered to him by Sedgwick CMS and Megabus. When I spoke to Mr. McKinney, he was using a cellphone that belonged to his mother, who had just picked him up from his new job at a sausage processing plant. “I don’t have nothing,” Mr. McKinney said. “I have to take the first thing available to get me back on my feet.”AdvertisementDeandre Bea wasn’t as inclined to accept Sedgwick’s offer. He estimates he lost $3,000 worth of possessions between two suitcases. “I had a PlayStation 4 in one bag; that’s $450 right there,” Mr. Bea said. Sedgwick CMS emailed Mr. Bea a claim form offering him $500; if he signed, he would forgo the right to further legal action and acknowledge the settlement as “the compromise of a doubtful and disputed claim.” Mr. Bea had not yet decided whether he would accept.When passengers ride Megabus, they agree to the company’s terms and conditions, which state that Megabus “assumes no liability for the loss of or damage of baggage in excess of two hundred and fifty ($250) dollars.” That is the “industry standard,” Sean Hughes, the director of corporate affairs for Megabus.com, wrote in an email.I asked Mr. Hughes why four fellow passengers I spoke to said that Megabus offered them between $400 and $500 — a seeming indication that the “industry standard” was not ironclad but rather was adjustable. “The $250 is an accepted norm for the industry which Megabus.com adheres to,” Mr. Hughes responded. “However, in exceptional circumstances such as this incident, Megabus.com will be flexible.”But liability terms such as those of Megabus “are the opposite of ironclad; they’re tin,” said Michael K. Demetrio, a partner at Corboy & Demetrio, a Chicago law firm that specializes in personal injury law and which obtained a $5.1 million settlement against Megabus in 2014. The $250 figure “is their attempt to limit liability,” he said. “I’ve never seen an instance where that type of provision is enforceable.”Illinois (the departure point of my Megabus trip) provides a potential remedy for property damage up to $10,000 in small claims court, which does not require the hiring of an attorney. I asked Mr. Demetrio what would happen if I dragged Megabus into small claims to collect a few thousand dollars in property damage, bringing receipts and affidavits. What would their defense be? “Depreciation,” he replied.A pair of jeans may have cost you $85, Mr. Demetrio said, but Megabus will claim it’s not their responsibility to replace the jeans, only to provide what they deem fair value. “They might say that the jeans are now only worth $15. That’s when fighting starts.”Every Saturday, get travel tips, destination coverage, photos from all over the world and more.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.That’s exactly what happened with Alice Taylor, who lost her laptop in the fire. “They told me, ‘It depreciates.’ They should be responsible! I lost my laptop on there and they should buy me a new one,” she said. Ms. Taylor, like others, was offered $500. She said she’s been unable to sleep since the incident, and has been failing out of school. Her attempts to find a lawyer have been unsuccessful. “If there are no personal injuries, they just say no.”AdvertisementIncidents like this concern Jacqueline S. Gillan, the president of Advocates for Highway and Auto Safety, a lobbying group that promotes highway safety measures. The federal Department of Transportation, Ms. Gillan said, has “delayed and ignored issuing stronger safety measures and regulations to address fires and improving occupant protection in crashes.”A recent New York Times Op-Ed article noted that the D.O.T. required that new buses have seatbelts only in 2013. Ms. Gillan considers it embarrassing that such a fundamental safety precaution was instituted so recently. The National Transportation Safety Board, another agency, “has recommended seatbelts since the 1960s,” she said. She added that the regulation applied only to newly manufactured buses — older buses would not be required to go back and retrofit.Gordon Trowbridge, communications director of the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, which is part of the D.O.T., responded by email: “D.O.T. considered a number of factors in issuing the requirement in 2013 for seatbelts on motor coaches, including consideration of whether to require owners to retrofit used buses with seatbelts.” He added: “From a technical standpoint, a retrofitting requirement would have required structural improvements to many older buses, which would have been difficult and in some cases impossible.”Ms. Gillan also expressed concerns regarding initial inspections for new commercial carriers. Up until 2012, the federal government had 18 months to inspect new commercial motor carriers. A law passed that year shortened that time frame to 120 days.Mr. Hughes of Megabus.com wrote that his company “maintains the highest safety compliance rating (Satisfactory) from the U.S. Department of Transportation’s Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration.” In addition, he said, “Megabus.com requires more hours off between shifts than is required by the federal and state regulators, has had seat belts on our bus since 2007, and has had GPS tracking on all of our buses since 2006.” The company’s rules, he wrote, “far exceed both federal and state requirements.”According to the D.O.T., in the last 24 months, Megabus USA LLC, the branch of Megabus that serves the Midwest United States, including Illinois, has had 74 inspections resulting in 35 violations for its fleet of 42 vehicles. In that time, there were 14 crashes, seven of which resulted in injuries. (That’s for “reportable” crashes that result in injury or a physical tow; it’s not specified whether that counts incidents like bus fires.) Megabus USA LLC has been assessed no penalties from the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration, a D.O.T. agency that oversees truck and bus safety, over the last six years.Inspection records for my Megabus were not available in time for publication. Still, my fellow riders and I felt compelled to question the safety procedures of our bus and its driver. Multiple passengers, including Ms. Grant, noticed a burning smell from the bus immediately after departure. Roughly an hour into the trip, after having made two unscheduled stops on the side of Interstate 94, the driver announced over the intercom that we were turning around to switch buses. We continued for several miles, eventually heading back toward Chicago on Highway 41. Soon after, a tire blew, we disembarked and, within minutes, fire consumed the bus.But why did we keep driving for several miles after the driver announced we had to switch buses? On the way, we passed businesses and parking lots — presumably safe places to pull over and wait for a replacement bus. When we reached our destination, I asked the driver, who would not tell me his name, why we kept driving. His response was, “We didn’t.” Confused, I asked him to clarify and he responded, “I was looking for a safe place to pull over.” When I asked him again why we kept driving, he shrugged and walked away.AdvertisementAccording to Mr. Hughes of Megabus: “The driver did the correct action by contacting dispatch and finding a safe place for the passengers to unload. Thankfully no one was injured in this incident, which is a testament to our safety procedures and driver training.”Lastly, I asked Mr. Hughes about obtaining a refund for the price of the ticket. None of the passengers I had spoken to said they were issued or offered one. Mr. Hughes responded that refunds are usually issued based only on how long a bus is delayed. In incidents where a bus is delayed more than four hours, full refunds are automatically issued. In my case, since our replacement bus arrived in Milwaukee a hair under three hours late, usually that’s not grounds for a refund — only a voucher worth 50 percent of the ticket price (my ticket cost $11, plus booking fee). However, Mr. Hughes said, “In this specific incident, since it was a major incident, Customer Service was instructed to give the passengers a full refund if contacted by the passengers.”I decided to try that out, and called Megabus customer service to ask for my money back. After taking my reservation number and placing me on a brief hold, the agent informed me that I was ineligible to receive a refund. I asked again, just to confirm, that they would not issue me a refund. No, he said — I would be issued a voucher, worth $5.50. I told them I wouldn’t be needing one.A version of this article appears in print on March 27, 2016, on Page TR4 of the New York edition with the headline: Frustration for Baggage Lost on Burning Bus.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »