
Explorer By                     
ELIZABETH ZACH

DEC. 14, 2016
There are countless ways to experience America. You could tackle blockbuster destinations like Niagara Falls or New York or California. You could get lost in its natural wonders, like the Rockies or the Everglades.Or, as an Armenian man suggested to me some years ago, you could travel from Indian reservation to Indian reservation, from the Cherokee, across to the Navajo Nation, and up to the Northern Plains and the Pacific Northwest. Such a journey would allow an exploration of this country’s troubled past, of migrations and massacres and cultural treasures lost and rediscovered.I thought of that approach when I went to Badlands National Park, a searing pastiche of rolling hills, dry grasslands and rimmed buttes that stretches over 244,000 acres divided into what are called North and South Units. A four-year-old proposal would make the South Unit, which is now administered in cooperation with the Oglala Sioux, wholly managed by the tribe. (The Oglala Sioux, or Oglala Lakota, the majority of which live on the Pine Ridge Indian Reservation, are one of seven members of a confederation of Sioux tribes.) Those plans have foundered, though, and the South Unit has gone from being celebrated as the possible site of the nation’s first tribal park to remaining a less-visited, more rugged stretch of Badlands National Park.The park was established as a national monument in 1939. During World War II, the federal government used the 133,000-acre South Unit area as a bombing range; in 1968, Congress gave it back to the Oglala Sioux tribe with the understanding that the National Park Service would administer it. In 1976, the tribe signed a memorandum of agreement to co-manage the land with the park service. But then two divergent arcs of development followed. Whereas the North Unit of the park has paved roads, marked trails, campgrounds, cabins and other amenities, the South Unit remains nearly inaccessible.AdvertisementThe recommendation for tribal control — which grew out of a collaborative environmental-impact statement — would allow preferential tribal hiring and provisions for tribal culture and customs, including the reintroduction of bison to the land.N.D.MONT.SouthDakotaS.D.Area ofdetailPierreWYO.NEB.9044240BadlandsNational ParkPine Ridgereservation44CedarButte731820 milesDEC. 13, 2016
At a time when tribal rights are playing out throughout North America, a tribal national park would offer some measure of autonomy to indigenous people.“If the South Unit of Badlands was designated a Tribal National Park,” said Ivan Sorbel of the Pine Ridge Area Chamber of Commerce, “it would be managed and staffed by the Oglala Sioux tribe. The designation as a national park would provide federal funding separate from Badlands National Park, and it could be developed similar to Badlands. The layout would have a different look than Badlands and would most likely center around the history and culture of the Oglala Sioux tribe.”AdvertisementFor now, though, the proposal is on hold pending tribal action. But this may be the best time to go, while it’s still under the radar.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.I first saw the South Unit one sunny fall afternoon last year with the wildlife biologist Richard Sherman. Born and raised on Pine Ridge, Mr. Sherman has a devotion to the land that was evident as he showed me the fringed sagewort, wild rose, curly cup gumwood and scarlet globe mallow he gathers, and as he described the wild deer he hunts in the region. During our hike, he had darted ahead of me with ease, disappearing around switchbacks and over bluffs and across a meadow of dry towering velvet mullein before leading me to Cedar Butte.There, we had a commanding view of the park’s magnificent buttes surrounding a desolate and verdant valley. And as if on cue, while I admired the dizzying landscape, a flock of wild pigeons swept across the ravine to our right, and then tucked into crevices in the canyon wall. Later, I spotted seven bighorn sheep, as still as statues as they balanced effortlessly on a precipitous mesa face, a startling image.Despite the steep ascent, it felt like a privileged trek, with no trail to follow because there isn’t one. Tangles of tree branches blocking passage and the tricky climb notwithstanding, the unspoiled remoteness, the wild, the silence, all illustrated to me that we were happily far, far from the beaten path. Mr. Sherman later told me that he had led groups of German and French tourists to Cedar Butte, and upon reaching the shelf where we stood, they had sat lost in thought, speechless and enraptured at the primeval landscape.But beyond the landscape, the Badlands are a sacred place to the Oglala Sioux. Before my hike with Mr. Sherman, a group of students from the Red Cloud Indian School let me tag along on an excursion to Stronghold Table, a grassy bluff believed to be where the Lakota performed the last ghost dance in December 1890 before the massacre at Wounded Knee Creek, about 30 miles south of here. The dusty and fissured road leading to the Stronghold ends in front of a hollowed-out, hexagon-shaped bungalow — a testament to Keith Janis, an Oglala Sioux, who built it in 2003 while protesting the park service’s possession of the land.“The natives told the settlers when they came to these lands that they were tough to live on,” Vance Blacksmith, the activities director at Red Cloud Indian Schools, told the students, as they sat in a semicircle at the bluff’s edge. He then turned to look out at the canyon and, with a sweep of his arm, described excavations that revealed alligators and three-toed horses had once roamed this arid region. “The Lakota,” he said, “helped scientists understand what came before.”During my hike later with Mr. Sherman, I asked him about the Lakota and their relationship to the land, and the idea of setting it aside — as the National Park Service has for 100 years now — to foster an understanding of natural and social history. He thought for a long moment and said: “This goes a long ways back. When settlers came to these lands, or scientists even, they said to the Lakota, ‘Show us your sacred sites.’ But,” he said, “for the Lakota, it’s all sacred, the land, the sun, the stars, all of it.”A version of this article appears in print on December 18, 2016, on Page TR10 of the New York edition with the headline: Hopes for the First Tribal Park Are Fading.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »