By JESSICA COLLEY CLARKEJUNE 9, 2017
When the beaches in the Hamptons fill up, the pace in the Caribbean slows down. June, July and August are considered low season, but hotels across the Caribbean are making a strong case for summer trips, offering special packages and a peaceful atmosphere.Rates at GoldenEye in Jamaica start at $635 a night during high season, but are $425 a night in the summer. Travelers who book the Barefoot Summer package (available through Oct. 31) will receive a seven-night trip for the price of five nights and a $150 resort credit.In addition to complimentary activities like kayaking, glass-bottom boating and snorkeling, the summer season at GoldenEye has its own attractions. “Seasonal summer treats include an abundance of exotic fruits and the turtle hatching experience at Holden Sea beach,” said Ricardo Bowleg, the general manager. “Plus, the island is traffic-free.”Elegant Hotels, a group of nine beachfront hotels in Antigua, Barbados and St. Lucia, is offering an online flash sale on June 21at cybersummertravel.com. With the promo code CYBERSUM travelers can receive from 40 percent to 50 percent off accommodations at properties including the Colony Club in Barbados (rates starting at $291 a night are 45 percent off high-season prices) and the Landings in St. Lucia (rates starting at $356 a night represent a saving of as much as 50 percent, and summer travel includes a $100 food and beverage credit). The travel window for this flash sale is June 21 through Oct. 3.In addition to lower rates, advance-purchase deals are also on offer. At Belmond La Samanna in St. Martin, low-season rates of $445 a night (available July 1 through Sept. 30) offer significant savings over the high-season rate of $945 a night, and an advance purchase will reduce the price by another 15 percent.Travelers seeking the luxury all-inclusive experience will find deals this summer. At the Palms Turks and Caicos, the Taste of the Good Life package (available through Aug. 31) includes three meals a day, unlimited beverages including alcohol by the glass and airport transfers starting at $799 a night. During the high season, rates start at $1,375 a night and do not include meals or drinks.A version of this article appears in print on June 11, 2017, on Page TR2 of the New York edition with the headline: Savings in the Caribbean.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.