AdvertisementSupported byBy Shivani VoraAn attempted coup in Turkey has left 265 dead, 1,440 wounded and chaos in its wake. Here’s what travelers need to know about how to stay safe there, including updates on flights.What should travelers in Turkey do right now? The State Department has issued a statement saying that travelers should continue to exercise caution, to leave their accommodations only for essential errands during daylight hours and specifically warns against travel to southeastern Turkey. It has also been frequently posting updates on its Twitter account.US citizens in #Turkey: Continue to exercise heightened vigilance & caution when visiting public access areas. https://t.co/GkAoPO7RDTThere and elsewhere, the State Department has been sharing the after-hours telephone number of the embassy in Ankara (90-312-455-5555 or +90-212-335-9000) as well as telephone numbers of its consulate and consular agencies in other cities.Britain’s Foreign Office said on Sunday that security in Turkey is “potentially volatile” though the overall situation is “calming down” and the coastal resorts are largely unaffected.And the French foreign ministry has updated its site to ask its citizens to remain vigilant as well.Nick Doyle, a terrorism expert and managing director of the security risk management practice at the security firm Kroll, advises travelers to remain at their hotels or rental homes and to communicate with their local consulate about the latest political developments. He also encourages them to liaise with their property or travel agent, if they have one. “Travelers may have the urge to head to the airport to try to get out of Turkey, but they could end up waiting there for endless hours and even a few days before they can so they’re better off waiting in a comfortable setting,” he said. “I suspect the situation in the country will stabilize within days.”Are airports open? Istanbul’s Ataturk Airport, Europe’s third busiest airport, closed shortly after the coup on Friday, and reopened Saturday morning. President Recep Tayyip Erdogan spoke from there shortly after returning the country and was shown on television there greeting supporters. Travelers have been urged to check with their carriers to find ways to depart the country.Delta, which stopped service to the airport last month because of security concerns, is offering a travel waiver through its Joint Venture partners to help those affected change their travel plans.British Airways has canceled all flights to and from Turkey scheduled for Saturday, July 16 and Sunday, July 17 and is offering travelers, who are scheduled to fly either to or from the country on Sunday and Monday, July 18, the chance to rebook their flights, subject to availability.The airport in Ankara is also open but is operating with some delays.Are hotels letting guests stay?Yes, for the most part. In Istanbul, many hotels are open and functioning, according to Pinar Timer, the general manager of the Pera Palace Hotel Jumeirah, an upscale 115-room property in the city. “We had 75 guests last night but most were Europeans, not Americans, and obviously they are concerned, but we have plenty of security and are doing our best to keep them safe and apprised of what’s going on,” she said.Ciragan Palace Kempinski Istanbul, a luxury hotel set on the Bosporus, is also open.Four Seasons has two hotels in Istanbul, and both are open, said Leonardo Baiocchi, the general manager for both properties. “ We had guests last night but are receiving early departures today,” he said. The hotel was on lockdown during the attempted coup, according to Kat Cohen, who phoned in to CNN during its coverage of the events.I have a trip to planned to Turkey soon. Should I cancel it?The U.S. State Department is warning people to reconsider any travel to Turkey right now. And if you haven’t already canceled your trip, your tour operator might.The Melbourne-based Intrepid Travel, which runs several trips to Turkey a week during the summer season, had two tours scheduled to depart on Sunday. One was canceled, but the other was not, according to spokesman Michael Sadowski. Travelers who cancel their Turkey tours for this week will receive refunds, he said.videoAdvertisement