
Heads Up By                     
SARAH STODOLA

NOV. 23, 2016
Inside the New York Restaurant in Catskill, N.Y., on a recent Sunday afternoon, a jazz band whiled away the hours as the place filled up. Fresh into town, a friend and I marveled at unusual dishes like “cauliflower wings” and brussels sprout chips, and at the sense that we’d stumbled into the clubhouse for local creatives. I’d last visited Catskill a couple of years before, and here was my first indication that since then, a new energy had taken hold in this small town of 4,000 set in the Hudson Valley, where Catskill Creek meets the Hudson River.The buzz comes largely on the heels of the Catskill Mill, a mammoth project that provides woodworkers, ceramacists and other artisans with well-equipped spaces to practice their crafts. The Mill was opened in 2013 by the Etsy founder Rob Kalin and his partner, Trevor Babb, after Mr. Kalin purchased three abandoned downtown buildings. In one, a former furniture store fronting Main Street, Mr. Kalin has already financed and built more than a dozen spare-no-expense workshops for craftspeople.Catskill once harnessed its natural resources — clay for brickmaking in particular — and a location central to many trade routes to become a major supplier to the region and New York City. Another of the three downtown buildings, a former textile mill, is a relic of that time. Built in 1940, it’s the most impressive of the Mill buildings and one that could become the main draw — perhaps a hotel, restaurant, apartments or some combination of those. Mr. Kalin said he hadn’t decided yet on its purpose.Mr. Kalin intends to cultivate a hands-on component where visitors can engage in what he calls “craft tourism.” As part of that goal, next spring the Mill will open a bed-and-breakfast in an early-1800s house. The furnishings, from the plates to the curtains, will be made at the Mill with locally sourced materials.AdvertisementSince the arrival of the Mill, its ethos has been permeating Catskill, a town previously known as the pleasantly down-at-the-heels seat of Greene County, across the river from the design-saturated city of Hudson. Catskill’s biggest attraction until now was the house of Thomas Cole, founder of the Hudson River School of painting.Now, Catskill boasts a number of reasons to visit.Between 2011 and 2015, noncommuter traffic across the nearby Rip Van Winkle Bridge increased by over 11 percent, according to the New York State Bridge Authority. A local real estate agent reported a waiting list for commercial properties on Main Street.AdvertisementAfter brunch, we wandered down Main Street and into House of Tuki, a new vintage shop run by Christina Paljusaj, a young Catskill native with an eclectic streak. Nearby, Magpie is a perfect used-books shop. The General Store of Catskill stocks artisanal toiletries and household goods. A ceramic studio and shop called L&M Studio  showcases pieces that are inventive and functional, and 394 Main serves coffee by day and wine by night.These new spots mingle with businesses that have anchored Catskill for a while. Of note are the Catskill Country Store and the Community Theater, a lovingly preserved 1920 movie house. We ate dinner at Tatiana’s, a four-decades-old Italian restaurant on the edge of town overlooking the creek, and then had a nightcap at Captain Kidd’s Inn, a bizarre spot featuring the owner’s collection of pirate paraphernalia in the onetime home of Samuel Wilson, a wealthy area meatpacker who supplied meat for the United States Army during the War of 1812 — and was reputedly the Uncle Sam. And of course there’s the Thomas Cole House, which last spring opened a reconstruction of his painting studio on the grounds.Adding to the momentum, Lumberyard, formerly American Dance Institute, recently announced its new headquarters down the street from the Catskill Mill, opening in 2018. The complex will include a theater and residences for 20 artists. And the Crossroads Brewing Company is building a production facility in town that by next summer is to feature a tasting room and beer garden on the creek.Jeff Friedman, president of the local Chamber of Commerce and a Greene County resident since the mid-1980s, can’t recall a time when so much was afoot in Catskill. There have been spurts, he said, but “this has been more sustained, and it’s been fueled by more public-private partnerships,” bringing a greater stability to the progress.Mr. Kalin said he wanted to take the Mill’s development slow, making sure to get it right. “We’ve played with different configurations of this whole space,” he said, referring in particular to the storefront on Main Street, which is expected to open in fall 2017 as a community space. He doesn’t want to build “some expensive retail storefront that just sits empty. Hudson has enough of that.”An article last Sunday about Catskill, N.Y., gave an outdated reference to a performing arts organization. It is Lumberyard, no longer American Dance Institute.A version of this article appears in print on November 27, 2016, on Page TR4 of the New York edition with the headline: A Hudson Valley Town With a Newly Creative Bent.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »