By SHIVANI VORAOCT. 14, 2016
Peak tourist season in Paris may be winding down, but several new and innovative tours in the city are keeping it a vibrant destination in the fall and winter, too. Many of the sites these excursions cover aren’t new; the way to see them, on the other hand, is.How about solving a murder mystery, for instance, to learn about the French Revolution? With the interactive  French Revolution: A Murder Mystery Tour from the tour company Paris Muse, visitors take a trip to 18th-century Paris and crack the case of a real-life political assassination. Along the way, they meet the suspects — a literature hawker and a prominent socialite are among the bunch — learn their views on the Revolution and visit the sights where they worked and lived, including the Palais Royal, the Louvre and Île de la Cité. Clues at each spot lead to the real murderer at the end (two and a half hours, 320 euros or about $352 for groups of six or fewer).A private tour of the under-the-radar Musée Jacquemart-André, a jewel box of a museum in an ornate 19th-century mansion near the Champs-Élysées, is available with the registered guide and art expert Jean-Jacques Serres. This former estate of Nélie Jacquemart and Edouard André, a couple who were passionate art lovers, houses their collection of works by renowned artists like Giovanni Battista Tiepolo and Rembrandt (two hours, 150 euros for up to five people).For those who want to avoid crowds, the Paris-based bespoke travel company My DMC can arrange a historian-led tour of Notre-Dame, the Gothic cathedral dating to the 12th century, before its doors open to the public (90 minutes, 1,150 euros).AdvertisementThe company can also set up before-hours access at the Louis Vuitton Foundation museum; here, the tour is with a member of the museum’s education staff. The contemporary art museum, commissioned by the LVMH chief executive Bernard Arnault and designed by the architect Frank Gehry, is home to changing exhibitions by modern artists and has towers of weblike steel and wood as well as curved glass panels. The views of the city from its several terraces are as Instagrammable as the building itself (90 minutes, 1,250 euros).Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The old and new come together with the excursion for guests of the hotel Le Royal Monceau Raffles Paris. The property’s art concierge, Julie Eugene, who has a degree in contemporary art, takes visitors to Château de Vincennes, on the outskirts of Paris, to see “Noir Éclair,” an exhibition by the French street artist Zevs. There, Ms. Eugene leads them through the chateau, which was the heart of the French monarchy until the 17th century and was later used as a prison, to see his thought-provoking paintings, sculptures and videos, many of which are inspired by the castle’s history. (until Jan. 29, prices from 250 euros; hotel room rates from 780 euros).AdvertisementIn the Saint-Germain des Prés neighborhood on the city’s Left Bank, a customized shopping tour from Sacrebleu Paris is led by the company’s founder, Stephanie Boutet-Fajol. The itinerary includes stops at small apothecaries selling beauty products not available in the United States and boutiques stocked with clothes and accessories from up-and-coming French designers.(three and a half hours, 490 euros for up to three people).No trip to Paris is complete without a little gastronomic indulgence. Secret Food Tours has a nighttime food crawl of Montmartre and South Pigalle. Participants will visit a chocolatier to sample handmade confections, and pick up French cheeses from a fromagerie and sausages at a family-run butcher. The final stop is at a 200-year-old wine cellar, where all of these may be enjoyed with French wine (three hours, 89 euros, including food and wine).Another perspective of Montmartre is offered in the Stars, Cinema and Glamour in Paris tour from the travel company Meeting the French. In the last few years, Paris has been the backdrop for more than 900 film shoots, and on this walk through winding cobbled streets, visitors will see the locations where “Moulin Rouge,” “Midnight in Paris” and other famous movies were shot (two and a half hours, 85 euros a person).A version of this article appears in print on October 16, 2016, on Page TR2 of the New York edition with the headline: In Paris, Eight New Tours, From Art to Shopping.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.