
Heads Up By                     
NICHOLAS GILL

JUNE 2, 2017
Until a few years ago, I never spent any time during annual visits to Santiago, Chile, in the neighborhood of Lastarria, a well-heeled belle epoque-style residential district at the edge of downtown. I would gravitate instead to three central neighborhoods; a meal in Vitacura, a cocktail in Bellavista, and a stay in Providencia. Lastarria, a triangular barrio partly closed to traffic by Santa Lucía Hill to the west and Parque Forestal to the north, was off my radar. Lately, though, with a half-dozen hotels having opened in Lastarria in the last two years alone, not to mention dozens of new shops and restaurants, it’s where everyone wants to be.Lastarria’s winding cobblestone streets and regal architecture are a stark contrast to the glass-towered commercial districts to the east, where the majority of Santiago hotels are concentrated. It feels almost European at times, with charming coffeehouses like Colmado Coffee & Bakery, which added a full-service restaurant on the second floor a year ago, and wine shops dedicated to independent Chilean winemakers now opening at a dizzying pace. Boutique hotels have taken up space in many of the 19th-century buildings while still meeting contemporary demands like rooftop pools and LEED certification.A onetime intellectual enclave, Lastarria lost much of its luster over the last half-century as more modern suburbs rose farther away from the center, luring Lastarria’s wealthier residents. In 1997, it was designated a historic district by the city, encouraging the preservation of its architectural heritage. Many of the buildings were restored, and in 2002 an antiques and used-book market sprang up from Thursday through Sunday in the pedestrian-only Plaza Mulato Gil de Castro.In 2010, the Centro Gabriela Mistral, covered with weathering steel and reinforced concrete, opened and began attracting concertgoers and theatergoers, while other cultural attractions like the Museo de Arte Visuales also brought in crowds. The trickle of visitors has swelled to a river, and now much of the neighborhood offers some of the best people-watching in the city.AdvertisementÑam, Santiago’s annual culinary festival, has been using Lastarria’s streets and the adjacent castle-topped Santa Lucía Hill as its setting for the last four years. The 2017 festival, held in late March, attracted 45,000 to the neighborhood over four days. “Lastarria has more than six museums concentrated in 10 blocks, plus theaters, cinemas and exhibition halls,” said Rafa Rincón, a founder of the event. “At the same time there are about 25 restaurants, and we felt that we could be able to assist in their growth and foster the spirit of collaboration that Ñam pursued.”AdvertisementMost tourists never ventured to Lastarria as there was nowhere to stay. Aside from a couple of hotels in more bohemian Bellavista, most higher-end accommodations in Santiago usually meant some international chain in a shiny tower in Providencia or Las Condes, like the Ritz Carlton or W. Now the neighborhood is overflowing with options.They include the 14-room Lastarria Boutique Hotel, in a 1927 rowhouse with marble floors and a winding staircase, and the refined eight-room Luciano K, with a cast-iron elevator and rooftop lounge and a heated pool overlooking Parque Forestal. Just beyond the edge of the district, the 42-room Hotel Magnolia added three floors covered in a modern glass facade that tops an early-20th-century mansion, while on Plaza Mulato Gil de Castro is the 70-room Cumbres, with its eye-catching concrete facade, a ground-floor tapas bar and huge headboards featuring replicas of 19th-century paintings inspired by Chilean heritage.A few blocks away, the Singular Santiago is the second property from the luxe Chilean brand, which opened a Patagonia property in late 2011 inside a former wool-processing plant that is widely considered one of the continent’s best hotels.The Santiago location, a new building with a brick, stone and steel facade that blends with surrounding buildings, features a 3,000-square-foot spa, seasonal French restaurant and rooftop pool and bar with sweeping views of the city’s skyline.“It is a very vibrant neighborhood because it shows a new face of Santiago,” said Sabrina Tettamanti, the hotel’s general manager. “It’s more local, more genuine and very trendy.”A version of this article appears in print on June 4, 2017, on Page TR4 of the New York edition with the headline: In Santiago, the Rebirth of a Regal Neighborhood.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »