

      By SUZANNE MACNEILLE

SEPT. 7, 2017

With its urban forests, glassy downtown and energetic food scene, it’s easy to be captivated with this coastal city in British Columbia.
Related Article
It happens before you know it: Suddenly, you’re smitten with Vancouver — its endless coastline, glassy downtown, the extravagant nature that surrounds and permeates it. A recent article in the Vancouver Sun featured a 600-year-old Douglas fir in Stanley Park. Vancouver is that kind of place — a place where a tree is a celebrity. It’s also a food lover’s kind of place: You could spend days sampling local variations on everything from sushi to lasagna to vegetarian concoctions that can transform an heirloom tomato into something decadent, and barely scratch the surface of the constantly evolving restaurant scene. On the cultural front, a commitment to public art has turned some areas into sculpture gardens. And in this city of many ethnicities, First Nations art and culture are becoming more and more visible: A series of murals by indigenous artists has appeared around the city; a reconciliation totem was recently raised; traditional dance and other performances are staples on the cultural agenda; and museums highlight the art, history and environmental practices of Squamish, Tsleil-Waututh, Musqueam and other Pacific Northwest societies. 
Explore the map and find things to do in Vancouver.
Stanley Park is the oldest and largest of the more than 230 parks in Vancouver: 1,000 acres of forest, wetlands and beaches (and a few manmade attractions — among them, an aquarium and a handful of restaurants). On mild weekends, some areas are more hectic than bucolic; by mid-morning, swarms of bicyclists and skaters race around the park’s peripheral trail (the views, like the one near Siwash Rock, are spectacular). But most of the park is quiet, threaded with trails. On a recent guided walk (adult, 35 Canadian dollars, or about $28), Candace Campo, a First Nations co-owner of Talaysay Tours, identified salmon berry bushes, skunk cabbage and other plants, noting that taking “only what is needed” — for food, clothing, medicine and shelter — has long been a given in indigenous cultures.On the opposite end of the park spectrum is tiny Cardero Park, with its views across the harbor to the mountains beyond. Stroll east, past lawns where people hunch over books or picnics. Not far away, on West Pender Street, the Heritage Asian Eatery offers communal tables and a concise, pleasing menu. A plump bao stuffed with sautéed shiitake mushrooms and green and crispy onions (7 dollars) will hold you over until dinner.West Pender changes as you head east into an area that itself wavers, block by block, from trendy to seedy to touristy. Eventually, you’ll reach Chinatown, which has its gritty areas, but is also home to food markets, the serene Dr. Sun Yat-Sen Classical Chinese Garden, and (if you are in the neighborhood later) notable dinner restaurants like the Japanese-Italian Kissa Tanto and the equally stylish, perpetually crowded Bao Bei. Not far from the flaring tiled roofs of the Millennium Gate, a totem rises above Skwachays Lodge, an indigenous artists’ residence and boutique hotel. In the beautifully lit gallery, contemporary works draw on ancient images and beliefs — including sculpted pieces by Alex Mountain and Chris Sparrow.MacLeod’s Books is a vintage bookstore par excellence. Inside, pure, lovely, literary chaos awaits: precarious stacks and overstuffed shelves of history books, novels, rare editions of Kipling and Wilde, pamphlets on Chinook jargon and endless art tomes. Then wander into the nearby Gastown neighborhood, its narrow streets thick with shoppers, restaurant-seekers and the occasional panhandler. Yes, it’s touristy, but this is also the historic heart of the city, a place where loggers and seafaring types once communed. Amid the current frenzy, Purebread, a Whistler import, offers irresistible treats, like a thick slice of buttermilk coconut cake, which can be wrapped up for later.Watch the sky fade above False Creek from the quiet terrace at Ancora Waterfront Dining and Patio. The Japanese-Peruvian menu recently included crispy prawn causa with gold Yukon potatoes and swirls of avocado mousse; and sablefish in an aji panca glaze, with broccoli, charred eggplant and roasted pineapple and tomatillo salsa. Regional ice wines may be paired with desserts, like coconut  panna cotta. Dinner is about 100 dollars, with drinks.Denman Street is lined with restaurants, galleries and shops (make a note to stop by Ayoub’s Dried Fruits and Nuts later, for everything from Turkish delight to okra chips). Get a coffee and pastry to go at Delany’s Coffee House and head past the bronze statues of laughing men, collectively known as “A-maze-ing Laughter,” to English Bay. Find a comfortable log on the breezy beach, and eat breakfast to a soundtrack of waves and gulls.Rent a bike near English Bay, and go east on the waterside bike path, past the Inuit Inukshuk rock sculpture, a peaceful, somber AIDS memorial in the form of steel panels engraved with names, and other installations. Once you cross Burrard Bridge, keep close to the shore. Consider a visit to the Museum of Vancouver, with an in-depth, multi-media exhibition on Musqueam culture, and Kitsilano Beach Park, favored by families, view-seekers, occasional film crews (this is Hollywood North, after all) and admirers of big, frothy weeping willows (download a tree map at kitstreemap.com). Take a detour down residential streets; when you reach the 1865 Old Hastings Mill Store Museum, turn back, this time taking the long way around False Creek (keep an eye out for dragon boats). If you can face the crowds, Granville Island has many shops, galleries and excellent food stalls offering vegan Vietnamese food, fish and chips and more.Emily Carr, born in Victoria in 1871, was a devotee of Pacific Northwest nature and culture, and made it her life’s work to paint both. Through Dec. 3, “Emily Carr: Into the Forest,” at the Vancouver Art Gallery, focuses on her moody, swirling landscapes and trees. At the Bill Reid Gallery of Northwest Coast Art, another creative luminary is celebrated, along with other artists. Of Haida and Scottish-German descent, Mr. Reid mastered Haida craftsmanship and — using wood, stone, gold, silver and other materials — produced exquisite objects, from jewelry to monumental sculptures inspired by indigenous designs and myths.It’s not difficult to find a reason to hop on the Canada Line for the short trip to nearby Richmond with its largely Chinese population. There are temples, like the imperial-style International Buddhist Temple, which welcomes visitors; midday dim-sum feasts; and tea shops where you can find rare and expensive pu-erh teas. And then there is dinner at Chef Tony. Blazingly bright beneath elaborate light fixtures, the restaurant was recently filled with celebratory diners who were in no hurry to relieve the anxiety of those waiting outside. On one wall, a screen flashed through the menu: stewed pumpkin and short ribs, stir-fried sea cucumbers, fried purple rice with eel, and on and on. Expect to stay long and pay from 50 to 70 dollars for a feast.Back on the downtown waterfront, wander past hotels and bars, some offering live music. You might stop at the Fairmont Pacific Rim hotel for a drink at the pastel-hued, plant-filled Botanist, a glamorous new restaurant and bar, replete with a “cocktail lab” equipped with things like centrifuges and ice-sculpting tools. Or head a few blocks inland to the Royal Dinette’s small, smart bar run by Kaitlyn Stewart, who was recently named the World Class Bartender of the Year in Mexico City. As long as you’re at this excellent farm-to-table restaurant, order dessert — sparkling wine sorbet and fermented pear was a recent possibility — to accompany your Bidi Bidi Bom Bom (Don Julio Blanco tequila, Aperol, soju, pressed grapefruit, rosemary and Peychaud’s Bitters, 14 dollars).At Forage, a sleek little restaurant in the artsy West End Listel Hotel, just about everything is housemade, from the spiced pear jam to the candied bacon. A full breakfast is about 20 dollars. Afterward, stroll around the neighborhood. Vancouver has many wonderful buildings — from the Art Deco Marine Building to the Colosseum-like Central Branch of the Vancouver Public Library — but the West End is special, with its verdant streets and graceful heritage houses. An online map provides highlights.The wooded campus of the University of British Columbia holds many surprises: a suspended walkway through a forest canopy; a Japanese tea garden; a reconciliation pole by the Haida master carver James Hart; and a longhouse that serves as a student center. Near the water, the Museum of Anthropology (adult, 18 dollars) has thousands of First Nations artifacts (among many other holdings). The splendid Great Hall, with its soaring glass wall, is a powerful setting for canoes, carved poles, house posts and other traditional objects.On a pretty stretch of Robson Street, the Listel Hotel (1300 Robson Street, thelistelhotel.com) is an eco-friendly boutique hotel with contemporary and Northwest Coast art and furnishings throughout the property’s public spaces, guest rooms and suites. There are two restaurants: Forage, a farm-to-table restaurant, and Timber, a Canadian gastropub. Double rooms start at around 212 dollars in early October.Rosewood Hotel Georgia (801 West Georgia Street, rosewoodhotels.com/en/hotel-georgia-vancouver) near the Vancouver Art Gallery, is a historic 90-year-old hotel, with grand public spaces, a saltwater lap pool, spa, fitness center and, among its dining options, the elegant, contemporary Canadian Hawksworth Restaurant. There are 156 rooms and suites, starting at 499 dollars in October.Flight and Hotel information provided by Google.Prices represent a snapshot of low fares and rates for weekend trips.Advertisement