By ELAINE GLUSACMAY 15, 2017
Favorable exchange rates between the dollar and both the euro and the pound, along with expanded air routes linking the United States and Europe, are helping to bolster tourism to Europe this summer despite lingering concerns over security in the wake of terrorist attacks over the past two years.From high-end travel agencies, including Kipling & Clark, to more affordable trips offered by Globus, operators are reporting strong interest in travel to Europe. Among the Globus family of brands, which includes Cosmos and Monograms tours and Avalon Waterways river cruises, traffic in many European regions is up 30 percent this year over last.The airfare prediction app Hopper analyzed flight searches for the coming season and found that fares are down about 18 percent versus 2016, a drop it attributes to the growth of low-cost carriers and depressed fuel prices.“People are looking at their checkbook and saying, ‘How scared do I need to be, considering Europe is less expensive than it has been?’” said Jim Berkeley, founder and chief executive of the California-based travel agency Destinations & Adventures International.AdvertisementAs a growing feature of the travel landscape, security threats have ushered in a range of travel practices — from easy behavioral adjustments like dressing inconspicuously, to training in taking evasive action — that many experts endorse.Advertisement“Whether there’s a risk or not, you should put in place at least the basic procedures: Think ahead and be prepared,” said Christopher Hagon, managing partner of Incident Management Group, a Florida-based international security consulting firm.Pretrip planning for safety includes reading the Department of State’s travel alerts and warnings. The department issued an alert on May 1 for general European travel, which notes, “Extremists continue to focus on tourist locations, transportation hubs, markets/shopping malls, and local government facilities as viable targets.”Britain’s Foreign & Commonwealth Office publishes profiles, including threat evaluations, on 225 countries or territories.“I find those reports more intellectual, in depth and measured than the U.S. State Department site,” said Mr. Berkeley, who urges his clients to consult the British source.Thinking ahead may also involve purchasing travel insurance, particularly plans that cover trip cancellation, in case an incident arises between the time of booking and the time of travel, or trip interruption, when something occurs during travel.“You need to do the research on the insurance plan to make sure the insurance plan you buy covers a violent act or State Department warning, or that an incident doesn’t void your plan,” said Jason Clampet, co-founder and editor in chief of the travel news site Skift.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Travelers interested in learning to identify threats and mitigate risks from the pros can take a new online course that covers awareness and emergency response from AKE International, a global security firm that specializes in corporate travel and protecting high-net-worth individuals (the course costs about $65).Security experts and travel professionals advise being prepared when traveling abroad, including packing to maintain a low profile by leaving behind any flashy jewelry, short shorts and Yankees baseball caps. Experts also stress avoiding gatherings and large crowds.Advertisement“If there’s a demonstration, don’t watch and hang out,” Mr. Berkeley said. “Go the other way.”Additionally, travelers should practice basic awareness, which means paying attention to what’s happening as you step out of a hotel, restaurant or train station.“The biggest thing we find is that people are completely unaware not only of issues that occur in that destination, but unaware of what’s going on around them in public because they’re looking at their phone,” Mr. Hagon said.FoneTrac, a newly updated app from GlobalSecur (part of the Incident Management Group), delivers security alerts in the event of an emergency and monitors users’ locations by asking them to check in on a regular schedule with the tap of a button. A panic button summons immediate assistance. The basic service costs $12 a month, with more expensive options that include emergency medical support and evacuation coverage.When it comes to lodgings, some agents avoid booking their clients in American-associated hotels, such as Trump hotels, abroad.“We’ve started shifting to small boutique luxury properties. Terrorists may be looking for Western symbols,” said Randy Lynch, chief executive of Kipling & Clark. He also recommends dining in smaller, family-owned restaurants that are off the beaten track over larger or more lauded establishments.Self-interest meets pragmatism in tour operators who now advertise their services as including the provision of an ally on the ground, such as a tour director, to turn to in case of emergencies. Guides, drivers and, of course, friends can also fill this role. Travel agents, too, remain on call to assist clients.“It’s a new world out there, and we’re always one email or call away from clients to give our support and help make the best decisions,” said Michael Holtz, president of the travel agency SmartFlyer.A version of this article appears in print on May 21, 2017, on Page TR2 of the New York edition with the headline: Security Experts Urge Preparation When Traveling to Europe.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.