

 Stephanie Rosenbloom
 

THE GETAWAY
JULY 3, 2017
Summer in Walt Disney World is not just for children, as scores of baby boomers roaming the parks in mouse ears can attest.You can bar hop among theme hotels, like the Tambu Lounge at Disney’s Polynesian Village Resort or the Victoria Falls Lounge at Disney’s Animal Kingdom Lodge. You can dance to hits from the ’80s through today at the adults-only Atlantic Dance Hall on Disney’s BoardWalk; find your Zen during a deep-tissue massage at the Four Seasons Resort Orlando at Walt Disney World Resort; sample sushi at Morimoto Asia by the Iron Chef Masaharu Morimoto; and canoodle with your sweetheart on a monorail as it glides by the Magic Kingdom (for a five-course meal and cocktails with your ride, followed by fireworks, check out the Highway in the Sky Dine Around).Whatever brings you to the theme parks — your honeymoon, nostalgia, business travel, unfulfilled childhood fantasies — there’s plenty of grown-up fun to be had. Here, a few choice stops.Epcot has some of the most flavorful food, thanks to its various “countries” like Morocco and Mexico. Adults may want to grab a table at Restaurant Marrakesh, which serves dishes such as roast lamb and shish kebab, and Moroccan pastries, alongside belly dancers; and La Cava del Tequila, a cozy bar with more than 100 tequilas as well as specialty margaritas and tapas-style snacks.AdvertisementWhile you are in the park, Soarin’, one of the newer rides, raises you 40 feet in the air and simulates hang gliding in a 180-degree, 80-foot IMAX projection dome. With its technology and footage of breathtaking landscapes, it’s among the most grown-up attractions in Epcot.AdvertisementDisney has never been known for white-knuckle roller coasters, but this park offers a few thrills, both real and virtual.The Rock ’n’ Roller Coaster Starring Aerosmith has high speeds, loops and drops, all in the dark and set to the pulsing music of Aerosmith. Nearby, you can hear screams from riders of the Twilight Zone Tower Terror as they are hurled up and down in an abandoned hotel’s ghostly elevator.For something more subdued but nonetheless delightful thanks to clever technology and familiar “Star Wars” beings like C-3PO, there’s Star Tours — The Adventures Continue, a 3-D motion-simulated intergalactic “flight.” Technically, you are not going anywhere, but if you keep your eyes on the screen, it can sure feel as if you are.One the biggest coasters in Disney, Expedition Everest — Legend of the Forbidden Mountain, is in this theme park, but those who want something wild in another way can get up close and personal with all sorts of creatures.On Kilimanjaro Safaris you can ride on an open-air vehicle through a wildlife reserve where you may see baboons, cheetahs, elephants, giraffes, lions, warthogs and wildebeests. Adults may appreciate that the park offers nighttime safaris.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But the real draw this summer is Pandora —The World of Avatar, with rides such as Avatar Flight of Passage, where guests are made to feel as if they are flying on a banshee over the jungles of Pandora, and Na’vi River Journey, a trip through a fantastical bioluminescent rain forest.Who’s to say what’s for children? Plenty of grown-ups delight in posing for photos with the Disney characters they grew up watching or revisiting rides they experienced as children (or wish they had). That said, this is the park that feels most geared to little ones. Will you be scared in the Haunted Mansion? No. But it, as well as so-called “dark rides,” in which you sit in a motorized vehicle in a pleasantly climate-controlled space while gliding along a track on the ground or in the air (like Peter Pan’s Flight), can feel like a far-out lullaby for adults.Those who have not been to the Kingdom recently may want to check out the latest additions to Fantasyland, including the Seven Dwarfs Mine Train, a swaying roller coaster ride through the diamond mine from “Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs.” (Note: Lines for this can sink your heart; use FastPass+, the free service for ticketholders that allows you to book a specific entry time on certain attractions up to 30 days in advance of your visit — more if you have a Walt Disney World Resort hotel reservation.)AdvertisementYou need not be in a theme park to have a Disney experience. Disney’s BoardWalk is a lakeside quarter-mile stretch of restaurants, boutiques and entertainment venues where you can stop and play a carnival game or rent a Surrey bike. Adults will fare better at the restaurants there and in nearby hotels such as the Walt Disney World Swan and Dolphin than in the typical park restaurant. There’s also an ESPN Club for those who can’t bear to miss a game.For late-night fun there’s Atlantic Dance Hall, a nightclub that plays music from the 1980s to today, and Jellyrolls, a piano bar for those who enjoy singalongs. Both are open until the wee hours; for ages 21 and older.Disney’s BoardWalk allows adults to stroll along the water to Epcot and simply walk in, one of the most sane ways to get there. A path by the BoardWalk in the other direction leads to Hollywood Studios. Alternatively, you can take a breezy boat ride along the water; the boats make stops at both of the parks as well as area hotels.For more adult restaurants (like Morimoto Asia and the Dining Room at Wolfgang Puck Grand Cafe) and shopping (Zara, L’Occitane en Provence), there’s Disney Springs. This year, Springs is opening more restaurants including Planet Hollywood Observatory, with burgers and sandwiches by Guy Fieri, as well as Wine Bar George, with small plates and wines by the glass and bottle.Rainy day? After sundown? There is live music at House of Blues; an AMC movie theater with dinner while you watch; as well as Splitsville Luxury Lanes, where bites like grilled avocado and ahi tuna surpass the usual bowling alley fare.A version of this article appears in print on July 9, 2017, on Page TR3 of the New York edition with the headline: Disney World for the Biggest ‘Kids’.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »