By SHIVANI VORAJAN. 28, 2017
When it comes to winter hotel openings, the properties worth talking about tend to be either beach or ski resorts: What is more appealing come cold weather than basking in the sun or hitting the slopes? This season, however, ski resorts are not part of the new hotel hype, said Jack Ezon, the president of the New York City travel consultancy Ovation Vacations. “The most exciting openings are in seaside destinations, along with a handful of urban locations,” he said.Here are six noteworthy hotels accepting reservations as of this winter.Kimpton Hotels & Restaurants is behind Grand Cayman’s first new resort in almost a decade. Though parts of the open-air, 266-room property opened in November, it is now fully complete; amenities include two pools, a kids’ club, an 8,500-square-foot spa with a hammam, and three restaurants. The resort, Mr. Ezon said, brings much needed contemporary accommodations to Grand Cayman. “Many of the hotels on the island are stodgy, but the Kimpton is modern and should appeal to a younger demographic as well as families,” he said. Nightly rates start at $499; seafireresortandspa.com.The Israeli boutique hotel brand Brown Hotels adds a zip of modernity to the ancient city of Jerusalem with this 23-room property set in a picturesque 19th-century villa in the heart of the city. Amenities include a garden cafe, rooftop spa and terrace and an underground bar. The Brown is a fresh addition to the city’s hotel scene said Hannah Roth, the owner of the Washington-based travel company WhereToNext. “Hotels in Jerusalem tend to be bigger and more traditional, but this one promises to be hip,” she said. Nightly rates from $265; brownhotels.com.Situated on Providenciales’ Long Bay Beach, an area known for fantastic windsurfing and a coral reef steps from the shore, this 106-suite resort has a spa, three pools, three restaurants and a kids’ club cleverly located inside a treehouse. Valerie Wilson, the founder of the travel consultancy Valerie Wilson Travel, said that the Turks and Caicos has some of the best beaches to be found anywhere, and the Shore Club setting shows off the island’s beauty. Nightly rates from $775; theshoreclubtc.com.Travelers to China increasingly want to venture beyond Beijing and Shanghai, Ms. Wilson said, and the Anantara Guiyang gives them incentive to discover another part of the country. Set in the southwest, an area known for its thick forests and historical sites, the property has 218 spacious rooms, three restaurants, a yoga center, a 54-hole golf course and also offers activities like cooking classes and nature walks. Nightly rates from $116; guiyang.anantara.com.Two hospitality companies, the London-based Soho House & Co and the New York City-based Sydell Group, have collaborated to create this 11-floor hotel and members’ club in the City of London, near attractions such as St. Paul’s Cathedral. Set in a building designed by the English architect Sir Edwin Lutyens, known as Ned, in 1924, the hotel section of the Ned has 252 rooms, but guests get access to areas reserved for members including nine restaurants, a spa and rooftop pool. “You’ll get an insidery feel staying here because you’re immersed with locals,” Mr. Ezon said. Nightly rates from £250, about $312; thened.com.The luxury brand Auberge Resorts Collection will have a second resort in Los Cabos with this property, where the smallest of the 92 rooms is a sprawling 760 square feet. Though the amenities include spa treatment rooms with outdoor showers and myriad watersports on offer like stand-up paddle boarding, the big lure, Ms. Roth said, is the resort’s location on a protected cove with tranquil waters that guests can actually swim in — a rarity in Los Cabos because of the rough sea. Nightly rates from $575; chilenobay.aubergeresorts.com.A version of this article appears in print on January 29, 2017, on Page TR2 of the New York edition with the headline: New Lodgings With Wintertime Appeal.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.