AdvertisementSupported by5 PLACESBy Esha ChhabraIn design-centric Helsinki, Teurastamo’s red-brick buildings once housed slaughtered reindeers, pigs and cows. Today, this meatpacking district has transformed into an epicenter for the city’s creative class. Everyone from trendy millennials and stylish moms pushing strollers to Finnish bureaucrats have taken to perusing the shops highlighting Finnish-made products, eating at the many eclectic restaurants and frequenting the indie and electronic music festivals held there. Getting to the neighborhood just got easier too with EkoRent, a Zipcar-like start-up with a fleet of electric cars and parking and charging stations.This lovely lunch spot, which focuses on fresh, sustainably sourced produce, offers global tastes from sriracha pork to falafel dumplings. However, on Fridays it converts into a food festival, diving into the food cultures of far-off lands such as Korea or Mexico. Tyopajankatu 2 Bldg 1E; 358-50-339-5400; kellohalli.fi.At the heart of the neighborhood’s restoration is this culinary studio, which is part restaurant, part cooking school and part event space. Learn how to cook reindeer with lingonberries or foraged sorrels from the wilderness with dill flowers.Tyopajankatu 2 R1 E; 358-40-021-9921; flavourstudio.com.Benjamin Andberg, founder of Helsingin Kahvipaahtimo, wants Finns, who are reported to drink the most coffee per capita in the world, to start appreciating the finer tones of coffee. He began roasting beans about 20 years ago in a fry pan. Thankfully, in his new roaster at the slaughterhouse, he’s not burning beans but hand-roasting each batch. Try his famous blend No. 3 at the cafe near the roaster.Paijanteentie 29; 358-40-678-1301; helsinginkahvipaahtimo.com/en.Opened in 2014, the distillery features a selection of whiskies and gins that have garnered acclaim, particularly the Straight Rye whisky, which taps into the Nordic love for all things rye. Tastings are available at the distillery.Tyopajankatu 2a R3; 358-40-706-0388; hdco.fi.For Finnish specialties like tar-based shampoos, soaps made with salt from the Baltic Sea, essential oils for the sauna, and candles that evoke scents of a Nordic summer evening, head to this small business run by two men who became soap makers more than 20 years ago.Tyopajankatu 2 (2nd floor); 358-09-291-7414; osmia.fi.Advertisement