
In Transit By                     
SHIVANI VORA

MARCH 2, 2016
A NEW ‘DOWNTON ABBEY’ TOUR“Downton Abbey” is coming to a close this Sunday, but fans have the chance to relive the show with the new Tribute to Downton Abbey Tour, a nine-day private trip through England and Scotland showcasing some of the most recognizable filming locations of the series. A private guided tour of Highclere Castle, the grand estate that served as Downton Abbey in the show, is a highlight; the itinerary also includes afternoon tea at the Ritz London, where Lady Edith and Lady Rosamund dine; a walking tour in London to see sites from the show such as Lady Rosamund’s residence in Belgravia; visiting the village of Bampton in Oxfordshire where Lady Mary and Matthew Crawley were wed in Season Three; and a day at the 50,000-acre Inveraray Castle on the banks of Loch Fyne in Scotland, and the fictional location of Duneagle Castle, the home of the MacClare family and Lady Rose. Prices from $4,500 a person inclusive of accommodations, breakfast, private driver and guide throughout and tea at the Ritz.AND A ‘HOUSE OF CARDS’ HOTEL OFFERThe Jefferson, Washington, D.C., an upscale hotel in the heart of the city, has a new package timed to the launch of the fourth season of the Netflix series House of Cards, premiering March 4. Called Welcome to Our House (of Cards), it includes a two-night stay, in-room access to the first three seasons of the show, a barbecue breakfast of ribs, coleslaw and cornbread and a session with a trainer who will run with or can map out what is believed to be Claire Underwood’s running route in the city; Ms. Underwood is a main character in the series and played by the actress Robin Wright Penn. Available until March 31. Prices from $706 for two people per night.FOOD FESTIVAL, GOLDEN GATE VIEWIt’s a food festival with views of the Golden Gate Bridge: From March 11 to 13, Cavallo Point Lodge in Sausalito, Calif., will host the second annual 2016 Lexus Culinary Classic. The three-day festival includes six different events featuring prolific chefs and showcasing wines from 20 California vintners. Four chefs — Michelle Bernstein from the Thompson Miami, Mauricio Luna from XV Beacon in Boston, John Cox from Post Ranch Inn in Big Sur and Justin Everett from Cavallo Point — will prepare a multicourse menu for the opening night dinner; other events include a brunch paired with sparkling wine, a four-course dinner paired with classic American cocktails and a tasting on the final day of small bites and wines from the festival’s chefs and winemakers. Tickets for the events may be purchased individually. Prices from $100.A GULFSTREAM JET TO MIAMI — AND A HOTEL ON THE BEACHA ride on a Gulfstream jet from New York City to Miami followed by a luxury hotel stay on the beach — that’s the idea behind the Setai One-Click Miami Weekend, a collaboration between the aviation company Blade and the Setai, an upscale property in Florida’s South Beach. It’s bookable through the Blade smartphone app and available on weekends through April 15; included are a round-trip flight from Westchester County Airport to Miami-Opa Locka Executive Airport on a 12-seater Gulfstream jet where guests are served cuisine created by the chef Todd English, a two-night stay in a suite at the Setai, round-trip helicopter transfers to Westchester County Airport from Blade’s Manhattan lounge and airport transfers in a Bentley in Miami. Prices from $4,500.A WINE HARVEST PACKAGE IN ARGENTINAThe harvest season for wine in Argentina happens in early April this year, and oenophiles can get in on the action with the Harvest Weekend package from Entre Cielos, a hotel and winery in Argentina’s Mendoza region. Available from April 1 to 4, it includes accommodations for three nights, airport transfers, the chance to pick wine grapes along with the professional pickers, a picnic lunch in the vineyard accompanied by wine, a wine dinner, a traditional Argentine barbecue dinner, a treatment at the property’s spa and a tour and tasting of another winery in the area. Prices from $2,950 for two.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »