AdvertisementSupported byIn TransitBy Shivani VoraHotels in the Caribbean and Mexico are being hit with room cancellations in the wake of the Zika virus. But these cancellations are not just in Zika-affected areas.Marco Franck, the general manager of the luxury resort Amanyara in the Turks and Caicos, a Zika-free destination, said that the hotel had a number of cancellations in February, typically a busy month, because of the virus.“What we’re seeing is that travelers hear about Zika being in the Caribbean and think all of the Caribbean is impacted and cancel their plans,” he said.Properties are responding to the dip in occupancy by offering deals during their peak season. None are being promoted as Zika deals; some, such as those from the Gansevoort and Ritz-Carlton hotels, are annual offers being introduced earlier than usual.Graeme Benn, the vice president for sales and marketing for Ritz-Carlton hotels in the Caribbean, said the incentives are meant to entice travelers to book a stay.“We want to help keep the Caribbean in people’s minds for a getaway,” he said.Here are seven such offers:At the Cape, a Thompson Hotel in Los Cabos, Mexico, travelers get a fourth night free through Dec. 18. Also, those who call the hotel and book 60 days in advance of their stay get 30 percent off their room rate. Nightly rates from $399.At Gansevoort Dominican Republic, guests get the fifth night free through March; thereafter, they get the fourth night free. At Gansevoort Turks and Caicos, guests get a fifth night free through March 9; after April 4, the fourth night is free. Also, travelers who book a stay at the Turks and Caicos property through a Virtuoso agent get a $100 food and beverage credit and room upgrade, provided space is available. Nightly rates from $595.Amanyara  in the Turks and Caicos has sweetened its Winter Getaway offer; it used to be applicable for a four-night stay and include daily breakfast and one dinner, but it’s now available in a three-night version. Guests who book for four nights get dinner daily in addition to breakfast. Valid through March 16. Prices from $1,750 a night. Also, from April 4 through May 31, the property has the three-night Sojourn package that includes breakfast and dinner daily, one lunch and sunset cocktails and canapés one evening. Prices from $1,500 a night.Malliouhana, an Auberge Resort in Anguilla, has a Winter Escape package; it includes a fifth free night, $300 resort credit, daily breakfast and nonmotorized watersports such as snorkeling and kayaking. Valid through March 31. Prices from $750 a night.The Ritz-Carlton  has seven hotels in the Caribbean and Mexico: Cancún, Los Cabos, Aruba, Grand Cayman, St. Thomas and two in Puerto Rico — in San Juan and Dorado Beach, a Ritz-Carlton Reserve. All have stay-longer, save-more offers although the amount varies by property. Guests who book a stay at the Cancún property, for example, get a 25 percent discount off their room rate on a four-night stay, 30 percent off for five nights and 40 percent off for seven or more nights. The luxurious Dorado Beach is offering 30 percent off room rates for stays between five and seven nights. Nightly rates for regular Ritz properties start at $399; for Dorado Beach the starting rate is $799. Carlisle Bay  in Antigua is offering guests 30 percent off their room rates when they stay four nights or more. Daily breakfast and afternoon tea and water and land activities are included. Valid between April 18 and Nov. 30. Nightly rates from $725. Those who book by May 31 get rates from $495 a night in an ocean-view balcony suite.Casa de Campo Resort and Villas  in the Dominican Republic has the Spring into Action package. Guests get either the fourth night free or pay for five nights and stay for seven. A daily $100 resort credit is included in both. Guests who book a villa receive a $300 resort credit daily. Nightly rates from $300. Valid through April 25.Advertisement