AdvertisementSupported byBy Shivani VoraHurricanes Irma and Maria upended life in the Caribbean and beyond, wreaking havoc on islands stretching from Barbuda to Puerto Rico. The scale of the damage is still being determined, but many islands in a region that draws the jet set for fall and winter getaways were largely unscathed. In fact, nearly 70 percent were not damaged by the hurricanes and are eager to delicately tout that they’re open for business, according to Frank Comito, the chief executive officer of the Caribbean Hotel Association, an organization that represents hotels and tourism-related businesses in 32 Caribbean destinations. (The organization has created a site, caribbeantravelupdate.com, where travelers can learn the latest on travel to the Caribbean).Beach getaways are no superficial affair in the Caribbean and the neighboring Lucayan Archipelago, where many islands rely on tourism. Spending by vacationers in this currently beleaguered region will determine its economic future. Below are five islands that are open for business, along with an affordable and high-end hotel package for each.  The hurricanes didn’t completely spare the Bahamas, a 100,000 square-mile nation comprised of 700 islands: according to Joy Jibrilu, the director general of the Bahamas Ministry of Tourism, Irma destroyed some islands not known to tourists, such as Ragged Island, which saw total devastation. “The islands that see tourists were mostly untouched,” she said. One example is New Providence, home to the city of Nassau, which is a big tourist draw.The Splurge: One & Only Ocean Club, situated on Nassau’s Paradise Island, has the Sweet Family Escape. It includes accommodations, a family picnic, three of hours of babysitting, free meals for kids at the resort’s restaurants, Dune and Ocean Grill, or through room service, and daily milk and cookies for kids. From $765 a night. Book by emailing reservations@oneandonlyoceanclub.com or calling 888-528-7157.The Steal: Grand Hyatt Baha Mar, part of the 1,000-acre Baha Mar resort, has a Sunshine on Sale deal, where guests pay for three nights and receive the fourth night free. From $219 a night before the discount. Call 242-788-1234 for more details and to book.This southern Caribbean island of 110,000 people is a less than a five-hour nonstop flight from the East Coast and had no physical impact from the two storms. According to the chief executive officer of the Aruba Tourism Authority, Ronella Tjin Asjoe-Croes, vacationers to Aruba will find world-class snorkeling and diving and a flourishing dining scene of more than 300 restaurants. “We have more than 90 nationalities living on the island, and the cuisine here, including Italian, Dutch and Indian spots, reflects this diversity,” she said.The Splurge: Bucuti & Tara Beach Resort has a five-night package that includes accommodations, breakfast, two yoga sessions and a session with the resort’s nutritionist. From $2,805 for two people. Valid from now until March 31. Book by calling 888-428-2884 or emailing info@bucuti.com.The Steal: Amsterdam Manor Beach Resort Aruba has a Deluxe Romance package. It includes accommodations in a studio room; a bottle of Champagne as a welcome amenity; an in-room breakfast with Champagne; a dinner for two at the resort’s restaurant, Passions on the Beach; a private sunset cruise; and two bath robes. From $260 per person, per night. Valid from Dec. 22 to Dec 21, 2018. Book by calling 800-969-2310. Mr. Comito, of the Caribbean Hotel Association, said that the three Cayman Islands saw no impact whatsoever from Irma and Maria. Grand Cayman is especially popular with vacationers. “There’s incredible diving, and it’s easy to get to with lots of airlift from the U.S.,” Mr. Comito said. The Splurge: Kimpton Seafire Resort + Spa has the Five Diamonds for Fall package: guests who book a five-night stay in a one-bedroom suite receive five amenities including a welcome amenity of a bottle of sparkling wine and macarons; an hourlong massage at the property’s spa; a three-course dinner for two, along with a bottle of wine, at the property’s main restaurant, Ave; a poolside cabana for a half-day with a bucket of five local craft brews; and a turndown amenity on the last night of a sting ray pendant and five truffles. From $1,555 a night. Bookable starting September 25 for stays through December 18. Book by calling 888-226-4412.The Steal: Sunshine Suites Resort has a Bring the Kids deal: families stay in a room with a full kitchen and receive breakfast daily for up to four people. Kids who are under eight years old eat lunch and dinner for free, when they are accompanied by a paying adult. A second room can be booked at half-off the price of the first room. Nightly rates from $162. Valid through December 21. Book by calling 877-786-1110.Like many of the islands in the Southern Caribbean, St. Lucia was not at all impacted by the two hurricanes. “Our hotels and businesses are all open and ready to welcome visitors,” said the island’s Prime Minister, Allen Chastanet. JetBlue has nonstop flights to the island from New York’s John F. Kennedy International Airport, and a handful of carriers offer connections through Miami.The Splurge: Jade Mountain Resort has a five-night Total Romance package, which includes accommodations, all meals; most alcoholic and nonalcoholic drinks; airport transfers; a welcome amenity of two cocktails; a one-hour massage per person; a scuba diving lesson for two people; a bottle of Champagne; a guided snorkeling boat trip; and a half-day sailing trip. From $9,732. Valid from January 3 to April 15, 2018. Book by calling 1-800-223-1108.The Steal: Bay Gardens Inn has a special nightly rate through April 2018 that includes daily breakfast, a welcome drink of rum punch, nonmotorized water sports and six one-hour passes to Splash Island, a water park located near the property. From $85 a night. The property also has a rate inclusive of all meals and alcoholic drinks which starts at $225 a night. Book by calling 877-620-3200. Why go Jamaica? “Why not?” said Donnie Dawson, the island-nation’s interim director of tourism. “We have miles of white sand beaches, a rich reggae music culture and lots of delicious epicurean finds,” he said. At roughly 4,400 square-miles, the island is about the size of the state of Connecticut, and is a three-and-a-half hour nonstop flight from New York.The Splurge: Rockhouse Hotel, in Negril, has the three-night “Fully Loaded” package for two people. It includes accommodations, a spa treatment a day per person for a total of three treatments for each guest, a welcome amenity of a bottle of Champagne and daily yoga classes. From $930 for two people. Book online through rockhouse.com.The Steal: Sunscape Cove Montego Bay, in Montego Bay, is an all-inclusive resort: stays include accommodations, all meals, snacks and alcoholic beverages, an in-room minibar stocked with a variety of drinks, all water activities, access to the kids club and gratuities. Nightly rates from $397; some rooms can accommodate four people. Call 866-786-7227 for more details and to book.Advertisement