By JOHN L. DORMANDEC. 1, 2016
When the food writer Andrew F. Smith had an idea for a new book on New York City, he went for an intriguing angle. “We preserve the homes of people who were born here and later became famous, and we preserve all sorts of artwork,” he said, “but people don’t think about preserving a city’s food heritage, which was something that was missing in New York.”His idea resulted in the book “Savoring Gotham: A Food Lover’s Companion to New York City,” which he edited. The topics range from the culinary history of the Lower East Side to the emergence of Automats, where food was dispensed to patrons through small vending windows.Below are edited excerpts from an interview with Mr. Smith.Q. “Savoring Gotham” is an ambitious delve into the city’s food and history. What led you to edit such a book?A. I really became interested in New York City food in 1991, with the closure of the Horn & Hardart [Automat]. To me, this was something that was symbolic of New York City food, so when it closed it seemed as though something was lost. Over the course of 20 years, I collected a lot of material about the history and culture of the city’s food system. I previously wrote “New York City: A Food Biography,” which was published in 2013, but that contained just small a fraction of the material that I collected, so I went to the publisher and said that we really need an encyclopedia of New York City. They’d never done anything like that before, and it took about a year to convince them that it was something that merited their attention.With the proliferation of chain stores and higher operating costs in the city, what is the challenge of restaurants opening in the future?AdvertisementI live in Brooklyn and it’s great. There are many new start-ups here. This is the place to come if you want good food. When I moved to New York, much of Manhattan was decaying. It was relatively easy to open up mom-and-pop shops. Today, every inch of real estate in Manhattan is going sky-high with condo construction, so it is not going to be easy for smaller operations.What New York neighborhoods have impressed you with their food offerings? From Park Slope, Brooklyn, west to Manhattan, there must be at least 300 or 400 new places that have opened up recently, and many of them are excellent. Bushwick, Brooklyn, is another place where you can walk around, and there are incredible places opening. Once you get out of the really expensive restaurants in Manhattan, you have ethnic restaurants that are opening from virtually every group. There must be 180 or more different food groups in the city, and the vast majority are in the outer boroughs [Brooklyn, Queens, the Bronx and Staten Island]. You can get good Ethiopian and excellent Afghan food farther out into the city.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Who makes your favorite cheesecake in the city?Junior’s. It’s a Brooklyn establishment. I’ve been going there for 30 years and it has become a tradition for me.AdvertisementLet’s say someone is in New York for a short trip. What are three food places they have to try? I love New York’s ethnic diversity, so I would strongly encourage them to go to an ethnic establishment to have cuisine that they haven’t sampled before. I would certainly encourage them to go to some of the more expensive restaurants. Lastly, they should go to a food truck. Some people turn up their noses at trucks because they don’t want to think of them as purveyors of good food, but I think this is one of the more interesting trends going on in New York.A version of this article appears in print on December 4, 2016, on Page TR2 of the New York edition with the headline: Andrew F. Smith on New York City’s Food Heritage.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.