
Bites By                     
MICHAEL KAMINER

JUNE 2, 2017
Before he became a global brand, Yotam Ottolenghi introduced Londoners to modern Israeli food — a minor trend that has become a phenomenon. His culinary disciples have carried the flag with smart Middle Eastern restaurants like Honey & Co., Jago and Berber & Q.Bala Baya, a restaurant, bakery and bar, open since January in the buzzing Bankside neighborhood, is the latest and hippest.Its chef, Eran Tibi, a Tel Aviv-born former tech executive who studied at London’s Le Cordon Bleu, worked under Mr. Ottolenghi for four years. His mentor’s influence shines through Bala Baya’s brawny spins on Mediterranean street food. And crowds are lining up in the narrow alleyway outside the restaurant for extravagantly flavored dishes that transcend their humble roots.“This food came from Israel, spread its wings and became part of London,” Mr. Tibi said. Fittingly, Bala Baya’s logo is a winged camel.Afternoon is your best bet to experience Bala Baya without endless waits — the restaurant’s £20 lunch menu is also one of London’s best values. During a recent visit, I tasted luscious, nutty hummus with zippy lemon salsa; yogurt-bathed cauliflower roasted to snappy softness with sumac and pomegranate; and freekeh-stuffed peppers with subtle, sweet-tart sour cherries.AdvertisementLunch comes with a house-made take on gazoz, the beloved fizzy drink, reformulated here with herbs and botanicals into palate-tingling refreshers. Mine, infused with quince and fennel, was bright, clean and mildly vegetal.AdvertisementSpiked with prosecco, the soda also resurfaces on a cocktail menu designed by Ali Reynolds, a star of the city’s mixology scene. The drinks menu, too, draws on Israeli produce: An artichoke julep, for example, is made with sharp Cynar liqueur and pink grapefruit juice.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.At dinnertime, Bala Baya gets warmly boisterous, and Mr. Tibi rolls out more elaborate creations like plump whole sea bass with fennel, burnt sage, lemon and anise. “So simple to cook, but so complex in flavor,” he said.Working with Afroditi Krassa, a Greek-born designer based in London, Mr. Tibi transformed an empty archway under an active railway line near Southwark station into an airy, Bauhaus-riffing fantasy that conjures his hometown; trains still rumble overhead. Along with tableware from a Jaffa flea market and breeze blocks for an intricate upstairs wall, Mr. Tibi imported bright terrazzo slabs from a Haifa factory. “I wanted to walk on floors that remind me of home,” he said.His brashest import, though, may be the gleaming pita oven in his open kitchen. Jagum, the Israeli manufacturer that built equipment for his father’s Tel Aviv bakery, created a souped-up version for Mr. Tibi. The oven can crank out more than 1,000 warm, pillowy pitas an hour; that should come in handy as Mr. Tibi follows Mr. Ottolenghi’s footsteps into wholesale and retail later this year.Bala Baya, Arch 25, Old Union Yard Arches, 229 Union Street; 44-20-8001-7015; balabaya.co.uk. Average lunch for two, without drinks or tips, is £20, about $26.A version of this article appears in print on June 4, 2017, on Page TR11 of the New York edition with the headline: Israeli Street Food in an English Kitchen.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »