
MAY 16, 2017

I'd like to thank everyone who participated in today's summer travel Q&A;! Check out all the questions and answers below, and follow me on Twitter @frugaltraveler to keep track of all my adventures. Thanks for participating and see you next time! -- Lucas
Any go-to travel accessories that make your life easier when traveling?This might sound funny, but it’s saved me endless grief: A belt with a sturdy plastic buckle. It was the number one thing that set off the metal detectors at airports for me, and having the non-metal buckle, along with TSA Pre-check, has made getting through security lines a usually painless experience.Another indispensable tool is a portable phone charger -- you can get on Amazon for about $10. It’s saved my hide plenty of times.Any tips for solo travelers? What to pack, what to avoid, how to meet locals?The Uber-fication of the hotel industry has some people complaining that Airbnb takes away housing from the residents who need it most. That being said, I’ve found it (and sites like it) extremely useful traveling overseas, especially to get a local perspective. More often than not, like during my trip to New Zealand, I’ve found that my host is more than willing to share their wisdom and expertise about the area. And when I haven’t done that, I find that you can get some pretty good interactions by treating people like experts in their own city. An unfortunate reality of traveling internationally is that, in certain parts of the world, solo women travelers are more likely to face harassment. Always use your common sense and if a situation feels wrong or uncomfortable, get out of it as quickly as you can. Finally: pack light. Always. Take much less than you think you need.My question refers to paying for items abroad. I understand that it is important to have some local currency on hand for casual purchase such as food and public transportation. When an option, are there certain times when you choose to use your credit card instead of exchanging your money?Great question! I always try to use a card, when possible, as many cards offer purchase and travel protection if something goes wrong. However, it’s important to always have a bit of cash with you at all times — in some countries, it’s more important than in others. In Cuba, for example, it’s very difficult to use an American credit card, and ATMs are not readily available. It’s important, in those cases, to bring as much cash as you’ll need for the entire trip — not the most comfortable situation, but better than running out of money. I recently stayed in an eco-lodge (check out next week’s column!) in Costa Rica that only accepted cash. In that case, too, I had to carry sufficient cash to pay for my stay. Be prepared, and make sure your credit card doesn’t have a foreign transaction fee — otherwise you might get a nasty surprise when your billing statement comes and you find 3-percent surcharges added to all your purchases.When searching for flights, hotels, and a rental car — or any combination of the three — do you find that bundling together saves more than combining individual deals?Funny you should ask! I recently did a little experiment, which I outline in this column from a few weeks ago. I was wondering the same thing: can you expect to save a ton of money by booking a package? The answer is: Sometimes. Big travel sites rarely have flexibility with flights, but they have enormous flexibility with hotel rooms, because they buy huge blocks of rooms and then sell them at deep discounts. It’s worth it, if you’re booking a trip, to check out packages but also find out what you’d pay by booking the separate parts individually — sometimes the savings are not what you’d expect.Car rentals seem crazy expensive over the summer. What's the best way to get a good deal on a rental? What websites should I be searching?There’s no perfect site to look for car rentals — any of the big aggregators will do the trick. Priceline, Expedia, and Hotwire are good options, and now Kayak and Skyscanner have gotten in on the action. Should you book directly with the company? You can, but I’ve almost never been in the situation where it’s cheaper to do so. I like Priceline because you can bid on cars — I’ve gotten some pretty good deals that way. If you’re truly looking for a bargain, you can do what I did when I went to Maui and check for local rent-a-car businesses — I went to a local company called Aloha Maui Vans and rented an old Ford Taurus with about 90,000 miles on it. Was it luxury? No, but it did the job, was cheaper than the major rental companies, and made it so I didn’t stick out like a sore thumb in a shiny new car — I felt like more of a local.What is a good travel insurance company that you use? What is the major differences between them and do you use it yourself?Travel insurance is tricky — while I can’t advocate for a particular company, Travelex and Allianz are a couple of the big ones. Obviously, no one wants to be medevac-ed off of a mountain by helicopter and then be stuck with a huge bill. It’s important to realize, though, that the chances of that happening are relatively low. (If you are going to be doing some extreme sports, though, companies like World Nomads will insure that.) While trip interruption/cancellation insurance can be extremely useful, your credit card may actually provide some of those benefits, so inquire before you go and always read the fine print. Or call the company and get very clear answers on what’s reimbursed. I once bought an Allianz policy to ask about trip interruption insurance for a missed connection and was informed that they would cover it — but only if I had planned my trip so that there would be at least three hours between my two flights. Who purposely plans their trips with three-hour layovers? More useful information in this article.Do you ever wonder what a laptop ban would mean for you and your many travels?I think about this a lot. Larger electronics like laptops have been banned from direct flights to the U.S. from ten cities in mostly Muslim nations, and now extending the ban to all of Europe is currently on the table. Obviously, this would be a huge inconvenience to anyone who travels for work or likes to be productive on a plane. Not only that, but having to check an expensive laptop is not an ideal situation, and will likely lead to many more cases of broken electronics. Not even an iPad would be a workaround -- those won't be allowed, either. While I obviously won't stop traveling to Europe, it will affect my plans. I'll most likely buy a Chromebook or "beater" laptop I can put in a checked bag so that if it gets lost or stolen, it isn't the end of the world. It’s also possible to attach a bluetooth keyboard to an iPhone, but the idea of having to write something substantial on a screen that small has my eyes feeling strained already, and won’t work for people who work in multimedia or need a larger screen.Is it true that there's a special day of the week (or time of day) that's best to buy tickets? Or is that an urban myth?Is there an optimal day or timeframe in which to buy air tickets? The short answer is: no. The long answer is: it’s complicated. As my colleague Stephanie Rosenbloom points out, there are some data points that might suggest it’s optimal to buy your tickets around two months or so in advance. I’ve found from personal experience, however, that you never really can predict flight prices. The best thing to do is set an “alert” for a particular route (on an aggregator site like Kayak, for example) and then have them do the work for you: You’ll get emails notifying you of flight price changes. Also, it goes without saying that it’s more important to pay attention to when you fly as opposed to when you buy your ticket. Flying the Sunday after Thanksgiving? You’re pretty much guaranteed to pay an arm and a leg. If you can wait until Monday or Tuesday, however, the price will be much more palatable.Hey Lucas! I'm constantly spending time to keep an eye out on like a million different websites for cheap flights to two or three cities I want to visit this year. Do you have any tips for keeping track of flight prices to specific places? Friends have recommended Kayak before but I'd love to hear if you have any advice. Thank you!!I like Skyscanner -- that also gives price alerts. I also like that you can use the site to look for the cheapest flights from a given airport (say, JFK) to anywhere in the world. You can enter JFK as your departure point and then put "anywhere" or "europe" in the destination.What is the best day and best sites to buy tickets out of the Bay Area?There aren't really hard and fast rules to when to buy tickets anymore -- buying on a Tuesday, for example, isn't always guaranteed to get you a cheaper fare. My colleague Stephanie Rosenbloom addresses this in her article here. One of the takeaways is that you may actually have to purchase tickets farther ahead than you might think -- nearly two months according to some Expedia data. However, as you can see in my flight hack tips article here. That rule doesn't always apply across the board. Sometimes you can find some excellent deals at the last minute -- if you have the stomach for it!I think some people are over-reacting in not traveling to Cairo, Istanbul and Baghdad, places that are on my bucket list. And yet I also hear that others are still traveling there and having grest trips. Are there special precautions or research you need to do before you go? I would imagine that this would be a frugal  time to travel to some of these places.I would tend to agree with you on Cairo and Istanbul (though I would urge extreme caution with Baghdad — I’m not sure that Iraq is the best place to take a holiday right now) — while vigilance is always necessary, ceasing travel to and isolating countries that face the threat of terrorism is counterproductive. Whether you’re in Paris or Istanbul, the sad reality is that something could always happen — the chances are low, but they’re real. Death from a terror attack is not something to take lightly, but it’s important to be realistic about the odds of it actually happening, and the risks that many people take in their everyday lives, like driving a car. Istanbul and Cairo are offering some particularly good deals right now -- a quick look on Hotels.com shows me some wonderful hotels available for around $30 per night or less.What's your favorite airport?Bob Hope Airport in Burbank, Calif. Hands down the easiest and most pleasant flying experiences I have are at this tiny, tiny airport.Are tropical destinations like Florida keys or Cancun worth considering in the summer months?They are! Although the sweet spot is really March through May for places like the Florida Keys — outside of the winter high season and not yet into the summer months, which, while it’s quite hot weather-wise, is still a popular time to visit thanks to school vacations. I currently see flights to Key West from the East Coast in the $300 range, and there are hotels around $190 per night.Montreal and Quebec City -- thoughts? Also, planning travel with disabled/senior folks?Why not do both? While summer is not sugar shack season, there’s always plenty to do in Montreal (here’s 36 Hours in Montreal) and Quebec City is a very easy drive (read my editor Dan Saltzstein’s story on culture in Quebec City, and last year’s 36 Hours column). Better yet — take the train. One-ways start at just 33 Canadian dollars. Traveling with persons with disabilities can present challenges, but nothing that can’t be overcome. My primary tip is to plan ahead, far in advance. Outside the U.S., hotels sometimes only have a couple of accessible rooms that can book out far in advance. Another solution might be to take a tour. Tour operators like Sage Traveling specialize in accessible travel.What's the best area to stay in New York City? In terms of its distance to food and tourist attractions? Thanks!Brooklyn isn't the strongest New York borough, food-wise, but I'm partial to it because of its relative cheapness (staying in Manhattan can be extremely expensive) and it also has some great destinations: the Grand Army farmer's market, Sahadi's on Atlantic Avenue, and good Chinese food in Sunset Park. I was able to stay with a family in Prospect Heights relatively cheaply through Airbnb, and access to lower Manhattan (and its great restaurants) is very easy from there. If you do want to stay in Manhattan, you'll find some of the better deals in Midtown -- but then you have to stay in Midtown. Read more in my column on frugal Brooklyn.I'll be booking my first Airbnb on an upcoming trip to Barcelona -- do you have any suggestions on a neighborhood to stay in and accommodation contingencies if the host cancels the reservation last minute?Great question, and be sure to follow my column over the next few weeks, as a Barcelona piece is currently in the works! Staying in the Gothic Quarter or El Raval will put you in the center of the action — but you’ll definitely pay for it. I stayed in the Sant Marti neighborhood — cheaper, but further away from most of the attractions. It wasn’t a huge problem — I just did quite a bit of walking and took the bus a lot. Last-minute Airbnb cancels by the host are the exception, not the rule, but it certainly happens. Have a backup plan, but don’t worry about it too much. Try to book with a “superhost” or someone with great reviews, and you’ll probably be just fine. Worst case scenario, if the cancellation is particularly egregious, take it up with Airbnb and they may compensate you for any extra costs you incur due to the cancellation.Hmmm, what's a good frugal foodie destination in Europe? (Unoriginal, but I'm genuinely interested in your answer.)Imagine sidling up to a small round table in a tiny, quaint cafe where the walls are loaded with bottles of liquor, stacked cheeses, jars of olives, and tins of smoked fish, ordering a small mondadito, a small sandwich with spiced pulled pork, and glass of good wine for 2 euros. Now imagine doing that once every three hours throughout the day. You’re in Spain! Spain is  heaven for anyone who likes to eat and drink cheaply — from the tapas to the pintxos of Barcelona, you simply can’t beat the food culture — small bites of cured fish, peppers, olives, and smoked ham and chorizo for a very reasonable price, and the wine (or fortified wines, if you happen to be in the Sherry region — a place I may currently be writing about) flows freely like a mountain stream. And if you ask Spaniards where they like to vacation to eat and drink cheaply, they’ll say: go to Portugal -- it’s even cheaper. (Look out for a couple of Frugal columns on Spain, coming in a few weeks.)Have you ever been in Lima, Peru, and eaten at its street carts?What a coincidence! I was just in Lima and, yes, I did indulge in their street food. The anticuchos (beef heart skewers) I had in the Barranco neighborhood were particularly good, as was the fresh juice I enjoyed closer to the main square. As always — be careful with street food. If you have a delicate stomach, don’t do it — just don’t. It’s not worth getting sick and ruining your vacation. If you’re feel adventurous, however, you could try some of the cooked food (like the skewers I had). Fresh fruits, vegetables, dairy, etc., are delicious, but are much more of a risk.I know it is late in the year but I want to go on a safari to Kenya and Tanzania in August. I am getting quotes over $10,000 per person. How can i do it more cheaply?Safaris are tricky, especially in the summer high season. As Shivani Vora pointed out in a recent Travel Tips column, you can get significant discounts if you plan a safari between December and March. If you have to do summer, however, there are a few things to keep in mind, some of which are outlined here in this article by my Frugal Traveler predecessor Seth Kugel, who managed to stay in a park in South Africa for roughly $100 per day (excluding airfare, of course). Don’t cut too many corners, however: paying for a knowledgeable tour guide is, I would argue, a worthwhile expense and can greatly enrich your experience. Try not to do too much: focus on one park in one country, and really get to know it. Airfares are another story — finding flights to sub-Saharan Africa from the States will most likely cost you over $1000 round-trip.Designed by Umi Syam. Produced by Benjamin Koski, Dan Saltzstein and Sona Patel.Advertisement