AdvertisementSupported byUpdateBy Shivani VoraAfter Hurricane Irma, tourist attractions and hotels in Orlando and Savannah are once again open for business and welcoming visitors — for the most part, at least.Orlando’s tourism districts sustained minimal damage from the storm, according to Becca Bides, the vice president of communications for Visit Orlando, the official tourism association for the Orlando region. “We mostly had debris from trees, which was quickly cleared, and also had some power outages, but recovered within a day,” she said.According to Ms. Bides, Visit Orlando’s staff contacted several hundred tourism businesses this week, including hotels, restaurants and attractions and determined that the vast majority of them are open. “Our destination is as vibrant as ever,” she said.The organization’s site has a link, VisitOrlando.com/hurricane, where travelers can see exactly which attractions are up and running and which ones aren’t.Walt Disney World’s six parks were closed Sunday and Monday, but the four theme parks reopened with regular operating hours by Tuesday, said Jacquee Wahler, a spokeswoman for Disney. One water park, Blizzard Beach, is open as of Thursday, while the second, Disney’s Typhoon Lagoon, is expected to open this weekend. “Our water parks were most impacted by Irma because they had a lot of debris from the storm, but our theme parks were minimally impacted,” Ms. Wahler said.Universal Orlando Resort’s three theme parks — Universal Studios Florida, Universal’s Island of Adventure and Universal’s Volcano Bay — are all open, and so is SeaWorld Orlando and its water park, Aqautica. SeaWorld’s Discovery Cove amusement park is scheduled to reopen Friday.Legoland Florida was closed Saturday, Sunday and Monday, but as of Thursday, all of its venues, including the theme park, water park and two hotels are back to their regular operating schedules, said David Brady, a spokesman for Legoland.Hotels in Orlando largely stayed open throughout the storm: Disney’s 26 resorts never closed, for example, with the exceptions of Fort Wilderness Campground and the Treehouse Villas, part of Saratoga Springs Resort, which remain closed while debris is removed. Four Seasons Resort Orlando at Walt Disney World Resort also stayed open throughout Irma.In Savannah, almost all hotels, attractions, restaurants, tours and boutiques are expected to be open as of today, according to Joseph Marinelli, the president of Visit Savannah, the city’s official tourism organization. “We had about 45 minutes of minor flooding on Monday on River Street, which attracts visitors, but we were able to bounce back quickly,” he said.Sea Island Resort, situated off the coast of Georgia, on the other hand, sustained debris from Irma, said Scott Steilen, the resort’s president and chief executive, and remains closed until Wednesday, Sept. 20; the property will reopen at noon on that day, he said.Advertisement