By SHIVANI VORANOV. 23, 2017
Christmas and the days leading up to the holiday are a magical time to visit Ireland, according to Siobhan Byrne Learat, founder of Adams & Butler, a Dublin-based company selling trips to Ireland.“The Irish go all out for Christmas with décor and celebrations, and the mood is cheerful and generous,” she said. “And over the years, it has become more of a cultural holiday for us than a religious one.”Ms. Learat said that while pubs and restaurants throughout the country are full of revelers, hotels have a lull in business, which means that enticing, amenity-inclusive deals abound for a Christmas-themed Ireland getaway.Lynott Tours, for example, has a seven-night “Ireland Bed and Breakfast Christmas” package that includes accommodations in your choice of more than 400 bed-and-breakfasts throughout Ireland, breakfast, a rental car, and round-trip airfare on Aer Lingus from a dozen cities in the United States including New York City, Los Angeles and Boston to Dublin International Airport. Valid from Dec. 21 to 29. From $1,568 a person. Book by calling 800-221-2474 or emailing ireland@lynotttours.com.AdvertisementAuthentic Ireland offers a four-night Christmas in Ireland package, which includes accommodations in two upscale castle hotels in the countryside, Abbeyglen Castle and Contarf Castle. Breakfast and a rental car are also included. Both properties are renowned during the holidays for their roaring log fires and abundance of fairy lights. Valid from Dec. 24 to 28. From $1,648 a person. Book by calling 888-443-5259.For travelers seeking luxury, the upscale Adare Manor, in County Limerick, offers a two-night, family-friendly getaway called “A Christmas Beyond Everything.” The package includes accommodations, breakfast, a Champagne afternoon tea, parties with Champagne on both Christmas Eve and Day, Christmas Day lunch with live music, multicourse dinners on both Christmas Eve and Day, a private car to a nearby church for holiday services on both Christmas Eve and Day, and even a visit with Santa and a treasure hunt on Christmas Day. You also get brunch with Champagne and live jazz on Dec. 26, and the choice of either a spa treatment or an activity such as archery, falconry or clay pigeon shooting. Valid from Dec. 24 to 27. From 1,475 euros (about $1,768) per adult; each child is an additional 250 euros. Book by emailing reservations@adaremanor.com.AdvertisementAdams & Butler has the five-night “Holiday in Dublin” offer which includes accommodations at the upscale Dylan Hotel Dublin, located in the city center. The package also includes breakfast, airport transfers, a holiday lights tour on a vintage bus, a mulled wine reception, cookie decorating, ice-skating and tickets to a holiday show of Rapunzel at the Gaiety Theater, in Dublin, on Christmas Eve. You also get a car and driver for a day to explore County Wicklow, followed by lunch at a farm in the countryside and a four-course Christmas Day dinner at the hotel. Also part of the package is admission to Leopardstown Racecourse near Dublin for the Leopardstown Christmas Festival, where watching the horse races is a beloved holiday tradition among locals. From 5,000 euros for a family of four. Book by emailing sales@adamsandbutler.com or calling 800-894-5712.A version of this article appears in print on December 3, 2017, on Page TR2 of the New York edition with the headline: Holiday Cheer in Ireland.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.