By JOSEPH BERGERMAY 17, 2016
From Maine to Florida, Washington State to Southern California, we are featuring six islands that make for ideal escapes—into the past, into nature, into luxury. Check back each day this week for more. When Kate Griffin was an adventurous collegian, she and a half-dozen friends spirited by boat across the waters of the St. Lawrence River to the small island dominated by Boldt Castle — a testament to true Gilded Age romance or a tycoon’s folly, depending on point of view — and spent the night there.They invaded the ruined castle and searched by flashlight through its 127 rooms, finding an indoor swimming pool, bowling alley, billiard room and other luxuries that George C. Boldt, the proprietor of Manhattan’s Waldorf Astoria, built for his wife, Louise, who, as fate would have it, died in 1904 before it was completed.Now Ms. Griffin, a retired English teacher, runs a bed-and-breakfast, the Jacob Brewster House, in an 1815-vintage Georgian wood-frame in nearby Sackets Harbor, N.Y., and offers well-seasoned advice and lore to visitors like my wife and me on their way to the pleasures of the Thousand Islands region, including Boldt Castle on Heart Island. Boldt, after 70 years of dereliction, has been restored and draws visitors who might never make it to castles on the Rhine.AdvertisementIslands are redolent with mystery and charm — perhaps stemming from the seclusion afforded by aquatic separation from mainland events and concerns — and there are 1,864 of them in the Thousand Islands that speckle the St. Lawrence River as it nears Lake Ontario. Some are on the Canadian side of a meandering marine border, some in the United States; almost all are privately owned. Still, they are there for the viewing, and we took in perhaps a hundred by stepping aboard a faux paddle wheel dispatched by Uncle Sam Boat Tours, one of several touring fleets.On a sunny but brisk May Day, we found ourselves on a dock in Alexandria Bay, a regional hub, which, like Gettysburg, Niagara Falls, Bar Harbor or other timeworn tourist spots, is chockablock with fast-food joints, fudge vendors and stores selling T-shirts, stuffed animals, gimcrack tchotchkes and signs that carry quotes like “I Am Not an Alcoholic. I’m a Drunk. Alcoholics Go to Meetings.” With the season about to begin, shopkeepers were painting faded outdoor benches and tables.AdvertisementThis early in the season, little was open except for the boat tour, but we learned that Alex Bay, as it is called, is a jumping-off point for fishing, scuba diving, cycling, camping and golfing. A year-round population of 1,300 explodes in the summertime to 25,000.As our boat wove among islands occupied by single stately homes sheltered by pines and leafless trees, a knowledgeable, droll guide told us all we wanted to know about the picturesque archipelago, from its ice age geological origins to its roguish Prohibition-era calling as a haven for liquor smugglers.Standing on the sun-washed top deck, she pointed out the opulent estates built by the merchant princes Abraham Abraham and Nathan Straus and by George Pullman, designer of the railroad sleeping car, homes that rival the mansions of Newport. She also called attention to oddities like the footbridge from a Zavikon Island cottage to a satellite islet that allows you to cross from Canada into the United States without a passport.Many islands are populated by turkey, otter, muskrat, deer and fox, and bald eagles can be seen atop the tallest pines. Some islands have granite cliffs; others are tiny, with one the size of a living room bearing a single juniper tree. (Only those spots that are above water year round and have at least one living tree qualify as islands.)The largest, Wolfe Island in Canada, is 18 miles long, and has a year-round population of 1,400. Wellesley Island, the largest on the American side, has state parks that invite overnight campers, golf courses and its own lake, and it supports some of the five spans of the Thousand Island Bridge system, which connects Ontario to northern New York.Every Saturday, get travel tips, destination coverage, photos from all over the world and more.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.As the two-hour tour ended, we were told of one other distinction that George Boldt could boast of. According to one popular theory, he learned of fishermen who had patched together a salad dressing from the eclectic supplies of their campsite — mayonnaise, ketchup, Worcestershire sauce, sweet pickles and chopped onion. He liked it so much he served it at his elegant hotel, christening it Thousand Island dressing.AdvertisementThe region embraces several 19th-century mainland villages away from the hubbub that are worth visiting by car or bicycle. We were enchanted by Clayton, which has a series of uncommon shops, one selling several dozen flavors of olive oil and vinegar, another selling local cheeses and candy. The town has set up Adirondack chairs for quiet contemplation of the silent, majestic St. Lawrence. The Antique Boat Museum features 300 craft to savor and ride, including the region’s classic wooden runabouts. Not too far away is Cape Vincent, with an 1854 lighthouse that overlooks the passage from placid river to sometimes treacherous lake.We chose to stay in Sackets Harbor, a 40-minute drive from Alex Bay. The village’s tenderly cared-for wood-frame and brick buildings reflect its prime years as a 19th-century port. We took a short stroll through a restaurant row (Tin Pan Galley, with a Thai salad and cookies-and-cream bread pudding, was our favorite) and soon were immersed in an important landmark of the War of 1812 — the village’s battlefield. Constance Barone, the site manager, described how English and Canadian ships seeking to control young America’s northern frontier shelled the village but were twice rebuffed, though casualties were high. A grove of silver maples planted in 1913 to commemorate the battle’s centennial graces a quiet lakeside field. A teeming marina occupies the yard where 11 warships were built.Ms. Griffin’s husband, Archie Thames, a retired chemistry teacher and habitual joker, carried our bags up to our room, the Mayflower, with its four-poster bed and fireplace. He told us that Jacob Brewster was a descendant of a Mayflower voyager, then asked us what we want for breakfast: “He-man coffee or wimpy coffee?” While serving us lavish breakfasts, Ms. Griffin entertained us with her local adventures, and we discovered serendipitously that she is a St. Lawrence University sorority sister of a friend of ours.One morning we had Ms. Griffin’s “Eggs Funny Cide Up,” a delicious English muffin concoction. There was a yarn there, too, as befitting the story-generating islands region. In the mid-1990s, six Sackets Harbor high school buddies put together $5,000 each to take a crack at thoroughbred racing, and the star of their stable, Funny Cide, ended up winning the Kentucky Derby and the Preakness in 2003.If You Go: Jacob Brewster House, 107 South Broad Street, Sackets Harbor, N.Y.; jacobbrewsterbandb.comA version of this article appears in print on May 22, 2016, on Page TR6 of the New York edition with the headline: Tiny Kingdoms Where Titans Ruled.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.