
Where to Go Now By                     
SHIVANI VORA

SEPT. 7, 2016
It’s that time of year again in New York City: New York Fashion Week, where more than 60 international designers showcase their spring 2017 collections, is held from Sept. 8 to 15 and kicks off a fall season of global fashion weeks in cities like London, Milan and Paris.Though the first fashion show in the United States was likely in 1903 at a specialty store in New York City called Ehrich Brothers, according to William Leach’s book “Land of Desire,” the concept of a group of shows held around the same time didn’t start in the city until 1943. And the first time New York’s shows were held in a single location — Bryant Park — was 1993.Throughout their history, the shows have had various names including “7th on Sixth,” “Olympus Fashion Week” and “Mercedes-Benz Fashion Week.” Today, they’re a semi-annual event, held in September and February and owned and operated by IMG, a multimedia company based in New York City.Most of the runway shows are in two places: Skylight at Moynihan Station, an event venue on Eighth Avenue in Midtown Manhattan that is part of the James A. Farley Post Office Building, and Skylight Clarkson Square, a modern whitewashed space on Washington Street in downtown Manhattan. A handful of designers hold their shows at other venues around town such as Tommy Hilfiger, whose show will be on Sept. 9 at Pier 16 in South Street Seaport.AdvertisementAccess to the shows is by invitation only, said the IMG spokesman Andrew Serrano, but even if the general public can’t snag seats, it is still possible to get a taste of Fashion Week throughout the city.AdvertisementThe Shop @ New York Fashion Week: The Shows and F.Y.I. @ MADE New YorkFor the first time, IMG is creating two temporary retail spaces during Fashion Week that are open to the public.The Shop @ NYFW: The Shows will be at 875 Washington Street and open Thursday, Sept. 8 through Sunday, Sept. 11. Consumers will be able to buy jewelry and accessories, such as shoes and scarves, from more than a half-dozen New York City-based jewelry designers like Lizzie Fortunato, a line by two sisters, Lizzie and Kathryn Fortunato, known for its eye-catching pieces with colorful stones. The merchandise for sale includes selections for both men and women.The Shop @ NYFW will also display art by Bradley Theodore, a New York native known for his colorful street art, and Nick Thomm, an Australian artist.F.Y.I. @ MADE New York will be at 449 West 14th Street and open Monday, Sept. 12 through Wednesday, Sept. 14. The venue will sell straight-off-the-runway clothing and accessories for men and women from up-and-coming international designers.At both stores, shoppers will be able to sip complimentary cocktails and enjoy tunes from a rotating lineup of D.J.s.What Bars and Restaurants Are DoingThemed cocktails and special menus: They’re how bars and restaurants in the city are taking part in Fashion Week. Here is a small sampling of participating establishments.- In honor of a dinner it’s hosting for the designer Prabal Gurung after his fashion show, on Sept. 11, the New York Edition hotel, in Manhattan’s Flatiron district, will serve the Prabal Glam cocktail in its lobby bar during Fashion Week only; the drink includes vodka, ginger and Champagne and costs $25. A second cocktail, the Pantsuit, with Scotch, vermouth and bitters, will also be temporarily available and is also $25.Advertisement- The Liquor Cabinet, a bar at the Gregory, a boutique hotel in Midtown West, has collaborated with popular designers like Nicole Miller and Nanette Lepore to create a collection of Fashion Week cocktails, complete with drink stirrers in the shape of a model’s silhouette. The cocktails are the designers’ personal favorites, such as Ms. Miller’s “Chambord Margarita,” which includes blanco tequila, fresh lime juice, simple syrup and Chambord; $8 for guests and $10 for nonguests.- Bar 54, a rooftop bar on the 54th floor of Hyatt Times Square, will serve a cocktail called the September Issue, made with gin, demarara, blackberries, lemon and balsamic vinegar; $25.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.- The Greek restaurant Loi Estiatorio, on Manhattan’s West Side, has a three-course calorie-conscious “Model Dinner” for $42 throughout Fashion Week; choices include grilled calamari with arugula as a starter, grilled branzino as an entree and house-made, high-protein Greek yogurt with honey for dessert.- In honor of the recent death of French fashion designer Sonia Rykiel, Kingsley, a French-American restaurant in the East Village, is serving a cocktail named the Sonia for $13; it’s made with cocoa liqueur, ginger liqueur, lemon and Champagne.- The Baccarat Hotel New York, in Midtown Manhattan, has a high tea in on Saturday, Sept. 10, in collaboration with the Italian fashion house Furla. Available in the hotel’s Grand Salon from 1:30 to 3:30 p.m., it costs $90 a person and includes a selection of Italian-themed dishes.What Hotels Are DoingFor hotels in the city, Fashion Week means enticing guests with room packages, shopping discounts and free amenities and events.- Launching in time for Fashion Week, all guests at the Trump International Hotel & Tower New York will receive a VIP Shopping Pass that gives them a 10 to 20 percent discount at neighborhood retailers such as Kiehl’s and Lululemon Athletica.- W New York — Union Square will be hosting a “What She Said” event on Sept. 14 from 3 to 5 p.m., which is free and open to the public. This speaker series focuses on empowering women through the inspirational stories of successful entrepreneurs, and for Fashion Week, the guest speaker will be the cosmetics industry veteran and Nars makeup stylist, Uzo.- All guests who stay at the Lowell Hotel, on Manhattan’s Upper East Side, during Fashion Week will receive a pair of Wolford leggings, which have a retail price of $155. Rooms are available during Fashion Week, and prices start at $830 a night.Advertisement- Guests who stay at the Peninsula New York during Fashion Week will be able to reserve a complimentary ride anywhere in Manhattan in a 1934 Rolls-Royce Phantom II that was shipped from the Peninsula Paris. The car’s driver will be dressed in a vintage chauffeur outfit from the 1930s. Rooms are available during Fashion Week, and rates start at $895 a night.- On Sept. 8, the Surrey, on Manhattan’s Upper East Side, is debuting an art exhibition called “Fashioning Art.” Photography, paintings and sculptures will be on display, including a portrait of Coco Chanel conceived in 8,000 pills by the American Pop sculptor Desire Obtain Cherish, and black and white photography of Naomi Campbell by the late fashion photographer Herb Ritts. The show will run through Jan. 15 and is free and open to the public daily from 10 a.m. to 9 p.m.- Mandarin Oriental, New York is introducing the Style My Suite package during Fashion Week: Guests stay in a newly restyled one- or two-bedroom suite and receive a scarf designed for the hotel by the fashion label Rodarte, a bottle of Champagne upon arrival and two massages at the property’s spa. Rooms are available during Fashion Week, and prices start at $3,200 a night.Beauty EventsWhat’s Fashion Week without a little primping? Free and with-a-charge beauty events abound in town. Here are three:- From Sept. 7 to 16, the upscale beauty product chain Bluemercury will be offering a complimentary “Fashion Facial” at its West Village, Union Square and TriBeCa stores. The 10-minute service includes a cleansing, exfoliation and makeup touch-up.- Sir John, the L’Oréal Paris makeup artist who counts Beyoncé among his many boldface clients, is hosting a makeup master class on Sept. 14 at Mercantile Annex 38, an event venue on Manhattan’s West Side; the class will instruct attendees on how to create runway looks at home. Tickets start at $350.- Model sightings are a given at a party that the makeup artist Charlotte Tilbury — who has been the makeup artist for Kate Moss and Amal Clooney, among others — is the host on Sept. 10 from 6 to 8 p.m. at Samsung 837 (837 Washington Street) in Manhattan’s Meatpacking District. The soiree is in celebration of her first fragrance, Scent of a Dream, and open to the public for no charge. Her team will be on hand to give guests complimentary makeup touch-ups.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »