AdvertisementSupported byBitesBy Adam H. Graham“It’s Danish Christmas in a sandwich,” said Mads Ravn, a Danish archaeologist, about the flaeskesteg sandwiches we were devouring. Flaeskesteg, the Christmas dinner of Denmark, is pork with a rind that’s been roasted to a crispy crackling. At Stegen & Dellen, a vendor at the new Street Food Market in Aarhus, it’s served year-round on a pillowy brioche bun slathered in mayonnaise and topped with bracing red kraut and long curls of pickled cucumber, wrapped in butcher paper (and, in this case, washed down with a Midtfyns Stout from a neighboring vendor, Olfred).The permanent street food market opened in August with 14 vendors and five bars, housed in shipping containers scattered across a former bus garage. (Twelve additional vendors are to open in the coming months.)“The idea came three years ago when my husband, [our] three boys and I were visiting London’s Borough Market,” said Britt Vorre, the market’s founder. “Afterward, we began planning a market with the same vibe, but in a Danish style. We visited more markets to gather ideas.”During my second visit a few nights later, I made the grazing rounds, working the garage’s perimeter. The fragrant pulled duck at Duck It came in a soft sesame bun with a slice of Danish Cheddar. The guys at Grilled Cheese tempted me with samples of a truffled mozzarella and Vesterhavsost, a Danish Gouda of sorts, but I stayed on course for a slice of broccoli and bacon pizza at La Rossa, followed by a fortifying glass of tempranillo at Vinos.Mexican food is a consistent letdown in Europe, but times are changing — the Mexican Donkey served authentic tacos with tomatillo salsa verde, complex mole without dairy, pink pickled onions and rustic wheat tortillas. To maintain momentum, I swung by Dash for an old-fashioned. Desserts at Nord Gourmet included rugbrodscrunch, a rock-hard rye biscotti that surely keeps Danish dentists in business, and a buttery rhubarb crumble.“We set out to find new and upcoming chefs and ended up with a street food community of vendors who are both co-workers and competitors,” Ms. Vorre said.The garage’s cavernous space with polished concrete floors is roomy enough for several communal tables. Seating spills out the oversized doors onto makeshift patios where students, young dads with babies and stylish grandmothers gathered in the cool night air. It was Danish cooperation in a nutshell — or in this case, a garage.Aarhus Street Food Market, Ny Banegaardsgade 46; aarhusstreetfood.com. Average price for a meal for two, with drinks, is about 300 kroner ($45).Advertisement