
Pursuits By                     
ROBYN ECKHARDT

MARCH 2, 2016
“Never oil, never lemon,” Pere Vehi said. “I mean, do you put lemon on caviar?” I had joined the opinionated owner of Bar Boia, a 70-year-old institution in Cadaqués, a whitewashed fishing village on the Costa Brava, for a midmorning nosh of sea urchin. Mr. Vehi opened each urchin Cadaqués-style, with a large, curved knife, bringing its blade to bear on the sea urchin as he rotated it in the palm of his free hand.He tore off a piece of bread and used it to scoop out the tangerine-hued roe. “Use your hands, never a knife,” he said.I had come to Spain’s northeast coast to feast on sea urchin. I was learning that there are right ways, and wrong ways, to do it.Like many American sea urchin lovers, I had my first taste at a Japanese restaurant. I’d eaten it in Japan too. From the first mouthful — a wild seesaw from saline sharpness to fatty roundness — I was entranced.AdvertisementBut more recently, thanks to Alex Garés, a Catalan chef I met in Thailand, I’d been dreaming of eating sea urchin in Spain. Mr. Garés spoke of childhood holidays on the Costa Brava spent feasting on fresh-from-the-sea eriçó de mar (literally, sea hedgehog; Catalans also call them garotes). Intrigued, I made a mental note, and in January, when an opportunity to travel to Spain arose, I mapped a sea urchin quest.On the Costa Brava, sea urchin season lasts from Nov. 1 to April 1. By luck, my husband and I would be traveling during La Garoinada, an annual sea urchin event staged by Palafrugell, a municipality in Girona province. (The festival’s name is taken from garoines, the word for sea urchin in Palafrugell dialect.) During the festival, which runs for about two months starting in late January, restaurants serve raw sea urchins à la carte and as part of set menus that include typical local dishes.AdvertisementThough commonly referred to as roe, the edible part of the sea urchin is actually its reproductive organs, or gonads. Each year Catalonia licenses up to 25 mariscadors, or professional gatherers, to collect and sell purple sea urchin, with a maximum catch of 330 pounds per day.It had been a foggy drive from Barcelona, but by the time we reached Palafrugell’s small medieval center, the sun was out and we were hungry. We ate our first garoines at La Xicra. Occupying a thick-walled village house, the restaurant is known for its changing menu of updated Catalan dishes made with local and seasonal ingredients, many from Palafrugell’s daily market. At 2 p.m. — on the early side for lunch by Catalan standards — all but one of the eight tables in its three cozy dining rooms were claimed; at least one order of sea urchins graced most.La Xicra serves garoines with traditional accompaniments: bread, blood sausage called botifarra negra and, if diners will have it, red wine.“Tourists often ask for white wine, but we prefer vinho negra. It answers the strong flavor of the urchin,” said Montse Soler Xargay, the owner, as she poured a garnacha-shiraz blend. A dozen urchins were arranged on a plate, the upper quarter of each spiky exoskeleton sheared off to reveal five symmetrical stripes of roe ranging in color from yellow-gold to brick red. Lightly cupping an urchin in her palm, Ms. Xargay demonstrated how to scoop out the roe with a spoon or, better yet, a piece of bread. “Metal changes the taste,” she said.Less fatty than the urchins I’d enjoyed as sushi, these carried an initial smack of brine followed by a lingering finish at the back of the tongue that varied from mildly sweet to downright honeyed. And they were light, leaving me with an appetite even after I downed a dozen.France5 MILESSPAINLlançàE-15CadaquésRosesN-260Costa BravaC-31C-66FRANCEArea of detailPalafrugellMadridLlafrancSPAINMARCH 3, 2016
The next day we drove an hour north to Roses, a sprawling resort city near El Bulli, the celebrated and now-defunct restaurant. The snack bar La Sirena (The Mermaid), opened in 1962, was bought 11 years ago by Jordi Blanch and Vicente Fernández, chefs who worked in kitchens in Barcelona and elsewhere before returning to their native Roses. They retained its original décor, including a handsome timber bar, and unpretentious feel. Blackboard menus list dishes featuring seasonal produce of the Empordà region and seafood caught off the Cap de Creus. In fine weather the best seats in the house are at tables outside.AdvertisementThat’s where we found Mr. Blanch, alternately taking orders and slicing open urchins with a custom-made mini guillotine. “These are at most one hour out of the water, but soon they will be too long in the sun,” he said, pointing to milky liquid pooling in the carapace of one just-opened urchin.Unfazed, we ordered a dozen, which Mr. Blanch paired with a lively cherry-hued garnacha blend from Tarragona, south of Barcelona.Costa Bravans swear that sea urchins are best eaten raw, but they shone in a humble dish of favetes (tiny young fava beans) with quartered slices of blood sausage, olive oil and finely snipped chives and parsley. Barely touched by the heat of the other ingredients, the urchin maintained its brilliant color, along with enough brine and sweetness to balance both the sausage’s fat and the bitter bite of the favas.Before we had arrived in Spain Mr. Garés had put me in touch with Paco Pérez, the chef and co-owner, with his wife, Montse Serra, of Miramar, a Michelin-starred restaurant in Llançà, a fishing village hiking distance from the Pyrenees foothills near the French border. Mr. Pérez offered to show us how to collect sea urchins the traditional way and prepare them in a few dishes.The next morning we hiked with Mr. Pérez and his son, Guillem, over headlands and then down to a stretch of rocks jutting out to sea. Wielding a shuttlecock-shaped basket attached to a long rattan pole, Mr. Pérez pointed to the sea urchins nestled in clumps near the rocks. He cantilevered out over the water, using the basket end of the tool, called a garroter, to pull out sea urchins. It was slow work; after 30 minutes he had collected fewer than 25 urchins. (Collectors simply don wet suits to snorkel for the urchins and pluck them from the rocks with gloved hands.)Back at his house, Mr. Pérez cut the urchins open with scissors and used a spoon to scrape out the dark brown bits of intestine that lie around the roe. The revealed lobes were the most impressive we’d seen yet, plump stripes of coral, apricot and Sedona red.“For me the sea urchin is number one,” Mr. Pérez said later in his kitchen, as he prepared small bites. “The aroma, the taste — there is nothing closer to the sea.” A thin slice of Catalan pa amb tomàquet (bread rubbed with tomato), drizzled with olive oil and topped with a few pieces of sea urchin, followed a dish of urchin and butter-soft raw white tuna. Then Mr. Pérez placed sea urchin at the bottom of a small glass, shaved over it Spanish black truffle and added a lightly cooked egg. Stirring the ingredients released an intoxicatingly earthy fragrance; the combination tasted as luxurious as it smelled.For a main course, Mr. Pérez cooked a comforting suquet de peix, fish stew with garlic, tomato, potato and pieces of urchin. Remarkably the delicate urchins retained their flavor, delivering little hits of briny freshness.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.By now we’d enjoyed sea urchin raw and cooked. But we had yet to experience it in quintessential Catalan fashion: on a beach, with bread, sausage and wine.AdvertisementWe came close the next day, on a 90-year-old timber fishing boat, when we joined a dozen Spanish tourists for a cruise off Llafranc, a well-tended village wrapped around a picturesque cove near Palafrugell.Joan Santolaria began offering sea urchin- and vinho-fueled cruises eight years ago. We gathered with our fellow passengers around the roof of the cabin, which held a 22-pound bag of sea urchins and a mini guillotine. While Mr. Santolaria opened the garoines, the crew sliced bread and sausage and prepared red wine in a porró, a spouted drinking vessel that, I found, is as likely to deliver wine to one’s neck or shoulder as to one’s mouth.We skirted the coast south of Llafanc, passing Cap Roig and circling the Illes Formigues, a group of small rocky islands that was the site of a 13th-century battle between Catalan-Sicilian, French and Genoese fleets. By the time we returned to port, the makeshift table was littered with breadcrumbs, urchin spines and splashes of wine.Cadaqués, whose steeply sloped, narrow streets terminate at a perfect half-moon of pebble beach, was our last stop. The village, at the tip of a peninsula midway between Roses and Llançà, is reached by a single two-lane road that snakes past vineyards and olive groves.We had come to see the former home of Salvador Dalí, who was obsessed with sea urchins, both as food and inspiration; a famous photograph shows the artist eating urchins on a boat, and sea urchin forms are seen in many of his works. But the home, now a museum, was closed for renovations.Fortunately Mr. Pérez had connected me with Mr. Vehi, a Cadaqués native and Dalí aficionado. We met on the water-facing deck at Boia Bar, which has been in Mr. Vehi’s family for four generations.It was unusually hot, the bay glassy. Sea urchins, a loaf of bread, a bottle of wine and a large curved knife sat on a table. Mr. Vehi was a bundle of nervous energy, juggling appointments, phone calls and his staff. Once he began opening sea urchins, he relaxed. Dalí, he said, “used to come to the bar four or five times a year. It was easy for people here in Cadqués to be in touch with him.”Every Jan. 20, Mr. Vehi told me, residents gather in front of Sant Sebastià Hermitage, built 300 years ago on a mountain overlooking the harbor, to celebrate Mass, dance and feast on a meal that includes sea urchin. On Ash Wednesday, they mark the end of Carnaval and the beginning of Lent with an urchin feast on the beach.I was too late for the former, and too early for the latter. But sitting in the sun, eating sea urchin with bread and red wine steps from the beach was close enough.AdvertisementDuring Costa Brava’s sea urchin season, November to April, many restaurants offer a dozen, raw, as a starter for around 20 euros (about $22).In 2016, Palafrugell’s annual La Garoinada festival runs until March 20. For a list of participating restaurants and hotels visit lagaroinada.cat.Tela Marinera (telamarinera.es) offers excursions on its restored fishing boat. A two-hour trip from Llafranc that includes sea urchins and wine costs €30 per person.La Xicra (Calle Sant Antoni, 17, Palafrugell; restaurantlaxicra.com) serves updated Catalan dishes featuring local fish, meats and produce, much of it from Palafrugell’s morning market. A three-course daily set menu for one, which includes a glass of wine, is €30.La Sirena (Plaça de Sant Pere, 7, Roses; restaurantlasirena.cat) features seasonal produce and local seafood in tapas and grills, with a Catalonia producer-heavy wine list. Lunch for two with a half bottle of wine comes to about €65.Paco Pérez’s molecular gastronomy rooted in tradition and local ingredients has earned Miramar (Passeig Maritím, Llançà; restaurantmiramar.com) two Michelin stars. A set menu is €160.In Palafrugell’s medieval old town, tinyVa de I (Calle Raval Inferior, 17, Palafrugell) serves charcuterie, cheeses and tapas and a small, considered selection of Empordà wines. Charcuterie plate and wines by the glass for two, about €30.A version of this article appears in print on March 6, 2016, on Page TR10 of the New York edition with the headline: On the Costa Brava, a Sea Urchin Quest.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »