AdvertisementSupported byThe GetawayBy Stephanie RosenbloomDo you know what a Q fare is? How about an X or a Z? When you browse for flights on an airline’s website, assorted letters appear in your search results. Travelers often miss them. Or see them but don’t factor them into their decision about which flight to choose. But these letters matter. Because of them, the person to your left may receive more award miles than you, reach elite status faster than you, or change her itinerary at no cost while you pay a $200 fee — yet you’re both in the same cabin. What gives?As many frequent fliers know, the visible class distinctions on airplanes (Economy, Premium Economy, Business, First) are further divided into invisible groups called fare classes, or booking codes. Different airlines assign different letters to these classes, which can also vary from carrier to carrier. Knowing the ABCs of fare classes may help you attain elite status, avoid penalties for changing and canceling flights, and rack up miles, among other things. If you’re aiming to earn award miles by flying an airline that’s partners with your primary carrier, it’s particularly important to learn how to make fare classes work in your favor.The major American airlines have charts that show the relationship between their fare class letters and the miles you’ll receive if you fly in those classes — though they don’t exactly make it easy to find them. The fastest way is to search the web for your airline’s name and the words “fare class chart.” Here are links for the big three’s charts: American’s is Aa.com/i18n/AAdvantage/earnMiles/airlines/american.jsp; Delta’s is Delta.com/content/www/en_US/skymiles/earn-miles/earn-miles-with-delta.html; and United’s United.com/web/en-US/content/booking/flight/fareClass.aspx.What those charts don’t show are details about the flexibility of each fare class. To see the complete rules, including how much you have to pay for itinerary changes, you often have to go deep in the flight search process, almost to the payment page. That said, airline websites tend to make it clear early on in a search whether a ticket can be refunded and if changes can be made. I’ll touch on this again below. For now, let’s look at how fare classes relate to earning award miles, and miles that count toward elite status.I’ll use Delta as an example because its website displays fare class letters clearly above the price of each flight. Members of Delta’s reward program earn award miles based on ticket price, not distance flown. The higher the price, the more miles you can use toward award travel. Additionally, program members earn Medallion Qualification Miles, which are based on both distance flown and fare class paid. These qualification miles are used to determine your status: Silver, Gold, Platinum or Diamond.While searching for a round-trip flight from Los Angeles to Panama City on Delta.com, I saw a business class ticket with two stops for $2,014 in fare classes Z, A and G. Call it Ticket No. 1. There was also a Business class ticket for $2,756 in fare classes J and F and F. Call it Ticket No. 2.According to Delta’s fare class chart, if I bought Ticket No. 1, I would earn 150 percent of the distance I fly. So the approximately 3,000-mile flight to Panama would earn me 4,500 qualifying miles. If I bought Ticket No. 2 , I would earn 200 percent of the distance I fly. So the flight to Panama would earn me 6,000 qualifying miles.Is there a winner? It depends on what you’re after. Ticket No. 1 is $742 cheaper than Ticket No. 2. But it earns 1,500 fewer qualifying miles. And it’s nonrefundable. Ticket No. 2 costs more. It earns more qualifying miles. And it’s refundable.Sure, one advantage of some higher-priced tickets is the ability to cancel a trip or make changes at no additional cost. (Keep in mind, though, that sometimes the cheaper flight is still cheaper even if you end up paying a change fee.)But consider another major benefit: If you’re trying to reach the next level of elite status, the right fare class can get you the qualifying miles you need — and fast. Look for fare classes on American that offer three qualifying miles per mile flown and, on United, classes that earn 300 percent of the miles you fly. “Both of them have a faster path to status for folks who spend more on their tickets,” said Edward Pizzarello, a founder of the frequent-flier forum Milepoint (now InsideFlyer.com), and the author of the travel blog Pizza in Motion.If you really want to parse the various letters and their rules, a premium subscription to ExpertFlyer is $9.99 a month and allows users to see detailed fare and booking class information, as if they’re travel agents. The ITA Software Matrix Airfare Search site, a precursor to Google Flights, is also handy (and free). Pick some flights and you not only see booking codes, you’re also given links to the fare rules and restrictions.It’s especially important for members of airline loyalty programs to understand fare classes when deciding whether to credit miles to their primary carrier or a partner airline. Travelers who are not careful can end up with few miles and, in some instances, none at all.For example, Turkish Airlines partners with United. Some Economy tickets (fare classes Y, B, M, H or S) on a Turkish Airlines-operated flight earn you 100 percent of the United award mileage. But an economy ticket in fare class E or Q is a discount code that earns you 75 percent. It gets worse. Fare classes V, T and L are deep-discount economy tickets for which you receive only 50 percent. Alas, that’s better than a W, G or P fare class, where you receive no mileage.When your primary carrier is giving you little or no mileage for travel on a partner airline, you’re often better off crediting your flight to the partner airline.“But those miles will go to waste,” you say. “I don’t usually travel on that partner airline.” Remember: You don’t have to fly the airline to accrue enough miles for a free ticket. Mr. Pizzarello said that with flexible credit cards such as Chase Sapphire Preferred and American Express, you can earn points with your everyday spending, then transfer them to a partner airline, such as Singapore Airlines or British Airways, for an award ticket. “I always look at those cards as top-off opportunities,” he said. And if you want to get creative, there may be instances where it’s desirable to top off your miles on the partner airline to get an award on your primary carrier (for example, a domestic United Airlines flight using the Singapore partner award chart).When miles matter, another thing to bear in mind is that while some fare classes put you in the Business cabin, they’re essentially upgraded Economy tickets that don’t earn many miles. Again, check the fare class chart to see the earn rate.Bottom line: I don’t waste time deciphering every last fare code. I read fare-class rules to see if I’m able to change or cancel an itinerary. I decide whether to gamble on a nonrefundable fare. And if I’m traveling with a partner airline, I look at fare-class charts to ensure that I’m not flying without earning. A little homework equals peace of mind and, just maybe, some status.Advertisement