
In Transit By                     
SHIVANI VORA

FEB. 10, 2016
ART AND LONGBOARDS AT A NEW SOHO HOTEL Aby Rosen is the co-founder of the New York City-based real-estate development company RFR Holding, which has a portfolio of 71 notable properties worldwide including the Gramercy Park Hotel and the Seagram Building in New York City. Mr. Rosen has always had partners for these ventures, but on April 1, he will open his first solo hotel project, 11 Howard in Manhattan’s SoHo neighborhood. The property has a Scandinavian design aesthetic with plenty of open space. There are 221 rooms, all with 11-foot-high ceilings, and a French eatery from the restaurateur Stephen Starr, with cuisine from the well-regarded American chef Daniel Rose, who runs the restaurant Spring in Paris.Art will be an emphasis at the hotel: Sculptures, paintings, photography and video installations will be on display throughout the space. Also, guests will be able to borrow longboards to explore the neighborhood through a partnership with Boosted. Prices from $400 a night.A MIDWEEK DEAL IN THE BERKSHIRESHotel rooms in the Berkshires in western Massachusetts are a hot commodity on summer weekends, the area’s peak tourist season, but the Wheatleigh, a 19-room luxury hotel set amid 22 acres, has a package to entice midweek visitors. The two-night package is for stays between Tuesday and Thursday; it includes a glass of Champagne upon arrival, breakfast, a barbecue on Wednesday night with grilled steaks and lobsters and a dinner in the property’s upscale restaurant, the Dining Room. Prices from $1,900, valid from June 29 to Aug. 31.HONORING FEMALE AFRICAN-AMERICAN CHEFS IN NORTH CAROLINAFebruary is Black History Month, and the Fearrington House Inn, a Relais & Châteaux property in Pittsboro, N.C., is commemorating the occasion by hosting a lunch on Feb. 17 with Toni Tipton-Martin, author of “The Jemima Code,” a cookbook with recipes by female African-American chefs from the early 19th century to present day. Fearrington’s executive chef, Colin Bedford, is serving a menu for the event that is inspired by the recipes of the legendary Southern chef Edna Lewis, who is featured in the book. Ms. Lewis was a guest at Fearrington in the 1980s, and it was at the hotel that she developed her chocolate soufflé, which remains on the inn’s restaurant menu to this day. The dessert will be part of the three-course meal along with several other dishes such as chestnut soup and braised beef short ribs. The price is $80 a person, which includes lunch with wine and a signed copy of “The Jemima Code.”A WINERY TOUR WITH A TASTE OF TECHNOLOGYA tour followed by a tasting is the gist of most winery visits, but at Palmaz Vineyards in Napa Valley, guests get to go beyond the usual by getting a firsthand look at the unique technology the winery uses to produce its six different wines. The president of Palmaz, Christian Gastón Palmaz, has invented a Fermentation Intelligence Logic Control System, a setup that gives the team of winemakers the information they need to adjust temperatures in different parts of the tank. A probe inside each tank measures the liquid’s sugar and alcohol levels as well as its fermentation rate. The data is displayed on a series of screens in the winery’s fermentation cave; an employee gives guests a tour of this cave and educates them on how the technology works. Following their lesson, they have a tasting of the wines paired with seasonal hors d’oeuvres. The price is $80 a person. Reserve by calling 707-226-5587.HIKING AND DINING (AND SAMPLING) IN NAPA VALLEYThere’s also a nontraditional visit in store at B Cellars in Napa Valley with the winery’s new “Wine and Wellness: Hike the Vines” offering. The activity begins with a three-mile hike past Napa vineyards including Conn Creek Winery. Following the hourlong hike, guests return to B Cellars to pick produce from the winery’s garden; the chef de cuisine, Brian Michael Green, uses these vegetables, herbs and fruits to prepare vegetarian, vegan and gluten-free dishes that are paired with the winery’s red and white wines. The price is $150 a person.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »