
In Transit By                     
SHIVANI VORA

MARCH 30, 2016
A TUSCAN TOUR OF WINE AND OLIVE OILTwo Eataly employees, the oleologist Nicholas Coleman and the wine expert Dan Amatuzzi, are leading an olive oil and wine trip to Tuscany as part of their new venture, an olive oil brand called Grove and Vine. Guests on the weeklong getaway stay at Villa Montecastello, an 11th-century restored hillside fortress situated an hour south of Florence. Activities include a workshop on Tuscan grape and olive varieties; visits to boutique wineries in San Gimignano, Chianti and Montalcino; tours and tastings at several well-regarded olive oil estates; a class on pizza making where the pies are baked in a 1,000-year-old outdoor pizza oven; a walking tour of the city of Arezzo; and an all-day trip to Florence. Prices from $3,900 a person, which includes accommodations, activities and most meals. The trip is Aug. 13 to 20 and can be booked by calling 973-327-2336. The trip is also available for year-round booking for a group of eight to 12 travelers.HIGH-TECH LUGGAGE (WITH A BUILT-IN CHARGER)Standard luggage goes high-tech with this week’s launch of Raden, a luggage company that is trying to make getting to destinations a little bit easier. Raden’s suitcases, available in both carry-on and check-in sizes, are equipped with an integrated scale, built-in-charger and location-awareness technology. When travelers pair the bags with the company’s app, they’re able to weigh their luggage at home and access information relevant to their trip, like the best routes to reach the airport, Transportation Security Administration line wait times and the weather at their destination. The bags are scratch-proof and available in seven colors. The 22-inch carry-on case is $295, the 28-inch check-in case is $395, and the two cases are sold together for $595.A NEW LOOK FOR A GREEK BOUTIQUE HOTELGrace Santorini, a luxury boutique property perched on a hill overlooking the Aegean Sea on the island of Santorini in Greece, is reopening for the summer season on May 2 after undergoing a renovation over the winter. The 21 rooms and two-bedroom villa have been refurbished with an elegant, simple aesthetic that includes contemporary furniture mixed with handcrafted Greek pieces; the hotel will also have a new Champagne and cocktail lounge more than 1,000 feet above sea level that’s an ideal spot for watching the sunset, a Mediterranean restaurant called Vassalti, complimentary twice-daily yoga sessions and areas for fitness and Pilates. Prices from 600 euros (about $670) a night including breakfast.A PACKAGE AT A MALAYSIAN GETAWAYThe island of Pangkor Laut, located off the coast of Perak, Malaysia, is a little-known destination with pristine private beaches and lush rain forest. A new package from the Estates at Pangkor Laut, a collection of eight villas ranging from two to four bedrooms, gives travelers the opportunity to book a getaway; it includes luxury yacht transfers to and from the island, all meals, a personal butler and a sunset cruise. Prices from $1,875 a night for two people.IN PALM SPRINGS, A RETREAT FOR MUSICIANS AND ARTISTS In 2013, the British-born musician Rocco Gardner went to Palm Springs, Calif., to record an album with the Eagles of Death Metal guitarist Dave Catching and ended up liking the place so much that he recently opened a retreat there, Rancho V, that caters to musicians, photographers and artists of various disciplines. The 40-acre, 4,200-square-foot estate is on the outskirts of Pioneertown, near the renowned music venue Pappy and Harriet’s and 15 miles from Joshua Tree National Park; the property has a recording studio and plenty of open outdoor space to inspire photographers and filmmakers. Guests can rent it in its entirety or book one of five areas: the main home, two smaller separate houses or two Airstreams. The cost is $2,500 a day for the entire property. Other prices vary depending on what facilities guests use.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »