By TALYA MINSBERGSEPT. 7, 2017
For many families in South Florida and Georgia, evacuating for a hurricane has become somewhat of an ordinary routine. Dealing with last minute airfare, pet-friendly accommodations and overwhelming lines for gas is par for the course.But as Hurricane Irma, one of the most powerful storms ever recorded, barrels toward the mainland of the United States, some residents are evacuating more quickly than ever. Searches for “where to evacuate from Irma” and “where to go for Hurricane Irma” have been trending on Google.By Thursday afternoon, airlines had canceled 4,000 flights to and from airports in Irma’s path. Airbnb has activated its Disaster Response Program for counties in Northern Florida and southern Georgia in which hosts can open their homes up to evacuees for free.“As soon as I went outside, I realized how panicked people were,” Sara Milrad said of the scene at the University of Miami in Coral Gables on Tuesday afternoon. The campus will be evacuated Friday.
            GABLES & MARINE CAMPUS CLASSES cancelled for Wednesday, Thursday, and Friday. Check UM email or https://t.co/yBXwB98SY6 for additional info.        She was urged by her colleagues to evacuate immediately and now is safely in Baltimore. “Usually everyone is fairly dismissive about these storms,” she said. “But this was different. There was an urgency of ‘if you can get out, you should get out.’”AdvertisementAs Floridians looked for safe evacuation routes, demand for flights out of Florida’s main airports skyrocketed. On Twitter, many customers accused airlines of price-gouging as one-way tickets out of Florida were upward of $1,000.
            Shame on you @delta. Jacking from $547 to over $3200 for people trying to evacute responsibly? #IrmaHurricane pic.twitter.com/O2nfPHQUAh But George Hobica, the founder of the site Airfarewatchdog, said that he did not think airlines were price-gouging, not consciously at least. “They are afraid of bad publicity,” he said. “There are times when there’s only one seat left on a plane and that will end up being thousands of dollars, but that’s directed at business travelers who the airlines assume will travel at any cost.”AdvertisementBy Thursday afternoon, JetBlue, American Airlines, United and Delta had all capped their one-way ticket prices out of Florida ahead of Irma’s arrival, although there were still reports of price fluctuations despite the caps.Some airlines and cruise lines have left travelers in limbo. While all cruises out of Florida set to leave Friday were canceled, some cruises scheduled to sail from Central and South Florida remain on course to depart over the weekend. Cruise companies are urging customers to check in daily as conditions evolve.
            Irma Update: The following sailings have been canceled - Splendor 9/9, Liberty 9/10. See full details here: https://t.co/uBWMi8SHA6 As soon as Irma appeared on the radar, Dave Kartunen, a Savannah, Ga., resident, booked a hotel room 50 miles inland. “Hurricane planning has taken a certain level importance in my family,” he said. Mr. Kartunen, a father of two, has Post-traumatic stress disorder from covering Hurricane Katrina as a news anchor.“Evacuating is sort of a no good deed goes unpunished,” he said. “You don’t want to drive too far because it’s like going on a run – for every mile you go, you’re going to have to go back. Every mile is going to be painful.”Eduardo Del Carmen, a Miami resident, decided to evacuate as well, comparing Irma to Hurricane Andrew, the last Category 5 storm to hit the United States, which arrived in 1992. His family evacuated for Andrew and was displaced for months.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“You can’t play around too much with a storm like this, so I think we may be waking up at 5 a.m. tomorrow to drive to Tampa,” Mr. Del Carmen said. “Last night was our first good night of sleep in a while, knowing we were ready to go. We have a place to stay and gas in our car.”For all those who can evacuate by road or air, many cannot because of physical or financial constraints.“We’re lucky, we have the mobility,” Mr. Kartunen said. “I’m terrified for the people that no one cares about, those that don’t have the ability to make the decisions that we do.”A version of this article appears in print on September 8, 2017, on Page A18 of the New York edition with the headline: In the Path Of a Storm, Wondering Where to Flee.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.