
                Travel Tips            By                     
SHIVANI VORA

OCT. 2, 2017
A theme park-focused vacation to Orlando can be an expensive proposition, according to Cara Goldsbury, the owner of Glass Slipper Concierge, a travel company that specializes in luxury Orlando trips. “Between admission to the various parks, accommodations and meals, you can easily spend several hundred dollars per person per day,” she said.But a high-end getaway to Orlando can be had without breaking the bank, Ms. Goldsbury said, and here she shares her tips on how:BOOK A SHORTER TRIP Shorten your trip by a day or two, and use the money you would have spent on that extra time toward luxury accommodations or an indulgent experience like a private fireworks cruise or after-hours access to Disney’s Animal Kingdom for an evening safari. “One or two splurges become more doable when your trip isn’t as long and go a long way in creating that unforgettable “wow” factor,” Ms. Goldsbury said.FAMILIES SHOULD BOOK FAMILY-FRIENDLY ACCOMMODATIONS Although Orlando is a popular destination for families, some of the upscale hotels like Four Seasons Resort Orlando at Walt Disney World Resort and the Ritz-Carlton Orlando, Grande Lakes especially cater to kids. Nightly rates at these properties are higher than at less luxurious hotels, but Ms. Goldsbury said that a stay at one of them will mean overall money savings because they have many free or low-cost activities for children. The Four Seasons, for example, offers a free day camp for children between the ages of 4 and 12 with pool games and outdoor scavenger hunts; also, children 5 and under eat free at the resort’s restaurants. “Most kids tire out after a half-day in the parks so it’s important to stay at a hotel where they will be happily occupied without any extra cost to you,” Ms. Goldsbury said.PLAN MEALS WISELY Save $100 or more a person a day on meals by following in Ms. Goldsbury’s footsteps: she has a hearty breakfast and buys snacks from a local grocery store, which she totes into the theme parks and nibbles on throughout the day. For lunch, she skips the pricey sit-down restaurants inside the parks in favor of a salad or sandwich for around $12 at one of the many grab-and-go restaurants. This approach allows her to spring for a nice dinner with wine.SAVE ON A V.I.P. TOUR Ms. Goldsbury said that private theme park tours, which provide expedited entry into attractions, are the most exclusive way to visit the theme parks. These tours are a big time-saver and worth booking but not over a holiday such as Thanksgiving or Presidents’ Day weekend, when they can cost between $75 to $175 more per hour. “V.I.P. tours are much more expensive over holidays,” Ms. Goldsbury said.WATCH FOR PROMOTIONS Luxury Disney and Universal hotels such as Disney’s Grand Floridian Resort & Spa and Loews Portofino Bay Hotel at Universal Orlando have various promotions throughout the year, such as discounted room rates, a fourth night free and packages with meals. Watch for these deals, and book your stay accordingly to get more value for your dollar.A version of this article appears in print on October 8, 2017, on Page TR2 of the New York edition with the headline: Luxury for Less in Orlando? It Can Be Done.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.