AdvertisementSupported byCompiled by Justin SablichFall isn’t just about pretty leaves for travelers. Those willing to venture overseas could end up with some major savings, according to Hipmunk, the website and app that studies itineraries and other data to reveal affordable travel deals. Hipmunk recently looked at a year’s worth of flight bookings to determine some of the best off-season bargain destinations for the fall season. It analyzed roundtrip flights departing from the United States to international cities between Oct 1. of last year through Sept. 30 of this year. The savings percentage is based on maximum monthly pricing for that destination.Here are selections from our coverage of some of those recommendations, including the percentage of savings for that destination. Average November Fare: $824 (-63 percent)“There is literally nothing to do here,” the British musician Noel Gallagher once said of Brussels, that hotbed of policy directives. Clearly he didn’t have a chance to admire the graffiti, avant-garde installations or conceptual creations in the city’s new art spaces. Or shop for vintage items in the many retro and antique boutiques. Or taste the innovative dishes in the city’s neo-Belgian and Belgian-fusion restaurants.36 Hours in BrusselsAverage November Fare: $1,875 (-55 percent)Heralded as one of the world’s most beautiful cities — few destinations can mimic the scale of its mountain-ocean convergence — Cape Town doesn’t need to be as accommodating as it is; it could, in theory, sit pretty on the merits of its natural bounties alone. And yet it remains a singularly inviting place.36 Hours in Cape TownAverage November Fare: $991 (-42 percent)There are few cities in the world that transform themselves as profoundly from season to season as Berlin. It remains a place for the strange and libertine, where the radical left still nips at the heels of neoliberalism, where snapping photos in public is often more taboo than smoking a joint, and where people seldom ask what it is you “do.”36 Hours in BerlinAverage November Fare: $752 (-42 percent)As impressive as Hong Kong’s skyline is, the city never seems to stop building. With all this attention on infrastructure, though, Hong Kong hasn’t sacrificed its soul. It remains one of Asia’s most passionately creative cities, a playground for artists and designers, chefs and entrepreneurs.36 Hours in Hong KongAverage November Fare: $1,050 (-21 percent)Contemplating the physical sprawl of Tokyo is dizzying. The Japanese megalopolis has no discernible center, and clusters of skyscrapers miles apart defy the idea of a downtown core. But when time is limited, don’t be distracted by the hypnotic, multistory video screens. Instead, focus on a diverse cross-section of neighborhoods, from peaceful Nakameguro to eclectic Koenji, for a taste of this capital that will leave you hungry for more.36 Hours in JapanAdvertisement