
In Transit By                     
NORA WALSH

JUNE 24, 2016
From the revitalizing Financial District to Brooklyn’s trendy Williamsburg, here are seven new New York City hotels to check out this summer.AKA Wall StreetThe Financial District has its first luxury all-residential hotel. AKA Wall Street occupies a restored century-old building on the corner of William Street and Maiden Lane. “Affluent travelers want more than a bed and a minibar,” said Larry Korman, the president of AKA. The hotel’s 132 modern studios, one- and two-bedroom suites and penthouses all feature living rooms and fully equipped kitchens with stainless-steel Celador countertops, custom cabinetry and Fisher Paykel cooktops, ovens, microwaves and refrigerators. A glass-enclosed lounge shares the 20th-floor rooftop with an indoor screening room and outdoor movie theater overlooking 1 World Trade Center. Now open; introductory rates from $428.The Beekman, a Thompson HotelA New York skyscraper built in 1881 will reopen as the Beekman, a Thompson Hotel. A mix of old and new, the landmark building maintains its original nine-story Victorian atrium and pyramidal skylight. Martin Brudnizki designed the hotel’s 287 guest rooms and suites and two penthouses with turret terraces overlooking the Financial District. The Beekman will feature a Keith McNally restaurant, the three-meal Augustine serving French fare, while Tom Colicchio dishes up American classics at Fowler & Wells and cocktails at the Bar Room. Opens in July; rates from $619.The Redbury New YorkThe Los Angeles-based hospitality group, sbe, is putting the finishing touches on the Redbury New York (formerly the Martha Washington Hotel), a bohemian-inspired boutique hotel in Manhattan’s NoMad neighborhood. The creative director, the well-regarded photographer Matthew Rolston, took design cues from the neighborhood’s legendary Tin Pan Alley, where music publishing flourished in the early 20th century. Historic black-and-white photos and gramophones decorate the 265 rooms. Danny Meyer’s popular ground-floor restaurant, Marta, an upscale Roman pizzeria, and the lobby lounge, Bar Marta, will be unchanged. Now open, renovation is to be completed late summer; rates from $299.AdvertisementThe BernicThe Bernic, in Turtle Bay near the headquarters of the United Nations, is a new 22-story hotel close to the Chrysler Building and Grand Central Terminal. Drawings by the Brooklyn-based artist Ian Sklarsky decorate the 96 guest rooms, which also feature floor-to-ceiling windows, Apple TV, Strand book collections and glass-encased balconies. The street-level restaurant Allora has a menu of homemade pasta and other Italian-American specialties, while the rooftop bar serves cocktails topped off with skyline views. Opens Aug. 1; introductory rates from $199.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.EVEN HotelsWellness travelers will have a range of neighborhoods to choose from when EVEN Hotels makes its debut in Downtown Brooklyn and adds a second Midtown location on the East Side. Catering to guests who want to maintain a healthy lifestyle on the road, the brand offers wellness experiences from in-room training zones with fitness videos and workout equipment to athletic studios, ergonomic work stations and nutritious meals at Cork & Kale Market and Bar. EVEN Hotel Brooklyn will feature an outdoor garden, guided runs through Brooklyn Bridge Park and partnerships with local purveyors like the Brooklyn Brewery. EVEN Hotel Brooklyn opens in July, and EVEN Hotel New York – Midtown East opens in September; rates from $150The WilliamsburgChanneling Williamsburg’s industrial past and the hip enclave it has become, the Williamsburg Hotel features an eight-story facade of Corten steel, brick and glass topped with a retrofitted water tower that houses a cocktail bar. Designed by Michaelis Boyd and run by hospitality veterans Evan Altman and James Stuart, the property will feature a vegetable-focused restaurant, three bars, a rooftop pool and lounge, a seasonal outdoor eatery and a double-height grand ballroom. Half the 150 guest rooms and suites come with private terraces overlooking Brooklyn and Manhattan, while a chauffeured tuk-tuk will shuttle guests. Opens July; introductory rates from $250.AdvertisementThe William ValeThe William Vale is reshaping Williamsburg’s skyline with a contemporary 21-story high-rise, and adding 20,000 square feet of retail space covered by a sweeping public park overlooking Manhattan. The hotel will offer a resortlike atmosphere that includes a 60-foot pool — the longest hotel pool in the city — a 24-hour gym, an oversize ballroom and upscale shopping. Each of the 183 guest rooms opens onto a glass balcony with panoramic vistas. The chef Andrew Carmellini and NoHo Hospitality Group will operate the restaurant Leuca, featuring Southern Italian, wood-fired fare and Westlight, the hotel’s rooftop bar with 360-degree city views. Opens in August; introductory rates from $350.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »