AdvertisementSupported byIn TransitBy The New York TimesBold, colorful works of art covering walls, stairwells and the sides of buildings take center stage on the new Rotterdam Street Art Tour, which can be followed using an app or by taking a guided tour. The 4.3-mile route starts at Rotterdam Central Station and directs visitors to more than 30 wall paintings created by local artists.The app has a map and background information in text and audio and also shows the locations of notable graffiti that has disappeared. The route can be downloaded in advance, making it possible to follow the tour without Internet access. Rewriters010, which designed the route, leads guided tours every weekend or by request during the week. Tours must be reserved at rewriters010.nl. The cost is 15 euros ($17) a person. The app is available at iTunes and Google Play.DIANE DANIELThere was a time when the town of Caudebec-en-Caux, along the Seine River in the heart of Normandy, was famous for “le mascaret”: a massive equinox wave that rolled with fury along the river and could splash water up to 30 feet high into the quay. The mascaret was tamed when a sea wall was built in the 1960s, but the Seine still determines everyday life.After eight years of planning, Muséoseine, a small, charming museum devoted to the Seine, opened on April 30. Among the highlights: vestiges from ancient Gallo-Roman, Viking and medieval eras; a collection of boats; videos that evoke the river’s traditions as a working water highway to the ocean; and footage of the mascaret in 1947. Visitors can watch the boats go up and down the river from a balcony built on a “gribane” — a flat-bottomed wooden barge.The center of Caudebec-en-Caux was largely destroyed in a fire following bombing by the Nazis in 1940, but merits a visit because of the Flamboyant Gothic Notre-Dame church, built in the 15th and 16th centuries; 333 sculpted human figures adorn its western portal. Then visitors can go on to the nearby G.a. Manoir de Rétival restaurant, which was awarded its first Michelin star earlier this year.ELAINE SCIOLINOAdvertisement