
In Transit By                     
THE NEW YORK TIMES

MAY 9, 2016
In the wake of Fathom cruise line’s announcement that it will be the first American line to travel from Miami to Cuba, the French line Ponant has received approval to cruise around Cuba. Its 64-passenger Le Ponant will begin seven- and eight-night trips in January. Passengers will gather in Miami and fly to Havana to meet the ship, making port calls in the wildlife-rich Cayo Largo, the French colonial town of Cienfuegos and the Unesco World Heritage site city of Trinidad and to Santiago de Cuba. In a “people to people” program, guests will meet Cuban artists. This is the first time the company will accommodate Americans, though it has been offering cruises to Cuba for Europeans. Eight-night trips start at $8,190 per person, double occupancy, including round-trip airfare between Miami and Cuba.ELAINE GLUSACThe state of Gujarat in western India — the birthplace of Mohandas K. Gandhi and of the current prime minister, Narendra Modi — has a rich culture and history that most tourists are not aware of. A new trip from Immersion Journeys gives them a chance to discover the region.The 12-day “Gujarat: The Land of Legends, Culture and Crafts” begins in Ahmedabad to see Hindu and Jain temples; the Sabarmati Ashram, where Gandhi once lived; and the Calico Museum of Textiles, whose handiwork spans five centuries. Other highlights include Palitana, with 900 carved temples; a safari in Sasan Gir National Park, home to 300 Asiatic lions; the fortified town of Gondal; Bhuj City, including a visit to the Zenana Mahal palace to see its wooden filigree work; and a drive through the Kutch desert region to visit tribes who have lived there for centuries. Prices from $5,295 a person include accommodations, some meals, a driver and guide, game drives and entrance fees.A version of this article appears in print on April 24, 2016, on Page TR2 of the New York edition.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »