AdvertisementSupported byBy Freda MoonFrom Maine to Florida, Washington State to Southern California, we are featuring six islands that make for ideal escapes—into the past, into nature, into luxury. Check back each day this week for more.“Dolphins, dolphins!” the girls shrieked, leaping from their seats, where they had just returned after chasing one another through the ferry’s aisles. They rushed to the windows, crushing shoulder to shoulder to glimpse a fin, rising and falling, here then there, cutting through the inky blue Pacific. Even from across the cabin, I was sure one of them must be the birthday girl. Among any group bound for Santa Catalina, often called Catalina, an island 22 miles offshore from Los Angeles, there is almost always at least one — a passenger taking advantage of the annual free ride aboard the Catalina Express.They are identifiable by ribbons on their chests, like the prize winners at a county fair. Throughout the ferry ride, and throughout the day, they are wished a happy birthday by strangers, handed free ice cream at Lloyd’s, treated to bowling at Three Palms Avalon Arcade or a free tour of the famous Avalon Casino. In this way, the once glamorous Catalina — now billed “Birthday Island” by the marketers at Catalina Express — has become a sort of upscale, multigenerational Chuck E. Cheese’s, a place for “birthday boys and girls” (as adults and children alike are called in promotional materials) to celebrate their day. The kids tend to be giddy and the adults, tipsy. (The bar on our 8 a.m. ferry had a line during much of the one-hour ride from Long Beach to Avalon, the largest of the two towns on the 75-square-mile island.)I wasn’t visiting Catalina for a birthday. Instead, I had tacked a two-day detour onto a trip to Los Angeles. That, it turned out, was just the right amount of time. It was long enough to repeatedly walk Avalon’s main drag, a pedestrian avenue lined with fish shacks, ice cream parlors and shops with names like Buoys & Gulls and Afishinados. Most sold some mix of swimwear, Hawaiian shirts, sunglasses and souvenirs. To its great credit, Catalina doesn’t take itself too seriously.My husband, daughter and I took a taxi — one of the few cars on the island, where the waiting list for a vehicle permit is over a decade long and where most people go by foot or golf cart — between the ferry terminal and our hotel, El Terado Terrace. Otherwise, we walked. Veering from the waterfront strip, I climbed the steep side streets devouring the smell of jasmine and relishing the sight of palm trees, purple-flowered jacaranda and hot pink bougainvillea.Sticking to town, I didn’t see the island’s celebrated bison (now our nation’s national mammal), which roam Catalina’s almost entirely undeveloped interior, the descendants of 14 animals brought here in 1924 for the filming of a movie. But bison iconography is everywhere in Avalon (including a statue on the roof of our hotel) — making it a sort of unofficial town mascot. During these walks, I would sometimes slip into seeing the streets, with their Art Deco architectural character and Moorish tiles, as a sort of movie set. Even the town’s name, Avalon, could be mistaken for a fictional Disney town.On a tour of Catalina Casino, the iconic 1929 structure that dominates Avalon’s waterfront, our guide — a woman with terrific Cruella de Vil hair — explained that the building was never a gambling hall, as most assume. It was a casino in the Italian sense, a palace of entertainment. During Catalina’s heyday, it was the island’s major attraction. The ground floor is a magnificent theater — among the first cinemas in the country designed specifically for “talkies” — while the top floor, 12 stories up, was an opulent ballroom with a Brazilian white hardwood dance floor and a Tiffany chandelier that drew big band fanatics chasing their favorite performers. The casino’s theater still operates, showing one first-run movie a week, one screening a night, and is owned, as much of the island once was, by the Santa Catalina Island Company and the Wrigley family. (Yes, those Wrigleys; the Chicago Cubs used to spend their spring training on the island.)Later, standing on the green pier, we watched a seal herd a thick school of darting, desperate fish. In contrast to Long Beach (our mainland departure point), the water in Avalon Harbor was as clear as an aquarium. The seal’s meal was our entertainment. “Who needs SeaWorld,” I thought. Here, there was snorkeling and diving, paddleboarding and kayaking, parasailing and sportfishing. I wanted to do it all. But short on time and traveling with an infant, we settled on a ride on a yellow submarine.The Nautilus, a semi-submersible tourist vessel with large porthole windows beneath the water’s surface and “missiles” of fish food, greeted us with a mock sci-fi soundtrack of a captain’s voice. But once we got moving, the hokiness gave way to excitement as my 10-month-old daughter, Roxie, stared in awe at the air bubbles, the rays of light through the water and, finally, fish. So many fish. There were bright orange garibaldi, the California state marine fish (and a $1,000 fine to catch and fail to release), blue halfmoon perch and opaleye, named for their opalescent blue-green eyes. With each blast of the food cannon, they swarmed and Roxie squealed, like the little girls on the ferry. The half-hour tour was over just in time for us to catch the noon boat back to the mainland, escorted from Avalon Harbor by a pod of dolphins.If You Go The Catalina Express (catalinaexpress.com) offers multiple passages daily from three mainland departure points. From $36 one way, full-fare adults.Advertisement