

      By JENNIFER CONLIN

AUG. 11, 2016

Urban edginess, cultural authenticity, not to mention spiced meatballs in lingonberry sauce: the perfect formula for a weekend away.
Related Article
Minneapolis, a city of lakes, has it all — an industrial past that is both gritty and glamorous; affordability and a high rate of employment that make the city a magnet for millennials (17 Fortune 500 companies are headquartered in Minnesota); and a full spectrum of cultural offerings and recreational activities. This year, Minneapolis and its environs have been a destination for Prince fans intent on exploring the artist’s beloved hometown — a place he stayed close to until his death last April. Urban authenticity, cultural sophistication, Midwestern friendliness: They all add up to the perfect formula for a weekend away.
Explore street view, find things to do in Minneapolis and sign in to your Google account to save your map.
Minneapolis is particularly alluring in the summer. Start the weekend on the riverfront, taking in the magnificent Mississippi. The Stone Arch Bridge has an excellent view of roaring St. Anthony Falls, the only major waterfall on the river. Built of native granite and limestone in 1883, the bridge allowed for increased movement of goods across the river. Now, it is both pedestrian- and bike-friendly, as are the banks lining the river. With an extensive bike-share program (Nice Ride costs $4 per half-hour), you can pedal the riverside paths, but be sure to look up at the Historic Mill District buildings. From the late 19th century to the 1930s, Minneapolis was the flour-milling capital of the world, and the Instagram-worthy signs (Gold Medal Flour, Pillsbury’s Best Flour) are still there to prove it. Stop in at Spoonriver in the Mill District for happy hour. The restaurateur Brenda Langton is credited with serving the first local, organic food in the area four decades ago when she opened her first cafe. Today, patrons head for the sleek bar to sip specialty cocktails (try the Elderflower Martini, $11.50, or Passion Fruit Bellini, $8.50), while nibbling on appetizers like shrimp quesadilla with coconut lime salsa ($13.50). The British stage director Sir Tyrone Guthrie could never have imagined that the theater he founded in 1963 to create a resident acting company outside of New York would one day become an architectural icon. Yet a decade ago, the Guthrie Theater was moved to a new facility in the Mill District designed by Jean Nouvel to reflect the neighborhood’s history. The form of the main auditorium is circular like a mill, and LED masts atop the building mimic smokestacks. The biggest highlight for visitors, beyond attending a performance in one of the three theaters, is the Endless Bridge. The 30-foot-wide cantilevered lobby stretches more than half a block, offering a spectacular 180-degree view. The dining scene in Minneapolis perked up five years ago with the arrival of the Bachelor Farmer, a stylish restaurant serving Swedish fare to reflect the city’s Scandinavian heritage. Recently named Best Midwest Chef by the James Beard Foundation, Paul Berglund dazzles diners with his open-face toasts with toppings (beef tartare, smoked pork shoulder, homemade pâté, from $15). Now he has a new competitor: the bright, airy French-inspired restaurant St. Genevieve, which opened earlier this year. The chef, Steven Brown, features an exquisite champagne menu and emphasizes small plates with big ingredients — morels, fois gras, scallop and crab — as well as tartines, the French open-face sandwich. (Small plates and tartines from $9.) On the outside of the building that houses the First Avenue & 7th Street Entry is a virtual constellation of white stars emblazoned with the names of those who have performed in these two music venues — Joan Jett, Wilson Pickett, James Brown, the Pretenders, to name just a few. But only one star is gold: that of Prince. It was recently painted to honor the music legend, who not only played at the club often, but filmed scenes there for his movie “Purple Rain.” Open nightly and showcasing a variety of groups (indie rock, British pop, garage, punk, new wave, electronic), the club has recently had a few “Let’s Go Crazy” Prince tribute nights. In early September the Revolution, the group Prince founded nearly 40 years ago, plans to play there once again. Hit the Mill City Farmers’ Market, open every Saturday through October. It is packed with local farmers, food vendors and artists. Pick up a bag of sugary, hot organic mini-doughnuts from Chef Shack ($6) and then head into the adjacent Mill City Museum. Housed in what was once the world’s largest flour mill, it is now a national landmark and boasts an eight-story glass facade overlooking the river with true-to-scale graphics of the machines once operating there. The nearby North Loop neighborhood — or Warehouse Historic district as it was known when a railroad yard was there — is now a booming area of independent retailers, coffee shops and bars for the young creatives living and working in the converted buildings. Check out Martin Patrick 3, a seriously stylish men’s store selling upscale furnishings, apparel and accessories. Then come down to earth at the Foundry Home Goods, where one finds bath brushes made by the visually impaired in Sweden and jute baskets from Morocco. Go back in time at the American Swedish Institute, a French-style mansion constructed over five years by wealthy Swedish immigrants for their family and completed in 1908. Though now a cultural center and museum, one can still tour the original home complete with ornate tile stoves and elaborate woodwork. But before your tour, put your name down at the popular Fika, the cafe  inside the Institute, which offers a contemporary twist on Swedish specialties like juniper spiced meatballs with potato purée and a lingonberry and mustard sauce ($11). For dessert, try the cardamom bread pudding, with brandy, caramel and cinnamon whipped cream ($7). Stop in at Lowry Hill Meats, which is far more than a butcher shop. Here you can create your own hamper for two and stock it with nut-filled breads, exotic charcuterie, duck liver pâté and artisanal cheeses. Take it straight to the Minneapolis Chain of Lakes (five in total), encircled by pedestrian and bike paths. At Lake Calhoun, the largest,there are public beaches with sand volleyball, and a place to rent canoes, pedal boats, bikes and kayaks by the hour. Head to Lake Harriet and the Lyndale Park Rose Garden, the perfect place for your picnic. During the summer, there are concerts at the nearby Lake Harriet Bandshell showcasing pop, blues, folk and rock. Grab a bench and enjoy the music with the sun still shining. But when it sets, stay put — this is when movie night begins, projecting modern classics like “Young Frankenstein,” “Back to the Future” and Disney flicks like “Enchanted.” Dining late is the norm at 112 Eatery, which serves food until 1 a.m. on Friday and Saturday. This intimate, dark restaurant with leather booths is known for its eclectic menu. Try the 112 Cheese Burger, slathered with Brie cheese inside a toasted English muffin ($12). Another favorite is ricotta dumplings with peas and morels ($15). The wine list is extensive and well-priced, making it easy to rationalize having just one more glass before bed. Don’t be surprised if you see a few people having a breakfast beer at Tilia, a colorful neighborhood bistro, where there are 21 special craft brews bearing names like War & Peace, Insurrection and Lonely Blond. The food is equally hearty and unusual — Fish Taco Torta ($11), Reuben Benedict ($12) and Biscuits and Sawmill Sausage Gravy ($11). Sit at the bar if you can, as you’ll quickly make friends with some of the top movers and shakers in the city. With major renovations underway on the Walker Art Center/Minneapolis Sculpture Garden campus (the Walker remains open despite construction; the sculpture garden is closed), visit the Minneapolis Institute of Art and the 10-year-old Target Wing, which added 34 galleries. Check out the “International Modernism” exhibition on display until May 7, 2017, exploring how artists and designers in the early 1900s were inspired by innovations (radios, skyscrapers, even modern psychology) from the 1910s to the early 1960s. Then, on your way out of town, stop at Minnehaha Falls, a watery wonder. Made famous in Henry Wadsworth Longfellow’s poem, “The Song of Hiawatha,” the cascading water ripping over the bluff is one of the prettiest, and most photographed, sites in Minnesota. Aloft Minneapolis, 900 Washington Avenue South; Aloftminneapolis.com. Located in the heart of downtown in the Mill District, the hotel has a fun lobby bar with a pool table, an indoor splash pool, free Wi-Fi and coffee, and a snack store downstairs. Double rooms recently started around $128. W Minneapolis, The Foshay, 821 Marquette Avenue;starwoodhotels.com. Also downtown, this Art Deco hotel has a full-service spa, 24-hour fitness facilities, free Wi-Fi and a cafe and bar. Double rooms start around $280. Flight and Hotel information provided by Google.Prices represent a snapshot of low fares and rates for weekend trips.Advertisement