AdvertisementSupported byWhere to Go NowBy Shivani VoraEven the cocktails will be stylish. Following New York Fashion Week: the shows, being held from Sept. 8 to 15, London, Milan and Paris celebrate spring 2017 fashion with their own events. The runway aside, there’s plenty going on in hotels in each city where travelers and locals alike can get a taste of the scene without attending an actual, invitation-only show. It’s a nice way to feel, well, fashionable.■ The Berkeley, in Knightsbridge, is hosting two fashion-themed tea classes — one on Sept. 16 and the other on Sept. 19, both from 2 to 4 p.m. Guests will receive a personalized apron and spend the afternoon with the property’s pastry chef, Mourad Khiat, learning how to ice Jimmy Choo cookies, cut out a Valentino handbag cake and whip up a Jason Wu mousse. They can enjoy the treats afterward in the Collins Room, the hotel’s dining room. 150 pounds a person ($196). Reservations can be made at 44-207-201-1619.■ On Sept. 19 from 6:30 to 8:30 p.m., St. Martins Lane, in Covent Garden, will host Christian Dior’s international makeup artist, Jamie Coombes, for a backstage makeup demonstration. Mr. Coombes will share his latest tips from London Fashion Week. £30; includes a Bellini. ■ Como Metropolitan London, near Hyde Park, has begun a partnership with the premium British accessories brand Gladstone, and during Fashion Week the brand will have a pop-up store in the hotel lobby. The selection includes unisex backpacks, messenger bags, totes and carry-on luggage. Prices begin at $370. Also, the hotel’s Met Bar will offer a menu of four fashion-themed cocktails including the Fashionista, a blend of fresh grapefruit, orange and tomato juices, agave, cherry liqueur, tequila, cinnamon, cardamom and fresh chile. About $18 each.■ The Library Bar at the Lanesborough, by Hyde Park Corner, has a menu of three drinks on its Cocktail Catwalk menu. One of them is the Ruby Seduction, which includes cherry brandy, hibiscus syrup, Creole bitters and Champagne. The drink is served in a teacup with a layer of cranberry and cherry blossom foam; £25 each.■ The Mandarin Bar at the Mandarin Oriental Hyde Park, London has teamed with the makeup artist Laura Mercier during Fashion Week for two chocolate cocktails, one alcoholic and one nonalcoholic, because Ms. Mercier loves chocolate but doesn’t imbibe. The Ershi kiss is made with Baileys, chocolate, raspberry and cinnamon (£18), and the Sweet Wugu has chocolate, raspberry, cinnamon and cream (£12.50).The new boutique hotel the Franklin, in Knightsbridge, has a fashion-themed package that includes overnight accommodations, a five-course dinner paired with gin and Champagne cocktails and a £100 gift certificate to Harrods. Prices start at £650.The Donovan Bar at Brown’s Hotel, in Mayfair, will offer two healthy snacks during Fashion Week: a cold-pressed juice with a quinoa burger for £34 and a cold-pressed juice with crudité and goji energy balls for £30■ Park Hyatt Milan, in the city center, will host a Fashion Week party with a D.J. on Sept. 20 in its Mio Bar; the 7 p.m. event is open to the public. There’s no cost to attend, and fashion-themed cocktails are 20 euros, about $22, each. ■ Four Seasons Hotel Milan, in the city center, is offering Taste and Shine — a health-conscious breakfast paired with a choice of an express beauty treatment. The service is available from 7 to 9 a.m. at the spa or in guest rooms. Rooms are available during Fashion Week, and prices begin at €620 a night.■ Baglioni Hotel Carlton, overlooking the Via della Spiga shopping thoroughfare, offers the Inside Milan Fashion package, which includes a two-night stay in a junior suite, breakfast, a three-hour shopping excursion with a personal shopper and a health-conscious lunch for two in its outdoor restaurant, Baglioni Terrace. Prices from €1,285.The Spa at Mandarin Oriental, Milan is introducing the Digital Detox Retreat treatment during Fashion Week, which encourages guests to surrender their phones and other gadgets upon arrival at the spa. The service itself is 80 minutes long and includes an aromatic bath and a massage. €200■ Le Bristol Paris, on the elegant Rue du Faubourg Saint-Honoré, will have a Fashion Saturday tea on Oct. 1 from 2 to 4 p.m. The menu includes sandwiches, a glass of Champagne and fashion-themed pastries. There will be an additional Fashion tea on Oct. 8. 70 euros a person.■ The Hotel Plaza Athénée, on Avenue Montaigne, renowned for its views of the Eiffel Tower, will debut a three-course dinner menu at its 1920s themed restaurant, Le Relais Plaza, that is inspired by Christian Dior’s cookbook “La Cuisine Cousu-Main.” The options include the designer’s favorite dishes such as green pea and mint soup, chilled langoustine and grilled lamb chops. €90 a person.■ During Fashion Week, all guests who stay at La Réserve Hotel and Spa Paris, a boutique property near the Champs-Élysées, will receive a red lacquer jewelry box as a gift. The box, which the hotel sells for €2,000, is designed by Sema, an artisan who also worked on the hotel’s library. Rooms are available during Fashion Week, and prices start at €1,100 a night.- Le George, the Mediterranean restaurant at Four Seasons Hotel George V, will serve the four-course “Be Trendy, Be Healthy” menu during Fashion Week, which has dishes like sea bass crudo with balsamic vinegar powder and baby spinach with red prawns and truffle. The meal comes with the Good Green cocktail, made of basil, cucumber, lemon grass, lime and ginger. €115 per person.■ The Kleber Bar at the Peninsula Paris will offer the Better in Red cocktail during Fashion Week. The drink includes Aperol, cherry nectar, raspberry-infused cordial and ginger beer. The price is €26.Advertisement