By MIKE McPHATEMAY 27, 2016
The wilderness of the 2,190-mile Appalachian Trail can pose many risks to its visitors. Getting hopelessly lost or falling ill, wild animals and dangerous weather are all possibilities. But no risk is so ominous as the humble tick.That is, at least, according to Matt Graves of the National Park Service.“You would think it would be things like wildlife, raging rivers and stuff like that,” he said. “But it’s the little things that will get you.”Hikers unknowingly pick up the ticks, and then two or three weeks later find themselves laid low on the trail by the fever and other flulike symptoms of a tick-borne illness.To be sure, lightning strikes, falling trees and getting lost are real dangers along the route that stretches between Georgia and Maine, said Mr. Graves. But cases like the death of Geraldine Largay, 66, who wandered off the trail in Maine in 2013, those instances are very rare. (The official file on her disappearance was released Wednesday by the Maine Warden Service. An experienced hiker, she survived a month and kept a journal before dying from exposure. Her body was not found for two years.)Advertisement“On the Appalachian Trail, we have little subtle things, dehydration, norovirus from hikers spreading stomach flu to one another,” Mr. Graves said.Preparation is key. We asked Mr. Graves and David Miller, the author of “A Handbook for Hiking the Appalachian Trail,” for tips on staying safe on the rugged path.AdvertisementYou can expect to meet a number of people on the trail, and maybe you’ll make a friend or two. Park officials simply advise hikers to trust their instincts if someone’s behavior seems a bit off and to keep their distance.“Don’t worry about being judgmental or hurting someone’s feelings; your safety may depend on it,” the service says.Mr. Miller said you’re probably more likely to run into a bandit in town than on the trail.“On the trail, you have a lot of exposure to other people,” he said. “But I don’t think it’s particularly dangerous in that respect. I would say it’s safer than normal.”Other suggested ways to keep the bad guys at bay: Camp away from roads, don’t bring jewelry, and keep your money out of sight.And if you hike alone, use extra caution. Tag along with a group if you can.It’s a good idea to take your phone, which could potentially help in an emergency. But it’s possible to go for days without any reception, the park service says.Tragically, Ms. Largay, the Tennessee woman who died after getting lost in western Maine in 2013, had tried to send texts to her husband pleading for help. Because of poor cellphone reception, they didn’t go through.AdvertisementCarry a current trail map and know how to read it, the service says. And whether you are going on a day hike or walking the 2,190 miles, let someone know.The park service also encourages hikers to sign the trail registers, which can help family members and law enforcement officials locate them if they need to.You’re allowed to carry one on parts of the trail, but the park service would rather you didn’t. “The threat of firearms being turned against you or an accidental shooting outweighs the benefit,” the service says. It also doesn’t fit with the culture of the trail.What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.If you must carry a gun, you’ll still have to abide by state laws.Mr. Graves said there are bears on the trail, but they are “generally well behaved,” as are the raccoons and skunks.Thunderstorm season along the trail typically runs from about April to October.Mr. Miller said lightning was the scariest thing ever encountered on the trail.“You’re often right on the ridgeline, and there’s not a lot you can do to avoid that when a storm rolls in,” he said. “In many places it’s difficult to get off the trail, to get down from high places.”Mr. Graves said hikers should try to spot dangerous weather as it moves in. When you see big clouds coming in from the west, he said, seek shelter off the ridge.The New Hampshire mountains have a reputation as the sketchiest section of the trail. Erratic weather, high winds and steep, rugged terrain create the potential for hikers to get into serious trouble.Advertisement“That’s generally considered the most dangerous in regards to terrain and exposure,” Mr. Miller said. “It’s difficult terrain, rocky and steep, and people don’t make progress as quickly as they expect to.”The range includes Mount Washington, at 6,288 feet the highest peak in the northeastern United States.The climate on the range “can rival the severity of the greatest ranges in the world,” the Mount Washington Avalanche Center says on its website. “Arctic temperatures, hurricane-force winds, snow and icing are possible in any month.”Norovirus, highly contagious, can travel fast on the trail, saddling its victims with nausea, vomiting and diarrhea.“In the last couple of years, there’s been a troublesome number of cases of norovirus just from the communal eating and tight living quarters,” Mr. Miller said.The park service advises hikers to wash their hands before eating and avoid sharing utensils. Whether you filter it, boil it or put chlorine dioxide in it, always treat your drinking water.“Hygiene is a little bit problematic because it’s not like you have a wash basin available to you,” Mr. Miller said. “Most people kind of just do the best they can with hand sanitizer.”When you meet people on the trail, go with a fist bump.And don’t forget to check for ticks.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.