Photographs by ADAM HARTEAUAUG. 28, 2017
When you are a child, time has a way of unspooling slowly, purely set to our natural rhythm. As we grow older, time is punctuated by appointments and alarm clocks, and we forget how to live at our own pace.When we set off on an overland road trip in a van five years ago, we wanted to slow down time again by raising a family on the road and use their questions about nature and life as our curriculum. We are world-schooling our kids.Many factors determine our plans. Weather and finances help us decide which activities we do, where to camp and how long to stay. We have a loose idea of where we want to be for, say, a season, or if we need to meet someone somewhere in three months.We have traveled throughout Central and South America, visiting one stunning landscape after the other. We hope that we are raising children who will grow up to cherish the natural wonders of the world. — Emily HarteauWatching children play in nature is the best reminder of how to remain present. Above, we were on the trail to the famed towers in Torres del Paine National Park in Southern Chilean Patagonia. We had hiked up and set a base camp at Campamento Los Torres, gone to bed early, then awoke at 4:45 a.m. in the dark for an early morning push to watch the sun rise over the gorgeous spires.AdvertisementFrom the highlands of La Paz, Bolivia, it took us three days to drive to the Amazon basin. After a few days by boat from Rurrenabaque, we met some locals who had just rescued this baby howler monkey the night before. They discovered it crying alone on the forest floor, and guessed that it was an orphan.When we saw these incredible rock faces in the Potosi department of Bolivia, we decided we’d have to stop to climb them. We consulted local shepherds at Estancia Churata, who confirmed that bolted sport-climbing routes were there. The sight on the ground, though, awed us. Llamas grazed in the verdant pasture, watered by a trickling stream that flowed down the center of the valley.We stopped to look for whales and other wildlife in the Atlantic from the top of Faro Punta Delgada lighthouse in Argentina. The Valdes Peninsula of Northern Patagonia is on the UNESCO World Heritage list for its bounty of fauna.El Tatio geysers in the Atacama desert of northern Chile sits above 14,000 feet in elevation, making them among the highest geyser fields in the world. The fumaroles, steam plumes and bubbling, bursting geysers put on an impressive natural exhibition. We love the breadth and diversity we’ve encountered on the road.We crossed one of the countless glacial rivers in Los Glaciares National Park in Argentina and took a break to let Colette lay on her belly to drink deeply from a stream. She exclaimed “THAT is the best water I have ever tasted!”The kids think that living in a tiny house with wheels is pretty cool because it means having a beach house one week, a mountain cabin the next. One week, above, we were 100 miles into the vast Salar de Uyuni, the world’s largest salt flats, in southwest Bolivia, exploring one of the islands.On another trip, below, we pitched camp in Los Glaciares National Park in Argentina with a view of Cerro Torre soaring in the background. Backcountry explorations with children require additional planning but pays you back handsomely.A version of this article appears in print on September 3, 2017, on Page TR6 of the New York edition with the headline: Life Among  The Llamas.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.