
Pursuits By                     
DANIELLA CHESLOW AND DANIEL ESTRIN

MAY 24, 2016
On the island of Lesbos, the slow and rustic rhythms of Greek life rule. Sheep block traffic as they amble across mountain roads, bells clanking. At a seaside tavern, diners nibble on freshly caught calamari under the generous boughs of an old mulberry tree.This is a routine Sunday afternoon at Myrivilis’ Mulberry tavern in Skala Sikaminias, a fishing village of about 100 residents on the northern tip of Lesbos, Greece’s third-largest island. It’s a sharp contrast from last autumn, when the restaurant’s calamari fisherman was busy hauling sea-soaked asylum seekers to dry land, and waiters turned tables into makeshift hospital beds for shipwrecked survivors treated for hypothermia.Since last year, more than a million Middle Eastern migrants (mostly Syrians, Afghans and Iraqis) fleeing war and uncertain futures have risked their lives crossing the Aegean Sea from Turkey on flimsy boats to reach Greece. More than 1,100 people drowned on the way. Nearly 60 percent of migrants landed on Lesbos, thrusting a quiet vacation island into newspaper headlines.The people of Lesbos looked at the newcomers and saw themselves. Most locals are descendants of people who also braved the Aegean Sea, fleeing Turkey or forcibly displaced in the aftermath of World War I. The two brothers who run Myrivilis’ Mulberry are the grandsons of a refugee. They and the majority of Lesbos’ residents received the recent arrivals with almost bottomless generosity. “Everybody asks why,” said Lefteris Stylianou, a tavern owner. “It’s normal. It’s our mentality.”AdvertisementIslanders call it philoxenia, Greek for “love of the other,” but it has come at a price: Summer tourism bookings are down about 70 percent. Potential tourists fear spending their vacation near refugee camps.AdvertisementThey are making a mistake.Lesbos (locals pronounce it Lesvos) remains an enchanting getaway, attracting bird-watchers and orchid obsessives in spring and lesbians in September for the annual International Eressos Women’s Festival at the birthplace of Sappho, the ancient poet who wrote about her love for women and inspired the term “lesbian.”In recent months, aid groups and thousands of international volunteers descended on Lesbos to feed and shelter the migrant arrivals, bringing a festival-like spirit to improvised camps — even importing food trucks and pagoda tents used in European festivals. “We saw the similarity between a refugee camp and a party event,” said Adil Izemrane, a Dutch volunteer. “People need to drink, people need to have food, people need to go to the toilet.”Pope Francis and celebrities like Angelina Jolie and Susan Sarandon also came to show their support. Yet new European Union steps to curb migration mean arrivals have plummeted to fewer than 100 a week, down from the thousands last fall, and many volunteers have packed up and moved to help the bulk of migrants marooned on mainland Greece. Now, even as the sun seekers have been scared away, many of the aid groups and volunteers who replaced them have moved on as well.Lesbos residents say this is a perfect time to visit. Vacationers should not feel as if they are being callous about a pleasure trip to a place still dealing with the migrant influx, residents say, because they would provide vital support to an economy doubly strained by a collapse in tourism and Greece’s financial crisis. A tourist who knows where to look can find monuments to earlier dramas: the graveyard of discarded orange life jackets piled in a field, and a few small graveyards of migrants who drowned on the way.The roughly 4,000 migrants who remain on Lesbos are mostly detained in camps. There is still plenty to do to help. Travelers can volunteer in a large-scale effort to remove boat parts and life jackets from miles of beaches and sea floor, or help distribute food and clothing to migrants stuck on Lesbos. But most of the island remains tranquil, unaffected by the crisis.The two of us, American journalists reporting out of Jerusalem, wanted to meet the people fleeing wars on our doorstep. We felt a personal pull, too, as the descendants of Eastern European immigrants who crossed the sea for a better life in America. And we heard that the island’s ouzo and sardines were among the world’s best. We experienced both faces of Lesbos, an asylum seeker’s portal and a sanctuary of slow Greek rhythms, and came away enriched.A 45-minute flight from Athens landed us in Mytilene, the capital of Lesbos, in late February. We rented a car and headed north for Molyvos, a picturesque town of stone homes and wisteria-covered alleyways that cascade down a hill under a Byzantine fortress, within sight of the Turkish coast. We ambled along the small harbor where octopus tentacles hang to dry before grilling, arriving at the seaside Captain’s Table fish restaurant for dinner. Donations from tourists helped the restaurateur Melinda McRostie found the Starfish Foundation, one of the first grass-roots aid groups on the island. Volunteers unwind in the small dining room, where a bulletin board advertises yoga classes and sharing circles where volunteers can debrief one another about their experiences.AdvertisementThe next morning, we joined a retired Canadian teacher, an Australian road tripper and other Starfish volunteers to greet about 50 Syrians and Iraqis in waterlogged shoes, brought ashore by the Hellenic Coast Guard. We distributed bottled water and dry socks, and activated an iPhone’s Wi-Fi hot spot so Mahmoud Qadi, 21, could let his father in Syria know that he and his teenage brother had made it. Boat arrivals are rare now, so Starfish’s international volunteers have been making about 1,000 sandwiches a day for migrants held at a closed facility in the village of Moria.Elsewhere in the Molyvos area, visitors can join the Dirty Girls of Lesvos Island, an islandwide laundry operation founded by an Australian tourist to wash and dry clothing and blankets for people in camps, or the Swedish group Lighthouse Relief, which is leading one of several efforts to clear the beaches of items migrants discarded on their arrival. A short walk from the Lighthouse home base is charming Skala Sikaminias, the village made famous by its fishermen’s valiant rescues.We wound back to Mytilene, a bustling port city, to chop carrots and onions in a food truck that the Dutch group Movement on the Ground drives around Lesbos, serving hot curries at camps. Volunteers are still needed to cook and hand out food, said Mr. Izemrane, a founder of the group. Near Mytilene is the Kara Tepe camp, where the Humanitarian Support Agency seeks volunteers to distribute food, tea and supplies. Although hotel reservations have fallen in most of Lesbos, in Mytilene many budget hotels were filled with volunteers and aid workers.A short drive from Mytilene is Therma Spa Lesvos at the Gera Bay hot springs, one of the island’s five natural thermal baths. We soaked in the quiet, stonewalled chambers, showered with a scented scrub and relaxed in an airy reception hall facing the bay. For five euros (about $5.50) each, it was a steal.We wanted to explore a quieter corner of Lesbos and gambled on Plomari on the southern coast. All we knew was that it is the source of some of Greece’s best olive oil and aniseed-flavored ouzo. We called Myrta Kalampoka, who runs the organic Eirini Plomariou olive oil company with her husband, Nikos, to arrange a tour of their orchards. But when we pulled into the town square, she insisted we first meet them for a glass of ouzo at To Sokaki, a taverna on a narrow side street near the Aegean Sea.Take out your batteries, Ms. Kalampoka instructed, and get on Greek time. So we recharged her way, savoring the locally distilled Barbayanni ouzo alongside a steady march of mezze brought to our sun-drenched table: wild asparagus with eggs; smoked mackerel; and tiny fried red mullet, called barbounia, that we ate whole, head and all. The bill was 10 euros each.Slightly hazy, we climbed into the Kalampokas’ pickup truck and drove to their hillside olive grove to taste their award-winning peppery oil. Ms. Kalampoka said marketing the oil as premium and organic kept their business afloat during Greece’s financial crisis. We spent the evening watching the sun set over a pale blue chapel from the balcony of their simple guesthouse, the Irini Plomari Apartments, perched over a secluded part of the Plomari shore (40 euros).Our lazy getaway ended abruptly the next morning in a forest clearing where Sigrid van der Zee of Pandora Travel Lesvos urged us into her red Jeep for a boisterous ride through muddy mountain roads, beeping for fun as we splashed through puddles. She is a Greek-speaking veteran transplant to the island with a shock of cropped blond hair revealing her Dutch roots, and she wants visitors to experience Lesbos as an adventure, not a crisis. “No one will come for holidays just because they pity us,” she said.AdvertisementOur first stop was the Myrsiniotissis Convent, built in 1523 and still home to a few elderly nuns. We hiked the hills, following in the footsteps of medieval monks along a weathered stone path lined with wildflowers, to reach the Limonos Monastery, the largest on Lesbos. We explored its tiny rooms where monks once lived and prayed, most notably St. Ignatius, who founded it in the 16th century and is a venerated figure on the island.Leaving the trail, we descended to verdant farmlands along the Gulf of Kalloni and stopped to photograph a flamboyance of pale flamingoes in seaside marshes. In the evening we pulled into Toumba Eco Farm, a cluster of comfortable stone cottages on a mountain overlooking the sea. Horses roamed near the reception lodge. Margarita Niziskioti, the innkeeper, poured us red wine next to a wood-burning stove before we burrowed under down comforters in our cabin for a deep night’s sleep.We left the island just before Europe began to close its doors to migrants in March. The volunteer universe that sprang up on Lesbos has thinned out and largely moved with most of the migrants to mainland Greece. What remains is the warmth, the kind welcome that the locals of Lesbos extended to Middle Eastern strangers — and to us.Take Tony Petrou, a 75-year-old guesthouse owner. We met him at the Sarandos restaurant in Anaxos, a coastal village 20 minutes southwest of Molyvos. He was nursing a small bottle of Macedonian wine across from our table, and he ordered one for us. We struck up a conversation.Mr. Petrou said he was recovering from surgery at a Lesbos hospital when a Syrian in his 20s stumbled into his room, shivering after a four-hour swim from Turkey. So he gave the young man his jeans and sweater, several sizes too big. “I wanted him to have something warm,” he said. Then Mr. Petrou called his sister: Could she bring him some pants?Mr. Petrou shrugged off his act of kindness. But now that he faces a summer of reduced bookings, it is he who is looking for a lifeline: renewed tourism.“We need the help,” he said. “I think the island deserves it.”Information for Volunteers on Lesvos is a user-friendly guide with constantly updated details on how volunteers can contribute to the migrant effort. Many aid groups require a minimum commitment of two to four weeks. Medics and Middle Eastern language speakers may find themselves more useful on the mainland.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Aid groups ask volunteers to contact them in advance to see how they can help, and caution against “voluntourists” arriving to take selfies rather than helping.For information about volunteering on other Greek islands, see bit.ly/confusedvolunteers; for information on volunteering on mainland Greece, go to bit.ly/greecemainlandinfodoc.AdvertisementThese volunteer groups update their activities online and on Facebook:The Dirty Girls of Lesvos Island, facebook.com/dirtygirlslesvos.Lighthouse Relief, facebook.com/lighthouserelief.Movement on the Ground, facebook.com/movementontheground.Humanitarian Support Agency, facebook.com/groups/Humanitarian.Support.Agency.In the Mytilene area, relax at Therma Spa Lesvos. Entry is 3 euros. Towels, soap and slippers are extra. Call ahead to book a massage or the outdoor Jacuzzi. 30-2251-041503.In Plomari, sample award-winning olive oil at the small hilltop Eirini Plomariou bottling plant. 30-6977-016768. Myrta and Nikos Kalampoka, owners, offer picnic lunches surrounded by their organic olive groves with a view of the sea. Their guesthouse, Irini Plomari Apartments, offers simple rooms next to the sea.Hike between monasteries, hunt for orchids, go fishing, join a Greek cooking class or customize your own back road adventure with Sigrid van der Zee, tour guide, of Pandora Travel Lesvos.  30-6986-729992.In Molyvos, the Belvedere hotel has stunning sunset views and a swimming pool overlooking the Aegean. The rooms are spartan but clean, making it a good budget option. 30-2253-071974; 30-2253-071975. Melinda McRostie, owner of the Captain’s Table restaurant, runs a well-appointed luxury rental apartment with her husband, Theo, near Molyvos harbor. 30-2253-071005.In Mytilene, the Theofilos Paradise Boutique Hotel, built into a mansion, offers an ample breakfast, a Turkish-style bath, a rooftop plunge pool and a respite from urban bustle. 30-2251-043300.Near Plomari is Toumba Eco Farm, with wood-floored cabins, and breakfast and dinner served in the reception lodge by Margarita Niziskioti, owner. She offers horse riding trips, and nearby walking trails wind through woods. 30-6981-923432; 30-6946-024485.AdvertisementMyrivilis’ Mulberry tavern (also called I Mouria tou Myrivili) on the harbor of Skala Sikaminias offers grilled octopus, memorable broiled feta cheese saganaki and the daily catch. Portions are huge and the house ouzo is delightful and sneakily potent. 30-2253-055319.The Captain’s Table on the harbor of Molyvos is a popular spot for volunteers; planning meetings usually take place over heaping plates of steamed local xorta greens, grilled fish and potatoes. 30-2253-071005.For a dinner away from the volunteer chatter, drive to Sarandos in Anaxos, where perfectly grilled lamb chops are accompanied by punchy skordalia garlic spread. On the main road of Anaxos. 30-2253-041449.In Mytilene, Zoumbouli offers excellent moussaka, good local wine and occasional live music on a pleasant alleyway. Vernardaki 2. 30-2251-021251.In Plomari, To Sokaki makes the most of locally distilled ouzo with excellent mezze. Off the main square. 30-2252-031000. If you have time, tour the nearby Barbayanni ouzo museum and distillery. 30-2252-032741.Daniella Cheslow and Daniel Estrin are American journalists covering the Middle East. Follow Ms. Cheslow on Twitter at @dacheslow; Mr. Estrin on Twitter at @danielestrin.A version of this article appears in print on May 29, 2016, on Page TR1 of the New York edition with the headline: On a Tranquil Island, a Haven.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »