
Check In By                     
INGRID K. WILLIAMS

JAN. 13, 2017
Rooms from £255 (about $315).In a city that has attracted visitors to its mineral-rich thermal baths since Roman times, the opening of the first hotel with its own natural thermal spa on site was a major event. The Gainsborough Bath Spa, which opened in July 2015, occupies two historic buildings with handsome Georgian and Victorian facades. But the crowning feature of the luxurious 99-room property is the spacious, two-level spa complex, which has three thermal pools fed by the area’s famed natural spring water. Champalimaud Design, based in New York, created elegant interiors that, in conjunction with the staff’s considerate service, ensure guests’ comfort even when they’re not “taking the waters.”The property is on a quiet lane in Bath’s historic center, the entirety of which is a Unesco World Heritage site known for its lovely Georgian architecture and golden limestone, called Bath stone. The historic Roman Baths are around the corner; other major sights are a short walk away.My third-floor Deluxe Room, the least expensive room category, had a spacious entryway where three steps led up to a bedroom with peacock-blue walls and plush, patterned carpeting. Cozy and comfortable, the room had a gray love seat at the base of a queen-size bed with crisp white linens, a pastoral-patterned headboard and large square pillows. Along one wall was a narrow black table with a large flat-screen television and a cognac leather desk chair. A choice selection of travel and fashion magazines was arrayed on a small round table. And the corner room had tall windows along two walls, with views of the rooftop pool at the neighboring Thermae Bath Spa, the spires of the Bath Abbey and surrounding verdant hillsides.The large bathroom had gleaming beige tile and a black vanity with plenty of space for toiletries. A standard-size white tub had a powerful shower head and a folding glass partition. Shower amenities were from Asprey London, and a couple of cozy robes and slippers, ready to be worn to the spa, were hung behind the door.AdvertisementThe palatial spa area, called the Spa Village Bath, is free for hotel guests during limited hours (7 to 9 a.m. and 8 to 10 p.m. daily). At other times, access to the spa requires paying a fee or booking a spa treatment. In-room amenities included free Wi-Fi, downloadable newspapers and magazines and a minibar stocked with complimentary soft drinks, water, beers and snacks.The hotel has a small, stylish cocktail bar, an elegant, mirror-paneled lounge serving afternoon tea and a spacious restaurant with locally sourced fare from the Austrian chef Johann Lafer. Room service is available all day; my breakfast order arrived in just 14 minutes, with the added courtesy of a call to let me know when it was on the way. Scrambled eggs with chives came with a generous serving of smoked Scottish salmon (£18), while the continental breakfast (£20) included fresh-pressed orange juice, delicious Bircher muesli with fresh berries and a selection of breads and excellent pastries with French butter, jams and Marmite.AdvertisementThis polished property earns top marks for pampering and attentive service, though the highlight of a stay is undoubtedly a serene soak in the mosaic-tiled baths.The Gainsborough Bath Spa, Beau Street, 44-1225-358-888; thegainsboroughbathspa.co.uk.A version of this article appears in print on January 15, 2017, on Page TR4 of the New York edition with the headline: Soaking in Luxury.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »