
Next Stop By                     
 JASON HOROWITZ
 
AUG. 4, 2016
If you are going to have a guide for a walking tour of Ljubljana in the footsteps of the local girl Melania Trump, her ex-boyfriend is hard to beat. For starters, Peter Butoln, in gold ascot, blue blazer and blond hair pinned back under gold-framed glasses, dresses the part. And Mr. Butoln, a public relations man, is a font of information, about not only this charming medieval town with terra-cotta roofs and Baroque fountains, but also the potential next first lady of the United States, who attended high school here as Melanja Knavs nearly 30 years ago.I was in Slovenia in the spring, conducting interviews and research for a profile on Ms. Trump for The Times, and one morning in Presernov trg, the historic square between Old Town and the 19th-century neighborhoods on the west bank of the Ljubljanica River, Mr. Butoln introduced himself under a bronze statue of the Slovenian poet France Preseren. The poet was depicted with a longing gaze toward the window of the woman who inspired his romantic verses, and Mr. Butoln looked intently in the same direction, at the outdoor pub now called Kavarna Tromostovje, where he first laid eyes on Ms. Trump.“The bar,” he said, “was called Horse’s Tail.”We walked across Triple Bridge, a masterpiece adorned with balustrades and milk-colored glass and composed of a stone bridge dating to 1842 and two side bridges designed by the architect Joze Plecnik in 1932. From there, we went to Cafe Romeo, where, Mr. Butoln said, Ms. Trump drank sodas and he drank wine mixed with Cockta, a cloying Tito-era version of Coca-Cola. He pointed out the dance hall (“a nice discotheque”), which is now a restaurant called Sokol, decorated with stuffed hawks. Farther up the river, on winding cobblestoned streets scored with the violin strains emanating out of classical music academies, he recommended restaurants and paid tribute to historical landmarks.“Here are the famous stairs,” he said outside St. Florian’s Church. “If you wanted to make romantic — you would go up to the castle.”AdvertisementIn the last three decades, Ms. Trump — who grew up in the small town of Sevnica before moving to Ljubljana for high school — went from Slovenian teenager to international fashion model and the wife of the Republican nominee, living in Trump Tower and Mar-a-Lago with her husband and son. She has matured and changed. But so has Ljubljana (pronounced LOO-blee-ah-nah), which became the capital of Slovenia after the country declared independence from Yugoslavia in 1991.Advertisement“We had this problem of putting the city on the map,” said the mayor, Zoran Jankovic, who is credited with revitalizing this not-so-secret gemstone of southern East Europe.The city’s most famous landmark, Ljubljana Castle, is an imposing medieval complex — home to Slovenian artifacts (a 5,000-year-old wheel and axel, medieval frescoes) and a watchtower overlooking Catholic, Orthodox and Protestant churches; the bronze dragons guarding Dragon Bridge; the elegant Art Nouveau accents on buildings and bridges; the city’s business districts; and the hills ringing the city.Since Ms. Trump made it big, Mr. Jankovic closed the historic city center to traffic, extended the hours of shops and much-improved restaurants and virtually erased crime. The city now has JB Restavracija, a Michelin-starred restaurant named after its chef, Janez Bratovz, and 1.5 million tourists a year who stay overnight, three times as many as did in 2007. More than 55,000 college students, 7,000 of whom come from abroad, fill stylish cafes and impromptu galleries, and drink mediocre Slovenian beer (Lasko) and good Slovenian wine (Movia Brda). The city recently renovated its opera house and National Gallery. Music is everywhere.And this year, in recognition of this bicycle-obsessed city’s strides in sustainability, the European Commission designated Ljubljana as European Green Capital for 2016. To celebrate, the castle is bathed in emerald light at night, casting a magical “Wizard of Oz” mood over the evenings. The mornings are filled with the clinking of espresso cups and the hum of conversation at Bar Pritlicje, an ur-hip cafe and the de facto headquarters for the city’s gay scene on the ground floor of City Hall.The city exudes a friendly, welcoming vibe. But just as in the United States, where Ms. Trump has drawn criticism for echoing her husband and cribbing lines from Michelle Obama, Ljubljana sometimes seems less than tolerant of its former citizen.“I think she’s not coming back,” said Jozica Trstenjak, a designer who was mending dresses in the atelier portion of Singer Atelier & Caffe, which Ms. Trump frequented when it was called Bar Clementino. She didn’t think the city suffered for the absence. “It’s a new city with new bars,” Ms. Trstenjak said. “It’s much better.”Across the street from the cafe, a domed poster kiosk advertised a Janacek opera under a whimsical open-air chandelier. Art instillations pop up here like the buttercups in the surrounding hills. Across the river, white benches are painted with the phrases of poets. Ljubljana is a rewarding town in which to wander, even without the gossipy guidance of Mr. Butoln.AdvertisementNot far from the Singer cafe I was drawn by the smell of fresh bread to Pekarna Osem where a baker in a sleek white shop kneads eight (“osem”) kinds of bread every morning.Farther down a gently curving street lined with design shops and galleries sits Piranske Soline, a shop selling canvas bags bulging with prized Slovenian salt, a “national treasure” from the Secovlje Salina Nature Park. Closer to the river, boutiques like Lola sell floral bicycle-seat covers.And while Mr. Trump has visited Slovenia only once, its capital has drawn its share of celebrity apprentices. Many of them stay at the Hotel Antique Palace & Spa, a 16th-century palace that bills itself as the town’s most luxurious hotel and that has a wall of fame featuring guests, including the N.B.A. star Dirk Nowitzki, members of Il Divo and the opera star Anna Netrebko. On a recent visit, the ambassador from Montenegro surveyed the airy, frescoed rooms. He looked impressed. He was not shown the Ikea showroom of a suite I’d stayed in.The food in Ljubljana is more reliable.At Compa, a casual restaurant in the funkier, slightly grittier section of the city center, regulars hang out by an old Tito calendar, as the chef sprinkles Slovenian salt on perfectly grilled steaks and Treviso radicchio. The goulash at Gujzina had a kick, though the gnocchi with a pumpkin-seed pesto was less memorable than the famous Prekmurska gibanica — a layered cake made from poppy seeds, walnuts, apples, raisins and cottage cheese. Everything can be washed down with excellent wines or Radenska, an effervescent mineral water, salty-tasting enough for gargling.Some locals have Trumpian complaints that the influx of outsiders drawn to the city’s charms has taken its toll on the Slovenian character.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.At Valentin, a fish restaurant in a handsome dining room behind a white-tiled fish market, my waiter feared that the city had reached a tipping point. Slovenian could only be heard in the daytime, he said. At night, the Italian, German and English speakers drowned out the native tongue.And yet, I saw no “Make Ljubljana Great Again” hats. Instead, many locals credit the immigrants and tourists with loosening the city up after decades of Communist control.At Tivoli Park, the stunning gardens and ponds that unfold a few blocks below the outdoor market and puppet theater, people now venture onto the grass and sunbathe. Teenagers hang out under a statue of Ivan Hribar, the mayor who drowned himself in the river when Italian Fascists annexed part of Yugoslavia in 1941, and mix with tourists in the Italian-level gelato shops. And on Friday nights, the vibe is downright Kit Kat Club, the New York nightclub where the Trumps met in 1998. The bars on the bank of the river are so packed with beautiful people that the Slovenian novelist Lenart Zajc has nicknamed the stretch Snobbyland.It starts with Patisserie Lolita, decorated with hanging lamps in the shape of red cherries, and reaches up to Slovenian House, which has embraced the traditional polka-dotted coffee pots of yesteryear. There’s the Vander Urbani Resort hotel, with Veuve Clicquot pillows and a pool glowing turquoise on the roof. Kavarna Macek, a well-known cafe, features the photos of everyday Ljubljanans on the wall.AdvertisementAfter a quick scan, I noticed Ms. Trump was absent.“She’s not going to be on the wall,” Tannja Janjo, a waitress, said, bristling.That is not to say that all of Ljubljana is antagonistic toward Ms. Trump.At Tozd, a cafe with a bicycle on the wall, Tito-era ashtrays on the tables and tapas named after 1980’s pop stars (“the Samantha Fox — Melon, Prosciutto, Olives”) on the menu, Gasper Oblak, a bartender, said he’d gladly add a “Melania” tapas.“It would be luxurious,” he said. “With truffles and caviar.”“And a bit of something Slovenian,” interjected Andraz Strgar, another bartender, who paused to think before adding, “Some salt?”A version of this article appears in print on August 7, 2016, on Page TR5 of the New York edition with the headline: In the Fleeting Shadow of Melania Trump.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »