

      By ANDREW FERREN

AUG. 10, 2017

Beyond the magnificent Moorish Alhambra, visitors will find a distinctive cuisine and a charming city that was once home to celebrated writers and artists.
Related Article
Like Agra, India, and the Taj Mahal, the Andalusian city of Granada in southern Spain is so well known for a single monument — the Alhambra, a walled fortress housing magnificent 13th- to 15th-century Moorish palaces and gardens — that the city itself is sometimes overlooked. With more than two million visitors descending on the Alhambra, a Unesco World Heritage site, every year, the city’s tourism industry had settled into a somewhat formulaic routine of shuttling visitors in and out of the city in about 24 hours. But recently some other ancient structures have been restored, and the region’s distinctive gastronomy has come into its own. The city that was home to the poet Federico García Lorca, the painter José Guerrero and the composer Manuel de Falla has deep cultural roots, but now a new crop of small foundations and independent exhibition spaces has revived its arty buzz. Let the Alhambra wait a bit while getting seduced by the city that has grown up around it.
Explore the map and find things to do in Granada.
Nestled into the same hill as the Alhambra and with the same sweeping views over the red-tile roofs and elegant domes of Granada is the Rodríguez-Acosta Foundation (5 euros, about $6). José María Rodríguez-Acosta (1878-1941), an accomplished painter of vibrant and moody Andalusian subjects, essentially gave up painting from 1916 to 1930 to create his greatest masterpiece, the stunning Art Deco studio that is now home to the foundation. Spread over five levels on the steeply pitched slope with stepped gardens, the foundation also houses the collection of the art historian Manuel Gómez-Moreno, including works ranging from pre-Roman Iberian tribes to early 20th-century masters like Joaquín Sorolla. Nearby is the Manuel de Falla House Museum (3 euros), where the celebrated Andalusian composer lived from 1921 to 1939.Before entering the plush-and-perfumed realm of the Nasrid rulers in the Alhambra, see how the other half lived with a stroll through the Albaicín, the ancient Moorish neighborhood of whitewashed houses climbing the hill on the other side of the Darro River. The winding streets are packed with fine restaurants with fine views, but the fun and unfussy Bar Kiki San Nicolás, with tables spread across the plaza, offers the views and the stars, and a huge array of tapas and main courses highlighting local products and preparations. If you’re lucky, you’ll also get an impromptu guitar concert in an atmosphere scented with jasmine — and perhaps the occasional whiff of hashish. Dinner for two, about 65 euros.A visit to the Alhambra can now be split in two with an evening visit to either the splendid Nasrid Palaces or the lush Generalife gardens, preceding or following a daytime visit to the ramparts, museum and gardens. (The two evening tours take place at the same time, so seeing both would require returning a second night with a separate ticket.) The palaces feature room after room of intricate tile mosaic walls, delicate plaster reliefs and elaborate coffered ceilings linked by gleaming marble patios with gurgling fountains and lush gardens. Set apart on an adjacent outcropping, the Generalife gardens were the pleasure zone of the Nasrid rulers and have been a reference for garden designers for centuries. Tickets for each are 9.40 euros, including a 1.40-euro service charge for advance purchase with credit card. Book well ahead.Join the locals for a breakfast of thick Spanish hot chocolate ideal for dipping crisply fried dough called churros (5 euros) at Café Fútbol. Opened in 1903, the cafe has a spacious outdoor seating area that stays busy all day long, so circle back for some house-made ice cream. Bernabeu, the friendly gentleman who makes it, recommends a scoop of the dense almond-rich turrón flavor (1 euro).Now for the daytime Alhambra visit. Taken as a whole, the complex is perhaps the most emblematic vestige of the highly refined and astonishingly luxurious lifestyle achieved by the Moorish rulers in medieval Spain. Tickets range from 7 to 21 euros. If you want to include the Nasrid palaces, note that visitors are given a specific time for entry.Granada is one of the last cities in Spain where tapas are served free with alcohol. So belly up to the bar — or better yet, find a table on the terrace — at Cunini, the city’s gold standard for seafood for more than 70 years. With each 2- to 3-euro refill of wine, another plate of free food arrives, quickly adding up to a full and satisfying meal that might start with tuna-flecked potato salad and move on to crispy croquetas de jamón. An individual pot of rice cooked with mussels and several varieties of tiny clams or rings of fried calamari may follow, along with lightly battered monkfish. Dessert is on you.After the conquest of Granada in 1492, the area just below the Alhambra and Albaicín became the stage for the display of Christian architectural might. The area is easily walked, with lots of history to see between the cafes and tearooms, ceramics shops and guitar makers that lend an extra bit of local color. Worth stepping into is the Cathedral (5 euros), which blends Renaissance, plateresque and Baroque architectural styles, and the late-Gothic Royal Chapel (4 euros), built between 1505 and 1516 to house the tomb of Ferdinand and Isabella. Worthwhile sites of more recent vintage include the Centro José Guerrero (free), devoted to the work of this seminal 20th-century Spanish painter, and the new Centro Federico Garcia Lorca, which organizes exhibitions on subjects related to the life of the city’s most beloved modern poet and author.In a city where tapas are famously free and dinner can be had for the price of a few glasses of wine, it’s been hard to get much traction for the alta cocina (haute cuisine) trend that swept Spain and the world in the past decades. The chef Ismael Delgado López is trying to fix that at La Fábula, in the Hotel Villa Oniria. The very formal service feels a little forced in groovy Granada, but the food does not disappoint. A 10- to 12-course chef’s menu might start with “gazpacho water and steamed brioche,” and end with local cheeses and three decadent desserts (75 euros, or 90 euros with wine pairings).The classic Granada experience has always included a late-night flamenco performance in the “caves” of the Sacromonte hill beyond the Albaicín. Venta El Gallo has a reliable roster of performers and draws the occasional star as well. Admission for performances starts at 26 euros; on some nights one-hour flamenco classes are offered for an additional price.Named after the British author Gerald Brenan’s book about his life in an Andalusian village, Al Sur de Granada is among the best places in the city to snap up delicious souvenirs. The shelves are lined with organic wines and olive oils, local honey and jam, craft beers and traditional almond-based sweets made in nearby convents. Breakfasts are simple, delicious and fortifying: yogurt and homemade muesli or toasted peasant bread rubbed with tomato, drizzled with fragrant olive oil and topped with succulent slices of jamón Ibérico.Surrounded by a lovely park, La Huerta de San Vicente has become a mythic place for many residents. Huerta means orchard or garden, and the property — the family summer home of Federico García Lorca — was originally far outside the city limits. The house features both quotidian items and artworks made by the poet’s artist friends, like Salvador Dalí. The 45-minute guided tours offer a glimpse into the place the writer himself called “the poetry factory” for a remarkably productive period between 1926 and 1936. Admission is 3 euros.Hammams, or bathhouses, were an essential part of daily life in Moorish Al Andalus, and they are making a comeback in Granada after being banned in the mid-16th century by the Christian kings. Hammam Al Andalus offers 90-minute sessions that start with the basic “water tour” (30 euros), which involves moving between hot and cold baths. Massages and other treatments can raise the price to a potential 115 euros, which includes an hourlong massage. Reservations required.Parador de Granada is part of the state-run Parador chain of hotels in historic buildings. It is the only hotel allowed to operate inside the Alhambra. Set in a former Catholic monastery that replaced a Nasrid palace, the four-star hotel has 40 rooms with charming Andalusian décor and a beautiful terrace for drinks or dining. Doubles in the last half of August range from 305 to 395 euros.Palacio de Mariana Pineda is at the edge of the Albaicín and overlooks the river and the Alhambra. This antiques-filled five-room hotel serves a daily afternoon tea that lures guests back to restore themselves in the cool shade of its patios. Doubles in summer from 121 euros.Flight and Hotel information provided by Google.Prices represent a snapshot of low fares and rates for weekend trips.Advertisement