

      By MIREYA NAVARRO

NOV. 2, 2017

The city’s Latino influences can be found throughout the cultural scene, from museums and street art to restaurants and night life.
Related Article
Once mostly defined by Puerto Ricans, Latino New York City has grown to more than 2.4 million residents with roots all over Latin America, the largest such population of any American city. Both native and foreign-born, Latinos are part of the city’s DNA — they account for 29 percent of the overall population and for more than half in the Bronx. Spanish speakers keep coming from countries like the Dominican Republic, Mexico and Ecuador, refreshing communities with their own cultural imprint and street-life vibe, in neighborhoods like East Harlem and Washington Heights in Manhattan, and Jackson Heights in Queens.As the city’s population swells, though, there are worries about a housing crunch that is bringing higher rents, gentrification and changing demographics to ethnic enclaves where old-timers fear dilution and displacement. For now, even sought-after East Harlem — where the Puerto Rican migration to New York after World War II spearheaded a thriving Latino presence that renamed the area El Barrio, or Spanish Harlem — is still going strong. Just follow Tito Puente Way and other road tributes to Latino notables in a tour of murals and mosaic art, cultural institutions and a restaurant scene that is as likely to include Puerto Rican mofongo as Mexican horchata.
Explore the map and find things to do in New York City.
El Barrio stretches north from East 96th Street to the Harlem River, but its heart is the commercial strip of East 116th Street, between La Marqueta, the revitalized historic market under the railroad tracks of Park Avenue, and First Avenue. Casa Latina Music Shop beckons with Latin rhythms blaring from loudspeakers. In the neighborhood for more than 50 years, the store is owned by the couple Vicente and Cristina Barreiro — he, Spanish; she, Argentine — who have survived both gentrification and music downloads with an eclectic mix of sounds, from salsa and reggaeton to vintage ballads. They also sell collectibles, books and percussion instruments like bongos and cowbells.Not far away, at 168 East 116th Street, Cuchifritos entices with the aroma of Puerto Rican fritters like alcapurrias (green banana dough filled with ground beef, $1.50). Caribbean comfort food includes pork shoulder and rice with pigeon peas, for $8, but seating is limited to a counter with stools, so pick up a snack at the sidewalk window and keep walking as you munch. Along 116th Street, between First and Second Avenues, a mosaic portrait of the Puerto Rican educator and Presidential Medal of Freedom recipient Antonia Pantoja, founder of the educational youth organization Aspira, frames the entrance of the senior center at Corsi Houses, a public-housing project. The piece is just a sample of the multimedia artist Manny Vega’s artwork and a good start to a walking tour of the street art throughout the neighborhood, including the 1970s-era, four-story mural “The Spirit of East Harlem” on a residential building at 104th Street and Lexington Avenue, by Mr. Vega and Hank Prussing, depicting a domino game in progress, kids playing basketball and other neighborhood scenes and portraits.The wooden fishing pier at the end of Dyckman Street in Inwood, a neighborhood on the northern tip of Manhattan with a large Dominican population, is an urban refuge, with stunning views of the Hudson River, the George Washington Bridge and the sunset over New Jersey. A boisterous Latin party scene awaits on the leafy street as you stroll east past playgrounds and auto shops. If it is warm enough, have a drink at the sidewalk tables of any of the restaurants that serve Dominican, Spanish and seafood fare with a pulsating beat. Another option awaits on 207th Street at Raíces, where the skirt steak marinated with chimichurri sauce and yucca fries goes for $25.95. Then dance off the meal when merengue and other Latin music starts after 8 p.m. (Dancing tip: march in place and sway the hips.)The city’s museum of immigration, the Tenement Museum on Manhattan’s Lower East Side, inaugurated a new permanent exhibit this fall that for the first time includes a Latino family. The 90-minute tour, “Under One Roof,” weaves together the story of Jewish Holocaust survivors, Puerto Rican migrants and Chinese immigrants who came after World War II. Largely based on the recollections of the children who grew up in the building where the exhibit is housed, it tells the story of the Saez-Vélez family, who moved to the building in the 1960s, and whose matriarch, Ramonita, worked in the garment industry. Entrance is $25 ($20 for seniors and students; tickets must be bought online in advance).Jackson Heights and Elmhurst in Queens are among the city’s most diverse immigrant areas, with bustling Latino and Little India sections. Colombians predominate among those hailing from South and Central America, so a befitting lunch at Arepa Lady is an arepa (grilled corn cake) stuffed with chorizo, chicken, cheese and other fillings ($8), accompanied by passionfruit sangria brimming with fruit ($7). (Arepa Lady is planning on moving from its present location in February 2018.) After lunch, stroll down streets that offer striking contrasts — botánicas selling potions and candles seem as numerous as Banana Republic and Gap stores. Colombian cumbia music follows shoppers from storefront to storefront, but all is quiet at La Librería Barco de Papel, a bookstore in Elmhurst that sells Hispanic literature and translations of books by authors like Stephen King. For a sweet snack, La Nueva Bakery in Jackson Heights is known for its alfajores sandwich cookies with dulce de leche and other fillings popular in Argentina and Uruguay.Founded in 1968, Repertorio Español, on East 27th Street, features the best of Latin American, Spanish and Latino theater with English subtitles via an in-seat captioning system (or simultaneous translation via headphones if requested in advance). Original productions presented by the company in rotation include “La Canción,” a musical about a young man from the Bronx with a passion for music, and “La Fiaca,” an Argentine comedy that has toured the world. Tickets: $17 to $75.For a late dinner or rum nightcap, Cuban live music and, perhaps, a freshly rolled cigar (made at a table by the bar or outside on balmy nights; complimentary Fridays and Saturdays from 7 to 11 p.m.), head uptown to Guantanamera Restaurant (dinner served until 1 a.m. on Saturdays) near Columbus Circle. The ropa vieja, or braised shredded skirt steak with rice is particularly tasty for $24.50.Vendors set up their umbrella stands early on Sundays outside Our Lady of Guadalupe at St. Bernard’s Catholic church, where three of five Sunday services are in Spanish. Tacos, champurrados (hot chocolate thickened with corn flour) and religious knickknacks greet the faithful on their way out of the oldest parish in the city serving Spanish-speakers. Built in 1902 specifically to serve the area on West 14th Street near 8th Avenue once known as Little Spain, Nuestra Señora de Guadalupe Church merged with St. Bernard’s church at its present location in 2003 to accommodate a growing congregation of Mexicans, the fastest growing Latino group in the city. Inside, bright murals depict Juan Diego, the indigenous peasant, now a Mexican saint, to whom the Virgin was said to be revealed in 1531. English-speakers can follow the Spanish readings and hymns to rousing organ music, with bilingual missals.For brunch, Raymi, in the Flatiron district, offers Peruvian healthy fare that draws from Japanese, Chinese, Spanish and other cuisines. Brunch includes sweet-tasting pan de yuca ($3 to $6) and bowls with choices of ingredients, like brown rice, tomatoes, cabbage, crispy quinoa, avocado and salmon ceviche, for up to $13. Cocktails ($8 to $10) are infused with ingredients like leche de tigre or tiger’s milk, the citrus-based ceviche marinade (and supposed aphrodisiac) and cayenne cleanse kombucha, a fermented tea. Diners sit in three rooms, including a bar area with spacious dining counters and communal tables. Bird of paradise flower arrangements are part of the décor and Marc Anthony is on the playlist.The Edge Hotel, on a leafy block of Washington Heights at 514 West 168 Street, is just steps away from the subway. A rare boutique hotel in the neighborhood, the modern 54-room property offers complimentary continental breakfast at rates of $180 to $280 a night. (edgehotelnyc.com)The Hotel Wales, at 1295 Madison Avenue on the Upper East Side, is within walking distance of East Harlem. The hotel has 89 rooms and suites and a rooftop patio with views of Central Park. Rates are $200 to $600. (hotelwalesnyc.com)Advertisement