AdvertisementSupported byBy Shivani VoraAn Airbnb guest has filed a lawsuit against the company, saying it failed to do a background check that would have uncovered the previous arrest of a host who she said sexually assaulted her.The property owner, who had earned the upper-tier status of “superhost” and had never been convicted of a crime, has said the assault never happened. Airbnb, for its part, defended its screening measures and has since barred the owner from listing on its site.The suit arrives as Airbnb, the peer-to-peer vacation rental and hospitality site, is touting on-the-ground hosts who guide guests through customized itineraries, bringing the groups into increasing contact with one another. It also lays bare the complications of peer-to-peer sharing, even through an established company like Airbnb, which says it performs background checks on hosts and guests in the United States annually, and also has a law enforcement liaison that helps its clients around the world manage potential criminal matters.But the lawsuit, filed by Leslie Lapayowker and first reported in The Guardian, contends that a background check would have uncovered the fact that the owner had been arrested and charged with battery, and prevented him from listing property on Airbnb.The suit charges that in July 2016, Ms. Lapayowker rented a studio apartment in Los Angeles that was attached to the home of Carlos Del Olmo, listed as a superhost because of his positive reviews on the site. Though she rented the property for a month, the suit says she had stayed only three nights because Mr. Del Olmo’s behavior — making sexually suggestive comments, using drugs in front of his underage son, pounding on her windshield while she was sitting inside her car — made her uncomfortable.According to the suit, the assault occurred when she returned a week after leaving the studio, to retrieve belongings she had left behind. Mr. Del Olmo told her that he wanted to show her something important inside the studio, the suit says, and locked the door after she followed him in. She was held in a chair, against her will, as he proceeded to masturbate in front of her, finally ejaculating into a trash can, the lawsuit says. Before she fled the scene, the suit charges, he said to her, “Don’t forget to leave me a positive review on Airbnb.”When Ms. Lapayowker complained to Airbnb about the attack a month a later, the company immediately removed Mr. Del Olmo as a host from its site, according to Nick Shapiro, the company’s global head of trust and risk management. “We supported her right away and took him off our platform,” he said.Mr. Shapiro would not comment on whether Airbnb knew that Mr. Del Olmo had previously been arrested, citing the Fair Credit Reporting Act, which prohibits the disclosure of the results of one user’s background check to another. He added that a background check had been done on Mr. Del Olmo and showed no prior convictions.But Ms. Lapayowker’s lawyer, Teresa Li, said the company should have informed Ms. Lapayowker that Mr. Del Olmo had previously been arrested and charged with battery, in 2013, in Florida. He was accused of pulling his former girlfriend by her hair, from the back to the front seat of his car, in front of his child; Mr. Del Olmo was referred to an anger management program after the arrest, but was never convicted.Mr. Del Olmo said he was not happy with Airbnb’s response.“I have not done anything wrong, and have lost between $30,000 and $70,000 a year in income, because Airbnb abandoned me,” he said in a phone interview.Airbnb has been on the receiving end of such complaints before. One woman said her son was sexually assaulted  by an Airbnb host in Madrid in 2015. A host in Fukuoka, Japan, was arrested and charged in the assault of a Korean tourist staying there. In England, a prosecutor charged a Couchsurfing host in Leeds with the rape of a Chinese tourist.There were no figures available on the number of such assaults domestically or internationally, and a sampling of vacation rental sites, when contacted, did not respond when asked about their policies on background checks.Advertisement