By NELL McSHANE WULFHARTOCT. 26, 2017
BUENOS AIRES — Independent designers in Buenos Aires are defying Argentina’s notoriously unstable economy, high rents and rising inflation by opening tiny boutiques and ateliers and turning to homegrown materials to produce a creative range of leather goods, housewares and jewelry.Full of unique creations to discover, the city is a discerning shopper’s dream. Businesses function on the smallest of scales; in fact, some designers’ showrooms are in their apartments or former garages, unsigned and available only by appointment. “It’s a more affordable option, to sell from workshops or apartments or private studio spaces,” said Sophie Lloyd, a British personal shopper and stylist whose company, Shop Hop, runs bespoke shopping tours in the city. “You can meet the designers in person and see the workspace,” she said. “Now, it’s a trendy thing.”One of these showrooms, tucked behind an unmarked glass door in the San Telmo neighborhood, belongs to Min Agostini. A former architect, she creates her structured-yet-elegant dresses, short jackets and wide-legged trousers directly on a mannequin, eschewing paper, and using fabrics originally meant for home furnishings. (Prices start at 2,900 pesos, or $166, and go up to 40,000 pesos, or $2,300, for evening wear.) The space doubles as an art gallery, and Ms. Agostini usually has homemade cakes and tea to share.In Colegiales, Paula Pereiro makes her silver, bronze and gold rings, necklaces and bracelets in a single room in a residential building, just above a tiny silk-screening business. Her workshop doubles as a showroom, with her modern and understated line of Astoria jewelry finding inspiration in objects including lace and bark. The lariat necklaces, which can be looped around the neck twice or worn as a belt, are especially elegant. Prices start at 500 pesos.Making an appointment is especially important when a showroom is in someone’s home. Maydi uses baby alpaca wool from northern Argentina and organic merino from Patagonia to construct gloriously soft, chunky knitted sweaters and loosely woven scarves in grays and creams (prices start around 2,500 pesos), selling her luxurious creations out of her living room.AdvertisementAnother living room turned showroom belongs to the three sisters behind Las Cabrera (Agote 2485), a new line of gaucho-inspired accessories made from handwoven cowhide and even softer goat leather; the perfectly round, fringed handbags (3,500 to 4,000 pesos) scream urban cowgirl. The shop is open Tuesday to Friday, 4 to 8 p.m.Cowhide and pony hair also take center stage at Terrible Enfant (Arroyo 961), an elegant atelier where the multi-toned men’s shoes (4,500 to 6,500 pesos) have soles lasted by hand and a funky but extremely stylish sensibility.AdvertisementFor one-stop shopping, try one of the city’s handful of elegant concept stores. These boutiques offer a selection of goods from Argentine designers and are especially good for picking up unusual souvenirs.Autoría (Suipacha 1025) sells uncommon jewelry, funky housewares and colorful goods by Vacavaliente, a company that turns leather scraps into chic modern wallets, storage boxes and notebooks. Patrón (Malabia 1644) occupies a light-filled, high-ceilinged space in Palermo Soho where you can pick up exquisite handcrafted leather and suede cross-body bags and canvas backpacks from Bastardo and Le Bas, two hip Buenos Aires leather brands (handbags around 3,900 pesos).Nearby in Palermo Viejo, dipping into Facon (Nicaragua 4880) is akin to wandering around the house of a well-traveled friend; the owner, Martín Bustamante, crosses the country to fill his shop with ceramic pots, oversize wooden spoons and bags decorated with chaguar, a traditional plant fiber from northern Argentina. You can pick up a hand-painted pingüino, the penguin-shaped wine carafes once found in every Buenos Aires cafe, and enjoy a small menu of wine and snacks at outdoor tables.Finally, it would be foolish to leave without picking up a bottle or two of Argentina’s most famous export. In Palermo Soho, Pain et Vin (Gorriti 5132) combines a tasting room and vinoteca (wine shop) with a carefully curated selection of wines from up-and-coming producers and some better-known winemakers. Flights (250 pesos) can be tailored to your preference, whether you like a robust Malbec blend or a fruity Torrontés, and the English-speaking staff can bubble-wrap your favorites to take home.Two tips for the ardent shopper: If you pay with cash, many designers will give you a discount of up to 15 percent. And the easiest way to make appointments for private showrooms is through WhatsApp, a messaging app that is ubiquitous in Argentina (most websites will have a phone number). Many addresses are not advertised because the shops double as homes.A version of this article appears in print on October 27, 2017, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »