By ELAINE SCIOLINOOCT. 26, 2017
PARIS — When friends come to Paris and ask what they should buy as gifts to take home, I start with a two-word answer: dish towels.Dish towels are practical, easy to pack, good value and, ideally, made in France. If you’re in Paris on a weekend, start by logging on to vide-greniers.org, which announces weekly street markets. Vide-greniers means “empty the attics,” but the site includes gatherings of itinerant professional dealers and residents participating in neighborhood yard sales. Crisply pressed old linens are usually for sale.Otherwise, my go-to place is the Marché St.-Pierre near the Sacré-Coeur basilica in the heart of Montmartre. One of the biggest fabric shops in the world, it spreads over five floors and covers almost 27,000 square feet. You can get lost for hours in the bolts of silks, satins, linen and lace. It is a journey into the past, a place where fabric cutters walk the aisles brandishing huge scissors and long wooden rulers. It is also not for the faint-of-heart shopper.Head straight to the second floor to find fine dish towels; the linen ones are about $7, and $21 will buy a crisp stone-beige all-linen chef-style apron. If you are brave enough to confront bolts of silks, satins, linen and lace, look for linen cloth with protective wax coating in solid colors. It makes an elegant, no-wash-or-iron dining room tablecloth. At $19 per 1 meter by 1.5 meter (around 3.2 feet by 4.9 feet), it’s a bargain. Dish towels tied with a ribbon around something else are an eco-friendly way to offer two presents instead of one.AdvertisementI have little patience for clothes and shoe shopping, so I recommend sticking to shops that focus on cooking and dining to find that special “something else.” These are some of my favorites.AdvertisementA. Simon (48, rue Montmartre) is the place for hard-to-find classic cooking implements like real Laguiole knives, blowtorches for caramelizing the sugar on a crème brûlée, and dozens of metal molds — for eggs in aspic, for charlottes, for savarins. My friend Julia was delighted to find dariole, the small, cylindrical molds she uses to make panna cotta, when we were shopping there the other day. I bought Eiffel Tower cookie cutters instead.Nearby is La Bovida, another classic kitchen equipment store. Its second floor concentrates on wooing large-scale dinner-party-givers and small-scale restaurateurs. A pack of five plastic serving spoons and forks in silver is $7. Chefs’ hats come in different styles. Silicone molds to make traditional pastries like madeleines, calissons, financiers and cannelés are tempting, but are trumped by macaron-making kits.Just down the street, at 58, rue Tiquetonne, is G. Detou, an épicerie that will make even the most banal cook dream of becoming an artisanal pastry chef. It has everything wonderful, and at bargain prices. Even if you don’t cook, it’s a pleasure to come and look at the crystallized violets, sugarcoated mint leaves, silver dragées, shocking orange-pink almond dragées. Fleur de sel, the crème de la crème of salt, so delicate it must be hand-harvested, costs a small fraction of what it costs back home; tins of cocoa powder and Puy green lentils are other gift possibilities. And who can resist half-kilo bags of Iranian pistachios or dried exotic fruits to get you through a day of walking? David Lebovitz, the Paris-based American author, chef and the best food blogger in town, once wrote, “If G. Detou didn’t exist, I couldn’t live in Paris.” He’s only slightly exaggerating.When my budget-conscious cousin Bernie wanted simple white porcelain china made in Limoges, I brought her to La Vaissellerie. Twice. One year, she bought 12 white place settings, the next year 12 more. Each time, the staff wrapped them in two separate packages so that she and her husband could easily hand-carry them back to New York. Knife rests in base metal that looks like silver? A knife with a cutout of the letters “tomato” on its blade that really cuts tomatoes? Look no further than one of the five La Vaissellerie porcelain and crystal shops in Paris. The second-generation pastry chef and owner of two Paris pâtisseries, Sébastien Gaudard is passionate about reviving forgotten classics like Paris-Brest and Framboisier. The newspaper Le Figaro calls Mr. Gaudard the “Tom Ford of pastry”; he was voted best pastry chef in Paris in 2012. His store, Sébastien Gaudard, also sells hand-painted pottery that he buys from a potter in St.-Clément, including tall pitchers in the shapes of birds: a rooster, a duck, a pelican and a parrot. Each sells for about $70. “They’re so beautiful that I can’t keep them in stock,” he said. “They make you smile, no?”Elaine Sciolino is the author of “The Only Street in Paris: Life on the rue des Martyrs.” Bérengère Sim contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on October 27, 2017, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »