
Bites By                     
JENNA SCHNUER

OCT. 29, 2017
Twenty-three miles south of Anchorage on the Seward Highway, the first glimpse of Froth & Forage’s turquoise roof comes two mountainside highway curves ahead of the restaurant’s gravel parking. Though the weathered wood building looks like the barbecue shack it was in a past life, it is now home to a 22-seat restaurant headed up by a chef who wants to prove that a restaurant in south-central Alaska can thrive using local ingredients or, at least, other small local purveyors, instead of goods delivered from, as Alaskans call it, Outside.The chef, Zachary Reid, who opened Froth & Forage in May, is making the case by serving up inventive comfort food that often pops with color and flavor. Even the tasty burger, made of venison and buffalo, is pretty, thanks to red onions pickled to a magenta hue.Mr. Reid is developing the winter menu — featuring heartier dishes anchored with root vegetables and pickled produce — but some of the standouts from the summer menu will live on. That burger, for one. Also staying, a decadent starter of poutine that might even make a Canadian get weepy: house-made fries — thin cut and dressed in garlic, Parmesan and truffle oil — topped with house-made Cheddar cheese curds, and a rich gravy made from reindeer and house-cured bacon.Mr. Reid and his wife Michelle McIntyre — she runs the front of the house — met in high school in Hawaii, the only other state in Alaska’s time zone (the Aleutian Islands share a time zone with Hawaii). His cooking resume includes high-end resorts on Oahu and, later, in Vermont. The couple’s first restaurant, Brown’s Market Bistro in Groton, Vt., brought Mr. Reid a 2012 Chef of the Year award from the Vermont Chamber of Commerce, but the couple, who have two children, wanted to live closer to Ms. McIntyre’s family in Alaska.AdvertisementBefore opening Froth & Forage, Mr. Reid was executive chef at Orso, in downtown Anchorage. Exploratory conversations with restaurateurs around town nudged Mr. Reid to go out on his own. “I knew I wanted to do the farm to table thing,” he said. “I knew it could be done here, but it seemed no one wanted to work that hard to do it, it was too easy to get the product otherwise.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Alaska’s size and intense winter weather aren’t kind to chefs with farm-to-table dreams. It doesn’t help that the restaurant isn’t in a spot where farmers could make daily deliveries or that the tiny kitchen only has fridge space for three-and-a-half days of food, tops. But the recent boomlet of Anchorage food businesses, including a vertical hydroponic farm and a farmers market stand-turned-butcher and charcuterie help.At an early summer meal, I sampled Mr. Reid’s take on shrimp scampi, which featured the delicate flavor of local side stripe shrimp. At summer’s end, I tried a cauliflower starter, topped with herbs and a balsamic glaze, that offered as much play on texture — a quick bite of crisp that gave way to a creamy interior — as flavor. That game burger followed. And the signature dessert of made-to-order doughnuts is a must. Made of deep-fried biscuit dough and sprinkled with powdered sugar, always served warm.Ms. McIntyre has applied for a beer and wine license, and hopes to have it approved to serve with the winter menu.Word about Froth & Forage has been getting around for locals, with reservations for dinner now a must. The place is tiny, so the only place to wait is outside. And in Alaska, winter is coming — really.Froth & Forage, 27635 Seward Highway; 907-653-1009; frothandforage.com. An average dinner for two, without drinks or tip, is about $70.A version of this article appears in print on October 29, 2017, on Page TR8 of the New York edition with the headline: Farm to Table Where It’s Least Expected.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »