By SHIVANI VORADEC. 8, 2016
There’s never been a time in Christy Turlington Burns’s life that did not involve travel. “I was practically born into traveling,” she said. Though the former model now lives in Manhattan, she grew up traveling the world with her parents, who worked for Pan American World Airways.Her subsequent career as a model, which made her famous, also involved frequent trips to far-flung destinations, and today, her role as the founder and chief executive of Every Mother Counts, a nonprofit organization dedicated to making pregnancy and childbirth safe for every mother, still has her on the road: Ms. Burns, 47, said that she travels at least once a month, either visiting the nine countries including Haiti and Tanzania her charity does work in, speaking at conferences or running in half and full marathons to raise awareness about maternal health.It’s a personal mission for Ms. Burns, who hemorrhaged while giving birth to her now 13-year-old daughter, Grace (she also has son, Finn, who is 10). “I was fortunate to have access to quality health care, but many women don’t, and through my experience, I learned that maternal mortality is a global crisis,” she said.Below are edited excerpts from a recent interview with Ms. Burns.Q. Of the destinations you’ve traveled to for Every Mother Counts, is there one you’ve found most compelling? AdvertisementA. I love them all in their own way, but I am pretty fixated by Tanzania. I first went in 1989 or 1990 when I was modeling and went back a few years later to climb Kilimanjaro. Since then, I have been back seven times and am going again in February to run a race for Every Mother Counts. The country has so many national parks with incredible wildlife, and the people there are also incredible and so friendly.What are some sights you have enjoyed in countries that your charity does work in?A trip I took last June to Guatemala with my daughter stands out. We went to Lake Atitlán, which is in the western highlands of the country and absolutely majestic, and took a boat across the lake to meet Mayan midwives in the rural community of Santa Catarina Palopó. It is a place untouched by time where old traditions are still alive, and watching my daughter connect with these midwives and learn about their traditions around childbirth was very moving.AdvertisementI have also discovered Haiti through my work. I went to Jacmel, which is a beautiful city on the coast that’s full of colonial architecture. It’s not the Haiti that people see in the media, and I think it’s important as a traveler to discover a destination as it really is and not the way it is portrayed to be.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Your work also takes you around the United States. What experience stands out from your domestic trips? My trip in June to Chinle in Arizona is one. I spent time with Navajo midwives there and learned about the rich history of Navajo people and running — they run for all sorts of reasons. There is a very sacred puberty ceremony, for example, of adolescent girls running in different directions to pay respect to nature. I was also quite taken with landscape in the area, especially the red rock mountains and the beautiful way the light hits them.How do you familiarize yourself with a new locale?I am old school and rely on travel guides that I have hung onto for years. And I am a big fan of word-of-mouth tips from friends.Where do you enjoy going when you’re not working?I love discovering new places, but lately, I’ve been discovering New York City and the areas around it. We live downtown, and though I’ve been in the city for 30 years, there is so much going on in my neighborhood. There’s 1 World Trade Center and the new Oculus, both of which have very cool architecture.A version of this article appears in print on December 11, 2016, on Page TR2 of the New York edition with the headline: Trips That Matter for Christy Turlington Burns.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.