AdvertisementSupported byLodgingBy Kenneth R. RosenDug into a sleeve of soil, the Earthship looks south from the Finger Lakes, in New York State, over a rippling field of countryside framed by mountains.The foundation of the eco-conscious home was made with car and truck tires filled with dirt. It was one of a few places to vacation if you wanted to bang dirt into tires. Along with the foundation, guests helped build an outdoor patio, stacking the tires, pounding dirt into them and pouring concrete to bind them. Other visitors to this homestead ate fresh produce and herbs from a greenhouse attached to the side of the home like a glass rib cage. One couple came to experience the subzero temperatures of a Finger Lakes winter in a home made of trash. Every guest had this in common: They came for a taste of living on a homestead.“More and more people want to live a far simpler life,” said Sue Merriam, an author who has written about guiding families who want to pursue a homestead life. “Living in a huge home is not only crazy, it’s just not doable for many people.”The rise of so-called slow living has inspired many to migrate from cities to rural hamlets. For all its idiosyncrasies — walls lined with tin cans and glass bottles, rainwater collection systems, the attached greenhouse — the Earthship in Freeville, N.Y., is now one of several hundred listings appearing on short-term rental websites like Airbnb, VRBO and Hipcamp that promote a relaxed, environmentally friendly approach to travel and a 21st-century take on homesteading.“You are welcome to help us with the many projects that farm living offers, from gardening and caring for the animals to projects around our restored 1860s log barn,” read one recent listing for a property in the Blue Ridge Mountains of Virginia. The owner of a farm in Franklinville, N.C., wrote that guests “are welcome to accompany and/or assist the owners with the daily farm maintenance or simply relax in the rocking chairs on the front porch or sit under the shade umbrella on the back deck.”Along backcountry roads more travelers are finding adventure through rustic enlightenment, according to industry professionals and current homesteaders. While some city dwellers find homesteading to be an idyllic escape — a website dedicated to fleeing couples is called Urban Exodus — there is no reason to buy a poplar cabin in Kentucky, or a cedar-framed cabin in the Berkshires. To get a taste, all you need is a reservation.“More and more people are looking to experiment with this rural, small-footprint, homesteading lifestyle,” said Stephanie Smith, who rents out three cabins in Coyote Valley, Calif. Ms. Smith’s cabins get upward of a hundred visitors yearly, many of whom are visiting the nearby Joshua Tree National Park and seeking a more homegrown experience. “It’s a popular tourist experience, the cabin in the desert part,” she said.The word “homesteading” comes from the 1862 Homestead Act. The law granted small parcels of public farmland to any adult citizen who paid a nominal fee. The citizen’s family had to live on and till the land for five consecutive years before they could legally own the property. Intended to hasten western expansion, it helped to settle states like Oklahoma and, later, Alaska. But the act did not offer the resources needed by families who were not already farmers.The last homesteader recognized by the Bureau of Land Management and the National Park Service was Kenneth Deardorff, who claimed 80 acres of land in southwestern Alaska in 1974 and received his patent in 1988. He sold the land in 1993.Much has become easier since then. Tutorials for farm life can be found on blogs and online community forums. Plots of land can be bought or sold with a credit card. A new ax handle can be bought at Walmart. Frontier and moving woes are now mitigated by advances in technology and transportation.On a balmy weekend last year, I visited several farms and homesteads in Massachusetts, New York and Vermont. (You also can find many scattered in the deserts of California and New Mexico, or in rural Georgia and other parts of the South.) A few hosts referred me to friends whose properties were not listed online; some homesteaders have formed their own off-the-grid, out-of-social-network community for the eco-conscious. Prices ranged from $79 to $151 per night.Chad and Courtney DeVoe own the Freeville Earthship. They are educators with one young daughter and another child on the way. They adopted the methods of the New Mexico architect Michael Reynolds, the creator of the Earthship concept and its passive solar design, which provides heating and cooling. For many years the DeVoes offered space to guests who wanted a taste of agricultural life, an arrangement sometimes referred to as agritourism.Guests who stayed at the Earthship found ways to use natural resources and learned to reduce their environmental waste footprint, adopting what they learned on their vacation in their lives back in the city.“We had a lot of people from the city,” Mr. DeVoe said. “They want to know what it’s like living off the grid — see what a house of garbage looks like.”A five-hour drive east yields sinuous roads etched along tributaries and across charming timber-truss bridges above ice fishing huts. I made my way to a homestead called Snow Farm, in Newfane, Vt.Snow Farm operates as a community-supported agriculture farm, an open-invitation homestead and an outpost of the World Wide Opportunities on Organic Farms network. Volunteers learn to live on an organic farm, tilling land, milking cows and taking produce to market, with the prospect of operating their own farm someday.Wwoof volunteers work for room and board during the summer farming season. But David Hull, who operates Snow Farm with his wife, Apple, also rents rooms to guests who want the opportunity to live in a cabin, work the land and benefit from the fruits of their labor, with the freedom to relax when they please.“My hope is that they want to participate in some way,” Mr. Hull said. “I want them to get dirty.”Visitors to the farm, which counts steers, lambs, goats, pigs and chickens among its livestock, often rise early to tend to the feeding troughs or help with the occasional livestock wrangle if, say, a steer breaks loose. The view from the dining room looks out over a dozen acres of land. Guests used to stay at the family’s main home, but now a detached cabin — with red window frames and split-wood siding — offers similar charm and tranquillity for $150 a night.“It’s never been about straight farming,” Ms. Hull said. “David isn’t just a farmer; he’s a farmer and an educator. His fantasy has always been to bring people here.”Advertisement