AdvertisementSupported byQ and ABy Shivani VoraDeborah Berke’s appointment last year as the first female dean of the Yale School of Architecture might have brought her into the limelight, but the architect and interior designer had already been getting attention for her work on 21c Museum Hotels, a small chain of boutique properties doubling as art galleries.Ms. Berke’s foray into hospitality started in 2005 when the contemporary art collectors Steve Wilson and his wife, Laura Lee Brown, who wanted to engage the public with art in a unique way, hired her to convert five 19th-century warehouses in a run-down area of downtown Louisville, Ky., into a 90-room hotel and contemporary art museum.Since that first 21c, Ms. Berke has designed locations in Cincinnati; Bentonville, Ark.; and Durham, N.C.; and has been working on a fifth property in Lexington, Ky., scheduled to open on Feb. 29.Following are edited excerpts from a conversation with Ms. Berke.Q. You’ve worked with 21c Museum Hotels since its founding in Louisville. How did you get involved?A. I interviewed for a job to renovate the Kentucky Museum of Art and Craft, which I ultimately didn’t get. Two years later, Steven Wilson, one of the trustees of the museum, called me and said: “You don’t know me, but I liked what you had to say during the craft museum interview process. My wife [Laura Lee Brown] and I would like to talk to you about a hotel we’re developing across the street.”Many of the 21c Museum Hotels are in historic buildings like the one in Durham, N.C., which was built in 1937 and was designed by Shreve, Lamb and Harmon, the architects famous for the Empire State Building. How is working with a historic property different from building anew?In old buildings, you’re taking what you find and complementing that with the architecture and design of today.I love thinking about them as architectural sites — cutting away, revealing, adding, subtracting, working from the inside out. There are also things about them that would never make sense now that you can appreciate on their own terms, like the fabulous silver-leaf ceiling outside the elevator banks in Durham.With new buildings, you’re starting from scratch and have much more control because you’re not working with an existing structural grid.How does the architecture of a museum need to function differently from that of a hotel?I think 21c Museum Hotels show that it doesn’t. The properties take all the existing components of a hotel and make them multifunctional with their art displays. The lobby is enlarged enough to double as a gallery space, and the hallways, public bathrooms, restaurants and elevators are all opportunities to show site-specific works.Can you tell us about the 21c opening in Lexington?It’s a nearly 100,000-square-foot space in the Fayette National Bank, the city’s first skyscraper, which was designed by McKim, Mead and White, the great masters of the Beaux-Arts in America. It will have a ballroom, event space and a restaurant in what was the former banking hall, and the works on display — which the public can view for free 24 hours a day — will be by emerging and established 21st-century artists.What are your favorite cities to visit for design inspiration?I love London and Tokyo because they are so intense and vital and real world cities, but I also love Providence, Halifax and New Orleans because they are gritty and haven’t fully been polished yet.Advertisement