AdvertisementSupported byBitesBy Diane DanielAs we entered under a stone archway hugging two oversize wooden doors, a nattily dressed man motioned us through a glass door, then thrust black pocket-size charge cards into our hands. Those cards (on which you run a tab and pay on the way out) at the ready, we set off to explore the 18th-century palace that houses Palácio Chiado, which opened to a lot of buzz in April.Once the residence of the baron of Quintela, the space has been transformed into a particularly elegant food court. Its two floors offer seven stops, each spinoffs of existing restaurants. The building has undergone a major restoration, resulting in bright-white molding, refreshed fresco murals and shiny stone stairways. The less-showy ground floor contains more affordable choices, while upstairs, the décor and food turn fancier.At the tapas station Páteo no Palácio, crisp alheira sausage croquets were pleasantly smoky, and we found ourselves unable to get enough of a mildly chewy octopus salad with garlic, onions, cilantro and olive oil. From Burgers & Feikes, we chose a “fake,” a stack of juicy grilled eggplant medallions layered with chèvre, caramelized onion and watercress; its only weak spot was a boring bun.We headed upstairs with our drinks — a Leffe beer and the namesake Palácio Chiado cocktail (Martin Miller’s gin, red wine, pennyroyal and lime), refreshing but surprisingly buzz-free, leaving me to wonder if the proportions were amiss. When climbing up the grand double staircase, we stopped short to gape at the gleaming stained-glass window above the landing — the Quintela regal coat of arms.“We wanted to offer the palace to the people, so everybody can discover the beauty inside,” said Duarte Cardoso Pinto, one of three partners who developed the concept and whose grandfather owns the building. “Not like a museum, but to really experience it.”That was easy to do at Delisbon, a charcuterie with meat and cheese pairings selected by Vitor Sobral, a chef noted for modernizing Portuguese cooking. We gazed at an elaborate frescoed depiction of Rome’s creation as we nibbled on salty smoked pork neck, Iberian ham and Portuguese cheeses.Our favorite room was home to the intimate Espumantaria do Mar. From a cushy corner banquette, we savored our top dish of the day, an artfully arranged carpaccio of silky sea scallops with dollops of parsnip purée. Fit for a king — or at least a baron.Palácio Chiado, Rua Alecrim 70; 351-21-010-1184; palaciochiado.pt. An average meal for two, without drinks or tip, is 100 euros (about $110).Advertisement