AdvertisementSupported byThe LOVE ISSUE | LODGING ROUNDUPBy Elaine GlusacRomance is a malleable concept. For some, it’s rose petals strewed on the bed. For others, it’s the awe of the great wide open. With that in mind, here are some new and improved hotels and resorts to woo many ages and stages of love, from platonic crushes to wedded commitment.St. BartsThe French Caribbean island synonymous with wealth and style, St. Barts, as it is called, is known as a place for pampering. Its new 46-room Le Barthélemy hotel is on one of the island’s most exclusive beaches, Grand Cul de Sac, which is also part of a nature preserve. Garden- and ocean-facing rooms all have a terrace with a dining table ideal for room service breakfasts. With an infinity pool, stand-up paddleboards and a restaurant from the Michelin-starred chef Guy Martin, guests may feel little impulse to leave, though if they do, the resort will arrange a Mini Moke, the island’s signature car, and a picnic basket filled with roast chicken and rosé. Rooms from 610 euros, about $650; lebarthelemyhotel.com.St. Augustine, Fla.The new Collector Luxury Inn & Gardens encompasses nine historic buildings dating back to 1790 that formerly comprised the Dow Museum of Historic Houses. Guests can book 30 rooms in seven of these Spain-meets-the-South homes built with ocean-harvested limestone bearing the imprint of shells. Guest rooms and suites include kitchenettes, and several have balconies, porches and fireplaces. The villagelike setting occupies an entire city block with walled gardens, a courtyard and pool, along with a guests-only bar in an early-20th-century garage. Rooms from $199, including breakfast and a wine hour; thecollectorinn.com.Greenough, Mont.Travelers commune with nature, and each other, by camping — with the comfort of real beds and a staff to do the hunting, gathering and cocktail shaking — at the Resort at Paws Up in western Montana. Just 30 deluxe tents, spread over five riverside camps, each with its own chef, and an additional 28 luxury vacation homes share 37,000 acres of wilderness. The resort offers guided river rafting, horseback riding and massages. In June, Paws Up will introduce its sixth tented compound, the six-unit North Bank Camp, with two- and three-bedroom tents big enough for an entire wedding party. Rates from $1,300, all-inclusive; pawsup.com.NashvilleWhichever half of a couple books the new Germantown Inn in Nashville’s hip, bungalow-lined neighborhood gets bragging rights for style and location. Each of the six bedrooms in the 1865 home is named after a president, whose collaged portrait within encapsulates the history-with-a-wink décor. Broadway’s honky-tonks and the state capital are a walk away, but the acclaimed restaurants of historic Germantown are even closer. Downy beds and local Steadfast Coffee and pastries served in the courtyard encourage lazy mornings. Rooms from $249; germantowninn.com.Austin, Tex.The motel — that tryst-destination cliché — gets an update from the hotelier Liz Lambert in the form of the Austin Motel. Under new management, the 1938 icon on South Congress Avenue has been fully remodeled, retaining the phallic neon sign and kidney-shaped pool while updating the 41 rooms with splashy accents including lip-motif wallpaper and lip-shaped telephones. There’s a pool bar and plans to showcase local bands poolside. Rooms from $125; austinmotel.com.Jenner, Calif.Wine country meets the coast at bluff-top Timber Cove in Sonoma County. Built in 1963, the property closed for eight months last year for renovation and expansion, updating the knotty-pine-paneled rooms and the wood-and-stone Great Room and adding eight ocean-facing suites with decks and a new farm-to-table restaurant. Redwoods dot the property’s 23 acres and line hiking trails close by. Guests can explore area wineries and return to nightly campfires. Rooms from $250; timbercoveresort.com.Palm Springs, Calif.The owners of the hip Palm Springs hideaway Sparrows Lodge strike again with Holiday House, their newest desert retreat. Opening in May, the 28-room downtown hotel revives the original, built in 1951, with a Pop Art-inspired color scheme and prints by David Hockney, Roy Lichtenstein and the street artist Mr. Brainwash scattered throughout. The courtyard contains a pool, bar and restaurant serving light fare, but one distinct advantage Holiday House has is its location, which is walking distance to downtown shops, bars and restaurants. Rooms from $199, including breakfast; holidayhouseps.com.Key West, Fla.Lovers of nature and night life can find both, and much more, on Key West. Lodging that everyone can afford on the island can be a challenge, but NYAH — Not Your Average Hotel — serves groups of friends ranging from two to six in flexible rooms where bunk beds can convert to doubles and couches to beds. That may sound like a dormitory, but guests will be pleasantly surprised to find classic Key West architecture with shady porches and several pools in the courtyard. A new bar adds to the social character of the Old Town property located in easy walking or cycling distance of most island attractions. Rooms from $150 for up to six beds; nyahotels.com.Jackson, Wyo.Adventure-loving besties can split their time between the wilds of Wyoming and the friendly confines of Jackson at the revived Anvil Hotel. Originally opened in the 1950s, the Anvil has been renovated in thoroughly frontier style with a wood stove in the general mercantile shop that acts as a lobby. Its 49 rooms contain an iron-frame bed or two. By day, nearby Grand Teton National Park beckons hikers, and the Snake River calls to anglers. By night, the pedestrian-friendly town offers plenty of diversions, from galleries and boutiques to a cowboy bar and restaurants, including the hotel’s own Italian trattoria, Glorietta. Rooms from $195; anvilhotel.com.Advertisement