By SHIVANI VORAMAY 19, 2017
A summer cruise around Iceland is an ideal way to appreciate the country’s landscape, which includes geysers, waterfalls and glaciers. Diane Eide, an Iceland specialist at Travel Experts, said such a trip was “a convenient way to see much of the country because driving from place to place takes a lot of time.” An Iceland cruise is also relatively affordable, with good values to be had between June and September.Peregrine Adventures, for instance, has several eight-day Cruising Iceland sailings this summer. The trips begin or end in either Reykjavik or Akureyri and include stops in Siglufjordur, Iceland’s northernmost city; the large fishing port of Isafjordur; and Heimaey Island, which was nearly destroyed in 1973 by lava flow. From $1,620 a person.With a similar itinerary, Variety Cruises has the Journeys in the Land of Ice & Fire: Akureyri to Reykjavik throughout the summer. The eight-day sailings are on a 34-passenger boat with overnight stops in Isafjordur and Husavik. From $2,650 a person.Iceland ProCruises is offering several 10-day Iceland circumnavigation trips this summer. The cruises have the expected stops, like Reykjavik, but also include more atypical ones, such as the town of Stykkisholmur, near Breidafjordur Bay, known for its bird life and Snaefellsjokull glacier, which sits atop a 700,000-year-old dormant volcano. From $2,595 a person.Travelers looking for a longer getaway have the option of the 12-day MSC Northern Europe Cruise, which has port stops in Akureyri and Isafjordur and also spends two days in Reykjavik. Options for shore excursions, available at an additional cost, include kayaking through fjords and hikes to waterfalls. From $1,869 a person.Luxury-seekers may consider Group IST’s Iceland Adventure trip, on a yacht with rich woodwork, brass finishes and antique décor. A highlight is a visit to Lake Myvatn to see fields of lava and bubbling mud pools. From $4,769, including land tours. SHIVANI VORAA version of this article appears in print on May 21, 2017, on Page TR2 of the New York edition with the headline: Cool Iceland Cruises.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.