
Check In By                     
LYNN FREEHILL-MAYE

FEB. 21, 2017
From $263.On Austin’s most famous street, a former gravel lot turned food-truck court has given way to one of the most popular spots in town. The South Congress Hotel, opened by the local hospitality group New Waterloo in September 2015, added a restaurant and coffee bar last March. The low-slung building is like a geode — chunky and nondescript outside but opening up to an appealing interior; local residents cannot seem to resist it at happy hour. The décor has a Latin flair, and there are fun touches like the vintage motorcycle shop, Revival Cycles, downstairs.Part of Austin’s 2,000-room hotel boomlet, the 83-room property offers what is arguably the best location in Austin, in the thick of South Congress Avenue’s pedestrian-jammed mix of shopping and dining. The State Capitol, one mile away, presides over the stretch. Sixth Street and Lady Bird Lake intersect with Congress Avenue along the route. And several of the food trucks once on the hotel’s lot are now parked in a cozier space on the next block.While half the rooms open onto hectic Congress Avenue, ours overlooked the quiet, leafy Travis Heights neighborhood. With concrete ceilings, hardwood floors, a brown leather bench and a charcoal accent wall, the space had a rugged vibe. There were unexpected details, like a headboard that appeared to be a wool blanket, draped and pinned over an extra-wide bed frame.The wall separating the bathroom from the rest of the unit had a full-length glass peekaboo panel, allowing welcome natural light into the shower stall (but making a post-workout room-service delivery a bit more risqué). There was no tub. Most of the bathroom was lined with white subway tile, though a tree-trunk stool in the long rectangular shower was an appealing feature. High-end toiletries by Aesop listed ingredients like cedarwood bark and geranium leaf.AdvertisementThe minibar was well-stocked with everything from Bearded Brothers chocolates to his-and-hers “love kits” with items like massage oil, and the TV offered artsy films selected by Alamo Drafthouse, the state’s cult-classic beer-and-dinner theater chain. The gym was where the hotel’s verve flagged. But the stylish pool area helped compensate — not only with its party-ready setting overlooking South Congress, but also with its service. Nic Martin, the outdoor bartender, made himself available immediately after the slightest glance in his direction, then went to great lengths to find outdoor outlets or to lug heavy umbrellas to help guests avoid sunburn — all in addition to mixing tangy margarita variations featuring mezcal.Some of the hardest seats to snag in town since it opened last March have been those at Otoko, the hotel’s 12-seat sushi and kaiseki restaurant opened by the local celebrity chef Paul Qui. For us, staying on the April weekend of the Austin Food & Wine Festival, a restaurant reservation was impossible. We went simple and ordered an in-room lunch, which arrived precisely 25 minutes later, from another hotel restaurant, Café No Sé. California-inspired dishes like tuna poke hit the mark, while the kale salad was vinegar-drenched. Also on the property are Central Standard, a polished bar and grill, and Mañana, an airy juice and coffee bar. An ice-cream truck, Stephen F. Frostin’, parks in the courtyard for occasional sweets service.AdvertisementThe South Congress Hotel takes one of the best locations in town and builds a stylish scene, with low-key but attentive service, around it.South Congress Hotel, 1603 South Congress Avenue, Austin; 512-920-6405; southcongresshotel.comA version of this article appears in print on February 26, 2017, on Page TR3 of the New York edition with the headline: New Buzz on a Famous Street.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »