AdvertisementSupported byChasing the DealBy Shivani VoraA much-anticipated annual tradition in Washington is here: The National Cherry Blossom Festival will take place through April 16. The event, celebrating its 90th anniversary, commemorates the 1912 gift of 3,000 cherry trees from Japan to the United States. Today, there are 3,800 cherry blossom trees, and visitors to the city during the festival can see them in bloom.Most of the trees are along the Tidal Basin in West Potomac Park, but they are also in East Potomac Park and on the Washington Monument grounds. .Numerous hotels in Washington have themed packages pegged to the festival.The Embassy Row Hotel is offering the National Cherry Blossom Festival Package, including two nights’ accommodations, two one-day Metrorail passes and a sake tasting at the hotel’s restaurant, Station Kitchen & Cocktails. From $179 a night. Available from March 20 to April 16.Washington Hilton has the Capital Coolcation package; it includes two cherry-blossom cocktails, unlimited coffee and hot chocolate, and late checkout. From $129 a night. Available throughout the festival.Embassy Suites by Hilton Georgetown is also offering Capital Coolcation; in addition to the cocktails, coffee, hot chocolate and late checkout, guests receive breakfast and evening drinks and snacks such as crudité with dips, miniquiches and a range of alcoholic beverages. From $219 a night. Available throughout the festival.The Willard InterContinental has a Cherry Blossom package that includes a space-available room upgrade, a $50 daily food and beverage credit, valet parking and a welcome amenity of a cherry-themed Japanese dessert. From $299 a night. Available from March 18 to April 30.The Dupont Circle has created the In Full Bloom offer. Accommodations, a $50 dining credit and valet parking are included. From $209 a night. Available from March 19 to April 30.Two options for luxury seekers include The Ritz-Carlton Georgetown’s cherry blossom Package with accommodations, breakfast, a private tour of the cherry blossoms via pedicab followed by a picnic, parking and a welcome amenity of dried and fresh cherries and a cherry-blossom iced tea. From $795 a night. Available to April 20.There is also the cherry blossom package at the St. Regis Washington, D.C., including accommodations, breakfast, afternoon tea for two in the hotel’s lobby and a bicycle loan for two. From $545 a night.Advertisement