By SHIVANI VORAFEB. 27, 2017
Hotels are taking a cue from the movie musical “La La Land,” winner of six Academy Awards this year. The movie, about an aspiring actress and jazz musician falling in love in Los Angeles, has inspired them to offer new jazz- and romance-themed packages.Several properties in the Los Angeles area are leading the trend.Fairmont Miramar Hotel & Bungalows, in Santa Monica, offers the “Escape to La La Land” package, which includes accommodations in a bungalow, a picnic lunch and a dinner for two, a map of Los Angeles marked with locations where the movie is set and two tickets to a show at the popular jazz club Herb Alpert’s Vibrato Grill & Jazz. From $1,900 a night. Valid to March 31.At the Hollywood Roosevelt, the “Love in La La Land” package includes accommodations, a welcome amenity of a dessert, two cocktails, breakfast, a $25 Uber credit and a $50 voucher for Pacific Theaters, where guests can catch a showing of the movie. From $439 a night.The InterContinental Los Angeles Century City has the “La La Land”-inspired “City of Stars” package: It includes accommodations in a suite; two tickets to the Grammy Museum; two tickets for a tour of Warner Bros. studios, where scenes from the movie were filmed; a hairstyling and makeup session for one; and a dinner for two at the hotel’s signature restaurant, Mari. From $619 a night. Valid through June 30.AdvertisementAnd packages aren’t limited to Los Angeles. Hotel representatives in other cities give “La La Land” credit for their music-themed offerings. The Hotel Granduca Houston, in the city’s Uptown neighborhood, is offering the “Jazz con Amore” package on Saturday evenings; included are accommodations in a suite, breakfast, reserved seating at the property’s evening jazz performance, a CD recording (if available) of that night’s entertainer and a bottle of prosecco. From $375 a night.Following the release of “La La Land,” the Betsy South Beach hotel in Miami Beach, Fla., introduced a “Mostly Jazz” series with free jazz performances on Wednesday and Thursday evenings; the shows are free and open to the public, but overnight guests are guaranteed prime seating and receive two cocktails. From $395 a night.AdvertisementAlso, the Ritz-Carlton New Orleans is offering the “Become a Jazz Musician” package — guests get accommodations and a private 90-minute trumpet lesson for one with the noted jazz musician Jeremy Davenport, who also performs at the hotel Wednesday through Saturday; his performances are free and open to the public. From $549 a night.A version of this article appears in print on March 5, 2017, on Page TR2 of the New York edition with the headline: A Vacation in ‘La La Land’.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.