By JOHN BRANCHFEB. 3, 2016
As covered in a recent article, samba schools in Rio de Janeiro are more like social clubs, fulcrums of community spirit tucked deep into a neighborhood, many in ramshackle favelas.If you’re planning a trip, know that because of Brazil’s sinking economy, the dollar increasingly goes a long way in Rio. In January, $1 equaled 4 reais, about twice as many as in 2012. Getting rooms during Carnaval, on New Year’s Eve and during the Summer Games this August is difficult.Information on samba schools is at www.rio-carnival.net/samba-school/samba-schools-rio-de-janeiro.php.The schools are often found in Rio’s poorer neighborhoods, not in tourist-laden Copacabana and Ipanema.AdvertisementIt is polite to wear the school colors — pink and green at Mangueira, for example, or blue and white at Portela. Samba schools are informal, and while they are safe on the inside, some are in unsafe neighborhoods. Do not carry valuables. Most sell drinks and light food.AdvertisementBeyond rehearsal nights for Carnaval, the schools have samba nights, with live bands and lots of dancing, and visitors are welcome — though few foreigners make their way to most. Prices are usually below 50 reais ($12.50). Rarely does the party start at the posted time; most do not get active until well past midnight on weekends.Two of the larger schools featured in this article:Mangueira Perhaps the most popular among residents of Rio. Rua Visconde de Niterói 1072, Mangueira. Samba nights: Saturdays, 10 p.m.Salgueiro A slicker operation, popular with tour groups. Rua Silva Teles 104, Tijuca. Samba nights: Saturdays, 10 p.m.Portela A bit removed, but the oldest among the big ones Rua Clara Nunes 81, Madureira: Samba nights: Wednesdays, 8 p.m., Fridays, 10 p.m.União da Ilha Widely respected, near the international airport. Estrada do Galeão 322, Ilha do Governador. Samba nights: Tuesdays, 8 p.m.; Saturdays, 10 p.m.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Samba City (Rua Rivadávia Correa 60, Gamboa (access through Avenida Rodrigues Alves); rio.com/rio-carnival/city-samba) is an enormous complex in central Rio where the top 12 samba schools build their Carnaval floats and costumes. Open to visitors during the day; site of occasional shows and miniparades at night.Most hotels are centered around Copacabana and Ipanema and include breakfast.Mar Ipanema Hotel Two blocks from the beach on Ipanema’s main shopping street, an understated hotel with clean, updated rooms. From 629 reais a night (maripanema.com.br/portugues/index.asp). Ipanema Inn Well-rated, moderate hotel, from 540 reais a night (ipanemainn.com.br/en).Windsor Atlantica: Highly rated high-rise in Copacabana, from 847 reais a night.Advertisement(windsorhoteis.com/hotels/windsor-atlantica/presentation-hotels-in-copacabana-windsor-atlantica/?lang=en).Rio has a global palate, from bar food served in open-air sidewalk cafes to sushi and steaks in hipster settings.A foodie place in the heart of Ipanema. www.bazzar.com.br/index.htmlGohan Top-end sushi in Lapa, a trendy neighborhood away from the beaches. www.gohanrio.com.br/Rio Scenarium Popular club featuring tables, food and a varied mix of live music, from samba and chorinho (Brazilian instrumental music) to jazz.www.rioscenarium.art.br/Helena Rebello contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on January 31, 2016, on Page TR10 of the New York edition.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.