
Heads Up By                     
RATHA TEP

FEB. 3, 2016
Most of the time, narrow Montague Street, a few blocks south of magnificent St. Stephen’s Green in Dublin, functions as a nondescript passage, allowing pedestrians a quick jaunt from the handsome red-brick Georgian townhouses of Harcourt Street to the motley restaurants and bars of Camden Street. But during the weekday lunchtime rush, the tiny brick-paved lane becomes a destination unto itself.Just past noon on a Tuesday, more than a dozen men in pressed suits and women in stylish flats — office workers from the nearby accounting and law firms — queued outside the Green Bench Café (greenbenchcafe.com), a shoebox-size restaurant that has no servers, tables or chairs, but luscious sandwiches including a slow-roasted beef brisket creation accented with caramelized onions, grated celeriac and Comté cheese that are ordered while you are still in line, picked up at the counter after payment, and often eaten on the go.The three-year-old restaurant, owned by Jason and Zuzana Warner, who are married, is part of a trend toward casual places that have opened within the past few years in the Irish capital that focus on creative, frugally priced sandwiches, many of which sell for about 5 or 6 euros. Some restaurateurs see this sandwich boom as a shift in the Dublin dining scene, a repercussion of the country’s recent severe economic downturn, even as signs of recovery now abound.“We used to be all about the fine-dining restaurants,” said Barry Stephens, who owns 147 Deli (facebook.com/147deliparnell), a two-year-old sandwich spot in north Dublin. “Then we went through a recession and people didn’t have money, but they still wanted to get out and eat. It made chefs and restaurateurs think outside the box to see what could be done.”Mr. Stephens’s answer, like that of a host of restaurateurs in this resilient city, came in the form of creative fillings sandwiched in a crusty loaf. Situated among the Asian grocery stores of Parnell Street, 147 Deli offers seven sandwiches. On my visit last spring, its popular barbecue pork sandwich, a juicy, messy, spill-out-of-a-toasted-onion-bun affair, was piled nearly an inch high with pork shoulder that had been roasted for eight hours, then pulled and tossed in a house-made tomato- and cider-vinegar-based sauce.Advertisement“At the height of the boom, Irish people would think nothing of spending 100 euros a person,” said Garrett Fitzgerald, who with his partner, James Boland, opened Brother Hubbard (brotherhubbard.ie) in north Dublin in 2012 and Sister Sadie (sistersadie.ie) in October 2014 on a leafy residential block in the Portobello neighborhood. “Now they prefer to go to a nice cafe for better value instead of something fancy.”AdvertisementMr. Fitzgerald and Mr. Boland’s two spots reflect that mind-set and offer a range of well-executed sandwiches. Available at both is a bright and lively update on the traditional chicken salad sandwich prepared with poached chicken breast dressed in a house-made harissa sauce and packed with fresh dill, parsley, cilantro and lemon zest, served on sourdough bread.Luca D’Alfonso, who owns the three-year-old Fumbally cafe (thefumbally.ie) with Aisling Rogerson, said the financial crisis helped their business; the partners were able to secure a sprawling corner location in a glass-and-concrete development, which had been empty since it was completed in 2005, a few blocks from St. Patrick’s Cathedral.The Fumbally’s short, focused menu often includes a seasonal lemon-roast chicken sandwich, which on a visit last spring included a juicy mix of white meat, dark meat and flavorful skin, slathered with house-made lovage-accented mayonnaise on a ciabatta bun.Meanwhile, Conor Higgins had felt the economic downturn on a personal level; he had been an unemployed chef for a year before opening Oxmantown (oxmantown.com) in 2013 with Amie Costello among the fruit and vegetable stands of the City Markets neighborhood, just above the River Liffey.Now, Mr. Higgins spends his days preparing sandwiches that include a pork belly special on a soft sourdough roll that he said was inspired partly by the 10 months he spent backpacking through Asia. He marinates the fatty, succulent pork in spices that include cardamom and star anise, and accents the meat with quick-pickled grated carrot and apple and aioli that has been spiked with sriracha chile sauce.In January, Mr. Higgins and Ms. Costello opened a second spot, Cotto (cotto.ie), serving sandwiches by day and pizzas in the evening, in the city’s Stoneybatter neighborhood.“The Dublin dining scene has gotten more creative with a lot of people willing to take more risks on new ventures, which I like to think is because of the recession,” Mr. Higgins said. “I was out of work and did something out of necessity, which got the creative juices flowing.”A version of this article appears in print on February 7, 2016, on Page TR4 of the New York edition with the headline: Hearty Sandwiches, With Aspirations.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »