
In Transit By                     
SHIVANI VORA

FEB. 13, 2016
Royal Caribbean’s Anthem of the Seas vessel returned earlier than scheduled to its port of origin, Cape Liberty, N.J., on Wednesday evening after facing 120 m.p.h. winds on Sunday off Cape Hatteras, N.C. The cruise ship departed last Saturday and was on its way to a port call in Port Canaveral, Fla., as part of a seven-day trip to the Bahamas when it ran into the storm.The Coast Guard is examining the cruise ship, and a Florida senator has said that the National Transportation Safety Board should also conduct an investigation.Of the 4,529 guests and 1,616 crew onboard, four sustained minor injuries, according to Royal Caribbean spokeswoman Cynthia Martinez. She said that the return journey — which took nearly three days rather than the one it took to reach Cape Hatteras — was intentionally slowed to make sure the ship’s mechanical systems were working. Passengers will get a full refund as well as a 50 percent discount on a future cruise.In a statement emailed shortly before the ship’s return, Royal Caribbean apologized for exposing guests and crew to the inclement weather .AdvertisementThe company also identified gaps in its planning system. “Though that system has performed well through many instances of severe weather around the world, what happened this week showed that we need to do better,” the statement said.In an email to The New York Times on Friday, Ms. Martinez said during the storm, the ship experienced a technical problem with its steering gear clutches on the propulsion system pods. “The ship is equipped with two pods and can function on just one,” she said. “Pods on today’s ships are extremely resilient. While this issue doesn’t happen often, when it does, the parts are easy to replace. The pod has already been repaired.”Anthem of the Seas, a Bahamian-flagged vessel, departed Cape Liberty on Saturday for its scheduled 8-night cruise, according to Ms. Martinez. “The departure was delayed a few hours to finish up some work on one of the ship’s 18 lifeboats,” she said in an email.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The United States Coast Guard Sector New York finished inspecting the vessel at 3 p.m. — the time it was due to set sail — spokesman Charles Rowe said; part of that inspection involved checking the lifeboats. “The Coast Guard inspects a cruise ship every time she sails from a U.S. port to ensure sure its safety to be on the seas,” he said. “But in this case, we are conducting a more thorough inspection.” The inspection began Wednesday, soon after the ship docked.Also, the Coast Guard and the Bahamas Maritime Administration will investigate why the vessel ended up where it did and whether Royal Caribbean might have avoided the storm.This review could take several months, Mr. Rowe said. “Right now, there is no reason to hold anyone accountable,” he said. “But there are consequences in any incident, not just this one, for preventable actions.” He declined to say what those consequences were.Senator Bill Nelson, Democrat of Florida, called for a safety board investigation of the Miami-based company. The incident was particularly important to him, the senator said Thursday in a telephone interview, because of the 33 Florida residents who died on the cargo ship El Faro last October. That boat departed Jacksonville, Fla., for Puerto Rico and was lost at sea Oct. 1 in the midst of Hurricane Joaquin. “Why did Anthem of the Seas do what El Faro did and leave port knowing that a storm would be coming?” he asked. “It’s my responsibility to ensure that this gets investigated.”AdvertisementTerry Williams, a safety board spokesman, said because Anthem of the Seas is a Bahamian-flagged vessel, that Bahamas investigators would lead the investigation, with the United States’ assistance.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »