

      By JEANNIE RALSTON

UPDATED August 1, 2016

The city is in the midst of a restaurant boom, and King Street has become the embodiment of a new, saccharine-free Southern charm.
As home to Rhett Butler, Fort Sumter, the fabled battery and perhaps the country’s highest concentration of magnolias and plantations, Charleston has always held a special place in the American imagination. But something has happened in the past few years that has given this small southern city a lot more than just sizzle, and made a complex, pivotal history seem almost like a footnote. The city is in the midst of a restaurant boom, and King Street has become the embodiment of a new, saccharine-free Southern charm: knowing, worldly, often cheeky. With the balmy climate, visitors can spend plenty of time outdoors year-round — either downtown or just across the river in the lovely lowcountry town of Mount Pleasant.Since the early 1800s, the Charleston City Market has been a center of commerce, and with its renovation a few years ago, it’s never looked so good. The main section of the market, the Great Hall, was enclosed and got skylights and a more expansive, elegant layout. The Historic Charleston Foundation offers all things Charleston, including night lights featuring key Charleston Attractions. Check out the Charleston Hat Man and the Charleston Shoe Company, which sells look-good, feel-good shoes billed as perfect for cobblestones or cocktails (starting at $100 a pair). For a recharge, sip a macchiato from the high-end grocery/cafe, Caviar & Bananas. Because Charleston is on a peninsula with views in almost every direction, it’s no wonder that rooftop bars are the rage. The perfect perch is the bar at the Market Pavilion Hotel, near City Market, which offers a panorama view of the harbor. The bar menu is dominated by “M” drinks: imaginative takes on mojitos ($14 to $16), martinis ($13 to $16) and margaritas ($8.50). Charleston, a city of 130,000, is home to a concentration of world-class dining normally seen in cities five times the size. For the past few years, the king-daddy of Charleston restaurants has been Husk, and several worthy spots are following in the footsteps of Husk’s executive chef, Sean Brock. For instance, The Grocery offers a menu with ingredients sourced from “favorite farmers, fishermen, foragers and artisans.” The restaurant cans its own vegetables, and on shelves in this bright, busy space—in a former furniture store—are jars of homemade pickles and other goods that help evoke the feeling of a small-town grocery. As long as you’re in the neighborhood, stop in at Fuel Cantina, a renovated Esso station. The décor is blue-collar cool, with old gas pumps and signs as accents. The roll-up garage doors are glass; the sconces are made from pump handles. Though burgers, fish tacos and sandwiches are served here, it’s best for a beer (16 types on tap, including its own brand) or an “antifreeze” shooter, a blistering green combo of vodka, pineapple juice and melon liqueur. If you still have energy, try your skill at a game of bocce on the back patio. The quickest way to soak up all the city’s marvels is on two wheels. Rent beach cruisers from the Bicycle Shoppe, where you can also pick up route suggestions. The best place to see the spectrum of architectural styles here, including the classic “single house” with porches running along one side, is south of Broad Street. Don’t miss Legare Street with its famous wrought-iron gates or wee, brick-paved Stolls Alley. Rainbow Row — a stretch of 18th-century townhouses in sherbet hues — is a few pedal pushes away. The narrow, shady streets open up to the Battery on the southern tip of the peninsula. Catch your breath (then lose it again taking in the view of the harbor) at White Point Garden. Though Butcher & Bee has recently expanded its menu into dinner, this recreation of an old-time deli is still most popular with the lunch crowd. That’s because sandwiches are the specialty here. Some of the delights to be found between two slices of homemade bread are pulled squash BBQ with pickled cole slaw and roast beef with smoked onion jam and chimichurri. Sides not to miss include the kale slaw and the sweet potatoes with a kale pesto. The two-mile-long Arthur Ravenel Jr. Bridge can be seen from almost anywhere in Charleston, but one of the most impressive views is from below it. The neighboring town of Mount Pleasant, across the Cooper River from downtown Charleston, has opened a handsome park on a pier beneath the bridge. After a stroll, stop at the Sweetgrass Cultural Arts Pavilion. Many places sell traditional sweetgrass baskets, originally used for plantation work, such as winnowing rice, but here a handsome museum display puts them in historical context. Watch local women weaving and buy a basket. Boone Hall Plantation in Mount Pleasant is still a working plantation that earned extra cachet a few years ago when Blake Lively and Ryan Reynolds were married on the Cotton Dock, which sits in the marshland. The main house embodies serene grandeur while the rows of slave quarters, now housing an exhibition on black culture, offer a sobering counterpoint. But probably the best reason to come here is the entryway: three-quarters of a mile of 270-year-old live oaks oozing with Spanish moss. Admission, $24. Shem Creek in Mount Pleasant has long been a harbor for shrimpers; you’re likely to see trawlers chugging in to anchor, often trailed by porpoises. Sunset is a good time for a turn along the boardwalk, where locals fish, seabirds squawk and, if it’s low tide, crabs scurry through the pluff mud below. Follow up with a drink at the Cabana Bar at Water’s Edge, where you can watch the day’s light fade over the boat masts. Who names a restaurant the Ordinary? Maybe someone who wants reviewers to use the phrase, “It’s anything but.” Inside this 1927 bank building in the Upper King neighborhood, you’ll find Charleston’s most vibrant restaurant. The high-ceilinged interior with arched windows feels like a temple to seafood. By the old bank vault is the raw bar, piled high with clams, oysters, crab. The white shrimp escabeche is a masterpiece and the fish schnitzel is, uh, extraordinary.  End the evening a few steps up King Street at a place with another ironic name: Closed For Business. This beer bar has an eclectic, rotating menu of 42 brews on tap. You might find a milk stout from the U.K. and a wild saison from up the road in North Charleston. Mingle with other beer aficionados at communal tables or on sofas in the back. There are reportedly more than 400 churches in Charleston. The most interesting sacred place in town, however, is the Magnolia Cemetery, which dates to the 1850s and is strewn across 92 acres on the Cooper River. Here the headstones may be shaped like pyramids or adorned with angels, and mausoleums are architectural wonders with columns and florid accents. One serene pond has a fetching white footbridge across it, and all apparently have a hidden danger. “S.C. Law Prohibits Feeding Alligators,” a sign says at the entrance. The cemetery is famous for its Civil War burial sites — including those belonging to three crews of the Confederate H. L. Hunley, the first submarine to sink an enemy ship, in 1864 in Charleston Harbor. (You can see the Hunley, discovered 18 years ago, on weekends in North Charleston.) At Halls Chophouse, two Sunday rituals come together: brunch and worship. Near the piano at the front door, a singer croons “Amazing Grace” and other gospel standards. Upstairs, the hungry sit on leather banquettes and dig into crab cake eggs Benedict, or shrimp and grits. Several Hall family members circulate to schmooze. Think of this robust dose of Southern hospitality as the weekend’s exclamation point ($75 for two). The 440-room Belmond Charleston Place: (205 Meeting Street; charlestonplace.com) is sumptuous and sophisticated and right in the heart of downtown. Amenities include a spa and rooftop pool. Doubles are $295 and up.Built for a wealthy cotton trader, the 130-year-old Wentworth Mansion (149 Wentworth Street; wentworthmansion.com) is a gorgeously restored four-story brick marvel with a mansard roof and 21 rooms featuring marble fireplaces, Tiffany glass and finely carved wood accents. Doubles start at $465.Flight and Hotel information provided by Google.Prices represent a snapshot of low fares and rates for weekend trips.This article was originally published on Nov. 21, 2013 and updated on July 19, 2016, and again on Aug. 1, 2016.Advertisement