AdvertisementSupported byPursuitsBy Justin SablichMost people have heard of Buffalo wings. But not everyone knows why they’re called that. (Hint: Buffaloes do not have wings.) And if people have heard, they don’t exactly equate the food with the region.But Buffalo and upstate New York are actually unsung food destinations with their own approach to cuisine in an age when locavore can mean New American food served with a few herbs grown in a nearby garden. You can even make the case that there may not be another region in the country quite like it when it comes to unique local dishes spanning generations.“Buffalo, without a doubt, I think, is one of the great eating cities,” said Michael Stern, a founder of roadfood.com. “When you think of gastronomic meccas in the country, you don’t think of upstate New York. But, in fact, it has so much to offer.”There are the beef on weck, a spiedie, a Garbage Plate, Cornell chicken: menu items that are nothing new to people who grew up in upstate New York (as I did) or went to college there.There are foods particular to cities and regions all across the country. Chicago has its Italian beef sandwich, Cincinnati has its five-way chili, and there are countless claims to America’s best barbecue.But you may be hard-pressed to find a cluster quite like the one that extends from western to central New York, along Interstates 90 and 81, with specialties deeply rooted in a wide array of ethnicities and cultures that support cultlike followings.“It’s really hard to think of other regions of the country that have so many different kinds of dishes, and unexpected dishes,” Mr. Stern said.Still not buying it? Let’s take a road trip.For the people who do know why they’re called Buffalo wings, you probably know about Anchor Bar, where most people agree the wing got its start in 1964.From there, it spread to other iconic wing joints in Buffalo like Duff’s (which President Obama chose over all others during a 2010 visit) and can now be found on menus all over the world.“Wings have the distinction of being probably the once most local to absolutely, utterly, more universal than any local dish has ever become,” Mr. Stern said.The same cannot be said about the beef on weck sandwich, a kaiser roll encrusted in caraway and pretzel salt, filled with warm, thinly sliced roast beef. The top of the roll is dipped in jus, and served with fresh horseradish. In Buffalo, at least, it’s a very big deal. “Many people suggest that the beef on weck, as well as the spiedie, came out of small, neighborhood bars, as a way to entice drinkers to stay,” said Chuck D’Imperio, an upstate native and author of “A Taste of Upstate New York.”Many believe that the sandwich was created by a German immigrant who sold beer and pretzels in Buffalo in the late 1800s. “He wanted to start serving a more substantial sandwich, and he remembers from his baking heritage that his grandparents in Germany would put caraway and pretzel salt on top of rye bread,” said Charles W. Roesch, better known in Buffalo as “Charlie the Butcher.”Mr. Roesch is the third family butcher named Charlie, and today his Charlie the Butcher chain of restaurants is one of many Buffalo institutions serving the sandwich, including the historic, family-run Schwabl’s (established 1837) and many pubs in the city. Mr. Roesch’s grandfather started his company over 100 years ago.“He was also the mayor of the city in the early ‘30s, and when he stopped being mayor he went back to being a butcher,” Mr. Roesch said.Beyond wings and weck, there are even more gastronomic wonders in Buffalo, some at a hyper-local level. “Boy, there are some foods that are really, really regional,” Mr. D’Imperio said.  “You get to Rochester, they think you’re speaking a second language when you mention sponge candy.”Sponge candy, a “cross between a little fluffy meringue cookie and a malted milk ball,” as Ted Marks, the owner of Fowler’s Chocolates, put it in Mr. D’Imperio’s book, was brought to Buffalo in the early 1900s by Joe Fowler, an English immigrant, who incorporated Fowler’s in 1910.“The number of really great ice cream parlors and candy stores in Buffalo is flabbergasting,” Mr. Stern said. “Plus, Buffalo has a wonderful hot dog culture, like the charcoal grilled hots at Ted’s.”Anchor Bar, 1047 Main Street, Buffalo, 716-883-1134; anchorbar.com.Charlie the Butcher’s Kitchen, 1065 Wehrle Drive, Williamsville, N.Y., 716-633-8330; charliethebutcher.com.Duff’s Famous Wings, 3651 Sheridan Drive, Amherst, N.Y. 716-834-6234; duffswings.com.Fowler’s Chocolates, 101 River Rock Drive, No. 102, Buffalo, 716-877-9983; fowlerschocolates.com.Schwabl’s Restaurant, 789 Center Road, West Seneca, N.Y., 716-675-2333; schwabls.com.About 75 miles east of Buffalo, you won’t find sponge candy, but you will find a foodie’s worst nightmare: the Garbage Plate.“It’s an outlaw dish,” Mr. Stern said. “I mean, no polite hostess is ever going to serve a Garbage Plate.”It is a fitting name for this decadent mix of hash brown potatoes, macaroni salad, a meat of some sort, eggs or grilled cheese topped with onions, mustard and ground beef chili, and there is only one place you can get it.Sure, you can get something called the Sloppy Plate at Mark’s Texas Hots, or the Trash Plate at Empire Hots. (“I’ve been trashed at Empire Hots” is its slogan.) There is even a variation for vegans called the Compost Plate at the Red Fern. But the original belongs to Nick Tahou Hots (as does the copyright).As with most of these upstate institutions, Nick Tahou is in its third generation of family ownership since the patriarch, Alex Tahou, opened it in 1918. The restaurant is named for his son, Nick.“It looks disgusting and it tastes heavenly,” Mr. D’Imperio said. “It’s not something you would do every day; it is something you might do after maybe you’ve been over served.”Yes, college students are regular customers at Nick Tahou’s, but the appeal extends beyond the hung over.“I think there’s a huge amount of gastronomy that succeeds because it goes against what we’re supposed to like and supposed to be eating.” Mr. Stern said. “A garbage plate would head the list of that gastronomy.”But, yeah, college students really do like it. So much so that a tradition among Rochester Institute of Technology students is to visit the cemetery where Nick Tahou is buried every Jan. 10, the date of his birthday, and dine on Garbage Plates next to his grave.Nick Tahou Hots, 320 West Main Street, Rochester, 585-436-0184; garbageplate.com.It’ll probably take you longer than 90 minutes to digest a Garbage Plate, but 90 miles east on Interstate 90 is the next stop.While Syracuse is famously the home of the first Dinosaur BBQ restaurant, its strongest impact on the region’s food culture can be seen more at picnics and cookouts than at any dining establishment, where crisp, barbecued Cornell chicken legs and salt potatoes are commonly consumed.“My most favorite Cornell chicken experiences were at firehouse fund-raisers and stuff like that,” Mr. Stern said, “where it’s not just about eating, it’s about community and people getting together and doing something for a good cause.”Cornell chicken made its debut at the New York State Fair in 1949, sold at the Baker’s Chicken Coop concession stand, which returns to the Syracuse Fairgrounds every late summer.But, as the name suggests, Cornell chicken officially came out of Cornell University in Ithaca, N.Y., where Dr. Bob Baker, the head of Cornell’s Department of Poultry and Avian Sciences, spent much of his career devising new and efficient ways to serve chicken (though the marinade was devised while he was working at Penn State in the 1940s).Among his creations were the chicken nugget, chicken hot dogs, chicken bologna and the marinade that lends the flavor to Cornell chicken.“This guy was a genius,” Mr. D’Imperio said. “He actually came up with a manual for how to barbecue chicken properly.”The manual, which details how to build your own stone fireplace and includes the original marinade recipe, was published by Cornell in 1950, before Weber was mass-producing charcoal grills, and when most Americans were not grilling chicken, or at least not doing it properly, Mr. D’Imperio said.“They would put on thick, red sauce, and it would burn to whichever makeshift grill they were using,” Mr. D’Imperio said. “So he came up with a thinner, spicier, tastier marinade sauce.”The fair ended last month but a popular variation of Cornell Chicken can be found at Brooks’ House of BBQ in Oneonta, N.Y., or you can look for smoke coming from any number of roadside farmers’ markets in the area.There are also bottles of Salamida’s State Fair Chicken Bar-Be-Que Sauce, “Cornell” style, in most grocery stores throughout upstate New York if you want to try it yourself.Dinosaur Bar-B-Que, 246 West Willow Street, Syracuse, 315-476-4937; dinosaurbarbque.com. You can get a spiedie sandwich at the fair as well, but not in many other places outside Binghamton, which lies about 75 miles south of Syracuse off Interstate 81.As with Cornell chicken, spiedies require just three things: meat, marinade and a grill (though you’ll also need a slice of Italian bread).The term spiedie comes from the Italian word spiedini, which is a meat dish cooked on a skewer. Think of lamb, pork or chicken shish kebab (but don’t even think about putting vegetables on it).Also, you can’t just use any marinade and call it a spiedie. A spiedie marinade is to be used only for spiedies, and you need to marinate the meat for at least 24 hours, preferably longer, otherwise it’s not going to be tender. (Can you tell I grew up in Binghamton?)Spiedies were devised by immigrants, the Italian brothers Camillo and Augie Iacovelli, and the more popular spiedie spots like Sharkey’s and Lupo’s S&S Char-Pit are still being run by the same families who started them.“I think there’s a whole element to those kinds of foods that once they get anchored,” Mr. Stearn said, “they’re going to go on for at least several generations.”It’s hard to describe just how big a deal the simple spiedie is in and around Binghamton. There are spiedie-costumed mascots at minor league baseball games, the annual Spiedie Fest and Balloon Rally draws over 100,000 people every year (more than half of Binghamton’s population), and yes, President Obama had some in 2013.The spiedie and these other regional hits (besides the Buffalo wing) have not caught on outside upstate New York in any significant way. Not that there haven’t been attempts.For example, the spiedie will rear its tasty little head every few years or so in one of New York City’s five boroughs. The Manhattan bar and restaurant Little Town NYC opened in 2011 with an upstate New York-themed menu that included spiedies, Garbage Plates and salt potatoes. Little Town is still open, but upstate food is no longer on the menu (other than Buffalo wings, of course).“You would think spiedies would be sort of a natural to become popular,” Mr. Stern said. “But I really think the issue with stuff like spiedies, and maybe beef on weck, and certainly Cornell chicken, is as right as it might be in all kinds of other ways, it’s not part of other people’s culture.”But others keep trying. Two expats in Brooklyn opened Buffalo’s Famous in May, featuring beef on weck (disguised on the menu as Hot Roast Beef), Garbage Plates (changed to Famous Plates) wings and more. Whether or not these dishes catch on, the restaurant has already gotten one of its beef on wecks on “The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon,” supplying the sandwich that was featured in a recent segment with the chef Mario Batali.“That might be the tastiest thing I’ve had in my entire life,” Mr. Fallon said after taking a bite.Lupo’s S & S Char-Pit, 6 West State Street, Binghamton, N.Y., 607-723-6106; spiedies.com.Sharkey’s, 56 Glenwood Avenue, Binghamton, 607-729-9201.Follow Justin Sablich on Twitter: @JustinSablichcookingcookingAdvertisement