AdvertisementSupported byFORAGINGBy Shivani VoraSeville never used to be a destination for shoppers. Up until about five years ago, travelers to this southern Spanish city could expect to find stores selling not much more than old-fashioned flamenco dresses or touristy knickknacks. The offerings became more inspiring with the 2011 opening of Metropol Parasol, a mushroomlike contemporary structure with Roman ruins and a market underneath and views of the city and countryside from the top. These days, the cluster of surrounding narrow streets lined with 16th- and 17th-century buildings is dotted with hip, locally run boutiques that show off the increasingly modern side of a metropolis steeped in history and tradition.In this bookstore-cum-cafe, the diverse offerings include best sellers, literary classics and selections for children. The cafe serves coffees and pastries. There’s also cultural programming, such as discussions with authors.José Gestoso, 8, 34-955-54-1966, caotica.esOrganic bread is the highlight of this tiny bakery. The 20 to 40 varieties available on any given day are baked in a nearby village and can be packed to take home. Though the flavors change seasonally, the varieties available year-round include chocolate, whole grain with walnut, and tomato with paprika. Prices from 1 euro.Plaza de la Encarnación, 12-34-955-189-389, no website.This bright shop selling handmade hats doubles as an atelier for the designer Agustín Roiz. Men can expect classic styles such as Panama hats in different colors. The women’s headwear, on the other hand, is more dramatic; an oversize pink hat of goose feathers was a recent eye-catching example. Prices from 60 euros.Calle Amparo, 9, 34-692-177-014, no website.Women with a taste for up-and-coming designers may enjoy this store, which sells affordable and casual clothing from small Spanish brands. Many of the articles are handmade, such as the soft cotton T-shirt with a red arrow silk screen print and purple sleeves that was part of the latest inventory. The selection changes weekly. Prices from 7 euros.Pérez Galdós, 18, 34-955-518-384, lasetacoqueta.com.This high-ceilinged, airy shop is the place for stylish clothing for men and women from Spanish and Danish brands. The men’s wear can be unusual; for example, a pair of dark blue denim shorts with a sky blue octopus print. The owner, Rafa G. Forcada, also a designer, has a women’s collection consisting of mostly dresses for formal occasions. Prices from 8 euros. Pérez Galdós, 2, 34-954-561-829, no website.Advertisement