
Bites By                     
REBECCA FLINT MARX

MARCH 3, 2017
Chefs name their restaurants after all sorts of things: obscure plants, childhood pets, villages on the Adriatic. But Tusk is most likely the only restaurant in Portland named for a Fleetwood Mac album. “When you listen to ‘Tusk’ or ‘Rumours,’ that’s the vibe we wanted to have,” said Sam Smith, the restaurant’s executive chef and an owner. But, he added, “We’re not playing that music all the time.”Hanging over the bar you will find a giant photograph not of Stevie Nicks but of Keith Richards, floating in a pool wearing a tiny Speedo. It’s the physical and spiritual centerpiece of the restaurant, which was opened in southeast Portland last August by the team behind Ava Gene’s, a popular local Italian spot. Decorated in shades of bone and wheat with pops of pale pink and gold, Tusk is, like its namesake, a California dream.Tusk also happens to be a Middle Eastern restaurant, or more specifically a showcase for local ingredients viewed through a Middle Eastern lens. The flatbread that emerges soft and fragrant from the oven, for example, is made from wheat and spelt grown and milled in the Willamette Valley, while the inventive, lustily flavored salads and grain dishes that form the heart of Tusk’s menu are tweaked daily according to what’s available.One evening in late December, candied walnuts, yogurt and sumac embellished a plate of chicories and fennel, and a dish described on the menu as “Barley” revealed a motherlode of roasted carrots, medjool dates, hazelnuts and goat cheese. Dusted with Aleppo pepper, it was both unassuming and addictive. The same could be said of Tusk’s dukkah, an Egyptian spice blend, and its twist on hummus, which swaps heirloom Dutch bullet beans for chickpeas. Its creaminess, Mr. Smith said, comes from cooking the beans with baking soda, a trick he learned as a sous chef at Zahav, Michael Solomonov’s pioneering modern Israeli restaurant in Philadelphia.But where Zahav is rooted firmly in the Middle East, the cooking at Tusk is not “based on anything except the way we want to eat,” Mr. Smith said. The restaurant is Middle Eastern in the same way it’s a tribute to Fleetwood Mac: sort of. If anything, Tusk is about Portland, a city whose earnestness is matched only by the creativity of its food. You can go your own way here, and Tusk’s bold, big-hearted cooking does.Tusk, 2448 East Burnside Street; 503-894-8082; tuskpdx.com. An average dinner for two, without drinks and tip, is about $85.A version of this article appears in print on March 5, 2017, on Page TR8 of the New York edition with the headline: Mideast Meets Northwest.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »