
In Transit By                     
JESSICA COLLEY CLARKE

JULY 26, 2016
The words “Miami” and “value” aren’t commonly found in the same sentence, but for a chunk of the year, from summer through fall, a surprising number of deals and discounts can be found.Summer is low season in Miami, and during this relatively quiet period, the best deals are available. While hotel prices in other beach spots, like those in the Northeast, are among the highest of the year, hotels in Miami are slashing prices and adding incentives like late checkout and complimentary valet parking.“As Miami continues to grow, the increase in hotel supply and lower demand during the summer months cause nightly room rates to drop,” said William D. Talbert, the president and chief executive of the Greater Miami Convention and Visitors Bureau. “Miami delivers high-design, high-value accommodations.”Suites beyond the budget in February are deeply discounted in August, by as much as 50 percent. The Betsy-South Beach, a boutique hotel built in 1942, offers 50 percent off Royal Suite bookings through Oct. 31. There are also discounts across room categories; a fourth night in any room category is free at the Betsy through Aug. 31. At the W South Beach, besides a free fourth night, guests get $100 dining credit toward the Dutch, the chef Andrew Carmellini’s on-site restaurant. Some hotels extend free nights past summer, like Como Metropolitan Miami Beach, which offers four nights for the price of three year round with its Extend Your Miami Beach Break promotion.AdvertisementBooking direct with the hotel can also yield extra value. At Circa 39, a boutique hotel on Collins Avenue, rates begin at just $100 a night from July through September, and guests booking direct-online receive Buy One Get One cocktails at the on-site Wunderbar. Bryant Soriano, Circa 39’s general manager, said that summer has a distinctly international feel that can be missing from other beach destinations in the country. “There is a nice mix of European, South American and domestic guests,” he said. “The summer has a truly international spirit.”AdvertisementTravelers on a budget with flexible schedules can take advantage of discounts particular to the day of the week, like a weekday rate of $199.50 a night in City View rooms at the Delano South Beach. Another beachfront property, the Surfcomber, encourages guests to stay longer with better discounts; the Make a Splash promotion includes 20 percent off five nights or more, 15 percent off three or four nights, and 10 percent off one or two nights. The absence of pesky extras can also add up to big savings, like free overnight valet parking at the Mondrian South Beach through Sept. 30; early check-in and late checkout are also available.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Summer value goes beyond hotel rooms to spas and restaurants. In July and August, Miami Spa Month opens the door to the city’s premier spas at affordable prices. Over 40 spas, including the Spa at Mandarin Oriental, Miami  and the Ritz-Carlton South Beach Spa, will offer treatments for $109 and $139 (up to 50 percent savings).“It’s a great way to get a taste of the hotel spas you’ve always wanted to try,” said Laura Pelliccio, spa director of Agua at Delano South Beach. These discounts include full access to luxurious spa sites. At Delano South Beach, the spa is on the penthouse floor with 360-degree views, a sun deck, indoor lounge and flowing Champagne. Additional spa promotions are created by individual hotels, like a complimentary 60-minute signature treatment per day at Como Metropolitan Miami Beach.More than 200 restaurants in Miami Beach and Greater Miami are involved in Miami Spice, a promotion from Aug. 1 through Sept. 30: three-course lunches are $23; three-course dinners, $39. “With Miami Spice, you can try the city’s best cuisine for a fraction of the price,” said Peter Vauthy, the executive chef at Red, the Steakhouse. Some places extend the value to wine. Red has a Spice Wine Menu with reduced options by the glass and bottle.With children off from school, hotels also offer family specials. At Fontainebleau Miami Beach, kid-friendly programs through Labor Day include family pastry classes, poolside movie nights on a large screen (plus summer Olympics coverage) and free poolside games like oversized chess.“The crowds and partyers that flock here during February and March are notably absent,” said Philip Goldfarb, the chief operating officer of Fontainebleau. “What you’ll find instead is programming geared toward families.” The summer at Fontainebleau also sees entertainment for parents, including sparkling wine tastings on Mondays, an Italian wine seminar on Tuesdays and a painting lesson and rosé tasting on Thursdays.A version of this article appears in print on July 31, 2016, on Page TR2 of the New York edition with the headline: In Miami, Hot Deals in the Summertime.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »