By SHIVANI VORAOCT. 26, 2017
On Friday, Oct. 13, locals in California’s Big Sur region gathered at Pfeiffer Canyon Bridge and celebrated its reopening with a ribbon-cutting ceremony. The bridge was severely damaged in early February, following a series of landslides, and rebuilt over the last seven months by the California Department of Transportation, known as Caltrans.Big Sur spans a roughly 90-mile stretch of Highway 1, and the reopening of the 310-foot-long bridge is significant because without it, about 35 miles of the highway south of the bridge was closed to vehicles, said Susana Cruz, a public information officer for Caltrans. As a result, the hotels, restaurants and other attractions located along this section were either closed or struggled to maintain business as usual.“The bridge is the artery to tourism in Big Sur because it connects north and south Big Sur, from Carmel to the town of San Simeon, and for nearly eight months, it wasn’t there,” Ms. Cruz said.Big Sur is in Monterey County and attracts many of the 4.6 million people who visit the county each year, according to Rob O’Keefe, the chief marketing officer for the Monterey County Convention & Visitors Bureau; travelers come to enjoy the spectacular vistas of the Pacific, hike among the redwoods and savor a remoteness that few destinations offer.AdvertisementThe new bridge, he said, means that visitors can once again have easy and convenient access to the area’s many attractions.AdvertisementSome of these attractions weren’t damaged by the landslides while others were, but regardless, being open without the bridge wasn’t worthwhile, according to their owners and managers, because of their inaccessibility.Ventana Big Sur, an Alila Resort, for example, reopened on Oct. 20 after being closed since the landslides in February. “Although the property wasn’t really damaged, it was very challenging for anyone to get here, so we decided not to stay open,” said Kristina Jetton, the resort’s general manager.During the closure, Ventana underwent a renovation and introduced refurbished rooms, a new bar with views of the coastline and an expanded spa. The resort also introduced an option for upscale camping with 15 safari-style canvas tents amid redwood trees.Unlike Ventana, Deetjen’s Big Sur Inn, a hotel and restaurant, did see damage from the landslides: general manager Matt Glazer said that four of the property’s 20 rooms were destroyed. The hotel reopened the day after the new bridge was inaugurated, but Mr. Glazer said that the damaged rooms have not yet been rebuilt. “We haven’t begun reconstruction because construction vehicles couldn’t get to the property, but we’re fully operational with 16 rooms and serving daily breakfast and dinner,” he said.Pfeiffer Beach, too, reopened on Oct. 14 to coincide with the new bridge. Known for its soft purple sand and photogenic sunsets, the beach is an ideal spot for picnics and long walks and is a favorite of photographers, said Mr. O’Keefe.Some businesses south of the bridge were open for at least some portion of the time when the bridge was closed. Visitors were able to reach them in one of two ways: they either hiked a steep half-mile temporary trail through Pfeiffer Big Sur State Park, which circumvented the bridge. Or they drove via a detour on Nacimiento-Fergusson Road, a remote route with no cell service, gas stations or other services; the road added between an hour to three hours of driving time to reach destinations off Highway 1, said Ms. Cruz of Caltrans. (Brent Marshall, the Monterey district superintendent for California State Parks, said that now that Pfeiffer Canyon Bridge is open, the trail will close to hikers within the next several months.)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But many of these establishments were affected by the lack of tourists in the area.Post Ranch Inn, a 40-room luxury hotel, for example, reopened in late April, after being closed since mid-February. Mike Freed, the property’s managing partner, said that he chose to open because he wanted to keep his staff employed. “These locals are dependent on income from the hotel to survive,” he said. In an attempt to give guests an incentive to stay and offer them quick access to Post Ranch, he started a helicopter service, for a fee, to the property from Monterey Regional Airport.The hotel’s occupancy level with the helicopter service was around 60 percent, compared with its norm of close to 100 percent throughout the year.Advertisement“People were put off from coming to Big Sur,” Mr. Freed said. “They want to be here when everything is open.”Nepenthe, a restaurant with water views that dates to 1949 and is considered a Big Sur landmark, was also open over the last several months, but as was the case with Post Ranch, business was a challenge, according to owner Kirk Gafill. “It was nearly impossible for people to get to us and also for supplies to reach us,” he said.The restaurant saw an average of 350 diners a day over the summer, compared to its usual average of 1,000 diners. Since the new bridge opened, however, Mr. Gafill said that about 900 people a day have dined at Nepenthe, compared with the daily fall season average of 750 people. “There’s been a pent-up demand so we’re seeing more people than we usually would in October,” he said.But not every attraction in Big Sur is open quite yet: hiking and camping are popular activities in the area, and while most campsites within the region’s several state parks are welcoming campers, including sites in Pfeiffer Big Sur State Park and Andrew Molera State Park, most of the hiking trails within them remain closed, said Mr. Marshall of California State Parks. “These trails are severely damaged from the landslides and we don’t expect many of them to reopen until the spring,” he said. “The full recovery process will take years.” (Visitors should check the California State Parks website for updates.)Big Sur Bakery, a popular bakery and restaurant, is still closed, but owner Mike Gilson said that he anticipates opening within the next few weeks. “We lost some employees over the last few months because most lived north of the bridge, but now that it’s open, they’re coming back,” he said.With much of Big Sur back on its feet, hotel and restaurant owners said that they look forward to a return to normalcy. The last helicopter ride to Post Ranch happened the same afternoon that Pfeiffer Canyon Bridge reopened. In the days that followed, Mr. Freed said, the property had a large number of reservations and is nearly booked to capacity for much of November. “I’m relieved and excited that travelers are coming back here,” he said.More information about what’s open in Big Sur and what’s not can be found on the Monterey County Convention & Visitors Bureau site, seemonterey.com/resources/travel-alert/.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.