
Bites By                     
GABRIELLA GERSHENSON

JULY 28, 2017
One of the first things you see when you arrive at Anna, an Italian restaurant in the heart of Jerusalem, is a still life of ingredients: a basket of kohlrabi, a bowl of olives and confited garlic cloves, pots of fresh herbs arranged artfully on the pass. The tableau is a fitting tribute to the place. The restaurant is on the top floor of the 19th-century villa where the artist Anna Ticho lived and worked. When she died in 1980, she left her home to the Israel Museum. After a renovation, the chef Moshiko Gamlieli opened Anna in May 2016.If you live in Jerusalem, you might have heard of Mr. Gamlieli. He runs the beloved restaurant Mona and was part of the team that opened the iconoclastic Machneyuda, in the bustling Jerusalem market. With Anna, Mr. Gamlieli takes a more conservative, inclusive approach. The restaurant is kosher (Machneyuda is brazenly not), and the Italian menu, which focuses on fish and dairy (omitting meat to comply with kosher law), aims to be accessible.The airy white dining room, with vaulted ceilings and swooping arches, is stunning, if stark. Better to dine on the trellised balcony. It’s a nice place to sip Anna’s fragrant take on a Bellini, made with fig eau de vie, peach liqueur, prosecco and lemon verbena.The best dishes encompass the shared Italian and Israeli passion for freshness and simplicity. Take the delicious kohlrabi. It’s grilled, then plated over romesco, with a splash of olive oil, crumbled Galilean feta and shaved Parmigiano-Reggiano. The feta appears again, alongside a single charred chile in a pool of tomato purée, to be scooped up by a blistered baton of focaccia.AdvertisementSave some bread for the crudo. The slivers of drum fish, topped with a tomato seed and hot pepper relish, are swimming in a splendid olive oil that’s begging to be mopped up. Anna excels at some greatest-hits Italian dishes, too. The ricotta gnocchi toasted in brown butter are positively cloudlike. Even fluffier is the tiramisù, coffee-syrup-soaked ladyfingers suspended in whipped mascarpone.The restaurant also pursues a noble mission. Mr. Gamlieli teamed up with Dualis, a group that specializes in creating businesses with social value. When he opened Anna, Mr. Gamlieli recruited 12 young employees from troubled backgrounds to work there for a year. “The program is all about giving the kids life skills, not so much culinary skills,” he said. “To help them find the right path and value and an occupation.”AdvertisementNow that the first class of graduates is close to wrapping up the program, Mr. Gamlieli is taking stock of its success: “When you see the improvement and advancement and how much of a change from the day they arrived to the day they’ll leave, is very, very rewarding.”Anna, Ha-Rav Agan Street 10; 972-2-543-4144. An average dinner for two, without drinks or tip, is about 200 shekels, or about $56.A version of this article appears in print on July 30, 2017, on Page TR6 of the New York edition with the headline: A Kitchen Where Israel and Italy Meet.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »