By SHIVANI VORAOCT. 6, 2017
Sunday, Nov. 5, marks the 47th running of the five-borough marathon in New York City, currently called the TCS New York City Marathon. The race is expected to draw more than 50,000 runners this year, according to New York Road Runners, the group that organizes the event, but the marathon isn’t just for participants: N.Y.R.R. as well as hotels and restaurants around the city have free or attractively priced events, packages and meals related to the race and open to the general public.“Spectators are integral to the spirit of the marathon, and there are lots of ways in town for them to get into the excitement of the day,” said Chris Weiller, a spokesman for N.Y.R.R.N.Y.R.R., for example, has several events leading up to Nov. 5, including the TCS New York Marathon Pavilion, near the race’s finish line at West 67th Street and Central Park West and open from Sunday, Oct. 29 through Friday, Nov. 3. The pavilion, which is free to enter, will host running-themed programs all week like meet-and-greets with renowned runners (the running star Meb Keflezighi was among those in the lineup last year). Visit tcsnycmarathon.org to see the 2017 schedule.Also, on marathon-eve, recreational runners and walkers can participate in the Abbott Dash to the Finish Line 5K, held at 8:30 a.m.; the race starts at the United Nations building on First Avenue and East 44th Street and ends at the marathon finish line. $50 a person, register online at nyrr.org/races-and-events.AdvertisementThe Westin New York at Times Square is hosting a run, too — this one free — the day before the marathon at 8 a.m. Westin’s running concierge, Christopher Heuisler, will lead the three-mile run along the Hudson River, and afterward, all runners are invited back to the hotel for bottled water and coffee. Registration not required; participants should meet in the hotel’s lobby at 7:55 a.m.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Several hotels are also offering special marathon meals in their restaurants.On the Friday and Saturday before marathon Sunday, Perrine, at the Pierre hotel, has a “Load-Up” menu with dishes emphasizing protein and healthy carbs such as wild salmon with quinoa couscous. Entrees are $26.20 each and accompanied by a wellness juice and in-house made protein bar. Reserve by calling 212-940-8195.AdvertisementAnd Church & Dey at the Millennium Hilton New York Downtown has the “Pasta Fuel Up” promotion from Nov. 3 to 5, where diners pay $25 for four varieties of unlimited pasta including a tagliatelle with seasonal vegetables and spicy ricotta cheese. Reserve by calling 212-312-2000.Visitors looking to stay in the city overnight during marathon weekend may want to consider the “Run this City” package at the Dream Midtown, available on Nov. 4 and 5 and inclusive of accommodations, a green juice, either a pizza or pasta from the Italian restaurant Serafina and a late check-out. Nightly rates from $269. Book online at dreamhotels.com/midtown, and use the code marathon.Another option is the marathon package at Luma Hotel Times Square , inclusive of accommodations and a juice and cookie from Juice Press. Nightly rates from $350. Book by calling 1-888-559-5862.A version of this article appears in print on October 15, 2017, on Page TR2 of the New York edition with the headline: Catch a Marathon Rate.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.