
In Transit By                     
ELAINE GLUSAC

MARCH 25, 2016
LAS VEGAS ADDS A PARK (WITH A SHAKE SHACK)Once the realm of windowless casinos designed to distance gamblers from daylight, Las Vegas has lately embraced the outdoors with new attractions including the $100 million Park set to open April 4. Built by MGM Resorts and set between the company’s Monte Carlo and New York, New York resorts, the Park offers walkways through landscapes designed to reflect the native flora of the desert and shade structures that light up at night. Drinking and dining draws include branches of Shake Shack and California Pizza Kitchen as well as a beer garden. The terminus of the Park is the $375 million T-Mobile Arena, a 20,000-seat indoor stadium and concert venue to be inaugurated by an unexpected line-up including the Killers and Wayne Newton on April 6.NANTUCKET GETS A STYLISH NEWCOMERRoman and Williams, the firm behind such trendy hotels as the Ace New York and Chicago Athletic Association, is bringing it signature vintage style to Nantucket in the new Greydon House hotel opening in June. Combining an 1850s-era Greek Revival mansion with a new addition, the 20-room newcomer adopts a nautical accent. The Greydon’s living-room-cum-bar, for example, features brass lighting fixtures made of repurposed ship’s portals, whaling artifacts and a mural depicting the 18th-century tea trade with China. The hotel garden will double as an outdoor lounge, and the restaurant will offer indoor and outdoor seating. Located on Broad Street, the new hotel will be about five minutes’ walk from the ferry docks. Reservations will be accepted beginning April 15. Rooms from $600.JOINING THE ‘DOWNTON’ GENTRY IN ENGLANDFor those experiencing “Downton Abbey” withdrawal, the 15th-century Farleigh House an hour outside London is newly available for rent. The 4,000-acre country estate has been in the hands of the Wallop family for five centuries, and includes an 11-bedroom house, billiard and cinema rooms, tennis court, heated swimming pool and croquet lawn as well as formal gardens and vast open lands. In addition to service staff, the house employs a shooting manager who will organize pheasant and partridge shooting parties on request. Weekend rates start at £14,000 (about $20,000), including breakfast, tea and dinner daily.AN ARIZONA SPA CELEBRATES FOODLow-fat fare and calorie counting are the food norm at most spas, but Miraval Resort & Spa in Arizona aims to redefine spa cuisine, at least for two weeks, with its new “Flavor of Health” events. Taking place April 11 to 17 and Aug. 8 to 14, the culinary programs will include farm-to-table dinners paired with biodynamic wines, cooking classes devoted to vegetarian meals and nutritionist talks on mindful eating, or listening to the body’s nutritional needs. Rates start at $549 per person, double occupancy, with special food programs ranging $55 to $250 each.A SPRING DEAL IN WINE COUNTRYThrough May 31, the Bergson resort in Calistoga, Calif., is offering a weekday special that includes late checkout, wine tasting vouchers and a free room upgrade from $139 a night (with the booking code SPRING). The 21-room Napa Valley inn was fully renovated last fall and some rooms include private patios, fireplaces or hot tubs. The property is within walking distance of downtown Calistoga and offers complimentary bikes.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »