
Next Stop By                     
 ERIC LIPTON
 
JULY 5, 2016

CreditTony Cenicola/The New York Times        For nearly a century, the Baronet Theater in Asbury Park, N.J., was a popular venue for vaudeville theater and blockbuster films. Then it, like the city that was its home, fell into disrepair. Eventually its roof collapsed and it was demolished.This summer, the salvaged marquee of the former theater is lit anew with the opening of the Asbury, a boutique hotel with a rooftop movie theater, complete with lawn chairs, a popcorn machine and a small bar, framed by a white picket fence and stunning Atlantic Ocean views.The hotel offers the retro-meets-modern sensibility that now defines Asbury Park, which has once again become one of the mid-Atlantic’s top beach destinations.Across this postage-stamp-size city are examples of the old and the new melding in a refreshingly creative way, pulling in families, professionals, young bar hoppers and a large gay population, all of them across income levels. This eclectic mix is a stark contrast to more stuffy (and staid) nearby beach towns, like Spring Lake.Advertisement“It’s Brooklyn on the beach,” said Jon Biondo, a local lawyer who runs a group called the Asbury Park Social Club, which hosts parties at venues including the Baronet Theater.AdvertisementThis city-by-the-sea became famous decades ago when the Asbury Park Convention Center opened its doors, drawing acts like The Doors and the Rolling Stones, just a stone’s throw from the Stone Pony, the music venue that Bruce Springsteen and members of his E Street Band have frequented, helping it achieve international fame, since it opened in 1974.The music scene is still hot, with a dozen or more live performances on any given summer weekend, from major national bands to young local artists, like Justin Franco, 23, who was playing folk/punk songs from his debut album, Postgrad, in the lobby of the Asbury one recent night.Asbury Park Convention HallAsbury ParkParamount TheaterFIFTH ave.Wonder BarN.J. TRANSITFOURTH ave.The AsburyAsbury LanesMain St.BOARDWALKSECOND ave.Ocean ave.MEMORIAL DR.Silverball MuseumThe Stone Pony Summer Stageasbury ave.The SaintLangosta LoungeHouse of IndependentsCookman ave.Lake ave.The ComplexNewYorkCityAsbury Festhalle & BiergartennewjerseyAsbury ParkstationAsbury ParkMOGO Korean Fusion TacosSpring LakeJULY 8, 2016
But there’s more to the place than music. Downtown Asbury Park has more than two dozen restaurants and bars, as well as a collection of locally owned furniture stores, art galleries, performance spaces and bakeries. Typical of the new attractions is the Asbury Festhalle & Biergarten, which opened last year. On busy weekend nights, it is packed with 700 patrons who take in a live polka band in the main beer hall or spread out on the rooftop. Wherever they settle in, they wash down bratwurst, Hungarian beef goulash and German-inspired menu items with one (or more) of the 65 varieties of bottled beer and 41 others on tap.“Five years ago, this would have been a scary decision,” said Jennifer Lampert, who teamed up with a Czech and a Slovak, both restaurateurs, and spent more than $3 million to open Festhalle. “But today, now, this is the right time to be doing this here.”Another local business developer is Sonia Jozajtis, 30, who splits her time between working at a new coffee shop/art gallery on the Boardwalk she has started with one friend while also preparing, with her boyfriend, to open the Wanderland Popup, a campsite that will consist of handmade canvas tents, set up (if they get the permit) across the street from the beach. “Glamping tents is what we call it,” Ms. Jozajtis said.Part of Asbury Park’s appeal is that it is so easy to reach: It’s just over an hour from New York City or Philadelphia by car, and an easy ride on a New Jersey Transit train, which drops off day-trippers just a few blocks from the beach.“It is everyone, and everything,” said Josh Melendez, 28, a bartender who works in Hell’s Kitchen in New York, but takes day trips to Asbury Park with his friends. “Straight, gay, families — you all kind of come together here.”AdvertisementThere is a sense of confidence in Asbury Park today, as locals and major national real-estate developers make increasingly large bets. IStar, the New York City-based real-estate company that owns all 35 acres of beachfront land in Asbury Park, and Madison Marquette, the real estate company in charge of leasing beachfront retail spaces, are planning to invest more than $1 billion in the city over the next decade.Another project is small only by comparison: The Fasano family this year turned another former department store on Cookman Avenue in downtown Asbury Park into the Complex. It houses three restaurants and four bars.But by far the biggest news in Asbury Park this year is the Asbury, designed by Anda Andrei, who in nearly three decades as the chief of design for Ian Schrager worked on such renowned hotels as the Delano in Miami, the Paramount in New York, the Mondrian in Los Angeles and the Public hotel in Chicago. The Asbury is one of her first projects since branching off on her own. It won’t be her last. She has been named creative director and lead designer for 10 projects planned or underway with the backing of iStar and its partners.Every Saturday, get travel tips, destination coverage, photos from all over the world and more.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Asbury’s lobby, which you enter through a solarium, features a living room lounge stocked with books on the history of rock music on one side and a pinball machine and mini performance space that hosts open-mike nights on the other.There is no formal hotel restaurant — but there are four bars, including a poolside bar, a sprawling black-and-white rooftop bar, a beer garden that operates out of a converted 1960s-era Volkswagen van packed with eight kegs and, of course, the Baronet Theater. A food truck is stationed right outside the lobby. On busy summer days, yoga is offered on the Baronet Theater rooftop space, and there are weekly beach bonfires nearby.The 110 rooms are comfortable, but simple — Ms. Andrei calls it “luxury with modesty.” Ten of them have as many as eight bunk beds to accommodate large groups of friends, and several other rooms designed with families in mind have wide open spaces and multiple sleep options.The Asbury is built in what was once a warehouselike Salvation Army Retired Officers Residence, before it too was left abandoned. It was yet another sign of the apocalyptic decline that started in the 1970s, after race riots, and endured during a surge in crime. The beach and Boardwalk were nearly empty even at the peak of summer.The revival slowly got underway about 15 years ago; New Yorkers built up a gay enclave as they bought rundown but still beautiful Victorian homes. The city still has its gritty parts — generally in areas at least five blocks from the beach — where some homes are boarded up and where crime is still a problem. But now the rebirth of Asbury Park is no longer in question.AdvertisementThe only question that does remain is how much of Asbury’s character will be retained as it becomes a summertime mecca again.“It is my legacy and obligation to not ruin this town,” Jay Sugarman, chief executive of iStar, told Ms. Andrei when he hired her to take over design of their efforts there. “We are not going to turn this into a Disneyland.”So far, at least, that is true. Along the Boardwalk, instead of the same old collection of pizza slices and French fries or chain restaurants and stores, there are distinctive flavors, from Langosta Lounge, whose menu includes butter-poached lobster, with coconut-scented grain and garden vegetables in a curry sauce, to MOGO Korean Fusion Tacos, which operates out of a converted ship container and where the best choice is the lightly floured cod taco, with onion salad and spicy mayo.The Silverball Museum, a Boardwalk game arcade, keeps the retro-modern theme going with antique pinball machines, dating from as far back as the 1930s — as well as classics like Skee-Ball, air hockey, bubble hockey and 1980s-era arcade games like Pac-Man.The music scene is still the element that holds Asbury Park together.There are at least eight venues that feature live music, like Wonder Bar — whose building is decorated with the grinning “fun face” Tillie that has become Asbury Park’s de facto trademark — which one recent night featured a collection of local legends like Vini Lopez, who back in 1972 joined with Bruce Springsteen and the other original members of the E Street Band to record the landmark “Greetings From Asbury Park, N.J.” album. Bruce Springsteen himself made a surprise visit  last summer to play a 15-song set on the tiny stage at the Wonder Bar.The historic convention center has been modestly refurbished — and reoccupied by locally owned stores — with summer concerts rocking at its Paramount Theater once again.Headliners at the Stone Pony this summer include the Lumineers, Violent Femmes and the Indigo Girls. The recently opened House of Independents also brings in out-of-town performers, while the Saint, a shoe-box-size venue, has more local bands like Karmic Juggernaut, which plays a mix of psychedelic rock, funk and jazz. Various music festivals and other events now continue throughout the year, pulling crowds down to the Boardwalk even in the coldest winter months.“You never know what kind of show will be in town,” said Ashley Daniels, who has worked at both the Stone Pony and Convention Hall. “There’s always some kind of brand-new experience waiting for you.”AdvertisementThe Asbury, the new boutique hotel across from the Asbury Park Convention Hall, has rooms ranging from $125 a night for a standard queen in the off season to $695 a night for a suite on a summer holiday weekend. Definitely the best option in town (theasburyhotel.com;732-774-7100).The Berkeley Oceanfront Hotel is the city’s other large scale hotel — a grand, nearly century-old property, which is hardly luxurious, but which for a beachside spot is reasonably priced and offers decent accommodations. Rooms range from $199 to $499 (berkeleyhotelnj.com; 855-797-8844).Hotel Tidesin Asbury Park, which is four blocks in from the beach, has 20 compact rooms in a former hotel and boardinghouse. It has a large gay clientele, but welcomes all others. Rooms range from $140 on the off season to $265 a night in summer (thehoteltides.com; 732-897-7744).Just next door from Asbury Park — it’s a few minutes’ walk — Ocean Grove has more than a dozen bed-and-breakfast options, including Ocean Plaza Hotel and its sister Ocean View Inn, which have rooms from $150 to $525 (theoceanplazahotel.com; theoceanviewinn.com;732-774-6552). Ocean Grove is a dry town, built around religious summer camps — God’s Square Mile is its slogan — so no bars with music there. But it is a museum of Victorian architecture.A version of this article appears in print on July 10, 2016, on Page TR12 of the New York edition with the headline: The Rebirth of a Beach Town.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »