

 Lucas Peterson
 

FRUGAL TRAVELER
MARCH 16, 2016
Famously, the word “aloha” has several meanings. It’s often used, I found during my stay on the Big Island of Hawaii, as a noun loosely meaning a spirit of affection or compassion, one that has persevered through a complicated and sometimes painful history. Maintaining a tourist economy is a tricky dance between locals and visitors. Native Hawaiian families have the lowest mean income of all major ethnic groups in the state. Yet property is unaffordable for many, thanks to outside speculation. Nevertheless, as a visitor in Hilo I never felt resentment; only a laid-back, welcoming warmth wherever I went. That sense of aloha came to characterize much of my visit to Hawaii — even when my rental car was hobbled by two flat tires.All of that compassion is in contrast not just to Hawaii’s modern history, but also its violent physical construction: the 4,000-square-mile Big Island is, essentially, one huge volcano. (More accurately, five volcanoes that erupted and overlapped with fiery magma flows.) Flying over to Hilo, on the eastern side of the island, provided gorgeous views of Mauna Kea, the tallest and most holy of the Hawaiian peaks, and Mauna Loa, the bigger, grouchier sibling.“We’re not afraid of that one,” said Solomon Kaholoaa, pointing toward Mauna Kea. He’s the owner of Poke to Your Taste, a small poke shack, complete with tin roof, hand-painted letters on the side and a rusted-out pickup in front. “Now, Mauna Loa,” he continued, “that’s the one we’re afraid of.” (Mauna Kea is dormant; Mauna Loa, though inactive for over 30 years, still threatens the island.)He and I chatted for a bit and he ran me through the protocol of his do-it-yourself poke (POH-kay) — raw cubes of sushi-grade fish doctored with various seasonings and sauces. “People always tell me I have the best poke in town. I tell them: ‘You have the best poke in town! You made it yourself!’ ”AdvertisementThe poke in question was a half-pound of cool, bite-size tuna cubes ($7), which I doctored (with guidance from Mr. Kaholoaa) with shoyu, green onion, spicy mayonnaise, chopped garlic and furikake, a dry mixture of chopped seaweed, sesame seeds and seasonings. The result was amazing — imagine sushi, only more accessible and casual.AdvertisementI also loved the Spam musubi, another traditional snack that consists of a fat slab of salty Spam sandwiched between two warm rectangles of rice, all wrapped in seaweed. It was only a buck, and made for a great snack later in the car.KAUAINIIHAUMOLOKAIOAHUMAUILANAIHAWAIIPacific OceanHawaii100 milesHawiPOLULUVALLEYHakalauMAUNA KEAHiloKailua-KonaMountain ViewHawaii(“BIG ISLAND”)KILAUEAMauna loaHAWAII VOLCANOESNATIONAL ParkKau20 milesPacific Tsunami MuseumHilo Hawaiian HotelBears’ CoffeeVerna’s III Drive InPalace TheaterHilo int’lairportKamehameha Ave.HiloMamalahoa Hwy.Poke to Your TasteMap data by OpenStreetMapMARCH 23, 2016
The food I had during my stay was filling and inexpensive — and was frequently topped with gravy. Hawaiians love gravy. You can get gravy on almost anything, from katsu bowls to loco moco (rice topped with a meat patty, fried egg and brown gravy) to cheeseburgers. In fact, a gravy cheeseburger was actually the first thing I ate on the island. Shortly after arriving at the airport, I wanted to grab a bite somewhere local. Verna’s III Drive In seemed perfect — there were a lot of customers, and everyone was wearing flip-flops (the unofficial state footwear of Hawaii).The service was friendly and meandering; a big sign out front proclaims “If no can, no can; if can, Verna’s!” It’s a twist on a phrase that sums up, in a lot of ways, the spirit of Hawaii: If something works out, great. If not, no need to worry. Verna’s gravy cheeseburger, at $3.65, was something of a revelation. The meat was charred so that the outside of the patty almost had a crust. The gravy and American cheese melded together to create a single, super condiment. I had never had gravy on a burger before, but I can’t wait to try it again.When I arrived at Akiko’s Buddhist Bed and Breakfast and told my host, Akiko Masuda, about what I’d just had, she made a face and teasingly slapped me on the arm. Akiko’s is a quaint and quiet operation just outside the town of Hakalau; I paid $65 for a good-size, simple room with a large common space and shared bathroom.Every Saturday, get travel tips, destination coverage, photos from all over the world and more.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Ms. Masuda, like many Buddhists, rarely eats meat, but was not judgmental; her demeanor was an interesting mix of calm wisdom you might expect from one who meditates every morning at 5:30 during the week (as she does) and of a former wild child, a firebrand who had had periods of profligacy. She was, in a word, wonderful.“I was in the Peace Corps, too!” she told me one morning, over a simple breakfast of rambutans, oranges, granola and coffee (breakfast is included, and communal with other guests). Ms. Masuda, who looks to be in her late 60s, is petite, muscular and tan. She adjusted her do-rag. “But I got kicked out,” she continued, flashing a smile somewhere between sly and winsome, “for shacking up with a volunteer.”The B&B is set up like a little compound: A couple of buildings hold guests, there’s an office, a space for meals, and a different building used for meditation. There are outdoor cats — lots of them — that patrol the area. (Don’t worry about allergies: I’m fiercely allergic and had no problems.)There is a phone in the main house, as well as limited Wi-Fi, but they’re not actively used. There was a slight dampness to everything — Hilo is one of the wettest cities in the Northern Hemisphere, and I had arrived just after a period of heavy rain. If you get something wet and hang it up, don’t expect it to dry anytime soon.AdvertisementPart of staying at Akiko’s is the spirit of ohana, which roughly means “family.” Ms. Masuda encourages you to get to know the surroundings, and to participate in activities she engages in. “So Lucas,” she said one morning after breakfast, apropos of nothing, “are you coming to clean graveyards with us?” I couldn’t turn down an invitation like that.We met up with a larger group of volunteers and spent the afternoon cleaning up an old Japanese graveyard that had fallen into disrepair. Afterward, we made one more stop on Kukuihaele Road. We visited a private residence with some centuries-old graves, and also one of the most extraordinary things I had ever seen: a banyan tree that had swallowed an old church.What I loved about staying at the B&B was feeling as if I was participating in a truly “local” experience, to use a phrase that’s bandied about far too often — one that captures the aloha and ohana qualities of the Big Island. Are there big resorts? Sure, but they aren’t prevalent around Hilo. Castle Hilo Hawaiian Hotel had rooms starting at $178 when I checked, but most of the large luxury hotels are on the Kona side. “You don’t really need to go to Kona,” Ms. Masuda told me. “It’s just like anyplace else.”That’s not to say it isn’t fun to play tourist. There are plenty of interesting things to see and do in Hilo’s beautiful downtown area — a long line of old, colorful buildings faces the bay on Kamehameha Avenue. Down a small side street is the gorgeous Palace Theater, built in 1925, which continues to show movies and host events. I spent a day wandering around downtown and discovered Bears’ Coffee, where I had a wonderful macadamia nut chicken salad sandwich ($6.95). From there I visited the Pacific Tsunami Museum: For an $8 admission fee, you get the story of how Hilo was inexorably and traumatically shaped by two major tsunamis, one in 1946 and one in 1960.There are, of course, beaches. One day, I decided to find a beach that had come up in a search for “Papaikou,” a small town between Hilo and my B&B, and “beach.” The result was interesting: Apparently there was a lovely beach nearby (itself public) that could be reached only via private property. After considerable tension between the property owners and other residents, it would seem a détente has been reached: When I sought out the beach at the end of Mill Road I encountered an unlocked gate with a sign posted by the owners encouraging simultaneously, “Take only pictures. Leave only footprints” and “Enter at your own risk.” Dodging cobwebs down a long and meandering path, I finally came out to a small but stunning black sand beach, with the husk of the old sugar mill looming above. There was one other person on the beach with me. It was wonderful.The other worthwhile tourist activities one would typically associate with the Big Island? Volcanoes. But also coffee. I stopped by the Hilo Coffee Mill in Mountain View and got an education during a brief tour. The most interesting part? “Dark” roasted coffees are not, in fact, stronger. Roasting coffee takes the caffeine out. The lighter the roast, the more potent. I found this out soon after trying a 12-ounce cup ($3), as I was positively buzzing while heading to the volcano.Hawaii Volcanoes National Park encompasses Mauna Loa and Kilauea. Hiking up Mauna Loa is a tremendous challenge — I went with the more accessible option, exploring the summit of Kilauea. Soon after entering the park and paying the $15 admission (which is good for a week), I came to the caldera, a huge, craterlike depression approximately two and a half miles long and two miles wide. As I approached the guardrail, I noticed ground vents belching enormous puffs of white steam. The view was awe-inspiring. In the center of the caldera was the pit crater, a smaller, glowing, caldron of sulfur and smoke. I was reminded of the Eye of Sauron from “The Lord of the Rings.”I had a great view of the glowing volcano while being towed back to Hilo after I got two flat tires on my rental car in Kau. During the long, slow drive, the driver of the tow truck, Larry Carvalho, told me about his life and family. He was kind to me, told me not to worry about the car, and proceeded to take my mind off things with stories of pig hunts, his children and growing up in Mountain View. When he dropped me off, I tried to tip him. Repeatedly. He refused, repeatedly, and told me to take care. He was simply doing his job, to be sure.AdvertisementBut that small kindness typified the aloha spirit and encapsulated my experience on the Big Island — an easy, casual compassion, welcoming of others, looking simply to live and let live.A version of this article appears in print on March 20, 2016, on Page TR10 of the New York edition with the headline: On the Big Island, ‘Aloha’ Is a Way of Life.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »