
In Transit By                     
JANE MARGOLIES

JULY 21, 2016
Back in January, the muralists arrived, tiptoeing into the Pierre Hotel in Manhattan at midnight. They erected scaffolding in the grand oval space known as the Rotunda Room, climbed up and stretched out on their backs, daubing at the painted clouds that have long drifted across the sky-blue ceiling.Then, in June, they turned their attention to the shiny faux-marbling on the stair railing (so dated), applying a subtler matte finish. And earlier this month, under the direction of the architect and decorator Daniel Romualdez, a squad of skilled workers appeared: Electricians installed theatrical lighting to highlight the room’s signature feature, its fantastical wall mural; floor contractors polished the parquet; and new furniture was carried in.All these efforts — the results of which were unveiled July 12 — have resurrected one of New York’s most spectacular gathering spaces. Beloved by brides who have taken their vows in the fairy-tale setting, remembered wistfully by those who once partook of its formal afternoon tea, and long familiar to members of the city’s upper crust who have mingled here during debutante balls and charity events, the Rotunda Room had languished in recent years. But as new boutique hotels turn lobbies and lounges into hip hangouts, the 86-year-old Pierre is capitalizing on one of its own extraordinary, but previously underused, common areas. And not just for the benefit of travelers who check into the Pierre’s 189 guest rooms and the occupants of its 75 full-time residences, but anyone who needs a place to recover from a shopping expedition to Bergdorf Goodman — or simply wants to revel in the Rotunda Room’s romantic atmosphere.“It’s always been the heart of the hotel,” said Francois-Olivier Luiggi, the general manager of the Pierre, which is run by Mumbai-based Taj Hotels Resorts and Palaces. “Now we’re turning it into more of a public space.”AdvertisementIn fact, the room has been reinvented repeatedly almost from the moment the hotel opened in 1930.Designed in Georgian style by the architectural firm Schultze & Weaver, the Pierre joined a cluster of luxury hotels around Grand Army Plaza, on the southeast corner of Central Park. The Plaza, which opened in 1907, was the first in this select group, followed by the Savoy (now demolished) and the Sherry-Netherland.Rising 44 stories on Fifth Avenue and East 61st Street, the Pierre was named for the Corsican-born restaurateur Charles Pierre Casalasco, who built it backed by Wall Street financiers. One of several so-called apartment hotels that were popular at the time, the Pierre combined lavish leased residences (allowing the affluent to live in splendor without the responsibility and even greater expense of maintaining a private mansion) with hotel rooms (offering guests the thrill of possibly sharing an elevator with Elizabeth Taylor, Cary Grant, Katharine Hepburn, Yves Saint-Laurent or any of the other luminaries who, over the years, have called the Pierre home).What made the buff-colored brick tower stand out — in addition to its stately limestone-fronted base, topped by gigantic garlanded terra-cotta urns, and its copper mansard roof floating above the treetops of Central Park — were its social spaces. The main ballroom had marble columns and mirrored walls. The dining room — overseen by Auguste Escoffier in the early years — was walnut-paneled with gold curtains.AdvertisementTo reach those spaces one passed through the Rotunda Room, then called the Oval Foyer. With its decorative plaster ceiling, stone walls and marble stairs, it looked like a room from a French castle.But not for long. Within three years of the hotel’s opening — and with the country plunged into the Depression — the extravagant décor was deemed excessive and was simplified. The Rotunda Room acquired a warmer, clubbier, more enveloping feel with Deco-style tub chairs and swag drapery.In 1942, the architect and decorator Samuel Marx, in step with the patriotic spirit of the war years, turned back the clock to the Colonial era. He decked out the dining room in red, white and blue and wrapped the Rotunda Room in a mural depicting the landscape of early New York.When Mr. Marx was invited back to update the space in the 1950s, the country’s mood had lightened. He painted over the colonial scene and suspended a curved Plexiglas bar from the ceiling. The Birdcage — “a Rendez-Vous for cocktails,” according to the hotel’s frothy promotional materials — was born.It was 1967 — after the Pierre had become a co-op, with full-time residents purchasing their apartments and hiring the first in a series of hospitality companies to manage the restaurants, ballrooms and transient-room operations — when the artist Edward Melcarth gave the Rotunda Room its trademark mural: a Renaissance loggia peopled with mythological characters and, seemingly, whomever else he fancied throwing in. Among the mural’s figures are prominent members of New York’s elite at the time — Jacqueline Kennedy climbs a staircase, for instance, and the actor Erik Estrada, posing as Adam, eyes a gamine Eve in slacks and a boho top biting into an apple.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Some members of the gentry, including Mrs. Kennedy, weren’t happy about being included in the mural and requested that they be removed, according to recently found hotel records. The Pierre responded by painting over telltale facial details, giving the visages a more generic look (though the former First Lady is still instantly recognizable).“It’s over-the-top, even a little bit camp,” said Mr. Romualdez, an admirer of the extravaganza, who recalls hanging out in the Rotunda Room in the 1980s when he was a Yale student coming to New York on weekends.But by the time Mr. Romualdez returned to the Pierre to renovate the fashion designer Tory Burch’s apartment in the hotel in the early 2000s, the Rotunda Room was a less lively place. After a period during which the Pierre was managed by Four Seasons Hotels & Resorts, which instituted the afternoon tea — towering tiered stands of sandwiches and scones and equally towering flower arrangements — the building came under Taj management. It was renovated — the designer Alexandra Champalimaud refreshed many of the social spaces — and reopened with fanfare in 2010.But the Rotunda Room lay largely dormant. The tea service had been eliminated. The few pieces of furniture sprinkled around looked rather forlorn.AdvertisementUntil Mr. Luiggi decided to bring the space back to life. “Every day people come in and say to me, ‘I got married here,’ or ‘My parents got married here,’ or ‘I came to the prom here,’ ” he said. “They want to come back.”Invited to help, Mr. Romualdez envisioned the space as “a piazza for people in this bubbly corner of Manhattan.” Out went the heavy furniture and imitation Aubusson rug.To give the space a more lighthearted look, he specified Louis XVI-style side chairs upholstered in a blue-and-white stripe, and he designed a carpet modeled on the stone paving of Michelangelo’s Piazza del Campidoglio in Rome. Green mohair-covered banquettes were made to line the walls.LED strips were threaded along the perimeter of the floor, up-lighting Mr. Melcarth’s creation. The room’s candelabra-style sconces were fitted with flame-tip bulbs to approximate candlelight.“I wanted the mural to glow,” Mr. Romualdez said.The carpet is yet to arrive, but the menu is set: Weekday guests help themselves from a center table piled with plated pastries — meringues, macarons and slices of lemon-blueberry bundt cake baked in a 1930s mold. Champagne and coffee flow.After 7 p.m., light supper fare is on offer, including appetizers ($18 to $24) and entrees ($20 to $29), “with the idea that people will choose one or the other,” Mr. Luiggi said. In this manner, visitors can sustain themselves while trying to guess the identity of the man in the mural wearing the blue Nehru jacket — or the guests seated across the Rotunda Room.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »