
Foraging By                     
NINA ROBERTS

JULY 14, 2016
Tranquil residential neighborhoods and commercial districts frequented mostly by locals make up Cannaregio, Venice’s northernmost section. Dotting its small canals, where workaday motorboats are more common than sightseeing gondolas, are cafes and shops, from trendy boutiques to family-owned gems. The Jewish ghetto used to inhabit one section where there are now a handful of shops selling books, artwork and Judaica, as well as kosher cafes and bakeries.A neighborhood favorite, this glass-front wine shop specializes in organic, small-batch wines from Slovenia to Portugal. The contemporary cozy space was opened two years ago by two brothers originally from Tuscany. Bottles of reds and whites are displayed on boxy wooden shelving extending to the ceiling. A few “orange” wines are for sale, which a co-owner, Massimiliano Bartoli, describes as the “inverse of rosé — white grapes processed like red grapes.” The shop’s cicchetto, a Venetian specialty similar to tapas, is exquisite.Cannaregio 2497, 39-041-275-0044, facebook.com/vinoveroveneziaThis renowned costume shop is ornately adorned with glass chandeliers, painted ceilings and gold accents. Mannequins, some in masks, wear lavish period gowns from an array of centuries. Fitted bodices and full, floor-length skirts are encrusted with intricate beadwork. Men’s suits — jacket, vest and pants — are equally fanciful. Nicolao Atelier provides costumes for theatrical productions (including operas and a handful of movies) around the globe, but party-going plebeians can also buy these elaborate works of art.Cannaregio 2590, 39-041-520-7051, nicolao.com/enThis tiny family-owned and -operated coffee roaster has been in business since 1930. Neighborhood regulars zip in and out for a shot of espresso or a cappuccino at a counter where the gleaming off-white La Marzocco espresso machine stands, steps away from the colossal coffee roaster.AdvertisementCannaregio 1337, 39-041-716-371, torrefazionecannaregio.itThe locally made leather footwear in this funky shoe shop features contemporary designs mixed with flourishes from a previous century. A pair of pumps might have a whimsical curling tongue or pull tab at the back of the ankle; boots, a Victorian heel or decorative side buttons.Cannaregio 2340, 39-041-244-0084, vladishoes.itSpecializing in glass jewelry and beads, this spot is tucked away on a quiet pedestrian street near the 14th-century church Madonna dell’Orto. All pieces are made on the premises. Customers can peek into the adjacent no-frills studio and watch one of the owners transform brilliant colored glass rods into intricate beads or chunky rings. All glass is guaranteed to be from nearby Murano.AdvertisementCannaregio 3378, 39-041-275-0658, momyliaperlebijoux.comA version of this article appears in print on July 17, 2016, on Page TR4 of the New York edition with the headline: A Respite From the Crowds in Cannaregio.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »