By SHIVANI VORAJULY 24, 2017
When outside temperatures soar, how exactly do airlines keep their passengers cool on board? The topic of airplane cabin temperature has garnered headlines this summer with a handful of instances in which passengers have complained about sweltering cabin heat.Most notably, in June, a Colorado woman said that her infant son overheated and passed out while they were on a United Airlines flight from Denver International Airport that sat on the tarmac for nearly two hours during a heat wave. Also in June, passengers had to deplane an Alitalia flight at Rome’s Fiumicino Airport after sitting for two hours in an uncomfortably warm cabin; video posted to social media showed passengers fanning themselves with brochures in an attempt to keep themselves cool.United has publicly apologized for the incident on board its aircraft, and in an emailed statement, a spokesman for Alitalia, Paolo Sanguinetti, said that the high temperature on board its plane occurred because of a technical problem with the external air-conditioning unit that was supplying the plane with cool air. The plane’s captain decided to disembark passengers, he said, because he “did not get authorization by air traffic control to start the aircraft engines in order to cool the cabin.”How Planes Get CoolGenerally, a plane supplies the cabin with air-conditioning from one of three sources, according to Billy Nolen, a former pilot and now the senior vice president of safety, security and operations for Airlines for America, a trade association that represents the largest airlines in the United States, including United and American Airlines.AdvertisementMost commercial planes, he said, have a cooling system that works when the engines are on. But when its engines are off while the plane waits on the tarmac, its auxiliary power unit, which relies on jet fuel, supplies a cabin with cold air once that unit is turned on. When the engines are off while the plane waits at the gate, an external air-conditioning unit pumps preconditioned air into the cabin through a hose; these units weigh 3,000 to 12,000 pounds and operate by getting electricity from the airport terminal, according to Louis Ferolito, the president of Gale Aviation Services, a consulting company that specializes in ground support equipment for planes.Advertisement“The bigger the plane, the bigger the unit an airline has to use to keep the cabin cool,” he said.Air-conditioning is the obvious way to maintain a comfortable on-board climate, but airline staff will often ask passengers to help as well. Michael Thomas, a spokesman for Delta Air Lines, said that when a plane is landing in a destination with warm weather, flight attendants usually ask passengers to close their window shades and turn on their vents. “Both help keep the plane cool until its next flight,” he said.American Airlines and British Airways ask the same of their passengers, according to representatives from both airlines.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Why Planes Get HotThere are a few reasons a cabin can become uncomfortably warm.Mr. Nolen said that it may take a few minutes for a plane to cool down as it switches from one air-conditioning source to another. “When a plane changes from using the on-board cooling system to either the auxiliary power unit or preconditioned air or vice versa, there may be a lag, and in hot weather, a plane can get steamy fast,” he said.Body heat on a full plane and heat from overhead lights can exacerbate this overall warmth, he said.When a plane switches from using the on-board cooling system to preconditioned air, a delay can occur if the ground crew needs a few minutes to connect the external air-conditioner to the plane.Mr. Nolen added that if an empty, powered-down plane sits in hot weather for an hour or more, the cabin may take a while to cool down when it is turned back on.Mr. Ferolito has another perspective on why cabins can get hot: He said that airlines tend to favor using external air-conditioning units over auxiliary power units because they are comparatively much less expensive and also more environmentally friendly. “The problem is that the external units many airlines purchase aren’t of the best quality and don’t sufficiently cool plane cabins,” he said.How to Stay Cool On BoardIn his more than three decades as a pilot, Mr. Nolen said, he kept cool on board during warm weather by always taking frequent sips from a bottle of cold water and wearing lighter clothing made from breathable fabrics. He advised passengers to do the same. Traveling with a reusable water bottle that can be filled at a water fountain after passing through security is one economical and hassle-free option.Mr. Ferolito recommended that passengers who feel overheated ask a flight attendant for ice wrapped in a towel, which they can then place on their head until they cool down.AdvertisementMr. Nolen added that passengers should remember that relief is always in sight. “When a cabin is hot, it will get cool,” he said. “Sometimes, it’s just a matter of time.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.