AdvertisementSupported byTrendingBy Dave Seminara and Shivani VoraCoast-to-coast solar eclipses are an exceedingly rare occurrence: The last one in North America occurred on June 8, 1918, and after this summer’s Eclipse Across America, there will not be another one like it until 2045. For about two minutes on Aug. 21, the sun will disappear behind the moon across a narrow band called a “path of totality” from the Oregon coast to South Carolina.NASA has set up a site for the eclipse (eclipse2017.nasa.gov), which lists the group’s official viewing locations around the country. And a host of communities in the center of the band, including some that rarely host large numbers of tourists, are staking their claims as the best place to watch the eclipse.A number of other communities in the path, including Columbia, S.C.; Nashville; St. Joseph, Mo.; Casper, Wyo; and Carbondale, Ill., which will have the longest duration of “totality” at 1:21 p.m. for 2 minutes 41 seconds, are preparing for big crowds.Fred Espenak, a retired NASA astrophysicist known as Mr. Eclipse, has watched and photographed 27 solar eclipses on all continents, and says that they are singular experiences everyone should enjoy at least once. He emphasizes that clear weather is key, and that, in this regard, the communities west of the Mississippi River have the best odds. Mr. Espenak will probably be in Casper, where he has a speaking engagement, but he and other eclipse chasers will be watching the weather forecasts, prepared to change plans at the last minute.Alex Young, the coordinator for NASA’s education and outreach programs, agrees with Mr. Espenak that sites west of the Mississippi have the best odds for good weather, but cautions that travelers need to plan ahead, consult weather forecasts before the eclipse and have a backup plan. He added that prime viewing spots that are easiest to reach could experience problems with congestion and other logistical challenges.“Roughly 100 million people live within a day’s drive of the path of totality, so we’re really in uncharted territory trying to estimate how many people are going to try to watch this event,” said Mr. Young, who plans to be in Carbondale for the eclipse.One backup plan may be an aerial view: Alaska Airlines is giving away two free tickets on an invite-only eclipse charter off the coast of Oregon. Also, NASA will be filming the eclipse at a number of sites across the country and will have multiple streams on its website.But if you want to see the real thing from the earth, here is a list of eight places that have planned celebrations.Madras, Ore. It is a largely agricultural community of 6,000 people in central Oregon that is attracting a huge amount of attention from eclipse chasers, given its reliably clear summer weather and position in the center of the path of totality. Hotels in Madras have been sold out for years. The Days Inn, in nearby Bend, Ore., was advertising standard rooms at $1,600 a night as of May 1. But officials in Madras say there are still plenty of campsites, and visitors will have a chance to take in live music, check out a superb aviation museum, hike at Smith Rock State Park, and sample brews at dozens of brew pubs in Bend.Hopkinsville, Ky. A farm just outside Hopkinsville has the distinction of being considered the “point of greatest eclipse,” which means that from the center of the earth, the moon makes its closest path across the sun there, giving viewers the best view of the solar corona, which some say looks like a bright diamond ring. Brooke Jung, who is coordinating Hopkinsville’s eclipse marketing efforts, says the eclipse is the most exciting thing to happen to the town — which they are now branding “Eclipseville” — since the same date (Aug. 21) in 1955, when a dozen “little green men” allegedly landed nearby in a spaceship.In addition to their annual Little Green Men Days festival, which commemorates the extraterrestrial occurrence that supposedly inspired the 1982 film “E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial,” eclipse chasers can drink moonshine at two bourbon distilleries, attend a Comic-Con event, and take in the  Friday night bluegrass jam at the nearby Rosine Barn. Ms. Jung says that the county has closed schools for the day, ordered 100,000 pairs of solar eclipse glasses ($1 each), and has requested 85 members of the National Guard to direct traffic.“It’s like us and the other towns in the center of the path of totality are preparing to host a Super Bowl,” she said.Jefferson City, Mo. Capital Eclipse Village, in northern Jefferson City is the center of the action, with live music, art installations, circus-style performances, beer and wine stands and children’s activities. The site Capital Eclipse (capitaleclipse.org) lists programming there and elsewhere in Jefferson City. The total eclipse is expected at 1:14 p.m. for 2 minutes 29 seconds.Lincoln, Neb. Haymarket Park, near the city center, is one of the largest viewing sites in the area. On the day of the eclipse, professors from the University of Nebraska’s department of physics and astronomy will set up sun-viewing telescopes and will be on hand to answer questions. There are a number of other places to see the eclipse and ways to celebrate it, including a “ribfest” ahead of the event and a commemorative T-shirts. The eclipse can also be seen from 125 smaller parks in and around Lincoln. Totality is expected at 1:02 p.m. for 1:24. Although most hotels in Lincoln are sold out during the eclipse period, Tracie Simpson of the city’s Convention and Visitors Bureau office can help you find accommodations. Contact her at tsimpson@lincoln.org or 402-434-5339.Nashville The most promising eclipse event is the Music City Solar Eclipse Festival & Viewing Party at the Adventure Science Center, a popular children’s science museum. Though the festival starts on Saturday, Aug. 19, the highlight is total eclipse day, where totality is expected at 1:27 p.m. for 1 minute 55 seconds. Indoor activities include multiple showings of Eclipse: The Sun Revealed, a show in the planetarium that the center produced in honor of the eclipse. Outdoors a giant screen will show NASA’s broadcast of the eclipse from space. There will also be science-themed games, food trucks and solar telescope viewing stations. The easiest way to find a place to stay is to search for hotels on the Music City Solar Eclipse Package page, provided by the city’s Convention & Visitors Corp. Make sure that wherever you stay, you listen to the city’s eclipse Spotify playlist.Casper, Wyo. The community is putting on the Wyoming Eclipse Festival, a five-day celebration culminating on Aug. 21. The festival has more than 40 events throughout the city, including races, music concerts and space-related exhibits. Also, on Sunday, Aug. 20, Ira Flatow, the host of the public radio show “Science Friday,” will give a speech at Casper College’s Wheeler Concert Hall titled “Science Is Sexy.” On eclipse day, when totality is expected at 11:42 a.m. for 2 minutes 26 seconds, the city will have several viewing events such as Solabration on the Circle, at Bart Rea Learning Circle along the North Platte River, which includes guided yoga, children’s activities, breakfast and viewing glasses. The cost is $110 a person plus $33 per car for parking. But it will be tough to find a place to stay. All public campgrounds in the area are sold out, and most hotels are also full. “We’re encouraging travelers to consider alternatives such as private land camping or home rentals through sites such as Airbnb,” said Anna Wilcox, the executive director of the Wyoming Eclipse Festival.Columbia, S.C. The Total Eclipse Weekend lists more than 50 eclipse events taking place in Columbia from Aug. 18 to 21. One example: Solar 17 at Lake Murray, the city’s largest viewing area, will have tents set up, and guests can receive free water and viewing glasses. Totality is expected at 2:41 p.m. for 2 minutes 36 seconds.Charleston, S.C.: Of the more than 100 eclipse events listed on Go Dark Charleston, one of the largest is expected to be Eclipse on a Warship, which takes place on the aircraft carrier and warship museum U.S.S. Yorktown. Visitors will be able to catch the eclipse from the boat’s flight deck, where Dr. Christian Iliadis, chairman of the department of physics and astronomy at the University of North Carolina in Chapel Hill, will give a presentation on the eclipse and answer questions. Totality is expected at 2:48 p.m. for between 90 seconds to two and half minutes. A full listing of hotels is available on the city’s Convention and Visitors Bureau site.Campsites: Nearly all the hotels in eclipse viewing destinations are sold out the weekend before the eclipse, but some campgrounds still have spots for tents and offer budget-friendly accommodations. According to Hipcamp, an online campground booking site, there are more than a 1,000 campsites in the path of totality with availability; most charge $100 or less a night, and many charge less than $50 a night. For a complete list, visit hipcamp.com/discover/eclipse-2017Advertisement