AdvertisementSupported byFrance is celebrating Bastille Day today, commemorating the storming of a prison and fortress that held dissidents. The battle was a pivotal point in the establishment of the French Republic, a point that is celebrated in the United States by cooking French food and shopping at a French linen store. Go a step further and dive into these stories that will give you a taste of France — and its history. Maybe by this time next year, you’ll be celebrating France’s national holiday in one of these destinations. Fontainebleau, 45 miles south of Paris, isn’t exactly unknown. But given its centuries of history at the center of the French monarchy, its relative obscurity is something of a mystery. Take a look at this singular space — a magnificent time capsule of French history. A map of France reads like a menu. Each has a signature dish, from Brittany’s butter-crisped crepes, to the generous cuts of pork draped over mounds of tangy sauerkraut in the eastern reaches of Alsace. A word of caution: don’t read our exploration of French cuisine if you are ravenous. Though best known for her career as an entertainer, including a prominent stint in France, the American singer Josephine Baker made another contribution to her adopted country: she was a spy. She hid weapons for the French Resistance and smuggled documents across the border, tucking them beneath gowns like the ones on the first floor. Explore the chapters of her life in Paris and in the French countryside.Walk through the Latin Quarter’s crooked cobblestone corridors or down the grand plane-tree-lined boulevards of St.-Germain-des-Prés and, more than once, you’ll think you’re inside a black-and-white Robert Doisneau photo. Here’s how to best pass a weekend in Paris.Look closely at a map of southwestern France and you’ll notice it: a blank spot just west of Toulouse where the place names thin out and the train lines and expressways veer away, like a stream flowing around a boulder. That blank spot is Gascony, one of the country’s most rural regions. Even a week or so spent eating and drinking your way around this rural area of southwestern France is enough to spark a lifelong love affair. Also worth exploring: the earthy pleasures of Médoc and the new vibrancy of Bordeaux.Advertisement