
In Transit By                     
SHIVANI VORA

MARCH 23, 2016
A NEW DESTINATION ON SRI LANKA’S SOUTHERN COASTShangri-La’s Hambantota Resort & Spa is opening in late August on Sri Lanka’s picturesque southern coastline. The 145-acre, 300-room beachfront resort will have lush tropical gardens, an 18-hole golf course, a spa, a kids club, several restaurants and an artisan village where guests can interact with and buy goods from local craftsmen. In the evening, this village will transform into an entertainment venue showcasing local music and dance performances of Angampora, Sri Lanka’s indigenous martial art. Hambantota is near several national wildlife parks that are home to wild elephants, the Sri Lankan leopard and thousands of rare and exotic birds; the concierge can help arrange excursions to these parks. Nightly rates from $216, including breakfast.THE RENOVATED CLIFF HOUSE REOPENS IN MAINECliff House, a Destination Hotel, in Ogunquit, Me., a resort that originally opened in 1872 and is situated across 70 oceanfront acres on the state’s southern coast, will reopen this July following a renovation over the winter. The 134 guest rooms have been redesigned with a chic, coastal-inspired look; there’s a new 9,000-square-foot spa and new dining options such as a restaurant that will include menu items like local produce and line-caught fish overlooking the cliffs, a bar specializing in regional beers and craft cocktails and a lobster shack. Nightly rates from $450.NEW ACTIVITIES (BREAD-MAKING INCLUDED) AT ROSEWOOD IN TUSCANYRosewood Castiglion del Bosco, the Tuscan resort in Montalcino set on an 800-year-old estate and founded by Massimo and Chiara Ferragamo of the fashion family, is reopening Thursday, after a winter closure, with several new activities. Guests can now partake in a nighttime horseback tour that departs after sunset and includes an option to stop at a local osteria or farmhouse for a tasting of Tuscan delicacies. There’s also a new class on bread-making and a half-day excursion to the nearby Puscina Wildflower Farm that includes a planting lesson, a bouquet arranging class with the farm’s wildflower experts and a picnic lunch· Nightly rates from 520 euros (about $585).IN KENYA, STARRING ROLES FOR A CHEF AND AN ARTISTArtist and chef residency programs are nothing new, but they may be worthy of more attention than usual if they take place in a remote destination with nothing but grasslands and wildlife for 50,000 acres. That’s the case at Wilderness Collection’s Segera Retreat, located at the heart of the Laikipia Plateau in Kenya overlooking Mount Kenya, when both a Michelin-award-winning chef and a renowned contemporary artist, respectively, will reside at the camp. From April 3 to 10, Sascha Kemmerer, from the Michelin-starred restaurant Kilian Stuba in Austria, will conduct cooking classes at the camp for guests and contribute dishes to the farm-to-table menus. Then, from June 15 to 30, the South African contemporary artist Michele Mathison, known for his sculptures and installations, will be on hand to dine with guests and give talks about his work.LUXURY STAYS AT DISNEY WORLDA luxury vacation at Walt Disney World complete with unique activities is the point of a new trip from the tour operator Adventures by Disney. Travelers who book the six-night itinerary stay at Disney’s Polynesian Villas & Bungalows and visit all four Disney parks where they get prime viewing spots and access to popular attractions such as the midday parade and nighttime fireworks at Magic Kingdom Park and a private safari at Animal Kingdom Park. Also included are a trip to the Kennedy Space Center Visitor Complex for a private tour and lunch with an astronaut and a visit to Shingle Creek in Central Florida for a kayak ride past turtles and alligators. Departures every Sunday from June 19 through Dec. 18 with the exception of July 3. Prices from $4,939 a person.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »