
Check In By                     
JUSTIN SABLICH

FEB. 3, 2017
Rooms from £179 (about $220).The Laslett personifies a Notting Hill that, despite its fashionable reputation, has not been known recently for its quality lodging. Taking its name from Rhaune Laslett, the chief organizer of the Notting Hill Festival, almost everything about this offering from the British-based hotel group Living Rooms has the neighborhood’s stamp on it, from its Portobello Market antiques to baked goods provided by the well-known chef Sally Clarke, whose restaurant is a five-minute walk away. It’s no surprise then that the 51-room property, which opened in 2015 and is housed in five Victorian mansions, was conceived by Tracy Lowy, who grew up in Notting Hill, as did the Laslett’s award-winning designer, Tom Bartlett. They managed to capture the neighborhood’s renowned style while providing genuine, home-style comfort.Near the Notting Hill Gate underground station and in walking distance ofthe neighborhood’s best shops and pubs, Hyde Park and the Portobello Market.My wife and I stayed in a master double room, a notch above the standard doubles, and slept well in an especially roomy and comfortable king-size bed. Though the walls were gray, with the abundance of natural light the room was far from gloomy. It was tastefully furnished with pieces from Pinch and Race Furniture, handmade lighting fixtures by the Nocturne Workshop and antiques from the dealer Jerome Dodd of the neighboring Les Couilles du Chien. Works by local artists covered the walls. A stack of Penguin Classics books was another nice decorative touch that could also come in handy should your complimentary high-speed Wi-Fi stop working (ours worked just fine).Spacious and elegantly styled, it had a bath and shower combination and was supplied with organic bath products from Neal’s Yard Remedies.There are more books and artworks in the lobby, which the Laslett describes as “more of a neighborhood hangout than a hotel lobby.” The space includes the Library (an airy book-filled area that was under renovation during our stay but is now open) and the Henderson Bar, which is open for breakfast, lunch and dinner and is also family friendly, as we learned during a post-dinner drink with friends who had an active 1-year-old son. No dirty looks from the accommodating staff, just smiles and toys. Room service is 24 hours, and a free pass to a nearby gym is included, as are “handyphones,” which give guests unlimited access to a 3G network and free calls within Britain and several other countries.The Henderson Bar typically has lunch and dinner offerings including small plates like the charcuterie board and large plates like shepherd’s pie and Thai green chicken curry. For lunch I had a delicious smoked salmon salad with mixed greens, pomegranate, beetroot, cherry tomatoes and mango. For breakfast, guests can choose one of six main meals, from smashed avocado and poached eggs on sourdough to pancakes with maple syrup and berries. We had both and they were as good as they sound.With its fine style, comfort and friendly staff, the Laslett fills a gap in a neighborhood with surprisingly few boutique hotels.The Laslett, 8 Pembridge Gardens, Notting Hill, 44-20-7792-6688, living-rooms.co.uk/hotel/the-laslett.Follow Justin Sablich on Twitter: @JustinSablichA version of this article appears in print on February 5, 2017, on Page TR3 of the New York edition with the headline: In the Spirit of Notting Hill.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »