AdvertisementSupported byThe GetawayBy Seth KugelThe run-up to the Rio Olympics has been a nightmare for Brazil, with the Zika virus, a crime wave, lagging infrastructure projects and “super bacteria” lurking in Guanabara Bay. The economy is in severe recession, and the president is fighting impeachment as the Games begin.Whatever. Well, not quite “whatever” — these are grave issues for Brazilians. But Olympics visitors should calm down. In the last decade, Rio de Janeiro has successfully hosted the World Cup; World Youth Day, starring Pope Francis; and the Pan-American Games — not to mention 10 raucous Carnivals. Its people know how to give a party, and how to show off their mind-bendingly beautiful city to visitors while insulating them from its jarring day-to-day reality.In addition, Zika cases were down 93 percent in June from January and may be lower in August, the heart of the southern winter. Tens of thousands of extra police officers and soldiers will patrol the games.Of course, visitors should exert caution. But barring a tragic infrastructure collapse or a terrorist attack, the Olympics will still be the Olympics, an event unlike any other.And I’ve never been to one. So I asked some experienced Olympics-goers for advice that has worked in past games, and — during a trip to Rio earlier this month — I applied them to the city.You can do last-minute It’s not too late to land tickets for marquee events. “The dirty little secret about the Olympics is all of the countries book up huge blocks of rooms and seats one or two years in advance, but they never ever bring as many people as they think,” said Pauline Frommer, a co-president of Frommer Media and a veteran of the London and Beijing Games. That goes double this year, thanks to negative press.Indeed, empty hotel rooms are out there. But your best bet is the over-1,000 more reasonably priced apartments and private rooms still available on HomeAway, Airbnb and TripAdvisor. Last-minute flights are trickier. Here’s a tip from me: Book a ticket to São Paulo, and then a separate flight using Brazilian airline sites for the short hop to Rio. (I found a LATAM Airlines Brazil direct round-trip flight from New York to São Paulo for $1,280 mid-Games on Hipmunk and matching Gol flights to Rio for $85 or so.)There were also tons of tickets when I checked, and that was before the recent release of over 100,000 more. Buy directly from Rio2016.com, recently available to Americans. Its prices are in the now-devalued Brazilian real, whereas the official American agent, Cosport, is still charging dollar rates. I found a ticket to the women’s basketball gold-medal match on Rio2016.com for the equivalent of $79, while the best price on Cosport was about $133.Schedule conservatively “Don’t overload yourself because you can’t physically get to more than one or two events a day,” said Micheline Maynard, the senior editor at NPR’s “Here & Now” news program, an Olympics enthusiast and a former Times reporter. Rio interpretation: If you have tickets for an afternoon swimming competition at Barra Olympic Park, don’t try to fit in a beach volleyball match at faraway Copacabana beach. Also leave full days to sightsee. Most events are far from marquee draws, and you’ll be reliant on barely tested subway, light rail and Bus Rapid Transit lines.The good news: You won’t be bored, even arriving early. “People just burst out in conversation,” Ms. Frommer said. “Exchange stories and ask what athletes they’re cheering for, and make it an opportunity for learning about other cultures.” Like the United Nations, minus the bureaucracy.Splurge for memories “Make sure you buy tickets to an event so amazingly good you’ll remember it forever,” said Kiratiana Freelon, a journalist in Rio who bought last-minute gymnastics-all-around tickets for $450 for the London Summer Olympics four years ago and did not regret it. (She loved it so much she got a job with the Olympics this summer, though she was not speaking for this article in an official capacity.)Pack red, white and blue “When you get to the Olympics, you’re going to want to dress as much like Uncle Sam as possible — it’s basically a big nationalistic costume party,” said Andrew Pham, an energy trader from Spokane, Wash., who has been to the London Games, as well as the Sochi Winter Olympics two years ago. “If you’re trying to be too cool for school, dressed in normal clothes, you’re going to miss out on the festivities and atmosphere.”Most other sources agreed, and this jibed with my 2014 World Cup experience. I took along just one United States soccer T-shirt — and felt like a total loser. (Warning: One source advised that this could also make you a terrorist’s target.)Use local and Olympic-oriented apps My prediction: Uber, which in Rio is much cheaper than taxis, is apt to be wildly popular, leading to long waits and surge pricing. As a backup, download the Easy Taxi or 99 (formerly 99 Taxis) apps, which work like Uber except that they call regular taxis and have no surge pricing. Also, download Rio data for Google Maps, so that you can use it offline to make sure your driver isn’t taking a roundabout route. And download the English and Portuguese languages in Google Translate for offline use.A final transportation note: From the international airport, forget about taxis and Ubers altogether if your lodging is anywhere near the Premium bus’s 2018 line, which it likely will be. The bus costs 16 reals (just under $5) and will drop you off anywhere on its route.Consider three other downloads: Safeture, which provides real-time local security warnings and will be free during the Games if activated in Rio; Moovit, a public-transit app that, in my tests, knew Rio’s bus lines better than Google; and Menu for Tourist, where you can find many Rio restaurant menus translated into English. You can even select everything you want, tap “translate” and show the order to your waiter in Portuguese. (As the app’s name suggests, the translations aren’t perfect: That “red fruits beaten with yogurt” is a berry smoothie, and “filet mignon to spider oswaldo” is arachnid-free. But it works.)Find the athletes You’ll know them by their toned bodies and (in some cases) medal-draped necks. But you have a better chance to meet competitors from specific sports the evening or day after their event ends. Some countries open hospitality houses (traditionally for athletes and families) to the public, and that’s a good place to start. The Holland Heineken House is a favorite. “In Sochi, every night was a big rager,” said Mr. Pham, the energy trader. All of the Dutch athletes who medal that day are brought in, “and it turns into a more raucous version of a medal presentation.”As an alternative to big ragers, Ms. Frommer, of Frommer Media, suggested planning your trip to Rio’s top attractions (Christ the Redeemer, Sugarloaf) for the day after your favorite sport wraps up. Many athletes hit the tourist trail as soon as they’re freed from training, she said.Save space in your bag Yes, even if you’re not usually a souvenir collector. People tend to collect more stuff at the Olympics than on a normal trip, my sources said. If you ignore this advice and regret it, there is still a solution: Give away your Uncle Sam beard and hat to a new Belarussian or Ghanaian friend, opening up space for your goodies.Advertisement