

      By NICHOLAS NOYES

JAN. 13, 2017

I like bookstores that shelve fiction, nonfiction and travel guides together by destination. But can you use a novel as a guidebook? Certainly tourists flock to fictional locations like platform 9¾ in King’s Cross Station. But what can you learn from following the footsteps of a fictional character? To see, I followed the route of Oliver Twist as he entered London for the first time.
Related Article
At the corner of Greville Street is an office rental space that advertises on its website that it is the “exact location of Fagin’s Den,” adding, “it’s improved since then.”Dickens (along with contemporary commentators) describes it as a place where stolen handkerchiefs (Fagin’s stock in trade) were sold, as well as the center of the used clothing trade. Dickens adds that “it has its barber, its coffee-shop, its beer-shop,” and, intriguingly, for historians of British cuisine “its fried-fish warehouse.” Today it is a private road, with no through traffic, although the public can walk through, using it as a short cut, a place to smoke or to try to park a bicycle.“Oliver Twist,” published serially from 1837 to 1839, was always a guidebook of sorts, taking Dickens’s middle- and upper-class readers away from the familiar streets of the London they knew and into the world that lurked down dark alleys.I’m an American but grew up in London, arriving there as a 5-year-old. The film of Lionel Bart’s “Oliver!” was released the month I arrived, and I was soon taken to see it. Catchy tunes aside, I found it terrifying: vicious, treacherous evil hiding around every corner, a child in peril in every scene and a rather bland hero with absolutely no superpowers beyond being secretly middle-class. What possible use could that be against Sikes and his dog? Besides, being new to the country, I wasn’t quite sure to what extent these conditions might still prevail.Reading the book as an adult made me want to connect Dickens’s work with the real London, to see if I could find the city it described. The novel’s description of Oliver’s first moments in town (quite different from my own at the age of 5: orange-colored streetlights on a foggy motorway with tiny cars going the wrong way) includes recognizable street names and a route I could more or less follow on a modern map.Oliver meets the Artful Dodger just outside of London. Tired, hungry and naïve, he’s happy to accept the dodgy Dodger’s offer of food and the possibility of lodgings with a “ ’spectable old gentleman” and is thus sucked into a criminal gang.For the book’s reader, it is a more ominous progression: a trip from bad to worse, from frying pan to fire, from leafy suburb to notorious slum, a step on the all-too-likely journey from workhouse to gallows, from Islington to Fagin’s live/work loft in the Saffron Hill Rookery. From Oliver’s point of view, the Dodger is a terrible tour guide.Charles Dickens, however, is pretty good. Names of roads have changed. Rivers have been redirected underground and 180 years of development and decay have changed a landmark or two. But Dickens’s description of Oliver’s entry into London is easy to follow. And following Oliver’s journey connects London’s 19th-century geography to the modern city.Muse is an occasional visual presentation of a discovery, adventure or escape.Photographs by Nicholas Noyes. Map from MOTCO Enterprises Limited.Nicholas Noyes is the author of “The Little Brown Book of Corporate Advancement” and “50 Places to See Before You Die & 50 Places That Are a Lot More Fun.” His photographs have appeared in Gothamist and Londonist, and in “Tiny Yarn Animals” (Penguin Random House).Advertisement