
Where to Go Now By                     
SHIVANI VORA

MAY 12, 2017
Donald J. Trump’s presidency and the events surrounding it have led to a revived interest in politically themed tourist sites and tours in the United States, according to Rob Stein, a travel adviser at the Stein Collective, a company in New York City specializing in trips inspired by politics. “Trump isn’t just a political figure,” he said. ”He’s like a controversial reality TV star, and because of him, the general public is more engaged in current politics and thrilling topics like spying and scandals.”The past week has not lacked for vivid political headlines, whether it was Sally Q. Yates, the acting attorney general Mr. Trump fired in January, testifying about the Russian connections of Michael T. Flynn, the former national security adviser, or the firing of James B. Comey, the F.B.I. director. Here are sites and tours that offer perspective and insight.International Spy Museum, Washington, D.C.: Open since 2002, this three-story museum claims to have the world’s largest collection of items related to international espionage. Examples include a lipstick pistol, a single-shot gun used by K.G.B. operatives during the Cold War, and a minuscule camera from the 1970s that was hidden in a coat button and used in the Soviet Union and North America. Visitors can also peruse several interactive exhibitions tracing the history of espionage from biblical times to the present day, including Weapons of Mass Disruption, which illustrates the role computers play in spying and terrorist attacks. You’ll see the personal laptop of the real-life hacker known only as Th3J35T3R (the Jester).Occasionally, the museum offers the opportunity to meet with former intelligence officers. Next up, on May 17, is dinner and drinks with two former C.I.A. station chiefs, N. John MacGaffin III and William Ross Newland III. Mr. MacGaffin serves as an adviser on the Showtime series “Homeland.” Adult admission is $22. 800 F Street NW, spymuseum.orgAdvertisementThe White House: A tour of the White House may be free, but it’s not an easy ticket to come by. United States citizens must submit a request through their member of Congress at least three weeks in advance but no sooner than three months in advance — during the peak summer tourist season; it’s advisable to ask sooner rather than later. The tours are self-guided and generally available only for limited hours Tuesday through Saturday. What you’ll see are the first floor of the East Wing and the ground and state floors of the executive residence. Noncitizens should submit a tour request to their embassy in Washington. 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue, whitehouse.gov/participate/tours-and-eventsIn Washington and didn’t plan in advance? A visit to the White House Visitor Center is the instant-gratification option. Less than a block away from the White House, the center offers a touch-screen tour of the presidential residence and has a display of 90 artifacts, such as a decorative eagle that once topped a White House flagpole. Admission is free. 1450 Pennsylvania Avenue NW, whitehousehistory.org/white-house-visitor-centerPlease verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The White House at Night — Secrets and Legends: Delve deep into the scandalous side of the White House with this 90-minute walking tour, held several times a week at 8 p.m. A guide shares stories about presidential affairs and colorful first ladies. Besides walking around the White House, participants visit Lafayette Park, nicknamed Tragedy Square because it is where many murders and assassination attempts have taken place. Given the graphic content discussed during the tour, it’s recommended for adults only. The fee is $20. freetoursbyfoot.comNewseum, Washington: In an era in which the term “fake news” has been much used, this seven-level museum dedicated to the history of journalism has never been more pertinent. Highlights include the Pulitzer Prize Photographs Gallery, with every Pulitzer Prize-winning entry back to 1942, and the Inside Today’s F.B.I. exhibition, dedicated to the agency’s fight against terrorism and cyber criminals, which includes artifacts from the 2013 Boston Marathon bombing such as the handcuffs that restrained Dzhokhar Tsarnaev, one of the bombers. A must on a visit is the Today’s Front Pages gallery, where 80 front pages from newspapers around the world are electronically displayed. Adult admission is $25. 555 Pennsylvania Avenue NW, newseum.orgPentagon Tours, Arlington County, Va.: The headquarters of the Department of Defense are a mini-city serving more than 20,000 employees. Hourlong guided tours are offered every weekday, excluding federal holidays. Tours include the history of the four branches of the military, and the one-and-a-half-mile route has stops at various exhibitions throughout the building, such as the indoor memorial near the Sept. 11 crash site. Requests for tours must be submitted online 14 to 90 days in advance of the desired date. Admission is free. 1400 Defense Pentagon, pentagontours.osd.mil/Tours/contact.jspAdvertisementRichard Nixon Presidential Library and Museum, Yorba Linda, Calif.: Similarities between the administrations of President Richard M. Nixon and President Trump are hot topics in the press and on social media — for one, both presidents fired men leading investigations (Nixon dismissed the special prosecutor Archibald Cox Jr.). Visitors will find replicas of the White House East Room and the Oval Office as they looked when Nixon was in office, as well as exhibitions related to his foreign and domestic policies. There’s also an area devoted to the Watergate scandal (visitors can listen to tapes of the Watergate testimony before Congress). Also on the grounds: the house where Nixon was born and his burial site. Adult admission is $16. 18001 Yorba Linda Boulevard, nixonlibrary.govWe’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »