By SHIVANI VORAJUNE 8, 2017
There’s no slump this summer when it comes to travel: Several indicators show that United States residents are traveling more than they did in summer 2016.At American Express Travel, a network primarily for leisure travelers, overall travel this summer is up 19 percent based on airfare bookings, compared with last summer, while international travel is up 26 percent based on airfare bookings.The travel network Virtuoso is seeing a 10 percent growth in travel this summer, compared with last summer, according to Mike McCown, the senior vice president for finance and analytics. Last summer, the network booked $5.57 billion in travel, he said, and this summer, that number is expected to be more than $6 billion.And Signature Travel Network has a 10 percent increase in sales of land vacations for this summer, compared with last summer, said Karryn Christopher, the senior vice president of sales and marketing.AdvertisementOutside of travel networks, individual travel companies are also reporting a rise. Indagare has 20 percent more bookings for travel from June through early September, compared with the same period last year, said Melissa Biggs Bradley, the founder and chief executive.AdvertisementAnd Josh Alexander, a travel adviser at the New York City-based Protravel International, said that he has planned 130 private trips for clients traveling this summer; last summer, that number was around 100.Flight searches are another barometer suggesting increased interest in summer travel. Between March 1 to May 24, for example, the online travel site Cheapflights.com saw flight searches in the United States for both domestic and international travel grow more than 26 percent, compared with the same period last year.“Generally, air is booked 60 to 90 days before travel, so it’s safe to say that people are traveling more this summer,” said Emily Fisher, a spokeswoman for the company.Some experts say that more Americans are traveling this year than they did in 2016 because of pent-up demand from the heated presidential election, when many people cut back on traveling. “Based on our data from the last 15 years, we’ve seen travel sales soften in election years and then rebound post-inauguration,” said Mr. McCown of Virtuoso.It’s not surprising that consumers scale back their travel during election years, said Zachary Sears, a senior economist at Tourism Economics, part of the research firm Oxford Economics.“When a president is in the process of being elected, there’s uncertainty about the future of the market so people cut down on discretionary expenses such as travel,” he said. But Mr. Sears also said that this cutback is usually temporary, and once an election is over, consumers return to their usual spending patterns.On the flip side, some data indicates that inbound tourism to the United States is down: For example, the app Foursquare, which analyzes the locations of more than 50 million global users a month, found that international tourism to leisure locations in the United States decreased 11 percent between October 2016 and March 2017, compared with the same period the year before.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.More Americans may be traveling come summer, but where exactly are they going?Here, five popular vacation destinations for summer 2017.AdvertisementIndagare has a 30 percent increase in trip bookings to Croatia for travel this summer, compared with summer 2016, and Expedia.com has seen air ticket demand to the country double from last summer. Mr. Alexander of Protravel International said that he has planned several dozen private trips to Croatia for travel this summer — the most he has ever done. The country has a multifaceted appeal as a vacation destination, he said. “The beaches are fantastic, the food is delicious, and there’s culture and history,” he said.In addition, Mr. Alexander said that many of his clients who are headed to Croatia in the coming months have told him that, at a time when terrorist attacks around the world seem to be increasingly commonplace, Croatia is perceived as being “safe.”After several years of weak tourism because of the country’s debt crisis, Greece is making a comeback as a summer getaway spot. Between March 1 and May 24, Cheapflights.com saw flight searches to Greece from the United States increase 50 percent, compared with the same period last year, and Indagare has a 30 percent increase in 2017 summer trip bookings to Greece, compared with last summer. Ms. Biggs Bradley said that Greece is an attractive vacation choice because it’s family-friendly and much more affordable than a number of other European countries.Andy Pesky, the senior vice president of leisure sales and marketing at Protravel International, which has $400 million a year in leisure sales, said that the country is one of the company’s top three destinations in sales for travel this summer.Sales for trips to South Africa in 2017 are up 20 percent within the Signature Travel Network, compared with sales last year, and the country is among the top five best sellers within the Virtuoso network. Expedia.com has seen a 25 percent increase in air ticket demand to South Africa this summer, compared with last summer, and searches for flights to South Africa from the United States on Cheapflights.com increased 11 percent between March 1 and May 24, compared with the same period last year.Ms. Biggs Bradley said South Africa is an attraction for every kind of traveler. “The country has great game viewing, a strong wine scene, beautiful beaches and vibrant cities like Cape Town,” she said. “Plus, you get value for your money on a trip there.”It takes nearly a day to reach this South Asian island country from the United States, but that doesn’t appear to be deterring travelers from planning summer vacations there. American Express Travel has seen a 117 percent growth in summer 2017 bookings to the Maldives, compared with last summer. And at Expedia.com, the demand for air tickets from the United States to the Maldives for travel this summer is up 30 percent from last summer, said Sarah Waffle, a company spokeswoman.Part of the draw may be the several hotels that have opened in the Maldives within the last 18 months, such as Soneva Jani and the St. Regis Maldives Vommuli Resort, but Claire Bennett, the executive vice president and general manager of American Express Travel, said that the growth is also because more Americans want to disconnect from everyday chaos and want to explore untouched places. “The Maldives is the essence of this experience,” she said.It’s a perennially popular vacation destination, and summer 2017 is no exception: Italy is the top seller for summer bookings within both Virtuoso and the Signature Travel Network. “First-time travelers to Europe tend to choose Italy as the first country they visit, and seasoned European travelers go there again and again,” said Ms. Christopher of Signature Travel Network. “The country has an enduring allure.”AdvertisementMr. Pesky said that Italy is Protravel International’s best-selling summer vacation destination. “We’re going to do $25 million this year in sales to Italy, and that number increases every year,” he said.A version of this article appears in print on June 11, 2017, on Page TR3 of the New York edition with the headline: Destinations Where the Aim Is to Disconnect.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »