
Heads Up By                     
SHIVANI VORA

AUG. 17, 2016
Málaga has long been a vacation spot for sun lovers in search of an affordable beach getaway. The metropolis of about 600,000 in southern Spain and the capital of the eponymous Andalusian province is part of the country’s tourist-heavy Costa del Sol and full of beachside resorts offering all-inclusive packages at wallet-friendly prices.Today, the growing number of cultural attractions here may be more of a reason to come than the soft golden- sand beaches and sparkling Mediterranean. In the last decade, more than 20 museums have opened in the port city showcasing everything from paintings by art world heavy-hitters to rare automobiles. Many are concentrated in the historical center, much of it entirely pedestrian and dating back to Phoenician times.Two of the most prominent institutions arrived in March 2015: the Centre Pompidou Málaga, the first branch of the Paris museum outside of France, and the Collection of the Russian Museum St. Petersburg/Málaga, also a first venture outside of Russia for the State Russian Museum. Part of an ambitious plan driven by the local government to transform Málaga into a global center for the arts, the City Council spent about seven million euros (about $7,760,000) to finance the Pompidou, and another two million euros for the Russian Museum.World-class museums like these opening in Málaga are a revolution for the city, said Virginia Irurita, the founder of the Madrid-based travel company Made for Spain and Portugal. “Málaga is where you went for a cheap beach holiday. People couldn’t care less about the city itself, but it’s become the place now where all the Spanish want to come and stay to see the museums,” she said.Málaga’s tide started to turn with the 2003 opening of the Museo Picasso Málaga in a 16th-century palace in the historical center. Picasso was born in the city and lived there with his family for about a decade, and many of the museum’s more than 200 works were donated by his daughter-in-law and grandson Christine and Bernard Ruiz-Picasso.AdvertisementAlthough there are other Picasso museums including one in Paris, Málaga’s is unique because of the artist’s connection to the city, said Cristina Savage, who works in the museum’s education department. “Since so much of what is on display in this museum comes from Picasso’s family, and he is from here, there is something very personal about the art,” she said.AdvertisementMore museums over the next decade continued to follow Picasso’s. The Automobile Museum of Málaga, for example, opened in 2010 in a former tobacco factory on the outskirts of the city. The sprawling building houses more than 90 rare vehicles from the 19th century to the present, such as a Mercedes 540K from 1937 that had its debut in a motor show in Paris in 1936; other brands on display include Bugatti, Aston Martin, Rolls-Royce and Jaguar. The cars are owned by João Magalhães, a businessman from Portugal whose father started the collection in the 1930s.Also in the historical center and in a 16th-century building like the Museo Picasso’s is the Museo Carmen Thyssen  Málaga, which opened in 2011, and is home to more than 200 works of Spanish art.But the splashiest museums to fold into Málaga’s already strong lineup are the two openings in the spring of 2015.The Centre Pompidou Málaga, housed in a futuristic-looking glass cube with red, yellow, blue and green squares on the city’s marina, makes a dramatic mark on the skyline. The visual appeal continues inside with works from marquee artists such as Frida Kahlo, Francis Bacon, Marc Chagall and John Currin.Málaga’s mayor, Francisco de la Torre, brought the endeavor to fruition by traveling to Paris and presenting a proposal from the city hall to Pompidou Center officials. “We already had the Picasso museum and came up with a strategy to build on that to make Málaga more cultural,” he said in Spanish through a translator. The museum had about 220,000 visitors in its first year, a number that he anticipates only to increase, he said.The mayor’s deal for Málaga’s branch of the Russian Museum St. Petersburg keeps the museum open for 10 years with the option to extend for another decade.Situated in the same tobacco factory complex as the Automobile Museum, the light-filled space, spanning two floors and about 43,000 square feet, is a showcase for 18th-century to modern-day works by prolific artists who are Russian or who have worked in Russia, such as the 19th-century landscape painter Ivan Shishkin and the 20th-century painter Vladimir Gavrilov.These museums undoubtedly have made Málaga culturally relevant. But the mayor said the transformation isn’t over. “We have big plans for the city, and there’s more coming to the work we’ve already done.”A version of this article appears in print on August 21, 2016, on Page TR4 of the New York edition with the headline: A Cultural Hub Takes Form on the Costa del Sol.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »