
Where to Go Now By                     
SHIVANI VORA

JAN. 10, 2017
On Friday, Jan. 20, around noon, President-elect Donald J. Trump will take the oath of office on the West Lawn of the United States Capitol in Washington, D.C., to become the 45th president of the United States; Vice President-elect Mike Pence will be sworn in before Mr. Trump. The occasion marks the country’s 58th presidential inauguration (George Washington was the first president to be sworn in, on April 20, 1789).Inauguration Day traditionally begins with the president-elect attending a morning worship service, this year at St. John’s Episcopal Church, and also includes a procession from the White House to the Capitol, where departing President Obama will accompany Mr. Trump to the swearing-in ceremony.Members of the U.S. Senate and the U.S. House of Representatives for the 115th Congress receive ticket allocations from the Joint Congressional Committee on Inaugural Ceremonies. Each member’s office manages its own allotment, and the public can contact their members of Congress to request tickets.Official tickets may be limited, but it’s still possible to take part in the inauguration festivities without one, said Elliott Ferguson, the president and chief executive of Destination DC, the marketing organization for the city.AdvertisementSpectators can catch the inauguration proceedings being streamed live from several dozen giant video screens and audio systems around the National Mall, a more than two-mile area in the heart of the district and bordering the Capitol.AdvertisementFollowing Mr. Trump’s swearing-in ceremony, a presidential procession and inaugural parade will make its way from the Capitol to the White House, and visitors can get a glimpse of the new president from the sidewalks along Pennsylvania Avenue. Mr. Ferguson advised that parade attendees arrive early that morning to snag a good viewing spot, dress warmly for the chilly January weather and either bike, walk or rely on the Metro train system to get around, as many streets will be closed and parking limited. Also, he said that the police will have security checkpoints throughout the Mall, and visitors can expect to be stopped to have their bags searched.Additionally, the Presidential Inaugural Committee is organizing a welcome celebration at Lincoln Memorial on Thursday, Jan. 19; Mr. Trump and Mr. Pence are expected to make appearances at the event, and it will likely take place in the early afternoon or late evening; no tickets are required for the general public viewing areas.The inaugural committee is in charge of two official inaugural balls on Jan. 20, which are open to the public via tickets. There will also be the Salute to Our Armed Services Ball, open to active members of the military. Mr. Trump is expected to attend all three balls, Mr. Stroman said. Visit 58pic2017.org for more information and prices.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Several unofficial balls are also being held on the evening of the inauguration and are open to the public via tickets. The Native Nations Inaugural Ball, which honors Native American veterans, begins at 7 p.m. at the National Museum of the American Indian; $750 per ticket.Some events are taking place on Jan. 19. Several celebrities, including the actor Danny Glover and the writer Alice Walker, are expected to attend the much talked-about 2017 Inaugural Peace Ball: Voices of Hope and Resistance at the National Museum of African American History and Culture, organized by Busboys and Poets, a group of six restaurants in the Washington area. Tickets, however, are sold out.A number of marches are expected to take place in Washington over that weekend and draw sizable crowds. The most prominent is the Women’s March on Washington, beginning at 10 a.m. on Saturday, Jan. 21, at Independence Avenue and Third Street SW, near the Capitol. The purpose of the march, according to the event’s co-chair, Bob Bland, is to bring people of all genders and backgrounds together to raise awareness about a variety of social issues. “We care about equality and rights for all,” Ms. Bland said.Several hotels and restaurants around Washington are offering themed packages and special offers. Kimpton Hotels & Restaurants has the Inauguration’s a Ball Package from Jan. 17 to 23 at all 10 of its Washington properties. Nightly rates start at $520; four-night minimum stay required. Call 1-800-546-7866 and mention the code BALLER to book. Rosewood Washington D.C. has a five-night package, which can start either Jan. 17 or 18, and includes a bottle of Champagne and a different turndown gift each night. Nightly rates from $1,395.For the Women’s March on Washington, the South American steakhouse Del Campo will serve as a lounge for marchers, who will be offered free hot chocolate, coffee, cider, hand warmers and caramel corn.AdvertisementAlso for marchers, the Italian restaurant Centrolina will have free hot chocolate in its market area.A version of this article appears in print on January 15, 2017, on Page TR2 of the New York edition with the headline: How to Take Part in Inauguration Weekend.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »