By SHIVANI VORANOV. 15, 2016
Third-party travel booking sites such as Expedia.com and Booking.com are go-tos for travelers in search of wallet-friendly accommodations or deals on packages that include both airfare and a hotel stay. But as sites to book high-end vacations? Not so much — that is, until recently.Today, these sites and two new search engines — Skylark and Lola — are looking to attract consumers seeking luxury getaways by including prestigious hotels in their inventory and selling discounted packages that combine luxe accommodations with business- or first-class flights.With Skylark, which is part of the luxury travel network Virtuoso, users pay an annual $400 fee to get favorable rates on 700 upscale hotels, discounted high-end packages and phone, email and live chat access to a team of about 20 travel agents.“We want to be a luxury online travel agency where our clients can plan their own vacations but also rely on a travel adviser if they need to,” said Paul Tumpowsky, Skylark’s chief executive and co-founder.AdvertisementIf, for example, a member is considering two hotels in London — the Connaught and the Beaumont — they can instant message an adviser to inquire about amenities, location and other deciding factors; the advisers can also arrange airport transfers, theater tickets and tours.AdvertisementBut Skylark’s biggest attraction may be the discounts (up to 60 percent off) and perks it offers on upscale air and hotel packages.A recent example is a four-night stay for two at the Mandarin Oriental Barcelona with round-trip business-class flights on American Airlines from John F. Kennedy Airport in New York City to Barcelona-El Prat Airport. The trip costs $6,588 for two, compared with $10,190 if airfare and hotel were booked separately.And because the Mandarin Barcelona is a part of Virtuoso, members who book this package receive the property’s Virtuoso amenities such as an upgrade, if space is available, and breakfast.Lola, a free chat-based iPhone membership app, is also a Virtuoso member, with around 1,100 of the app’s 250,000 bookable hotels being Virtuoso properties where clients receive extra benefits, said Lola’s chief marketing officer, Robert Birge.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.One example is the Ritz Paris, where perks might include a room upgrade, early check-in and checkout, breakfast and airport transfers.Lola and Skylark are coming into the market at an opportune time, said the travel industry analyst Henry Harteveldt, the founder of Atmosphere Research Group, because affluent consumers rely on digital technology for much of their travel planning. But these high-income travelers also use travel agents, and both search engines offer a chance to work with agents.Booking and Expedia, both around since 1996, are also getting into the luxury game.On Booking.com, reservations at five-star properties grew 40 percent from September 2015 to September 2016, compared with the same period a year earlier, said Leslie Cafferty, a vice president and head of global communications.Expedia, meanwhile, is pursuing luxury travelers with the premium package business it introduced last year — the packages pair flights in business and first class with upscale hotels and sell them to consumers for an average of 20 percent savings, compared with the cost if each were booked separately.Advertisement“There is a shrinking price gap between economy and premium cabin airfare, and we saw an opportunity to offer discounted packages that bundle these airfares with stays at luxury hotels,” said Sarah Gavin, a spokeswoman for the company.At any given time, Expedia has at least a few thousand premium packages for sale. A recent one, at a cost of $3,800 a person, was a seven-night stay at the Park Hyatt Tokyo from Dec. 12 to 19 with round-trip business-class airfare from New York City.Some luxury hotels see an upside to being a part of third-party travel sites.François Delahaye is the chief operating officer for the Dorchester Collection, a group of 10 properties that includes the Hôtel Plaza Athénée in Paris, which can be booked on Skylark and the other three search engines. He said that third-party travel sites are a way to bring in more business. “We get a new set of clientele who may not be familiar with our brand, and sell inventory,” Mr. Delahaye said. “What doesn’t make sense about that?”A version of this article appears in print on November 20, 2016, on Page TR2 of the New York edition with the headline: Booking Sites Add a Luxury Component.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.