By SHIVANI VORAAPRIL 4, 2017
Don’t save your tax refund check — spend it on travel. That is the message some tour operators, cruise lines and hotels want to get across this year, and with Tax Day approaching on April 18, they’re offering tax-themed trips and stays. Most are priced below $3,000, the amount of the average tax refund in 2017, as of early March, according to the Internal Revenue Service.The South African Tourism office in the United States has created a tax-related travel initiative of nine trips to entice aspiring travelers to visit the country. All cost about $3,000 or less and include accommodations and some meals and activities; most include airfare. Each trip is from a different tour operator — SmarTours, for example, has a six-night package that includes a stay in Cape Town and a safari in Kruger National Park. From $1,799 a person.And Travel Discounters has a six-night itinerary that includes stays in Johannesburg and the Karongwe Game Reserve, where guests go on daily game drives. From $2,199 a person.Bangu Masisi, the president of South African Tourism in North America, said the tax season was an ideal opportunity to show that a trip to South Africa is within reach. “Most people think that a vacation to South Africa is out of their budget, but these trips prove that it’s more affordable than they may imagine,” she said.AdvertisementThe travel company STA Travel has two “TaxPerience” trips; both are available throughout 2017 and include flights, internal transfers, accommodations, tours and some meals and activities.AdvertisementThe eight-day “Northern Hilltribes and Villages” package includes stays in Bangkok and Chiang Mai, but the heart of the trip is exploring more rural northern Thailand — there, travelers visit villages to learn about the local culture and cuisine and also go on guided wildlife-watching treks through the countryside. From $1,295 a person.The second trip is a nine-day “Cambodia Experience,” in which travelers visit not only Angkor Wat and Siem Reap in Cambodia but also Ho Chi Minh City in Vietnam and Bangkok in Thailand. From $1,641 a person.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Cruise fans can consider the two “Tax Refund” journeys from Variety Cruises, both available throughout 2017: a 12-day cruise of the Greek Islands, including stops in Santorini and Mykonos (from $2,695 a person), or an eight-day cruise around Iceland, with stops in the cities of Siglufjordur and Reykjavik (from $2,950 a person).Hotels, too, are using tax season as a peg to attract guests. In Zanzibar, the Baraza Resort & Spa has a six-night “Under Taxing Rejuvenating Yoga Holiday” package; included are accommodations in a two-bedroom villa with a plunge pool, all meals, 10 one-hour yoga classes and airport transfers. From $1,995 a person. Available throughout 2017. Book by emailing info@thezanzibarcollection.com.And in St. Lucia, the Capella Marigot Bay Resort and Marina has the “Taxes at Bay” package, including four nights’ accommodations, all meals and alcoholic beverages, a couples massage, a sunset cruise, a zip line rain forest excursion and all taxes and service charges. From $3,800 for two people. Available throughout 2017.In the United States, Kimpton Hotels & Restaurants has several properties offering tax-related packages. Kimpton Hotel Allegro, in Chicago, is offering “Tax-Cation,” which includes accommodations without the city’s 17.4 percent accommodation tax (the hotel covers the fee), a $25 daily food and beverage credit and a welcome amenity of prosecco and chocolate gold coins. From $114 a night. Valid through May 31.For indulgence-seekers, the Kimpton Hotel Palomar, in Philadelphia, offers “Relax After You Tax,” which includes accommodations in the presidential suite, an in-room couples massage and a bottle of sparkling wine. At $1,040 a night. Available through May 31.A version of this article appears in print on April 9, 2017, on Page TR2 of the New York edition with the headline: That I.R.S. Refund Can Be a Ticket to Travel.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.