
In Transit By                     
SHIVANI VORA

JUNE 29, 2016
Summer isn’t the busiest time for buzzy hotel openings. According to Kristen Korey Pike, who owns the Atlanta travel consultancy KK Travels Worldwide, many splashy properties tend to debut in the fall. That said, there are some noteworthy lodgings that will be open for business as of this summer. Below is a list of five we’ve gathered from hotel industry experts.Mercer Hotel Sevilla, Seville, SpainOpening: Early SeptemberFrom a Barcelona-based hotelier, Pedro Molina, the Mercer Hotel Sevilla is aiming to offer the most luxe accommodations in Seville, a city with a dearth of upscale hotels. Situated in an early 19th-century building in the heart of town, in the lively Arenal neighborhood and near the Cathedral and Royal Alcazar Palace, the property has just 12 rooms, all with sleek, contemporary furnishings. There’s also a rooftop terrace, a pool, a cocktail bar and a light-filled courtyard where guests can enjoy breakfast in the morning and drinks throughout the day. “Seville is challenging when it comes to finding upscale lodgings so this hotel has the potential to really change the game,” said Jean Pickard, a travel consultant at SmartFlyer in Atlanta. Prices from 500 euros.Anantara Al Jabal Al Akhdar Resort, Al Jabal Al Akhdar, OmanOpening: Late AugustThis hotel, according to Ms. Pike, will open up an area of Oman that travelers know little about. “It’s in the Green Mountain, which is an absolutely gorgeous part of the Middle East, and because it’s in the mountains, it enjoys a cooler climate than the rest of the region,” she said.The 115-room resort, from the Bangkok-based hospitality brand Anantara, is perched more than 6,500 feet above sea level and has three pools including one for children; a cooking school, Spice Spoon, that specializes in Omani and Thai food; a spa with a hammam; and eight different dining options including the Omani restaurant Al Qalaa. Cultural sights such as the ancient city of Nizwa, often called the pearl of Islam, are nearby.AdvertisementPrices from $500.W Goa, Goa, IndiaOpening: Sept. 1Surrounded by dramatic red cliffs and overlooking the Arabian Sea, the hotel — W’s first in India — is spread over 21 acres and situated on the hip Vagator Beach in North Goa. It has 151 rooms, a 12,000-square-foot spa and three food and beverage venues including Spice Traders, a restaurant offering a fun take on Southeast Asian street food. Bobby Zur, who owns Travel Artistry, a consultancy in Franklin Lakes, N.J., says the property is a refreshing addition to the exotic jungle-meets-beach setting. “I am intrigued by the striking contrast between W’s chic design and the centuries-old fishing village community in which it will be set. Staying here will be an interesting add-on to traditional Indian itineraries,” he said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Prices from $208.AndBeyond Matetsi Private Game Reserve, Zambezi River, ZimbabweOpening: July 15Located on a 123,000-acre wildlife concession on the Zambezi River and 25 miles upstream from Victoria Falls, this lodge consists of two camps with nine suites each and has more amenities than most safari getaways including a state-of-the-art gym, a massage room, an 82-foot-long pool stretched along the riverbank and a wine cellar. Also, unlike many other African safari lodges, kids are welcome and entertained with AndBeyond’s WildChild program where they participate in activities such as making and using their own fishing rods and making plaster casts out of animal tracks. The biggest perk of a stay, however, may be the wildlife viewing: guests can expect to see herds of elephants and the rare sable antelope among other animals. “This property is a game-changer in the luxury lodge sector on the Zimbabwe side of the Falls for its contemporary aesthetic and wow factor rarely seen on this stretch of the Zambezi,” Mr. Zur said.AdvertisementPrices from $675 per person per night.Nickelodeon Hotels & Resorts Punta Cana, Punta Cana, Dominican RepublicNow openIn a partnership between Karisma Hotels & Resorts and Viacom International Media Networks, Nickelodeon, the popular television channel for children, is getting its own hotel. The upscale beachfront property has 208 generously sized suites with Jacuzzis and private patios and also four villas including the Pineapple Villa, inspired by SpongeBob SquarePants’s home in Bikini Bottom. Amenities at the resort include a water playground, a clubhouse for kids, a sports and entertainment center, 10 restaurants and a spa. Also, families with children can look forward to a slew of complementary perks like baby food, stroller loans, kids’ spa robes and baby bottle warmers. Ms. Pickard says that Punta Cana, with its several high-end resorts for couples, is a popular choice for honeymooners so the Nickelodeon brings in a different character to the destination. “My guess is that the property will be an instant hit with families,” she said.Prices from $345 per person, per night, inclusive of all meals, premium alcohol and 24-hour room service. Children under 13 are free. Guests who book a stay before July 31 get a 45 percent discount off the room rate.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »