By SHIVANI VORAOCT. 22, 2016
Buying goods at local markets on your vacation is a tangible way of capturing a memory of your destination, according to Hannah Roth, a travel adviser with McCabe World Travel in McLean, Va., who specializes in creating shopping-focused itineraries.“Markets can be treasure troves for locally made clothes, jewelry and knickknacks, and because the good ones are frequented by locals, they also give shoppers a pulse of the local life,” she said.Here, she shares her top tips on how to find must-visit markets and how to shop in them once you do.SHOP THE RIGHT MARKETS Big cities tend to have several dozen markets, but the ones around major tourist landmarks, such as La Rambla in Barcelona, are usually overpriced and sell unremarkable items like magnets and shot glasses. “You sometimes need to venture off the beaten path to find the best markets,” Ms. Roth said. In Barcelona, for example, she suggests the market in the city’s Gothic Quarter where up-and-coming artisans sell their wares.For ideas on the best ones to hit, ask your hotel concierge, tour guide or your travel adviser; reading travel magazines and blogs or simply wandering the streets and keeping your eyes peeled work, too.AdvertisementLOOK FOR HANDMADE ITEMS Markets are gems for handmade goods that the region or country you’re visiting is known for. In Nairobi, Kenya, it’s belts, bags and necklaces that Maasai women spend up to several days hand-beading (these can be found at the Maasai Market), and in Jodhpur, India, it’s hand-woven textiles such as jackets, pillow cases and rugs.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.BUYER BEWARE Unless you’re with a reputable local guide or another in-the-know local, be mindful when buying high-ticket items, such as fine jewelry, in markets. “At most markets, you can only pay in cash so if you get ripped off, you’re out a big chunk of money,” Ms. Roth said. Also, avoid vendors with advertising in English that’s marketed to tourists such as “Special Pricing for Americans,” especially if English is not the country’s primary language; you most likely won’t get any special pricing or find goods worth buying.HAGGLE, PLEASE  Haggling at markets is customary and expected. For any item you’re interested in buying, you can generally negotiate a price that’s 30 percent lower than what the vendor initially quotes — start by offering half the quoted amount, and go back and forth until you settle on a price. But don’t haggle if you’re not serious about the item; it’s insulting to the vendor.AdvertisementAIRPORT MARKETS COUNT Don’t discount markets at airports, Ms. Roth said, especially in smaller countries not known as shopping destinations. “After perusing and comparing prices throughout my trip, I have found some of the best shopping at airport markets,” she said. The goods she has picked up at the airport include a handmade conch shell necklace in Turks and Caicos and a painting in the Dominican Republic showcasing the island’s scenic landscape.A version of this article appears in print on October 23, 2016, on Page TR2 of the New York edition with the headline: Shop for Memories at Local Markets.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.