AdvertisementSupported byIn TransitBy Elaine GlusacINTO THE WOODS, HIPSTER STYLEThe creative forces behind some of Portland’s trendiest food and lodging are joining together to create Suttle Lodge & Boathouse, a new rustic-chic resort on 15.5 acres fronting Suttle Lake in the Deschutes National Forest in central Oregon. The hospitality company Mighty Union, the creative and management company behind the Ace Hotel Portland, is giving the former Lodge at Suttle Lake a makeover to be completed by June with a variety of rooms including those in the main lodge, two-story lakefront cabins and more simple ones with a shared bathhouse for those on a budget.The chef, Joshua McFadden, of Portland’s popular Ava Gene’s restaurant, will oversee the food operations, including the Boathouse restaurant on the lake, an outdoor beer garden and lobby bar near the lodge fireplace. About an hour from Bend, the property aims to attract day-trippers as well as overnighters with canoe, kayak and stand-up paddleboard rentals, lawn games, arts and crafts workshops and music events. Bookings will open in May; room rates from $125 a night.AIRBNB IN CUBA, ONE YEAR LATERFrom the visas to the charter flights, there is little that is straightforward about travel to Cuba for Americans. But enough of them are managing, according to Airbnb, which began operating there April 2, 2015. In its first year of operation, the company, which offers a centralized platform for homeowners and renters to list their quarters for rent by travelers, says it provided lodgings to over 13,000 travelers from the United States representing all 50 states. From its original 1,000 listings, Cuban properties have grown to 3,700 today. The majority (2,500) are in Havana, followed by Trinidad (330) and Viñales (200). The average price for one night, according to its website, is around $48.OLYMPIAN-LEVEL BOOT CAMPFeeding Olympic fever before the Summer Games, the BodyHoliday resort in St. Lucia is offering daily opportunities to work out with the former Olympic runner Donna Fraser over two weeks, April 3 to 17. Ms. Fraser, who represented Britain at four Olympics, will lead fitness sessions combining circuit training, cardio, strength training, yoga, stretching and running, often on the beach. She will also offer motivational and nutritional talks and participate in cooking classes with guests. Rates start at $900 a night, all-inclusive, with a five-night minimum.OVER-WATER VILLAS COME TO THE CARIBBEANMore closely associated with the South Pacific or the Maldives, over-water bungalows are coming to Jamaica at the Sandals Royal Caribbean resort in Montego Bay. The five suites, arrayed on a circular dock that extends from a private island, will feature glass floors for viewing marine life below, terraces at water level, outdoor plunge pools and hammocks-for-two suspended above the water. Guests will have access to a pool, restaurant and beach on the island, and amenities of the larger 210-room property on the mainland, reached via boat. The new deluxe accommodations will debut Nov. 15 and are open for reservations now at $4,300 per night, all inclusive.GREEN DEEDS GET AN ASSISTLaunching on World Water Day, March 22, Waves for Water, a 6-year-old nonprofit that encourages travelers to take water filters on their trips to developing countries, will launch an iPhone app called ForWater. With the app, as well as via the organization’s website, travelers can create a platform for crowdfunding for the water filters, which cost $50 each. Then with the app, travelers can post photos about their missions that will go out to their social media platforms and to those who funded them.“We said, what if we could make it feel like you could be your own NGO and you could have a legitimate stake in solving a global issue?” said Jon Rose, the founder of Waves for Water and a former professional surfer. The new technology, he added, “is building on that D.I.Y. ethos, but it’s all done on your phone.”Waves for Water will help travelers identify organizations such as schools or clinics as well as individuals in need of clean water, and encourages more independent travelers to find their own recipients in their travels. “It could be a taxi driver, or someone in a hotel or in a restaurant,” said Mr. Rose.Each filter weighs about half a pound and comes in the size of a Ziploc freezer bag. The organization says one filter can provide one million gallons of clean water, or the equivalent of serving roughly 100 people for five years.Advertisement