AdvertisementSupported byIn TransitBy Shivani VoraA NEW DESTINATION IN BERMUDAA major project to increase tourism is underway on the island of Bermuda: The Bermuda-based real estate company Morgan’s Point Ltd. announced today its plans for Caroline Bay, a development on the island’s west end with a 79-room Ritz-Carlton Reserve hotel, residences, restaurants, high-end retail shops and a megayacht marina with slips for 77 boats and 21 super yachts. Construction for the project has already started and is expected to be completed in 2018. Morgan’s Point is planning a second phase of development within Caroline Bay that includes a larger hotel, an inner harbor megayacht marina, more residences and a boardwalk.A LOCAL PERSPECTIVE AT ROCCO FORTE HOTELSRocco Forte Hotels wants the guests at its 10 properties to see their destination like a local, and to help make that happen, the brand recently launched Insiders, a program of itineraries created by notable residents in each city. Guests of the hotels will find a package in their rooms with a map of the city along with a guide of suggestions from three locals on their most treasured places to eat, drink and visit. Guests at the Hotel Astoria, St. Petersburg, for example, can read recommendations from Irada Vovnenko, the deputy director of St. Isaac’s Cathedral; she likes early morning walks along Nevsky Prospect, a lunch of sea bass at Astoria Café and walking in the park at Tsarskoye Selo in the suburb of Pushkin. Munich, Frankfurt and London are among other cities where Rocce Forte has properties.A JEWEL TOUR IN RUSSIAAppreciating Russia’s past and present jewelry culture is the focus of a new trip from the art travel company Adventures in Art. Called “Jewels of Russia,” it takes place from May 22 to 26 in St. Petersburg and Moscow and includes a visit to the Fabergé Museum at the Shuvalov Palace in St. Petersburg; in Moscow, travelers get a tour of the imperial crown jewels at the Diamond Fund in the Kremlin, a visit to the workshop of the renowned contemporary jeweler Ilgiz Fazulzyanov and dinner at the home of a prominent jewelry collector. The company’s co-founders, the art specialist Karen Stone Talwar and the jewelry historian Amanda Triossi, will lead the trip. Prices from $7,950 a person.PHOTOGRAPHY IS THE FOCUS FOR LUXURY COLLECTION PROGRAMThe Luxury Collection Hotels & Resorts, a portfolio of more than a 100 high-end properties that is part of Starwood Hotels & Resorts, is collaborating with Leica Camera to lend its guests cameras during their stay. The cameras are available on a first-come, first-serve basis through the concierge and come with a booklet of images by a notable local photographer who shares suggestions on locations to shoot. The French photographer François Fontaine, for example, guides guests of the Prince de Galles in Paris to capture picturesque spots throughout the city such as the art museum Musée Bourdelle. Meanwhile, the New York-based photographer Jillian Guyette encourages guests at the Chatwal to photograph such landmarks as the Chelsea Flower Market. The program is free, and guests get a memory card of their images to take home.BEFORE THE G.O.P. CONVENTION, A NEW HILTON IN CLEVELANDThe Republican National Convention this July is taking place in Cleveland, and one of the host hotels, Hilton Cleveland Downtown, is opening on June 1 — just in time for the event. Located near the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame, the property has 600 rooms, a bar overlooking Lake Erie, underground links to the Cleveland Convention Center and a sleek, modern design.Advertisement