By SHIVANI VORAJUNE 24, 2016
When she was a child, the actress Carla Gugino, 44, best known for her roles in the “Spy Kids” movies and on the television show “Entourage,” accompanied her mother on road trips along the California coast and thought that they were the most exhilarating getaways possible. “There was such a sense of freedom and an adventurous spirit to them,” she said.Her love for road travel remains, and her latest role in the new Showtime series “Roadies,” created by the Oscar-winning director and writer Cameron Crowe, gives her a chance to bring her off-camera passion into her professional life. Ms. Gugino stars as Shelli Anderson, a tour production manager of a successful rock band on a concert tour of the United States.The show chronicles the rock world through the eyes of the backstage workers who put on the concerts; the series premieres on June 26.Following are edited excerpts from a conversation with Ms. Gugino.Q. In “Roadies,” you’re the production manager for a prolific rock band that travels around the country and plays for thousands of fans. Have you gotten a perspective on if the job is as high-pressure as it sounds?AdvertisementA. It is incredibly stressful. You’re basically managing a moving set and have to recreate it in different venues. Concertgoers go to shows to have fun and listen to music, but it takes a lot of magic to make that happen. I went to the Beyoncé concert in L.A. recently and saw it from a completely different perspective because I knew what was involved backstage to create that performance.AdvertisementThe characters in the series move from city to city by bus. In playing your role, what have you learned about traveling in that setting?On one hand, it’s arduous because you’re constantly moving from place to place, and the trips are long and include overnights. But there is a sense of escape and a meditative nature to watching the scenery go by.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Also, you’re living in close quarters with a lot of people so there is a sort of campfire feeling. Someone may pull out a guitar spontaneously and start singing, and everyone joins in.When you’re moving between cities so frequently, as the characters in “Roadies” do, is it possible to get a sense of the local culture?If a concert is for one night only, then no — there is no time. Sometimes a band plays two shows in a city, and in that case, the backstage crew has time the second day to explore.Also, in playing my character, I’ve learned that production managers, like Shelli, get to know a lot about the city’s food scene, even if they’re only there for a day, because the singers have demands. They may want the best fried chicken or B.L.T. in town. Production managers have to know where to get all that and do research in advance to find out.Among the many road trips you’ve taken, which one is the most memorable?The trip I recently took from Austin to Marfa, Texas, [about 430 miles] stands out. It’s a city that’s in the middle of the desert and surreal with its Airstream trailers and tepees.Do you have essentials you take along?A good playlist is a must. It’s usually themed to the vibe of where I am going and has some singalong songs like “Satisfaction” by the Rolling Stones. I also take lots of water, a cooler with a meal and Green & Black’s dark chocolate.A version of this article appears in print on June 26, 2016, on Page TR2 of the New York edition with the headline: Carla Gugino Likes the Freedom of the Open Road.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.