By SHIVANI VORAJAN. 27, 2017
If you’re lesbian, gay, bisexual or transgender, traveling has the potential to be a challenge, said David Rubin, the chief executive of the California travel company DavidTravel. He said L.G.B.T. travelers “may have to contend with discrimination or inadvertent uncomfortable situations when there’re on the road.”Here, Mr. Rubin shares his advice on planning a seamless and satisfying getaway for those who might face some of those challenges.PICK THE RIGHT DESTINATION Some cities are especially welcoming to L.G.B.T. travelers, whether your budget is lavish or shoestring, Mr. Rubin said. “These cities have long histories of diversity, acceptance and creativity,” he said, plus a strong a night life scene. They include New York City, Los Angeles, San Francisco, Montreal, Barcelona, Berlin and Amsterdam. Conversely, travelers should be mindful about public displays of affection when traveling in destinations where their communities aren’t generally well accepted, including Brunei, Ethiopia, Iran and Saudi Arabia.BOOK WITH INTERNATIONAL HOTEL BRANDS Most internationally recognized hotel companies believe that all guests should have the best stay possible. Employees at these brands are trained to engage with a diversity of travelers, asking, for example, if two male or female guests checking into a room together would like one or two beds, rather than assume separate beds are needed. Mr. Rubin recommended brands such as Belmond, Hyatt, Rocco Forte Hotels, Preferred Hotels & Resorts and Oetker Collection.CONSIDER A GROUP TRIP OR A CRUISE Group trips by companies that cater to lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender travelers or attract a diversity of travelers are great options because they can take care of booking for hotel rooms and excursions. Mr. Rubin specifically mentioned HE Travel and Coda International Tours, which both focus on trips for gay men, and Olivia Lesbian Travel, which caters to lesbians. In the mainstream group tour market, Abercrombie & Kent, G Adventures, Insight Vacations and Trafalgar are known for being welcoming to L.G.B.T. travelers. Many cruise and riverboat companies also promote an inclusive culture, including Silversea, Holland America Line and Viking River Cruises.USE A TRAVEL AGENT Mr. Rubin said a knowledgeable agent could help gay travelers handle issues they might not feel comfortable addressing, or may not even know need addressing. For a male couple with a child, for example, an agent can request that the hotel staff not ask the child, “Where is your mommy?” — a not uncommon occurrence, according to Mr. Rubin. An agent can also choose the helpful guides, drivers and hotels and advise clients when it may be safest for them to not be open about their sexual orientation. Find one through the global travel networks Virtuoso.com and AmexTravel.com and the Signature Travel Network, by emailing info@signaturetravelnetwork.com.A version of this article appears in print on January 29, 2017, on Page TR2 of the New York edition with the headline: Advice for Gay and Transgender Travelers.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.