
Where to Go Now By                     
VICTORIA BURNETT

MARCH 15, 2016
Every American dashing to Cuba these days seems to share a goal: to see the island “before we ruin it.”But Havana, the city that awaits a historic visit by President Obama and his family next week, owes many of its charms — from Oldsmobiles to the Hotel Nacional and the sweeping seafront esplanade — to America.Many more Americans may soon follow in the Obama family’s footsteps after it was announced on Tuesday that individuals would be allowed to travel to Cuba for “people to people” educational trips and lift limits on the use of American dollars in transactions with Cuba.Havana, of course, used to be a playground where rich Americans misbehaved in opulent bars and casinos. But Americans were also industrious, building hotels, train stations and elegant mansions as well as ice-making plants, churches and department stores.
                Learn everything you need to know about how to plan a trip to Cuba with coverage from the New York Times Travel section.            “It was really a North American city,” said Elizabeth Newhouse, an American who spent her childhood in Havana and is director of the Cuba project at the Center for International Policy in Washington. “There was every modern convenience. So many artists and celebrities. So many Americans owned businesses.”AdvertisementThanks to its architectural stagnation, Havana is replete with reminders of its shared history with the United States, which, while bitter, was also deep. Here are a few ways to sample our cultural intersection.AdvertisementSip a sundowner on the terrace at the grand, eclectic Hotel Nacional and you’ll have a view of the white-tipped Florida Straits that was once enjoyed by Errol Flynn, Rita Hayworth and Frank Sinatra.The hotel, which opened in 1930, was the work of the architecture firm McKim Mead & White, whose projects included the original Penn Station and the Brooklyn Museum.Rosa Lowinger, a cuban-born art conservator, said that in its heyday it hosted so many Americans — including a famous Mafia gathering reportedly summoned by Lucky Luciano in 1946 — that Cubans called it the “American embassy.”Every Saturday, get travel tips, destination coverage, photos from all over the world and more.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Judging from the hordes of Americans once again crowding the Nacional, it would seem those days are returning, only these days they sport Birkenstocks and baseball caps rather than linen suits.From the Nacional, you can stroll to the waterfront Hotel Habana Riviera, a sleek 1950s modernist resort built for Meyer Lansky by Igor B. Polevitzky, part of the Miami Modern architecture movement.The hotel’s interiors, by the Los Angeles designer Albert Parvin, are largely untouched, down to the credenzas and terrazzo floors.The classic cars that rumble along the Havana streets are a cliché, but they are also rolling pieces of history. You can pick up a gleaming Chevy outside the Hotel Nacional, or book a ride with Nostalgic Car (25 Cuban convertible pesos per hour; 535-295-3842, 537-641-4053) and glide along the Malecón, the seafront road whose construction was started by United States Navy engineers.AdvertisementStop at the twin-columned monument to the American soldiers who died when their battleship, the U.S.S. Maine, was blown up in February 1898. The monument is missing a huge eagle that blew down in a storm in 1926 and now sits in the gardens of the United States ambassador’s gracious Havana residence. A replacement eagle was destroyed by an anti-American mob in 1961.To experience the jalopies as Cubans do, flag down an “almendrón,” the shared taxis that ply avenues like Linea or Avenida 23 in Vedado and charge 0.45 CUC to 0.90 a ride.The American billboards and shop signs are long gone from buildings and sidewalks, but you can still find them in the studio of Kadir López, whose work plays with the themes of politics and memory. Mr. López overlays photographs of mobsters or 1950s cityscapes on salvaged American signs — Coca-Cola, Texaco — creating ghostly images that float over the American logos.Regardless of whether President Obama throws the opening pitch of the exhibition game between the Tampa Bay Rays and a Cuban national team on Tuesday, it will be a highlight for islanders, who are crazy for the game. Before the revolution, the Havana Sugar Kings were the International League Class AAA affiliate of the Cincinnati Reds and the standard of play is still high – hence the exodus of Cuban baseball players to the Major Leagues. If you cannot get a ticket for the Rays game at the Estadio Latinoamericano, head to the Parque Central in Old Havana to observe the gatherings of baseball fanatics who talk pelota year-round.In a city known for its glamour, the Tropicana cabaret was, in the 1940s and 1950s, the fanciest joint in town and the only one run solely by Cubans, rather than the mob, said Ms. Lowinger, author of “Tropicana Nights,” a history of the club.Still, “every American who ever went to Cuba, went there,” she said. Set in a lush garden in the suburb of Marianao, the Tropicana still puts on a Las Vegas-style show complete with women dressed in thongs with chandelier headdresses. It’s not what it once was and it’s packed with tourists, but even today, it’s a reminder of what brought Americans to the island. (Tickets start at 75 CUC and include a bottle of rum and cola to mix with it).If you don’t fancy a three-hour cabaret, Sloppy Joe’s, near the Capitolio, was a Prohibition-era favorite among Americans, including John Wayne and Clark Gable. The bar was restored to its original glory, including a polished, 60-foot bar, and reopened in 2013. You can’t replicate its yesteryear buzz, but a Sloppy Joe (7 CUC) and a cold beer (2.50 CUC) await.A version of this article appears in print on March 20, 2016, on Page TR2 of the New York edition with the headline: How to Sample Americana in Havana.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »