
In Transit By                     
SHIVANI VORA

JUNE 15, 2016
Instead of a stateside getaway for the long July 4 weekend, why not get into a different kind of American spirit by heading to South America?Courtney Regan, a South America specialist at Brownell Travel, an agency in San Francisco, says that in July, the continent offers a variety of trips for every kind of traveler. “You have fabulous skiing this year because there is plenty of snow, or can go hiking or visit wineries,” she said. “And, because it’s not the peak travel season there, the prices are lower, and you’re going to get good value for your money.”Below are six packages to South America bookable over July 4.- Ski trip outfitter PowderQuest has a four-night skiing package in Bariloche, a city in the foothills of the Andes Mountains in Argentina. Travelers can choose to stay at either the three-star Las Marianas hotel in the town of Bariloche or the four-star Pire-Hue Lodge, a ski-in, ski-out property within the nearly 3,000-acre Cerro Catedral ski resort, and also receive four days of lift tickets and airport transfers. Prices are $1,200 a person for the three-star property and $1,400 a person for the four-star.- Viña Vik, an 11,000-acre luxury resort and winery in Millahue, Chile, about a two-hour drive from Santiago airport, has a three-day package over July 4 that includes a guided tour of the winery followed by a tasting; a chocolate and wine pairing class; a horseback riding trip through the surrounding valleys; a half-day of foraging followed by a cooking class with the executive chef Rodrigo Acuña Bravo; a traditional South American barbecue lunch; and a spa treatment. Prices from $730 per person, per day, inclusive of all meals and activities.- The travel company Upscape is offering the Ultimate South America Skiing & Riding Tour: Heli-Ski, Cat Ski & Chile’s Top Resorts, a five-day trip where travelers visit three ski resorts — La Parva, Valle Nevado and Portillo — and also spend a day heli-skiing and at Ski Arpa, a resort where they go cat skiing (they are transported to deep powder in a snowcat). $6,222 a person, inclusive of luxury accommodations, some meals, lift tickets, heli-skiing, cat skiing and ground transportation.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.- The Alto Atacama Desert Lodge & Spa in Chile’s Atacama Desert has a three-night package offered in July, when the days are warm and sunny but the evenings are chilly, where guests can take excursions to flamingo-studded salt flats, lunarlike landscapes of salt mountains and sand dunes, the world’s highest geyser fields and natural hot springs. Come evening, the desert’s clear skies are prime for stargazing. Prices from $1,892 per person, inclusive of ground transportation, lodging, excursions and all meals and beverages.- For active travelers, Mountain Lodges of Peru, a network of eight lodges in Peru, has the five-day Lares Adventure, which includes five daily hikes with a guide that lead to Machu Picchu. The trip takes guests along the Sacred Valley of the Incas and the Lares Trail and includes stops at local villages along the way. Available from June 28 to July 4. Prices from $2,250 a person, inclusive of accommodations and meals at each lodge.- The Belmond Hotel Das Cataratas, inside Iguazu National Park in Brazil and a short walk away from the renowned Iguazu Falls, has the Enjoy Cataratas offer over July 4 where guests who book four nights or more get 25 percent off their room rate. Rates begin at $358 after the discount and include breakfastWe’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »