AdvertisementSupported byCities around the world that are currently trending in the right direction for budget fare hunters, and why you might want to visit them in 2018. By Justin SablichNew routes and cheaper fares from budget carriers are among the factors leading to more options for travelers seeking domestic and international bargains, according to the travel website Hipmunk.“It’s all about supply and demand,” Hipmunk’s chief executive, Adam Goldstein, said. “In this case, demand is in response to things like currency fluctuations, perception of which destinations are hot and supply is determined by factors such as airlines launching new routes or changing what size planes they’re using.”To pinpoint destinations that may be unusually affordable in 2018 compared to a typical year, Hipmunk analyzed the average price for flights leaving from the United States with 2018 departure dates, booked between Jan. 1 and Dec. 13, 2017, and compared it to a similar time frame for flights booked in 2016 with 2017 departure dates.By analyzing the average booking prices for round trips departing from the United States between June 1, 2016 and Nov. 30, 2017, for flights that departed and returned in 2017, Hipmunk was also able to estimate which month is likely to be the most affordable for these same destinations. Mr. Goldstein said he recommends booking your airfare as soon as possible.“Extremely low fares rarely last long,” Mr. Goldstein said. “They’re often a teaser to drum up awareness or P.R., or a sign of a fare war that will end once one of the airlines decides they can’t afford to lose money anymore.”Below are 10 destinations that are currently trending in the right direction for bargain hunters, and why you might want to visit them in 2018. Average 2018 airfare: $737, down 26 percent from 2017.Best Month: January.There’s no better time to check out what some call South America’s “coolest city.” A thriving upscale restaurant scene and expanding transit system make La Paz as attractive as ever. Herbivores should budget for a meal at Ali Pacha, which, along with Noma co-founder Claus Meyer’s Gustu, are highlights of the city’s highly-rated roster of restaurants. Average 2018 airfare: $816, down 24 percent from 2017. Best Month: January. Vietnam’s biggest metropolis has no shortage of energy (or Vespas), and you can indulge in all of the banh xeo, banh khot and canh chua you can handle without putting a dent in your wallet. The coffee culture, featuring countless quirky cafes, is not to be overlooked either. You’ll be reminded why Vietnam is the second largest exporter of coffee in the world. Average 2018 airfare, Bergen: $790, down 16 percent from 2017. Best Month: October.Average 2018 airfare, Oslo: $837, down 9 percent from 2017. Best Month: April.The fjords and waterfalls of Bergen, the second largest city in Norway, draws outdoors-loving tourists. But it’s also a hotbed for New Nordic cuisine and a cultural scene worth exploring. In Oslo, a recently opened waterfront promenade, Havnepromenaden, with its Sorenga Bridge transformed into a pedestrian park, is one of the reasons to get excited about 2018. Once you get your fill of the capital, consider a scenic drive north on Norway’s scenic remote roads to take in some of the country’s architectural wonders.Average 2018 airfare: $866, down 10 percent from 2017. Best Month: March. The virtues of Barcelona are widely known (the food, the architecture, the culture, the everything). But it can also be a pricey experience, which is why 2018’s lower fares should be considered carefully. There are also ways to save money and still engross yourself in the stunning architecture. Various Gaudí exteriors, like Passeig de Gràcia and Casa Milà, are free to view. Average 2018 airfare: $1,748, down 9 percent from 2017. Best Month: August.If you’ve yet to experience Melbourne’s diverse dining and art options, consider taking advantage of the discount. Newer restaurants include Atlas Dining, whose revolving cuisine (the menu changes three times a year) perfectly encapsulates the city’s multicultural dining landscape. Consider Melbourne’s streets and alleys for a free sampling of the urban art that helps make it Australia’s cultural capital.Average 2018 airfare: $250, down 18 percent from 2017. Best Month: January.April 4 will mark the 50th anniversary of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.’s death, and the state of Georgia is commemorating it with the April launch of the Georgia Civil Rights Trail. The trail will connect various notable civil rights sites, including King’s boyhood home in Atlanta. “We expect some people will come to Atlanta for a meeting or convention, and they will seek out sites in the area. Other people who are intrigued by the civil rights movement might plan a trip to experience the whole thing,” Kevin Langston, Georgia’s deputy commissioner for tourism, told The New York Times in November. Average 2018 airfare: $340, down 16 percent from 2017. Best Month: September.You may have missed some notable happenings in San Antonio over the last several years. Its River Walk was expanded to 15 from three miles in 2013, which connected it to five Spanish colonial missions — which, in turn, were named a Unesco World Heritage site in 2015. In addition, the Pearl District, anchored by the Pearl mixed-use space (formerly the Pearl Brewery) loaded with shops and restaurants, continues to grow. And, as always, remember The Alamo. Average 2018 airfare: $475, down 16 percent from 2017. Best Month: August.After being battered by Hurricane Irma, the Florida Keys and its $1.6 billion a year tourism industry are hoping for a major rebound in 2018. While some Duval Street businesses were damaged by flooding, and a handful of Key West businesses remain closed, the island was spared from the more serious damage. And so Key West is ready and willing to have you enjoy its many tropical pleasures. Average 2018 airfare: $347, down 13 percent from 2017. Best Month: August.The Over-the-Rhine district is at the center of Cincinnati’s resurgence. If you like beer, check out the district’s Brewery Heritage Trail, a walking path that connects some of the city’s oldest breweries, some dating to the 19th century. Guided tours are available, but you can also do it with the trail’s audio-guided app. Average 2018 airfare: $363, down 8 percent from 2017. Best Month: August. Not that you ever need additional reasons to visit New Orleans, but it’s celebrating its 300th anniversary in 2018. In the coming year, the city is promising a plethora of special events and the completion of major infrastructure projects, including a makeover of Bourbon Street and an expansion of its streetcar system.  Advertisement