AdvertisementSupported byBy The New York TimesLast week marked the final Frugal Traveler column for Seth Kugel, who has been bargain hunting and globe jumping for us for almost six years. Next week, he passes the baton to Lucas Peterson. In preparation for the handoff, the new columnist interviewed the outgoing one to find out how cheap travel opens up a new world and about the time he got jumped.Lucas Peterson: Why do we value the Frugal Traveler? Is it simply saving money, or is there something else that’s inherently valuable in traveling inexpensively?Seth Kugel: I assume that different readers value the column in different ways. Some come for practical tips, others to be entertained by a guy eating crazy stuff or enduring preposterous discomfort. I try to write for both groups, but my heart is really with a third crowd: those who believe, or at least are open to the argument, that traveling on the cheap can actually mean a better experience.Taxis versus buses, luxury hotels versus guesthouses or hostels, guides versus going solo. I’d argue that each additional dollar you spend puts up barriers between you and the world. The best moments in my travels are virtually always free. Immediately popping to mind: a picnic in a pistachio orchard in Turkey; a day out with an Albanian fisherman; joining a pickup soccer game in Tubingen, Germany (at least until I tore my calf muscle).L.P. Of the places you traveled on assignment, which is the first you’ll return to?S.K. That is a surprisingly difficult question. My most successful trips have depended on individual experiences as much as the place itself. I had a great whiskey-soaked evening with a Swedish farmer I met sitting outside my tent on a random patch of grass during a medieval festival. But rural Sweden isn’t currently calling my name.I’ll say Korea, since I spent only a week there and saw just two tiny slices of the country: the Gangnam neighborhood of Seoul and Jeonju in the south. I’ve had so many Korean-American friends over the years that I was intensely curious to see where their families were from. Also, literally everything I ate there was delicious. Maybe in a past life I was a restaurant critic for a Seoul paper — who got fired for giving rave reviews to every place he visited.L.P. What was the most trouble you got into while on the road, and how did you get out of it (or not)?S.K. The diciest moment was when I got into a brief fistfight at the bus station in Porto Velho, a small, isolated state capital in the Brazilian Amazon. I had arrived at 1 a.m. and was looking for a place to sleep. There was one at a shady hotel near the station, but a taxi driver told me he would take me to a much better one. We agreed on a price, and he proceeded to drive me all over the city in a vain search for an empty room. I finally told him to take me back to the bus station, which he did, and tried to double the price. I refused to pay — we started cursing each other in Portuguese, and I guess I took it too far because he basically jumped me. He was diminutive, but in the time before another driver broke it up he managed to rip my shirt. The resulting article doesn’t mention it, because I probably didn’t want to upset one of my most loyal readers. Hi, Mom.L.P. What are you most proud of about your Frugal tenure? Any favorite columns that come to mind?S.K. Proud may not be the right word, but I’m happy that I never fell into a pattern of whitewashing or glorifying my experiences. So much travel writing makes things seem perfect, which is extraordinarily suspicious, because stuff always goes wrong on the road.My favorite columns are from the times I got sick of the over-documented, over-reviewed world and escaped to places that did not appear in any guidebook or in TripAdvisor and had no tourism infrastructure. I stayed with a cheesemaker and retired farmer in San Juan Teitipac, Mexico; searched for homemade fruit brandy in Mezobereny, Hungary; and hiked 41 miles of isolated coastline in Piauí, Brazil. I hope these pieces made readers question how much they even need the travel industry.L.P. If 2016 Seth could write a letter (or email) to 2010 Seth, what would it say?S.K. I’d probably send a WhatsApp message, not an email, since that’s the primary source of communication in so much of the world today. (Readers should download it before traveling abroad if they expect to keep in touch with new friends in most countries.)But what would I write? First, no matter what your agenda, abandon it as soon as you have a better idea. Find out what’s down that dirt road, talk to the quirky stranger, knock on the door of that house. Draw the line at physical danger, not social awkwardness. Second, consistently making up stories to maintain your anonymity, as travel writing sounds like fun in theory, like you’re a spy, but in fact it’s very stressful. Create a back story that doesn’t require much effort: “I’m taking a year off work to travel.” What work? “Oh, I’m trying not to think about it while I’m away. Hey, what’s down that dirt road?”Advertisement