By LIZETTE ALVAREZMAY 21, 2016
From Maine to Florida, Washington State to Southern California, we are featuring six islands that make for ideal escapes—into the past, into nature, into luxury. Check back each day this week for more.As I lay on my lounge chair watching the egrets preen on the sandbar at low tide, oblivious to my voyeurism, I felt the first tinges of surrender. Abandon did not come without a dogged fight. Life on the mainland — work, traffic, teenage daughters, a ticker-tape of obligations — is an all-consuming, around-the-clock frenzy.But the Florida Keys always offer an escape hatch. They command relaxation, managing somehow to slow the heart rates of even the most incorrigible multitaskers. This is even truer here on Little Palm Island, a private five-acre islet that offers a chandelier-bedecked, thatched-roof luxury resort, a smattering of mischievous key deer and one exhortation: Let it all go.Little Palm Island Resort and Spa nudged me into that mind-set the moment my husband and I arrived at the check-in area and boat landing on Little Torch Key, which is about a 30-minute drive north of Key West. From there, you take a 15-minute boat ride to the islet. The car stayed behind, as did our credit card number (so that we wouldn’t have to think about it again, until the staggering bill arrived — prices range from $890 to $1,700 a night excluding taxes and fees). Then we slipped away, a rum concoction called the Gumby Slumber firmly in hand, aboard the Truman, a wood-paneled boat named for the president who used Little Palm Island as a fishing camp.AdvertisementOn Little Palm, there are no cars and there is no lobby, just a concierge who greeted us on the dock and steered us along sandy mazelike trails to our hut. The first thing I noticed was the silence. No ringtones or chatter (cellphones are strictly banned in public areas). No sports blasting from flat-screens (there is only one television at the resort). No children under 16 (no shouting or whining). With only 30 suites on the property, conversation was scarce, even around the small but inviting freshwater pool and the nearby skinny strand of beach. Tranquillity isn’t expected to make you giddy but it did exactly that as we anticipated the many happily uncluttered hours ahead of us. As a recovering activity freak, I’ve seen the light: Nothingness is bliss.AdvertisementCouples, some well into retirement age, a few just a sprint to their 30s, lay indulgently on lounge chairs under umbrellas, reading from actual paper books or iPads. Many napped, by far the most common pastime here, with genteel drinking coming in a distant second. The well-made cocktails, like the Gumby Slumber, with its shredded coconut, and the mojito, with its watermelon slices and flash of jalapeño, are hard to resist. Soft music — a little Latin jazz, a dip into calypso, a U-turn into New Age — was piped in during the day, none of it designed to rattle the brain.Our elevated thatched-roof hut, where we happily lounged before dinner on our front veranda overlooking the Atlantic, summoned castaway fantasies with its rustic, well-appointed vibe. Memorable flourishes abounded: My last name hung in oversize letters, like Scrabble tiles, near the front door. A small bottle of Champagne in an ice bucket awaited our arrival. A pair of binoculars with a Florida bird guide beckoned, as did the requisite fluffy robes and slippers. In the bathroom was a stand-alone white soaking tub. At bedtime, a handwritten card, with an inspiring quotation, greeted us atop our canopy bed.Every Saturday, get travel tips, destination coverage, photos from all over the world and more.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Nothing beat the hot outdoor shower just outside the bathroom side door, where bamboo reeds shielded me from all living creatures except the trilling birds. The comfy king-size bed surrounded by a gauzy, billowing curtain was a close rival, but the noisy on-again, off-again air-conditioner marred the cult of silence I had gladly succumbed to on the island.My husband, Don, marveled at the incredible service, which anyone paying Little Palm resort prices should expect. When we walked up to the poolside palapa bar to fetch our first round of mojitos, the bartender knew my suite number just by looking at us and without asking for my signature (money feels illusory here; there are literally no transactions. They tally the charges for you). A breakfast of light pancakes and a fluffy omelet was served on our veranda. We felt right at home when a miniature Key deer gazed up at us expectantly, begging for scraps, not unlike our black lab at home.But a few of the deer’s table manners needed polish. At dinner on the beach, one emboldened deer clambered on a table with his two front hooves, spilling wine, clattering plates and prompting a waiter to swat him away with a menu. The two young women at the table sat wide-eyed, too stunned to move.The next morning, I persuaded my lazy husband to trade his lounge chair for a two-person kayak. It was a journey well worth taking, if only to commune with the ibises, great blue herons and cormorants wading in the mangroves — unspoiled Florida at its best.As adept as the island is at lulling you into a kind of tropical reverie, the resort bungles the job of managing its guests’ expectations. In a hotel with only one restaurant option, dinners were a colossal disappointment. For the exorbitant prices — $49 to $68 for an entree — the food should have matched the sumptuous setting: linen-draped tables on the beach, a mesmerizing sunset, lighted torches, a nearby fire pit and, one night, sweet live jazz. After all, the Keys spit out fresh fish like Minnesota manufactures snow banks. And yet the grouper was tasteless. The veal was bland. The Key lime pie was tired. The macaroni and cheese wasn’t quite Stouffer’s.AdvertisementSome former guests posted other complaints online, and most could have been easily defused if the resort’s website was more forthright about the Keys’ imperfections. At sundown, the no-see-ums and mosquitoes race from their mangrove hideaways to begin their own feast. We live in South Florida so we knew to bring insect repellent. But many of the guests were unprepared. A free bottle of repellent in every room with a little warning about the perils of Florida at sunset would temper frustrations.The same goes for what passes for a beach on Little Palm Island. The Keys don’t really have wide, sandy beaches. They have spits of sand surrounded by clear water, but the shore can get mucky pretty fast in stretches. People come here to gaze at the sea, boat, snorkel, fish (all of which the resort offers), and not swim at its beaches. But look at the beach photos on the resort’s website and you are sure to be confounded and disappointed.Despite these failings, the place was excruciating to leave, a common sentiment if the resort’s farewell routine was any indication. Back in the car, which the valet had waiting, we opened our parting gifts: a travel air freshener, a book about the resort, cold bottles of water and a little note of encouragement. “Don’t be sad that it’s over. Be happy that it happened.”If You Go Little Palm Island Resort and Spa, 28500 Overseas Highway, Little Torch Key, Fla.; littlepalmisland.comA version of this article appears in print on May 22, 2016, on Page TR6 of the New York edition with the headline: Resistance Is Futile in the Florida Keys.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.