
In Transit By                     
THE NEW YORK TIMES

MAY 6, 2016
This year marks the 400th anniversary of the death of Miguel de Cervantes, the renowned Spanish writer and author of the enduringly popular “Don Quixote” In commemoration, a new trip to Spain from the travel company Zicasso traces his footsteps from Madrid to La Mancha. The eight-day Miguel de Cervantes 400-Year Tribute Tour begins in Madrid; a Cervantes expert provides background on the author and his works and takes travelers to the convent where he is buried. Visitors also travel to the writer’s hometown, the Unesco World Heritage City of Alcalá de Henares; visit Esquivias, the village where he married and wrote much of the second half of “Don Quixote”; see a live performance of the book at a 17th-century open-air theater in the town of Almagro; and take a cooking class in dishes popular when he was alive such as pipirrana, a Spanish potato salad.Other activities include a tapas tour in Madrid, visits to wineries and a tasting of Spanish brandies. Prices from $4,336 a person, which includes accommodations, seven private tours with a Cervantes guide, all transfers, some meals and numerous activities.SHIVANI VORAMarfa, the small West Texas town with a big art reputation, has a new place to house its culture-seeking travelers, the just-opened Hotel Saint George. The 55-room hotel takes the place, and the name, of an original 1886 property on the site. The new four-story version features minimalist design, all the better to show off its nearly 300-piece contemporary art collection. Sheepskin rugs, white bedding and original paintings by Mark Flood soften the rooms, which overlook the surrounding desert plateau. A bookstore, restaurant and bar are on the ground floor, and this summer the property will open Farmstand, including a diner, taco stand and farmers’ market stalls located across the street, with a pool to be added next year. Rooms start at $195. ELAINE GLUSACA version of this article appears in print on May 8, 2016, on Page TR2 of the New York edition.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »