AdvertisementSupported by5 PlacesBy Lindsey TramutaFor years, Rue Jean-Pierre Timbaud in the 11th Arrondissement, named for a steelworker, unionist and resistance fighter, was known for its dualities — on one end, a rowdy bar scene that attracted college students and young expats, and on the other, a sleepy home for hardware stores and takeout places. Lately, creative galleries, restaurants and independent boutiques, many of which have been opened by neighborhood residents, are tucked among design studios, dining institutions like Astier and the performance art center La Maison des Métallos, transforming the street into a vibrant hash of cultural and culinary destinations.This two-year-old spot, which takes its name from the distance in miles between Paris and Tokyo by plane, is the neighborhood’s first izakaya (an informal Japanese bar with food). And it’s making a determined bid for the street’s smallest restaurant, seating only 14. Diners are within poking distance of the chef Haruka Casters’ matchbook-size open kitchen and can watch as she prepares a simple but skillful menu of small plates that might include seasonal velouté, onigiri with salmon and trout eggs, and fresh salads dressed in sesame vinaigrette. Reservations recommended. 82, rue Jean-Pierre Timbaud; 33-1-73-71-38-12; resto6036.comThe designer Chantal Manoukian’s career has taken her from Isabel Marant to Kookai, but she’s in her creative element at the neo-vintage jewelry boutique and showroom she opened at the end of 2014. Named after the Josephine Baker song “La Petite Tonkinoise,” her collection features repurposed, one-of-a-kind pieces handmade from antique and recycled watch bracelets, beads, brooches and various curiosities discovered at flea markets. 80, rue Jean-Pierre Timbaud; 33-688-48-14-30; latonkinoiseaparis.comSince the end of 2011, this intimate, multibrand boutique has specialized in children’s wear, accessories and a short array of home products, with a focus on small French labels like Blune and Craie. But recently, Sophie Ternard, the owner, began to incorporate her namesake brand of clothing for mother and daughter, sourcing fabrics with vibrant prints. Prices from about 25 euros.50, rue Jean-Pierre Timbaud; 33-9-53-59-96-42; yumestore.comOnce a spacious pharmacy, this art gallery, which opened in 2014, features limited-edition silk-screen prints, illustrations and other graphic arts from French and foreign artists, and regularly hosts private viewings. A cozy cafe nook is in the back of the space, encouraging visitors to slow down and savor the art on the walls and perhaps a slice of artisanal cake while sitting around a large communal table.5, rue Jean-Pierre Timbaud; 33-1-43-55-44-68; slowgalerie.comFor four years, Rose Chalalai Singh’s Thai canteen was the darling of the north Marais and a popular spot for the city’s fashion industry set. Her operation outgrew the tiny kitchen space as she received frequent requests to cater events. Since last June, her just-like-grandma’s cooking has attracted a wider fan base in a roomier home that seats 70, less than 10 minutes from the previous location.4, rue Jean-Pierre Timbaud; 33-1-83-56-55-00; yalamai.comAdvertisement