AdvertisementSupported byFORAGINGBy Elaine GlusacGrafton Street, one of Dublin’s main shopping thoroughfares, is a bustling pedestrian-only attraction, but most of its occupants — other than the homegrown luxury department store Brown Thomas — tend toward international brands like American Apparel, Disney and Ted Baker. One block west of it lies a mix of independent boutiques, cafes and galleries in what is known as the Creative Quarter. Many shops on three parallel streets — Clarendon, William and Drury — feature local designers and artisans. While the district has been a retail area since the 19th century when the George’s Street Arcade, Ireland’s first (and still functioning) shopping center opened, new developments have helped create a concentrated destination for contemporary Irish design.Opened in 2016, Made carries fashion-forward women’s clothes from Irish lines, such as cartoon-illustrated dresses by Electronic Sheep and Victorian ruffle collars by Natalie B. Coleman. One corner is devoted to the nature-inspired jewelry company Chupi. The store is in Powerscourt Centre, a Georgian-era mansion that holds more than 40 shops.59 South William Street, Top Floor; 353-1-555-4644; madedublin.comClare Grennan and Laura Caffrey sell their own jewelry and housewares lines, hot water bottles covered in cable-stitch knits by Ekotree and ceramic brooches from Andrew Ludick, among other goods.41 Drury Street; 353-1-679-8871; irishdesignshop.comTake a shopping break at this restaurant in the Westbury Hotel, which backs up to the Creative Quarter. The Irish-ingredient-focused menu features oysters, Dublin Bay prawns and grass-fed beef, served in a plant-filled room where the windows are often open. Blankets and gin and tonics provide warmth on chilly days.Harry Street; 353-1-646-3352; wilde.ieThis boutique offers vintage-inspired fashion at affordable prices, including its own women’s brand, Circus, characterized by A-line skirts, waist-nipped dresses and flowing blouses in floral, polka dot and geometric fabrics. In the basement, you’ll find the real thing: racks of pretty patterned 1950s housedresses.20 Exchequer Street; 353-1-677-8713; ilovecarousel.comThis inviting shop in Powerscourt Centre features jewelry by its owner, the designer Margaret O’Rourke, including pendant necklaces with nine-karat-gold discs and gold chain drop earrings. Also look for alpaca and silk scarves from Mucros Weavers, based in Killarney, and made-in-Dublin cashmere knits from Eilis Boyle.59 South William Street, Ground Floor; 353-1-707-1763; momuse.ieAdvertisement