By SARAH AMANDOLAREMARCH 27, 2017
Travelers can take advantage of extra savings by booking tours during India’s off-season, and some deals extend to travel beyond summer. Safari parks offer peak wildlife viewing in April and May, while mountainous regions provide respite from the heat in June.On the Go Tours is offering two India tours for the price of one on bookings made by April 15. The discount applies to all India tours fewer than 12 days in length for select departure dates until Dec. 31. Rates range from $768 to $948 per person, with accommodations, breakfast and transfers included. An 11-day Taj and Raj itinerary includes stops at the Taj Mahal and the historic havelis of rural Shekhawati (from $1,785 versus $3,570 for two travelers).Five India tours from Peregrine Adventures are 15 percent off (promo code 30273 by April 15 for travel through Oct. 31). The Essence of South India tour includes two nights in Munnar, a tea-growing region in the Western Ghats mountains (from $2,112). The Rajashthan Revealed tour includes morning and evening safaris at Ranthambore National Park, where tigers emerge in warmer months seeking watering holes (from $2,461). Tours include accommodations, breakfast and transportation.G Adventures has several different land and river cruise tours of India discounted 20 percent to 40 percent. Summer is a good time to visit the mountainous region of Ladakh, where a two-week trekking tour is available in June (from $1,879 versus $2,349). The National Geographic Journeys Ganges River cruise includes a stop in the Unesco-protected Fatehpur Sikri, where 16th-century sandstone monuments and temples from the Mughals’ first planned city still stand ($2,099 versus $3,499). Accommodations, some or all meals, and transportation are included (book by April 30 for departures before August).Intrepid Travel, which became the largest employer of women tour guides in India this year, has several India tours available at a 15 percent discount for select departures in April and May. The Classic Rajasthan itinerary ($1,232) includes a night in a rural property owned by one of Rajasthan’s royal families, and a camel ride in the desert of Pushkar. Trips are 12 to 37 days in length and include accommodations, transportation and some meals. This deal lasts until trips have been filled.Greaves Tours is offering 20 percent off India itineraries for travel between April 1 and Sept. 30. This discount is available only through May for tours that include visits to safari parks, which close for breeding season from mid-June through September. The Family India: The Golden Triangle & Hill Stations of the Northtour includes a sunset visit to the Taj Mahal. There is no booking deadline; travelers must call for prices.A version of this article appears in print on April 2, 2017, on Page TR2 of the New York edition with the headline: Off-Season Discounts.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.