
In Transit By                     
CHARU SURI

MARCH 22, 2016
Hotels are ready to celebrate cherry blossom season.In Japan, where the tradition of sakura, or celebration of the blooms, originated, the Peninsula Tokyo has a Cherry Blossom ceremony that lasts until April 28. The ritual begins with a cup of tea and a pink macaron offered during a gentle foot scrub that is a prelude to an hour and 50-minute body treatment ($350 on weekends). The hotel also displays nine illuminated eight-foot-tall sakura arrangements.Some places offer rooms with views of the blossoms, especially in Washington, D.C. At the Mandarin Oriental, rooms with views of the Tidal Basin and the city’s cherry trees come with two passes on the Odyssey Washington D.C. Cherry Blossom lunch cruise, along with a seasonal welcome amenity, sunscreen and snacks (rates from $495). The hotel’s spa will also introduce qigong, a Chinese holistic practice, on April 1; participants receive instruction in the best physical postures and breathing techniques while strolling through the blossoms (daily at 6 a.m. from $95 a person).As part of the Blossoming Adventures Cherry Blossom package at the Ritz-Carlton, Pentagon City, $50 of the room rate will go toward planting trees on the Tidal Basin in April (rates from $279 a night).At the Ritz-Carlton in Battery Park, New York, a Cherry Blossom package includes overnight accommodations in a guest room with views of the Statue of Liberty, two tickets to the Sakura Matsuri festival at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden, two themed cocktails and recommendations on where to capture the best floral sites in the city ($487 a night).Washington, which received the gift of 3,000 cherry trees from the mayor of Tokyo in 1912, hosts the nation’s largest springtime celebration with visitor numbers reaching 1.5 million in 2015, according to Elliott L. Ferguson, the chief executive of Destination D.C. “We have seen a global increase in visitors for this particular event, which pretty much starts the summer season,” he said in a phone interview.A version of this article appears in print on March 27, 2016, on Page TR2 of the New York edition with the headline: Trending: Hotels Gear Up for Cherry Blossom Season.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »