AdvertisementSupported byIn TransitBy Shivani VoraCRUSADERS AND CULTURE IN ISRAEL Acre is a 4,000-year-old port city in northern Israel that most travelers to the country don’t visit, and to help change that, Uri Buri, the owner of the Efendi Hotel there, has created a four-day culturally focused trip in the city and surrounding region called Acre & Western Galilee and the Crusaders Seminar. As the former capital of the Second Crusader Kingdom, Acre is home to one the world’s largest collections of Crusader-era ruins and artifacts, and travelers get to see these relics through a series of guided tours led by Prof. Efraim Lev, who teaches Jewish history at the University of Haifa. Visits to the Western Galilee Crusader sites of Montfort Castle and Mi’ilya, discussions about medicine during the Crusader period, a belly dance workshop and meals paired with Israeli wines are also part of the itinerary. Prices from $800 per person, per day.AN AUSTRALIA TOUR, FROM REEF TO OPERA HOUSEA new trip to Australia from the travel company Down Under Answers gives travelers the chance to see some of the country’s most iconic destinations and landmarks. The 11-day itinerary begins with five nights at Qualia, an upscale resort on Hamilton Island in the Great Barrier Reef, where guests take a private seaplane ride to scenic Whitehaven Beach. The rest of the trip is in Sydney; accommodations are at the Four Seasons Hotel Sydney, and activities include a small group tour of the city and a performance at the Sydney Opera House by Opera Australia, the country’s official opera company. Prices from $4,899, which includes accommodations, breakfast, a helicopter ride at the Great Barrier Reef, city tour and opera performance in Sydney and transfers. Departures are available throughout the year.HOTEL DINING: COOKING CLASSES, GUEST CHEFS, A RESTAURANT REDOFood news from three hotels:Following a four-month refurbishment, the Peninsula Beverly Hills is reopening its signature restaurant, Belvedere, next week with a new culinary concept and aesthetic. The menu is now Mediterranean-inspired and emphasizes local ingredients and wild-caught seafood; there are more than 50 by-the-glass wine choices, and the design is a combination of French country and contemporary. The eatery also has a large outdoor terrace and a notable collection of artworks from renowned artists such as Robert Indiana.Auden Bistro at the Ritz-Carlton New York, Central Park is starting a monthly dinner series on Thursday called Kitchen Takeover, where a different New York City chef takes over its kitchen for a night. Maria Loi, the owner of the Midtown Manhattan Greek eatery Loi Estiatorio, is the inaugural chef and is serving four courses of Greek specialties like octopus with fava bean purée, eggplant stuffed with feta cheese and ice cream made with her house-made yogurt. The Ritz-Carlton’s sommelier, Marika Vida-Arnold, will offer wine pairings for each of the dishes.The cost is $85 a person, $35 additional a person with wine.Hotel Ändra in downtown Seattle has teamed up with the well-known local hospitality group Tom Douglas Restaurants to open a cooking school at the property called the Hot Stove Society. Classes are held several times a week on a broad range of topics such as doing healthy cleanses, cooking Filipino stews and becoming more adept at food photography; they’re taught by local chefs, writers and other experts. For a full schedule, visit hotstovesociety.com.Advertisement