
In Transit By                     
SANDRA E. GARCIA

FEB. 4, 2016
There is a point at which you may find yourself so at odds with your country — over its policies, its people or other matters — that you no longer want to be a citizen. Which passport should you travel under if you leave? One group has created a solution for such a scenario: the World Passport, which doesn’t explicitly label you as a citizen of any nation.This fringe movement now has one high-profile member. Dante Terrell Smith, best known as the actor and rapper Mos Def and more recently known as Yasiin Bey, was arrested last month at Cape Town International airport after trying to leave the country on the World Passport. He decided against using his United States passport for political reasons, according to his lawyer, Bernard H. Jackson.“He is uncomfortable that the majority of the population is willing to justify the murder of unarmed black youths by law-enforcement agencies,” Mr. Jackson said.And, Mr. Bey said in a video recorded before his arrest, “My country is called earth.”After his arrest, Mr. Bey released an audio message through the musician and rapper Kanye West’s website.Advertisement“I am currently in Cape Town, South Africa, and I am being prevented from leaving the country,” Mr. Bey said in the recording. “Everyone can do the research on the World Passport; it is not fictitious.”AdvertisementBut that doesn’t necessarily mean that the passports are considered a valid form of ID. They are supplied by the World Service Authority, the administrative wing of the World Government of World Citizens in Washington, D.C., which claims that bearing one means you are a world citizen, entitled to human rights as described in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights adopted by the United Nations in 1948.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The World Government was created in 1951 by Garry Davis, who considered himself to be the first world citizen. The philosophy of the World Government, a nonprofit organization, is that boundaries and laws in different countries do not affect human rights. While it may draw some disgruntled U.S. citizens, it says its main mission is to provide license for stateless refugees to travel, according to “The World Is My Country,” a documentary about the World Government in which Martin Sheen praises the founder. The World Government claims that it has more than one million citizens worldwide.“My country is the world,” David Gallup, the organization’s president and general counsel, said in a phone interview. “You have the right to travel through planet earth as a human being unless you want to harm someone.” The group offers examples of passport stamps of scores of governments as proof that it is a valid form of ID when traveling.The United States and South Africa beg to differ.So the South African authorities arrested Mr. Bey when he tried to leave Cape Town on the World Passport and prevented him from boarding a flight to Ethiopia. When he entered the country in November 2015, it was on his United States passport.Mr. Bey is being charged for misrepresenting himself, and having a false identity along with presenting a document not issued by a lawful authority, and aiding and abetting his family’s illegal stay in South Africa.For now Mr. Bey reports twice a day to South African authorities and has a court date on March 8. His family has been ordered to leave South Africa as well. He maintains he did nothing wrong. But even as a citizen of the world, he is subject to South Africa’s laws.A version of this article appears in print on February 14, 2016, on Page TR2 of the New York edition with the headline: Traveling Under No Nation.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »