
Footsteps By                     
NOEL RUBINTON

AUG. 10, 2016
To walk through the streets of Providence, particularly those of the city’s verdant, historic East Side, is to be deep in Lovecraft-land.Though H. P. Lovecraft was not widely appreciated during his prolific but brief writing career in the early 1900s, his love for and connection to his Rhode Island hometown were near absolute. His stock has risen dramatically in the worlds of horror and science fiction literature in recent years, and so has his place as a local hero.When I moved to Providence not long ago, I was drawn to learn more about Lovecraft. It proved a fateful decision, because to know Lovecraft turns out to be a way to know a great deal about the city.Last year was the 125th anniversary of his birth and it’s clear that Lovecraft is more studied and more hip than ever, certainly far more than during his relatively short life (he died at 46 in 1937). More than 2,000 people from around the world came last summer to a four-day NecronomiCon (named after a fictional book Lovecraft created) with more than 100 programs; the next convention is already being planned for Aug. 17 to 20, 2017.AdvertisementThis summer will see the city host the first H. P. Lovecraft Film Festival-Providence Aug. 19 to 21 (the weekend of his birthday), showing short and feature-length films based on his life and work, along with walking tours and Lovecraft-inspired gaming.Lovecraft’s higher visibility has come after a radical reassessment by literary critics. He has gone from an eccentric minor author of fantasy and horror tales for the pulp magazines of the 1920s to one of the seminal figures in the development of the horror and science fiction genres. He is credited as an influence on many writers, including Stephen King and Robert Bloch, best known as the writer of “Psycho.” As Lovecraft’s reputation has grown in recent years, so has the recognition that some of his writing was racist; as a result, the World Fantasy Awards last year stopped using his face as a model for their trophy.In his lifetime, Lovecraft’s work gained little attention. He worked ceaselessly, spending his days and nights writing stories with layered and complicated prose, and he was paid a pittance to rewrite the fiction of others. On top of that, he spent many hours each day writing letters to fans and favorite correspondents. Estimates are that he wrote a staggering 80,000 letters in his lifetime.When he wasn’t writing, Lovecraft was known for taking long walks. His fiction, full of high-styled descriptions based on many Providence places, shows that he must have been looking and thinking hard on those rambles.“As a historian and preservationist, I love how he writes about Providence,” said Sarah Zurier of the Rhode Island Historical Preservation & Heritage Commission as she led a Lovecraft-like walking tour through many of his places. “That’s what he loved to do, go for long walks and show off Providence to his friends.”AdvertisementIt seems fitting to do as much as possible of a modern-day tour through Lovecraft’s historic and architecturally rich Providence on foot, a feat made easier because many of the essential sites are packed into a compact area.A Lovecraftian journey has a brand-new starting place these days, the Lovecraft Arts & Sciences store that opened last summer in the Greek Revival Providence Arcade downtown. Niels-Viggo Hobbs and Carmen Marusich are the proprietors of a shop that is part bookstore (Lovecraft and beyond in horror and science fiction) and part tourist information bureau for Lovecraft pilgrims from around the world.“Providence is a peculiar town,” said Mr. Hobbs, who is also director of NecronomiCon. “It is really embracing of weirdness.”Downtown Providence is not too different now, building-wise, than in Lovecraft’s time. The iron, brick and granite City Hall is the same place where Lovecraft has the main character in his novel “The Case of Charles Dexter Ward” do research.The former Industrial Trust tower — often a character in Lovecraft stories and also called the “Superman Building” because the 26-story skyscraper closely resembles the Daily Planet building Superman leapt over in the television series — has been empty since 2013. Yet it remains a towering presence on the city’s skyline and each night on goes its large beacon, a recurring motif for Lovecraft, including, menacingly, in his “Haunter of the Dark” story.One of the great changes in Providence, helping to fuel its renaissance in the last two decades, happened in the 1990s, when two rivers, the Moshassuck and the Woonasquatucket, were moved and a wide bridge covering a third, the Providence River, was removed, creating a wonderful walkway downtown. (This is the site of the spectacular WaterFire on the rivers many Saturday nights each summer.)11/2 mileRHODEISLANDLadd ObservatoryN. MAIN ST.598 Angell StArea ofdetail454 Angell St6Seekonk R.95Moshassuck R.10 Barnes StCONGDoN ST.SMITH ST.PROSPECT ST.BENEFIT ST.N. MAIN ST.Rhode IslandState HouseBOWEN ST.ProspectTerrace ParkCANAL ST.65 Prospect St.ProvidenceMEETING ST.Fleur-de-LysThe First BaptistChurch in AmericaJohn Hay LibraryWATERMAN ST.RISDMuseumMEMORIAL BLVD.BrownUniversityMarket HouseGEORGE ST.Providence AthenaeumProvidenceCity HallThe ArcadeProvidence R.westminster ST.AUG. 9, 2016
Near the river, Ms. Zurier led me to the Market House, the stately brick landmark built in 1773 and now a classroom building for the Rhode Island School of Design. Lovecraft wrote of the spot in a story: “He liked mostly to reach this point in the late afternoon, when the slanting sunlight touches the Market House and the ancient hill roofs and belfries with gold, and throws magic around the dreaming wharves where Providence Indiamen used to ride at anchor.” The shipping trade is gone, but the late-day natural light show continues, showing off many of Providence’s remarkable buildings.A block up College Hill on majestic Benefit Street, we went to the Providence Athenaeum, an independent library whose origins date back to 1753. It was a place Lovecraft spent many hours, and where his great inspiration, Edgar Allan Poe, had sat before. The Athenaeum welcomes visitors and is home to a bronze bust of Lovecraft. As a child, he had also visited the nearby Rhode Island School of Design Museum, particularly enjoying ancient Greek and Roman artifacts that now share space with more contemporary works.AdvertisementFarther up the hill took us into the picturesque environs of Brown University. Lovecraft dropped out of high school, yet Brown was a center of his universe as he walked among its buildings most of his life. His writing is infused with the results of his prodigious research in its libraries. Sometimes the school is mentioned by name in his work, though more often it is Miskatonic University, Lovecraft’s creation with Brown at its roots.Nearby is Brown’s John Hay Library, the rare book repository whose archives include the largest collection of Lovecraft materials in the world, including original manuscripts, books, magazines, letters and items from his personal library. The library, a center of international research about Lovecraft, also mounts occasional exhibitions about him.Every Saturday, get travel tips, destination coverage, photos from all over the world and more.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Lovecraft was generous in helping many young writers, as his letters show, and Robert Barlow started as a teenage fan and eventually became Lovecraft’s literary executor, donating Lovecraft’s materials to the John Hay. Lovecraft made several trips to visit Barlow in Florida by bus, debunking what for years was a common image of Lovecraft as a sickly person who rarely left home and confined most of his outside activity to nighttime. A broader picture, of a man full of curiosity who loved to travel, has emerged.An exception to his joy of travel and other places was the two-year period he spent living in Brooklyn after he married Sonia Greene at St. Paul’s Chapel in Manhattan in 1924. He raged about New York and its crowds, and returned to Providence alone in 1926, never to live anywhere else again.Providence has embraced him. Next to the John Hay library is a memorial plaque installed for the centennial of his birth in 1990. A sign at the next corner, the intersection of Prospect and Angell streets, declares it H. P. Lovecraft Memorial Square.Nearby, at 65 Prospect Street, is Lovecraft’s last home (though the house was moved a few blocks from College Street, where Lovecraft lived in it). There he wrote “Haunter of the Dark,” the last of his stories. He lived on part of the upper floor of the handsome 1825 house.“Providence was a place of outcasts and independent-minded people,” Ms. Zurier said as we approached Prospect Terrace Park on Congdon Street. Lovecraft was a regular visitor to the park, with its statue of Roger Williams, the nonconformist proponent of religious freedom who started what became Rhode Island. The magnificent view of the State House and downtown gave Lovecraft inspiration. “The vast marble dome of the State House stood out in massive silhouette,” Lovecraft wrote, “its crowning statue haloed fantastically by a break in one of the tinted stratus clouds that barred the flaming sky.”Not far from the park is the house at 10 Barnes Street where Lovecraft was his most productive, from 1926 until 1933, writing his legendary story “The Call of Cthulhu”; “The Shadow Over Innsmouth,” a novella; and more. The burst of energy seemed related to his return to Providence from New York.AdvertisementLovecraft had wide-ranging tastes and loved to say what he hated. The 1885 Fleur-de-Lys, seen as an early and important example of Arts and Crafts architecture in the United States, is back down the hill on Thomas Street. It was an example of something Lovecraft despised. But that didn’t keep him from using it in his fiction, Ms. Zurier pointed out, as it became the home of Henry Anthony Wilcox, a character in “The Call of Cthulhu.” He wrote, “Wilcox still lived alone in the Fleur-de-Lys Building … a hideous Victorian imitation of 17th-century Breton architecture which flaunts its stuccoed front amidst the lovely colonial houses on the ancient hill, and under the very shadow of the finest Georgian steeple in America.”That steeple across the street is of the First Baptist Church in America, built in 1775; Lovecraft liked it despite his lack of interest in religion and despite being kicked out of the Sunday school as a child. You wouldn’t know it for the brightness of the church now, but in Lovecraft’s day it was a gloomy place and was crumbling, which appealed to him. Lovecraft sneaked in once with friends, intending to play “Yes, We Have No Bananas” on the church’s organ, but the organ was locked.Some Lovecraft sites are a little beyond an easy walk, so I rode with Mr. Hobbs of Lovecraft Arts & Sciences.As a preteen, Lovecraft was smitten with astronomy. He got a telescope and made many visits to Brown University’s Ladd Observatory, built in 1891 and still open to the public. “It was a place where Lovecraft’s precocious nature was allowed to develop,” Mr. Hobbs said. “It’s also where he started to consider the cosmos.”We visited a green, nondescript house at 598 Angell Street, where Lovecraft lived from 1904 to 1924 and wrote some of his early stories, working to develop his craft. He also lived there through the hospitalizations and death of both his parents.While preservation has saved three of Lovecraft’s residences in Providence, the house where he was born, at 454 Angell Street, is no more. It was demolished in the early 1960s and replaced with an apartment building, though a stone marker of his birth has recently been installed at the site. “You can imagine how heartbroken Lovecraft would be,” Mr. Hobbs said. But he looked around and, seeing a coffee shop and a bookstore, smiled and said, “He would have liked those.”Mr. Hobbs and I went into Swan Point Cemetery, the beautiful place where Lovecraft is buried along with many of Providence’s best-known citizens, including 23 state governors. Because he died nearly broke, he was buried in a family plot, unmarked for many years until admirers paid for a stone.Lovecraft’s is one of the most visited graves in the cemetery and workers at the gate often meet foreign tourists who struggle with English except to say “Lovecraft.” Offerings frequently adorn his grave, and the day we visited, there were pennies (a visitor said it’s connected to Lovecraft dying penniless), a plant and notes, including one marked with a lipstick kiss. As Mr. Hobbs talked about the regular procession of visitors, a car drove up and two men, off-duty police detectives, got out for a look. One of them said he was a Lovecraft fan and had always been curious to see the grave.AdvertisementLovecraft, like his Providence, has that effect on people. This, after all, is the legacy of a man who wrote a line that became his epitaph: “I am Providence.”Providence has had a boom in accommodations, particularly downtown. For something different there, the Dean has staked its claim as state-of-the-art cool. Fun touches include a karaoke lounge (122 Fountain Street, 401-455-3326;thedeanhotel.com; weekday rates from $149).A pleasant spot on College Hill, in a building that Lovecraft wrote about, is the Old Court Bed & Breakfast, with 10 eclectic rooms (144 Benefit Street, 401-751-2002;oldcourt.com; weekday rates from $155).Providence has become a great restaurant city, and one highlight for dinner is Local 121, in a beautifully restored space (121 Washington Street, 401-274-2121;local121.com).Another is New Rivers, a cozy, romantic spot that specializes in locally grown or made food (7 Steeple Street, 401-751-0350; newriversrestaurant.com).For a simple breakfast or lunch, near Benefit Street and College Hill, Cafe Chokladhas a comforting assortment of pastries, soups and sandwiches (2 Thomas Street, 401-383-4764).A version of this article appears in print on August 14, 2016, on Page TR10 of the New York edition with the headline: A Writer Steeped in the City of His Birth.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »