
Foraging By                     
ROOKSANA HOSSENALLY

SEPT. 29, 2016
A homegrown design scene is emerging in Singapore, which last year celebrated 50 years as an independent state. A smattering of 19th-century buildings from its days as a British colony conjure up images of steamy afternoons of Singapore Sling cocktails and card games at the Raffles Hotel, which its owners named after Stamford Raffles, founder of modern Singapore. But get a taste of Singapore’s cultural mélange by delving into vibrant enclaves like Little India, Chinatown and Arab Town. Look even further and you’ll find local designers setting up shops across the island city-state, increasingly giving this global financial center a reputation as a design hub.This neo-modern clothing brand doesn’t follow trends or seasons. It was established online in 2013 by four Singaporean friends for whom being “in good company” is essential. The brand’s boutique opened in 2015, selling well-designed minimalistic yet classic casual lines for women and children.ION Orchard, 2 Orchard Turn, B1-06; 65-65-09-47-86; ingoodcompany.asiaThis multilabel home decoration boutique was opened by the local graphic designer Leyna Poh last year on Haji Lane, an indie shopping hub with colorful street art and trendy boutiques and bars. The boutique sells affordable cushions and Carrara marble kitchen items, international skin-care products, locally made tea, and delicate Scandinavian stationery, as well as bold graphic posters designed by the owner.76 Haji Lane; no telephone; shopmondaysoff.comDennis Tay’s online business was such a hit that he opened brick and mortar stores offering locally designed home decoration pieces, high-tech gadgets and leather goods. Mr. Tay now has six shops, including this flagship store featuring more than 800 local and international brands.Advertisement2 Handy Road, The Cathay #B1-08; 65-62-52-77-01; naiise.comModern Danish vintage furniture is the focus of this concept shop opened by Marko Dylan Yeo and Tawan Conchonnet in 2013. Though its emphasis is on Danish pieces from the 1940s to the ’70s, including pieces by celebrated furniture designers such as Hans Wegner, it also sells candles as well as ceramics and artwork.Block 65, Ubi Road 1, 03-75 Oxley Bizhub, #03-75; 65-67-02-64-75; nodenhome.comEdwin Low and Mei Ling Lee started Supermama five years ago, but opened this restful space stocked with porcelain and home wares last March. A platform for local designers, the shop commissions and showcases their work.Advertisement265 Beach Road; 65-62-91-19-46; supermama.sgThe Foraging column on Oct. 2, about Singapore, referred incorrectly to Stamford Raffles, founder of modern Singapore. He died before — not after — the Raffles Hotel, named for him, was built.A version of this article appears in print on October 2, 2016, on Page TR11 of the New York edition with the headline: Design Gains a Foothold in a Financial Center.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »