

      By DAVE SEMINARA

DEC. 8, 2016

Venture past Sydney’s Central Business District to where residents live and play, and you’ll discover that the city’s heart is nowhere near the center of town.
Related Article
Sydney is famous for its Opera House, its postcard-perfect beaches and its glorious natural harbor. But these are just small parts of what makes the city one of the world’s great urban centers. Dig into Sydney’s origins as a penal colony to understand what an unlikely success story it is. Mingle at every opportunity with Sydneysiders, who may be the friendliest, most laid-back urbanites on the planet. Turn off your phone and hit up a stranger for directions. Ask a bartender for a lesson in how to speak Australian. Go to a rugby or cricket match and ask your neighbors to recall their favorite win over England. You’re sure to make friends. But to be properly seduced by Sydney and its people, venture past the buttoned-up Central Business District to where residents live and play, and you’ll discover that the city’s heart is nowhere near the center of town.
Explore street view, find things to do in Sydney and sign in to your Google account to save your map.
Start your Greater Sydney experience as newly arriving convicts and immigrants once did, at Q Station, a quarantine station that is now a hotel, restaurant and museum complex. Situated inside Sydney Harbour National Park in Manly, a picturesque beach community a 30-minute ferry ride north of Sydney, Q Station has views and stories in spades. Between 1828 and 1973, more than 15,000 newcomers, along with hundreds of residents suspected of carrying contagious illnesses, were held here at the North Head Quarantine Station. You can learn about this chapter of Australian history at the free museum, on a history or ghost tour, or by staying in the historic hotel. Before you leave, take the North Head scenic drive and stroll along the Fairfax walkway for cliff-top views of the city. Watch surfers kick out over monster waves on Manly Beach and then explore the town’s pedestrian Corso, stopping at Aboriginal Dreamtime, a local gallery that specializes in Aboriginal art. Earn your dinner with a short walk along the wharf to the Manly 16 Foot Skiff Sailing Club, where you can watch the sunset over the harbor on the deck while feasting on Sydney rock oysters (3.5 Australian dollars each; about $2.60), grilled barramundi (32 dollars), or their famous Keralian fish curry (26 dollars). The Four Pines Brewing Company, a second-story brewpub named after Manly’s Norfolk Island pine trees, is easy to miss but hard to leave. Its signature brew is a low carbonation, dry Irish Stout “space beer” that the company claims can be consumed on zero gravity spaceflights, or in their dark, convivial pub, where locals commune at candlelit tables over pints. Like Americans, Aussies aren’t ones to skimp on breakfast, and when in Sydney, neither should you. Start your morning with a selection of newspapers; a strong flat white (3.50 dollars), the Australian take on a cafe latte, invented in Sydney in the 1980s; and a sinfully cakelike chocolate almond croissant (4.50 dollars) — or try a spicy lamb, harrisa and almond sausage roll (5 dollars) — at the Central Baking Depot. In the aftermath of America’s victory in the Revolutionary War, the British needed a new place of exile for convicts and found one in Sydney, some 18 years after Capt. James Cook claimed the continent’s east coast for Britain in 1770. From 1788 until 1868, more than 162,000 convicts were sent to Australia in the largest organized penal transportation scheme in history. More than 50,000 passed through the Hyde Park Barracks, a handsome brick building designed by the architect Francis Greenway, a convict who was pardoned for his fine work. The barracks are home to a fascinating museum that uses multimedia displays to tell the stories of convicts, many forced to endure unimaginable hardships for petty crimes. (If you want to see where those convicted of more serious offenses were sent, take the ferry to Cockatoo Island and rent an audio guide for the walking tour.) Sydney is blessed with walkable suburbs filled with colorful Victorian and Edwardian-era terraced rowhouses. Stroll and eat your way through enclaves like Paddington, Surry Hills, Woollahra, Watson’s Bay, Mosman, Haberfield and Hunter’s Hill. But don’t miss charming and lively Balmain, a historically working-class inner suburb that is now quite fashionable. It takes just 12 minutes to reach the Balmain Wharf by ferry, but if it weren’t for the palm trees, you might believe you’ve parachuted into a prosperous English market town. Head to Darling Street, where you’ll find inviting restaurants and shops, including two well-stocked independent bookstores, Hill of Content and Brays Books. Quaff a pint of Balmain Pilsner and treat yourself to a pub lunch at the Riverview Hotel, a refurbished 19th-century tavern with an eclectic British country menu (lunch, 20 to 25 dollars). The Rocks neighborhood is better known for debauchery than tearooms, but it’s hard to find a more tranquil oasis for a midafternoon break than Tea Cosy, an Irish tea shop in a rambling 1870s rowhouse. Order a pot of Russian Caravan and colonize “Nana’s Corner” room upstairs, where you can spin Perry Como records on a vintage turntable. Once you’ve recharged, download the Walking the Rocks app and enjoy a tour of Sydney’s oldest neighborhood. Glebe is an inner suburb that’s long been a haven for creative types. It has a lively Saturday market; two great bookstores, Sappho Books and Gleebooks; a Cruelty Free Shop for vegans; the Record Crate, a cool record shop that doubles as a bar; and many cafes and restaurants. Once you’ve had enough of shopping, repair to the Friend in Hand Pub, an eccentric watering hole with the friendliest barflies in Sydney. Come before the pub’s mascot — George, a gregarious cockatoo — goes to bed. The culinary maestros who run Thievery, a Lebanese tapas place in Glebe, boast that they “stole their menu from a big-time chef.” But the food and the cocktails seem anything but derivative. Sit on the second-floor patio, overlooking Glebe Point Road, and start with a Baby Got Baklava (Maker’s Mark bourbon, amaretto, lemon, pistachio, honey and pistachio pashmak, a Persian take on cotton candy; 17 dollars). The burnt butter hummus (10 dollars), grilled haloumi (19 dollars) and beef brisket kebab (14 dollars), served with spiced pumpkin, smoked garlic and pickled peppers on roti, are delicious takes on traditional mezze fare. Newtown, a slightly offbeat suburb that brims with energy and revelers (including students from the University of Sydney), is bursting with music venues, watering holes and other places to blow off steam. But on a warm evening, the best attraction is people watching along King Street. Once you’re worn out, take a load off at Mary’s, a renowned burger joint with macabre wall art and a nice beer list, including local favorites like Young Henrys Newtowner and Murray’s Rudeboy Pilsner. Cap your evening at Gelato Messina, with a heaping scoop (4.80 dollars) or two of the “boss’s wife,” an irresistible combination of hazelnut and coffee gelato with white chocolate and hazelnut praline ganache. On Sundays, unlimited rides on any form of public transport — buses, trains, ferries — cost 2.50 dollars with an Opal card. Public ferries are a good way to explore Sydney’s spectacular harbor. Start with the F6, where you’ll disembark at Mosman Bay and take a short bus ride across tony Mosman to the Boathouse for brunch on a deck overlooking idyllic Balmoral Beach. Waiters quite accurately say that their burnt butter and vanilla cakes are “life changers,” and their bacon and egg roll (13 dollars) with barbecue sauce and cherry tomato chile jam is sensory nirvana. Then rent a kayak, pedal boat or stand-up paddleboard on the premises.Sydney is ideal for coastal rambling, and it’s a cheap pleasure to take a ferry to one wharf and walk along the harbor to the next stop or farther afield. The Cremorne Point to Mosman Bay walk, a 1.25-mile ramble, takes you past lovely homes and offers panoramic views of Sydney. If you’re feeling more ambitious, take the F7 ferry to Rose Bay and continue north along the coast for five miles to Watson’s Bay, where you can feast on seafood or take a snooze on the beach.Few tourists venture to the University of Sydney campus, and that’s a shame. Its Gothic Revival quadrangle is a lovely spot for a picnic. Turn up at 2 p.m. on Sundays and you’ll be treated to a free carillon recital, followed by a tour, also free, that takes you inside the clock tower to meet the carillonneur. If you ask politely, you might get to hear the “Game of Thrones” theme.History buffs and those in search of views and solitude will appreciate Q Station’s (North Head Scenic Drive, Manly, http://www.qstation.com.au/) smartly refurbished rooms and historic cottages located inside a nook of the Sydney Harbour National Park in Manly. The grounds, still divided among first, second and third class precincts, as they were when it was the nation’s largest quarantine station, are dotted with historic buildings where guests can pass the time as quarantined migrants once did, playing billiards, table tennis or savoring the views of Sydney Harbour over cups of tea. Rooms start at AUD $160 per night.The recently refurbished Old Clare Hotel (1 Kensington Street, Chippendale, http://www.theoldclarehotel.com.au/) is a stylish, 62-room boutique hotel with a sleek rooftop pool and bar located in the heart of Chippendale, a hip neighborhood with an emerging arts and dining scene.Flight and Hotel information provided by Google.Prices represent a snapshot of low fares and rates for weekend trips.The 36 Hours column last Sunday about Sydney, Australia, misspelled the name of a Sydney suburb. It is Woollahra, not Woolahra.Advertisement