

      By CHARLY WILDER

SEPT. 21, 2017

There has never been a better time to visit the Spanish capital, where the political and economic turmoil of the past decade has helped spur creativity and enterprise.
Related Article
There’s arguably never been a better time to visit Madrid. Prices are still relatively low, but the economic and political turmoil of the past decade has helped spur an outpouring of creativity and enterprise in Spain’s golden capital. Experimentally minded locals have enlivened the city’s aging mercados and turned its derelict factories into thriving art centers. Young culture makers and party people continue to flock to established night life and shopping hubs like Malasaña, even as they invigorate upwardly trending barrios like fashionably chill Conde Duque and multicultural Lavapiés.
Explore the map and find things to do in Madrid.
There’s probably no dish more emblematic of Madrid than the bocadillo de calamares, the simple wedding of crusty baguette and squid fried in olive oil that, when done right, is extremely satisfying. Grab a standing spot at one of the bars at the edges of the grand, arcaded Plaza Mayor to enjoy a classic, under-three-euro (or about $3.60) version of the sandwich, washed down with a caña, or small beer. Or pair an acorn-fed Iberian ham bocadillo with a chilled glass of Champagne — a combination that’s been winning the hearts of local foodies — at Bocadillo de Jamón y Champán in the Alonso Martínez neighborhood.One of Madrid’s most of-the-moment shopping areas is Las Salesas, the leafy downtown neighborhood running from Chueca to Salamanca. The concept store Do Design carries design, fashion and art objects, while quirky Cacto-Cacto carries only, yes, cacti. Check out the elegant, century-old pastry shop La Duquesita Pastelería, which got a smart makeover at the end of 2015, as well as the tiny, three-year-old boutique Jápines (think “Happiness” with a Spanish accent), which the local designer María Beltrán Joyas filled with a tastefully eclectic assortment of accessories, candles, perfume and jewelry, much of it of her own design.One of the best of the recently opened crop of modern tapas bars, Celso y Manolo knows what to update and what to leave alone. This goes for the stylish interior, with its preserved 1950s-era bar and floor tiles, as well as the menu, featuring reworked classics like grilled organic Cantabrian veal ribs with chimichurri (10 euros) or the chuletón de tomate, a luscious layering of avocado, mango, papaya, olive oil and fresh herbs on a half heirloom tomato (10 euros).Some things don’t need updating, like La Venencia, a gorgeously musty, sepia-toned sherry bar frequented by Hemingway that has hardly changed in 70 years. Tipping and taking photos are still strictly forbidden — remnants of the bar’s time as a Republican haunt during the Spanish Civil War — and the only drink on offer is sherry: exquisite, honey-hued and poured from hulking oakwood casks, same as it ever was. Another fetching Madrileño relic, Bar Cock has been open since 1921 in a cavernous former brothel decked out like an English gentlemen’s club. With its well-poured cocktails, pleasantly stagey interior, and whiff of debauchery, it’s easy to see why it’s been a late-night spot for everyone from Frank Sinatra to Pedro Almodóvar to Francis Bacon, who according to bar legend came here for his final martini.After a revitalization campaign in the early aughts, multiethnic Lavapiés, the southern neighborhood once known as a “vertical slum” because of its teeming low-rent tenement blocks, has been transformed into one of Madrid’s hippest neighborhoods. Opened last April in a small red-brick atelier, Pum Pum Café is already popular with bohemian-inflected locals, who flock here weekends for the brunch offerings. Try the “Club Mix”: eggs Benedict with avocado, a fresh croissant, organic granola with fruit and yogurt, a mimosa or fresh-squeezed orange juice and an espresso drink or artisanal pour-over filter coffee, all for 10 euros.One of several vibrant reuse projects in the neighborhood, La Casa Encendida hosts exhibitions, concerts and talks in a grand early-20th-century Neo-Mudéjar building. Down the street, the Mercado de San Fernando, once a traditional covered market, has been transformed into a spirited modern hub where local vendors, artists and chefs hock everything from Andalusian wine to tango lessons to sushi. And see what’s on later at La Tabacalera de Lavapiés, a mixed-use cultural space and social center in a derelict multilevel tobacco factory. Today, the mural-splashed structure houses a bar, library, kitchen, community garden and patio space.No trip to Madrid is complete without a visit to a few of Europe’s most important art museums. With some rigorous time management, you can enjoy much of it without paying a penny. Entry is free on Saturdays from 6 to 8 p.m. at the Prado Museum, with its extensive collection of works by El Greco, Velázquez, Rubens, and above all, Goya (do not miss the astonishing subterranean gallery devoted to his haunting, late Black Paintings), and from 7 to 9 p.m. at the Reina Sofía Museum, home to Picasso’s “Guernica,” among many other masterpieces.It may be a bit of a Madrid cliché, but it’s hard to match sipping a pre-dinner drink while watching the sun set over the city from the panoramic rooftop terrace of the ’20s-era Círculo de Bellas Artes. Entry costs 4 euros, as does a glass of wine or a beer.Since opening last summer in upmarket Salamanca, Amazónico, an opulent jungle-inspired restaurant by the gastronomic power couple behind El Paraguas and Ten con Ten, has become the city’s latest “it” dining spot. Hanging palms, lush jungle prints, and a circular sushi bar topped with exotic fruits and a luminous stuffed peacock — the work of the Catalan interior designer Lázaro Rosa-Violán — create an aptly flamboyant backdrop for Madrid’s fat cats and debutantes, while chef Sandro Silva’s menu travels from his native Brazil to Japan by way of Argentina, India, China and Peru. The result is creations like Hawaiian-style red tuna poke tartare with sesame, pineapple and toasted cashews, and raw scarlet shrimp yarikahua marinated in lime and yuzu with purple corn, in addition to fire-grilled meats and cocktails containing dragon fruit and sambucus flower. Dinner and drinks for two starts around 200 euros.After a decade-long slump, Madrid’s clubbing scene is once again on par with Europe’s best, with a clutch of new under-the-radar venues, like members clubs El Sótano and Cha Chá, that require connections or a bit of hustle to access. The uninitiated might try Goya Social Club, a buzzy Berlin-inspired subterranean venue with a Funktion One sound system (entry, 15 euros), or Sala el Sol, a bastion of “la Movida” movement in the 80s that now plays host every Saturday to one of Madrid’s best electronic music nights (entry 15 euros, including first drink).Whether you’re waking up or just leaving the club, sugar-shock yourself back to life like generations of Madrileños have before you with chocolate con churros — rich, dark hot chocolate and warm deep-fried churros (basically a linear donut) — a specialty served from the green wood-paneled interior of Chocolatería San Ginés since 1894 (a mug of hot chocolate and six churros cost 4 euros).El Rastro, Spain’s largest flea market, has been unfurling across La Latina neighborhood for half a millennium. Named for the trail of blood left by slaughtered cattle on the way to the tanneries, the teeming market offers everything from vintage furs and antiquaria to mismatched silverware, craft items, hand-me-down curios, synthetic flamenco frocks, and midcentury modern furniture. Equally engaging is the crowd, a motley cross-section of locals and visitors walking the great hill of La Ribera de Curtidores, browsing the stalls and clustering around busking gypsy-klezmer bands and sub-Saharan drummers.Walk La Latina until you reach El Imparcial, a restaurant, bar and concept shop in an elegant two-story manor house that once held the offices of the newspaper “El Imparcial.” The 20-euro Sunday brunch includes fresh fruit with yogurt and granola, regional sausage and cheeses, a bread basket with crushed tomato, marmalade and butter, and a main course of your choice with coffee and juice.Set in the central Alonso Martínez neighborhood, Urso Hotel & Spa is a chic boutique property in a restored early 20th-century palace replete with marble stairs, a wrought-iron balustrade and stained-glass windows. Doubles start at 170 euros.Since moving into tony Salamanca at the end of last year, Tótem has quickly become one of Madrid’s most coveted accommodations. Its 1920s-inspired décor features potted palms, blue velvet sofas and a Mediterranean restaurant inspired by F. Scott Fitzgerald’s “The Beautiful and Damned.” Doubles start at 154 euros.Flight and Hotel information provided by Google.Prices represent a snapshot of low fares and rates for weekend trips.Advertisement