By FRANCESCA DONNEROCT. 26, 2017
LONDON — A friend once said London is small. He’s from Los Angeles. And he’s wrong. With nearly nine million people, London is not small, but it can feel that way. It’s a city of villages glued together, with nooks and neighborhoods that make it feel scalable, manageable, sometimes even bite-size.Take Marylebone, for example. Stumble out of the Bond Street Tube station and a two-minute walk north will land you in the midst of dozens of specialty shops, each selling its wares as if big-box retailers and online shopping don’t exist. The area’s elegant pocket of shops and restaurants is wedged between frenetic and frenzied Oxford Street and less-than-quaint Marylebone Road.Bishop Instruments and Bows (2 Hinde Street) sells heartbreakingly beautiful string instruments. “By appointment or chance,” read a plaque by the front door. I took my chances and met Melody Greene, who is in charge of accounting at the shop. The violins were lined up in glass cases, cellos upright by the front window. “It does seem very village-y,” she said of Marylebone. “All the people in the bank know you by name.”Nearby is Paul Rothe & Son (35 Marylebone Lane), which brands itself as a deli but seems more of a jam shop, still going strong in its 117th year. Behind the counter, Paul Rothe worked alongside his son Stephen (the computer expert). To the left of the shop’s door, typed on nine sheets of paper, is the Rothe family history, surprisingly intriguing reading. “Many people don’t know we’re here,” Paul Rothe said, “while others will travel from 20 miles outside of London just to buy a particular type of jam.”Next stop was VV Rouleaux (102 Marylebone Lane), a veritable paradise of ribbons, lace, trims, flounces and frills. “Fluttery butterflies, couture flowers, gorgeous trims … and all manner of bits and bobs,” advertised a hand-painted sign in the stairwell. Fay Erek, whom I found downstairs in the atelier, told me she could offer millinery services with hats starting around £150 (nearly $200).Marylebone High Street offers more of what a Briton might refer to as the “high street brands” — Sweaty Betty (workout clothes), Emma Bridgewater (ultra-British everyday china), Brora (Scottish sweaters). Daunt Books has three levels of volumes, tote bags, cookbooks and greeting cards. And at the northernmost point of Marylebone High Street, a large Conran Shop anchors the end of the neighborhood with modern furniture, chic gifts, books and a dreamy children’s section.Heading the other way, it would be wrong not to make a quick stop in La Fromagerie on Moxon Street, if not for the cheese, then for tiny jars of candied violets, lavender essence and other essentials of a well-stocked larder. The Ginger Pig next door allows you to play the role of Oliver Twist, pressing your nose to the glass of a butcher that trades in sausages and meat pies piled high.Just to the west lies Chiltern Street, where, if you’re on the hunt for a wedding dress or a double-reed instrument, you’ll find yourself in luck. Chiltern has four bridal boutiques (a fifth, Browns, is just around the corner on Hinde Street), as well as Howarth of London, a woodwind shop with a particular focus on bassoons and oboes, and, for rest and relaxation, Cadenhead’s Whisky Shop & Tasting Room.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »