By NORA WALSHOCT. 14, 2017
City or country, jungle or beach, safari or surf? Hotels are taking the decision-making out of travel by offering guests packages that combine different destinations into one vacation.In New York, AKA’sfive all-suite Manhattan hotels have partnered with Richard Gere’s Bedford Post Inn, an eight-room property located on 14 acres an hour outside the city. AKA guests receive perks, including an overnight duffel bag packed with a bottle of house wine, preferred restaurant seating, yoga classes and rooms with fireplaces and terraces (based on availability). AKA rates start at $425 per night and $390 per night at Bedford Post Inn. The AKA hotels book the stays at the Bedford property.Chaa Creek and Naïa Resort and Spa have teamed up to offer a seven-night Belize jungle and beach experience. Guests stay in one of Chaa Creek’s rain forest cottages and explore Maya sites such as the temples of Tikal, ceremonial caves and pyramids. At Naïa Resort and Spa travelers get beachfront accommodations, a day trip to Monkey River, a snorkeling tour and complimentary use of paddle-boards, kayaks and bicycles. The package includes lodging, meals, excursions (with the exception of park fees), a flight between properties, and land transfers for $3,359 per person based on a minimum of two guests.Four Seasons offers a Safari Unplugged package that combines a safari adventure at Four Seasons Safari Lodge Serengeti (full-board rates from $1,315 per night) and a seaside getaway with tree house-inspired villas at Four Seasons Resort Seychelles (rates from $1,300 per night including breakfast). When booking a minimum of three consecutive nights at each property, guests receive a $350 credit to be used at either hotel. Connecting flights, airport transfers and an overnight stay in Arusha or Nairobi are additional costs.A version of this article appears in print on October 22, 2017, on Page TR2 of the New York edition with the headline: Double Your Pleasure.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.