

      By STEPHANIE ROSENBLOOM

MARCH 25, 2016

If you’re the sort of traveler who desires a private pool, a grand piano or seating for 24 in your hotel room, look no further than today’s outrageously outfitted suites— with price tags to match. The prices below are starting rates per day and may change according to season or special events. In some cases, prices will fluctuate depending on currency rates.You can entertain like you’re Gatsby in this five-bedroom penthouse where the living room, with 26-foot-high ceilings, a fireplace and wet bar can be transformed into a ballroom with a grand piano. Designed by Jacques Grange and introduced last year, the more than 12,000-square-foot retreat is spread out over two floors and is billed as the largest hotel penthouse suite in the country. There are six bathrooms (one with a steam room), two powder rooms, two wet bars, four fireplaces, a kitchen, a conservatory, a library lounge, a formal dining room with seating for 24 and a rooftop terrace from which you can see Central Park and the Metropolitan Museum of Art. Who needs East Egg? Themarkhotel­.comWinner of the World’s Leading Hotel Suite category at the World Travel Awards last year, this gold and cream-colored fantasy offers nearly 10,800 square feet. Spa-lovers will be delighted. There are two terraces, including one with a solarium connected to a private spa with a Turkish bath and a Jacuzzi. And along with four bedrooms there’s a kitchenette with Limoges porcelain and French crystal. Wish to be discreet? A “diplomatic entrance” leads directly into the suite. And if you need to mix a little business with pleasure, the suite includes a private meeting room on the eighth floor.Excelsiorhotelgallia­.comIf you were hoping to host a dinner for 12 in your hotel room, this three-bedroom, nearly 10,000-square-foot suite will do the trick. After dessert, everyone can move from  the dining room table and take a dip in  the rooftop plunge pool. The suite is part of Dubai’s Al Habtoor City, which includes three hotels, three residential towers and what is described as a “Las Vegas-style” theater. But why bother leaving the suite? There’s a living room, a study, walk-in dressing areas and a lounge area. And should you require anything — bags unpacked, tour reservations, forgotten toiletries —- you need only ask the butler.Stregisdubai­.comIt’s such a drag when the hotel pool is crowded, isn’t it? There’s no need to reserve a lounge chair if you book this suite. It comes with its own 70-foot outdoor pool framed by frangipani trees. For sun worshipers there are loungers and sofas and views of Lake Pichola. Inside, amid mirror mosaics and marble privacy screens, there’s a dining room, living room, two bedrooms, powder room, as well as three televisions, and, of course, 24-hour butler service. It may be hard to go wrong in any room at Oberoi Udaivilas, though: It took first place in Travel & Leisure’s World’s Best Hotels awards last year, and has a top rating from TripAdvisor users.Oberoihotels­.comNamed for Rudyard Kipling, who is said to have written “The Jungle Book” in the hotel, this suite will warm the hearts of bookworms. There’s a sitting room with floor-to-ceiling windows and a hardwood floor. You can choose a personalized experience, such as a tour of Peter Harrington Rare Books on Dover Street, to go with your stay, or, say, the Bloody Mary master class. This nearly 970-square-foot suite comes with a one-way airport transfer, two half-hour treatments in the Spa, a bottle of Ruinart Champagne, breakfast, as well as the unpacking and packing of your luggage.Roccofortehotels­.com­/hotels-and-resorts/browns-hotelWith ocean and beach views, a wraparound terrace, fire pit, outdoor shower, dining table and a private beach cabana, this penthouse is ideal for those who want to spend most of their time outside. It’s one of the largest in the Caribbean, with 8,000 square feet of indoor and outdoor space, three bedrooms with flat-screen televisions (there are televisions in the bathroom mirrors, too), a cinema room with projector screen, a library, living room, wet bar, butler room, service kitchen, Bose sound system, dedicated concierge and private elevator.Ritzcarlton­.comA trek through Bolivia’s dramatic Cordillera de los Frailes reveals the fantastical culture and art of the indigenous Jalq’a people.AdvertisementA trek through Bolivia’s dramatic Cordillera de los Frailes reveals the fantastical culture and art of the indigenous Jalq’a people.