
In Transit By                     
SHIVANI VORA

JAN. 6, 2016
NEW ORLEANS DRAWS AN ACE HOTELAce Hotel, the Portland, Ore.-based brand known for its eclectic properties, is opening a location in New Orleans on March 14 and is now accepting reservations. The 234-room property is in a 1928 Art Deco building in the city’s warehouse district and has an Art Deco and Dadaist-inspired aesthetic, courtesy of Roman and Williams, the New York-based interior design firm. The James Beard Award-nominated chefs Andy Ticer and Michael Hudman are in charge of a yet-unnamed restaurant where American Southern cuisine is the highlight; the property will also have a branch of Stumptown Coffee Roasters. From $189 a night.A ‘HUNT’ GUIDE FOR BOSTONThe Hunt, the popular series of pocket-size travel books, recently released an edition for Boston. The guide is divided by neighborhoods, like Back Bay, Beacon Hill and Seaport. As with other Hunt books, the content is tightly focused on eating, shopping and activities — a mix of offbeat gems and hip newcomers. $12.The existing Hunt guides are available in two boxed sets: one of Austin, Tex., New Orleans, New York and San Francisco; and the other of Hong Kong, London, New York and Paris. $59.AT ONE&ONLY RESORTS, THE LOOK OF LAIRD HAMILTONLaird Hamilton, the surfer, is teaming up with One&Only Resorts to sell Laird Apparel. A collection of board and fitness shorts, hybrid surf and polo shirts, fitness and studio pants, graphic tees and hoodie jackets will be available this month at One&Only Palmilla in Los Cabos, Mexico, and at other locations, including the Bahamas, Mauritius and Maldives, throughout the year. Prices from $30.AdvertisementGILT TAKES ON TRAVELGilt.com, the online flash sale shopping site, expanded to include travel this week with the introduction of Gilt Travel. The new site is a collaboration with Secret Escapes, a flash sales site for affordable luxury travel, and will feature upscale hotel stays around the world at up to 70 percent off. Sales are posted weekly on Mondays. There will be an average of 30 offers posted at a time.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.NEW RESTAURANTS FROM SARABETH’S, TAILLEVENT — AND JESSICA BIELJessica Biel is going into the restaurant business. The actress and her business partner Estee Stanley are opening the child-friendly, all-day eatery Au Fudge in West Hollywood, Calif., this month. Children will have a spacious area for activities like fingerprinting T-shirts, and adults can choose from a menu that includes coffees, a full range of alcoholic drinks and salads. Fudge, as the name suggests, will also be served.AdvertisementSarabeth’s, the New York-based brand of casual American restaurants and bakeries, is in the midst of an international expansion. Sarabeth Levine, the company’s founder, started the growth in 2012 with a location in Tokyo. She has since opened four more restaurants in Tokyo and Osaka, Japan. Last fall, she opened a restaurant and bakery in Pangyo, South Korea, just outside of Seoul, and in mid-March, she’s set to open in Dubai, United Arab Emirates, at City Walk 2, a new mall in the city center. More Sarabeth’s restaurants are planned for Japan and Taiwan.Three new restaurants are opening this year at the Cosmopolitan of Las Vegas: Beauty & Essex, the popular small plates eatery on Manhattan’s Lower East Side, will have a location within the next few months; Eggslut, an all-day restaurant in Los Angeles emphasizing eggs, will open in the spring; and later in the year, the contemporary Japanese spot Zuma will open at the resort.Taillevent Paris, the family-owned hospitality group behind Le Taillevent in Paris, which has earned two Michelin stars, recently introduced Les 110 de Taillevent London, a wine bar and brasserie in Cavendish Square in London. The casual eatery is open from breakfast through dinner, and serves contemporary and seasonal French dishes and 110 wines by the glass.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »