APRIL 15, 2016
An article last week about airport design that prioritizes lofty architectural vision over comfort, “Airports, Designed for Everyone but the Passenger,” struck a chord with readers, who posted more than 400 comments in response to the piece. Among the many lamenting the awful state of airports were several comments lauding airports that get it right. Edited excerpts from their praise are below.The less architecture the better. The Jackson Hole, Wyo., airport is basically just a flat-top barn. But there are deep-seated leather chairs with ottomans, fake fireplaces and big glass windows looking onto the mountains. There is good free Wi-Fi. It’s almost as good as the local Four Seasons and probably costs much, much less than the “designer” airports. It’s about the only airport where you get angry when they announce your flight is leaving instead of when they announce it isn’t. The new Bangkok airport on the other hand has all the allegedly sophisticated exposed pipes but just looks like a German factory from the 1970s. I talked to a woman who works there. Three years in and she still gets lost.Aurther Phleger Sparks, Nev.Over time I have come to like EWR (Newark). Because the site is very constrained, there is little room for grand architecture. The changes have been incremental and usually for the better: more lanes, more dropoff levels, monorail between the terminals, train service to Manhattan and so on. To my mind these outweigh the many small absurdities that EWR inflicts on the unsuspecting traveler.Some may complain, but at least you never get the feeling that money was squandered on high-concept design while the practicalities went begging.AdvertisementGlobal Charm Near the Pacific OceanDespite the overall quality of design, American airports are lagging drastically behind those elsewhere in the world. I recently traveled to India for work from New York. I flew through New Delhi, Bangalore, Goa and Mumbai. All had beautiful, modern airports. Some may have had the issues described here of seating shortages and no places to lie down. But upon returning to La Guardia Airport, I felt like I was in a third-world country. It was beyond awful. The U.S. needs to get its act together, not just the airport architecture community.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Manish New York, N.Y.You can’t beat the international area at Nadi, Fiji, if you need a comfortable place to rest during a long layover; for example, the eight-hour layover when I fly that route from Australia to the U.S. It is full of these big beat-up old leather sofas that are perfect for lying down and having a nap. (There are usually a number of travelers doing so at any one time.) And when you wake up, there is a cheap curry stand to fill you up before getting on the next flight. The airport may not be modern, but it is as close to bliss as you will find in long-haul air travel.AdvertisementUniversity instructor formerly of N.Y.Changi Airport in Singapore is so pleasant that it’s a tourist destination in itself. And it has real sleeper seats, clean bathrooms, good acoustics, etc. The luggage carousel is a short walk from the gate, and bags arrive very quickly. Passport and customs are properly staffed at all hours so that waiting is minimized. Perhaps there is some reason this kind of airport is possible only in Singapore?Harvey S. Cohen Middletown, N.J.The United terminal at  O’Hare in Chicago has a piano player in the hallway, and it is refreshing. At Incheon in Seoul, there is frequently a band of walking musicians in rich, traditional costumes greeting passengers as they walk by. At least some airports are trying to make traveling a pleasant experience.@PISonny Manhattan, NYCA version of this article appears in print on April 17, 2016, on Page TR11 of the New York edition with the headline: Comments.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.