
Where to Go Now By                     
 MICKEY MEECE
 
JUNE 8, 2016
Fans of Muhammad Ali, the three-time world heavyweight boxing champion who died on June 3, have been flocking to Louisville, Ky., to pay their respects and to learn more about his hometown roots.There are three main attractions, but many other places of interest for visitors, according to Stacey Yates, vice president of marketing communications for the Louisville Convention and Visitors Bureau.The attractions include:The Muhammad Ali Center, part of Museum Row on Main, offers an immersive look at Ali’s boyhood in Louisville, his boxing career and his lifetime humanitarian achievements. Cassius Clay, as he was known then, got his start in boxing at age 12, as the story goes, after his new $60 red and white Schwinn bicycle was stolen, and the police officer he sought out to help find his bike encouraged him to start boxing. A replica of the bike is on display at the Ali Center.“For many,” Ms. Yates said, “it’s a boxing museum. But it really takes you on a journey of his lifetime, from the bicycle to him holding the torch at the 1996 Olympics.”AdvertisementThe center, open since 2007, features 24,000 square feet of interactive exhibits that promote his six core principles (confidence, conviction, dedication, giving, respect and spirituality), a retail store, classrooms, theaters, library and archives. 144 North Sixth Street. Tuesday to Saturday, 9:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. Sunday, noon to 5. Admission: $9, $8 for seniors, $5 for military and students with an ID, $5 for children ages 6 to 12. (alicenter.org)AdvertisementAs a child, Ali lived in West Louisville. His modest home was recently renovated and turned into a museum, Muhammad Ali Childhood Home. A bronze marker in front of the house reads in part: “Cassius Marcellus Clay Jr. was born on Jan. 17, 1942, at Louisville General Hospital. He grew up and lived in this house.” 3302 Grand Avenue. Currently open seven days a week, 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. Admission: $8 for adults and $5 for children. (alichildhoodmuseum.com)Ali’s final resting place is in Cave Hill Cemetery, a scenic 296-acre Victorian-era National Cemetery. He joins other Kentucky icons, including the founder of Kentucky Fried Chicken, Colonel Harland Sanders, and Louisville’s founder, George Rogers Clark. Open seven days a week, 8 a.m. to 4:45 p.m. (cavehillcemetery.com)Mint Julep Tours is introducing a Muhammad Ali Hometown Hero Tour, as a custom package for now, for groups traveling in their own vehicles. It plans to add public tour dates this summer, according to David Nichols, the group’s marketing and social media director. Prices vary depending on the size of the group. (mintjuleptours.com)Other points of interest, Ms. Yates said, include the former Columbia Gym, where Ali first trained as a boxer, now part of Spalding University’s athletics facility. A mural on South Fourth Street reads: “I hated every minute of training but I said, ‘Don’t Quit. Suffer now and live the rest of your life as a champion.’ ”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Central High School, where Cassius Clay graduated in 1960, at 1130 West Chestnut Street, features a photography display.Freedom Hall, 937 Phillips Lane, is where Cassius Clay made his professional boxing debut on Oct. 29, 1960, winning in six rounds against Tunney Hunsaker.A gigantic mural of Ali that hangs on the LG&E building at Third Street and River Road, says, in large letters, “Louisville’s Ali.”The 1920s-era Brown Hotel offers the Muhammad Ali Suite, dedicated by Ali in 2001, which showcases signed memorabilia, photos and boxing gloves. The luxury suite is decorated in gold and black and features a living room with wet bar, dining room with crystal chandelier, mahogany four-poster king bed and master bath with marble Jacuzzi tub. It is available as a one- or two-bedroom suite. 335 West Broadway, rates from $900. (brownhotel.com)We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »