By MASHA GONCHAROVAAPRIL 14, 2016
@evangeiselmanSurfer72,600 followersThis is the second in a series of interviews with the creators of some of the most-followed accounts on Instagram — those who travel for a living, whether it be surfing down the coastline in Chile, organizing a participatory art project in Paris, or orbiting the Earth.The world map section of Evan Geiselman’s Instagram account is a gallery of some of the world’s top surfing destinations. Zoom in on the Pacific Ocean for local spots in Hawaii; scroll across the United States down to the Caribbean for the best waves around the islands; thumb your way across the world down to Australia and find even more destinations for the best swells Down Under. The traveling competitive surfer recently adopted the hashtag #justpassingthrough as another way to keep track of his favorite places. The title comes from a 12-part film series for Reef clothing in which surfers “showcase their adventures in the best waves around the globe,” according to the website, and which will be shown over the course of 2016. His first episode, in Bali, aired last month, and episodes about Mr. Geiselman’s surf trips to France and Portugal will be released later this year.How did you get involved in “Just Passing Through”? I got involved through [one of my sponsors] Reef a little over a year ago. They got me on that hashtag #justpassingthrough, so everywhere I go, I’ll tag the places I’m surfing. I was just in Panama the other day, so I tagged that; it’s a local spot, in case anyone else want to go there and surf those waves. It’s not necessarily the best beaches, it’s just where I was surfing that day. I was in Australia the other day for a contest at Manly Beach. It’s not necessarily the best beach, but it’s where the action was happening that day.Are your travels mostly for surfing, then? I actually don’t think I’ve ever gone anywhere and not surfed, unless it was for a layover.AdvertisementHow do you choose where to go? A lot of it is based on waves, unless it’s already on my schedule, like a contest. Right now I’m at home in Florida, but usually this time of year I’m based out of California. But I’m excited because last night, a swell just popped up in the Caribbean. So I’m going to get a couple filmers and try to link up with some people there.Favorite surf destinations?Every year I try to make it in Indonesia. Bali is really easy for a week, and because everything is really close, all the islands are just a little flight away. That’s always on my list. Tahiti is my favorite place I’ve been to; that was about four years ago. It’s the most beautiful place I’ve ever been, with the most beautiful waves — it’s heaven, really. Teahupo’o is one of the most iconic waves in the world; you can surf these heavy, big barrels. It’s amazing.AdvertisementWhere do you stay when you travel? I like to make connections with the locals, which helps with where I’m staying, so next time I pass through, I can hit them up. But usually for contests, me and three to four guys will group together and get an Airbnb near the contest beach.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.You recently had a pretty rough  experience at Pipeline Beach on the North Shore of Oahu in Hawaii when you were pulled unconscious from the water after a wipeout. Did that affect your outlook on traveling and participating in contests? If anything, it made me appreciate more what I get to do. It really opened my eyes. For a little bit, you feel like, I’m 22 and I get to travel the world, it’s my job — you don’t think stuff like that’s going to happen to you. It was so out of nowhere. So now I look at everything a bit differently, and I just feel blessed and grateful to get out there and find the best waves.How many continents have you surfed? I think nearly all of them. I really can’t think of where I haven’t surfed. I’ve done Africa, Brazil, Central America. … In South Africa, there’s a beach called Bellito that’s great, it’s just such a mission to get over there. West Africa has some crazy waves I’m trying to get to.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.