By NELL McSHANE WULFHARTJULY 22, 2016
This year has been a career-making one for the tennis player Madison Keys. She is ranked No. 11 in the world, won her second Women’s Tennis Association title in June, and will be competing at the Olympics in Rio de Janeiro. Ms. Keys doesn’t do much vacationing, preferring to spend her limited time off with her family. When she does travel for pleasure, she isn’t the type to lounge around.“I love to be outdoors and doing activities,” she said. “I’m not a person who can just go to the beach and then the spa and then the beach again — I’d rather be jet skiing or kayaking or hiking. Or surfing, although right now I can only float on the surfboard; that’s as far as my capabilities go. I don’t ski or snowboard because I’m kind of a klutz, and that’s a bad combination for a tennis player.”One of her favorite destinations is Rome. “Everything is so close to everything else; you can walk from the Trevi Fountain to the Colosseum. Everywhere you look it’s something that’s been there for thousands of years, or an alleyway with window boxes of flowers and cute little cafes. And the food is great. Nutritionists probably don’t love it, but in Rome you have to eat the pasta, maybe some pizza occasionally, and the gelato … your diet kind of goes out the window the whole time you’re there.”When in Rome and not booked in at the tournament hotel, she heads to the Westin Excelsior. “It’s comforting to be somewhere familiar and always get the same service when I’m traveling a few months at a time for tennis. Not a lot of hotels in Rome have gyms, and I work out a lot, so I need to be somewhere with a good gym. It’s where I stay when I’m with my family.”AdvertisementThe other place she loves to go — even though it’s for work — is Australia. “I always do Brisbane, Sydney and Melbourne because that’s where the tennis is. Sydney is so different and cool. It’s a very pretty city, with great restaurants and so many beaches that are easy to get to, like Bondi Beach and Manly Beach. Same with Brisbane and the Gold Coast — beautiful beaches! And whenever I’m in Sydney I love to go to Rockpool, the steakhouse.” Her coffee obsession is well documented on Twitter, and she has a recommendation: “It’s a coffeehouse called Joe Black. It’s off the beaten path, in a weird little alleyway in Sydney, but it has the best coffee.”Here’s what she packs on every trip.Beats headphones. “I always bring my Beats: one pair for working out and the big ones for the plane. I really like listening to music on my phone while reading a magazine or a book.”AdvertisementHand sanitizer(s). “I have an insane amount of Bath & Bodyworks hand sanitizers. Mostly because I have an addiction to Bath & Bodyworks, and they always have ‘buy three, get two free’ sales. So I take, like, four different fragrances and throw them all in my bag.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Rackets. “I always bring tennis rackets on the plane, just in case. I travel with eight rackets, so I grab two and check the rest.”Magazines. “I always buy them at the airport: Cosmo, Glamour, Elle — I love the clothes and the makeup in Elle. And if there are any trashy headlines on, like, People, I usually grab that.”Emergency mascara. “I have a go-to kit that I always take with me. It has moisturizer, perfume, an eye mask, lip gloss, and a mascara just in case. You never know who you’re going to see in an airport! You might need to say, ‘I’ll be right back,’ and run and apply a couple of coats of mascara really quick.”Necklace. “I always wear a necklace when traveling and on the court, and this one was designed by my friend Laura Robson [also a tennis player]. It’s one of a kind and reminds me of the people who support me, which is why I love it.”A version of this article appears in print on July 24, 2016, on Page TR2 of the New York edition with the headline: A Go-To Cosmetics Kit (and Rackets) for Madison Keys.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.