
5 Places By                     
AUDREY HOFFER

SEPT. 7, 2016
North Shaw is popping as a vibrant urban landscape with new shops and restaurants and more in mid-construction. Formerly a 15-acre swath known for gritty streets, parking lots, vacant buildings and chain-link fences, it’s the latest residential, retail and creative hub in the nation’s capital. On warm nights now, crowds pack the outdoor tables of tasteful restaurants on the wide sidewalks near the intersection of Florida Avenue and Eighth Street Northwest; street murals by local artists brighten building facades; and posters promote sumo wrestling and free henna tattoos.This outpost of the San Francisco cyclist lifestyle and work-wear shop opened last October and vibrates with color and whirring sewing machines. Custom messenger bags are made on-site to personal specifications. While the bag is shaped you can pick up socks, caps, wind- and waterproof jackets, clip-on shoes, shirts, shorts and pants to complete your biking outfit.1924 Eighth Street NW; 202-885-9838; chromeindustries.comA nomadic venue in the district for decades, the nonprofit contemporary art organization is now ensconced in 1,400 square feet of white gallery space. The floor-to-ceiling glass facade faces the sidewalk, allowing passers-by to view works by painters, photographers and performance artists. Between Labor Day and Election Day, the spoken-word artist Sheldon Scott is producing a fictitious political campaign, Sheldon for D.C., transforming the gallery into an active campaign office to promote his bid for D.C.’s first minister of culture.2124 Eighth Street NW; 202-234-7103; wpadc.orgOpened last November, this men’s wear store, which takes it name from its owner, a 29-year-old Washingtonian, specializes in custom suits, shirts and trousers. To enhance your comfort during a fitting, employees will hand you a drink from their stock of whiskey.Advertisement1921 Eighth Street NW; 202-733-1913; readwall.comIn March, the husband and wife chefs Tim and Joey Ma opened this Chinese-French fusion restaurant, offering entrees from “on the ground, in the ground, underwater.” Tuck into a meal at a street-side table or in the sleek interior, perhaps starting with the cocktail “If It Ain’t Broke...”1924 Eighth Street NW; 202-525-2383; kyirisandc.comLast fall, the local entrepreneur Theresa Watts moved the women’s apparel shop she named for her Virginia-bred grandmother from around the corner. With its white walls and concrete floor stained golden saffron, the new space and its 18-foot ceilings nicely show off handpicked clothing, much of it from emerging designers.Advertisement1921 Eighth Street NW; 202-332-4242; lettiegooch.comA version of this article appears in print on September 11, 2016, on Page TR6 of the New York edition with the headline: A Creative Hub Takes Hold in Gritty North Shaw.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »