By SHIVANI VORADEC. 4, 2016
Checking into a hotel and sleeping in the same room for your entire stay might be the norm but is undoubtedly routine. Travelers looking for variety can now have it. Some properties are giving their guests a chance to spend a night or more in secluded lodgings.• The upscale Hotel Rosa Alpina in the Dolomites of Italy, for example, has a small cabin at an altitude of 6,000 feet with no electricity or hot water. Guests reach it from the main hotel by hiking, mountain biking or car and arrive in time to catch the sunset. A dinner of grilled meats and vegetables, cheeses and wine — either prepared on their own or with the help of a hotel chef — follows. Prices from 650 euros (about $730) a night, which includes accommodations and dinner with wine.“There is something to be said about getting away from the creature comforts and being surrounded by stillness and stars,” said the hotel’s owner, Hugo Pizzinini.• The Gstaad Palace in Gstaad, in the Swiss Alps, has the Walig Hut, a mountain farmhouse that’s reachable by a two- to three-hour hike. Along the way, guests take in views of the snow-covered peaks and lush green valleys. At the hut they’re greeted by one of the hotel’s chefs, who will cook them dinner. Prices from $1,560 a night with dinner.• At Lion Sands Game Reserve in South Africa, adjacent to Kruger National Park, guests can book Chalkley’s Treehouse, a room on a platform underneath a canopy of stars; once there, they enjoy a sunset aperitif and picnic dinner. Prices from $240 a person, including dinner and drinks.• For a larger group there is Perivolas Hideaway, at Perivolas Lifestyle Houses in Santorini, Greece. The four-bedroom villa is on the nearby island of Therasia and comes with a boat for exploring the area, meals, alcohol, laundry and a staff of five; 70,000 euros a week for eight guests.A version of this article appears in print on December 4, 2016, on Page TR2 of the New York edition with the headline: Cabins and Treehouses.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.