
Bites By                     
ROSE MAURA LORRE

DEC. 9, 2016
Is the name of this restaurant in the Shoreditch area of London a cheeky nod to the neighborhood’s preening see-and-be-seen-ness? Nope. We’re actually talking turkey.Amir and Limor Chen, married partners, opened their casual-cool restaurant in June after experimenting with the bird at a pop-up last fall and, before that, at home for roughly 20 years. “Here in England, you basically have turkey at Christmas and that’s it,” said Mrs. Chen, who hails from Tel Aviv and employs the Eastern Mediterranean flavors to prove it.During a recent visit, turkey (raised free-range in and around East Anglia) appeared in all eight main dishes. (Plans are underway to expand to fish and other meats come January.) The most splendid preparations venture farthest from preconceived notions of poultry, like a savory thigh that’s marinated for 24 hours, slipped into an ovenproof, sous vide pouch and slow-cooked another six to eight hours in a conventional oven. The dark meat separated from the bone at the mere suggestion of cutlery, yet the skin crackled delectably.Schnitzel breaded with crushed matzo, lightly fried and plated alongside a zippy slaw, delivered a bright interpretation of typically staid breast meat. I couldn’t stop eating the pleasantly sticky, cartoonishly large turkey wings, slathered in a surprisingly sweet harissa and honey glaze.However, a turkey pastrami sandwich faltered not for the meat, but for the bread. Though billed as grilled sourdough, it resembled untoasted whole wheat, imparting a sad-desk-lunch feel — disappointing given the restaurant’s airy, courtyard-dinner-party aesthetic.Just as at so many Thanksgiving meals, Strut & Cluck’s best items are its appetizers, almost all of them vegetarian. While we thoroughly enjoyed the starter of lettuce cups filled with hand-pulled turkey, most crowd-pleasing were a seasonal watermelon and feta salad with flavorful notes of fresh mint and roasted pumpkin seeds, and a charred cauliflower topped with pomegranate seeds and served with pomegranate molasses and lemon-zest-infused crème fraîche, a lusty combination. “Right from the outset, this wasn’t just about turkey,” said Mr. Chen. “It was about a way of eating.” That way of eating — friendly yet refined, adventurous yet cozy — deserves more than one meal a year.Strut & Cluck, 151-153 Commercial Street; 44-20-7078-0770; strutandcluck.com. An average meal for two, without drinks or tip, is £50 (about $62).A version of this article appears in print on December 11, 2016, on Page TR11 of the New York edition with the headline: Talking Turkey, in All Its Guises, in Shoreditch.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »