

      By KENNETH R. ROSEN

JUNE 8, 2017

Vineyards, rolling farmland, waterfalls and culturally rich towns surround these 11 sinuous lakes in west-central New York.
Related Article
The roughly 9,000 square miles that surround the 11 sinuous Finger Lakes in west-central New York State are filled with blue hills, rolling farmland and vineyards that produce some of the world’s greatest rieslings. It is an area of charming villages and towns, with historic treasures, including the Women’s Rights National Historical Park, in Seneca Falls. Ithaca, the site of Cornell University, is the jewel in the region’s crown, with plenty of cultural offerings for the weekend traveler. Abutted by the shoreline of Lake Ontario, the Adirondack Mountains and a series of steep cliffs along the Genesee River — over which flow three of the most dramatic waterfalls in the state — the region attracts hikers, boaters, mountain climbers and thrill seekers. Bird-watchers can expect to see wood ducks, scarlet tanagers and pileated woodpeckers in summer. Just don’t try to see the lakes in one day as each offers a distinct and vibrant world all its own.
Explore the map and find things to do in the Finger Lakes region.
The Cornell Botanic Gardens in Ithaca are a treat in the early summer, with marsh marigold and trillium in full bloom at the heart of this 35-acre site. Twelve specialty gardens — among them, the Bioswale Garden with native switch grass and sneezeweed, the Pounder Vegetable Garden and the Heasley Rock Garden — wend their way on a northern fringe of the Ivy League campus. Since the inception of Cornell’s Sage Hall in 1875 — the university’s first dormitory for women, where an arboretum used for botany lessons was constructed — the gardens have grown to accommodate guests seeking specimens from skunk cabbage to the 123 types of rhododendrons in the Bowers Rhododendron Collection. A short drive north, you’ll find a waterfall roughly 30 feet taller than Niagara Falls. Situated in Taughannock Falls State Park, the waterfall is at its most vibrant in early spring, when water plunges over the gorge buttressed by 400-foot cliffs. Admission to the gardens is free. For information on fees for using Taughannock Falls State Park, refer to parks.ny.gov/parks/62/details.aspx.At the heel of Cayuga Lake, Ithaca is a music-filled town. Courtney Love scattered some of the ashes of Kurt Cobain nearby; the School of Music at Ithaca College, which began as a music conservatory, draws symphonic, blues and jazz musicians; and venues like the Dock offer live music. Along the wide pedestrian way through Ithaca Commons in the basement of Autumn Leaves Used Books, Angry Mom Records has a collection of rarities and the just plain weird. Spend an hour in this eclectic music house with its simple milk crate décor, browsing albums by acts like Mars and Do Make Say Think.Though the city’s known for its Bo Burger, a cheeseburger topped with a fried egg, there is plenty of innovation on the culinary scene. At the brick-lined enclave Coltivare, students from the Tompkins Cortland Community College recently served up duck poutine (pan seared with local cheese, $12) and savory elk burger (from Cortland, N.Y., $16) — part of a culinary program that aims to give students learned experience. If you’re up for a short drive back toward the waterfalls, Hazelnut Kitchen offers farm-to-table dining in a quaint setting around a menu inspired by local suppliers. The menu changes weekly, with updates appearing online each day. On a recent day: pirogies with chèvre, caramelized onions, apple butter and whipped potatoes ($23) and cornmeal-crusted haddock ($26). Reserve in advance.Stroll toward a timeless stalwart of Ithaca. Just a Taste offers tapas-style entrees with local wine pairings in a hauntingly cozy entrenchment off the Commons. Sip piquant local ciders, or choose any of the area rieslings or cabernet francs to enjoy with desserts, which recently included warm chocolate soufflé ($6).In the town of Corning, south of Keuka Lake, the Corning Museum of Glass draws visitors from around the region and beyond who come to view items from the museum’s collection of 50,000 glass objects. A new gallery exhibits nearly 50 glass mosaics, created by Louis C. Tiffany between 1890 and 1920. Daily 40-minute workshops and classes with master glass blowers teach visitors the nuances of glassworking and flameworking, including more technical production skills like fusing and sandblasting. Admission: $19.50, free for children 17 and under.Stop by Nickel’s Pit BBQ to pick up slow-smoked classic brisket ($13) or sandwiches like a Cuban ($14) with double-smoked bacon. Take your feast to the foot of the Seneca Lake wine trail, just beyond Watkins Glen State Park. Nearby you will find Rooster Fish Brewing, which offers indoor picnic tables for bring-your-own-grub, and in-house craft seasonal brews. Try the $8 flight of four four-ounce pours and enjoy each pour after for only $2.Keuka Lake, which lends its name to wines across the region, is one of the more picturesque, less-traveled lakes, surrounded by countryside dotted with vineyards, cabins and unobstructed views. At the southernmost tip of the lake, Keuka Oil Company, in the quaint downtown square of Hammondsport, features more than 30 infused olive oils including Parmesan garlic rosemary and cilantro chipotle ($16 each) and a grapeseed oil ($18), extracted by a native of Penn Yan, a village at the northern tip of Keuka Lake.Wine trails and apple orchards for cider production are ubiquitous in the region, as are private car and limousine companies — necessary services for visitors indulging in wine tastings and the like. Most designated drivers run about $35 per hour (Main Street Drivers provides a chauffeur for a minimum of three hours, providing you supply the car; rates vary on weekends), shuttling visitors along winding roads overlooking rippled valleys of vineyards above the lakes. Seneca Lake is the deepest of all the Finger Lakes, at 618 feet, and surrounding it are more than 30 wineries and vineyards. (And to think, the state had only 19 wineries in 1976.) A chalet with a view of Seneca Lake, 80-acre Lakewood Vineyards offers 14 wine varieties, including a very pale gewürztraminer ($15). A five-wine tasting is free with the purchase of a bottle (otherwise the tasting is $3). At Shaw Vineyard a tasting ($5) of dry wines and perhaps the chance to try their Shaw Vin d’Orange, a white wine produced like a red wine that releases an orange color. Snack (feast, really) at the Ravinous Kitchen at Ravine Wines, where a recent wine and food flight (crispy duck egg with mustard aioli, roasted goat’s milk feta with beet crudo, butternut squash mousse, duck confit and wild arugula salad, all paired with house wines) cost $12, and a cheese and charcuterie board cost $12.Snag a coveted reservation at FLX Table, a spinoff from its namesake vineyard, in one of two nightly time slots. The five-course prix fixe ($49) is an intimate experience at a shared table in a dining room situated in front of an open kitchen. Or head over to the Red Dove Tavern. Opened by the husband-and-wife Philadelphia natives Rune Hilt and Giulietta Racciatti in 2007, the bar and restaurant features domestic pub fare in a hip, lively bistro atmosphere. Ask for the Damiani Wine Cellars dry rosé ($9), or go with a local brew like Lucky Hare Cézanne ($5, pint) that pairs well with a dozen clams in a white wine-butter broth ($13.50).In the western fringe of the region, the Genesee River flows through the Grand Canyon of the East (Letchworth State Park), surrounded by 66 miles of hiking, horseback riding, snowmobiling and cross-country skiing trails. This eerily quiet and sequestered part of the state adds to the enchantment of visiting the waterfalls as spring turns to summer. Rise early and soar in a hot-air balloon over the falls at sunrise (book in advance, $285 per ride). Or keep your feet planted, and treat yourself to the collection of rare, out-of-print and occasionally bizarre books at Old Scrolls, a gem of a bookstore in an old farmhouse.You’ve viewed the lakes from the sky and high serpentine roads. Now find yourself skimming across them on one of the tours offered on the Canandaigua Lady, a replica of a 19th-century steamboat (lunch cruises start at $35 for adults, $21 for children). Or rent your own equipment at Canandaigua Sailboarding ($20 for one hour with a double kayak; $7 each additional hour), and paddle off the weekend’s excess.Belhurst Castle, 4069 West Lake Road, Geneva, belhurst.com. Built in 1889, the castle offers 47 accommodations, including cottages, houses and castle lodging (11 are in the castle proper). Rooms start at $145 a night in-season and come with a wine key for free spigot wine.The Chalet of Canandaigua, 3770 State Route 21, South Canandaigua, chaletbandb.com. This private home was converted in 2007 to a bed-and-breakfast with three king-size suites, ranging from $245 to $299 per night and includes a three-course breakfast each morning and dessert each night.The William Henry Miller Inn, 303 North Aurora Street, Ithaca, millerinn.com, was built by Cornell’s first architectural student, Henry Miller. The converted home features Tudor turrets, and is adorned with 19th-century Tiffany stained glass windows. Singles and doubles range from $195 to $280, which includes beverages and meals.Flight and Hotel information provided by Google.Prices represent a snapshot of low fares and rates for weekend trips.The 36 Hours column last Sunday, about the Finger Lakes region in New York, referred incorrectly to admission to Taughannock Falls State Park. While walk-up admission is free, there are fees for vehicle entrance and camping, as well as other use and activity charges; admission is not free.Advertisement