By JAMI ATTENBERGAPRIL 19, 2017
For our first-ever Love issue, we asked four authors to recount times when love and travel intersected in their lives: Alexander Chee writes about a possible betrayal in Spain. Jami Attenberg recalls how a friendship deepened in Sicily (below). Sarah Hepola remembers a road trip — and an uncertain future — in Mexico. And Sloane Crosley looks back at a relationship that took three trips to kill. We also have six writers recounting transformative moments that happened while traveling; a roundup of new hotels and resorts for all kinds of relationships, and a collection of readers’ stories of loves found and lost on the road.We met in Toronto, Viola Di Grado and I. We were attending a literary festival, and I saw her across the room in a crowded hospitality suite at a harborfront hotel, amid all the writers eagerly suckling the free liquor. She was 15 years my junior, an Italian baby goth princess: pin thin, long blond hair, a childlike face, wearing dark eyeliner and a dramatic black Victorian gown. I immediately thought: Her, I must know. We talked briefly and had an instant ease around each other, a major triumph among writers. (Most of us are inherently awkward creatures.) The next day we became friends on Facebook. It is always good to have a new contact in a foreign country, I remember thinking at the time. What more could I expect from this stranger I met for only a few moments?But over the four years that passed since we met, Viola became more than that. Even though we communicated only via the internet, having long, funny, intimate chats, she became a confidante (and, more recently, with my latest book, my Italian translator). I’ve read and loved her novels, which revolve around young, unconventional women who have complicated relationships with reality, and are often otherworldly. My favorite, “Hollow Heart,” is written from the perspective of a ghost, a suicide victim who is haunting the living.AdvertisementViola is, predictably, wise beyond her years; emotionally, I am permanently trapped in my early 30s, so together we make a good friend match. I knew someday we would meet again; it was just a question of when and where.Then, last fall, my Italian publisher arranged a tour for me for my most recent book, starting in Milan and ending at my favorite Italian bookstore, Modusvivendi Libreria, in Palermo in Sicily. Viola is from Catania, on the opposite side of the island, about two and half hours away by bus. She agreed to meet me for two days, with two nights of readings at the store — a long time to spend with someone you have met only for a few minutes. Still, I loved the idea of an emotional adventure, taking a risk. We would see if our brief meeting four years before was a fluke or if our May-December friendship was built to last.I’d been to Palermo before, in 2014, to visit the same bookstore. My time there had been limited to one night and one day, and most of my exploring had involved hunting for street food along its back alleys. Palermo is a highly walkable city, with cobblestone streets that seem eternally damp, and, at least by daylight, safe. A day’s amble there seemed like a fine waste of time at that moment, though I didn’t leave Palermo knowing much more about it than when I had arrived. But now was my chance to get to know the city better.AdvertisementAnd we were off to a fine start as the bookstore had generously arranged for our lodgings in a literary-inspired Airbnb. Bed and Book is a sunny, bright, two-story building with bookshelves full of first editions, and an outdoor seating area where readings and book club discussions are held. Marco, the cool, young proprietor, has a Ph.D. in cultural studies and semiotics, and was writing a book about street and urban art. He even took us on a brief tour of Palermo street art.But Viola was to be my true guide. And Viola had opinions about Palermo, not to mention Italy in general. For me, the best way to get to know a city is the same as with a human being: learn both the flaws and the charms. I cannot fully love something until I know both. To my eye Palermo had seemed like a pretty, crumbling city, perhaps careless in its beauty. Viola saw something else.“It’s a Jackson Pollock painting in city form,” she said over coffee the next morning, before we set out on our adventure for the day. “There is an abstract quality in the structure of its everyday life, in the way cars and people and everything interact, and it’s very violent and unpredictable. Like, you never know, a car could hit you while you’re walking on the sidewalk.”I found this thrilling — not the getting hit by a car part, but the unpredictability. Anything could happen. After 18 years in New York City, I long always for a surprise.Viola suggested we spend our morning visiting the Capuchin Catacombs. We left our lodgings, taking the pedestrian path of the city’s oldest street, Via Vittorio Emanuele, home to many historic buildings as well as beautifully weathered, balconied apartments and tourist shops. We passed the broad and impressive Palermo Cathedral, its many towers softened by the occasional palm tree. And then we walked beneath the Porta Nuova, a triumphal arch that dates to the 1500s, and I felt as if I were leaving one part of the city for another.Until that point, everything had been tall and spacious, a testament, as I always feel in so many European cities, to masculinity. But as we veered up Via Cappuccini toward the catacombs, the streets grew more cluttered, the buildings more humble, the sidewalks more narrow and crowded with garbage and oddly parked vehicles, until we were dodging speeding scooters. Viola was annoyed by the tumult, but I think slightly pleased, too, that her point was proved.And then we arrived at the catacombs, their exterior a plain, graying building with a small plaza and parking lot. Nothing seemed suspect. Heretofore my main understanding of catacombs had been from “The Sound of Music,” in a scene where the von Trapps seek shelter from the Nazis; it was a place where dead bodies were hidden away from innocent eyes. The Palermo catacombs, however, were not made for Technicolor. We entered, and walked down to the depths of the building.Look, I haven’t seen it all, but I’ve seen a lot. And I was definitely not expecting hundreds of mummified corpses hanging in airless, limestone corridors beneath the city streets. I let out a genuine noise of surprise, a mumbled, “Oh my God.” The corpses — 1,252 in total — were all dressed in centuries-old attire. Viola, of course, was delighted by my shock. A gift from one writer friend to another: a genuinely memorable experience, one that could be breathlessly recounted over cocktails for years to come.AdvertisementThe catacombs, first founded in the 16th century as a place to house deceased friars, were the most haunted place I’ve ever been. I sensed a specific energy in the particles in the air; there was a thickness to it, as if they were parting and allowing us in as we moved through the space, pushing us along. Practically every inch of wall space was decorated with a dead body. There was no downtime for the mind. We were fully present with death.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Just when I had gotten over the shock and had grown accustomed to the atmosphere, we approached the cavallo di battaglia, a small child encased in a glass coffin.“This was what I wanted to see,” Viola said excitedly. It was Rosalia Lombardo, the last person to be embalmed in the catacombs. She had died at the age of 2 in 1920. Viola explained that because the child had been embalmed much later than the friars and the rest of the townspeople, a different method had been used on her, which helped to preserve her better. I looked closely. She looked perfectly human, but her skin was purple. There was a small bow in her hair. “That is … no joke,” I said, and held myself steady. A hundred stories blossomed in my head about a purple child sleeping in a glass case forever.There could be no more surprises left, I was certain, but oh, no, there was one more delight waiting for us. For around the corner was a nook of female forms hanging high on the wall, with words painted next to them. Viola translated: “They are virgins, they follow the lamb” — they had kept themselves pure for God. We both smirked. “Why is it the women always have to be the virgins?” I said. “Stuck sexless for eternity, that doesn’t seem fair at all.” Outside I bought a postcard of the virgins, so I could remember them forever. As if there was any chance of forgetting them.“I will take you to eat something good now,” said Viola, as we wormed our way through back streets, clotheslines overhead, passing a small pup watching the world go by in a sunny window, until we found the Pasticceria Cappello, a gleaming bakery overlooking Palermo.We sat outside and ate a slice of setteveli, a seven-layer chocolate hazelnut cake (veli means veils), reportedly invented at the pasticceria. As we ate, Viola told me the most salacious story about the Italian publishing industry — one final surprise — thus sealing our friendship forever. Surprise me and then feed me, that’s all I desire.Cars zoomed by us, precariously close, and we stared at the crooked, gritty facades of buildings in the distance. Yes, there was the chaos of a Pollock painting, but those paintings are gorgeous in their disorder. And Palermo will always be perfect to me no matter what, because that is where I got to spend time with my friend.Jami Attenberg is the author of six books of fiction, including, most recently, “All Grown Up.”A version of this article appears in print on April 23, 2017, on Page TR5 of the New York edition with the headline: Exploring a Town, Nurturing a Friendship.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.