
Heads Up By                     
ROOKSANA HOSSENALLY

SEPT. 27, 2016
Emily Dixon still recalls the horrified reaction of Manchester residents when she told them in the early 2000s that she lived in the Northern Quarter, which had been a dicey industrial pocket in the heart of the city. “They’d say, ‘You live where?!’ ” said the 34-year-old Ms. Dixon, drinking coffee at a wooden table in the housewares/art shop and coffee bar  Fig and Sparrow (figandsparrow.co.uk), which she co-owns. Now an artsy hub of trendy cafes, restaurants, bars and boutiques opened mostly by independent entrepreneurs, the Northern Quarter and its next-door neighbor, Ancoats, are blurring the lines between gentrification and regeneration. Both neighborhoods are seeing revivals as locals have increasingly returned to settle there.Manchester has been in the spotlight for its two Premier League football teams and faded rock and house music scenes. It is also one of Europe’s largest university towns. Even so, the city has long been seen as down-at-the-heels, suffering from gang culture and poverty, especially after the decline of the textile manufacturing industry and the 1996 I.R.A. bombing, which destroyed much of the center. However, with rebuilding over the last 20 years, the city of Manchester is a booming postindustrial metropolis, and the Greater Manchester region is the country’s second most populated area with 2.5 million residents.Young entrepreneurs, with their stylish establishments, have turned around the Northern Quarter, while change is emerging in Ancoats. And breaking the traditional gentrification mold, much of the evolution in these neighborhoods hasn’t fallen into the hands of the big brands. Longtime institutions like Piccadilly Records (piccadillyrecords.com) subsist among the newer spots including Fig and Sparrow. “Our landlord had the choice between us, two independent photographers who were going into business for the first time, and the big retail chain American Apparel. And he chose us,” Ms. Dixon said. “There’s a real consciousness about how this part of Manchester should evolve. The locals put up a real fight for integrity.”What’s missing for many of the area’s habitués are more art and live music venues, but even that is changing. The music space Band on the Wall (bandonthewall.org) recently reopened in the Northern Quarter, and the entrepreneurs Sophie Jarvis and Bryan Regan, both 32, have brought back Stage and Radio, a popular music and dining spot that introduced modern jazz to Manchester in the ’50s (facebook.com/stageandradio), replacing the Cuba Cafe that played Latin music for 18 years. Stage and Radio, as before, will host live bands. The two are also undertaking several privately funded projects in Ancoats, which Mr. Regan described as being previously “dangerous and derelict.”AdvertisementA mural of a multicolored bird on the outskirts of Ancoats acts as a marker of the transformation. The mural, “The Guardian of Ancoats,” by the Brazilian artist Mateus Bailon, was commissioned by the local street art association Cities of Hope (citiesofhope.global) run by James Spencer, 37, and James Mearns, 28, and based nearby at the government-funded Manchester Creative Studio (mcstudio.co.uk). The two-year-old school for youths ages 14 to 19, headed by Peter Ramsay, 45, focuses on the digital creative industries. Here, students are hard at work on Apple computers designing logos for start-ups and learning how to make videos.Farther into Ancoats, deserted streets remain lined with vestiges of old textile mills. As you walk past patches of fenced-up wasteland, a boarded-up pub and renovated red-brick workers’ terraced houses, there’s an almost palpable sense that the Industrial Revolution began here underneath the polished facades.AdvertisementOn Cutting Room Square, one of the renovated facades belongs to the Cutting Room cafe-bar (cuttingroommcr.co.uk), which was the first cafe to open in the area and is owned by Ms. Jarvis and Mr. Regan of Stage and Radio. “There was practically nothing here apart from a load of derelict buildings until the property boom of the last few years,” recalled Ms. Jarvis. “And with all the new flats — about 6,000 people live here already — and offices we were wondering why there wasn’t anything else.”Later this year, the two are set to open Goose Fat & Wild Garlic (facebook.com/goosefatandwildgarlic), an industrial-chic restaurant with an organic farm-to-table focus and brewery.Next door to the site, Jim Morgan, 29, and Kate Wilson, 27, opened Rudy’s (rudyspizza.co.uk) last year. Rooted in Mr. Morgan’s passion for Neapolitan pizza, the simple retro-meets-warehouse restaurant is already packed with locals most lunchtimes. “It’s an exciting place to be in Manchester,” said Mr. Morgan, beaming at the prospects for the area. “And it’s only the beginning.”A version of this article appears in print on October 2, 2016, on Page TR11 of the New York edition with the headline: An Entrepreneurial Spirit Revives 2 Neighborhoods.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »