AdvertisementSupported byCheck InBy Ingrid K. WilliamsFrom 250 euros ($275).The 235-room Excelsior Hotel Gallia officially opened last May after a four-year closure and a complete renovation by the Milanese architect and designer Marco Piva. A modern new wing now rubs shoulders with the hotel’s original belle époque facade, which is still a stunning entryway to the gleaming lobby, awash in polished black marble and futuristic bronze fixtures. Most signs of the landmark property’s sophisticated pedigree have been replaced by state-of-the-art luxuries, but one original feature that was preserved is the beautiful seven-story central staircase that now encircles a mesmerizing cascade of Murano-glass pendant lamps.Across the street from Milano Centrale, Milan’s main train station, the hotel could not be more conveniently located. Milano Centrale’s adjoining metro station, Centrale, serves two of the city’s four subway lines. Numerous buses and trams stop in the immediate vicinity.The premium room that I reserved was the lowest room category, but at check-in I was upgraded, unprompted, to a larger Excelsior Room. The fourth-floor room had an unobstructed view of the neighboring station’s impressive Fascist-era facade. The décor leaned heavily on contemporary Italian design, with velour drapes, mirrored accents and an extra-deep leather love seat that was ideal for lounging in front of the large flat-screen TV. The plush king-size bed was piled with pillows, and a long wooden desk had a panel fitted with outlets for charging every conceivable electronic device.The spacious bathroom, clad in beige marble, had a double vanity, heated floors and a floor-to-ceiling mirror on one wall. A large glassed-in shower, with a bench, had rainfall and hand-held shower heads with powerful water pressure. There was also an extra-long bathtub, a toilet and bidet, plus plenty of towels and a terry-cloth robe.These included free Wi-Fi, bottled water, a large box of chocolates and coffee in the room. The Shiseido Spa Milan is on the sixth and seventh floors. A collaboration with the Japanese beauty brand Shiseido, the spa is one of the city’s largest at more than 10,000 square feet and boasts an indoor pool, Jacuzzi, 24-hour gym, and a series of saunas, treatment and relaxation rooms gussied up with neon lights and unusual elements like shimmering gold paneling. Access is free for guests.The first-floor Gallia Restaurant starts the day with a breakfast buffet augmented by a chef station, while the neighboring Gallia Lounge & Bar offers coffee and light meals all day. On the seventh floor is a new restaurant and bar (not yet open during my visit) called the Terrazza Gallia, which serves trendy cocktails and inventive Italian fare alongside panoramic views. Room service is available around the clock and my breakfast order, which arrived in less than 20 minutes, included granola with natural yogurt (€9); a delicious white omelet with mozzarella, cherry tomatoes and basil (€12); and a basket of pastries including two chocolate-filled cornetti (€10).The Excelsior Hotel Gallia excels in a brand of luxury that lacks personality, but delivers on convenience and comfort.Ingrid K. WilliamsExcelsior Hotel Gallia, Piazza Duca D’Aosta 9; 39-02-67-851; excelsiorhotelgallia­.com.Advertisement