By ELAINE GLUSACJUNE 27, 2016
Run or fight? That is the question prompted by a series of recent animalattacks on humans, including an alligator that dragged a 2-year-old to his death in an Orlando lake last month. And CNN reported recently that a mountain lion in Colorado had attacked a 5-year-old boy, who was saved when his mother pried the child away from the animal.While both of those incidents were rare events, travelers seeking to watch wildlife or spend time in national parks and preserves should keep a safe distance from any animals they encounter, experts say.“You’re safer in a national park than you are in any city if you use respect and allow the animal a comfort zone,” said Jack Hanna, the director emeritus of the Columbus Zoo and Aquarium who has hosted several television series devoted to wildlife.Safe distances depend on the animal. A rattlesnake, he said, can spring a body-length or more from its coil, and should be given at least a six-foot berth. Give an alligator 50 to 60 feet and a bear not less than 30 yards and up to 50 if they have cubs.AdvertisementHow to respond to an encounter with a wild animal depends on which animal it is, as outlined in these species-specific responses to North American wildlife.AdvertisementAlligators are found from North Carolina to Texas but are especially prevalent in Florida where, according to the Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission, they number 1.3 million and populate all 67 counties.“They prefer freshwater lakes and slow-moving rivers and their associated wetlands, but they also can be found in brackish water habitats,” wrote Tammy Sapp, spokeswoman for the commission, in an email.The agency reports that alligator incidents are rare. From 1948 through April 2016, 383 people were bitten. Of those, 23 died.It advises not swimming between dusk and dawn, when the animals are more active. If an alligator does attack, fight back by hitting, kicking or poking it in the eyes. The commission recommends getting immediate medical attention, as alligator bites can result in severe infection.Bears are usually a threat only when surprised or when they are protecting their cubs, situations that can occur when hikers are in remote areas. Rangers at Yellowstone National Park recommend hiking with bear spray, a pepper spray that inhibits a bear’s ability to see, smell or breathe.Every Saturday, get travel tips, destination coverage, photos from all over the world and more.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.To deter surprise encounters, the park recommends avoiding hiking at dawn, dusk or night, and making noise while walking along, such as periodically yelling out “Hey, bear!” especially when encountering blind corners or heading through brush. It also encourages visitors to hike in groups of three or more. Ninety-one percent of people injured by bears in Yellowstone since 1970 were hiking alone or with just one companion.If you do encounter a bear at a distance, slowly back away. If you surprise one, do not run, as it may trigger a chase response from the animal. Slowly retreat, drawing your bear spray. If the bear charges, stand your ground and begin spraying it when it is 30 to 60 feet away. Only when it makes contact should you play dead to show that you are not a threat.AdvertisementFighting back during an attack only makes it worse. According to park statistics dating to 1970, those who fought back sustained very severe injuries 80 percent of the time. Those who remained passive received only minor injuries 75 percent of the time.The advice holds for black and brown bears. “Black bear are more carnivorous than a grizzly,” Mr. Hanna said.He survived his own encounter with a mother grizzly and two cubs on a hiking trail in Montana six years ago. By backing away, he and a group of hikers successfully escaped two bears. One cub, however, charged, forcing Mr. Hanna to use his bear spray, after which the animal fled. “As a human being you want to run like hell, but if you run you won’t make it,” he said.According to the nonprofit Mountain Lion Foundation, which is devoted to protecting the cats and their habitats, mountain lions are generally found in 14 Western states. Because they are solitary and hard to spot, population estimates are difficult, though the foundation believes there are fewer than 30,000 in the country.“I’ve seen one three times in 40 years of being in the mountains,” said Mr. Hanna, who has a home in Montana. “The mountain lion is one of the most elusive cats in the wild.”He said attacks are extremely rare, “and when they do hurt people it’s when they’re injured or older. That’s like a needle in a haystack.”Avoid hiking alone, or take bear or pepper spray along. If you are attacked, according to the Mountain Lion Foundation, do not run, but stand tall and open your coat or raise your arms to look big. Maintain eye contact, slowly wave your arms, speak firmly and throw items at the mountain lion if necessary. Normally, the cat will move on.Shark attacks are on the rise, according to the International Shark Attack File at the University of Florida, which tracks incidents worldwide. There were 98 shark attacks in 2015, surpassing the previous record of 88 set in 2000. Of those, the largest share, 59, took place in the United States.To prevent a shark attack, the university research center recommends not swimming at dawn, dusk or night; not swimming where people are fishing, where fish are schooling or where seabirds are feeding; and not wearing shiny jewelry in the water.AdvertisementIf you are attacked by a shark, pound it on the nose and scratch at its eyes and gills.A version of this article appears in print on July 10, 2016, on Page TR2 of the New York edition with the headline: What to Do When a Wild Animal Attacks.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.