
Next Stop By                     
DANIELLE PERGAMENT

JULY 12, 2016
There is an island so perfect — the skies so blue, the beaches so smooth, the water so tranquil — that the seaweed off its shores is protected by Unesco. People travel from near and far to lounge on these shores, to swim in these waters, perhaps to break up the day with a plate of fresh fish, still briny from the sea and shiny with olive oil. This island is made for people who embrace the beach like an old friend, for people who would brave hardship for homemade pasta, for people who make vacationing well their life’s mission.This island is made for Italians.But Formentera is, in fact, one of the Balearic Islands of Spain, a good 600 miles from the coast of mainland Italy. It’s also just hard enough to get to (from New York, two planes and a boat) that if you tell someone you’re going there, you’ll most likely need a follow-up line, like, “It’s in the Mediterranean,” or “It’s just below Ibiza.” But it also happens to become, for a few months, the extra-national home of Italian beachgoers. Go there in the summertime, and you will experience a fusion of two of the most sun-and-olive-oil worshiping cultures in Europe: the Italians and the Spanish. Formentera is, I would soon learn, an island given to man-buns, mopeds and melanoma.Don’t be misled by its proximity to Ibiza. While Formentera is only about a dozen miles off the southern coast of that famous celebrity stomping ground, the foam parties and ooonz-ooonz club beats of Ibiza might as well be a million miles away. (In recent years, Formentera has gone so far as to impose major restrictions on night life, limiting how many people can gather in one place and how late a bar can play music.)Like so many summer destinations, Formentera fills to bursting in the warmer months, swelling from 12,500 local inhabitants year-round to over 45,000 in August. Seventy percent of the island is protected from developers, and there hasn’t been a major new hotel structure for 35 years. Said one local, “We do not want to become Majorca or Ibiza.”AdvertisementThis beautiful, unassuming spit of sand — about 30 square miles — is not without a formidable history. Formentera was colonized over 4,000 years ago. It has been occupied by Arabs, Romans, Vandals, Moors, Byzantines and pirates, until it eventually became Spanish territory. During the Spanish Civil War, left-leaning Formentera came under heavy fighting; during that time, the island had a concentration camp for political dissidents. In the 1960s, Formentera became a haven for bohemian Europeans.In the mid-1990s, Italians really took notice of the island. “We realized we had the Caribbean a couple of hours away from Italy,” Jonathan Di Segni, a native Milanese who has been living in Formentera since 2003, told me when I visited with my family last summer. “Of course, once the Italian football players started coming here, everyone wanted to come.”AdvertisementFormentera has been a favorite destination of Italy’s soccer (a.k.a. football) players for years. “It’s beautiful, it’s fun, it’s close to Italy, we love everything about it,” Cristian Brocchi, the coach of AC Milan, told me on the phone. “I’ve been coming here for 15 years. It’s true that it’s more popular today, but Formentera doesn’t change — this is the best part about it.” (One Roman woman on the island likened her country’s obsession with their athletes to lemmings: “We would jump off the cliff right behind them.”)A few days into our trip I had lunch with Claudia Bordino, owner of Casa Y Entorno Inmobiliaria, a local real estate agency. Ms. Bordino, an Italian expat, and I were sharing pizza margherita at Panperfocaccia, an open-air trattoria in the port town of La Savina. “Most Italians take their first vacation in Spain, so it holds a special place in our hearts,” she said. “Italians love the Spanish — we love the language, we love the culture. And the Spanish love a good party; in that way they are more fun than the French.”The island itself is mostly sandy, and rocky, with a good portion given over to salt flats. It’s the driest place on earth — or at least the driest place I’ve ever been. When the kids and I hung out our laundry, dripping wet, in the morning, it was crunchy and stiff in an hour. After a couple of days, my skin felt rougher, and small flecks of salt started collecting in the cracks of my knuckles. It’s a climate perfectly suited to the island’s primary inhabitants — bright green lizards that scatter over the parched landscape, scampering from one prickly bush to another whenever we walked past.Formentera is full of caves to explore, Instagram-friendly lighthouses, classically Mediterranean white stone villages, and mopeds zipping around. But the real action is at the beach.FRANCEBarcelonaS’EspalmadorSPAINMINORCAMAJORCAIBIZAFormenteraLa SavinaEs PujolsSant Francesc XavierLucky BarFormenteraMediterranean Sea2 milesJULY 12, 2016
Early into our trip, we went to Playa de Migjorn (Lucky Beach), a stretch of sand on the southern side of the island, nicknamed for a beloved seaside restaurant shack that serves homemade pasta, bresaola, aperitivi, and “music that is really something not to be missed,” in the words of Davide Busi, one of the owners of Lucky Bar. “We combine the best of Italy with the best of Spain — figs and mozzarella and Ibérico ham,” said Mr. Busi, who is originally from Bologna.A few days later, we discovered Playa de Illetes (pronounced ee-YAY-tes) — a flat, gentle expanse of beach perfectly tailored for children, sunbathers and anyone who likes her waves no more than eight inches high. Walk out into the water a few feet — or a few hundred — and you will notice the water around Formentera is startlingly clear. It’s like walking through liquid air.AdvertisementAnd then there’s that seaweed — actually a sea grass. “It is called Posidonia,” said Carlos Bernús Blanch, manager of the ministry of tourism for Formentera. “It’s 100,000 years old, this seaweed. In 1999, it was protected by Unesco, and it only grows in the Mediterranean.” (Other reports have it as old as 200,000 years, possibly making it the oldest living organism on earth.)“One square meter of this seaweed gives more oxygen than one square meter of the Amazon rain forest,” he added. “And the biggest concentration of it is right here between Ibiza and Formentera.”Posidonia itself isn’t much to look at — my children thought it was shredded newspaper. But our maiden trip to Illetes also revealed another one of Formentera’s trademark characteristics: Sunscreen is not a booming industry here.The beach was teeming with glistening brown bodies; towels rotated toward the ultraviolet light like a field of sunflowers. Running around the sunbathers were the children — shaggy-haired, barely dressed in skimpy bathing suits, skin the color of mahogany, all calling to each other in Italian.My children, on the other hand, were dressed as if sunlight were their mortal enemy: wide-brim sun hats, long-sleeve rash guards, board shorts to their ankles. I had already covered the only exposed skin — the tops of their feet and the backs of their hands — with a thick white paste of sunscreen.We stood on the beach, Puritans at Woodstock, and gazed longingly at the Italian families. I asked my children to help me set up our umbrella.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.There are plenty of ways to test the outer limits of one’s melanin on the island. For one thing, because of its place on the far reaches of the Spanish time zone, the Formentera sun sets after 9 p.m. There are typically over 300 days of sunshine here, not to mention a handful of nude beaches, a fact of which we were unaware — until we weren’t.“Mommy?” My son squinted up at me.“Yes, sweetheart?”“I sure hope that man has sunscreen on his penis.”It was time for lunch.We headed into the main town of Sant Francesc Xavier for wine, pasta and a respite from the blazing sun. We found a table under the canopy of a fig tree at El Gioviale Café & Restaurant, a trattoria run by Matteo and Francesco Trecca and Giulia Tulli, three Italians who brought recipes from the old country when they moved to Formentera a few years ago.Advertisement“Our mother taught us how to make proper Italian pasta,” Matteo told me. “She owns a restaurant outside of Rome.”Sitting in the dappled Mediterranean sun with my daughter (my husband and son stayed at the beach), I could have easily believed we were in a restaurant outside Rome. Or Portofino. Or Positano. I read the options off the blackboard — spaghetti all’amatriciana, rigatoni carbonara, insalata caprese — as my daughter wiggled the sand out of her toes. A short while later, Ms. Tulli appeared, her arms laden with sauté pans — tonnarelli cacio e pepe for my daughter and penne pomodoro e mozzarella for me.Serving the pasta in the pans is a typically Italian way of reminding you just how authentic the sauce is — and ours, respectively cheesy and peppery and earthy and ripe, were so authentic we nearly licked our pans clean.Later that day, showered and dressed for an evening out, my family and I went to Es Pujols, a lively town on the northern side of the island. Es Pujols is the most Italian pocket of Formentera — many of the people who were walking on the boardwalk and sipping Campari and sodas spoke to us only in Italian when we tested our halting Spanish.We settled into a table at Cafe Miranda as the sun was just starting its dip toward the horizon — well past 9 and well past my children’s typical bedtime. We ordered aperitivi — Aperol and prosecco for my husband and me, San Pellegrino Aranciata for the children, plump green olives and salty potato chips for all.We sat quietly for a few minutes, and I could feel my skin radiating warmth from our time on the beach. A handful of Italian soccer players strolled by with their girlfriends. Waiters were saying things like, “Buona sera, signorina.” The sea had taken on a romantic orange tint.Soon, our waiter came over to take our order for dinner, but quickly apologized.He only spoke Italian.Ca Na Pepa. In the middle of a white-stone piazza in Sant Francesc Xavier, this is the place to come for a light lunch (carpaccio di zucchine, Caesar salad) or to feed the kids; it has one of the best children’s menus on the island (Plaça de la Constitution, 5; canapepa.com).AdvertisementCafe Miranda. Come to this spot on the boardwalk in Es Pujolsa for a cafe macchiato in the morning or an Aperol spritz in the evening. If you see a bunch of very fit men with man-buns walk by, it’s safe to assume they’re Italian soccer players (Paseo Maritimo 1;facebook.com/cafemiranda.eu).El Gioviale Café & Restaurant. Aim for the table under the fig tree, order whatever pasta the young Roman chef recommends, and enjoy it right from the pan (Carrer de Santa Maria, 59, Sant Francesc Xavier; 34-666-605-973).Aigua. Overlooking the bobbing sailboats in the port of La Savina, this is one of the more formal places on the island, with its white tablecloths and elegantly prepared seafood. That’s not to suggest it’s stiff: The kitchen doesn’t close until 2 a.m. (aiguaformentera.com).Obi Formentera. The Milanese Lorenzo Pepe and his wife, Elena Hurtado, own the island’s loveliest shop, which sells artfully structured dresses of her own design and heavy silver jewelry of his (Avenida 8 de Agosto 55, Sant Francesc Xavier; obiformentera.com/en/gallery).A version of this article appears in print on July 17, 2016, on Page TR10 of the New York edition with the headline: On a Spanish Island, Italian Charm.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »