By SHIVANI VORAJULY 25, 2017
Although the last two weeks of August are a peak time for summer getaways, plenty of properties in appealing places still have availability during this busy periodHere are five vacation possibilities for late August:An Adriatic CruiseVariety Cruises is offering the Adriatic Odyssey, departing Aug. 20 from Dubrovnik for a seven-night itinerary on a 24-cabin motor sailer, with stops in Croatia, Greece and Montenegro. From $1,175 per person including all meals and a 50-euro onboard credit per person. Reserve at varietycruises.com or 800-319-7776.Biking in ProvenceDuVine Cycling & Adventure Company has a four-day biking trip through Provence from Aug. 27 to 30, which is open to all levels but best suited for those with cycling experience. Travelers bike through orchards, olive groves and vineyards; explore village markets; and visit family-run wineries. Stays are at upscale hotels throughout the region; $3,495 a person inclusive of accommodations, meals, activities and nightly cocktails. Reserve at 888-396-5383.Hotels in Nantucket, Mass.Nantucket Island Resorts, a collection of five properties on Nantucket, has rooms available in late August. Each hotel is different: The White Elephant overlooks the harbor; White Elephant Village offers free bicycle rentals and has a pool; the Cottages sits alongside the marina; the Jared Coffin House is in the heart of town, near boutiques and restaurants; and guests at the Wauwinet have access to two private beaches. Nightly rates from $365. Reserve at 800-475-2637 or nantucketislandresorts.com.Hiking in PeruRoyal Travel & Tours is offering an eight-day trip to Peru, which includes a night in Lima followed by six nights of guided hiking on the Inca Trail. Travelers hike through the Sacred Valley of the Incas and get a private tour of the Ollantaytambo ruins. They also take a predawn hike in time for sunrise at Machu Picchu; a guided tour follows. From $1,700 a person including accommodations, some meals and guided hiking. Reserve at 800-747-7695 or by emailing Kendra Thornton at kthornton@royal-travel.com.Safari in KenyaThe safari outfitter Roar Africa is selling a seven-night trip to Kenya, which includes a night in Nairobi with a visit to an elephant orphanage and six nights split between two safari lodges; they will also catch the wildebeest migration from Tanzania to Kenya. From $1,700 a person a night inclusive of accommodations, meals, game drives and excursions from the lodges. Reserve at welcome@roarafrica.com.A version of this article appears in print on August 6, 2017, on Page TR2 of the New York edition with the headline: 5 Last-Minute Vacations.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.