AdvertisementSupported byIn TransitBy Shivani VoraUNITED RETROFIT: 10-ABREAST SEATING IN ECONOMYDomestic flying on United Airlines is about to get cozier. The airline announced this week that it plans to retrofit the economy class on 19 of its 74 Boeing 777 planes with 10-abreast seating in a 3-4-3 configuration, a change from its current nine-abreast 2-5-2 or 3-3-3 configuration. The planes will operate on domestic routes including Hawaii and Guam, and the first aircraft with the new seating is scheduled to debut in May, according to a spokeswoman, Karen May. The change will bring the total number of seats on the planes to 364, an increase of either 20 or 98 seats depending on the aircraft. The move echoes a larger industry trend, Ms. May said. “Many airlines are now offering 10-abreast seating on 777s so we are not an exception,” she said. United expects to have all 19 of the planes retrofitted by May 2017.IN COOPERSTOWN, ‘ANSEL ADAMS: EARLY WORKS’The Fenimore Art Museum in Cooperstown, N.Y., is reopening for the spring and summer season on April 1 with a new exhibition of 41 prints by the renowned photographer Ansel Adams. Called “Ansel Adams: Early Works,” it runs through Sept. 18 and gives visitors a chance to see prints by Mr. Adams from the 1920s into the 1950s such as “Moonrise, Hernandez,” a 1941 print from New Mexico depicting a light gray sky — a contrast to his darker prints from the 1970s and 1980s. In commemoration of the exhibit, the nearby Otesaga Resort Hotel has an “Ansel Adams Special” package; it includes accommodations, breakfast, tickets to the museum and a collection of Ansel Adams postcards. Prices from $299 a night.A ROYAL OFFER IN BHUTANThe Duke and Duchess of Cambridge, Prince William and Kate Middleton, recently announced plans for their first visit to Bhutan this spring, and in celebration, Uma by Como, Paro, a 29-room resort in the Paro Valley of Bhutan, has introduced a “Royal Himalayan Discovery” package. The offer includes a five-night stay, all meals, daily guided hikes in the surrounding mountains, excursions to cultural sites such as Tiger’s Nest Monastery, a spa treatment per person and traditional English afternoon tea on three occasions. Available from April through July. Prices from $5,827 for two.A NEW CRUISE ON THE GANGESSeeing the Ganges River in India by boat isn’t common, but a new cruise from Uniworld Boutique River Cruise Collection on its river cruise ship, the Ganges Voyager II, gives travelers a chance to do just that. The 13-day trip, called “India’s Golden Triangle and the Sacred Ganges,” includes seven nights on the new 56-passenger, all-suite vessel and five nights in Oberoi Hotels & Resorts in New Delhi, Agra and Jaipur. Those who book the trip will see Humayun’s Tomb in Delhi, the Taj Mahal in Agra, Mother Teresa’s home and tomb in Kolkata and the Hare Krishna Complex and Temple of the Vedic Planetarium in Mayapur.On the Ganges Voyager II itself, guests can expect accommodations with hand-painted murals, flat-screen televisions and marble bathrooms; the boat also has a spa and fitness center. Prices from $7,599 a person.AN AKA IN DOWNTOWN MANHATTANAKA, the extended-stay hotel brand with eight properties in the United States and one in London, will have an addition to its portfolio in mid-May when AKA Wall Street is scheduled to open in downtown Manhattan. The property has 132 suites, ranging from studios to penthouses and measuring between 362 and 1,103 square feet; all have kitchens, living rooms, free high-speed Wi-Fi and Apple TV. A highlight of the property will be the outdoor cinema on the rooftop with views of 1 World Trade Center and the city; guests can reserve the theater for screenings of their favorite movies or catch a movie that’s part of AKA’s film series. Prices from $525 a night for a one-bedroom suite.AT HOMEWOOD SUITES, MEALS TO COOKFor its new “Home Cooked Meals” program, Homewood Suites by Hilton is partnering with the meal kit delivery service PeachDish to give its guests a 20 percent discount off the service; guests who order will receive pre-portioned ingredients to prepare meals in their suite’s kitchen. There are at least four menu options a week to pick from, such as green tea chicken over spinach and sprouts and beef hot pot with Asian greens. The program will be available in 22 Homewood properties in Atlanta and Dallas through early June and will eventually expand to other locations. Prices from $50 for one meal that serves four or two meals that serve two.Advertisement