
Bites By                     
ALEXANDER LOBRANO

MARCH 11, 2016
Britain and France may have a historically complicated relationship, but this has never stood in the way of their longstanding connection through fine dining. In this culinary minuet, France has always led by bestowing its food and wines on an island it deems gastronomically benighted, and Britain has shown its gratitude by revering French cooking more than any European country aside from Belgium and maybe Switzerland.Recently, however, a new generation of London chefs has taken French cooking and made it its own. One example of this Anglo-French cuisine can be found at Piquet, the new bistro where the chef Allan Pickett, 43, coaxes the best out of British produce with a mastery of classical French technique learned at Galvin Bistrot de Luxe and Orrery, two of London’s best French restaurants.Every Saturday, get travel tips, destination coverage, photos from all over the world and more.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Pickett’s place is a two-in-one spot that opened in a duplex just north of Soho last September. A cozy bar offers an appealing menu of small plates like an irresistible pairing of pork crackling and crab meat to accompany well-mixed cocktails. But it’s downstairs, in a wood-paneled dining room, that Mr. Pickett’s cooking really shines.The duck rillettes that began a recent dinner revealed Mr. Pickett’s skills as a charcutier. More striking were the freshness and ingenuity that guide his cooking in other starters, like marinated Scottish sea scallops with pickled apple balls and squid ink and a crab meat-filled raviolo in a ruddy shellfish sauce punctuated by crunchy, salty samphire.Main courses like roasted sea bass with cauliflower purée or crispy and custardy veal sweetbreads on wilted Romaine with a Madeira sauce displayed the very British love of savory and fruity flavors, often in the same dish, which has become the rudder of Mr. Pickett’s otherwise assiduously Gallic cuisine. Standout desserts included blood-orange sorbet with citrus shortbread and a Yorkshire rhubarb tart with cream.In a city with too many tables courting expense-account extravagance, Piquet stands out by offering beautifully sourced and cooked food at reasonable prices. And with casual kitchens as good as Piquet, Britain is showing France that it can lead every bit as well as it’s always followed.Piquet, 92-94 Newman Street; 44-20-3826-4500; piquet­-restaurant.co.uk. Lunch, £16.50 to £19.50 ($23 to $27); market menu, £45. À la carte dinner for two, including service, about £100.A version of this article appears in print on March 13, 2016, on Page TR4 of the New York edition with the headline: More Than a French Accent.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »