

      By ELAINE GLUSAC

FEB. 25, 2016

The city's midcentury modern architecture, which effortlessly blends desert and design, is all the rage.
When Hollywood stars were contractually restricted to a residential radius that allowed for spontaneous meetings, Palm Springs, just over 100 miles east, offered both escape and access, drawing A-list residents like Cary Grant and Frank Sinatra. Moneyed clientele met celebrated architects in an era when modernism was the rage, perfect for indoor-outdoor desert living, at least in winter when temperatures hovered in the balmy 70s. The city’s midcentury legacy has lately attracted a new generation of fans like Leonardo DiCaprio, who bought Dinah Shore’s 1963 Donald Wexler-designed house in 2014. The fashion designer Trina Turk was among the preservationists who enabled the Palm Springs Art Museum to convert a former 1961 bank into the new Architecture and Design Center, Edwards Harris Pavilion. Though many travelers spend weeks reveling in Palm Springs modernism, surrounding communities from soak-centric Desert Hot Springs to Indio, site of the growing Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival, expand the appeal of the valley, which, like the best midcentury modernist buildings here, effortlessly blends desert and design.
Explore street view, find things to do in Palm Springs and sign in to your Google account to save your map.
There are few better ways to get acquainted with the wealth of modernist architecture in Palm Springs than to ride around in the six-passenger minivan of Robert Imber, owner of Palm Springs Modern Tours. Leading three-hour tours ($85 per person), Mr. Imber covers about 35 miles of drive-by gaping at structures from the 1946 Kaufmann  House by Richard Neutra to modernist banks and the 1952 Palm Springs City Hall. Tours start at the Palm Springs Visitors Center, in a dramatically cantilevered former gas station designed by Albert Frey, and offer acquaintance with the valley’s hero architects of the period like E. Stewart Williams and William F. Cody, as well as contemporary architects such as Lance O’Donnell and Sean Lockyer. Don’t leave without perusing the $2 vintage postcards of resorts and pools in the visitors’ center. With a serious concentration of retailers selling curvy period couches, starburst-shaped lighting fixtures and other retro appointments, Palm Springs is a shopping mecca for fans of midcentury interiors. Hit the shop-filled Uptown Design District to indulge in fantasy home-feathering, beginning at Just Modern, dealing big-ticket furniture as well as more souvenir-friendly artwork, design books and dishware. Stop by the sprawling Trina Turk boutique featuring Ms. Turk’s sunny signature women’s wear collection as well as kicky shopping totes, notecards and swimwear. Across the street, Bon Vivant, Retrospect and A La Mod offer wonderfully curated collections of vintage housewares. Given its legacy of Rat Pack steakhouses, country club surf-and-turf dinners and seniors’ early-bird specials, Palm Springs’ food scene has been conservative compared with its maverick taste in design. But earlier this year, the Italian chef Giacomo Pettinari, who previously earned a Michelin star at Valentino’s in Los Angeles, moved to the desert, attracted by the newly renovated luxury resort L’Horizon with the offer to lead its restaurant, Sopa. Mr. Pettinari’s menu surveys the Mediterranean from Turkish red pepper dip and roasted Spanish octopus starters to squid ink gnocchi and mushroom risotto. All seating is outdoors on a romantic terrace with lights dangling from the trees, ideal for sipping palomas. Dinner is about $100 for two, without drinks. For after-dinner drinks and a retro spin on the dance floor, stop by Melvyn’s Restaurant. One has only to take in  the wall of celebrity photos in the lounge to know Melvyn’s has a long history in Palm Springs. Known as a hangout of Frank Sinatra, the old-school restaurant has a new-school following, especially during the Coachella music festival, when parties frequently buy out the place. In its lounge, a pianist plays American standards and other pop  numbers beside the  dance floor. Golf and tennis are perennial draws in the area, and the latter has been accented by the expansion of the Indian Wells Tennis Garden in down-valley Indian Wells. Now owned by the Oracle Corporation founder Larry Ellison, who also owns the BNP Paribas Open tennis tournament held this year on  March 7 to 20,  the tennis facility recently added a second stadium court and 16 more acres. The benefit to visitors is that they can play on many of the 29 courts on the club grounds. Keep your eye on the ball while taking in the mountain-ringed vistas (most clinics and drop-in classes start at $25). As in many wealthy enclaves, thrift shopping in the Coachella Valley is rich. Cathedral City, to the south of Palm Springs, offers top one-stop secondhand shopping, starting at Resale Therapy. Its owner, Caroldean Ross, has a smart eye for vintage and gently worn contemporary apparel in a packed shop featuring Prada sunglasses and racks devoted to recent designs by Trina Turk and Tory Burch. Next door and across the street, two locations of Celebrity Consignments recently turned up reasonably priced midcentury modern dishware and costume jewelry. Nearby, Victoria’s Attic Antiques offered Red Wing pottery, vintage ice buckets and tiki bar mugs. Quench your thirst at the two-year-old Coachella Valley Brewing Company. In a nondescript office park in Thousand Palms, the microbrewery owned by the brewmaster Chris Anderson offers a quaffable overview of the area’s agricultural bounty in its tap room, featuring beers made with local honey, citrus, herbs and spices. Up to two dozen selections may include such brews as Monument on Fire, an IPA made with guava, mango, roasted chiles and habaneros. Four four-ounce tasters cost $8. The San Andreas Fault runs through the eastern valley, marked by thickets of shaggy palms that thrive in the natural springs that surface at the fissure. There are public palm oases, including Thousand Palms Oasis Preserve in Thousand Palms, which travelers can visit free, but it’s worth signing up for Desert Adventures stargazing Jeep tour to investigate further ($150). The three-hour trip starts on the private 800-acre Metate Ranch in a bird-filled oasis of soaring Washingtonia palms and continues through the slot canyons formed by ancient floods in the fault zone. After sunset, the Jeep pulls up to a particularly dark site where an astronomer leads a guided stargazing session. 