
In Transit By                     
SARAH AMANDOLARE

JUNE 2, 2016
Summer days are made for meandering museum visits, and new additions and locations will offer travelers an e array of gallery spaces and exhibitions in Germany, New York City and London.The Vitra Design Museum has just opened a new building, Schaudepot, opposite Zaha Hadid’s Vitra Fire Station on the Vitra Campus in Weil am Rhein, Germany. The ground-floor gallery showcases the first permanent display chosen from the museum’s vast furniture collection, including rarely seen works by Charles and Ray Eames, along with recent acquisitions like the Dutch designer Joris Laarman’s 3D-printed aluminum Gradient Chair and the Mali designer Cheick Diallo’s Ségou Rocker.In the basement, hundreds more furnishings and accessories are visible through glass walls, including sculptures and prototypes from the Eames estate, and classic lamps by Alvar Aalto, among others. “You get a glimpse of what there is,” said Mateo Kries, the museum’s director. “You see that it goes on and on and on.”On June 23, the International Center of Photography is scheduled to reopen in a two-level, glass-fronted space in New York City, across the street from the New Museum. The debut exhibition, “Public, Private, Secret,” is a constellation of contemporary and historic works alongside social media feeds curated in real time.AdvertisementOne room juxtaposes historic mug shots with a stream of modern-day police amber alerts and CCTV footage. Historic photography, such as the suburban living rooms of Larry Clark’s “Tulsa” series, illuminates privacy issues that continue to be debated. “None of us are being told off in this exhibition about how much we choose to reveal,” said the curator-in-residence Charlotte Cotton. “It’s a distinctly empowering exhibition.”Tate Modern will open a new addition to its existing, 1950s-era power station campus on June 17. Switch House, a brick-clad pyramidal design by Herzog & de Meuron, emphasizes physical and digital interaction. Visitors can climb into Ricardo Basbaum’s steel cages or take in a floor-to-ceiling, multiscreen display of international artists and their work spaces. A new Tate app will also launch with background on art and artists featured in the museum, and navigational tips to guide visitors toward specific works and exhibitions.AdvertisementNew displays in the existing Boiler House will feature artists outside North America and Europe, like the painter Malangatana Ngwenya and his depictions of civil war in Mozambique. To usher in the new space on June 18, more than 500 singers from London community choirs will perform together inside Turbine Hall, where the museum’s newest acquisition, a 22-foot-tall tree sculpture by Ai Weiwei, will stand.A version of this article appears in print on June 5, 2016, on Page TR2 of the New York edition with the headline: Trending; Museum Upgrades Not to Miss This Season.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »