
Heads Up By                     
GISELA WILLIAMS

AUG. 30, 2016
Frankfurt’s Bahnhofsviertel, the city’s red light district, was the neighborhood that parents always warned their children about. “When I was a teenager my mother forbade me to ever come here,” said Marijana Condic, a Frankfurt-based fashion designer and one of two women behind the shoe label Lika Mimika, who until recently lived in the area. “At the time that small park over there,” she said, pointing to a rectangular lawn in Willy-Brandt-Platz, “was loaded with junkies.”On this particular summer day, only caffeine addicts were to be seen, sipping espressos at a handful of new and trendy cafes, such as AMP (ampyourself.de) and Plank (barplank.de). Still, while the Bahnhofsviertel, which means “train station quarter,” has been rapidly gentrifying in the last few years with uber-cool restaurants, clubs and luxury apartments, its streets remain mostly lined with cheap chain stores, bordellos and sex shops. The area seems especially down and out when compared with the rest of prosperous, well-kept Frankfurt.The sharp contrast is its appeal. Many of the stylish new clubs and bars that have made this neighborhood the most exciting corner of the city are purposely hidden in courtyards or on upper floors of nondescript buildings.“None of our places have any signs,” said Ata Macias, a revered German D.J. who has opened nearly a half-dozen fashionable clubs and restaurants in the neighborhood over the last five years.On a recent morning Mr. Macias was sitting in the sun outside AMP, his latest venture. By day it is a coffee bar serving homemade lemonade and strong espresso, and by night, a small, one-room club with a top-notch bar that hosts a rotating crew of visiting and local D.J.s.AdvertisementA geometric mirrored sculpture by the renowned Frankfurt-based artist Tobias Rehberger was hanging from the ceiling just inside the entrance. About 10 years ago Mr. Rehberger and Mr. Macias, who are friends, founded Club Michel, an underground supper club that Mr. Rehberger also used as a canteen for his studio.AdvertisementIn 2012, Mr. Macias moved Club Michel to the Bahnhofsviertel, where he and another partner continue to host rotating chefs and special dinner parties open to those who sign up on the Club Michel website (clubmichel.com). Thursday is usually a visiting chef night; Friday is Italian night; and Saturdays feature ambitious vegan food.Mr. Rehberger also designed the colorful neon sign that reads “Free Parking, Free Coffee, Freedom” over the year-old Pizzeria Montana (montana-pizzeria.de), now arguably Frankfurt’s coolest pizza place, just around the corner from Club Michel. The tiny place is almost always packed, and serves excellent Neapolitan pies from an authentic Stefano Ferrara wood-burning oven.Exit Pizzeria Montana, take a left and pass a dusty shoe store; just across the street is Maxie Eisen (maxieeisen.com), a modern deli, cafe and cocktail bar named after a Jewish gangster from Chicago as interpreted by three German-Jewish culinary entrepreneurs, the brothers James and David Ardinast of Frankfurt and the Berlin club promoter Oskar Melzer.Besides Maxie Eisen, which prides itself on its pastrami sandwiches, last year the three also opened an ambitious bistro called Stanley Diamond (stanleydiamond.com), which serves elevated Teutonic dishes like roast beef with green sauce, a beloved regional condiment made with seven local herbs, in a sleek dining room with a gleaming copper ceiling and open kitchen.Mr. Melzer, who has brought some major Berlin street credibility to this corner of Frankfurt, said the neighborhood reminded him of Berlin’s once-edgy Kreuzberg neighborhood. “It’s really multiculti and real here.”Last year, in an effort to counter crime in one pocket of the neighborhood, the Ardinast brothers helped organize the successful Taunusstrasse Arts & Bites festival, a monthly art market in the Bahnhofsviertel’s Kaiserpassage (tab-ffm.de), a shopping passage built in the ’70s that had become a hangout for drug dealers. “We thought we’d try bringing in more people and artists and music, rather than the police, to clear out the criminal element of the street,” said James Ardinast.For some Frankfurters, the Bahnhofsviertel remains a bit too “real.” “A lot of locals still don’t dare to come here,” said Ulrich Mattner (umattner.de), a gregarious journalist and author of a neighborhood guide who offers specialty tours to small groups, many of them Frankfurters. “I am the one who opens doors for those who are curious but feel shameful or nervous to explore the streets on their own,” Mr. Mattner said. Bahnhofsviertel, he said, is a good counterpoint to Frankfurt’s affluent vibe, adding that it is “important to the atmosphere of the city.”A version of this article appears in print on September 4, 2016, on Page TR8 of the New York edition with the headline: Respectability in the Red-Light District.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »