

      By JUSTIN BERGMAN

NOV. 24, 2016

Explore the city’s innumerable charms — ruin-studded gardens, a growing contemporary art scene, diverse regional cuisines.
Related Article
Strewn with splendid Mughal forts, monuments and mausoleums, Delhi is imbued with history much the way Rome is. India’s capital, though, is often overlooked by visitors passing through on their way to the Taj Mahal and Rajasthan and, more recently, it’s been avoided because of concerns about safety and pollution. Determined to revive Delhi’s reputation, the government started a campaign this year to rebrand the city and announced a “Delhi Festival” reportedly set for early 2017 to showcase its culture and heritage. Tourist safety is also being addressed, with a new 24-hour, multilingual foreigner helpline and enhanced Uber background checks and safety measures. Such steps are sure to help, as are the city’s innumerable charms — the ruin-studded gardens, the growing contemporary art scene, the diverse regional cuisines. And then there are Delhiites themselves, ever-proud to show visitors the best their ancient city has to offer.
Explore street view, find things to do in Delhi and sign in to your Google account to save your map.
Dive into the Delhi experience with a visit to one of the capital’s most atmospheric corners, the shrine to Nizamuddin Auliya, a Sufi saint who lived more than 700 years ago. Set amid a maze of perfume shops, butchers and flower vendors, the complex draws legions of worshipers to toss rose petals on the saint’s shrine (or dargah) and listen to entrancing, devotional Sufi music called qawwali, performed by singers sitting on the marble floor. Guests (and cameras) are welcome, though you should dress conservatively and offer a donation (500 to 1,000 rupees, or about $7.50 to $15). On Friday evenings, the nearby Inayat Khan dargah also hosts qawwali singers in a shady courtyard, minus the crowds. The Hope Project charity leads guided tours of the neighborhood (300 rupees) ending at either dargah and can provide up-to-date details on qawwali performances. The chef Manish Mehrotra’s star is firmly on the rise. Not only is he at the helm of a top international restaurant, Indian Accent — No. 9 on Asia’s 50 Best Restaurants list  in 2016 — he recently took his modern Indian cooking style to New York with the opening of a second branch this year. Mr. Mehrotra’s inventiveness is on full display in the chef’s tasting menu at his original Delhi restaurant (3,200 rupees for vegetarian, 3,300 for carnivores), a playful mix of traditional dishes reimagined with nontraditional ingredients. On a recent visit, it included baingan bharta, a Punjabi eggplant dish, served inside a cornetto-style cone made from sun-dried tomato flour, and a tikki croquette elevated with beetroot, a dab of peanut butter and caper-wasabi chutney. For a bit more ambience, sit on the candlelit veranda with views of the frangipani-fringed lawn. Walking into the 1911 Bar at the Imperial hotel feels like stepping back in time to the final days of the British Raj. Named for the year King George V announced that the capital of British India would be moved from Calcutta to Delhi, the bar is steeped in colonial history, from the chairs used by King George and Queen Mary during their coronation, also in 1911, to the bartenders in bright red coats with gold epaulets, and the military medals decorating the walls. (Look for the Victoria Cross, Britain’s highest military honor.) Even the cricket match on television feels like an appropriate distraction as you sip a Saffron cocktail (brandy, rum, Galliano and a bright mix of pineapple, orange and lemon juices), 900 rupees. When Delhi’s madly honking drivers get to be too much — and they will — head for the (relative) quietude of a park. Purana Qila, which means Old Fort, is a lovely place to escape, as much for the ruins as for the palm-shaded lawns (entrance, 100 rupees). The 65-foot red sandstone entrance and now-crumbling walls were built in the 16th century, but archaeologists have found evidence of habitation dating back more than 2,000 years. Not that anyone is paying much attention to the history — the young couples are too busy canoodling on the grass to notice. Across busy Bhairon Marg is the venerable National Crafts Museum (entrance, 150 rupees). It feels like a lively village, with hand-carved sculptures and replicas of huts from India’s various states set along winding paths, an outdoor craft market and a courtyard where you might catch folk dancers festooned with red turbans and plumes of black feathers. The incense-filled Café Lota serves a mix of traditional dishes like Assamese black chicken (395 rupees) and a hearty Gujarati lentil stew with spinach and cottage cheese dumplings (315 rupees). Hold back on your shopping impulse at the Crafts Museum — the selection is even better at the Central Cottage Industries Emporium, run by the government to support the country’s traditional artisans. There are exquisite silk carpets and papier mâché vases from Kashmir, block-printed cushion covers and quilts from Rajasthan, and splendid silk saris from Varanasi. With fixed prices and a no-hassle sales staff, this is about as stress-free as shopping gets in India. It’s not all about the traditional in Delhi — there’s a vibrant design and fashion scene, as well, centered in two gentrifying neighborhoods in the leafy southern part of the city, Shahpur Jat and Hauz Khas. In Shahpur Jat, the less-polished of the two, seek out Second Floor Studio for homegrown fashion labels like Antar-Agni and Péro; GreenR for artisanal chocolate bars; and the designer Ayush Kasliwal’s brass thali sets and incense holders. In Hauz Khas, the Ogaan boutique has designs like Pratima Pandey’s simple silk dresses with embroidered flowers and Kiran Uttam Ghosh’s billowy pleated creations inreds and golds. Nearby, Nappa Dori sells the designer-owner Gautam Sinha’s leather messenger bags and totes printed with India street scenes from vintage photographs. Hauz Khas is a creative and progressive enclave that throbs with fashionable young people on weekends in search of release in a conservative city. Their hub is Social — a multilevel, exposed-brick-and-recycled-furniture venue that doubles as a bar and work space for entrepreneurs and freelancers (the hanging power sockets are a nice touch). It’s the perfect spot for a sundowner on the roof where old-fashioned dormitory beds have been converted into lounges overlooking a 14th-century reservoir and madrasa ruins. For a Delhi-inspired cocktail, try the Aacharoska (260 rupees), a take on the Caipiroska made with a lime pickle and served in a stoneware jar. Old Delhi, the centuries-old, labyrinthine heart of the city, is crowded beyond belief — a gritty tangle of bleating tuktuks and rickshaws, jostling shoppers, and merchants dashing to and fro with sacks of spices on their heads. It’s not where you’d expect to find the Haveli Dharampura, a 19th-century former nobleman’s mansion that’s been restored and reopened in March as a boutique hotel and a restaurant, Lakhori. The menu, inspired by the cuisine of Old Delhi, is an eclectic mix of vegetarian Jain dishes and meat-centric Mughlai specialties, as well as street food classics like dahi bhalle, lentil dumplings in yogurt (350 rupees). The atmosphere is all the more magical thanks to the traditional Kathak dancers. In winter, there’s rooftop dining, with splendid views of the Jama Masjid mosque. For a taste of Old Delhi’s shopping madness, head to the Khari Baoli, touted as Asia’s biggest wholesale spice market, where you’ll find everything from saffron to dried fruits and nuts. Stop at Mehar Chand and Sons, a century-old shop run by the affable Anshu Kumar, a master spice and tea blender, which stocks masala spice blends, chiles and teas from all corners of India. To venture further, Delhi Walks offers tours of Old Delhi’s other bazaars. Jama Masjid is the last of the three marvels built by the Mughal emperor Shah Jahan in the 17th century, following the Taj Mahal and Red Fort. It’s as impressive, too, particularly when the courtyard — large enough to hold 25,000 people — is filled with worshipers and picnicking families. For those not fearful of heights, the climb to the top of the minaret is worth the effort to take in the mosque’s white marble domes, as well as the streets of Old Delhi and the modern city beyond. From 130 feet in the air, India’s capital, with its regal architecture, boundless energy and striking contradictions, feels as if it finally comes into view.There are two reputable taxi companies operating outside Delhi’s international airport — Meru Cabs and Mega Cabs. Make sure the driver uses a meter from the airport. Also, Delhi has launched a 24-hour helpline for foreigners: 91-1800-11-1363.Opened in 2013, the 49-room Bloomrooms Hotel (8591 Arakashan Road; bloomrooms.com) offers affordable micro-rooms with a bright white-and-yellow design in a refurbished Art Deco building courtesy of a New Delhi-based, French-run design firm. Doubles from 3,000 rupees ($44).Restored over six years, the historic Haveli Dharampura (2293 Gali Guliyan, Dharampura; havelidharampura.com) has 13 rooms with gorgeous Mughal design flourishes set around an open-air courtyard. Doubles from 13,640 rupees ($200).Flight and Hotel information provided by Google.Prices represent a snapshot of low fares and rates for weekend trips.Advertisement