AdvertisementSupported byQ and ABy Shivani VoraGiven his nonstop travel schedule, the Chinese classical pianist Lang Lang will tell you that he doesn’t really have a home. “I’m on the road for work more than 300 days a year,” he said. On the rare occasions when he does stay put, he likes to be in New York City, where he has an apartment near Carnegie Hall. In fact, his love for the city is the inspiration for his new album “New York Rhapsody,” a collection of recomposed tunes that pay homage to New York, such as “Empire State of Mind” and “New York Morning.”Mr. Lang, 34, also gets to promote the city by being its first “cultural tourism ambassador,” a role that’s meant to encourage more Chinese tourists to visit his adopted hometown and designated by NYC & Company, New York City’s official destination marketing organization.Below are edited excerpts from an interview with him.Q. What inspired you about New York to compose your new album?A. New York is a beautiful and unique city and truly the world’s melting pot. I’m lucky to live here, and I thought it was a great choice to make it the center of the album. There’s classical music on it, of course, but also blues, soul, jazz and hip-hop.How do you spend your downtime in the city? I like to take in the culture every way I can, and in New York, that’s not hard because there is culture everywhere you look. I love the museums — the Met, the Guggenheim and MoMA but also like walking across the Brooklyn Bridge and exploring Harlem, the East Village and the meatpacking district. And, Madison Square Garden is fun to visit for sporting events and concerts. Also, I sometimes teach music at two schools in East Brooklyn and think that area is exciting, too. You see fresh faces and a lot of diversity.New York has no shortage of well-known cultural attractions. Have you discovered any of its lesser-known gems?Honestly, I think the city streets and the subway are true cultural gems when it comes to music. I have heard so many talented musicians playing on the streets and in the subway. And, to hear great music from younger musicians, there’s no place like Washington Square Park near N.Y.U.Where do you go for a good meal?I love Italian restaurants, and there are many near my apartment. For Chinese food, I go to Shun Lee because the food is authentic. You can ask for the dishes to be prepared Chinese style, and the kitchen will cook them with more ginger, garlic and soy.When you’re on the road, do you ever get to to explore the cities you’re performing in?I try to. After an evening concert, I go out for a nice dinner, and if I’m in a big city, such as Paris or London, I will walk the streets at night. To see museums, I go the day of or the day after a concert.What are some of your favorite destinations?Definitely big cities because they are so energetic and inspiring. I love Paris, London and Rio, where I recently went for the Olympics, and also Shenzhen, which is an incredible high-tech city in China.I also like the peace I get from smaller cities such as Bilbao in Spain. They give me the concentration I need to practice.You also have a home in Beijing, a city that’s popular with tourists. What do you think its biggest attractions are?Beijing is a mix of old and new. You have ancient Chinese culture with sights like the Forbidden City, the Temple of Heaven and the Great Wall, but then there are new shopping malls everywhere, a contemporary arts scene and really nice concert halls like the National Center for the Performing Arts, which looks like a big egg.Advertisement