
Bites By                     
ALEXANDER LOBRANO

DEC. 2, 2016
The most visible sign of an artistic quickening in Arles is probably the Frank Gehry-designed tower rising at LUMA Arles, a contemporary art center being created in a former rail yard. But it’s Chardon, a cozy restaurant that opened this summer, which perfectly expresses its new bohemian effervescence.This bistro and wine bar is run by the British chef Harry Cummins, known for his light but earthy and original produce-driven cooking style, and Laura Vidal, a Québécoise sommelier. (They are partners in both business and life.) Since 2013, the 30-something pair, who met while working at the celebrated Paris restaurant Frenchie, have run the Paris Pop-Up, a roaming series of food-and-wine events featuring his cooking and her biodynamic wine lists. But Arles made them decide to stay put for a while.“Arles is becoming really edgy because the new cultural institutions are drawing more creative people,” Ms. Vidal said. “This is why we thought our concept of a restaurant that’s constantly evolving instead of being static would work here.” So when you don’t see Mr. Cummins in the kitchen, you might find a visiting cook, like Haan Palcu-Chang, a Canadian of Chinese-Romanian descent, who was the last guest of 2016 at Chardon.“Chardon is like a little theater, because the show, which is the menu, changes often,” said Mr. Cummins. The only criterion for visiting chefs is that they follow Mr. Cummins’s lead by cooking with local seasonal produce when possible.Since Chardon serves in a small-plates format, the best approach is to order the whole menu, which feeds two generously when shared. A recent lunch began with beef carpaccio, smoked oysters, leeks and salad burnet, a beautifully balanced composition of flavors and textures spiked by the astringency of the herb. Next, a soothing salad of warm winter vegetables and toasted rye was brightened by the fruitiness of homemade fig vinegar.Barbecued lamb heart with harissa was succulent, while black rice from the Camargue garnished with grilled squid, chorizo and turnips satisfied with locavore rusticity. The dessert we shared, a treacle tart with pickled lemon and Earl Grey ice cream, winked at the chef’s English origins and also his globe-trotting palate.Chardon, 35-37, rue des Arènes; 33-9-72-86-72-04; hellochardon.com. Average price of a meal for two, without drinks or tip, is 80 euros (about $85).A version of this article appears in print on December 4, 2016, on Page TR11 of the New York edition with the headline: Small Plates for a Creative Crowd.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »