By ELAINE GLUSACJULY 12, 2017
The chef Nobu Matsuhisa and the actor Robert De Niro have been partners since opening Nobu restaurant in New York in 1994. The name of the Japanese chef, whose signature cooking style borrows from his experiences working in Lima, Peru, and other coastal locales, is now affixed to more than 30 Nobu restaurants on five continents. In 2013, the partnership opened its first Nobu Hotel in Las Vegas and now runs five, including the new 16-room Nobu Ryokan Malibu in California. Its first European property, Nobu Hotel Shoreditch, opened in London’s East End this month, with 150 rooms and a Nobu restaurant where, unlike at the stand-alone restaurants, diners can get breakfast. Mr. Matsuhisa, who popularized sashimi with jalapeño, is similarly creative with the morning meal, including dishes like cured salmon on a “bagel” of crispy rice.The following are edited excerpts from a conversation with the partners.Why London, and why Shoreditch specifically?Nobu Matsuhisa: London is a big market for hotels. They know good food. We opened our first restaurant there 20 years ago, and we now have two successful restaurants. A lot has changed in London in the food market. Especially Shoreditch, which has a lot of young people and a hip scene.Robert De Niro: It’s an up-and-coming location, like the meatpacking district in New York.You both travel a lot. What’s your favorite thing about hotels?AdvertisementMr. De Niro: I like a hotel that’s got good service. It can be old style or new style, but the service has to be good. You can tell when people care or when things are running down.AdvertisementMr. Matsuhisa: I travel 10 months a year and in every city, I stay in a hotel. You spend most of the time in the room so you have to have a nice, comfortable bed and a large bathroom with a big showerhead in the shower. I like an iPhone plug near the bed, a big-screen TV. It’s the details that make it comfortable. I like warm service, like you’re in a house.Black cod in miso is a staple of Nobu restaurants. What’s the signature dish of the hotels?Mr. De Niro: I want black cod. It’s one of my favorites.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Matsuhisa: My special dish in the hotel is scrambled eggs donburi. In any country, every hotel serves eggs for breakfast. Also, the Japanese like rice — it’s a rice culture, not a bread culture — and soy sauce and grilled fish. For donburi, on top of the rice you have grilled salmon, seaweed and scrambled eggs done in tomato juice and onion that makes them soft. It’s international ingredients prepared in a new way.What’s in your minibars?Mr. Matsuhisa: We have half bottles of our Matsuhisa wines in chardonnay and cabernet. We have a sake that only we can use. We also have some Japanese tea. We have some alcohol, of course, and soft drinks, but just drinks, no food.Why did you get into the hotel business?Mr. De Niro: Nobu restaurants were asked to be in a lot of places, in hotels and shopping centers. We were asking, if we’re going into those places, why not do this ourselves? If you’re giving credibility and cachet to a place, why? We have something people want, to elevate their brand. Why not do it ourselves?Mr. Matsuhisa: The idea is Bob’s. He’s my good partner.What’s the difference between feeding someone dinner and having them spend the night?Mr. Matsuhisa: Basically, hotels and restaurants are the same hospitality, but in the hotel, there are more details. In the restaurant, people are spending a few hours eating, drinking, in a beautiful surrounding with excellent service. In the hotel, there are more team members, more points of service, more time, and we need to be sure to take care of our guests every minute through check-in, housekeeping, room service. We are taking care of them for several days, maybe a week. For this, we need to have everyone on the team understand the Nobu philosophy and how to make guests happy.A version of this article appears in print on July 16, 2017, on Page TR2 of the New York edition with the headline: Why Matsuhisa And De Niro Open Their Nobu Hotels.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.