
Bites By                     
CHRISTOPHER HALL

SEPT. 23, 2017
For the 700,000 or so people who surge daily through the Gare du Nord in Paris, one of Europe’s busiest train stations has offered little respite from noise and crowds, let alone somewhere to get a decent meal. But the Parisian chef Thierry Marx aims to change that with L’Étoile du Nord, a brasserie with an upstairs wine bar that opened in November in a two-story pavilion of concrete, polished metal and glass inside the station’s bustling entrance hall.“I wanted to create a brasserie inspired by the old buffets de gare,” Mr. Marx said, “where you could eat a good meal made with quality ingredients in the days before everything at a station became prepackaged industrial food.” Using some of the same suppliers he uses for his Michelin-starred restaurant, Sur Mesure, he devised a contemporary French menu with a few dishes, like fish and chips and a Liège-style waffle, that nod to London, Amsterdam and the other northern destinations served by the station.During a recent weekday lunch, a lively crowd of business people in suits and travelers with rolling suitcases filled the 120-seat dining room, where red Scandinavian modern-style chairs and touches of knotty pine paneling warm an otherwise spare-feeling space. Floor-to-ceiling glass walls afford views of passengers hurrying to and from platforms.I began with a meaty, juniper-seasoned terrine from master charcutier Gilles Vérot and continued with an excellent sea bass fillet in a deep-green pool of zucchini cream. My companion’s three-course prix fixe lunch (31 euros) included tender leeks dressed with an orange-infused vinaigrette, and a roasted chicken breast lacquered with reduced jus. We split his deconstructed lemon tart, a delightful round of crisp crust topped with hillocks of tangy lemon cream and a nest of tiny meringue sticks. Service at times veered from briskly efficient to rushed.AdvertisementL’Étoile du Nord continues a push by the French rail company S.N.C.F. to raise the bar on station food. For decades, the only Parisian station restaurant of note was Le Train Bleu, the gilded bastion of Belle Époch glory in the Gare de Lyon. But in 2013, Lazare opened in the Gare St.-Lazare, serving Eric Frechon’s traditional French dishes with a Norman accent, and an Alain Ducasse outpost is slated for the Gare Montparnasse in 2019.“We’re trying to give passengers a place where they can relax with a coffee, a glass of wine or a good meal,” Mr. Marx said. “Whether you have 10 or 80 euros to spend, every station should offer that.”AdvertisementL’Étoile du Nord, Gare du Nord, 18, rue de Dunkerque; 33-1-40-36-54-36; l’etoiledunord.fr. An average meal for two, without drinks (tip is included), is 75 euros (about $90).A version of this article appears in print on October 1, 2017, on Page TR8 of the New York edition with the headline: A New Star in a Train Station.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »