By DANIEL VICTORMAY 26, 2016
You’re alone at the beach, or maybe in a pair or a small group. It’s pretty hot out there, so it’s time to cool down in the water.How do you make sure your phone, money and keys aren’t stolen?It’s a simple question with no easy answer, especially if you don’t have a car nearby. While it’s easy to suggest leaving your valuables at home or at a hotel — which is, indeed, sensible advice — that option isn’t always practical or desirable.When I posed the question to my Facebook friends, I got a surprising variety of responses.• “Dig a hole, place your stuff in a zip lock, cover the hole and place your beach blanket on top of it,” Javi Calderón offered.• “When I went to Hawaii by myself, I kept my phone and wallet in a plastic bag, and when I went in the water would put it under the towel, leaving a largely empty backpack on top,” Ross Maghielse said. “Still keeping a close eye on it.”Advertisement• Doris Truong suggested “stashing stuff inside a clean diaper (that to others looks dirty).”• “Get one of those dorky plastic waterproof compartments to wear around your neck,” Pamela Hobart suggested, knowing full well I have no problem wearing dorky things.Advertisement• “Ask someone to watch it for you, like your computer at the library,” Meredith Pickett said. “If you ask, people are surprisingly trustworthy.”What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.• “Asking a lifeguard to watch your bag,” Michelle Markowitz said. “They usually nod, which is Lifeguard for, ‘No prob! I’d love to!’ ” • “Wrap your valuables in a shirt and leave a bag sitting out in the open, so a potential thief would grab the wrong thing,” Jessica Lee said.• “I’ll generally put all my belongings in a bag and stuff that in another bag, tie that bag to my sandals or something and put it under my beach towels when I’m going to the water,” Michael Ip said.Captain Steven Ang of the Ocean City Police in New Jersey said he offers beachgoers one primary rule: “If you don’t need it, don’t bring it.”Yeah, we knew that was coming. But since many of us will bring our phones anyway, he added a few more novel ideas, like stashing your cash in a cleaned-out suntan lotion bottle or a split tennis ball. While no single method could bring total peace of mind, the idea is to make yourself as unattractive a target to thieves as possible.“They’re not going to spend a lot of time rummaging through your stuff,” he said. “They want to get something easy, something in plain sight. They want to grab it and they want to go.”Feel free to share your methods in the comments section of this article, along with any lessons you’ve learned on the subject.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.