By KIRSTIN VALDEZ QUADESEPT. 20, 2016
When I was 11 and my sister 6, my parents pulled us out of our new Australian school for a six-week-long research trip across the belly of the continent. A year earlier, we had moved from the United States to Canberra, where my dad was doing post-doctorate work in geochemistry at the Australian National University, and now we were setting out to explore this vast new country.Our four-wheel drive — on loan from the university — was a troop carrier that could, in a pinch, be used to transport prisoners. My sister, Gratianne, and I sat in back with the camping equipment and soil samples, perched on side-facing benches too narrow for even our skinny butts, separated from our parents by a wire grille as if we were unruly dogs. The back opened only from the outside, so at every stop we’d have to wait to be set free.My dad drove, his grubby Indiana Jones hat planted on his head, Tevas strapped to his feet, squinting determinedly at the horizon. “There’s no place like Australia!” he announced enthusiastically. “It’s incredibly geomorphically stable, no geological deformation at all. A real museum of deep Earth time!” Beside him, my mother read Trollope. In the back, my sister and I read or squabbled or paged through activity books.My whole life we had accompanied my dad on his quest for dirt, mostly around the American Southwest. He studied — still studies — desert geology. We were used to roughing it, used to the sleeping bags and the grime and the new schools; used to making friends and then, once we’d made them, moving on. I attended eight elementary schools, with some casual home schooling in between.AdvertisementWe lived in rentals and apartments and trailers and tents and our ’67 Volkswagen van, which was so rusted that you could lift the torn linoleum beneath your feet and watch the highway blur below. The only certainty I had was that I’d better not get too close to friends, because before long I would be moving on.This time as we set out, my father offered us a stake in the trip: “Two dollars, girls, for every kangaroo skull you find.” Why he needed those skulls is a little hazy; I believe he was comparing the tooth enamel of these modern kangaroos to that of fossilized herbivores to determine their diets and therefore the flora of that long-ago landscape.AdvertisementHe probably lectured us about radiocarbon dating and the elemental composition of enamel, about paleoclimates and C3/C4 plant material, but if so, I missed it, because I was already running calculations. The Australian two-dollar coin, with its profile of an Aboriginal elder, was thick and heavy, exactly like, I imagined, a doubloon. I pictured hundreds of them clinking dully against each other in my backpack. My obsession took root.I should say upfront that the trip wasn’t just about kangaroo skulls, and we saw incredible things. Kangaroo Island, off South Australia, was the trip’s highlight. There we experienced beaches (beaches!) and camped in a real campground. We went on guided bush walks (an anomaly for my father, who still generally prefers to make his own way across deserts and mountain ranges, occasionally meeting some irate and armed landowner who demands to know what the hell he’s doing).We saw koalas, wallaroos and, best of all, fairy penguins, the smallest and most enchanting penguin species. Nocturnal, burrowing, bottom-heavy and just about a foot tall, they waddled with a hunched determination, flapping their expressive little wings. Their eyes shone silver in the glow of our headlamps. (On another nighttime bush walk, we caught a glimpse of a platypus, nothing more than a disappointing flicker in dark water.)One evening we returned to our tent to find that a wallaby had raided our campsite and was helping itself to our sugary Kix cereal, which my parents had bought as a rare treat. The wallaby and I tussled over the box, and I’m pleased to say that I won.CoralSeaNorthernTerritoryDevils MarblesAustraliaAlice SpringsqueenslandUluruBrisbaneCoober PedySouthAustraliaNew south walesSydneyKangaroo I.CanberraVictoriaGreatAustralianBighttasmania400 milesSEPT. 19, 2016
In Coober Pedy, 600 miles inland, we toured dugouts, where, to escape the soaring summer temperatures, a large percentage of the population lives in the hollowed-out spaces of the opal mines. Shops, churches and motels are all carved into the sandstone hillsides. I remember trim curtains hanging on the rock walls to simulate windows. This was also where I bought rough opals (actual jewels!) with my own money, selecting my favorites from a huge dusty bin.The Devils Marbles, north of Alice Springs (the geographic center of the continent), are amazing rock formations, as is, of course, Uluru, which was, 25 years ago, still referred to mostly by its English colonial name, Ayers Rock. It’s breathtaking, the way the massive rock rises out of the flat, red landscape. Uluru holds spiritual significance for the Anangu people, who own the land once again; I don’t think we were aware of how disrespectful it was to climb it, because we did. I remember making my way down the steep incline, gripping the cable with slick hands, thinking of the photos in the visitors’ center of bloody compound fractures.AdvertisementOne night, camping beside the empty road, after not passing a single car all day, we awoke to gunshots, bullets whizzing over our heads. “Stay down, girls!” my parents hissed, until the assailants drove off. In the morning we discovered tire tracks and beer cans and the fact that we had managed to set up camp just beyond the only road sign — and the only shooting target — for miles. Another night we awoke with the unpleasant revelation that we’d pitched our tent next to an enormous termite mound, and they were swarming.There were other high points, too. Sometimes, for a special treat, my dad would stop and get us a Fanta. A single Fanta, which we passed around. As my mother, father and sister gulped that precious nectar, I’d eye them, these people I was supposed to love, ready to accuse them of hogging, of backwashing, ready to pounce on the soda when it was my turn again. Then my father would toss his head back, drain the can, and wipe his beard with relish, while the rest of us looked on in sorrow. “Here, honey,” he’d say, handing my mother the empty can, and we’d all pile back into the truck.But what I remember most vividly about that trip 25 years ago are the kangaroo skulls and the glorious promise of wealth.In the early days of the trip, I sought the sun-bleached, wind-worn skulls, teeth rattling loose in the jaw. I’d shake the red soil from the ocular cavities, hand them over to my father as he scribbled in his field notebook, and pocket the coin.But as we inched into the continent’s interior, stopping whenever some outcrop or dirt pile caught my father’s eye, I realized I could be wealthier than I had ever imagined — if I availed myself of the skulls still firmly rooted in their carcasses. With few natural predators left, the kangaroo population of central Australia is enormous, and its human population, though sparse, has excellent aim.Most vehicles in the Outback are outfitted with roo-bars, large metal contraptions strapped to the hoods like orthodontic headgear. The shoulders of the highways were littered with road kill: wallabies and wallaroos and kangaroos in various stages of decomposition, leading the way to Alice Springs and beyond.I’d kneel on my seat, scanning the side of the road greedily. “Pull over,” I’d command through the grille and over the sounds of the engine and the wind blasting through the open windows. Then I’d wait, jittery with anticipation, to be let out.It’s not easy to dismantle a medium-size mammal. With my father’s rock pick I gouged at the dull, bristly hide of the nearest mummifying kangaroo, prizing apart bones and leathery tendons, mouth-breathing through the nausea all the while. As I worked, the hot wind blew across the desert, mounding tiny dunes around the tires of our lone truck. I’d pick up each head by an ear — barely registering the desiccated lips drawn back from yellow teeth — and, hoping the flesh held, I’d toss the whole thing into a sample bag. Then I’d tie it shut with a twist tie, wipe the decomp off on my shorts, and help myself to potato chips.Gratianne was out of the game from the start. She didn’t have the upper arm strength necessary to hack a head from a body, but her real problem was that she didn’t want it enough. She hadn’t learned to be disappointed by life, didn’t understand that money could remedy those disappointments.AdvertisementThere was so much I wanted: Sportsgirl brand jeans with flowers stitched on the pockets, a wheeled suitcase, a ferret. I wanted to move back to America. I wanted a best friend — preferably my old best friend from two schools before, but really any best friend would do. Mostly I wanted to enroll in one school and stay there for the rest of my life.There aren’t many pictures from this trip, or any of our family trips, really. Most are of landscapes, or are close-ups of soil, with my dad’s rock pick in there for scale. A few, though, feature people. In these, my sister and I grin into the camera, hair knotted, our cheeks red and scaly with windburn. But while my sister’s expression has a sweetness to it — humanity, really — my eyes glint, feral and obsessive.After a couple of days, I no longer gagged as I worked. Maggots, brains, milky, unseeing eyes in their sockets: I handled it all with professional efficiency. Soon I couldn’t see a kangaroo bounding through the desert or grazing on hummock grass without thinking of the skull behind those living, thick-lashed eyes. I’d wonder how long that kangaroo had left before it keeled over and then decomposed entirely. I’d wonder to what extent it needed me to help it along.Oh, we were a spectacle, in our filthy clothes, sample bags of gore piled on the roof of the truck. Once, pulling into a gas station, we watched as the attendant surreptitiously gave his armpits a sniff. First relief, then confusion and horror registered in his face as he realized that we were the source of the stench.I might have gone on forever, amassing a fortune two dollars at a time and descending into Ahab-grade derangement. I might have had a future as a butcher or a serial killer. But within weeks, market forces intervened, and I learned a bitter lesson in economics. As I brought in more and more skulls, my father saw his mistake, and the price he offered plummeted: two dollars to one, from one dollar to 50 cents. My income, like the carbon-14 my dad was measuring, was in a state of radioactive decay.Possibly the roof of the truck couldn’t accommodate any more putrefaction. Possibly my dad began to dread the prospect of opening my sample bags in his lab. Or maybe he just had enough teeth for his enamel study. Whatever the reason, the skull market crashed, and with it, my entrepreneurial spirit.I didn’t especially hold this against my dad. I knew money was tight. But nonetheless, I felt humiliated, disdainful of that girl who had been willing to do such undignified things for a doubloon. Suddenly I saw myself as another, prettier girl might see me, a girl back at Garran Primary School in Canberra, say: crass and desperate, dirty and wild-eyed, with a terrible American accent, sawing away at roadkill like a maniac.AdvertisementI was sharply aware that even if I had gotten rich, I’d still just be myself: almost 12 years old, in a ratty T-shirt, locked in the back of a troop-carrier, being taken wherever my parents were taking me, and, at least for the time being, there wasn’t a thing I could do about it. I felt a little more hesitant to want.That was a quarter-century ago. Now I’m a writer and professor; my work takes place indoors, and I mostly avoid touching dead things. I own a hatchback with both air-conditioning and a functional radio, and it couldn’t take me off-road if my life depended on it. I still hike, but only on marked trails. The last time I camped, I actually brought my down duvet.I have many of the things I wanted so much as a child: home, stability (or, if not stability, at least a say in whether I stay or leave), a wheeled suitcase.But sometimes, sitting at my computer in the quiet of my house, I wonder where that girl has gone, that girl who could identify tracks and scats and didn’t mind smelling a little gamy. To that girl, the world was traversable, the future so full of possibility that she saw promise even in animal remains.Kirstin Valdez Quade, who teaches at Princeton, is the author of the story collection “Night at the Fiestas.”A version of this article appears in print on September 25, 2016, on Page TR1 of the New York edition with the headline: The Season of the Skulls.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.