AdvertisementSupported by5 PlacesPiazza Gae Aulenti, a futuristic-looking square, sits at the heart of a recently developed part of town, where shiny new high-rises are redefining the cityscape. By Shivani VoraOne of the hottest areas of Milan is Piazza Gae Aulenti, a futuristic-looking square with a fountain at its center in the Porto Nuova neighborhood. The square, named after the prolific Italian architect, sits at the heart of this recently developed part of town, where shiny new high-rises are redefining the cityscape. Today, the piazza and the area surrounding it are where in-the-know Milanese head to check out the tasteful shops, buzzy restaurants and cafes.Is it a bookstore or an all-day restaurant? This airy, large establishment with a bustling vibe is aiming to be both: customers can peruse the selection of best-selling books in Italian and English and are welcome to read them while they sit and order everything from coffee and pastries to burgers and salads. Piazza Gae Aulenti, 1; 39-02-6558-01531; lafeltrinelli.itChic meets sportswear: this two-story location of a popular Italian fashion label has a large collection of casual and sporty pieces for men, women and children including puffy jackets, sweatshirts and collared T-shirts. The merchandise is undeniably stylish and designed in a range of hues but toned down enough to appeal to those who favor a more classic look.Piazza Gae Aulenti, 6; 39-02-6347-1465; colmar.itThere’s usually a wait for a table at this homey restaurant which serves hearty Italian dishes such as cannelloni stuffed with spinach and ricotta cheese and impossibly decadent and creamy tiramisù. The shelves along the walls are full of tempting products to take home such as olive oil, honey, hazelnut spread and tomato sauce.Piazza Gae Aulenti n. 1, livello-1; 39-02-6556-0926, capellettilocandaitalia.itEdgy and loud are fitting descriptions of the streetwear clothing line for men and women sold at this boutique. The pieces are the creation of the Naples-born Giuliano Calza, who founded the line and continues to be the creative director. Hard-to-miss items for sale during one visit included an army print bomber jacket for women embroidered with a pink sequined flower pattern and frayed bluejeans for men adorned with patchwork.Via Vincenzo Capelli, 5; 39-02-6347-0345; gcds.itThis intimate cocktail bar overlooks the piazza and specializes in creative cocktails crafted from more than 900 different spirits combined with syrups, sodas and fruit infusions made in-house. There’s a menu of these libations, but the bartenders are also skilled at concocting custom-made cocktails.Piazza Gae Aulenti, 4; 39-02-6379-3539; replaythestage.com/en/bar/octaviusAdvertisement