AdvertisementSupported by5 PLACESBy Anja MuticJust east of Zagreb’s main square, a formerly bland residential neighborhood has been transformed into the creative hub of the Croatian capital. Along its principal thoroughfare, Marticeva, and the streets around it, artsy cafes, bookstores, boutiques and design studios have moved into storefronts that once sold auto parts. The micro-cultural revolution was spearheaded in 2004 by the cafe-literary club Booksa, which drew creative types to the area. As if to confirm the neighborhood’s cool factor, the Design District Zagreb festival, from June 13 to 18, is to be held there for its second year in a row.Opened last fall, this corner restaurant serves globally inspired fare focused on seasonal ingredients; dishes have included veal liver with coconut and pumpkin agnolotti and tuna steak with hummus and bell pepper coulis. A mixologist presides over the small lounge area; check out the menu of artisanal waters and craft beers and an extensive wine list. Popa Dukljanina 1; 385-01-4844-297; noel.hrFashionistas flock to the bright showroom of this trendy Croatian sunglass brand, which sells catchy, vintage-inspired frames with UV-protected lenses. On display in the showroom, from Mauro Massarotto, a designer born in Rovinj, is the brand’s collaboration with Everest Isles swimwear, frames in navy blue or gray stainless steel. Franje Rackog 11; 385-1466-7360; sheriffandcherry.comThis multimedia cultural center hosts a rich repertory of events that include design- and architecture-focused exhibits, lectures and workshops, as well as concerts in its all-white, gallery-like hall. It also has a cozy reader’s corner with a library. Kralja Drzislava 3; 385-1-3778-177; oris.hrThis sleek month-old shop showcases a discerningly curated collection of Scandinavian fashion brands and Croatia’s own IO Ivana Omazic. Ms. Omazic makes each piece using artisanal techniques like hand-painting and woodblock printing. In three giant fitting rooms, you can sip cocktails and coffee as you try on outfits. Marticeva 17; 385-1-7701-177; facebook.com/garderobastoreNamed after Phileas Fogg, the protagonist of Jules Verne’s adventure novel “Around the World in Eighty Days,” this popular spot opened in December 2016 as Croatia’s first steampunk bar. Dark and smoky, the two-floor space has whimsical interiors inspired by the British Victorian era, and a sun-kissed streetside deck. A metalwork-decorated wooden bar serves eclectic drinks like Japanese whiskey, Nicaraguan rum and a Croatian travarica, an herb brandy. Marticeva 31; mr.fogg.zagreb@gmail.comAdvertisement