

      By SUSANNE FOWLER

DEC. 21, 2017

A visit here becomes an exercise in peeling back layers of sooty, hard-working history to arrive at a shinier, bustling and hopeful present.
Related Article
With a surprising number of things to do and see, Manchester doesn’t let you ignore its glory or its grit. A visit becomes an exercise in peeling back layers of sooty, hard-working history to arrive at a shinier, bustling and hopeful present. Ruins reveal the city’s Roman roots. Grand brick buildings evoke the cotton-boom wealth of the 1800s — wealth that was helped along by America’s use of slaves. Glossy modern towers and sleek new hotels reflect the city’s status as a culture, sports and media hub, meaning you could as easily spot American music stars like Jennifer Hudson or Will.i.am of “The Voice UK” as you could soccer millionaires like Paul Pogba of Manchester United. Locals debate whether it is becoming, or even wants to become, a London of the North, and outsiders wonder how it is doing after the terrorist attack at the Manchester Arena in May. Chris Fletcher of the Greater Manchester Chamber of Commerce says hotel and event bookings are back to normal, with the Arena reopening and the city’s Christmas markets up and running. “The general feeling was that we were going to get on with it, and show people what the spirit of Manchester really is,” he said. “That doesn’t mean that we will forget the victims and what happened, but we won’t be defeated.”
Explore the map and find things to do in Manchester.
Trade unionism and the fight for men’s and women’s voting rights rose to prominence in an industrial Manchester, and The People’s History Museum uses color-coded sections and interactive displays to trace 200 years of British revolutions and reforms. Start with the Peterloo Massacre of workers demanding the right to vote; the early socialists; the rise of secret societies; and the birth of the Labour Party, then move through postwar questions of gay rights, migration and how people fought for, and spent, their leisure time. Free admission.Stroll across the Santiago Calatrava Trinity Footbridge over the River Irwell to what is actually Salford, Manchester’s adjacent city, for a seasonal, three-course dinner (£24.95, or about $33) at The River Restaurant. Inside the swank Lowry Hotel, the white-tablecloth dining room, with muted tones of olive and grape, is a fine place to plot your next step over a plate of grilled Yorkshire asparagus, hay-baked chicken or English cheese.Ask for the dinner bill (not “the check”) in time to catch a performance at one of Manchester’s many theaters, where the velvety venues can be a show in themselves. It’s primarily musicals, concerts or dance at the Manchester Opera House (built in 1912) and The Palace Theater (1891); engaging new plays or riffs on classics at the Royal Exchange Theater (1976); or a pop, jazz or classical concert at The Bridgewater Hall (1996). After, head to The Oast House, a welcome retreat for the post-theater crowd in the Spinningfields commercial district. The structure, said to have been used in the 16th century to roast hops, now houses rustic wooden tables, metal chairs and industrial lighting. The large courtyard is a great spot for mingling with Mancunians over a pint of craft ale from the extensive beer list.Grab an Aeropress coffee and an avocado toast at North Tea Power, or head to Home Sweet Home for a plate of seared rump steak hash, in what amounts to Manchester’s hipster zone. For shopping, Afflecks is a four-floor emporium, reminiscent of a huge 1960s head shop, where you can also scout out an au courant ’70s cardigan and vinyl by rock bands that formed here in the ’80s, like the Stone Roses and the Smiths. For more contemporary fare, head to the Manchester Craft and Design Center, in a glass and brick former Victorian fish market, where you can meet regional artists in their studios and browse their handmade jewelry, ceramics and more.For soccer fans, seeing the Premier League clubs Manchester United or Manchester City in action could be the highlight of the weekend. But if your team isn’t playing, a stop at the free National Football Museum can still score points. Delve into the details of England’s 1966 World Cup victory, or — for a fee — have your picture taken with famed championship trophies and test your skills in a penalty shootout.Lovers of rare books and manuscripts will want to quietly ensconce themselves in an alcove of the cathedral-esque Historic Reading Room of The John Rylands Library, established in 1900 by Enriqueta Rylands, widow of the wealthy textile dealer. Others might enjoy traipsing up the Gothic building’s stone staircase or down to its original Victorian toilets, still in use. There’s also a papyrus fragment said to be the earliest known piece of the New Testament.Just a few blocks from the Rylands is Mr. Thomas’s Chop House. There’s been a pub here since around 1870, and today’s version serves satisfying British classics like bangers and mash, steak and kidney pudding, and fish and chips. The other draw here is the décor: Art Nouveau wall tiles in shades of green add to the heritage mood. A double lamb chop lunch runs about £15.Manchester is dotted with statues of figures from the past: There’s Queen Victoria, the Duke of Wellington and even Abraham Lincoln. But a more recent work sits on a bench in the small park called Sackville Gardens: a life-size bronze of the computer science pioneer Alan Turing, who helped crack the Enigma Code during World War II and helped run the computing lab at the University of Manchester.You can go from classy to kitschy for this time-honored afternoon tradition. On the classy but still casual end of the spectrum, sit under the Gothic arches of the Sculpture Hall Café in the Town Hall with a pot of Earl Grey and an assortment of savory finger sandwiches made with free-range egg and watercress, or goat cheese and spinach (£14.95). For a twist on the Alice in Wonderland experience, take your tea party (pot for two is £5.95) for a slice of decadently decorated layer cake (about £4.50) within the pastel walls and faux-frosted countertops of the Richmond Tea Rooms in the area known as the Gay Village.Spend a little shoe leather and work off that extra scone in the company of a local. New Manchester Walks (starting at £8) offers guided strolls on subjects like Hidden Gems of Manchester, Great Art Treasures of Manchester, Le Corbusier’s Manchester, Manchester Music: The Hacienda Years, and Bohemian Literary Manchester, which was actually a congenial pub crawl spiced with anecdotes about writers with ties to the city, including Anthony Burgess and George Orwell.Efforts to cater to the well-heeled are in evidence at Adam Reid at The French, the flagship restaurant inside The Midland hotel, where a plaque proclaims it is where Charles Rolls and Henry Royce first met more than a century ago. In the conversation-friendly, oval dining room, the Manchester-born chef-patron Mr. Reid offers a nine-course tasting menu (£85) of “modern British” food like a Lancashire cheese and onion tart with lovage and eel; almond-poached brill, artichoke and basil; and a clementine mousse cake with white chocolate and buckthorn.A short bus ride from the city center is The Whitworth art gallery. Its collection includes works by English artists, among them the painters J.M.W. Turner and L.S. Lowry, and the sculptors Barbara Hepworth and Henry Moore. But the collection ventures beyond the expected to include examples of Outsider Art, Islamic embroideries and, perhaps most unusually, hand-printed and industrial wallpapers dating from the 17th century to more contemporary designs by Niki de Saint Phalle and Damien Hirst.A 10-minute walk from the Whitworth is Elizabeth Gaskell’s House. Mrs. Gaskell was a Victorian-era author whose books formed the basis for the BBC television mini-series “Cranford” in 2007, starring Judi Dench and Imelda Staunton; and “North and South” in 2004, featuring Richard Armitage. Visitors are guided by volunteers who describe life in the years that fellow writers Charles Dickens, Charlotte Brontë and Harriet Beecher Stowe were dropping by to visit Mrs. Gaskell and her Unitarian minister husband, William. End your tour of the restored Regency-style home with a slice of homemade cake and a pot of steaming tea in the downstairs gift shop where Mrs. Gaskell’s works are sold at bargain prices.In the terracotta-brick former headquarters of a Victorian-era insurance company, the Principal Manchester (at corner of Oxford and Whitworth Streets; 44-161-288-1111; www.phcompany.com/principal/manchester-hotel; doubles from 85.50 pounds; suites from 361 pounds) offers contemporary comfort and boutique-hotel chic for history buffs. After a renovation costing more than 25 million pounds, the Principal has kept intact the lovely period faience in hallways, and the glass-domed ceiling in the spacious lobby, while converting former clerks’ offices into wood-paneled bedrooms with soaring ceilings and sleek subway-tile bathrooms. On the ground floor, there’s a lively public bar. Some room rates include a generous breakfast in The Refuge by Volta restaurant.Across from the Piccadilly Rail Station, the sleek design inside Motel One (34 London Road; 44-161-200-5650; www.motel-one.com/en/hotels/manchester/; doubles from 84 pounds), an outpost of the German budget hotel chain, makes up for the more dingy feel of the street outside. Rooms are compact, but the lobby lounge is a welcoming area for a Cottonopolis cocktail, in a nod to the city’s industrial past.Flight and Hotel information provided by Google.Prices represent a snapshot of low fares and rates for weekend trips.Advertisement