Slaves fleeing the American South established new lives in Canada. Three noteworthy museums tell of their struggles and triumphs.By AFUA COOPERFEB. 24, 2017
The British North American provinces, or Canada, were among the most storied termini of the Underground Railroad. At least 30,000 African-American men, women and children — fugitive slaves — fled the American South and made their way to Canada. The overwhelming majority settled in the southwestern portion of Ontario, where many of them forged new identities as African-Canadians.At the three Ontario museums featured here, the spirit of the Railroad is undeniably present. I have been visiting these places for more than 20 years, and each time I feel as if I am walking through living history.This museum on the banks of the Sydenham River is dedicated to the life and times of one towering figure — Josiah Henson, a freedom seeker from Maryland. In 1830, Henson fled with his wife and young children, endured hunger and exhaustion on the Underground Railroad and finally made it to Dresden. He farmed, became a preacher and emerged as a leading abolitionist and community leader. He and other abolitionists, black and white, established the nearby Dawn settlement as a refuge for Underground Railroad immigrants, and also for free African-Americans who could no longer live in a place that was hostile to black freedom. Dawn became a self-sufficient community.Henson is believed by many to be the prototype for the title character in Harriet Beecher Stowe’s “Uncle Tom’s Cabin.” Before Stowe published her novel, Henson had written his own story, “The Life of Josiah Henson, Formerly a Slave, Now an Inhabitant of Canada, as Narrated by Himself.”AdvertisementThe museum has an interpretive center, a 19th-century pioneer home, the Henson home with some of the original furniture, and the Henson burial site. One exhibit details Henson’s journey to freedom in considerable depth.AdvertisementThe story of Dawn, told through museum exhibits, is interwoven with that of Henson. At least 500 freedom seekers made their home in Dawn, where Henson and his colleagues founded the British-American Institute, one of the few institutions where black youths could receive quality education.The museum also has a display dedicated to the Middle Passage, the trans-Atlantic crossing from West Africa to the United States during which captive Africans were chained together in the holds of slave ships. It includes a display of whips, chains, branding instruments, thumb screws and shackles that were part of the daily regimen of slave torture and discipline on plantations. I ran my hands over the leg shackles and felt instant dread.In 1849, a white Louisiana slaveholder and preacher, William King, freed his slaves and journeyed with them to Ontario, where he bought hundreds of acres of land. The former slaves and King founded Buxton, also known as the Elgin Settlement. Families of freedom seekers bought property from King and established themselves, and Buxton emerged as a vibrant farming community.Today, although most of the black families are gone, some remain. Among them are Bryan and Shannon Prince and their children, descendants of some of the original families. Today, the Princes work to continue the story of the Buxton settlement. Ms. Prince, the curator, often does 19th-century re-enactments, while Mr. Prince, who describes himself first and foremost as a farmer, is an indomitable researcher and genealogist who has written several histories of the black experience at Buxton and in Canada. (One of them, “A Shadow on the Household,” tells the story of Maria Weems, a black teenager who dressed as a boy as she made her way to freedom.)At the museum, several exhibits speak to the lives of the early settlers and the history of the African diaspora in Canada. A Civil War exhibit is excellent. A number of men from Buxton and the surrounding area went to the United States to fight on the side of the Union, and visitors can see some of the weapons used during the war, including rifles, pistols, balls (bullets), knives and swords.A 19th-century barn is also part of the museum. A farm life display showcases hoes, axes, plows and other implements.“We are a hands-on community museum,” Ms. Prince said, “and when people visit and are encouraged to pick up original shackles and to touch the logs on an 1850 log cabin that were handhewn, it is a memorable experience for them.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The story of Buxton’s Underground Railroad freedom seekers is remembered every year at “Homecoming” on Labour Day weekend in September. Thousands of the descendants of original settlers from around the world converge on the site to honor their ancestors. The weekend offers Civil War re-enactments, a parade and a baseball game, a favorite pastime of Buxton settlers.AdvertisementIn 1845, Daniel Walls, a North Carolina slaveholder, died, leaving his slaves and plantation to his wife, Jane, and their four children. Walls had freed his trusted slave John Walls and instructed him to look after Jane and his family. The former slave and his mistress fell in love. But knowing that interracial marriage was illegal in North Carolina, and knowing that their love could result in their deaths, John, Jane and the children fled the state. In Indiana, the couple paused long enough to be married, and then hurried to Canada. They landed in Puce township, 25 miles east of the Windsor-Detroit border.John Walls purchased 20 acres from the Refugee Home Society, which sold land at a low cost to African-American Underground Railroad immigrants, and built a log cabin, established a small farm, and, with his wife, charted a life of freedom. The Walls had six children together, and over time acquired an additional 180 acres. In Canada, John added the word “Freeman” to his name.The Walls joined another 100 other black families and established a vibrant community at Puce, with several churches, schools, farms, a grist mill, a saw mill and shops.Today, the Walls property is still in the hands of the family but is now a museum, run by Bryan Walls, a retired dentist and a direct descendant of John Freeman Walls, and Bryan’s wife, Anna. (Mr. Walls is the author of “The Road That Led to Somewhere,” a biography of John Freeman Walls.)The museum has several buildings. One of them, the John Graves Simcoe House, is named after the first lieutenant governor of what was called Upper Canada, an abolitionist. Exhibits on the lower level include one devoted to black history in the United States and Canada.The original log cabin of John and Jane Walls still stands, and inside is the original bed where they slept. When I touch the walls of the cabin, I feel the roughness of the original logs, and I am sure I sense the expectation and aspirations of John and Jane Walls as they begin a new life.The Peace Chapel, a small wooden structure next to the creek that runs through the property, is also part of the museum’s offerings. Inside the chapel, behind the podium, is a four-foot cross made from bricks from the Lorraine Motel in Memphis, where the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. was assassinated.The chapel is dedicated to the civil rights heroine Rosa Parks. In the years before her death in 2005, Ms. Parks and students from her institute’s “Pathways to Freedom” educational program were guests of the museum every summer. Ms. Parks trained her students in civil rights advocacy, Underground Railroad history and other subjects. Bryan and Anna Walls recall her sitting by the chapel, her eyes closed in deep reflection.The property has a forested area, the historic walkway, where visitors can experience what it must have been like to travel along the Underground Railroad. On a day I took part, a conductor led visitors through the dense shrubs. We ran through the woods pursued by the howls and growls of hound-dogs (coming from loudspeakers on trees) causing our hearts to beat faster and faster, and giving wings to our feet, until we safely arrived at “freedom’s land.”AdvertisementBryan Walls said the museum is meant to have an impact: “I want visitors to leave this site feeling strong and empowered and ready to change the world.”Afua Cooper is professor of black Canadian studies at Dalhousie University and the author of “The Hanging of Angelique: The Untold Story of Canadian Slavery and the Burning of Old Montreal.”A version of this article appears in print on February 26, 2017, on Page TR4 of the New York edition with the headline: Farming, Fellowship and Liberty Up North.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.