

 Stephanie Rosenbloom
 

THE GETAWAY
JAN. 30, 2017
Reports of lost luggage have hit a record low in the United States. There were about two accounts of mishandled bags for every 1,000 passengers in November, according to the Department of Transportation. In previous years, there were many months when the mishandled bag rate was double that. If you have been longing to indulge in more refined luggage, now may be the time to spring for something new.Whether you check them or carry them on, today’s bags are stylish and high-tech, be they shiny spinners from the model Ines de la Fressange and the French label Lipault, or sleek suitcases from the newcomer Raden with USB ports to charge your smartphone and tablet. And for something, shall we say, unconventional, there’s Modobag, a motorized suitcase that you can sit on and ride through the airport like a scoot-along toy. Below, a look at some of the more upscale innovations.LIPAULT PARIS AND INES DE LA FRESSANGE PARIS Ms. Fressange, a model, writer and the owner of a clothing and home goods boutique in Paris, has teamed up with Lipault for a smart-looking collection of luggage and accessories in the colors of the French flag, including deep navy blue and bright red spinners (starting at $201), backpacks ($72 for the XS) and a duffel bag ($95). Like Lipault’s luggage, the pieces are chic yet sporty. Smooth with a faint sheen, they stand out without any frippery. Available beginning Feb. 21.LOUIS VUITTON AND MARC NEWSON The French luxury house collaborated with Mr. Newson, an Australian-born industrial designer, on a collection of rolling leather luggage in saturated hues — with names such as citron, noir, coquelicot, piment, saphir, fuchsia, indigo — that call to mind summer in the Mediterranean. (Also available in the classic LV Monogram canvas and Damier Graphite canvas.) With clean lines and corners and handles covered in matching cowhide, these suitcases (starting at around $2,660 online) look as if they ought to be displayed in a posh living room rather than pulled through an airport.AdvertisementTUMI V3 AND 19 DEGREE Last year, Tumi introduced its lightest hard-sided collection to date. Known as V3, the rolling luggage ($425 to $625) comes in colors with names like hunter, magenta, Pacific blue and waterfall stripe. The 19 Degree collection, which is newer, is Tumi’s first aluminum ($995 to $1,395) luggage collection (also available in polycarbonate). Monogramming is free on Tumi.com.AdvertisementHARTMANN 7R COLLECTION Those looking for a little flash will find it in the rolling luggage from this veteran label’s 7R and 7R Master collections (from $650 to $1,195 for the largest 7R Master). Hartmann has been around since 1877 and, like Tumi, was acquired in recent years by one of the world’s largest luggage companies, Samsonite. The 7R collection has classic leather details, but your eye is likely to be drawn to the notice-me metallic shells in pale blue, silver and gold. (And yes, the bags are available in black, too, though that’s hardly the point.)EBBY RANE 12 IN 1 QUARTERMASTER Those who long for the days when it was commonplace to travel with a trunk full of clothes and accessories may want to check out this Canadian brand’s Quartermaster, which was rolled out to the United States over the last year or so. Ebby Rane only makes carry-on luggage, and inside its Quartermaster rolling suitcases ($995) are 10 separate containers, including a vanity case, jewelry case, cosmetics case, two shoe sleeves, a bath or beach bag, a “knickers” bag, a laundry bag, a tech case, a liquids case and a dust cover. The Quartermaster 12 in 1 also comes with a cognac leather clutch bag. For men, there’s the black Quartermaster Homme ($925). Later this year, Ebby Rane plans to introduce soft, leather-trimmed bags for men and women that can slip onto the handle of a Quartermaster to store additional carry-on items.RADEN This brand, introduced last year, makes high-tech, lightweight suitcases as glossy as hard candy (though you can choose a matte version, if you prefer). Each bag has a handle that doubles as a scale to determine the bag’s weight; proximity sensors that alert you when your case is coming down the luggage carousel; and not one, but two USB ports, so you can charge a smartphone or tablet. A companion app provides information like the weather, security line wait times and your suitcase’s weight and proximity to you. The suitcases are available in two sizes ($295 and $395, or $595 for a set) and colors including whimsical options such as light pink, light purple, gold and bronze. Alas, when you try to purchase many of them on the company’s website, you’ll find them on “presale” or you’ll have to join a waiting list.AWAY Another relative newcomer, this brand — founded by two former executives at Warby Parker, the vintage-inspired eyeglasses company — offers bags that can charge portable devices yet don’t look as if they’re from the year 2025. Those who want to fly under the radar will appreciate The Carry-On ($225) and The Bigger Carry-On ($245), low-key looking suitcases in subdued neutrals with a USB port so you can charge devices like your phone or tablet. It’s worth noting that early adopters of smart luggage from Raden, Away and other brands such as Bluesmart may find that the battery packs inside the suitcases are unfamiliar to Transportation Security Administration workers. That could get you stopped while trying to breeze through airport security. Aware of potential pitfalls, Away includes a “T.S.A.-approved screwdriver” to open the battery case and remove the battery (which can be found by unzipping the lining of the luggage) if necessary.RIMOWA ELECTRONIC TAG The Rimowa Electronic Tag bag (from $695 to $1,725) looks like its parallel-grooved brethren, but it allows travelers to tag and check their luggage from home using a smartphone. A companion app personalizes the bag’s electronic tag, allowing it to communicate with an airline app. Then flight data is sent to the luggage via Bluetooth and appears on a display screen on the bag. When arriving at the airport, the bag is already tagged and ready for drop off. Of course, all of this requires cooperation from the airlines. So far Lufthansa is the major partner, though the bag is also available for EVA Air flights, and Rimowa is testing the technology with other airlines, including United.The Sweethome, a product recommendation website owned by The New York Times Company, has additional information on the best travel backpacks and the best full-size, carry-on luggage.A version of this article appears in print on February 5, 2017, on Page TR3 of the New York edition with the headline: The Bold and the Beautiful in Luggage.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »