
In Transit By                     
ELAINE GLUSAC

JAN. 4, 2016
CRYSTAL CRUISES EXPANDS ON THE SMALL SIDEOvershadowed by the holiday rush, Crystal Cruises launched its newest ship, the 62-passenger yacht, late last month in the Seychelles Islands. With its new Crystal Esprit, the luxury line adds a third and entirely new boutique class of ship to its fleet. Featuring contemporary décor with sea blue accents, the ship provides a swim deck off the stern; dining areas indoors and out; a top-deck pool, sauna and bar; and generous bathrooms, including double sinks and deluge showers, adjoining its 31 guest rooms. It also carries a deep sea submersible vessel with which guests can explore underwater. Through mid-March it will cruise the Seychelles with nine-day trips from $4,960 a person, and thereafter will spend most of summer and fall in the Mediterranean. Crystal is amid a major expansion with the expected introduction of private charter jet service in March and five river cruise ships coming next summer.EUROSTAR’S WINTER SALEThe high-speed passenger rail service Eurostar has begun a winter sale from London to France and Belgium. Until Jan. 12, passengers can book fares starting at £29 ($42) one way to Lille, Calais and Paris in France, and to Brussels in Belgium. Fares to Belgian cities Bruges, Ghent and Antwerp start at £35 one way. The sale is good on bookings between Jan. 15 and March 23. A similar sale to the French destinations Lyon, Avignon and Marseille start at £40 one way for travel Jan. 9 through Sept. 30 if booked by Jan. 12.MSC’S NEW SHIP ON SALEThough it won’t hit the water for another two years, MSC Cruises’ new ship, the MSC Seaside, is open for booking now. The 4,140-passenger ship will launch in December 2017 and sail year-round from Miami to the Caribbean. The new ship defies norms by placing the pool, normally found on the top deck, at ocean level with a promenade ringed in windows. Some staterooms, designed for families and groups, will accommodate up to 10 people, and luxury suites will include private hot tubs and hanging gardens. Other amenities include a full-size bowling alley, a kids-only restaurant, and a water park with five slides. Seven-night itineraries will visit St. Thomas, the Bahamas and Puerto Rico on eastern sailings, and Jamaica, the Cayman Islands, Cozumel and the Bahamas on western Caribbean routes. Prices start at $589 a person.VIRGIN AMERICA AND CHINA SOUTHERN LINK FLIGHTSVirgin America and China Southern Airlines have announced a code-share agreement between the two airlines that will offer one-stop booking, check-in and seamless baggage handling on itineraries that involve both airlines. China Southern is the only airline offering nonstop service between the United States and Guangzhou and Wuhan. Its flights to and from Los Angeles and San Francisco will link up with Virgin America routes from those California airports to and from Boston, Chicago, Dallas, Fort Lauderdale, Las Vegas, Newark, New York, Seattle, San Diego and Washington, D.C.AdvertisementAIRLINE ROUTE EXPANSIONSJetBlue continues its expansion in the Caribbean with the announcement of a new flight from Fort Lauderdale to Aguadilla, Puerto Rico. The new service to Aguadilla, gateway to the tranquil northwest region of the island, will begin May 5.LAN Peru has announced it will begin service from Washington, D.C., to Lima, Peru, beginning May 2. Service will run Mondays, Thursdays and Sundays and is the only nonstop flight between the two capitals.AdvertisementIn time for bud break, the wine country term for blossoming grapevines, Alaska Airlines plans to begin new service from Orange County to Sonoma County in California. The new daily service begins March 16, 2016.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »