AdvertisementSupported byBy The New York TimesOur recent article about people who travel to a salon in the Dominican Republic that styles hair in natural coils rather than straightening it drew more than 100 comments from readers. Many not only touched on the standard of straightening hair but also expanded on the view of race within the Dominican Republic. Here are a few edited excerpts.I live in Santo Domingo. For many years, I play with my hair — sometimes I wear an Afro and sometimes I straighten it. I even got respect with my hair style. In many places in the Dominican country, people look badly on the Afro style. So it’s a kind of racism. Really funny in a country where we are not white.LizaSanto DomingoI’m Dominican and I went natural when I was a teen in the ’90s. My Dominican hairdresser encouraged me to do it, and I did, against my mother’s wishes. I’ve had to deal with a lot of negativity for it. I understand why so many people hesitate — the pressure and resistance to something so personal is immense. But I’m stubborn and strong-willed. Even so, it hasn’t been easy. Don’t be so quick to judge Dominican women for taking their time to go natural.RFManhattan, NYFascinating. Dominicans yearn for natural hair only after expelling Haitians for being black.MonchèreHaitiThe timing on this story is perfect, especially given the news surrounding the awful treatment of Haitians/Dominicans of Haitian descent and the draconian new immigration law in D.R. If you’re paying attention, there is a clear connection. This is about more than just hair. By and large, Dominicans work hard to reject every aspect of their African heritage, a regal heritage that links them directly to the Haitians. Disdain for thick, tightly coiled or curly natural hair is merely an extension of the larger social forces at work here: Black/dark brown skin is viewed as somehow tainted and even hideous, whereas café con leche complexions or lighter are viewed as pure and therefore more desirable. White colonizers have long since left these shores, but isn’t it remarkable how their influence never seems to wane? Carolina Contreras is my hero! She is starting an important dialogue, which could lead to a little truth and reconciliation.MJPnew york, nyAs a Dominican woman, I believe we ladies choose how we prefer to wear our hair. Dominican women from all ancestries are beautiful, no matter how they choose to wear their hair, and anyone who is trying to make this about colonization has hate in their heart. Relaxing/straightening hair is like hair dying it, which many cultures enjoy doing.Love Straight, Love Curly, Love Style, Love DominicansNYCSo I guess if a white woman with pin straight hair gets a perm to make her hair curly, then it’s self hate. If she cuts her hair short in a boy cut style, that must be self hate too.BRidgewoodI’m a white woman with fine, limp hair, and I’ve always thought natural hair is beautiful, so I’ve spent my life envious of the gorgeous curls on African-Americans or the thick, sleek locks of Asians (and many natural styles and textures in between). I also think people should wear their hair however they want, so I’m not judging women (or men) who choose to alter their natural textures, but if it stems from any motivation other than personal choice — such as social status or the pressure of cultural conformity — that makes me sad. Hence I’ve found myself smitten by this article and by this salon.EWRMinneapolis, MNThis is beautifully written. I myself am not Dominican, but I am Mexican & Chinese and have very thick, curly hair. It’s great to see more and more women embracing the curls and teaching the younger generations that beauty is far more than what they see on TV. What this salon is doing is commendable, it may not seem like a big deal to most people, but from a young age we are taught that how we look is not necessarily beautiful, or AS beautiful as the models or celebrities we see, because of our hair. Thank you for this article. Curls are beautiful!!DaniaCaliforniaAdvertisement