AdvertisementSupported byBitesBy Cheryl Lu-Lien TanAt the Kilted Lobster, in a quiet nook of Edinburgh’s trendy Stockbridge neighborhood, Colin Hinds, the owner, is more than happy to tell you what you should be eating. “We’ve had some beautiful halibut on for three weeks because it was real plentiful,” he said during a recent visit. “And the really soft flakiness of the whole sea bream is great.”Mr. Hinds, who was executive chef at various Edinburgh restaurants before opening the Kilted Lobster in October, was right, of course — the sea bream with a briny, rock-salted skin was marvelous, with its juicy flesh bearing a lovely sweetness that married nicely with its tomato salsa pairing. During our meal, little else — seafood and not — disappointed.Matching its fare, this 27-seat restaurant aims for a laid-back seaside feel. Small wooden sailboats and candleholders that resemble wave-bashed sticks that have been tied together adorn the ocean blue tables, and large paintings of brightly colored fish and lobsters cover the walls. “I wanted it to be rustic, comfortable and a little bit quirky,” Mr. Hinds said. “We’ve certainly got the quirky part down.”In the kitchen, the chefs Andy Wilson and Grant Mercer are working on rustic and comfortable. Our meal began with an amuse-bouche of little bites served on a mirrored plate — quarter-size crispy haggis balls, a deliciously simple roll of smoked salmon and a perfectly executed fried oyster.Of the traditional (non-seafood) Scottish dishes that dot the menu, we tried the Morangie Brie rumbledethumps, an old Scottish Borders dish that’s a little akin to the English leftover mash-up bubble and squeak. The lightly crispy potato cake was a delight, with or without the sweet tomato jam served with it. The local beef is flavorful and worth a try — the sirloin with a salted hazelnut crumb, potato fondant and garlic greens made for a comforting dish. And a toffee apple panna cotta on shortbread resembled a Scottish-inflected cheesecake and proved to be a tasty finish.Mr. Hinds has pledged the restaurant’s profits to initiatives such as training and job placement programs as well as to cooking classes for single parents on a budget. “I wanted to open a socially conscious restaurant that was really for the local community,” he said. “We closed the restaurant on Christmas and fed almost 100 people for free.”If they were all eating this well, they were very lucky indeed.Kilted Lobster, 112 Saint Stephen Street; 44-131-220-6677;  kiltedlobster.com. An average meal for two, without drinks or tip, is about £50, or $72.Advertisement