
Personal Journeys By                     
VERONICA CHAMBERS

SEPT. 6, 2016
Like many first-generation Americans my age, I learned Spanish on the fly. My Panamanian mother spoke to my brother and me in Spanish. We answered in English. Back then, in New York City in the late 1970s and ’80s, being able to speak flawless English was a prize. When people complimented me on how well I spoke, my family members beamed.I eventually learned to read, write and speak Spanish on my own. It was an important way to connect with my heritage since the language unifies Latinos of every national origin and race. But I would never be mistaken for a native speaker, could never let loose a torrent of Spanish words like the heroine of an Almodóvar movie. My accent isn’t perfect but all across Spain, from the Costa del Sol to Granada, from Bilbao to Barcelona, I have had the happy experience of being able to understand every menu, every movie poster and every sign.I was determined that my daughter, Flora — born the year that President Obama reminded us in his campaign that Sí, se puede (Yes, we can) — would learn to speak Spanish early, and better than I did. So we moved to Hoboken, N.J., where she could attend a Spanish-language immersion school. And as she prepared to enter the fourth grade, I decided to move to Madrid for a month so that she could live like a Spanish girl, and I could work on my own accent (ay la verguenza! or Oh the shame!).It helped that she had already gotten to know — and love — the city during a short business trip two years ago when we had taken her along. My husband could work from there and planned to enjoy the food and the gin and tonics (the cocktail of choice in Madrid) in between business meetings and communicating with his New York office. My husband isn’t Latino, but we’ve made a decision to raise our daughter with an emphasis on her Latina heritage. Decamping to Madrid for a month was a way of keeping that cultural focus front and center, to say that, in our family, we’re passionate about Spanish language, movies, theater, art, books and food. I wanted to make it a vacation with a purpose, and my job, as the adult who speaks Spanish, would be to make it all seamless and fun.AdvertisementI started by renting an apartment with a roof deck in the center of town. Madrid is not close to any beach, and yet the city thrives on outdoor living. In my estimation, I would get both urban pleasures and that resort feeling. I rented the apartment almost a year in advance, and in the time between booking and visiting, I spent months fantasizing about our trip while looking at the photos. To provide some structure to the trip, I enrolled my daughter in a one-week camp at Museo Thyssen-Bornemisza. To New Yorkers, the cost of the camp is likely shockingly low: $135 for the entire week. My plan was to book just a few things, then let local discovery lead us to activities we wouldn’t have found from afar.AdvertisementDuring our first week it seemed as if it was already paying off. I learned about a local parenting site called Sapos y Princesas, a wellspring of information that is something like a Spanish-language Time Out. I discovered that in honor of Cervantes’s 400th birthday, there were a number of free children’s workshops around the city. There was even one at Cervantes’s birthplace that still had space: Periodicos del Siglo Oro (Journalists of the Golden Age). In this workshop, children pretend to be reporters during the age of Cervantes and figure out all his secrets. I signed my daughter up for two days and then did a happy dance around our enormous apartment.The dance slowed a bit the next day when my husband discovered the reason there were free slots: Cervantes’s childhood home is a good 50-minute train ride east of the city center, in a town called Alcalá de Henares. Our daughter didn’t care much, though. The ride, she said, gave her an opportunity to learn how tickets work on a different train system. Madrid’s system is more like Paris’s and less like the swipe and smart cards of New York and New Jersey, she said. By the workshop’s last day she was on first-name basis with the museum staff and local girls, and had grown fond of the 17th-century wooden toilet in an upstairs bedroom. We ended the week with her high-fiving the life-size sculptures of Don Quixote and Sancho Panza that stand guard in front of Cervantes’s home.The following Sunday, I signed my daughter up for a one-day workshop at Museo Sorolla,  a little gem in the home of the 20th-century painter Joaquín Sorolla, not far from the American embassy. Sorolla was a friend of John Singer Sargent, and his work was noteworthy for the same mastery of portraits and light. The workshop cost all of five euros, about $5.50, and Flora loved touring the museum, then creating her own impressionist work in the garden where Sorolla himself liked to paint.In between museum workshops, we spent time at Buen Retiro Park, Madrid’s Central Park, which is just a short walk from our apartment. The park features Andalusian-style gardens, two palaces from the late 1800s and a small lake with row boats for rent. Walking home from the park one day, we found a charming puzzle and game store called Don Juego. We bought a deck of cards and a Clue-like game called Código Secreto.The second week of our trip Flora would attend the weeklong camp at Museo Thyssen. On our previous trip, she had done a one-day workshop there, and we had all been struck by how engaged the staff was with the children. Before the program began, they sat one on one with each participant and asked them questions in Spanish such as: “Have you been to this museum before? Do you like to make art or see art, neither or both?” The theme of the camp was “the Laboratorio of Dr. Haustein,” a mystery they built around a portrait in the gallery. During the week the children are challenged to use the museum and the children’s lab on the ground floor to answer these questions: Are scientists artists? Can artists be scientists?The day before camp started, my daughter was nervous. She said, “I don’t speak the language.” I reminded her that she does. She said, “What if I don’t make any friends?” I told her that I hoped that she would. At the end of the first day, she was excited to report that the Spanish was easy to understand and that she had made two friends, a British girl who attends school in Madrid and a German girl whose family has a summer home in Spain. That both girls were three years older than her and leaned on her to translate when they didn’t understand made her immensely proud. She had gone from a 9-year-old to a tween in un momento.PORTUGALMuseo SorollaFRANCECalle de Sta EngraciaLuzi BombónAlcala de HenaresMadridSPAINSergi Arola GastroPaseo de la CastellanaMadridcalle de alcaláPaseo de RECOLETOSDon JuegoAv. de menéndez Palayoparquedel retiroMuseo Thyssen-BornemiszaPradoSEPT. 8, 2016
But we came to Spain as much for the language as we did for an immersion in its culture. During our last week in town, we were joined by friends whose son does not speak Spanish. This turned out not to be any problem at all because our friend’s son spoke two universal languages: food and soccer.AdvertisementWe booked a 2 p.m. lunch at Sergi Arola, a two-Michelin-star restaurant. A protégé of Ferran Adrià’s at the now-closed El Bulli, Mr. Arola serves up playful and delicious molecular gastronomy-inspired takes on classic Spanish cuisine. It was easy to choose when to go: Saturday at 2 p.m. is the only time they allow children and accommodate them with a special menu. On our last visit, the children’s menu had been a kid version of the adults’ with lots of foams and bubbles. This time around, my heart broke a little when I heard the waiter say, “For kids, we have a hamburger or pasta option.” Our kid went for the hamburger. Our friend’s kid, an always ambitious diner who was fresh off an omakase meal at Nobu, went for the adult tasting menu. While our meal began with a molecular gastronomy version of a deconstructed martini, complete with an olive that melts like air in your mouth, the kids started with a cocktail glass scoop of berry sorbet and “lemon caviar.”The fact that some hard-working chef spent the time to blow dozens of little lemon-scented spheres to resemble caviar is a miracle to me. It was a big win with the kids, as were the chef’s take on traditional Spanish tapas. They devoured an entire plate of deconstructed patatas bravas, the fried roughly cut chunks of potatoes drizzled with tomato aioli. No matter how refined and experimental the execution of the dish, fried potatoes are always a winner, as are bombas, the traditional Barcelona dish of mashed potato balls stuffed with beef. At the end of the meal, each member of the party was given a freshly printed menu of the tasting, describing what they ate. The kids loved this, too.On our last night in town, I booked a table at Luzi Bombón, a sleek, stylish restaurant on the Paseo de la Castellana, Madrid’s answer to the Champs-Élysées. I had heard that there was music on Thursday night so I booked for then. We arrived at 10 p.m., our daughter in tow, and the hostess did not blink: She seated us at a great table, next to a wall of open glass doors. We could see out to the Paseo and could feel the breeze as the city finally began to cool down. I thought that music would mean live musicians: a guy with a guitar, perhaps, or a jazz trio. I was so surprised when I realized that “music” meant a D.J. who was Spanish and had a fondness for ’90s rap and R&B.My daughter, exhausted from weeks away from home, promptly fell asleep on my lap, minutes after we arrived. This left my husband and me free to enjoy dinner to the beat of all our hip-hop favorites from Biggie Smalls to LL Cool J to Cypress Hill and everything in between.A year ago when I’d suggested that our family rent an apartment in Madrid for the month of July, my husband had thought it was a crazy idea. But we found a beautiful, affordable apartment with high-speed Wi-Fi that enabled us to work as much as we needed to. Our daughter attended one camp and two museum workshops and walked away with not only improved Spanish but also the email addresses of two new friends with whom she hoped to keep in touch. We hosted two dinner parties on the deck of our Madrid apartment, one for friends who we discovered were in Madrid only after seeing them post photos on Facebook.My favorite painting is at the Prado in Madrid. It is “Las Meninas,” the famous 17th-century portrait of a young princess and the girls and young women who attend to her, las meninas. I was a 15-year-old high school student when my Spanish teacher first showed me a slide of the painting and explained how Diego Velázquez had changed the course of modern painting by painting himself into the picture. I remember dreaming back then of going to Madrid to see that painting, the way I dreamed of seeing movies by Pedro Almodóvar without subtitles or reading Isabel Allende novels in their original version.For me, the Spanish language was always more than a door into a deeper level of my family life and our own particular heritage. It was access to a culture that would take (and has taken) me around the world. By the end of our month in Madrid, I felt a little like Velázquez. Our family had, if only for a few short weeks, painted ourselves into the canvas of Spanish life.A trip to Madrid with your child doesn’t have to be stressful. Here are some major stops to keep it fun and educational.AdvertisementCervantes’s Birthplace Museum (Calle Mayor, 48 28801 Alcalá de Henares; 91-889-96-54; museocasanataldecervantes.org) provides workshops, exhibitions and themed tours year-round to celebrate the 400th anniversary of the birth of the Spanish writer.Museo Sorolla (General Martínez Campos, 37 28010; 91-310-15-84;museosorolla.mcu.es) sits in the home of the 20th-century painter Joaquín Sorolla. It offers a workshop in addition to exhibitions.Museo Thyssen-Bornemisza (Paseo del Prado, 828014; 91-791-13-70; museothyssen.org) is one of three major museums in the city. It offers family workshops in the fall and has a stunning collection of works from the 13th through the 20th centuries.Sergi Arola (Calle de Zurbano, 31, 28010; 91-310-21-69; sergiarola.es) is a two-Michelin-star restaurant devoted to a molecular gastronomy-inspired version of Spanish cuisine.Meat Madrid (Calle Vallehermoso, 72, 28015; 91-027-42-75; meatmadrid.com) is a stylish spot with only six items on the menu: hamburgers, cheeseburgers, onion rings, French fries, milkshakes and cake.Salón Cascabel (Calle de Serrano, 52, 28001; 91-432-54-90;saloncascabel.com) occupies the top floor of the El Corte Inglés department store and is complemented by Rocambolesc (7a Planta, Calle de Serrano, 52, 28001; 91-576-52-34; rocambolesc.com), a little Willy Wonka-like dessert store. Try quesadillas and guacamole, followed by fresh-spun cotton candy.Luzi Bombón (Castellana 35, 28046; 91-702-27-36;grupotragaluz.com/en/restaurante/luzi-bombon) is a sleek restaurant on the Paseo de la Castellana with music your children may not nap through.An article last Sunday about a family trip to Spain rendered incorrectly the name of a Madrid thoroughfare. It is Paseo de la Castellana, not Paseo de Castellano.A version of this article appears in print on September 11, 2016, on Page TR8 of the New York edition with the headline: For an American Kid, D.I.Y. Spanish Immersion.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »