

 Lucas Peterson
 

FRUGAL TRAVELER
AUG. 8, 2016
“No. Is not you.”The officer at Pulkovo Airport in St. Petersburg, Russia, was adamant: I was not the person in my passport photo. I turned and smiled apologetically at the dozens of people behind me who were waiting their turn to go through passport control. She looked skeptically at my passport again, then at my face. My passport again; my face again. “No,” she replied, shaking her head and typing something on a keyboard. This went on for several minutes. I handed her my driver’s license and she scrutinized it like an incredulous club bouncer.Suddenly, she seemed to tire of the exercise. “O.K.,” she said, shrugging. She stamped my passport and motioned to me to pass through. It was a taste of the old regime — a bit of Soviet-era bureaucracy to scare the American, perhaps, but I wasn’t going to let it color the rest of my trip to Russia’s cultural capital. It was White Nights, after all, the annual summer festival that celebrates St. Petersburg’s extreme northerly location and takes its name from the perma-glow that results, making night almost indistinguishable from day. It was one of the most visually beautiful cities I’d ever visited, as well as cheap: Tasty food, decent lodging and rich cultural experiences are well within reach of even the most miserly budget.The airport incident was the only security issue that occurred during my stay, but it does point to a larger theme visitors to Russia should be aware of: There is red tape, and there are a lot of rules. The moment I arrived at Nevsky 126 Guest House (5,500 rubles per night, or about $82), a small hotel on Nevsky Prospekt, the buzzing, feverishly busy main avenue that runs through the heart of the city, the kindly woman behind the desk promptly picked up the phone and called the local police. It wasn’t because I was in trouble — it’s simply policy that foreigners register with Russia’s Federal Migration Service upon arrival. According to the United States Embassy page, visitors staying more than seven days in Russia must register their visa; those staying fewer than seven days are merely “encouraged” to do so. In my case, it happened without my even asking.Visas to Russia can also be tricky to negotiate. You can research specifics online, but here are a few pointers: First, they are expensive. You should budget for at least a couple hundred bucks; more if you’re in a rush. If you happen to live in a city with a consulate, like New York or San Francisco, you’ll have an easier time. Second, you will need an official “invitation” from a sponsor, hotel or tourist organization. This can be arranged by your hotel or through a third-party service (I used one called Allied Passport & Visa). Above all, plan ahead and give yourself plenty of time — a month is best.AdvertisementAfter the initial hassles had faded away, however, St. Petersburg felt like a constant street party fed by the dim solar haze that lasted throughout each night. Pedestrians flow constantly up and down the city’s main avenues, particularly around Nevsky Prospekt. The streets in St. Petersburg’s center are a web of bridges and canals interlaced by the Neva River: It’s a fantastic walking city, and the waterways give parts of it an almost Venetian feel.It was difficult to get anywhere with any kind of haste because there was always an interesting distraction: a street performance from some local musicians or a particularly fascinating-looking shop. I stopped into Eliseev’s Emporium, a restaurant, grocer and confectioner that has served the city for over 200 years. They sell everything from colorful éclairs to black sturgeon caviar, in a playful environment like something out of Willy Wonka. As I was leaving, I noticed a group of people outside laughing and throwing coins up at a small statue of a cat perched about 15 feet up the side of the building. I asked a woman what was going on: “You try!” she said, and motioned me closer. I took out a handful of spare coins and began tossing them at the cat. Eventually I got a coin to land on the statue. “Good! It’s good luck for you,” the woman said, and we exchanged an awkward high-five-slash-handshake.AdvertisementThe people I met in St. Petersburg were nearly all friendly, and some had wicked senses of self-deprecating humor. Maria, a young woman who worked at the tourist information center, was helping me brainstorm some ideas for activities in the city. I asked her what local people here did for fun and she said, “I don’t know. We suffer? Or read. Sometimes we read,” she said, before breaking into a large smile.Maria’s tourist booth was right next to the State Hermitage Museum, founded by Catherine the Great. The complex, which encompasses over 2.5 million square feet and claims over 3 million items, is one of the largest museums in the world. The crown jewel of the Hermitage is the Winter Palace, the official residence of Russian czars up until the revolution of 1917. The building, its bulk juxtaposed with its delicate color — somewhere between mint and eggshell blue — overlooks Palace Square and the Alexander Column, a large memorial commemorating the Russian victory in the Napoleonic Wars.I paid the 600-ruble admission (400 rubles for Russian citizens, and free for everyone on the first Thursday of the month) and passed through the palace’s massive archway. Once inside, I did my best to take in the Hermitage’s overwhelming collection of art and artifacts. I encourage you to do what I did: get lost. Wander around the lavishly ornamented rooms, endless sculpture, piles of paintings from Dutch masters and Italian renaissance art, and take in what you can. Pace yourself and take frequent breaks.While St. Petersburg is a walking city first and foremost, other transportation options come in handy. The Metro (35 rubles for a single ride) can be a great way to get around — the system is also interesting for its deep subway stations that doubled as bomb shelters during the Cold War.I took the subway up to the Sportivnaya station to visit a Georgian restaurant Maria recommended called Pirosmani. I had some fantastic, smoky eggplant rolls filled with a savory walnut and garlic mixture for 430 rubles. I also put away a wonderful bowl of Georgian kharcho — brisket soup with rice, tomatoes and herbs (370 rubles).It was getting late, and I had to make it back for an evening performance of “Swan Lake” at the Alexandrinsky Theater. Ballet is a national obsession, and Tchaikovsky’s 1876 composition has become the quintessential embodiment of the art form. The cashier at the box office showed me the available tickets, from those in the thousands of rubles to the cheap seats on the upper balcony. She literally stuck her tongue out and gave me a thumbs down sign when she presented me with my 800-ruble ticket, the cheapest available. The cashier was right — my view was obstructed — but I was happy to have paid a little more than $10 for such a wonderful cultural experience. I ended up standing for most of it, but the performance (what I could see of it) was excellent.AdvertisementFood and culture were clearly both city strengths — why not enjoy both simultaneously? I headed to Loft Project Etagi, an exciting, colorful cultural and restaurant hub where no one appeared to be older than 25. The five-story complex is an old bread factory that has been refashioned into galleries, restaurants and stores. You’ll find food there you’ll have trouble finding anywhere else in the city (maybe even the country): a vegan street food stand called Pootz and even a specialist in takoyaki, Japanese octopus balls (230 rubles for an order). There’s a tiny, dense bookshop called Fakel Books and a hip clothing store called Second Hand Labor.I climbed up to the top floor and paid an additional 250 rubles for roof access. I milled around with the 20 or so other people up there, taking in the gorgeous panoramic view and lounging on some old furniture. I was hungry, though, so I made my way down to the restaurant on the fourth floor, which has a large, outdoor deck. There, I enjoyed a cheap, satisfying meal of chebureki, a large, deep-fried turnover filled with minced beef and onion, and topped with tomato sauce and sour cream (260 rubles).Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.There was another sight in St. Petersburg I really couldn’t afford to miss: the raising of the bridges. April to November is navigation season, and bridges on the Neva River are raised nightly to allow the flow of maritime traffic. The raisings, which take place in the wee hours, are staggered beginning around 1 a.m., and have the feel of a huge outdoor carnival.I made my way toward the river just after midnight. The sky was a bright purple, as if the sun had just set. Three people joined me on the sidewalk, walking toward the river, then three more, then a group of about a dozen guys, each of whom were carrying a giant beer. Soon, we were a huge throng moving toward Alexander Garden. As we came closer to our destination, the Palace Bridge, the crowd grew to hundreds, then thousands. Vendors sold snacks and cheap souvenirs; music from street performers added to the festive din. We all squeezed together on the bank of the river, straining to get a view of the bridge, which was dotted in colorful lights.At around 1:25 a.m., the bridge slowly began to rise. A cheer rose from the crowd, people whooped and hollered, and tourists and locals alike had their phones raised high to take photos. The river was jam-packed with boats, which immediately began moving en masse to the next bridge down the river. I felt wired — as if I could stay up all night — but had a plane to catch in the morning so I decided to get a few hours’ rest. I headed back to my room, looking at the gentle incandescence of the sky, high on my White Nights experience.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »