By ELAINE GLUSACMAY 16, 2017
In this week’s special Europe issue, explore the rivers, lakes and shorelines of 10 favorite places; follow in the footsteps of Carl Linnaeus in Swedish Lapland; dine along the Adriatic coast between Venice and Trieste; and find a serene hotel with a water view (below).Whether they sit beside city-splitting rivers, Alpine lakes or oceans, waterfront hotels connect guests to nature, through merely a glance out the window. The following new and renovated European hotels and resorts enjoy the reflected light of their littoral locales.DUBROVNIK, CROATIAHotel Excelsior DubrovnikThe 1913 landmark Hotel Excelsior Dubrovnik has long been celebrated for its location near the gates of the walled city overlooking the Adriatic Sea. In May, it will reopen after a seven-month renovation, promising 158 contemporary rooms divided between the original Villa Odak and a modern addition. Public spaces, including a light-flooded lobby and piano bar, have been reimagined, and outdoor dining, with views of the town’s red rooftops, remains. Rooms from 600 euros, or about $655; adriaticluxuryhotels.com.LONDONGood HotelThe Good Hotel doesn’t just face the Thames River. It floats on it or, at least, on a port off the river, known as the Royal Victoria Dock. It’s a cable car ride across the water from Greenwich. The 148-room pop-up hotel crossed the North Sea to London from Amsterdam, opening last December for an intended five-year stay. Social sustainability is at its heart, with materials and food sourced locally and training and jobs for the unemployed. Most rooms are ship-style compact, but industrial public areas, including a work space, restaurant and a parklike roof space, encourage lingering in view of the river. Rooms from 80 pounds, or about $103; goodhotellondon.com.AdvertisementEXMOUTH, ENGLANDLympstone ManorOpened in April in a former Georgian estate, Lympstone Manor overlooks the protected Exe Estuary in southwest Devon. Each of its 21 rooms is named after a bird found near the estuary, such as kingfisher or heron. The space blends modern elements like free-standing bathtubs in living areas with vintage chandeliers and fireplaces. Owned by the chef Michael Caines, the country-house hotel makes food its focus. The seven-course “Taste of the Estuary” menu features local seafood. Guests can walk off any food splurges on the site’s 28 acres and along its waterfront trails. Rooms from £305, including breakfast; lympstonemanor.co.uk.AdvertisementST. RAPHAEL, FRANCEHôtel Les Roches RougesOn the French Riviera, between St. Tropez and Cannes, the 50-room Hôtel Les Roches Rouges, a Design Hotel opening in May, pares an original 1950s building to its core to emphasize its seaside location. Nautical accents and Provençal ceramics decorate whitewashed rooms, some with ocean views (even from the marble bathrooms). Two saltwater pools edge the crashing sea; the lap pool is cut into shorefront rock. Activities include snorkeling and paddleboarding. On land, guests can stroll the gardens, play pétanque or attend the outdoor cinema, all while listening to the surf. Rooms from €210; hotellesrochesrouges.com.HAMBURG, GERMANYWestin HamburgDesigned by Herzog & de Meuron, the new Elbphilharmonie building on the Elbe River is best known for its concert hall within a glass crown atop a vintage brick warehouse. But it also contains the new 244-room Westin Hamburg, where curved window walls frame views to the river and the ships coming and going from the Hamburg port. The eighth-floor BridgeBar serves port and tonic cocktails and those panoramic views. An expansive spa features saunas, steam baths and an indoor swimming pool. Rooms from €273; westinhamburg.com.FLORENCE, ITALYHotel LungarnoThe “lungarno” in Hotel Lungarno translates to “along the Arno,” the river that bisects Florence. The luxury hotel is just steps from the Ponte Vecchio bridge. Owned by the fashion-famous Ferragamo family, the hotel closed this year for renovations, and will reopen in June with 64 expanded rooms, including 10 spacious family rooms; 40 will overlook the Arno, as does the lounge terrace. The designer Michele Bonan references the waterway in the new blue and white color scheme, a backdrop to the 400-piece art collection, which includes works by Picasso and Cocteau. Rooms from €410; lungarnocollection.com.MÁLAGA, SPAINGran Hotel MiramarThe new Gran Hotel Miramar in Málaga, built in 1926 as a hotel and serving more recently as a courthouse, returns to its original purpose. The palatial property sits opposite a Costa del Sol beach. Indoors, the arched atrium has been restored as a lobby, and geometric-patterned screens, keyhole recesses and perforated metal pendant lamps lend an Andalusian accent to its 200 rooms, which overlook palm-filled gardens or the Mediterranean. Opened in January, the hotel will add two outdoor swimming pools and a spa, and bring the number of restaurants and bars to five this spring. Rooms from €184; granhotelmiramarmalaga.com.IBIZA, SPAINNobu Hotel Ibiza BayThe chef Nobu Matsuhisa and his partners, one of whom is Robert DeNiro, are expanding their hospitality empire to a growing string of Nobu Hotels. In June, they plan to open Nobu Hotel Ibiza Bay on curvy Talamanca Bay. Its 152 guest rooms, most with sea views and all with terraces, adopt a palette of golden sand, pale driftwood and marine blues. There will be a Nobu restaurant, with the chef’s signature Japanese-Peruvian dishes, as well as a gluten-free cafe, and in keeping with Ibiza’s reputation as a party place, a beach club. Rooms from €490; nobuhotelibizabay.com.ST. MORITZ, SWITZERLANDSuvretta HouseThe serene Alpine lakes Champfer and Silvaplana lie below the stately Suvretta House, a 1912 mountain resort reopened this year with 181 refurbished rooms. Guests can take a chairlift above the Engadine Valley for mountain hikes, descend to walks along the chain of lakes threading the valley or just work up an appetite en route to two chalet restaurants run by the Suvretta House. Glaciers above and lakes below provide a scenic backdrop to tennis matches on the resort’s clay courts, swims in the outdoor pool or time out on lounge chairs scattered across the lawn. Rates from 660 Swiss francs, or about $660, including breakfast; suvrettahouse.ch.A version of this article appears in print on May 21, 2017, on Page TR5 of the New York edition with the headline: Places to Stay on the Waterfront.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.