
Bites By                     
 DAN SALTZSTEIN
 
SEPT. 3, 2017
You might not know it by appearances, but Brothers Food & Wine in Toronto is run by a couple of young iconoclasts: co-owners Chris White, 30, and Jonathan Nicolaou, 33, who shares chef duties with Keenan McVey, 29. The two met in Toronto culinary circles, then rose up through boundary-pushing London kitchens — Dandelyan for Mr. White; St. John for Mr. Nicolaou.But talk to Mr. White and you get the sense that they have no interest in their restaurant being of-the-moment.“We don’t use words like seasonal and local because they’ve been garbaged,” he said. The menu, which changes daily, “is rooted in our personal history and heritage.” Simplicity is the key: “The more we think about a dish, the less we like it.”That’s evident on the plate at Brothers, which opened last October in a slim, plain space just above the Bay Street subway station (you may occasionally feel the train rumbling under your feet). During a recent meal, dishes were indeed presented without much adornment. But their flavors — drawing from (sorry, Mr. White) seasonal, local ingredients — were complex and satisfying.AdvertisementA starter of charred entree-size mackerel filets was served atop deeply roasted tomatoes, alongside a tangy herb aioli. The best appetizer, though, was a rich, aromatic mix of sweetbreads, chanterelles and peas — each ingredient perfectly cooked, then jumbled into a pleasing orange-hued mound, punctuated by the bright green peas.On to the mains. Fat, soft gnocchi arrived in a creamy sauce of young broccoli, guanciale and pecorino. Steelhead trout, its skin seared to a perfect crisp, was paired with braised gem lettuce and a yogurt-and-caper sauce. A rack of lamb was served so rare that some might send it back; I found it delightfully tender and flavorful, as were the accompanying turnips and luscious jus.AdvertisementThe two desserts on the menu were both stunners: fresh strawberries macerated in lemon and sugar, and a gâteau Basque. The latter, a classic French cake with a custard filling (lightly flavored with cream sherry and vanilla), was, like the menu as a whole, elementally simple and utterly delicious.Mr. White considers all of this “wine-first food” and the list is full of natural wines from trusted producers, including some Canadian delights.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The atmosphere is mellow and cozy. A long counter, which seats about 18, runs nearly the length of the restaurant, and a handful of tables (set up with comfortable salmon chairs and a banquette) sit opposite a shockingly tiny kitchen.Though Mr. White is quick to point out that Brothers is not a tasting menu restaurant, a group of four can essentially treat it that way; the menu is brief and servings are mostly generous enough for sharing. (Make reservations well in advance, up to a month ahead for weekends.)So, whence the name Brothers? The answer is also simple: “We’re best friends,” Mr. White said of his relationship with Mr. Nicolaou, “and somehow still are.”Brothers Food & Wine, 1240 Bay Street; 416-804-6066. An average dinner for two, without drinks and tip, is 55 Canadian dollars, about $43.A version of this article appears in print on September 3, 2017, on Page TR9 of the New York edition with the headline: Taking Simplicity and Making It Burst With Flavor.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »