
Check In By                     
BONNIE TSUI

NOV. 11, 2017
From about 1,755 Hong Kong dollars (or about $225, at 7.8 Hong Kong dollars to the dollar)Opened last year, the 32-room Olympian Hong Kong offers a rare amenity in one of the densest, most property-crunched cities in the world: breathing space. An enormous five-tiered chandelier, elegant wingback chairs, and overflowing bouquets of (very realistic) fake flowers — complete with customized scent — adorn the serene, marble-clad entrance lobby; hotel guests go up an escalator for check-in with a dedicated “guest ambassador.” All rooms are on the second floor of the One Silversea private residence building, with cushy seating areas overlooking the lobby. This is clubby, apartment-style living for less, made possible with a quieter location just off the beaten path.West Kowloon, on the water with tree-framed views of the Kowloon skyline anchored by the distinctive 118-floor International Commerce Center tower, known for having a rooftop sky bar that’s the tallest in the world (it’s so tall that it’s often shrouded in clouds). Across a pedestrian footbridge from the hotel is the Olympian City mall and the Olympic MTR subway station, with easy access to Kowloon and Central stations. It’s also close to the glittering shopping bazaar of Tsim Sha Tsui, and convenient to the China-Macau Ferry Terminal and to the airport by train or taxi.Massive and opulent, with 11-foot ceilings, lacquered-wood sliding doors and gold-accented everything, from the bird-sculpture art pieces to the blackout curtains. Our room, in the lowest “deluxe” category, was more of a suite: 463 square feet with floor-to-ceiling windows and a city view. Just off the hallway from the front door is a kitchenette, with full-size fridge, pantry space, microwave, Nespresso machine and teakettle. Down the hallway is an enormous bathroom, a separate living room with a couch and table, and the bedroom. Sadly, the generous wraparound outdoor patio is not accessible to hotel guests because of the upper-floor residences. Our host, Yoyo, told us that housekeeping has found cigarette butts and eggs — “you know, like a sunny-side up egg?”—on the deck, tossed out by residents above.The bathroom alone is the size of a Manhattan studio. But it actually contains multiple rooms: a toilet (with telephone), a massive glass-doored rainhead shower room that might as well have its own ecosystem, and a separate spa tub with headrest.Each room has a complimentary smartphone for you to use out on the town, with free calls and Wi-Fi — it comes preloaded with helpful features like maps, city guides, shopping and ticket discounts, currency calculators, and a local phone number for people to reach you. There’s also a fitness center, and a laundry room for guest use — extremely rare in Hong Kong, and tremendously useful for those staying longer than a week. The hotel also offers Rolls-Royce limousine service (for roughly double the price of a taxi).A 24-hour private lounge serves complimentary drinks and snacks. There’s also room service, offering an all-day menu of items including soy-sauce chicken wings (88 Hong Kong dollars), spaghetti Bolognese (108 Hong Kong dollars), and grilled minced beef and potato (88 Hong Kong dollars). But you’re in Hong Kong — and Kowloon has some of the best eating districts in Hong Kong — so the street is really your restaurant.Room-to-roam apartment-style living in a city where space is at a serious premium. Convenient to the airport and Kowloon’s attractions, it’s a luxuriant, calm oasis amid the Hong Kong hubbub, and surprisingly affordable.The Olympian Hong Kong, 18 Hoi Fai Rd.; 852-3199-8888; theolympianhotel.comA version of this article appears in print on November 19, 2017, on Page TR2 of the New York edition with the headline: Breathing Space in a Crowded City.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »