

      By JEANNIE RALSTON

JAN. 19, 2017

Though it’s now known mostly as a frothy beach resort, this port city, population 49,000, has more character than most flip-flop playgrounds.
Related Article
It’s hard to believe that Galveston, situated on a needle of land 50 miles southeast of downtown Houston, was once the largest city in Texas or was ever home to a business district called the “Wall Street of the South.” That is, until you visit there. Though it’s now known mostly as a frothy beach resort with a cruise ship terminal and an amusement park built on a pier that extends about 1,130 feet into the Gulf of Mexico, Galveston (population, 49,000) has more character than most flip-flop playgrounds. Its history, as rich as that of Charleston, S.C., or New Orleans, is evident in the majestic downtown structures and in palm-lined neighborhoods of Victorian homes painted in jelly bean shades. A devastating hurricane in 1900, which killed more than 6,000 people, couldn’t keep Galveston down. More recently, an enormous rebuilding effort in the 1980s started a new round of changes. Artists and entrepreneurs are filling downtown lofts and restaurants; these days many visitors come for the manufactured wonders as well as natural ones along the shore.
Explore street view and find things to do in Galveston, Texas.
The sea has always shaped Galveston Island — physically, economically and psychically. So start your weekend on the water at Jimmy’s on the Pier, a cheery aqua-and-yellow restaurant and bar perched atop a fishing pier, with the rhythmic surf rolling beneath you. Try the Frozen Tropical Lemonade or Kewl-Aide, a rum drink with cranberry and passion fruit juice ($8). Galveston’s 17-foot-tall sea wall was built after the 1900 hurricane as part of the defense against destructive winds. The (sometimes flashy, sometimes gritty) boulevard that runs along the wall is lined with hotels, condos and restaurants. Some restaurants are throwbacks (the interior of the 106-year-old Gaido’s, for instance, is Sixties-in-Vegas vintage). One of the newest additions is BLVD. Seafood, which prides itself on its locally sourced ingredients, including the fish. The snapper and grouper — either blackened, grilled or pecan crusted — come with tags that allow you to use a smartphone to trace exactly where, when and on what ship it was caught. About $110 for two. Head inland for a nightcap, into the edgier downtown. The Proletariat Gallery and Public House, in a 19th-century brick building, could be in SoHo, in New York, with its refined industrial vibe and tall windows. Calling itself a “collaborative exhibition and community space,” the Proletariat features rotating work by local artists, such as Anne Genung’s paintings that imagine Willie Nelson as other icons like Ziggy Stardust, Cookie Monster and Batman. Sixteen beers are on tap, including Galveston Island Brewing’s Tiki Wheat; another 50 kinds are available in bottles. East Beach — on the island’s sunrise-facing point — feels raw and secluded, which is why a morning walk here is so exhilarating. Ironically, an unnatural component of this region boosts the awe level. Massive freighters, on their way to dock in Galveston, round this point close to the land, appearing like Macy’s Thanksgiving Day Parade balloons, almost floating above the dune grass. In many beach communities, residents putter around in golf carts for errands or pleasure. Why should they have all the fun? Rent a golf cart for the day (or longer) at Coastal Cruizers — an ideal way to see the East End Historical District, more than 50 blocks between Broadway and Mechanic Street, and east of 19th Street. Here you will pass ornate specimens from Galveston’s Gilded Age — multigabled Victorians, regal Greek Revivals, wraparound porches. You will also see a clever solution to the problem of fallen trees after Hurricane Ike in 2008. Several craftsmen have transformed stumps into works of art. For example, at 902 Ball Avenue are the remains of a camphor tree carved to look like a mermaid and a pod of dolphins emerging from the water. $125 per day for a four-seater cart. Now for the interiors. Many grand buildings are open for touring, such as the Moody Mansion (1895) and the Menard House (1838). But the rock star is Bishop’s Palace, constructed in the late 1880s by Galveston’s famous and prolific architect Nicholas Clayton. Built of multicolored stone for Col. Walter Gresham and his family, the three-story home with a raised basement features a turret, Romanesque and Tudor arches, a red-tiled roof, winged-lion statues and a 40-foot mahogany stairwell under an octagonal skylight. In 1923 the Roman Catholic Church bought it as a residence for Galveston’s bishop. Admission: $12. The Star Drug Store is billed as the oldest pharmacy in Texas, but it isn’t filling prescriptions any longer. Head there for another feature of old drugstores: the lunch counter. Comfort food like grilled cheese sandwiches and burgers are made on a griddle in the middle of a U-shaped marble slab. Try the coconut cake that beckons from the glass case. About $26 for two. He started at age 10 with two classic Western handguns; today J. P. Bryan’s collection of art and artifacts has grown so enormous (70,000 items covering 12,000 years of Texas and Western history) that the businessman had to move it from his offices in Houston to its own building in Galveston, a 122-year-old former orphanage that is as stunning as the objects inside. The newly opened Bryan Museum features important pieces such as the sword used to capture Antonio López de Santa Anna after the Battle of San Jacinto, a buffalo hide Comanche shield and the protractor used to create the Texas-Mexico boundary in 1848. Fully interactive, with information-packed iPads by displays of silver saddles, ancient pottery and the like, the Bryan also showcases Texas artists. The ground floor, where 19th-century toys and a secret hiding place for the orphans were found, is especially poignant. Entrance: $14. Don’t park the golf cart yet. Use it to meander through the Strand Historic District, where you can shop at island favorites like La King’s Confectionery. The vast store is filled with bins of licorice and gummy candy down one side, with a saltwater-taffy-making section in the back and a soda fountain on the other side. Also worth a visit is Nautical Antiques & Tropical Decor, which sells salvaged ship parts (anchors, steering wheels, portholes) and nautical gear. Many people say Galveston is haunted, and appropriately a store called Witchery sells paraphernalia — crystals, tarot cards — related to all things eerie and unexplainable. For another perspective, head to the open-air Rooftop Bar in the Tremont House Hotel. From the fourth floor of this 1879 building, you will have views of the harbor and the elaborate facades and cornices of neighboring structures. The glow from the lighted manzanita tree situated among the sectional sofas adds magic. Heaters and blankets are on hand for chilly weather. The exterior of Rudy & Paco’s is deceptively unexciting. Open the door and you feel as if you’ve walked into a private club. Lights are low; the bar is dark wood, as are the cabinets — each one bearing a small plate identifying the regular client who owns the bottles of wine stored within. Many local residents claim that this is the best restaurant in town, and there is no reason to argue. The menu is influenced by Central and South America, offering choices such as ceviche, ahi tuna in a jalapeño cream sauce and plantain-encrusted chicken in a black bean sauce. The doesn’t-get-better-than-this dish: pan-fried calamari tossed with caramelized onions and peppers. $160 for two. On the wall behind the cases of baked goods (gooey cinnamon rolls, fat muffins) at the Sunflower Bakery and Cafe is the word “EAT” in red letters. As if you need encouragement. Brunch dishes include eggs Benedict surf and turf, avocado toast with fried eggs, and shrimp and grits; $25 for two.End your visit kayaking through the mazelike waterways among the salt marshes. Because Galveston Island lies in a major bird migratory path, you can see a variety of splendid passer-throughs as well as permanent residents like pelicans, herons and ibis. Book private tours through the nonprofit conservation group Artist Boat. (Beginning in March, the group regularly schedules public tours.) As you paddle, you will learn about the ecology of salt marshes. You will also be given paper and a watercolor set to render the serene coastal scenery. Since you will use water right from the bay to mix the paints, you could say that you will actually be taking some of Galveston home with you. Four-hour private tours, $100 a person; public tours, $50 a person.You can’t miss the Hotel Galvez & Spa (2024 Seawall Boulevard; hotelgalvez.com), a grand resort in the tradition of the Greenbrier or the Breakers that sits like a sphinx along Seawall Boulevard. Built in 1911, the Galvez has an alluring, of-another-era charm. Double rooms from $199.For something more modern, try the sleek Galvestonian (1401 East Beach Drive; galvestonian.com), a high-rise beachfront condo resort on the quiet east side of the island. One-bedroom units start at $265 per night.Flight and Hotel information provided by Google.Prices represent a snapshot of low fares and rates for weekend trips.​Because of an editing error, an earlier version of this article misspelled part of the name of a district in Galveston. It is the Strand Historic District, not Straand.Advertisement