
In Transit By                     
ELAINE GLUSAC

FEB. 12, 2016
NASA’S NEW PLAY SPACE Kennedy Space Center near Cape Canaveral, Fla., plans to open a new visitor attraction called Cosmic Quest on Feb. 25. Through hands-on gaming-style exhibits, visitors will be able to launch a rocket into space accompanied by effects such as steam and vibrations; virtually direct the capture of an asteroid on an overhead half-dome screen and release it to orbit the moon; build a research base on Mars that appears as a 3-D hologram; and perform science experiments reminiscent of the film “The Martian,” including growing potatoes in space. Visitors will also meet Robonaut, a humanoid robot designed to work in space. According to the center, the tasks are based on actual NASA missions and are designed to inspire future space explorers.IN PLAYA DEL CARMEN, A BEACHFRONT RETREATWhen the Thompson Playa del Carmen resort opened last November with 92 rooms on the main pedestrian thoroughfare of Playa del Carmen, social center of Mexico’s Riviera Maya, its beachfront satellite property was still a construction site. But last week that second location, the Beach House, opened with 27 additional guest rooms, a cabana-lined pool and an additional restaurant, C Grill, a casual beachfront spot from the New York-based restaurateurs behind Catch in Manhattan and at the main hotel. The smaller, more exclusive property features balconies on all rooms, loaner bicycles, stand-up paddleboards and beachfront yoga. The city and beach properties are just a few blocks apart, and guests of the former have access to the latter’s restaurant and beach chairs. Rooms at the main hotel start at $251; rooms at the Beach House start at $405.‘SPEED SAILING’ IN NEW YORKThe next America’s Cup sailing championship won’t be contested until 2017 in Bermuda, but the preceding warm-up series of races, Louis Vuitton America’s Cup World Series regattas, will come to New York May 7 and 8. Marking the occasion, the boat tour company Classic Harbor Line plans to offer “speed sailing” in April and May, fast boating with fewer passengers when the wind is above 10 m.p.h. The outings take place aboard the 85-foot schooner America 2.0 modeled on the original ship to win the race in 1851, and will carry half of the normal load of 80 sailors to keep the ship light and fast. Two-hour speed sailings will take place at 1 p.m. and 3:30 p.m. when conditions allow and will cost $52. They will launch April 22 and only take place in April and May, which are some of the windiest and best for sailing, according to the company.TO THE DERBY BY RAILPullman Rail Journeys will send its restored Pullman rail cars from Chicago down to Louisville this year for the Kentucky Derby in a special rail-to-race trip, May 4 to 8. Once in Louisville, guests will use the train as a hotel, and the package includes tickets and transportation to the Churchill Downs’ clubhouse and hospitality lounge for both Friday’s Kentucky Oaks and Saturday’s Kentucky Derby races. Apart from the track, activities include a city tour, visits to the Louisville Slugger factory and the Muhammad Ali Museum, and a bourbon tasting. Rates start at $6,091 a person, double occupancy.A DEAL IN PATAGONIAOccupying a cold storage plant built in 1915, Singular Patagonia, a 57-room luxury lodge in Puerto Bories in southernmost Chile, is celebrating the centennial of the building with a special rate of $100 on guests’ birthdays between Feb. 15 and May 31, and Oct. 1 and Dec. 15. The resort with a deluxe spa and loftlike dining rooms overlooks the Last Hope fjord and offers wilderness excursions including kayaking, biking, hiking and visiting nearby Torres del Paine National Park. Rooms normally start at $360, and the deal includes breakfast.A version of this article appears in print on February 21, 2016, on Page TR3 of the New York edition with the headline: Exhibits; NASA’s New Play Space.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »