By AMY TARA KOCHJUNE 1, 2016
Sometimes rowdy parades, random eruptions of jazz and traffic jams involving cross-dressing belles on the way to a Krewe ball are just what a family vacation calls for. It is this unapologetic sass, in fact, that makes children fall head over heels in love with New Orleans.Once they see rainbow-colored houses and adults sporting what looks like Halloween apparel (even outside of Mardi Gras season) without anyone so much as offering a querulous double take, they understand that this is no slog-through-museums type of trip. In fact, no need to enter a museum at all.Though the city has many outstanding institutions, the best interaction with Nola’s curious brew of culture happens right in the street. It’s promenading past the historic homes of the Garden District. Weaving through the career buskers in Jackson Square. Locating — and dancing to — a brass band performance on Frenchmen Street after dark. Each neighborhood has a flavor, and exploring the various pockets, gritty, glam and everything in between, is the main event.New Orleans’s reputation as the ultimate American party town is part of its charm, even to families with young children. But not in a knock-back-shots-on-Bourbon-Street kind of way. It’s the mood. The quirky mash-up of cultures — French, Spanish, Caribbean and American South — lends an exuberance to the tourist experience. It’s also an excellent jumping-off point for teaching moments. While children are spellbound by beignets and bowling to live “swamp pop,” a Creole/Cajun/rockabilly musical genre unique to Louisiana, parents can stealthily work in discourse on colonialism and position “Nouvelle Orleans” as a microcosm of the melting pot called America.AdvertisementHere, an itinerary that melds street culture, history, art, food and entertainment.The heart of New Orleans is the Vieux Carré, also known as the French Quarter.AdvertisementKick off the day at Café du Monde, the landmark coffee shop that has been serving up sugar-dusted beignets since 1862. Though a tourist magnet, the beignet symbolizes the city’s French roots. You won’t be disappointed. Then, cross the street and hit Jackson Square, an open-air artist colony teeming with street performers. This is the moment that children notice that New Orleans is a different kind of city. Sure, the colorful Creole architecture registers. But it’s the kooky “Mary Poppins” meets “Pirates of the Caribbean” vibe, a dreamscape of jugglers, artists, musicians and magicians, that makes them prick up their ears with delight.Take in the scene (family portraits are a fun souvenir) and then get ready for a 30-minute tour through the cobblestone streets of the French Quarter. If a fact-filled wander about town sounds like pure punishment, think again. For children, learning about the past can be fascinating, if the setting is right. Taking in the sights from a carriage is decidedly cool. So is picking out the mule leading your expedition.Then there is the delivery. The drivers of Royal Carriages are veterans at winning over a pint-size audience. Their secret? Cast history as fairy tale with politicians, European monarchs, jazz greats and voodoo masters as heroes and villains. For families with older children, there are French Quarter tours (many are free) to suit every fancy: walking, Segway, bicycle, food and even voodoo themed.Suddenly, it’s lunchtime. Gather the troops and head over to Johnnys Po’ Boy to score the requisite foodstuffs for a picnic. Exceptionally tasty sub sandwiches, po’boys, are to New Orleans what hot dogs are to Chicago. Encourage the brood to live like locals and eschew the comfort of chicken parm in favor of a sandwich laden with crawfish, catfish or oysters. Plop down on the riverbank and enjoy a leisurely meal in front of the mighty Mississippi.The Garden District, a glamorous 19th-century neighborhood famous for white colonnaded mansions, makes for great sightseeing. Make transportation part of the adventure. For $1.25 a ride, the St. Charles streetcar line (the oldest continuously operating streetcar system in the world) will provide an inexpensive brush with history as it ferries you across town to Washington Avenue. There are many D.I.Y. tours spotlighting the spectacular architecture of this area. Do an abridged version, peppering the walk with queries that have the children visualizing what life was like for the inhabitants of these stately homes.Then, meander through Lafayette Cemetery No. 1, one of New Orleans’s oldest “Cities of the Dead.” Though creepy, the mazes of aboveground tombs are hauntingly beautiful, a testament to the city’s unique landscape. Children are obsessed with zombies. Once they learn that this macabre site was the setting for the WB hit show “The Originals” and Anne Rice’s vampire series (there are fictional graves for the Mayfair Witches and Lestat in Ms. Rice’s popular novels), they will be eager to examine the sun-bleached headstones and voodoo coins left in exchange for “favors.”In a city whose motto is “laissez les bons temps rouler,” it is not surprising that there are more good times to be had after dark. Case in point: Rock ‘N’ Bowl. Unlike the average 10-lane space blasting ’70s rock from a jukebox, this New Orleans institution is a top venue for live music. And when the band begins, the dance floor fills with lively two-steppers (children are welcome) hoofing it to whatever the nightly lineup brings: zydeco, funk, blues, swing, “swamp pop.” Arrive at 7 p.m. for bowling; music begins at 8:30 during the week; Sundays at 5:30 p.m. The St. Charles streetcar will get you there cheaply and efficiently.AdvertisementExperiencing the bustle of Frenchmen Street when the sun goes down is essential. Again, transit is part of the fun. Pick up a pedicab (they are in tourist hubs or can be easily ordered; 504-891-3441) and make your way over to the Faubourg Marigny district, wooting freely with your clan and passers-by as you encounter costumed partygoers and “second line” parades, the impromptu street celebrations featuring a sizable brass marching band.Take a lap around Frenchmen Art Market to check out local art and crafts. Then follow the music. After 8 p.m., it is commonplace to find clusters of folks dancing to a jazz happening in the street. Most of the dozen venues in this area do not allow children, but Three Muses is an exception. If you reserve a table (walk-ins are permitted but space is limited) and order some small plates, a truly authentic New Orleans evening awaits. Another option for music is Preservation Hall, a child-friendly jazz venue in the French Quarter where patrons of all ages take in old-school jazz from rough-hewed wooden benches.When in New Orleans, put all healthy food edicts on hold. To get a sense of place, it is imperative to gorge on all things fried and creamy.Every Saturday, get travel tips, destination coverage, photos from all over the world and more.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.At District, comfort food gets a dose of Southern zip: biscuits infused with praline bacon and egg. Brûléed cinnamon rolls. Croquenuts, a Croque Madame hybrid featuring a griddle doughnut filled with havarti cheese, béchamel sauce and an egg.Dat Dog’s rendition (three locations) of the old-school hot dog takes street food to decadent heights. Crawfish, duck and smoked andouille sausages (there are also vegetarian and fish “dog” options) are smothered in homemade fixings like Creole mustard and sweet relish. Traditional beef wieners are available for those with a tamer palate. A side of crawfish étouffée fries adds local flavor.For a sugary pick-me-up, Sucré’s (three locations) Parisian-style pastries, chocolate truffles and macarons inspired by the flavors of New Orleans will satisfy munchkins and parents alike.The funky, folk-art-infused ambience of Jacques-Imo’s Cafe  is reason enough to hit this renowned Uptown restaurant. But the satisfying mélange of “Nawlins” grub — fried grits, Creole jambalaya, stuffed quail, blackened redfish with crab chile hollandaise, smothered chicken with biscuits — is, quite simply, the stuff of Southern foodie fantasies. Go for dinner before Rock ‘N’ Bowl. For a splurge, book the “Haute Creole” jazz brunch at Commander’s Palace.To combine chill-out time with an afternoon activity, head to the Toulouse Street Wharf in the French Quarter for a two-hour jazz cruise aboard the Steamboat Natchez. Children will love peeking into the engine room and learning about the steam-powered stern-wheeler, one of the few still in operation, while parents will enjoy listening to the live music.AdvertisementEn route to your hotel, let the kids burn off the remainder of their sugar intake on the slides and jungle gyms at Cabrini Playground, a sweet green space conveniently tucked into the French Quarter.New Orleans has a wide range of hotels and well-priced bed-and-breakfasts. Staying in or near the French Quarter is both fun and efficient. It offers easy access (by foot, pedicab or streetcar) to all activities and restaurants noted. And it includes a front-row seat to New Orleans’s lively street life. Three choices: Maison Dupuy,  Le Pavillon and Windsor Court Hotel.If you have the time to travel outside the metro area, consider a trip to the bayou. Cajun Encounters will pick you up at your hotel and shuttle you to the swamp, where you will traverse brackish channels by boat in search of snakes, alligators and wild boars. Visiting Louisiana’s famed antebellum mansions is another standout day trip. The opulence of the grounds and “big houses” speak to the wealth of the sugar cane heyday. At the same time, preserved (or often reconstructed) slave quarters illuminate one of the grimmer moments in American history.An article on Page 12 this weekend about a family-friendly trip to New Orleans misstates part of the name of a green space in the French Quarter. It is Jackson Square, not Jackson Park. The article also refers incorrectly to a sightseeing carriage. It is led by a mule, not by a donkey. In addition, the article misstates part of the names of two streets. They are Frenchmen Street, not Frenchmen’s Street, and Washington Avenue, not Washington Street. And the article misidentifies the departure location for a jazz cruise. It is the Toulouse Street Wharf, not Canal Place. (The errors about Jackson Square, the carriage and Frenchmen Street also appear in an accompanying article on Page 11 about five vacation alternatives to Disney World.)Amy Tara Koch is a travel writer and author of “Bump It Up: Transform Your Pregnancy Into the Ultimate Style Statement.”A version of this article appears in print on June 5, 2016, on Page TR12 of the New York edition with the headline: Adults Aren’t the Only Ones Having Fun.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.