By FREDA MOONAUG. 3, 2016
Looking to take an unconventional, and cheap, family vacation in the Florida Keys? Consider the camper van. Here’s how to get started.First, you need to decide which camper to rent. Compared with full-size R.V.s, both vintage vans and contemporary vans are more affordable to rent, less cumbersome to drive, get better mileage and don’t require R.V.-designated campsites, which are typically more expensive and less attractive than tent sites.Florida Oldscool Campers, based in St. Petersburg, Fla., rents the iconic VW vans for about $1,300 for seven nights. It’s a reasonable rate for a costly-to-maintain classic vehicle that evokes an Americana nostalgia well-suited to South Florida’s kitschy charms. But at roughly the same price as a standard R.V. through Cruise America, the rental company that operates in 33 states and several Canadian provinces, the vintage van began to seem like a big splurge for style points. Ultimately, we decided to skip the vintage VW, and go with a contemporary Ford Econoline from Escape Campervans, which has locations in Los Angeles, San Francisco, Las Vegas, New York and Miami. From its Miami Beach office, the Maverick model cost about $700 for the week, a $500 savings.Unlike Cruise America’s near national coverage, camper van companies are scattered: Vintage SurfariWagons in Costa Mesa, Calif.; Peace Van Rentalsin Seattle;Scooby Campers in Scotland; Camper Tales in Portugal and Happy Little Camper in the south of France.During peak seasons and in popular areas, like the Florida Keys and prime parks in California, campgrounds are booked up to a year in advance. Still, you’re not necessarily out of luck if you’re planning a couple of months, or even weeks, ahead.AdvertisementBeginning about a month before our early April trip, I made a list of the state park campgrounds tucked into the mangroves and lining the beaches of the Keys, which are cheaper and better maintained than private R.V. parks. While at my desk, I kept a browser tab open to Reserve America, which I would periodically check for cancellations. By our departure, I had managed to piece together four nights at three different state parks ($50 to $60 per night), including Bahia Honda, Long Key and Curry Hammock, and three nights at two private R.V. parks.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Escape Campervans’s vehicles are stocked with a bare minimum of camping and cooking supplies: a couple of folding chairs, two pots, plastic plates, bowls and cups, basic utensils, a gas stove, a (very) small mini-fridge and bedding for the bed, which converts easily from a foldout bench seat. Though it wasn’t included in the gear list, the Miami office threw in a fan, for which we were grateful the entire trip.While we mostly made do, we bought a few things on the road. Because of the small size of the fridge, for example, we picked up a $5 chest for ice and beverages, along with heatproof cups and a small lantern. Had I known how many campsites in the Keys are virtually shadeless, I would have splurged on a pop-up canopy ($60) from Escape Campervans, which rents them along with other extras, like an optional rooftop sleeper ($25 per day) that adds a second double bed to the van.AdvertisementBut the benefit of a camper van is how easy it makes an otherwise planning-intensive, far-from-home family camping trip. Rentals come with everything you really need and some things, like running water in our tiny sink, which are luxuries when traveling with small children. Except for the minutes it takes to convert the bench seats into a bed, there’s no setup. Campers are the sweet spot between roughing it and glamping, which discounts the joy of getting down to basics, if only for a few days.A version of this article appears in print on August 7, 2016, on Page TR8 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s Well Suited for Getting Around.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.