By LUCAS PETERSONOCT. 20, 2016
This article is part of a series aimed at helping you navigate life’s opportunities and challenges. What else should we write about? Contact us: smarterliving@nytimes.com.Quotes touting the benefits of the well-traveled life are a dime a dozen, but Aesop was right: “Adventure is worthwhile.” Travel teaches you more about yourself and the rest of the world than any other experience can. And don’t let finances get in your way. Here are a few ways to make that trip — during or right after college — more attainable.Travel doesn’t have to be a luxury — it just sometimes takes some extra work to find the bargains. While scanning through airfares this morning, I came across a $400 nonstop, round-trip fare between New York and Copenhagen. I also discovered a $561 round-trip fare between Hartford and Beijing. It’s all about priorities: I recently asked my college-age cousin to join me on a recent trip to Florida and she balked at the cost. Scarcely a sentence later, she let me know that she’d recently spent $250 on a pair of sunglasses.The college study abroad program is the first international experience for many young people — it provides a controlled environment, typically with a group of one’s peers, to enjoy and explore a new country. (If you’re taking classes and expecting college credit, though, be warned: Your semester of partying in Barcelona may entail you spending your evenings hitting the books.)AdvertisementMore often than not, students will apply to programs through their college or university and should enlist the help of their academic adviser. New York’s CUNY system, for example, has a list of programs in over 50 countries. Some are open only to students of that institution; others are open to all students. Begin planning a year in advance and keep an eye on application deadlines. (I ended up missing an opportunity to go away when I was a student for just that reason. Some domestic study away programs are still available — I ended up going to N.Y.U. for my semester “abroad.”)AdvertisementFinancing some of these trips can be tricky. A semester in France through the American Institute of Foreign Study will run $15,000 — and that doesn’t include the flight. Fortunately, there are many scholarships available to help defray the costs. Scholarship Portal, FastWeb and the College Board all have searchable scholarship databases with awards in varying amounts — many students will be able to piece together an award that makes some of the more expensive programs feasible.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Barring that, there are a couple of other options. Federal financial aid will actually cover eligible study abroad programs. Another option is to simply pick a cheaper and shorter program. That semester in France might cost $15,000, but this poetry and studio art summer program in Athens through the University of Oregon is less than $3,000.Volunteer work is a way to travel cheaply while doing some good. While some volunteer through their church or local community organization, others search for opportunities through clearinghouses like Go Overseas, which lists different programs based on area of interest and destination. AmeriCorps and Teach for America are service-oriented ways to work within the United States. (Teach for America educators, it should be noted, are salaried full-time employees.) Both programs offer potential student loan forgiveness.Peace Corps, the government-run volunteer program, focuses on social and economic development in over 60 countries across the world. I went to El Salvador with the Peace Corps in 2002, and would advise potential candidates to think seriously about the type of work they would like to do before they join. Those in my agroforestry cohort group who had some sort of background in agriculture or geology generally fared better than those with no experience, like me. While fumbling my way through many of the training activities, I was all thumbs — and not the green kind, either.Want more? You might also like:• 10 free (or cheap) travel apps worth downloading• Best international destinations for solo travel• 11 ways to take better food photos on InstagramWe’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »