AdvertisementSupported byIn TransitBy Shivani VoraA NEW LOOK — AND MENUS — AT THE WATERGATE HOTELA legendary hotel known for scandal wants to have a name for its good food and drinks, too: The Watergate Hotel in Washington, D.C., famous for the break-in that led to President Nixon’s resignation, will be home to three new restaurants and bars when it reopens this spring following a $125 million face lift. The property’s new executive chef, Michael Santoro, who has worked at Michelin-starred restaurants like the Fat Duck in England, has created the menus for all of them and is emphasizing seasonal dishes and modern cooking techniques in his approach. The outlets include Kingbird, a restaurant with both a casual dining area and an upscale one serving American cuisine with French influences; the Next Whisky Bar, featuring an expansive list of whisky, bourbon and rye from small-batch producers and large distillers; and Top of the Gate, a rooftop lounge with a firepit that will offer cocktails and Asian street food.PASSPORT RENEWAL BY APPThere’s an Apple app today for just about everything, and one for renewing passports just got added to the list. ItsEasy.com, a government-registered passport and visa expediting company, introduced the app this week and claims it is the first of its kind; it gives travelers the option to process their passport renewal application and take new passport photos through their iPhones. The pictures are reviewed and approved by one of the company’s employees and can be delivered to customers by email or regular mail along with their ItsEasy order. Once the order is completed, ItsEasy will send users a passport application and a trackable United States Postal Service priority shipping label so they can mail back their documents to the company for processing. Prices for rush processing start at $140, while standard six-week processing is $29.95. The app also has a free passport renewal reminder service that tells users to renew their passport via email nine months before it expires.NEW RAIL SERVICE BETWEEN LONDON AND PARISEurostar, the high-speed train service between England and mainland Europe, recently introduced service between St. Pancras International Station in London and Gare du Nord in Paris on its new e320 train — the first of a fleet of 17 trains designed by the renowned Italian design house Pininfarina. The trains carry 900 passengers — 20 percent more than the old ones — and can travel as fast as 200 miles an hour. They’re equipped with free Wi-Fi and have larger seats than their predecessors, all with USB sockets. The rest of the new trains will debut throughout the year.Also, Eurostar has partnered with the well-known French chef Raymond Blanc and Silent Pool Distillery in Surrey, England, on a new spirit called Toujours 21 Gin. The drink has a combination of French and English botanicals such as juniper, citrus and angelica; business class passengers can enjoy it for free in Eurostar’s business class lounges, and it’s also available to purchase by the bottle for £40 ($55).AN OPERA PACKAGE IN GERMANYGermany’s largest opera house, Festival Hall Baden-Baden in the spa town of Baden-Baden, is partnering with the Metropolitan Opera in New York City for a coproduction of “Tristan and Isolde” by Richard Wagner. The opera will make its debut on March 19 in Baden-Baden, and to celebrate the production, the Festival Hall’s in-house travel concierge is offering a Deluxe Opera Package; included are two nights’ accommodations at one of several hotels in the area, a ticket to a performance of “Tristan and Isolde,” a ticket to a daytime classical music concert at the Festival Hall and a four-course meal at the Festival Hall’s in-house restaurant, Aida. Packages are available starting March 19, 22, 25 and 28. Prices from $950 a person.A NEW PASS FOR STOCKHOLM ATTRACTIONSPay one price, see many sights. That’s the idea behind the new Stockholm Pass, which offers fast-track admission to more than 60 popular attractions in the Swedish capital. Prices for adults for the one-day pass start at around $69; those who buy it are getting a discount on normal admission prices and don’t have to prebook or wait in line for tickets at any of the featured attractions. Included are admission into the Royal Palace — one of Europe’s largest palaces; a boat trip from the city center into the Djurgarden Canal; and admission into the Nobel Museum, which is full of history about the Nobel Prize. There are also two-, three- and five-day pass options available. The pass can be purchased through the company’s site.Advertisement