AdvertisementSupported byComedians know a thing or two about travel, since their job is to make people laugh in cities all across the world. Here are a few pointers from Iliza Shlesinger, the author of the new book “Girl Logic.”By Justin SablichIn her new book, “Girl Logic,” the comedian Iliza Shlesinger writes about the hidden genius of irrational behavior. The title, she writes, refers to “a characteristically female way of thinking that appears to be contradictory and circuitous but is actually a complicated and highly evolved way of looking at the world.” Traveling, on the other hand, doesn’t have to be complicated, as Ms. Shlesinger has learned from her many years on the road. “A very long time ago I accepted that travel is just a necessary evil, and unlike many things in my life, I decided going with the flow would make it less painful,” Ms. Shlesinger said. The problem, she added, is that not every traveler is as sensible. “There should be an F.A.A. fine for those who bring hot food that emits odor onto the plane,” Ms. Shlesinger said. “You’re deemed selfish and you have to take some sort of social awareness class.” The following are edited travel tips from Ms. Shlesinger, who will be headlining the New York Comedy Festival on Nov. 11.Always be nice to the front desk staff because they can choose to make your life a living hell, and they’ll remember you. You’re going to run into all types, but the best idea is to always give them a second chance and be nice, because I found that those are typically the people who will say, “We’re not going to charge you for the internet. Thanks for coming.” I bought some at O’Hare during a layover. They’re great because if there’s a weird squeaking noise outside your hotel room, or there’s a dripping sound and there’s nobody at the hotel who can fix it right away, sometimes you need the ability to just tune it out. And get the noise-canceling earbuds, not headphones, because you can’t sleep on a headphone. When you travel, try having an open mind, not just about the city that you’re in, but about the surrounding areas. One time I went to Detroit and outside of Detroit is a city called Hamtramck. Another comic took me to this Polish neighborhood and we went to the basement of this house where there was this 50-year-old Polish restaurant. We got to experience that and I bought a bunch of Polish stuff and it was cool. Trying to really get to what’s at the heart of a city or region, I think, is what makes it an experience, not eating at the Chili’s in Terminal C.For me cities are defined by the type of person who comes to my show. I chose to shoot my Netflix special in Denver because the people there are just happy. It’s really about the people. And I try to always find the one thing people are famous for. I’m very open-minded about eating when I travel, but I went to Cincinnati years ago and I tried Skyline Chili. I will be back to Cincinnati but not for Skyline Chili.I am tired of people giving eye rolls to mothers with screaming babies. You know, it’s not the mother’s fault and she is trying as hard as possible to get the kid to stop crying. I know that one day when I have a child on a plane, and if that child cries, I swear on my life, if one person gives me an eye roll I am going to have to be air-marshal-dragged off that plane for attacking them. I’ll be like: “I spent my teens and my 20s and a good part of my 30s allowing everyone’s baby to cry. I have earned the right to have my baby cry. And you will respect that.” There should be a special place, not only in hell, but in an off-site waiting area where if you get to security and you ask a question like, “Can I bring this bottle of water” or “Do I have to take off my shoes,” you automatically get sent to this special waiting room. And, you know what? You don’t get to take the flight. We can’t have you on a flight, because if you’re someone that asks those kinds of questions, who knows what you’re going to do on a plane? You’re probably going to do something like bring a hot hamburger and stink up the entire aircraft. You never feel great after drinking. They try to make it like, “Oh, you’re on Virgin Airlines. It’s a big sex party.” And you’re like, “No, I need to brush my teeth and eat this Jidori Chicken dinner before we cross some sort of prime meridian so I get some normal sleep.” But if you take a Virgin Airlines flight first class, it’s almost like flying private. They really shoulder the responsibilities of your mental anxiety. Other airlines, they start with, “This is a full flight, so we’re going to need you to remove your arm. We hate you.”Honestly, my only anxiety comes from getting from my home to LAX. I don’t feel this with any other airport. The thing about LAX is it’s just so congested, so you pull up and there’s a 40-minute line just to get into your terminal, and you’re like, “I’m going to miss this 30-minute flight to Las Vegas.” I also believe that LAX was built based on a blind child’s drawing competition, because the Tom Bradley international terminal is right in the middle of the domestic terminals. There’s no reason that if I’m flying to Chicago that I need to pass people flying on, like, Aer Lingus, trying to get to Ireland. Advertisement