

      By MARK VANHOENACKER

MAY 5, 2016

The neighborhoods in Southeast London are among the capital’s most energetic, with lively streets, tempting restaurants and a spooky cemetery.
Historically the south of London has “remained relatively unknown to other Londoners, except as a source of disquiet,” writes Peter Ackroyd in “London: The Biography” — home to the poor and to prisons (including the original Clink), not to mention “dubious taverns and doubtful pleasure gardens.” But these days the neighborhoods south of the Thames — in particular, those roughly southeast of London Bridge — are among the capital’s most energetic. Well-known districts such as Greenwich are  thriving on a revitalized riverbank, while urban explorers, creative types and middle-class families priced out of other neighborhoods are riding upgraded transport links into areas they had long overlooked. Travelers here can expect to leave the familiarity of the Tube mostly behind. But aboveground trains (and the occasional Uber) will get you anywhere, while local buses and old-fashioned shoe leather are perhaps the best ways to discover this changing corner of a metropolis you thought you knew.
Explore street view, find things to do in Southeast London and sign in to your Google account to save your map.
“A crowd flowed over London Bridge,” wrote T.S. Eliot in “The Waste Land,” and the perfect place to take cover is Evensong at Southwark (that’s SUTH-ukk) Cathedral, London’s oldest Gothic church. Don’t miss the Harvard Chapel (John Harvard was baptized here in 1607); the Shakespeare Memorial and Window (the Bard once lived in the parish); and Doorkins Magnificat, the cathedral’s formerly homeless tabby, usually found dozing on a heating grate. A volunteer pointed me to the 13th-century retrochoir, where heresy trials were held under Queen Mary I (Bloody Mary). “But don’t look down,” she called, gesturing to the map in my hand. “Look up!” In a city that’s sprouting distinctive buildings almost faster than it can conjure cheeky monikers for them — e.g. the “Cheesegrater” (the Leadenhall Building)  and the, um, “Glass Testicle” (City Hall)  — it’s the neo-futurist Shard, Western Europe’s tallest building, that offers views as cool as its name. Walk-up tickets to the observation deck — featuring curious seating grottos and English gales howling through the open structure — are an eye-watering £30.95 (about $45). A better investment? A Charcoal Cobbler cocktail (vodka, pear, citrus, peach liqueur, charcoal sugar; £15.50) at Aqua Shard, a bar and modern British restaurant on the 31st floor (no shorts or sneakers). In the 1987 film “Withnail and I,” Withnail (Richard E. Grant) asks Danny (Ralph Brown) about the ample joint he’s about to roll. It’s a “Camberwell carrot,” Danny explains, because “I invented it in Camberwell and it looks like a carrot.” Equally straightforward is the food at FM Mangal — a loud, affordable establishment on Camberwell Church Street that’s filled with a London fog of intoxicating scents rising from a blazing grill. Try the delicious Special — garlic, yogurt, eggplant, rice and minced lamb or chicken (£13.50). And the secrets of that pita bread — smoked paprika, sumac, oil and garlic, right? “Guess again,” the waitress said, smiling, and so we ordered more.Borough Market, perhaps a millennium old, is still home to all that’s tasty and trendy in the capital. Of more recent vintage is the well-curated Druid Street Market, opened last summer by Miranda York, a former BBC journalist. The restaurant St. John, famous for satisfying London’s least prudish carnivores with “nose to tail” offerings like ox heart, also runs a (blessedly vegetarian) weekend bakery on Druid Street. Try the Swedish sourdough, or grab a few of what some say are London’s best doughnuts. “It is with perfect tranquillity of conscience,” huffed a French delegate in 1884, “that we declare that we do not concur in the adoption of the meridian of Greenwich …” The globe-dividing line of zero longitude was nevertheless decreed to run through the Royal Observatory at Greenwich, now one of the world’s most charming science museums. Dive into the exhibits on the “longitude problem” at sea or the instruments of Edmond Halley. At 1 p.m. the observatory’s time ball drops, as it has almost every day since 1833, allowing ships in the Thames to set their clocks before sailing across the world. Grab an artisanal sandwich and scone at Paul Rhodes Bakery, and stroll past the three-masted  Cutty Sark. Then make for the Thames Clippers, a fleet of catamarans, for a quick lift back to London Bridge. This year Shakespeare’s Globe commemorates the Bard’s southeast London life, and the 400th anniversary of his death, with a jam-packed schedule of events. Tilling newer ground on London’s effervescent theater scene is the community-minded Southwark Playhouse. Henry Hitchings, theater critic for The London Evening Standard, told me he’s looking forward to a new adaptation of Gorky’s “Vassa Zheleznova” (opens June 15). Rapidly gentrifying Peckham (where John Boyega, who plays the rebellious storm trooper in “Star Wars: The Force Awakens,” was born) is one of London’s most diverse districts. Artist-clogged watering holes stand cheek by jowl with discount shops, auto-repair establishments and bustling African hair salons, while American-accented travelers (aside from Harrison Ford, who recently visited with Mr. Boyega) remain a rarity. Take your guest from a galaxy far, far away to Peckham Refreshment Rooms, opened by two local residents, Sven Mündner and James Fisher, in 2013. Sit at the chatty bar and try the dandelion and lentil salad with local Graceburn cheese (£6.50), then the confit duck leg (£13). Peckham Refreshment Rooms’ first manager, Coco Bayley, recommends Bar Story, “a real scuzzy bar which has been there for years in a railway arch.” Outside there’s an urbanely rustic patio where local art students and other young millennials crowd at plywood tables or on railroad ties set around open fires, as laughter and smoke rise into the London night. I won’t argue with Ms. Bayley’s perfect summary: “Horrid loos but quite fun.”Have all the bacon and eggs you like at Village East, a popular joint on the sort of long-since gentrified street The Guardian once described as “where people used to go for a good mugging.” Then take a stroll with London Walks. Their 10:45 a.m. Bermondsey tour (£10) is led by the local Tim Thomas (who played a doctor in “Four Weddings and a Funeral”). Mr. Thomas covers the once-infamous “Wild West”  character of southeast London — think brothels, bearbaiting and Dickensian slums. You’ll also explore the globalized geography here — southeast London was as much a hub in its heyday as Heathrow Airport is in ours, something to ponder as descending airplanes  cross over places with such worldly names as Jamaica Road, Cathay Street, Ivory Wharf and the Mayflower pub (yes, that Mayflower). The tour’s highlight is the 19th-century Thames Tunnel, the first under the Thames (or any major river).  With residents like Karl Marx, north London’s Highgate Cemetery is the city’s most famous. But Nunhead Cemetery in southeast London, an all-but-elvish realm where dense woods have grown up around the graves, and signs warn of the dangers of vine-clad stone crosses and monuments tilting under the weight of the ages, is the most atmospheric. Cue up your Smiths playlist as crows and magpies screech overhead, then wander up to the spooky, open-air remains of the Anglican Chapel, which burned in the 1970s. There are dog-walkers and jogging kids here, and photographers changing lenses and filters as they try to capture all the fallen, overgrown grandeur. The Green Chain Walk, a well-signed pedestrian route across south London, takes you from Nunhead Cemetery to One Tree Hill (where Queen Elizabeth I is said to have rested) and on to the Horniman Museum, where lovely gardens, child-friendly exhibits and a motley collection of musical instruments and taxidermied animals await. From there head to Forest Hill and the shop Stag and Bow, where local artisans sell such wares as resin jewelry and African print dolls. When you’re shopped out, move on to the Sylvan Post, a philatelist-gladdening pub that opened in 2012 in a disused Royal Mail post office, for their Sunday roast. The front room has lovely booths and views over the busy street, while in back are armchairs and two old bank-style vaults with seating. On a recent visit, one of the friendly servers recommended I try the Belleville Balham Black (£3.90), a German-style schwarzbier from a brewery just a few miles away, and I’m so glad she did. For riverside luxury, try the InterContinental London - The O2, which opened in Greenwich this past winter (Waterview Drive; intercontinental.com; from around £250).For something completely different, head to the Finnish Church (33 Albion Street; finnishchurch.org.uk/english; dormitory rooms from £20). Rest assured, says the website, “you do not have to be Finnish or a member of our church” to stay in this unique, sauna-equipped accommodation not far from the Mayflower pub.Advertisement