AdvertisementSupported byBitesBy Steve ReddicliffeThe building had the right bones.When Brian Ahern and Jamie Finnegan were looking for a space where they could start a food truck business in Chicago, Craigslist led them to the border of Ukrainian Village and a building that, they quickly discovered, had been a Polish and Ukrainian butcher shop since the early 1900s. At some point, an owner acquired a liquor license and added a small buffet restaurant.Mr. Ahern and Mr. Finnegan, who met while working at Daniel Boulud’s DB Bistro Moderne in Miami, decided to change course.“It had been a butcher shop for a hundred years, and we just kind of ran with the idea of beef and making it a focal point,” Mr. Ahern said.They bought the building and got to work turning it into the high-spirited Boeufhaus, which opened last year. Wood from a vintage meat cooler on the property was used in the dining room (including for the banquette); when that supply ran out, Mr. Ahern found wood from an old Chrysler plant in Wisconsin for the handsome back bar. The subway tile is original, from the 1930s.The ideal meal here, not surprisingly, involves red meat, although both owners say the restaurant is not a steakhouse but a brasserie that is committed to serving outstanding beef dishes.Mr. Ahern, the executive chef, and Mr. Finnegan, who works in the kitchen and is the director of operations, created the delicious starter of short-rib-filled beignets (with jus for dipping).The recipe for the ceci bean cavatelli is Mr. Ahern’s, drafted on a napkin years ago when he was enjoying a meal at a New York City steakhouse (where else?). He makes the pasta dough out of ricotta and chickpea flour, the merguez sausage is made in house with lamb and a little pork, the jus is seasoned with smoked paprika; in the mix are fried chickpeas and caciocavallo, a sheep’s milk cheese.It’s an inspired prelude to the exceptional Creekstone Farms steaks, butchered at the restaurant, cooked in cast iron, basted with butter, garlic and thyme, and brushed with an oil made from rendered beef trimmings and aromatics.We ordered a 55-day dry-aged rib-eye with a side of roasted mushrooms but the steak really needed nothing more than a glass of red wine (the list is first-rate and the staff knows it well; half-glasses are happily poured).The beer selection is solid, the cocktails well-made. But with steak, Mr. Ahern said, “I’m a wine guy,” a principle that applies no matter the hour. As Boeufhaus tweeted earlier this year: “TGIF. A glass of wine or two with lunch will not ruin your day.”Boeufhaus, 1012 North Western Avenue; 773-661-2116; Boeufhaus.com. Dinner for two without drinks or tip, about $100.Advertisement