

      By SHIVANI VORA

MARCH 24, 2016

Parallel to the famous (and touristed) Via Condotti, a quieter, more understated thoroughfare.
Related Article
It’s easy to overlook the elegant Via Borgognona in Rome. The long cobblestone street in the heart of the city is parallel to the famous Via Condotti, which is always jammed with tourists hitting the big-name designer stores. This thoroughfare is no less of a shopping draw, albeit a more understated and quieter one. Though it is home to some chains, many establishments are lesser-known; the boutiques are housed on the ground floor of the 15th- to 18th-century low-rise buildings with pale orange and yellow facades lining the avenue.This more than century-old brand that’s headquartered in Naples has a devoted following of men looking for high-quality and chic wardrobe staples. The pieces at this branch — one of several in Italy — are tastefully displayed in a bright space with high ceilings and include accessories and clothes like pants, shirts and jackets. The classic blue blazers are especially popular, and custom orders are also a big part of the business. Prices from 100 euros. Via Borgognona, 36; 39-06-679-4117; eddymonetti.com.Stylish, minimalist clothing and accessories for men, women and children are the mainstay at this Swedish chain owned by H&M Group, the same parent company that owns the budget behemoth H&M. While fashionable, this brand isn’t as trendy or inexpensive; items such as crisp cotton button downs and knit sweaters lean toward classic and are built to last. Prices from 7 euros ($7.70). Via Borgognona, 36; 39-06-3283-2707; cosstores.com.A homage to Italian truffles, this small specialty shop, part of a restaurant with the same theme, sells more than 60 products in which the namesake ingredient is the star. Most products, such as butter, balsamic vinegar, pesto, mayonnaise and mustard, use black truffles, while a handful like pâté, salt and honey are available in the rarer white. Die-hard fans can also buy fresh whole truffles. Prices from 12 euros. Via Borgognona, 4E; 39-06-679-4980; tartufiandfriends.it.In this minimalist shop with gray resin floors, the French clothing label sells trendy designs for men and women. The creations are easy to wear and come in materials like linen, cotton and silk. While the casual attire is continually updated, there are signature items like loose-fitting T-shirts for women in muted colors such as cream and patterned with holes, and buttery leather jackets for men and women. Prices from 90 euros. Via Borgognona, 29; 39-06-6919-0631; iroparis.com.On the corner of Via Borgognona, this women’s shoe brand has been a family-run endeavor since it started in 1938 and is the place to go for exceptionally comfortable and well-made sandals, pumps, flats and oxfords. Among the most popular in the collection are the ballerina flats in varied colors — regular customers buy as many as a dozen at a time. Prices from 180 euros. Via Belsiana, 52; 39-06-678-9083; domus1938.com.Advertisement