
Check In By                     
SHIVANI VORA

OCT. 28, 2016
From $300.The infamous past lives on.Following a $150 million, extensive renovation, the Watergate Hotel reopened in June in Washington’s Foggy Bottom neighborhood. Who hasn’t heard — even a bit — about the property’s scandalous history? In June 1972, five men used rooms 214 and 314 as a base to break into the headquarters of the Democratic National Committee on the sixth floor of the Watergate office complex. The burglary, ordered by officials in the administration of President Richard M. Nixon, led to his 1974 resignation. Though the hotel made its place in history, wear and tear took a toll, and the Watergate closed in 2007. But in 2010, a real estate developer, Euro Capital Properties, bought the 336-room hotel for $45 million with a plan to turn it into a luxury urban retreat.The Israeli designer Ron Arad, a disciple of the building’s original architect, Luigi Moretti, is behind the midcentury modern, sleek interiors, which include steel twisted columns and bronze curved walls in the lobby and sculptural furniture in red and orange tones throughout.The Watergate is within walking distance of popular attractions such as the Lincoln Memorial, the Renwick Gallery and the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts. The Metro is a five-minute walk.There are seven room categories ranging from a 350-square-foot superior to the 2,500-square-foot Presidential Suite; all have a modern aesthetic that includes beds with wavy upholstered headboards and custom-made furnishings evoking the 1960s. My premium room, the third-highest category, had a clean, polished look with a long, built-in wood desk and a silvery gray carpet with a wavy pattern. The king bed was comfortable, dressed with soft white sheets and plenty of down pillows, and the crystal goblets by the bedside made staying hydrated an elegant exercise. The room’s broken thermostat, on the other hand, didn’t match the surroundings on a humid 90-degree day. A front desk employee offered a floor fan and eventually another room. I accepted the fan because I was already changed for bed. The hotel owners said these issues had been resolved.AdvertisementSpacious with black and white glossy marble walls and floors, the bathroom had double sinks, a roomy shower with a rain shower head and toiletries from the luxe Italian brand La Bottega.Diversions here are impressive: The 10,000-square-foot Argentta Spa has an indoor pool, a fitness center and an extensive menu of treatments including body scrubs and massages. The hotel also has a lobby-level bar, the Next Whisky Bar, with more than 75 kinds of whiskeys, scotches, ryes and bourbons; a reading lounge called the Library; and another bar on the roof, Top of the Gate, with views of the Georgetown waterfront and the Washington Monument. Wi-Fi is free.There’s a robust room service menu, but the better bet may be a table at Kingbird, the hotel’s seasonal American, all-day restaurant that seats 120. An inviting terrace has an additional 90 seats for alfresco meals. A more formal section of Kingbird serves a dinner tasting menu Tuesdays through Saturdays.AdvertisementThe history is fascinating, the location is desirable and the attractive surroundings are a draw. Service, too, is on the ball. And so, the legend of the Watergate has a new chapter.The Watergate Hotel, 2650 Virginia Ave. NW, 202-827-1600, thewatergatehotel.comA version of this article appears in print on October 30, 2016, on Page TR3 of the New York edition with the headline: Moving Beyond the Scandal.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »