By NORA WALSHMAY 25, 2017
This year is the 150th anniversary of the birth of the prolific American architect and designer Frank Lloyd Wright. Born on June 8, 1867, Wright designed more than a thousand structures during a career that shaped the country’s architectural and cultural identity. To commemorate the milestone, historic Wright sites, museums and hotels are celebrating with special events, new exhibitions and anniversary packages.Wright’s home state, Wisconsin, recently introduced a self-guided driving tour in his honor. The 200-mile trail winds through a cluster of southern counties featuring nine Wright landmark sites. Taliesin, Wright’s 800-acre estate in Spring Green, offers a robust calendar of events, including two concert series, art workshops and architecture camps.In Illinois, the Frank Lloyd Wright Trust is celebrating with an extensive lineup of festivities, including a lecture and dinner in partnership with the Art Institute of Chicago on Wright’s birthday ($100), and Pedal Oak Park guided bike tours of 21 Wright sites throughout the summer ($45). A newly started Prairie Style Passport gives sightseers who visit three participating Frank Lloyd Wright Prairie-style locations a complimentary tour for two of the Frank Lloyd Wright Home and Studio (valid through the end of the year).Buffalo is offering a seasonal All Wright, All Day Trolley ($130) tour of the city’s top Wright masterworks, including the Martin House, fresh off a 15-year, $50 million restoration, and the Graycliff estate overlooking Lake Erie. Other stops highlight structures that were designed by Wright but constructed decades after his death, including the Filling Station at the Pierce-Arrow Museum, the Fontana Boathouse on the Black Rock Canal and Forest Lawn’s Blue Sky Mausoleum. Tours are offered on select dates from June 10 through Oct. 27.AdvertisementThe Museum of Modern Art in New York will honor Wright’s legacy with a major exhibition of his work from June 12 to Oct. 1. “Frank Lloyd Wright at 150: Unpacking the Archive” includes about 450 works ranging from the 1890s through the 1950s, featuring architectural drawings, models and photographs.AdvertisementMilwaukee Art Museum is also set to introduce a new exhibition, “Frank Lloyd Wright: Buildings for the Prairie,” showing from July 28 to Oct. 15. With a focus on designs from the Wasmuth Portfolio — famous lithographs by Wright published in 1911 by the Berlin firm Ernst Wasmuth — the show also includes examples of his furniture, stained glass and textiles.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Wright-designed Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum in New York will be open Thursday, June 8 (it is usually closed on Thursdays), offering $1.50 admission, free birthday cupcakes, a noon tour and rarely seen construction photographs of the museum. During the Museum Mile Festival (June 13), visitors can receive free after-hours admission and Frank Lloyd Wright temporary tattoos. Wright-inspired sketch workshops for adults and families will also be offered on select weekend dates in June.Hotels nationwide are offering Wright-themed anniversary packages. Nemacolin Woodlands Resort in Pennsylvania has a Frank Lloyd Wright 150th Birthday Package available from June 1 through Nov. 26 at Falling Rock, its 42-room boutique hotel with butler service. It includes tickets to Fallingwater and Kentuck Knob, two famous nearby homes designed by Wright, as well as breakfast, a $150 resort credit and “The Wright Perspective” souvenir book (rates from $644).The 19th-century Victorian Ash Street Inn in New Hampshire is offering a celebratory one-night package for two (rates from $259) that features a tour of the 1950s Zimmerman House (the only Wright-designed building in New England that is open to the public) and same-day admission to the Currier Museum of Art. In addition, the inn is providing a complimentary breakfast and a gift card to local food establishments.The Edgewater in Madison, Wis., is catering to Wright aficionados with a two-night hotel package on June 23 and 24 that includes visits to four surrounding historic Wright sites (rates from $959). Guests will also be driven to the architect’s Taliesin Home and Studio for a two-hour docent-led walking tour that includes a box lunch. Cocktails and dinner for two at the hotel’s restaurant are also included.A version of this article appears in print on May 28, 2017, on Page TR2 of the New York edition with the headline: For Wright’s 150th Birthday, Festivities Abound.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.