
Bites By                     
STEVE REDDICLIFFE

MAY 12, 2017
The chef Andrew Brochu was deep into the development of a new restaurant in Chicago when he came across a promotional video while doing some research on the internet. Mr. Brochu liked the trailer for “The Lee Bros. Charleston Kitchen” cookbook, and he especially enjoyed the music credited to Roister. Curious about the word, he looked up its meaning, and, to quote Leslie Nielsen quoting a thousand other gumshoes in “The Naked Gun,” bingo.“The definition was ‘to revel in a boisterous manner or to be loud and drunken,’” Mr. Brochu said. “I said, that could be the name of a restaurant, Roister.”The name fit what Grant Achatz, the highly regarded chef at Alinea in Chicago, and his business partner Nick Kokonas had in mind when they enlisted Mr. Brochu to create a casual restaurant in the West Loop.The idea, Mr. Brochu said, was to showcase “global ingredients — we gather inspiration from everywhere and kind of smash it into this neighborhood environment that’s loud and, I hope, fun.”AdvertisementRoister, which opened last April, really is fun, and the food is fantastic (Mr. Brochu has cooked in the fancy-and-playful Alinea and the now-closed Graham Elliot). A very good place to start: creamy cheese rillettes, dressed with cauliflower and a truffle vinaigrette and served with airy fry bread. Pipe pasta with clams is supple and surprising thanks to the crème fraîche and a sneaky hit of heat from poblano peppers.AdvertisementA Dark and Stormy glaze gives a Caribbean lilt to the long-braised pork butt; fried pecans and red peas are a shout-out to the South, where Mr. Brochu grew up. The Wagyu steak, sliced and on a sizzling platter, doubles up on buttery: the lush A5-grade beef is topped with a wavelet of sea urchin butter spiked with the restaurant’s own togarashi spice blend. (Meant for sharing, it’s worth the splurge price of $115.)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.For Roister’s cookies and milk dessert, Mr. Brochu wanted the accompanying ice cream “to taste like an ice-cold glass of milk” and not like “vanilla ice cream without vanilla.” As one buoyant diner at our table put it, “I never tasted something that was so much like milk that wasn’t milk.”Most every aspect of the restaurant has been similarly considered: The meal’s cutlery comes in a pouch designed to evoke a mess kit. Many of the sleek dishes were made by Eshelman Pottery in Illinois. The soundtrack began as a crowdsourced playlist of 900 songs, and with staff additions has grown to 3,000, including Harold Melvin and the Blue Notes, REO Speedwagon, late-period Johnny Cash and Ed Sheeran.Somehow, the music always seems to match the moment. When an order of Yukon fries arrived at the table, the garnish of bonito flakes was doing a little dance to the Talking Heads’ “Psycho Killer.”At Roister, even the potatoes get funky.Roister, 951 West Fulton Market; no phone; roisterrestaurant.com. An average dinner for two, without drinks or tip, is $135.A version of this article appears in print on May 14, 2017, on Page TR9 of the New York edition with the headline: Is That Ed Sheeran I Hear? Dinner’s Going to Be Fun.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »