AdvertisementSupported byTrendingBy Amy Tara KochSummer camp used to be for children. But in recent years (maybe because of their children’s Instagram posts of water skiing and spiking volleyballs) parents decided they wanted in on the fun. Now, resorts — some luxe, others more basic — are offering more than s’mores for family stays.Club Getaway in Kent, Conn., in the southern Berkshires, is more summer camp — softball, sailing, tie-dye, archery, wall climbing — than fancy resort. Guests sleep in cabins (air-conditioned), and there is themed evening entertainment as well as communal dining and a long list of activities. The property designates specific weekends and midweek days for families. The all-inclusive rates are $325 for adults and $225 for children for a two-night program.At Tanque Verde Ranch  in Tucson, guests sleep in casitas and spend their days roping, team penning and horseback riding (the sunrise gallop culminates in a pancake breakfast). The ranch is all-inclusive and there is a Kids Stay Free summer package (two children ages 4 to 11 stay free when booked with two paying adults). Rates are $365 a night (based on double occupancy) for two adults during summer months. Blackout dates may apply.Lone Mountain Ranch in Big Sky, Mont., features rustically chic cabins and activities include a ropes course, canoeing, horseback riding, hiking, archery, horseshoe competitions and fly fishing with an Orvis-certified guide. The Summer Discovery Package includes most activities as well as guided hikes of Yellowstone National Park. Rates start at $2,250 a night for a family of four. There is a minimum stay of five nights through June and a seven-night minimum for July through mid-August.At Blackberry Farm in Walland, Tenn., in the foothills of the Great Smoky Mountains, cabins are luxurious (300-thread-count sheets) and adventures focus on appreciation through exploration: hiking, beekeeping, wildlife encounters, mountain skills, paddling clinics, geocaching. Summer rates start at $795 per room for two people.Advertisement