
Heads Up By                     
 CHRISTINE HAUGHNEY
 
OCT. 26, 2017
In that exhilarating and sleep deprived first year of parenthood, one of my fondest memories is the summer afternoon my husband and I spent with our then six-month-old son touring Melford Hall in the countryside dotted by farms in Suffolk, roughly two hours northeast of London.We visited the 16th century stately home on the advice of my English in-laws who thought it would be a manageable trip for parents recovering from our son’s first international flight. What we did not expect was how welcomed we would feel at this home where Beatrix Potter, the creator of “Peter Rabbit” and other beloved children’s book characters, used to visit her relatives.When we walked up the long stone driveway, stepped through the home’s imposing front entrance and hallway, a bearish volunteer enveloped our son in his arms and offered to show him the nursery toys. As we left the house to tour the gardens, we were lent a canvas bag filled with a tartan-printed blanket, one of Ms. Potter’s books and a stuffed bunny.We settled ourselves onto the blanket in the gardens, gave our son the bunny to nuzzle and read to him over the coos of wood pigeons and as blooming flowers bent around us. It felt like a more experienced parent had been thinking of ways to make our visit memorable.Since that trip three years ago, I have learned that what felt like an invisible parent was a well-developed strategy by the National Trust, the 125-year-old charity that manages properties and land that wealthy Britons often bequeathed when they no longer could afford them. Many homes now feature museums, use their spare rooms for film shoots and rent some parts of the properties as holiday cottages – also to families.AdvertisementWith every annual trip, the National Trust has continued to impress me with their family-friendly programs. At Snowshill Manor in Gloucestershire, I discovered a spotless changing table and rocking chair. During a tour of Basildon Park, which “Downton Abbey” fans will recognize as the family’s London residence, we were offered a baby carrier if we wanted to explore the stroller-unfriendly upper floors of the 18th century home.AdvertisementAt Barrington Court in Somerset, where parts of the television series “Wolf Hall” had been filmed, volunteers didn’t mind as our son endlessly toddled up and down a wood-paneled hallway. On our most recent trip in August to Winston Churchill’s family home Chartwell, our son was delighted by the play kitchen in the child-sized playhouse that Churchill built for his own daughters and that the National Trust recently stocked with toys.As the mother of a now inquisitive preschooler with ninja-like skills at leaping onto antique chairs and fast fingers eager to touch everything new that reaches him, I appreciate even more the risks involved with welcoming children into these homes.Denise Foster, a manager on a National Trust team to improve visitors’ experiences and a self-described “history nerd,” spent the past seven years working on ways to offer better services for families.She recognizes that when parents work, these visits are “precious family time where you are building memories together.” Ms. Foster has made sure the cafes have child-sized cutlery and high-chairs that pull up to tables, well-conceived playgrounds, step stools in bathrooms and extra events during school vacations. Volunteers who used to act as guards protecting artifacts are now encouraged to welcome families.We have an annual family membership that covers more than 500 properties (114.60 pounds, or about $151). Royal Oak Foundation, the U.S. arm of the National Trust, lets visitors buy memberships before their trip. We even use National Trust properties as rest stops on long car trips. We broke up one journey and had lunch at The Vyne — a 16th century Tudor Palace in Hampshire, less than an hour’s drive from Heathrow Airport. There our son ran around the grounds and sized up the playground. The grounds we strolled around Dyrham Park, just north of Bath, let our son marvel at herds of deer.Ms. Foster recognizes that there are limits to how child-friendly she can make homes filled with priceless paintings and furniture. So at homes like at Avebury in Wiltshire, better known as the home of Stonehenge and where the National Trust had produced a television show with the BBC called “The Manor Reborn,” the National Trust kept the replicas after filming finished and welcomed children to play. There my son played peekaboo behind the curtains of a Tudor era bed. Then he ground coffee in a grinder dating from a 1912 kitchen and asked why it lacked batteries.Just as Ms. Foster had hoped, Avebury, along with all of these homes, gave us more memories to add to our own family history.A version of this article appears in print on November 5, 2017, on Page TR8 of the New York edition with the headline: Day-Tripping With Family to the Manor Reborn.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »