

      By JULIE BESONEN

MARCH 10, 2016

A Frank Lloyd Wright house intensifies the cultural traffic in an Arkansas city known mostly as the headquarters of Walmart.
Related Article
A reconstructed Frank Lloyd Wright house opened last November in Bentonville, giving a fresh cultural jolt to this city of 43,000 in the northwest corner of Arkansas. The midcentury gem so far has welcomed about 22,500 visitors. The house was relocated from its site near the flood-prone Millstone River in New Jersey to the forested campus of Crystal Bridges Museum of American Art, itself only four years old and a popular attraction. In a city known mostly as the Walmart headquarters, the escalating cultural traffic in the downtown area has helped revitalize the once-sleepy 19th-century town square whose arteries lead to new bistros, breweries and trails for hiking and biking. Off the Bentonville town square, this snout-to-tail, Ozark-rustic pub tenders smoked pig wings in sweet chile glaze, crispy pig’s ear nachos and, for a change of pace, an opulent pastrami-cured catfish sandwich. The drinks program includes nine Bloody Mary variations, garnished with pickled okra, bacon or ghost chile. 110 Southeast A Street; 479-268-4494; tuskandtrotter.comA fleet of full-suspension mountain bikes, cruisers and hybrids is available for rent at this earthy, longtime shop just off the town square. Helmets and trail maps are supplied to help riders explore a dozen trails in the region, from mountain terrain to daredevil downhill courses. 125 West Central Avenue; 479-715-6170; phattirebikeshop.com­For budding scientists and lifelong learners, this sprawling, state-of-the-art indoor-outdoor children’s museum opened in July near Crystal Bridges. Educational amusements include a simulated mini-tornado, a splashy rain room, art workshops and “Swiss Family Robinson”-type climbing adventures. 1009 Museum Way, 479-696-9280; amazeum.org­An intensely hoppy IPA and a clean, balanced amber ale are among the pours at this brewery, which opened last May inside a corrugated metal warehouse. Lean back and enjoy local and traveling musicians belting out bluegrass, folk and edgy Americana songs. 1000 Southeast Fifth Street; 479-464-0150; bentonvillebrewing.com­Luke Wetzel, a Chez Panisse alum and Arkansas native, is the chef and co-owner of this nearly year-old restaurant outfitted with Arkansas hardwoods and a wood-burning oven. The local, seasonal menu features New American dishes like fried chicken with sweet potatoes and pork meatballs on sourdough bread. 215 South Main Street; 479-268-5884; ovenandtap.comAdvertisement