
Cultured Traveler By                     
TONY PERROTTET

AUG. 31, 2016
My cultural pilgrimage to the Rocky Mountains began more than 20 years ago, a few steps from my door in the East Village of Manhattan. The poet Allen Ginsberg was staging one of the regular readings at St. Mark’s Church in-the-Bowery, featuring his Buddhist-inspired verse. As he fielded queries after the reading, he mentioned that he was decamping to teach at something called the Jack Kerouac School of Disembodied Poetics in, of all places, Boulder, Colo.Poetry in Boulder? Until then, I had envisioned the town as a high-altitude boot camp, where every resident dressed in colorful spandex and went hiking, biking and climbing with grim determination. When it came to culture, it was hard to imagine anything more profound than the “Mork and Mindy” house, whose exterior is featured in the TV series. But Ginsberg insisted that Boulder was actually brimming with progressive artists, writers and musicians. It used to be called “the Athens of the West,” he enthused.So as an Amazonian heat wave descended on New York a year ago, I decided to finally make the expedition to the Rockies to answer a question: How does culture thrive in a world of free-climbers and triathletes, who one might think are more concerned with perfectly formed abs than deeper questions of the soul? Or has Boulder’s very intimacy with the great outdoors created a cultural scene all its own?Arriving on a hot but blissfully dry July night was a disorienting experience, and not just because of the thin alpine air. At first glance, Boulder seemed dreamily pleasant, as clean and orderly as a Swiss resort, but not exactly in bohemian ferment.AdvertisementOn the tidy Pearl Street Mall, crowds were gathered by burbling fountains to watch buskers, jugglers and flame-swallowers. Uplifting mountain views framed every corner. The bike lanes were so perfectly drawn they qualified as site-specific sculptures. In fact, everyone was so cheerful, healthy and fresh-faced that I had to fight the urge to flee back to Manhattan.AdvertisementInstead, I checked in to the Colorado Chautauqua, an enclave of cottages that opened in 1898 at the base of the Flatirons, the dramatic foothills of the Rocky Mountains. This was the Western outpost of a national adult education movement specifically created to combine culture and the great outdoors: Gilded Age travelers flocked here to meet visiting artists, listen to lectures by mutton-chopped philosophers or hear opera sung by visiting European divas, then go hiking in the idyllic natural setting. (One fan, Teddy Roosevelt, called the Chautauqua movement “the most American thing in America.”)The Chautauqua’s once-austere teetotaling regimen has clearly loosened up. When I arrived, the historic concert hall had been taken over by Ziggy Marley and his band. The air vents had been opened for the warm summer night, so the strains of reggae wafted from the auditorium across the landscaped grounds, accompanied by a sweet miasma of legalized marijuana from hundreds of Boulderites picnicking and sipping wine beneath the stars.In the spirit of improving both mind and body, I went hiking the next morning with Carol Taylor, a local historian, newspaper columnist and program manager for the Chautauqua. We followed a trail into the Flatirons, soaring triangular crags that were named for their resemblance to Victorian-era clothing irons. As sweat-soaked fitness devotees jogged past lugging backpacks filled with rocks, Ms. Taylor engaged me in a mobile history lecture, explaining that Boulder’s current status as a perpetual contender for “America’s most livable town” was the result of a century and a half’s worth of efforts to imbue its idyllic setting with intellectual cachet.Boulderites gave land and cash in the 1870s to establish the University of Colorado, then donated Chautauqua’s choice site to lure creative celebrities. In 1908, they even hired the renowned landscaper Frederick Law Olmsted Jr., son of the designer of Central Park in New York, for aesthetic advice. He recommended they plant more trees — the mountains were barren then — and clean the refuse-strewn Boulder Creek.Soon after, a boosterish collection of poems by William O. Wise, “Boulder the Beautiful,” complete with promotional photos of the area, anointed Boulder the “Athens of the West,” a cultural beacon for the Rockies. (The lofty title has also been claimed by several other cities, including Cleveland and Louisville, Ky.).Ms. Taylor led me to Enchanted Mesa, a pine-clad expanse that is a sacred site for the conservation movement, which was inseparable from the vibrant intellectual and scientific community. In 1962, forward-thinking citizens banded together to stop a luxury hotel from being built here, purchasing the area’s 55 acres at risk instead.They had already voted in 1959 to enact the famous Blue Line, which prohibits city water services from being built at higher elevations, effectively limiting development and protecting the pristine views of the lower Rocky Mountains. For good measure, Boulder in 1967 became America’s first town to tax itself to provide money to buy chunks of wilderness — an “open space” program that continues today.“Can you imagine if this place was concreted over?” Ms. Taylor mused as we took in the fairy-tale beauty of the valley, carpeted with colored wildflowers and exploding with clouds of butterflies.AdvertisementI decided to settle into a regimen. Like genteel Edwardian travelers of a century ago, I cleared my city lungs every morning with a wilderness jaunt — one day mountain biking the Switzerland Trail, a 20-mile former railroad track through gold mining ghost towns; the next day inner-tubing down Boulder Creek. Then, in the heat of the afternoon, I sought out the cultural attractions, following the advice of writers who congregate here, creating their own literary enclave in the West.Steps from the Farmers’ Market, I paid my respects to the Dushanbe Teahouse, a psychedelic edifice transported from Tajikistan — it looks like a jewel box from “Arabian Nights” — then dropped by the Boulder Museum of Contemporary Art next door. The entire museum was being transformed by a local celebrity chef, Michael Neff, for one of their regular “art dinners,” with culinary treats delivered to guests via a model electric train.For avant-garde architecture, I headed to NCAR, the National Center for Atmospheric Research, which looms like a western Stonehenge over the town. I. M. Pei’s masterpiece, completed in 1968, gained additional cultural cachet by being featured in Woody Allen’s 1973 sci-fi classic “Sleeper” as a futuristic “laboratory” (Mr. Allen infiltrates the building in a mock-athletic moment by awkwardly rappelling down a tower with computer tape).It’s hard to remember that until the late 1960s, Boulder was still a sober, conservative and pious place. (It remained “dry” until 1967.) Its image changed almost overnight when university students became radicalized, hippies and antinuclear demonstrators arrived from around the country, and a progressive City Council voted in the town’s first (and last) African-American mayor. Suddenly, Boulder was a countercultural mecca.To get a sense of how Boulder went from sober “Athens” to raucous “People’s Republic,” I headed to Naropa University, a pioneering Buddhist university in the Western Hemisphere, founded in 1974 by a wealthy Tibetan exile named Chogyam Trungpa Rinpoche. It was Open Day when I visited, and a graduate was escorting three students around the leafy campus. We paused to admire Eastern shrines, a geodesic dome used as a greenhouse and the Consciousness Lab, where “the neuroscience of meditation” is researched, and poked our head in at a poetry conference, which was in full swing.Allen Ginsberg was first invited to teach here in 1974, along with luminaries like John Cage and William Burroughs. He already knew Colorado well from his beat days with the Denver denizen Neal Cassady. By the ’70s, the creative ambience and radical politics in Boulder were so convivial that Ginsberg agreed to found the Jack Kerouac School of Disembodied Poetics with another New York poet, Anne Waldman. “It was supposed to be a ‘hundred-year project’ at least,” Ms. Waldman recalled in an email. “That was the hook, to help found a school in this part of the country that had a spiritual context, that would go beyond our lifetimes. It was inspiring.”Today, Naropa’s Allen Ginsberg Library remains as a modest homage, preserving many of the poet’s papers and films of his lectures on literature; a small black-and-white portrait hangs over the door.AdvertisementBut the most intimate shrine turned out to be Ginsberg’s long-term residence, which I tracked down in the quiet back blocks of the town. Stone steps led up from a sleepy lane to a quaint cottage with a “Bernie for President” sign in the window. The current owners, Steve and Jennifer Hendricks, welcomed me in for iced tea.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.They admitted that they had known nothing of Ginsberg’s life here before moving in five years ago. “We do get a few poetry fans every year,” Mr. Hendricks said. “Not many.” The interior of the house had been renovated, they said, but its exterior has barely changed since the glory days. As proof, Mr. Hendricks pulled up on his laptop a snapshot of Ginsberg with friends gathered on the porch, including Lawrence Ferlinghetti, Peter Orlovsky and Burroughs.“What worries us is that property prices are so high now in Boulder, the new arrivals are going to be more mainstream,” Ms. Hendricks mused. “It changes the atmosphere.”“They won’t have ‘Bernie for President’ signs in their windows,” Mr. Hendricks added.I.T. specialists, professionals and retirees are descending on the town, squeezing out the more chilled-out — and impecunious — population. Last year, Google broke ground on an office with room for 1,500 employees, which threatens to force even more locals out.But reports of Boulder’s demise are premature, as I found on my last afternoon. First I visited the artist Rebecca DiDomenico, whose house was as open and airy as a Balinese villa and crowded with an extraordinary range of her creations, made from raw minerals and dead insects. From there, we went to her studio, Swoon Art House. Built from rammed earth and powered by geothermal and solar energy, it contains two basement “cave” installations made from brilliantly colored butterfly wings sealed in mica, which glittered like dragon scales in the half-light.“Boulder is actually becoming more artistic every year,” Ms. DiDomenico said, as we clambered through one of the magical refuges. “Artists have been working here for decades, only now we’re getting some attention.”As I was leaving, I heard music in the distance. “Oh, that will be the ‘bee party,’ ” Ms. DiDomenico shrugged casually. A backyard fund-raiser was in full swing for Bee Safe Boulder, a group dedicated to saving bees and other pollinators. Over Coloradan wine and cheese, a bevy of activists explained in detail that bees are a key indicator of environmental health, and that they are in radical decline.By now the sun was sinking, so I drove up to the Flatirons and pulled on my hiking boots. Within an hour, I was up at a spectacular rock formation called the Arch with a cadre of sweaty fitness fans, watching the sun turn the mountains blood red. Allen Ginsberg would surely have been enraptured.Colorado Chautauqua (900 Baseline Road; 303-442-3282; chautauqua.com) offers a regular diet of cultural events and concerts throughout the warmer months, and is also the starting point for spectacular hikes into the Flatirons.AdvertisementBoulder History Museum (1206 Euclid Avenue; 303-449-3464; boulderhistory.org; admission, $6) is getting a new home in 2017, but modest interim exhibitions can be seen by appointment.Boulder Museum of Contemporary Art (1750 13th Street; 303-443-2122; bmoca.org) hosts “art dinners” three times a year.Prospective students at Naropa University (2130 Arapahoe Avenue; 303-444-0202; naropa.edu) can apply online for open house tours in summer, although drop-ins seem welcome any time.Dushanbe Teahouse (1770 13th Street; 303-442-4993; boulderteahouse.com)A picture caption on Sept. 4 with an article about Boulder, Colo., described a house in the city incorrectly. The house was the setting of the “Mork and Mindy” TV show, not the residence of the poet Allen Ginsberg.A version of this article appears in print on September 4, 2016, on Page TR7 of the New York edition with the headline: Where Inner Peace Meets Outer Beauty.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »