AdvertisementSupported byBy Jessica Colley ClarkeWhether they are functioning towers casting a beam over the sea or simply historic landmarks, lighthouses are full of intrigue. Their isolated locations, vantage points over cliffs and open water or associations with tales of storms and shipwrecks — whatever the reason, they capture the imagination. Here are seven examples outside Ireland that might inspire a trip.1. South Stack Lighthouse, Anglesey, Wales. On a small island reached by footbridge off the northwest coast of Anglesey in Wales, this lighthouse requires descending over 400 stone steps down a cliff for a visit. Tours (5.80 pounds, about $7.25) include the interior of the lighthouse and climbing spiral steps to the top of its tower. trinityhouse.co.uk/lighthouse-visitor-centres/south-stack-lighthouse-visitor-centre2. Kilauea Lighthouse, Kauai, Hawaii. Perched above the Pacific on the northern coast of Kauai, the Kilauea Lighthouse was restored in time for its centennial celebration in 2013. Visits ($5) include the tower and explorations of the surrounding wildlife refuge. kilaueapoint.org3. Peggy’s Point Lighthouse, Nova Scotia. One of many lighthouses that dot the coastline of Nova Scotia, Peggy’s Point sits among large boulders in the fishing village of Peggy’s Cove. A visit includes scaling the rocks and admiring the scenery; the tower is not open to the public. novascotia.com/see-do/attractions/peggys-cove-village-and-lighthouse/14684. West Quoddy Head Lighthouse, Maine. This red-and-white-striped lighthouse is at the far eastern stretch of Maine. Whale sightings are a highlight from this vantage point. The tower is not open to the public, but a museum inside the former lighthouse keeper’s quarters (free admission) features historical displays. westquoddy.com5. Enoshima Lighthouse, Fujisawa, Japan. A contemporary tower completed in 2003, Enoshima is in Fujisawa, about an hour southwest of Tokyo. Elevators can be used to reach the top of the 131-foot tower, but spiral stairs offer views in all directions, including out to Mount Fuji (admission, 500 yen, about $5). jnto.go.jp/eng/spot/comcobtw/enoshima-lighthouse-observation-tower.html6. Start Point Lighthouse, Devon, England. Two cottages are available in the former lighthouse keeper’s quarters of the Start Point Lighthouse on the Devon coast. The lighthouse offers access to scenic cliff-top walking paths. Guided lighthouse tours are also available (£4). trinityhouse.co.uk/lighthouse-cottage-rental/start-point-holiday-cottages7. Slettnes Lighthouse, Norway. Bird-watching and hiking are popular activities around this lighthouse on the northern coast of Norway. Guided tours (50 Norwegian kroner, about $6) are available and include a trip up the 139 steps to reach the top of the tower. lighthousesofnorway.com/slettnes-lighthouse-710533n/Advertisement