By BRIAN NICHOLSOCT. 27, 2016
If you’re near Harrisburg, make a pit stop for sandwiches at the well-hidden ShakeDown BBQ (668 Firehouse Road, Grantville, Pa.; shakedownbbq.com). The menu changes regularly, but the sausage is always good. It is open all day Friday and Saturday and for lunch only on Thursday and Sunday.If you’re out on a Thursday, try the weekly special at Hempen Hill BBQ (13208 Fountain Head Plaza, Hagerstown, Md.; hempenhillbbq.com). If not, both the chicken and the sausage are fabulous. The crab chips, expansive beer selection and big screens can draw a crowd if a game is on.Bonnie Blue Southern Market & Bakery (334 West Boscawen Street, Winchester, Va.; bonnieblue.us) puts out a stellar sausage gravy and even better grits, if you’re around for breakfast. Otherwise, you can’t go wrong with a pulled pork sandwich with collard greens.There are no wrong choices at Beammeup BBQ & Cafe (411 Lime Kiln Road, Lexington, Va.; beameupbbq.com). Unlike many joints, the vegetables aren’t cooked to death. And don’t forget to have a sweet tea, especially if you’ve been out hiking.AdvertisementDue South Pit Cooked BBQ (1465 Roanoke Street, Christiansburg, Va.; duesouthbbq.com) serves excellent pulled pork, brisket and fried tomatoes. Try all of their sauces until you’ve discovered your favorite. They’re sold by the jar as well.AdvertisementLexington Barbecue (100 Smokehouse Lane, Lexington, N.C.; lexbbq.com) is just about perfect. The only problem is everyone knows it. Expect a wait if you visit on a weekend. Don’t fill up on the hush puppies.It’s a little off the beaten path, but Countryside Barbeque (2070 Rutherford Road, Marion, N.C.; countrysidebbq.net) is worth the extra miles. If there are no ribs, get the pulled pork with fried okra. Buy a jar or two of their sauce to turn a home-cooked dinner into an event (hint: think of Buffalo wings).Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Pork platter and beans are about the only way to go at the Original Ridgewood Barbecue (900 Elizabethton Highway, Bluff City, Tenn.). The short wait for a table will be made up for with very fast and friendly service. Only the biggest appetites won’t need a to-go box.If you can, save room for banana pudding at Sweet P’s BBQ & Soul House (410 West Jackson Avenue, Knoxville, Tenn.; sweetpbbq.com). Ribs and chicken outdo the other meats, and don’t forget to try their baked beans.Edley’s Bar-B-Que (2706 12th Avenue South, Nashville; edleysbbq.com) has great daily specials, so read the menu before you spring for the pulled pork sandwich. Smaller portions leave plenty of room for sides, like the bean salad.Ribs go fast at Scott’s-Parker’s Barbeque (10880 Route 412, Lexington, Tenn.; facebook.com/scottsparkersbarbeque) but the best item is probably the chopped pork sandwich. The sauce looks extra spicy but it’s actually very well balanced, and can be bought by the bottle.Central BBQ (2249 Central Avenue, Memphis; cbqmemphis.com) runs a fast counter, so don’t be scared off by the long line. Pulled pork is good but ribs are better, wet or dry. Mac and cheese is great. Memphis weather makes sweet tea a necessity.Don’t shy away from the BBQ pasta at Bar-B-Q Shop (1782 Madison Avenue, Memphis; dancingpigs.com). Just keep in mind you’ll also want more than a couple ribs, and dry is the best order. Slaw, beans and toast are all recommended.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.