
Next Stop By                     
BRENDAN DONLEY

AUG. 22, 2017
Gary, Ind., is rooted at the bottom of the U-shaped curve of Lake Michigan, a region of crisscrossing highways, casinos and forests of smokestacks.Gone are the days of the Jackson 5, its greatest claim to fame. Gone are many of its other residents, the prosperity of its steel mills, the letters listing the showings on the Palace Theater marquee. Gone, too, are the Chicagoans each day of the summer, stopping, if at all, for gas as they head east on road trips and summer vacations.They should consider making a stop. Far from the cement grid lining the city’s heart, there are sandy ridges of wooded pines, serene footbridges over natural ponds, and the feeling of some faraway world — the dream of Michigan’s Mackinac Island winking its way onto the scene, a mirage that just can’t be true.The beach, very much not an illusion, is a foreign image to the industrial norms of northwest Indiana. The despair of an ailing city met with the beauty of a beloved wedding venue, at the Marquette Park Pavilion. The city churches gaining a prayer in the proud bronze statue of Jacques Marquette. And a view of the Chicago skyline, like a giant ship in the distance, the buildings’ bottom halves blurred by sky-colored mist — a floating city. The redevelopment is part of a $28 million project.Advertisement“It’s our own world down here,” said DeAundra Joshua, an employee of Carmella’s Café, which overlooks the lake and acts as a venue in the summer months for karaoke, jazz, folk music, and group sessions of yoga.Down the shore from the cafe, wedged between patios of family cookouts, the Gary Aquatorium has revived an even more distant history. The stately cement building, a former shower and changing facility designed by Prairie-School architect George W. Maher, has survived abandonment and closure to become repurposed into a museum of aviation. An exhibit commemorating the Tuskegee Airmen occupies one half, and on its roof sits a replica hang-glider of wood and polyester — perched, as it was in 1896, above Indiana’s sandy dunes, where experimental flights by French-born engineer Octave Chanute inspired and informed the later success of the Wright brothers.AdvertisementThe city’s days of aviation aren’t quite behind it: a new runway built at the Gary/Chicago airport is ready for flights.“Focal points,” explained Mayor Karen Freeman-Wilson, tasked with improving the city she’s always called home, back after time away that included Harvard Law School.It is a phrase she’s taken up to describe her approach to city mending. The local airport, the downtown, the Glen Park neighborhood, the university campus — focal points like an updated lens prescription, to make what’s visible more clear, more bright.“My rule is to make investments for the people that are here,” said Mrs. Freeman-Wilson, “to honor the people that have remained and weathered the storm.”Those who have weathered it also supply color that comes with the polish. On the corner of Jackson Street and 23rd Avenue last summer, a man in a bright blue vest and matching checkered shorts — greeted a small, out-of-town crowd. This was a day before donning a wig, makeup, and a glimmering outfit of pop superstardom.“I’m a Michael Jackson impersonator,” said C.J. Williams, shaking hands with tourists from Ontario and North Carolina, taking photos outside the King of Pop’s boyhood home. The next day, he explained, would be the anniversary of Jackson’s passing, the day when the lights would flick on and the crowds would arrive, to watch him moonwalk up a burst of old memories.AdvertisementOn the other side of town, tucked between the interstate highway and remaining steel mills, Mike Klidaras closed up shop for the day at the family-run Great Lakes Café, with a menu of lunch options overhead: the “Truckers Favorite,” and “Steel Worker’s Omelette” included.In a red plastic booth seat along the windows, Mr. Klidaras sat down beneath a wall-hung marlin studded with sequins — the “disco fish,” as he called it — pulling out a laminated photo of downtown in the 1960s, Broadway in black and white.The city is hoping that its glory days aren’t all behind it.A version of this article appears in print on August 27, 2017, on Page TR4 of the New York edition with the headline: A Day at the Beach in Gary (Yes, Gary).  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »