AdvertisementSupported byBy Concepción De LeónAs the Caribbean recovers from a devastating hurricane season, here are three books by writers from the region that tackle the culture and resilience of the people of Grenada, Haiti and the West Indies.LADY IN A BOATBy Merle Collins95 pp. Peepal Tree Press. (2003)In this book of poetry, Collins reflects on her childhood in Grenada, the failed Grenadian revolution, and the quotidian lives of the island’s people. It is divided into five sections — “Quality Time,” “Se Mwe, Nutmeg,” “A Letter and a Note,” “Voices and Journeys” and “The Word — In the Beginning” — each highlighting a different aspect of Grenada’s history and culture. She writes of her parents’ relationship — her father’s love of “green bush” and her mother’s disdain for it. “This is it?/ This really is the place/ where you bring me to spend my days?” she asks of him. The lushness and particularities of the island are omnipresent in her verse, from the “raindrops huge as grapefruits” to the “radio shouting bout rumors of wind” during hurricane season.MIGUEL STREETBy V.S. Naipaul160 pp. The Vanguard Press. (1960)This collection of short stories is about life in the West Indies in the 1930s and ’40s. Each story is narrated by the same young boy — they are drawn from the writer’s own memories of growing up in Port of Spain — but a large cast of characters is introduced. In one story, the young narrator describes them this way: “Man-man was mad; George was stupid; Big Foot was a bully; Hat was an adventurer; Popo was a philosopher; and Morgan was our comedian.” Yet as the narrator becomes an adult, he complicates these observations, painting a vivid picture of the people that live on his street and showing why he sees “our street as a world.” In 1960, our reviewer wrote: “The sketches are written lightly, so that tragedy is understated and comedy is overstated, yet the ring of truth always prevails.”GOD LOVES HAITIBy Dimitry Elias Léger272 pp. Amistad. (2015)Set in the aftermath of the 2010 earthquake that claimed hundreds of thousands of lives and destroyed much of the island’s capital, this story revolves around three characters: Natasha, an artist, Alain, a dreamer and entrepreneur whom she loves, and Natasha’s husband, Haiti’s fictional president. The driving narrative of the book is Natasha’s quest to find Alain, whom she believes may have died, amid the destruction, but it is a powerful portrait of a nation in peril and the citizens who inhabit it. Our reviewer called the novel “energetic and unusual,” and wrote that Léger’s “Haiti-in-crisis, richly seen and unforgettable, is all too real.”Advertisement