AdvertisementSupported by5 PLACESBy Grace BanksUntil recently, Kenya’s Diani Beach was a well-kept secret for a cultured international crowd that has been vacationing on the coast since the 1970s, fueled by a passion for the sparkling white-gold beaches, rare sea safaris and luxury hotel scene that characterizes this strip of coastline on the Indian Ocean. But with the arrival of new dining, shopping and drinking spots, and a celebrity following, Diani Beach is now the trendy escape for tourists looking for respite after safari trips in the Samburu and Maasai regions. At only an hour’s domestic flight away from the Kenyan capital, Nairobi, the golden stretch of beach is becoming one of the most popular sun, sea and sand destinations in the country.Founded in the late 1970s and rediscovered by travelers, this seafood spot is in a cave believed to be between 120,000 and 180,000 years old. Its candlelit tables are dotted across a subterranean warren of small caves. A cocktail bar carved from stone makes this the perfect spot for an aperitif.Ali Barbours Rd, Diani Beach, Kenya; 254 714 456131; alibarbours.coThis five-star hotel has hosted numerous celebrities, including Angelina Jolie and U2’s Bono. Guests can choose from one of Alfajiri’s three private villas tucked on a cliff overlooking a private strip of Diani Beach, a giraffe-patterned infinity pool and the Indian Ocean. Rooms are decorated with traditional beaded furniture from the Samburu region and midcentury objects from the Maasai region.P. O. Box 454, Ukunda, Kenya; +254 722 727876; alfajirivillas.comThis independent contemporary art gallery has been a regular haunt of locals since it opened two years ago. The gallery has a strong roster of East African artists, including established painters like Kizito Maria Kasule and Maggie Otieno, and emerging talent such as the sculptor Lukwago Saad.Diani Beach Shopping Centre, Diani Beach Rd, Diani Beach, Kenya +254 706 629655; kenyaafricanart.comIn 2015, the Swedish scientist Volker Bassen launched a conservation initiative on the Diani coast to combat the extinction of whale sharks. On weekends, he runs water safaris, offering the once-in-a-lifetime chance to swim with whale sharks — a nice extension of Kenya’s intrepid safari culture.Blue Marlin Beach Hotel, Diani Beach Road, Diani Beach, Kenya; +254 720 555222; www.giantsharks.orgWith rare Kenyan souvenirs on sale, this spot is the perfect place to browse bone crockery, handmade wooden cutlery and hand-printed textiles from Mombasa, a city about 20 miles away. Locals like Marika Molinar, owner of the luxurious Alfajiri Villas, consider the three-year-old boutique to be “the best shopping in Diani.”Bahari Plaza Shopping Center, Diani Beach Rd, Diani Beach, Kenya; + 254 (0)40 320 2360; dianishopping.comAdvertisement