
In Transit By                     
ALYSON KRUEGER

FEB. 19, 2016
Several ski seasons ago Mark Bell, the hotel manager at Sunshine Mountain Lodge in the Canadian ski resort Sunshine Village, had an idea: Let’s throw parties in the property’s gigantic hot tub, which is big enough for 40 people.The lodge takes its role of entertaining guests seriously. It is set high in the Rockies in Banff National Park, and the only way to get there is by gondola. When that closes at 5:30 p.m. daily (except on Fridays, when it is open until 10), guests can’t leave and seek fun elsewhere.So the receptionist came up with hot tub bingo. The resort purchased waterproof boards and game pieces, and then invited all guests (over 250 of them when the hotel is fully booked) to grab a drink from the bar, jump in the hot tub and try their luck. The first game was held three years ago. The resort now holds sessions every Saturday night when the hotel is at least 70 percent full.“It was a different experience in the outdoors, with the snow falling on us,” said Jay Uthman Manoharan, managing partner for Energy Associates International in Calgary, who played the game in December with his three sons ages 12, 9 and 7. “No winners in the family, but it was a positive experience,” he said in an email.AdvertisementIn the past few years ski destinations around the world have upped their après-ski offerings by staging creative events in hot tubs. The idea is to occupy and amuse guests, while setting themselves apart from the competition. As Lindsay Gallagher, Sunshine Village’s media and marketing coordinator, said, “We definitely use it as a selling tool.”AdvertisementOn Saturdays in the spring,Squaw Valley Alpine Meadows in Lake Tahoe hosts a daytime hot tub party on its mountain peak. The hot tub can hold 50 people, and the event attracts 150 to 250 who come for the booze (served from an umbrella bar), great views of the Sierra Nevada, local music and flirtations.The resort has been holding the parties for five years, but its popularity is increasing, said the marketing manager, Cameron Calvert. “People are starting to recognize the hot tub parties in the spring are something worth coming to and planning a special trip for.” This year, in addition to having D.J.s, the resort is hiring bands to perform for the soakers.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Valle Nevado, Chile’s largest ski resort, stages afternoon hot tub parties every day during ski season, which runs from late June to early October. Skiers and snowboarders drink pisco sours while listening to pop and house music played by a D.J. and watching the Andean sunset. On occasion there is a volleyball net in the hot tub to encourage friendly competition.Brian Pearson, a 46-year-old who lives in Massachusetts and runs Upscape, a tour operator that specializes in ski tours in Chile, last visited the hot tub in August. “I normally don’t think about a hot tub as being a major part of my ski visit, but in the case of Valle Nevado, the pool après-ski scene is so fun, it makes me always really look forward to visiting,” he said in an email. “There’s just no other way to finish up a ski day.”Even the town of Breckenridge, Colo., has gotten on board. This year at its Ullr Fest, a celebration of the Nordic winter god and a chance to pray for snow, the parade featured a trailer with a hot tub whose occupants threw candy into the crowd. Afterward the town hosted its first ice plunge and set up a hot tub party for freezing participants. It’s already on the schedule again for next year.“It’s a pretty rowdy crowd doing that,” said Paul Baumgardner, the owner of Affordable Mountain Hot Tubs, which supplied the hot tub for the event.In London, the pop-up Soak recently tried to replicate the hot tub craze in the middle of the city for those who could not make it to a ski resort. Over New Year’s it hosted a party where groups soaked in hot tubs while drinking cocktails, listened to comedians perform and went after one another with water pistols and rubber ducks. “Some Londoners are still a bit shy when it comes to tubbing, and we wanted something extra to tempt them in,” said the founder, Adam Taffler. “It was hilarious.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »