By BRETT MICHAEL DYKESFEB. 8, 2016
It was around 5 p.m. on Sunday when I began contemplating whether or not I should start composing goodbye messages to the people I love, as well as one to the friend dog-sitting my golden retriever to ask her to find him a good home for me in the event I didn’t live to see another day.The Wi-Fi aboard the Anthem of the Seas, billed by Royal Caribbean as “the fastest Internet at sea,” had remained remarkably resilient up to this point — fading in and out at times but largely functional — but I was worried that it wouldn’t be so for much longer. The ship was rocking back and forth so violently that I’d been tossed off my bed a few minutes before. I’d begun plotting my evacuation, contemplating what I should wear, what should I bring with me, and would it even matter?Just a few minutes earlier, the ship’s cruise director had made an announcement to the 4,000 or so passengers on board stating that “things are going O.K.” and asked for everyone to “remain in your rooms and enjoy the complimentary movies.”Things did not seem to be going “okay.”At the time we were sailing through a winter storm in the Atlantic, a few hundred miles south of Cape Hatteras in North Carolina, that reports say produced hurricane-force winds of up to 150 m.p.h., in addition to 30-foot seas. The first sign I saw that something was seriously amiss on the Anthem of the Seas, reported to be the third largest cruise vessel ever built, came a few minutes before 3 p.m., when I walked into the ship’s solarium and saw that we were rocking back and forth significantly enough that the water in the Jacuzzis was spilling over the sides of the pools and hot tubs housed within, causing the Jacuzzi jets to shoot water straight into the air. At 3:40, Captain Claus Andersen made an announcement asking everyone onboard to “go back to your state rooms until further notice.”AdvertisementThere we would all remain for what turned into arguably the longest seven or eight hours or so of my life, an experience that ranged from scary to downright terrifying. Below is a sampling of the notes I took on my phone during that time.Advertisement— “Surrounded by the sound of things crashing all around. Glass breaking ... sound of pipes clanking. Boat is shaking.”— “Boat feels like it’s tilting severely to the right. No idea how I haven’t thrown up.”— “Trapped in a small room, all by myself. Broken glass everywhere. I’d secured most of the breakables in the room but forgot about two cocktail glasses in the bedroom. Boat is shaking. Sound of swirling wind is constant.”— “No other sounds. Eerily silent. No human voices other than the occasional announcement from the captain. The only sounds are those of rancor, things breaking, clanking, etc.”— “This is terrifying. Super Bowl pregame show is on. Had to mute because it was stressing me out. God, please don’t let us lose power.”— “Just when I think the worst is passed something new happens to scare the s*%t out of me.”— “Meanwhile, I’m getting texts from friends sending me Mardi Gras pics and asking me to come to their Super Bowl parties. God, how I wish I were there. Anywhere but here.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.— “I have to go to the bathroom. No idea how I should go about doing this. Boat is rocking like nuts and there’s broken glass all over the bathroom floor.”— “An announcement from Captain Claus, just as the Super Bowl coin flip was taking place: ‘This storm turned out to be much more violent than anyone could have anticipated ... I know many of you are very worried and very afraid ... I want to assure you that the situation is stable.’ ”— “Rotating between sitting crouched at the end of my bed with two hands on the bed and my feet firmly planted on the floor to maintain a stable position.”Advertisement— “I just texted a friend saying that I think the worst is over, but now the boat is shaking and rocking arguably worse that it has all day. I jinxed us. Not thinking or saying anything to anyone now.”Eventually, things began to settle down a bit. During the Super Bowl halftime show the captain made an announcement saying that the winds had calmed down to 60 to 70 m.p.h. He added, “We are being put to the test, and I apologize for you having to experience something like this.” He concluded by announcing that all guests were welcome to help themselves to anything in their room mini-bars free of charge. I took this opportunity to help myself to some M&Ms, some Pringles and, of course, some alcohol.On the bright side, the Anthem of the Seas never lost the Super Bowl satellite signal throughout the storm. I turned off the television in my room right after Peyton Manning announced that he’d be celebrating the Broncos’ victory by downing a slew of Budweiser, and actually slept surprisingly well through the night.This morning, as the ship’s crew — who, by the way, have been outstanding throughout this entire ordeal — hustled around to clean up and return some semblance of normalcy to the ship, the captain made an announcement thanking everyone for cooperating and remaining calm throughout the ordeal. He added, “It was one of my worst days at sea.” A few hours later, just after noon, Captain Andersen made another announcement: because another storm system appeared to be developing ahead of the course we were on, he decided to turn the ship around and head back to New York (passengers will get a full refund as well as a 50 percent discount on a future cruise with the company).“I am not prepared to ask you to go through more than one storm,” Captain Andersen said. “One storm is enough.”And how.Shivani Vora contributed reporting.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »