AdvertisementSupported byIn TransitBy Brett Michael DykesThe voyage of Anthem of the Seas was cut short after sailing through a strong winter storm that produced hurricane-force winds. Here is Brett Michael Dykes’s original firsthand account.When he came out for his late-night set in the Royal Theater aboard the Anthem of the Seas on Tuesday night, the comedian Miguel Washington was wearing a bright yellow life vest.“Yes, I’m doing the show all night with this on,” Mr. Washington told the audience, which got a good laugh out of the joke. “It’s like a fat turtle neck.”Two nights before, the ship had sailed into a monstrous Atlantic storm, one that produced winds and seas on par with a Category 5 hurricane, making for a harrowing experience for passengers. But things are largely back to normal on the ship, which is scheduled to return to New Jersey late Wednesday night. People relaxed throughout the day all over the massive ship’s many public areas. A newly married couple posed for photographs on a staircase, surrounded by family members. Children ran around conducting scavenger hunts.Because of the storm, almost all of the bells and whistles on the boat had been shut down—the skydiving simulator, the North Star capsule, the FlowRide. But the bar staffed by robots was still functioning and the restaurants onboard buzzed with activity during the dinner hours.And on this night Anthem of the Seas passengers were clearly ready to laugh about the trauma they had experienced on Sunday. Mr. Washington’s jokes about the storm received more laughs and applause than most of the other jokes he performed during his set.“People keep asking me stupid questions like, ‘Were you scared?’ Hell, yeah, I was scared!,” Mr. Washington said during his act. “That was the roughest night I’ve had in 15 years working on cruise ships ... I told myself, ‘If I die, I’m coming back to kill the captain.’ ”Mr. Washington did eventually take off the life jacket, by the way. But it remained close to him on the stage for the duration of his act.Advertisement