
Bites By                     
EDWARD SCHNEIDER

APRIL 29, 2016
Apart from a couple of brass weather vanes, there is no art on the walls of Rijks, the principal restaurant at the Rijksmuseum, the cultural institution in Amsterdam that reopened in 2013 after a decade-long renovation. Perhaps that’s for the best: After long hours of scrutinizing Rembrandts and Vermeers, it’s relaxing to enter an old-master-free zone for lunch, dinner or a midafternoon pause.That said, the gnarl of driftwood and foliage set on our table before the beginning of our meal rose almost to the level of art. The leaves, however, turned out to be a snack: crisp tempura-fried spinach dusted with a tart seasoning mix. (The driftwood was whisked away before we could hazard a taste with our first glass of wine — Dutch wine, no less.)The restaurant offers a tempting six-course tasting, but we chose our own meal à la carte with enthusiastic and well-informed advice from a waiter. The menu, by the executive chef Joris Bijdendijk, is almost equally divided among seafood, meat and vegetables. Ingredients are excellent, local and seasonal, and the cooking is precise and imaginative in both flavor and technique, yielding delicious, satisfying, sometimes intriguing dishes.When we visited earlier this year, a good example was spit-roasted celeriac, which was fetched from the kitchen on a board and carved and sauced at the table. The consistency was creamy and the flavor intense, but there were layers to this dish: The celeriac was steamed, then studded with Dutch-cured smoked pork lardo and slowly roasted and basted for hours. It was served with a smoked-oyster emulsion and a rich veal gravy and topped with red sorrel leaves. All those elements were there to support the vegetable, which remained the center of attention.Tender, rare hare was served with a purée of blood sausage: an appealing variant on blood-based sauces traditional in game cooking. It came with outstanding cabbage-stuffed cabbage, the filling finely shredded and buttery. A vegetarian dish of carrots and eggplant included a savory miso cream and a vegetable broth whose clarity belied its intensity. Our caramel dessert benefited from a similar “consommé” as a foil to denser ingredients: clear to the eye but full of cacao flavor.The restaurant is open far later than the museum and has its own entrance for those who, for some reason, are steering clear of the fine arts.Rijks, Museumplein 2; 31-20-674-7555; rijksrestaurant.nl/en. Dinner for two, without drinks or tip, is about 110 euros ($124); the six-dish RijksTable menu is €67.50 ($76).A version of this article appears in print on May 1, 2016, on Page TR11 of the New York edition with the headline: Museum Menu: Artful Fare.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »