AdvertisementSupported byFrugal TravelerBy Lucas PetersonFull disclosure: I was already sold on Milwaukee before I arrived. I’m originally from outside Chicago, and spent some time in Wisconsin’s largest city around 10 years ago when I was performing in a local theater production. During my time there, I came to appreciate the city’s appealing mix of outstanding cultural institutions, fantastic food and dive bars.I am satisfied to report that, in those respects, very little has changed. I found a small but vibrant city that balances its traditional Germanic origins with an embrace of contemporary art and design, great live music, and fun, casual dining.Whether it was a concert at Turner Hall or a quick, satisfying dinner at the bar of the Noble, I was constantly impressed by how good (and cheap) almost everything was that I encountered. Lily Shea, a student and waitress at Lakefront Brewery, maybe put it best: “Milwaukee is really underrated. I think it surprises people.” I couldn’t agree more.It’s also a quick jaunt from Chicago, where I was visiting family, so I decided to check my ground-transit options. Wanderu, a metasearch aggregator that specializes in buses and trains, spat out results that varied in price from high ($25 one way on Amtrak) to low ($11 one way on Megabus).Since I would save only about 30 minutes traveling by train — Milwaukee is just 90 minutes up Interstate 94 — I went with the cheaper bus option. Some of you may already know how that trip turned out.Luckily, it wasn’t a harbinger for the rest of the trip. From the bus terminal (which is also the Amtrak terminal), it was easy to get to my Airbnb in the Lower East Side neighborhood, between Lake Michigan and the Milwaukee River (New Yorkers, I can sense your confusion). For what I paid, $55 a night, the cozy apartment with a twin bed on the fifth floor of a sometimes-walkup (the elevator didn’t always work) was a decent value.But in this instance, saving money by using Airbnb may have been something of a hollow victory. On a different night during my stay, I booked a room at the Hyatt downtown: $66 a night, found on Priceline. In this case, the added comfort and reliability of a hotel was worth the extra $11.But the location of the Airbnb was great. It was an easy walk over to Brady Street, a busy restaurant and shopping area that’s just slightly over a half-mile long.Glorioso’s Italian Market has been a fixture on Brady since 1946: Three brothers, Joe, Eddie and Teddy, opened it after World War II. “Uncle Eddie,” now in his early 90s, still works four days a week behind the meat counter — he said it helps his mind stay sharp.He’s seen generations of customers grow up: “Some of them come in now and they’re 70 years old. They say, ‘Remember when you used to have those open barrels of olives in the front of the store?’ And I say, ‘And I used to catch you eating them!’ ”I enjoyed a spicy sausage and pepperoni calzone at Glorioso’s ($5.95), a gooey pocket of tender dough filled with cheese, sauce, pepperoni and homemade sausage. The sausage was particularly good: tender and crumbly, with a faint spicy kick.The eating options in Milwaukee may not always be the healthiest, but the amount of simple, down-to-earth, delicious comfort food is seemingly without end. And what better way to represent America’s Dairyland (the phrase that’s been on Wisconsin’s license plates since the 1940s) than a butter burger from Kopp’s Frozen Custard?Elsa Kopp opened the business in 1950, and the stand’s frozen custard and butter burgers — burgers in which the patties have been thoroughly slathered in butter — made the place a local legend. The frozen custard, which is similar to ice cream but is made with eggs in addition to the requisite cream, feels like something between frozen yogurt and ice cream. Huge mixers behind the ordering counter churn the stuff out, and it pours slowly, like concrete.I had a cheeseburger ($4.75) with ketchup, onions and mustard, served on a pillow-soft bun with a couple of bread-and-butter pickles slapped on top. It was a greasy, delicious mess: hard to dislike something so unabashed and in-your-face about being bad for you. I chased it all down with a root beer float ($2.85) made with root beer from Sprecher, a nearby craft beer brewery, and vanilla frozen custard. That, too, was pure decadence.Eating and drinking go hand in hand, of course, and Milwaukee is a city built on beer. Waves of German immigrants settled in Milwaukee throughout the 1800s, and they brought brewing traditions with them.Milwaukee once had four of the world’s largest breweries within its city limits — Miller, Pabst, Schlitz and Blatz. (Miller, still located in “Miller Valley,” about three miles west of downtown, is the only one left. Blatz and Schlitz were acquired by Pabst, which is now based in Los Angeles.)Today, there are newcomers on the Milwaukee beer scene, one of the best of which is Lakefront Brewery, in the Riverwest neighborhood. Started in 1987 as a small brewery by brothers Russ and Jim Klisch, Lakefront grew quickly and moved to its current location, an enormous former electric plant.Today it has one of the more entertaining brewery tours. My Uber driver pointed me toward it during my ride from the bus station to my Airbnb. “By the end, you won’t know who’s drunker: you or the tour guides,” he said. I was convinced.“The tour starts in five minutes,” the voice on the intercom crackled. “Make sure you have a beer. A full beer!” The tour, which is $9, is half off on Mondays from 4 to 8 p.m. The tour price includes four beer tokens, each good for a six-ounce pour of some of Lakefront’s finest.I got an IPA and joined my group. Our tour guide, Max, was in rare form. “You can call me Max, Maxwell, Maximilian, or my personal favorite, Optimax Prime,” he began, and proceeded to riff through a well-rehearsed spiel about the brewery’s history.The jokes came a mile a minute. And while many were groan-worthy, his energy won over even the most jaded in the group. “In my neighborhood, Riverwest,” he said, “there’s a bar and church on every block, meaning you can sin and repent in one fell swoop.” Rimshot!Among other Lakefront tidbits imparted to us on the tour: The brewery was the first to produce an organic and gluten-free beer approved by the federal government; indeed, a surprising 27 percent of Lakefront’s sales come from their gluten-free beer.We proceeded to look at the huge brewing tanks, followed by what Max said was the original assembly line featured in the opening credits of “Laverne & Shirley,” the classic Milwaukee-based sitcom that ran in the late ’70s and early ’80s. (Max wasn’t merely a good tour guide, by the way. The concert at Turner Hall and dinner at the Noble? His suggestions.) After the tour, we went back in the main meeting hall for more beer — pints are also half-price between 4 and 8 p.m. on Mondays.As are the cheese curds. Lakefront makes some mean pub grub as well, and if you’ve never had beer-battered and deep-fried cheese curds (regularly $8), you are truly missing out on something spectacular.They’re fat, springy chunks of creamy, mild cheese with a crisp outer fried layer, but they have retained their characteristic “squeak.” Slightly gooey and served with a tangy garlic ranch dipping sauce, they’re the ideal vehicle to absorb alcohol. I also enjoyed a bratwurst from Usinger’s — a famous local purveyor of sausages and meats — with a pretzel bun ($5).It’s tough to burn off all those calories, but a stroll through the Milwaukee Art Museum will get you part of the way. Housed in a gorgeous set of buildings designed by Santiago Calatrava, Eero Saarinen, David Kahler and James Shields, the museum is worth visiting for its swooping, stunning architecture alone.It also houses a world-class collection of around 30,000 works, including pieces by Picasso, Chagall and Miró. Georgia O’Keeffe, a Wisconsin native, is also well represented. Admission is $17, $15 for students and seniors, and free the first Friday of every month.Another worthy architectural wonder to visit, if you happen to have transportation, is the Annunciation Greek Orthodox church in nearby Wauwatosa. One of Frank Lloyd Wright’s final works, the circular domed church is reminiscent of an old Byzantine temple.+On my way there I stopped by the wonderful Amaranth Bakery on Lisbon Avenue. All items are made in-house from scratch; I had a piece of Cheddar and broccoli quiche ($6.95) that was outstanding.One of my last evenings in town, I went on a mini bar crawl beginning in the hip Bay View neighborhood south of downtown and heading up South Kinnickinnic Avenue before jumping over to Second Street.I wandered into Just Art’s Saloon, a dive bar that looks like a small, weather-beaten house. (The name appears to be the answer to the hypothetical question, “Art’s Saloon? Art’s Saloon and what?” It’s Just Art’s Saloon.)The owner, Art Guenther, presides in this neighborhood bar like an old wisecracking dad. “Get the ham and scalloped potatoes,” he barked at me when I walked in. “Mm-hm, I’m going to get one of those.” I got it: It was a juicy steak the size of a large pork chop, with a side of creamy scalloped potatoes.Just Art’s has absurdly good food and drink deals throughout the week: free French fries on Tuesday, free pizza on Wednesdays and $7 pitchers, and dollar hot dogs on Thursday.Mr. Guenther holds court over the small L-shaped bar, teasing patrons and telling stories from his past — charming, but in a crotchety-old-man sort of way. “Went to Rufus King High School,” he said. “Best seven years of my life!” As he poured drinks, he talked about the days he worked as a carpenter and as a military bomb loader in the ’60s.We ribbed each other — good-naturedly — for a bit while I finished my ham steak and a PBR (total cost: $8.80). “You’re from Chicago?” He asked with mock seriousness. “Pay first!”As I was about to leave, he called after me: “Hey,” he said, and pointed at me. “Come back anytime. Seriously, you’re welcome here anytime.”It seemed to encapsulate Milwaukee for me: cheap drinks, Midwestern soul food and a sensibility that incorporates equal parts worldliness with small-town friendliness.Advertisement