AdvertisementSupported byFrugal FamilyBy Freda MoonAt $120 a night during Florida’s notorious spring break, the Art Deco Hotel Shelley had seemed like a bargain. It even included a free airport shuttle to the hotel’s South Beach address, walking distance from where we would pick up our camper van rental the next morning before making a beeline for the Florida Keys. When the shuttle arrived, it was impossible to miss. Wrapped in a wheels-to-roof vinyl ad, the bus was a mobile billboard splashed with the racy, larger-than-life image of a buxom woman — her blond hair thrown back, her face flushed — being caressed by a masked man, red silk around his neck. Next to the door was a slogan: “Quirky + Sexy + Chic No-Tell Hotels.” My husband, infant daughter and I climbed aboard. I had, it seemed, booked my family at what in Mexico is artfully referred to as a “love motel.” Well, I thought, no “Mom of the Year” award for me.We staggered into the Shelley under the weight of suitcases, diaper bags, strollers and collapsible baby beds, piling them alongside the hotel bar, where a glossy international crowd sipped free drinks (another Shelley perk, from 7 to 8 nightly). Then, as if we had stumbled upon a semitropical knockoff of “Cheers,” the crowd shouted to the new arrivals, “Happy Hour!” This isn’t so bad, I thought, ordering a rum and tonic in a tiny plastic cup. And it wasn’t. Our room was clean and quiet and, exhausted from a long day, our 9-month-old, Roxie, slept through the night.For years, I had fantasized about a camper van and taking a weeklong road trip through the Florida Keys. After Roxie was born last summer, a camper seemed like the ideal introductory family vacation. With the van doubling as accommodations and transportation, we could camp our way down the Overseas Highway on a relatively modest budget without the hassle of hauling our camping gear cross-country.From the Shelley, we pushed Roxie in a combo car seat and stroller the half-mile to Escape Campervans, passing head shops selling assault rifle-shaped hookahs and Liquored Up stores with overflowing bins of travel-size spirits. We stopped at Las Olas Cafe, an old-school Cuban steam table spot, where for $13 we sat at a sidewalk table and shared a plastic foam container piled with picadillo, black beans, white rice and sticky plantains.The Escape Campervans office, hidden in a fountain courtyard, was a closet-size room stacked with camping gear and staffed by an affable South African expat named Leon. Nothing if not thorough, he spent an hour introducing us to our home for the week: “Topiary,” a converted Ford Econoline utility van painted in impressionistic multigreen foliage. Then he equipped us with maps and brochures, and offered recommendations for our Florida Keys road trip.After picking up our luggage at the hotel, we drove south through the khaki, stucco and mauve Miami suburbs and an Everglades landscape that, from the highway, was a blur of shrub. I was desperate to see the Atlantic. But three and a half hours into our drive, there had been only brief flashes of the patchwork of Pantone ocean blues and greens I had been imagining for months. I wanted more. By the time we made it to Curry Hammock State Park, a tidy loop of campsites occupied by gargantuan R.V.s and separated from the shore by a wall of brush, I feared my expectations for the Keys, shaped by a fleeting childhood infatuation with Jimmy Buffett and, more recently, the Netflix noir series “Bloodline,” had been too high.When our site turned out to be a shadeless gravel pad with a view of a wooden fence and the large concrete block structure housing bathrooms, I needed to redeem the day. I had fantasized about an oceanfront campsite, but I would settle for a cold beer and 30-cent peel-and-eat shrimp, which we found at Sparky’s Landing, an over-the-water bar, where locals watched sports and tourists gawked at manatees on the deck. (We, sadly, missed a sea cow sighting by minutes.)My hopes for the trip resurrected, we stopped at Publix, the Florida-based grocery chain, where we stocked up on good-quality prepared dishes and salads from the deli section before returning to camp. But instead of heading straight for our site, we drove to the park’s beach, where we sat at a picnic table watching dusk settle over the Atlantic. The palms pattered overhead and Roxie, a wide giddy smile across her tiny face, leaned into the warm wind, which smelled sweet and funky from decaying seaweed, as boat motors buzzed on the horizon.The next morning, I walked through the park and realized how pleasant it actually was. With my expectations adjusted, I noticed the comfortable space between the sites, which were surrounded by shrubby buttonwood trees, bay bean vines and lantana. Still, we didn’t linger. We hit the beach, where we waded out into the shallow, pale blue water for Roxie’s first dip into the ocean. My husband, Tim, and I passed her back and forth as she shrieked in wild, unrestrained excitement. She splashed and giggled, acting out the joy I feel every time I leap into warm, salty sea. From her enthusiasm, any remnant of my initial disappointment disappeared. I was all in.For lunch, we drove on a potholed side road to Burdines Waterfront, a marina and boat fuel dock with a tiki-esque restaurant on stilts high above a mangrove channel. The open-air Chicki Tiki Bar & Grille was packed, so the host pulled a highchair up to the bar beneath a palm frond roof. Iced tea was served by the pitcher; Tim’s beer came in a neoprene cozy; and we shared the house specialty, a huge green-chile cheeseburger. Roxie, meanwhile, befriended our tie-dye-wearing bartender who gave us a history lesson on the Overseas Highway and the grand plan of Henry Flagler (a founder of Standard Oil and essentially the creator of much of modern South Florida) to build a railroad all the way to Key West, which was once the largest city in the state. Despite the plaque that read, “A bad day spent on the water still beats a good day spent at work,” everyone at Burdines seemed to be relishing theirs.I’d made a reservation at Bahia Honda, a state park wrapped in white sand, with views of the old Flagler railroad bridge. But Leon from the Escape Campervans office had recommended Big Pine Key Fishing Lodge, a private R.V. park and campground nearby. Since we already had reservations to spend our last two nights at Bahia Honda, I decided on a whim to give Big Pine Key a try. As soon as we arrived, I regretted my spontaneity. Our so-called rustic site had one scraggly shade tree along the rocky shore and no electricity — and, therefore, no fan, a major flaw in the South Florida heat. At dusk, the no-see-ums (tiny biting flies, stubbornly undeterred by repellents) attacked like an invisible army. But we zipped Roxie into a netted bassinet and took the brunt of the insect onslaught ourselves.Thankfully, the rest of Big Pine Key’s fauna was charming. There were aggressively friendly toy-size Key deer, which begged for picnic table scraps, and a regal great white heron that held court for hours. Fuchsia-legged ibis scampered at the waterline while cream-colored doves and brown pelicans flew in dance-troupe formation overhead. Then there were our fellow campers, who strolled the grounds at sunset, topped-off glasses of wine in hand.From Big Pine Key, we backtracked 35 miles to Long Key, a state park where every site has an ocean view, before heading another 65 miles south to Key West, where we spent two nights at Boyd’s Key West. It was another crowded R.V. campground, but without the bugs. Tim was tied to his computer, working remotely, while Roxie and I made the best of the location, five miles from Key West’s New Orleans-like historic district. We sat by the pool and explored the grounds, where iguanas and chickens roamed beneath palm trees. For dinner, we walked to Hogfish Bar and Grill, a seafood restaurant a short distance from Boyd’s, where we splurged on garlic shrimp, which had become Roxie’s favorite food.During Tim’s off hours, we drove into town, where we ate breakfast at Cuban Coffee Queen, listened to a bluegrass quartet play barefoot in the garden at Blue Heaven, visited the lush (and free) botanic garden at the Key West Garden Club and walked onto the White Street Fishing Pier just as the sky grew dark and rain started to fall. I even bought a container of conch chowder from a woman selling it out of the trunk of her car. For $8, it was the best meal we had all week.Our last couple of days in the Keys, Tim and I were groggy from being awakened by Roxie, who slept beside us in a bed-top travel bassinet. But we weren’t any more tired than our new normal as parents of an infant. Fortunately, the things to do at Bahia Honda didn’t require much of us. Our site, tucked into the foliage at the northern end of the park, was secluded. A sandy path led to a long beach and, for two days, we did little but swim in the ocean, which was everything I had fantasized about during the months leading up to our trip.It looked like a glass marble threaded with shimmering blues and greens, and had gentle, baby-size waves. At dusk, the dolphins swam past in a tight pod. The sky was deep black and the stars were silver spurs. After Roxie fell asleep, Tim and I played music on our iPhones, the volume low, and slow-danced like honeymooners. The trip hadn’t been as carefree as our prebaby travels, but nine months into parenthood, we were finding our rhythm.Advertisement