

 Lucas Peterson
 

FRUGAL TRAVELER
OCT. 21, 2016
They had turned out the regular overhead lights at the Pearl Champagne Lounge, and now there was just black light, which lent an eerie fluorescence to the clubgoers’ white T-shirts and teeth, and the occasional glow stick. The bass-heavy thump was shaking the walls of the club, but the room was so packed it was difficult to dance. Unable to move their legs, dancers resorted to simply pointing to the ceiling in time to the music (“Do you want to get wasted, wasted”). At one point a huge, muscled gentleman pulled out a full-size trombone — if he didn’t work there, I’m not sure how he got that thing past security — and began playing along to the music.This was not exactly my scene. I love going out and dancing, but my days of wearing glow paint and getting “wasted, wasted” are in the distant past. Nevertheless, I was in South Beach, a neighborhood of Miami Beach known for being one of the night life capitals of the nation, and I was sure I would find something to my taste.I knew going in that South Beach is expensive and fairly touristy and has long since been surpassed in hip-factor by neighborhoods like Wynwood and Edgewater. But its glamorous history, legendary Art Deco buildings and weekend party scene along Ocean Drive continue to draw visitors from all over the world. And it presented me with a challenge: whether I could “do” the notoriously expensive South Beach on my frugal budget.I had just returned from my Fathom “social impact” cruise to the Dominican Republic, and I and several hundred other passengers had been dropped off at the dock on Dodge Island, near downtown Miami. I hopped into an Uber and made the quick and cheap (less than $10) ride across Biscayne Bay to the barrier island on which South Beach lies.AdvertisementCollins and Washington Avenues serve as the main traffic arteries on the east side of South Beach, but Ocean Drive, which is closest to the beach, is where most of the action is. Don’t try to drive (or call a taxi or rideshare) on Ocean on weekend nights, by the way — traffic is bumper to bumper.I headed to the Palace Bar, on the corner of Ocean and 12th Street, a popular club and restaurant known for its weekend sidewalk drag queen shows. When I arrived, a mixed crowd of men and women were eating and drinking while two topless young men gyrated for tips. The activity inside the Palace spills out onto the sidewalk, where there are covered tables that provide some shelter from Miami’s frequent flash rainstorms.AdvertisementThat’s how I ended up at the Palace in the first place — I was seeking refuge when it suddenly started to pour (not the first or last time this would happen during my trip, though this was before Hurricane Matthew battered Florida). There’s an interesting mixed reaction to the rain in South Beach: Some people run for cover; many others, who are wearing very little clothing to begin with, seem completely unbothered. I was one of the former and stumbled upon the Palace right when it happened to be starting one of its famous drag shows. A beautiful, statuesque drag queen in full hair and makeup stood on the sidewalk, eyes closed, in deep concentration.Palace security cleared the sidewalk in front of the restaurant, making the pavement into a long runway. The music began, and the drag queen started to dance and strut up and down the length of the sidewalk, lip-syncing a Beyoncé song while onlookers waved dollar bills. At the end, the sidewalk audience burst into applause and the drag queen, who was also the M.C. for the rest of the evening, took the microphone. “Thank you so much,” she said breathlessly. “Please stick around for more homosexuality after the break.”The show at the Palace was free, but I wouldn’t get away with paying so little during my entire trip. Just down the street from the Palace was Mango’s Tropical Cafe, one of the better-known nightspots in South Beach. It’s known for its scantily clad dancers (male and female), long lines to get in, and Latin music that pumps until the early morning hours. I went in after 2 a.m., hoping to avoid paying the cover: no such luck. I forked over $20 and made my way into the sprawling club.A group of young women in sequined outfits was doing a choreographed dance on the bar near the V.I.P. area. Hundreds of people were packed inside: dancing, talking, drinking, making out, trying to push through to another area of the bar, or on their phones. The main dance floor area, toward the back, was so full it was almost impossible to move. The upstairs area was more chilled out, and had rooms off the main thoroughfare that were like clubs-within-a-club and offered different types of music; one was hip-hop, one was more lounge-y. I passed on the drinks (a Corona was $10) as I had paid so much for the cover, but I was glad I had come: When you think about the quintessential clubbing experience, Mango’s is what comes to mind.I did indulge down the street, however, at a popular hotel called the Clevelander, where the party space is outdoors — something that I imagine works both for and against it. Because of the periodic rainstorms, the crowd at the Clevelander was pretty thin — no line, no cover. Once inside, I found a dedicated clubbing crowd bouncing up and down to a D.J. I went to the bar and got something called a “Frozen SoBe” (“SoBe” being “South Beach”) that tasted like sickeningly tart alcoholic lemonade. It should be noted that tax and a 20 percent gratuity are typically automatically added to your drink tab in these South Beach clubs — my $12 frozen lemonade was actually $15.75. (One bartender said the automatic tip was added because of the number of foreign tourists in South Beach.)The Clevelander is also one of hundreds of Art Deco buildings in South Beach, best appreciated during the day. Ocean Drive north of Fifth Street and Collins Avenue around 17th Street are particularly good areas for walking around and enjoying the wonderfully preserved structures. The Miami Design Preservation League, with a visitors’ center on Ocean Drive, conducts tours and fights to protect the architectural integrity of the area.AdvertisementMac’s Club Deuce, a cash-only dive that bills itself as the oldest bar in Miami, is not one of those curated architectural gems, and I love it all the more because of it. With $1 pool and a jukebox blasting songs that took me back to high school (Green Day, Collective Soul), it was exactly what I needed to balance out those packed rooms of sweaty clubgoers. I had a Miller Lite for $5 — the cheapest drink in South Beach I would find — and enjoyed the respite from throbbing bass.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Still, there were club scenes I enjoyed. One of my favorite locations, in fact, was a small club called Do Not Sit on the Furniture, an intimate space on 16th Street known for its cozy confines and good D.J.s. A headliner known simply as Mira was spinning that night, and I pondered whether to purchase tickets in advance on the Resident Advisor site, which promotes electronic music events and sells tickets, or to just show up at the door and see if I could get in. I decided to wait and approached the entrance, a small gate between an apartment building and a seemingly deserted retail showroom. I had my wallet out, prepared to inquire if there was a cover. Instead I just asked the bouncer if I could go in. “Sure,” he responded. “Just need to see some ID,” and ushered me in. Sometimes, you just have to ask.Once inside, I walked past Mira’s D.J. booth to the dance floor littered with a few cigarette butts and a couple dozen people moving to the music. The sound system was very good — an underappreciated aspect of many clubs. It was loud enough and the bass full enough to rattle your very bones, but it didn’t hurt your ears. Since it was after 4 a.m., I skipped the alcohol, opting for a bottle of water and a soda for $10.Given the bar’s name, it wasn’t a surprise that no one was sitting, but rather dancing to Mira’s excellent set. The music pounded into the night and, at a little after 5:30 a.m., things wrapped up. The lights went on, the disco ball stopped and those of us still dancing began dazedly applauding. Mira seemed surprised and slightly touched by this as she acknowledged our applause. And one by one we tumbled back out into the street, the sky dark but with a faint penumbral glow of coming morning.A version of this article appears in print on October 23, 2016, on Page TR5 of the New York edition with the headline: Tonight I’m Gonna Party Like It’s $19.99.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »