AdvertisementSupported by5 PlacesBy Alexander LobranoVersailles, the third most-visited monument in France after the Louvre and the Eiffel Tower, has evolved into a seriously sublime food destination. Until recently, Versailles dining typically consisted of forgettable sandwiches and salads at tourist restaurants. Dining in this town 13 miles from Paris oddly paid little tribute to its most famous attraction, the magnificent, mostly 17th-century Château de Versailles. The palace, as it exists today, was largely built by Louis XIV, a notoriously epicurean monarch whose sumptuous meals included everything from deep-sea oysters and lobster aspic to wild duck croquettes and morel mushroom soufflé. Now, though, the culinary reputation of Versailles is in the midst of a delicious revival as talented chefs open restaurants so good they’re pulling Parisians.At this simple shop-front restaurant, the chef Cécile Hatchuel cooks a new menu daily using locally grown seasonal produce. A sampling of recent dishes includes split pea soup with vegetables, beef meatballs and orecchiette with tomato-pepper sauce, and mascarpone cream with raspberries. Vegetarian dishes are always available. Lunch Monday to Friday; dinner only on Fridays. No reservations.38, rue Carnot; no phone; facebook.com/mangetteThe chef Alain Ducasse opened this sophisticated restaurant just inside the gates of the chateau last month. With dishes like roasted guinea hen with peaches and fennel and steamed turbot with truffled hollandaise, the menu makes a delectable statement about the glories of Gallic gastronomy that’s surprisingly affordable.Château de Versailles, Pavillon Dufour, 1st Floor, Place d’Armes; 33-1-30-84-12-96; ducasse-chateauversailles.comAfter working with Yannick Alléno in Paris, the young chef Jean-François Lavergne Morazzani returned to his hometown and opened this casually stylish bistro with a market-driven menu. Serving bright, inventive dishes like shellfish with coriander and poutarge (dried mullet roe); cod with carrots and wild herbs; and red berries with pistachios and coconut, it’s become the most sought-after table in town.11, rue Saint-Honoré; 33-9-83-34-76-00; latabledu11.comJust steps from the palace, the chef Franck Loeuillot’s friendly bistro serves moderately priced French comfort food, including dishes like homemade terrine de foie gras with fig chutney and braised pork belly with white beans. Friendly service and sidewalk tables in season.10, boulevard du Roi; 33-1-39-49-58-35; restaurant-nuance.comFlorent and Sophie Pavillard’s cozy bistrot à vins offers over 200 wines, most of them biodynamic. The menu features a different simmered dish daily, including such notably succulent classics as navarin d’agneau (lamb stewed with vegetables), blanquette de veau (veal in cream sauce) and cassoulet. Steaks and roast chicken are also offered. Reservations essential.7, rue de Montreuil; 33-1-39-49-55-27; lesept-versailles.comAdvertisement