
Bites By                     
MEGHAN MURPHY-GILL

APRIL 28, 2017
People in New Orleans won’t bat an eyelash if you put a pig’s tail or feet on a plate in front of them, said Marcus Jacobs, the chef for and an owner of Marjie’s Grill in Mid-City: “You can go to a gas station and buy pig’s feet pretty much anywhere in town. People are open-minded about those kind of ‘off cuts.’”While traveling in Southeast Asia, Mr. Jacobs and his partner and the restaurant’s other owner, Caitlin Carney, who are alumni of the fine dining stalwart Herbsaint — discovered similar appetites for “off cuts” in Laos, Thailand and Vietnam. “People make a lot of comparisons between the Mississippi Delta and the Mekong Delta,” Mr. Jacobs said. “They’re not afraid to eat weird pieces of pork. There’s a lot of cultural crossover.”Weird pieces of pork are indeed on the menu at Marjie’s Grill, and they are sublime. During a recent visit, I could have ordered a dozen plates of pig knuckles — salty, crispy and unctuous morsels drizzled with cane syrup, down-home and decadent. I washed them down with a tropical sunset-hued cocktail called the Rad Jam made with tequila, Campari and Stiegl Radler Grapefruit (a beer and juice mixture). And if crisp, spice-dusted cracklings and supple slices of soy- and chile-glazed pork jowl are weird, who could want normal?The palatable balance of sweet, salty, spicy and acidic flavors typical of Southeast Asian cuisine pairs fabulously with Gulf ingredients, many of which are smoked, grilled or coal-roasted over a barbecue pit out back, a feature reminiscent of that at Mr. Jacobs and Ms. Carney’s pop-up restaurant, Sparklehorse Grill. “We enjoyed doing pop-ups with this food but knew we could do more,” she said, so they began looking for a permanent spot. They opened Marjie’s Grill — named after Ms. Carney’s mother — in December.At Marjie’s, rich, charred ribbons of cabbage are brightened with cilantro and scallions and sprinkled with toasted sesame seeds. Cornmeal-coated and fried head-on Gulf shrimp are sweet and crunchy, while Mississippi beef tartare tossed with mint and cilantro and savory fried shallots is meltingly tender. Coal-roasted Gulf fish — a firm and flaky sheepshead the night I dined — is served on its blackened skin beside a bouquet of fresh, leafy herbs meant for wrapping and dipping bites of the fish into a lively, citrusy sauce.I finished things off with johnnycakes smeared with strawberry jam and topped with a sweet praline. The balance between Delta influences was all off, favoring the Mississippi and abandoning the Mekong. It was surprisingly incongruous end to an otherwise delightful meal.Marjie’s Grill, 320 South Broad Street; 504-603-2234; marjiesgrill.com. An average dinner for two, without drinks or tip, is about $70.A version of this article appears in print on April 30, 2017, on Page TR9 of the New York edition with the headline: A Pig’s Tail (and Knuckles) of Two Deltas.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »