

      By NELL MCSHANE WULFHART

APRIL 13, 2017

Charm City has raised the charm quotient, with hip cocktail bars, coffeehouses and a quirky historic appeal.
Related Article
Charm City has raised the charm quotient considerably in the past few years, managing to retain its quirky appeal as it develops stylish, more upmarket restaurants and hotels. The traditional things, like the old-school sheet cake at Lexington Market, remain unchanged, while neighborhoods like Charles Village seem to be opening new bars and restaurants daily. The allure of Baltimore lies not in its built-for-tourists Inner Harbor, where you’ll find chain restaurants like Hard Rock Cafe, but in its abundance of 19th-century architecture and hip cocktail bars — not to mention its welcoming outdoor spaces and world-class art museums.
Explore street view and find things to do in Baltimore.
Crab shacks might be ubiquitous in Baltimore, but Matthew’s Pizzeria, in Canton, might be the only place to get a crab pizza. This casual, Formica-table-filled institution (it opened in the 1940s) turns out chewy, cheesy deep-dish pies that are worth a visit on their own. But the backfin crab-topped pizza, sprinkled with mozzarella, caramelized onions and Old Bay (which originated in Baltimore) is an experience not to be missed. Note the painted window screen on the outer wall, a Baltimore tradition. Lunch for two, around $20. Then stroll across the street to the Creative Alliance, a community arts space, for whatever’s on offer — a theatrical performance, a locally made documentary or an art exhibition. The American Visionary Art Museum (AVAM), a temple of outsider art (admission, $15.95), deserves all of the praise that has been heaped upon it since it opened in 1995. Since then, it’s added a warehouse, a second sculpture park and an outdoor movie theater, all at the foot of grassy Federal Hill, just steps from the harbor. The signs accompanying each artwork describe artists whose life stories run the gamut from uncomfortable to tragic, while the pieces themselves — colorful and compelling — merit hours of examination. Maggie’s Farm, in the northeast section of the city, is the purveyor of a winning combination of seasonal ingredients (some from its own garden), domestic inspiration (like brisket rubbed with coffee from the Baltimore roaster Zeke’s) and global influence (Singapore noodles with peanuts and peppers); it’s one of the leaders in the city’s rapidly growing local food movement. The red interior manages to be dimly, romantically lit even at lunch time. Try quirky cocktails like the Corn ’n’ Oil, a combo of barrel-aged rum, Velvet Falernum, lime juice, Angostura bitters and Coke. The oft-changing menu is limited to a small number of dishes, but the beloved crispy brussels sprouts are usually available. Dinner for two, about $90. The Station North neighborhood is home to an array of late-night options. Start at Red Emma’s, a radical bookstore-cafe run by a worker cooperative. The cavernous space sells its own roasted coffee, vegan and vegetarian meals and children’s books with a revolutionary bent. Then head to the Crown, a bare-bones venue that hosts bands, art shows and competitive karaoke competitions in its “red” and “blue” rooms. This is where former art students like to drink $6 pints of Duckpin pale ale, made by Union Craft Brewing, based in Baltimore, and named after the local style of bowling. Afterward, head around the corner to Jong Kak, where the Crown clientele soak up the night’s high-percentage beers with enormous portions of Korean barbecue and kimchi ji gae, a spicy kimchi stew. Wash down a last soju with a crispy seafood pancake stuffed with green onions and shrimp. Get a dose of fresh air and architectural history at Druid Hill Park. Home to the Maryland Zoo, the park’s less-visited destination is the Howard Peters Rawlings Conservatory and Botanic Gardens, a stunning greenhouse that dates to 1888 and sits on a lush green lawn surrounded by the small but colorful botanic gardens. The elegant glass-enclosed conservatory retains all of its original steel structure and houses five rooms of plants, including desert plants, orchids and palms. The friendly staff are happy to expound on the flora. Lexington Market, established in 1782, with its stalls selling a range of items, including Jamaican snacks and chicken and waffles, has stood the test of time. Over the years, its clientele has gone from residents to tourists to residents again, and it remains a landmark well worth visiting, particularly for Faidley’s Seafood. This long-established local favorite serves what might be the best crab cake on the East Coast (go for the lump crab, $14.95); enormous, shucked-to-order Chesapeake Bay oysters with fresh horseradish ($12.20 for six) on a plastic foam plate, plus National Bohemian, or “Natty Boh,” on draft ($3.25). Finish up with a slice of Berger’s Bakery retro yellow sheet cake ($2.50). The cool, calm spaces of the Baltimore Museum of Art are at the opposite end of the spectrum from the colorful chaos of the AVAM, but are no less compelling. In 2014, the BMA (free) renovated all nine galleries on the second floor, and in 2015 inaugurated the first exhibit in the new Patricia and Mark Joseph Education Center. Called “Imagining Home,” it runs until August 2018 and is a startlingly varied collection of works pulled from the permanent collection and interactive exhibits that explore the theme of “home.” The museum’s biggest draw is the Cone Collection, which includes more than 500 works by Matisse, as well as gems from Picasso and Cézanne, but the temporary exhibitions — like the current show of work by the mixed media artist Adam Pendleton — are often provocative. Woodberry Kitchen’s lengthy New American menu showcasing Chesapeake producers is one of the city’s most ambitious. The space itself, a beautiful brick factory building with an outdoor firepit that makes a perfect cocktail spot, has a high ceiling and an open kitchen. The food dives deep into the local bounty, from heirloom tomatoes on toast to cornmeal fried soft-shell crabs with buttermilk dressing and spelt toast. Desserts, like the roasted summer peach sundae with maple oat streusel and house-made ice cream, are worth saving room for. Dinner for two, around $130. The narrow, speakeasy-style pub W. C. Harlan, tucked away in a quiet, residential part of Remington, was the first destination bar in the area when it opened in 2013. In 2015, the owner Lane Harlan opened a second, a mezcaleria called Clavel, just a block away. While somewhat isolated from the rest of Baltimore’s nightspots, W. C. Harlan is worth a detour. The reclaimed furniture, candelabras and old-timey knickknacks make a cozy, relaxed space for sampling the inventive cocktail menu, which features a list of vintage amari and includes an amaro flight ($12 for three pours) for the uninitiated. The selection of professionally made cocktails changes often, but you will always find a few originals, like the recently featured Emily’s Fugue, a mix of Cognac, Sibona Amaro, amontillado, Fernet Branca and lemon oil. The Paper Moon Diner, a Baltimore institution near the Baltimore Museum of Art, is decorated floor to ceiling with retro toys. Dolls and Radio Flyer wagons are wedged between ceiling beams, the windows and tables are painted in bright primary colors, and walls are covered with a quirky collection of miniature robots, dart boards and the occasional tree branch. The menu of diner classics hits the mark with apple-smoked bacon, eggs Benedict and made-to-order omelets. Soak in the atmosphere over a bottomless cup of coffee. Breakfast for two, around $30.An excellent opportunity for urban hiking, the Gwynns Falls Trail covers a total of 15 miles, including trails that thread through the city itself, beginning at the Baltimore Visitors Center and passing through historic neighborhoods like Federal Hill. Other starting points include the Carroll Park golf course and Leakin Park. History buffs will appreciate the sights, from railroads to flour mills to 19th-century mansions, while the more outdoorsy can hike, bike or birdwatch along the paths, stream and waterfall.Baltimore’s craft beer scene is becoming one of the best in the country. Pratt Street Ale House gets crowded after Orioles games, when the crowd hanging out on the patio seems uniformly orange, but the English-style bitters, American ales and oatmeal stouts by Oliver Brewing Company are worth fighting your way to the bar. Alewife, a 10-minute stroll north, is a bank-turned-bar with 40 craft beers from around the country on tap at all times. If the Hopulent IPA, by Epic Brewing Company, based in Utah, is available, treat yourself. Served on nitro, it’s citrusy and extra creamy.The Kimpton Hotel Monaco (2 North Charles Street; monaco-baltimore.com; doubles from $159) has a downtown location that’s close to the harbor, and rooms with the signature Kimpton touches, like yoga mats. The building still boasts the original marble, elevators and Tiffany stained glass of its original incarnation as the B&O Railroad headquarters.For the money-is-no-object set, Baltimore’s hottest hotel is the Ivy, a Relais & Chateaux property that opened in 2015 in a stunning Gilded Age mansion (205 East Biddle Street; theivybaltimore.com; doubles from $525). Everything from cocktails to wooden puzzles to local kombucha is provided.Flight and Hotel information provided by Google.Prices represent a snapshot of low fares and rates for weekend trips.Advertisement