
Bites By                     
JOHN L. DORMAN

AUG. 18, 2017
Even with three successful restaurants in New Orleans, Emeril Lagasse knew that there was room for a new addition to the city’s ebullient dining scene. Emeril’s New Orleans has long cultivated contemporary food in the city, while Emeril’s Delmonico offers a fresh take on Creole cuisine and NOLA Restaurant presents a taste of Acadiana, with a global tinge. Meril, which Mr. Lagasse named after his youngest daughter and opened in the Warehouse District in September 2016, is the newest star in his constellation.Unlike the others, though, Meril looks farther afield for inspiration: The menu, an array of small plates, is influenced by his international culinary forays.“This is not the typical New Orleans experience,” Mr. Lagasse said. “I’ve had customers who have been with me for nearly 30 years who see the menu and ask, ‘Where’s my entree?’ Others ask, ‘Is it a Creole place?’ Meril is how I think people want to eat today.”Wilfredo Avelar, the chef de cuisine and a New Orleans native, has worked at every New Orleans restaurant owned by Mr. Lagasse. At Meril, Mr. Avelar has relished being able to drive the creative process in the kitchen. “One of the things we did was take the tamale, a delicacy popular in Central America, where my family is from, and mix it with boudin, a product that we love here,” he said. “We have a pasta section on the menu, but we’re thinking about having bowls, with shrimp and grits and jambalaya. We’re not limiting ourselves.”During a recent visit, the atmosphere was jovial. Reclaimed wood is a prominent interior element, giving off a modernist vibe. I was promptly seated in front of the open kitchen, where I felt immersed in the inner workings of the restaurant.AdvertisementOn the cocktails menu, the specialty drinks are numbered, something that was deliberate. “I didn’t want to have gimmicky names,” Mr. Lagasse said, adding that he pushed for genuine ingredients. “If we’re making a drink with mint or wheat grass, we are going to use the real stuff.”AdvertisementThe No. 11 cocktail, with vodka, Aperol, lemon juice and house-made lavender syrup, and the classic Hemingway daiquiri, were both refreshing and strong.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The buttermilk biscuit, with foie gras butter and blackberry preserves, was outstanding: soft and generously sized. The zucchini, with toasted garlic and lemon zest, was flavorful; the Spanish-style croquettes, with ham, manchego and piquillo pepper sauce, were crisp and delicious.Lastly, I chose the lemon ice box pie, one of the most enjoyable desserts I’ve had in quite some time. It was not overly sweet, and was complemented wonderfully by a buttery crust.“I never ate a lemon ice box pie when I lived in Costa Rica,” Mr. Avelar said. “It reminds me of the first time I fell in love with dessert.”Meril, 424 Girod Street; 504-526-3745; emerilsrestaurants.com/meril. Each dish is roughly $5 to $18, with cocktails around $11.A version of this article appears in print on August 20, 2017, on Page TR9 of the New York edition with the headline: From Small Plates, Inspiration Goes Beyond the Local Scene.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »