
Check In By                     
NICK CZAP

APRIL 8, 2016
Doubles from $229.With its mix of understated luxury and restorative amenities like volcanic ash mud baths and an enormous geothermal swimming pool, Indian Springs in Calistoga, Calif., has long been one of the Napa Valley’s most popular spa hotels. Last year, Indian Springs completed a $20 million renovation and expansion. While taking care to preserve the resort’s early-1900s character, the owners added 75 new guest rooms, enhanced the hotel’s gardens and grounds, and opened the resort’s first restaurant, Sam’s Social Club, named for Sam Brannan, the Gold Rush entrepreneur who built the original spa on the site in 1861.Indian Springs is about 90 minutes by car from San Francisco, Berkeley and Oakland. Downtown Calistoga is a few minutes’ walk from the hotel. There are several wineries within easy cycling distance of Indian Springs, and the hotel maintains a fleet of snappy single-speed bikes from the San Francisco-based company Public.Last April, my wife and I booked a Geyser View room, one notch above a basic unit, on the second floor of one of several new Mission Revival-style buildings. A private balcony offered a view of the valley’s eastern hills, steam pluming from one of Indian Springs’ three active geysers, and an attractively landscaped pond in which a pair of resident mallards quacked quietly. Spotlessly clean, bright and airy, its décor a pleasing mix of earth tones and pastels, the room was outfitted with a good-size closet (with plush robes for the pool and spa), a writing desk, two lounge chairs, a credenza with a mini-fridge, and a drip coffee maker.Fittingly, for a mineral spring spa hotel, the bathroom’s focal point was a luxuriously big shower clad in handmade Ecuadorean tiles. Shower and sink were stocked with an array of verbena-scented shampoo, soap and lotion from Pharmacopia.AdvertisementAn Olympic-size geyser-heated pool, built in 1910, is the relaxing social hub of Indian Springs. A second, smaller pool nearby is reserved for adults. A new steam room, also heated by the geyser, which burbles softly beneath the planks of the benches, offers an additional degree of thermoregulation. Indian Springs’ spa offers mud and mineral baths, massages, facials and a variety of body treatments, although these services are not included in the price of a stay.There is no room service, but Sam’s Social Club is just a quick stroll on the new pea gravel path that nearly encircles the property. That Sam’s serves some of the tastiest food in the Napa Valley is perhaps not surprising. Its chef, Kory Stewart, worked at some of San Francisco’s most highly regarded restaurants, including Postrio and Michael Mina. Virtually everything is made in-house from scratch, from its bread and its beer to the fresh mozzarella on its Neapolitan-style pizzas. The pizzas and several other dishes are available as takeout. Note to the weak-willed: In a clever ploy, takeout must be ordered from the bar, where tempting drinks, costing $12 to $13, abound. (The Mermaid, a citrusy constitutional made with top-flight tequila, is outstanding.)AdvertisementIndian Springs has managed to triple its capacity while keeping the resort’s historic aesthetic and mellow feel intact. The crowds at the swimming pools may be bigger — on weekends, especially — but in every other regard, a very good thing has gotten even better.Indian Springs, 1712 Lincoln Avenue, Calistoga, Calif.; 707-942-4913; indianspringscalistoga­.comA version of this article appears in print on April 10, 2016, on Page TR8 of the New York edition with the headline: A Spa Grows Without Losing Its Charm.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »