AdvertisementSupported byQ and ABy Masha GoncharovaThe NASA astronaut Timothy L. Kopra started actively uploading Instagram photos from above the stratosphere in March, the latest to join an intergalactic space travel Instagram feed flurry this year, following in the footsteps of his fellow astronaut Scott J. Kelly (@stationcdrkelly) along with the International Space Station (@iss) and NASA (@nasa).The interest in space travel accounts has boomed since last year, when President Obama, during his State of the Union speech, called upon Mr. Kopra’s colleague Mr. Kelly to Instagram his year #YearInSpace.Now, Mr. Kopra is sharing a travel experience few will replicate. On May 16, Mr. Kopra also hosted a live Snapchat story called “Day in Space,” in which he showed viewers his life on the International Space Station, from swallowing a floating bubble of water and stream of honey for lunch, to preparing the Soyuz aircraft that is parked at the International Space Station, which will be taking him home on June 18. To see Mr. Kopra’s photographs, follow @astro_tim. This interview was conducted by email.Instagram handle: @astro_timFollowers: 27,500What’s your favorite part of the intergalactic lifestyle?Floating, and then learning to move around in zero gravity and essentially flying from place to place, is pretty amazing. I find that the longer I’m here, the more coordinated and natural it feels. The other aspect of our life here that is just incredible is looking out our windows and seeing Earth. The view is truly remarkable, and it is diverse in so many ways.What are your favorite natural phenomenon or places on Earth to fly over?I love the coral reefs around the planet — the different shades of blue are very striking. And Africa and Australia in places look like an alien world. I love trying to capture the unique and strange features on these continents. Photographing cities at night is also one of my favorites. You can get a sense of the activity in a city by the brightness and distribution of its lights.Do you think space travel will be realistic for people — not billionaires, but your average Joe?I think there will be a day when space travel, especially to low Earth orbit, will be relatively commonplace. I don’t think that will happen soon, though. Getting to space takes a tremendous amount of energy, and once you arrive, there is a lot of overhead to living here. Your environment is completely based on the life support system onboard your vehicle, and you also have to send up everything you need to live. We will have to find a significantly cheaper way to leave the planet, and life support systems will need to be very robust.You launched your Instagram in March, in part helping @astro_tim take over for the Scott Kelly. You’ve shared moments when you pass over places where your loved ones live, like your Golden Gate Bridge post to say hello to your sister. What does it feel like to fly so high over people and places you know?Seeing our planet from this perspective is pretty unbelievable. The Earth is beautiful, dynamic, unusual and diverse. When I’m taking photographs and we pass over countries where I know someone, I often think about them, and when we pass over historical sites or areas where there is some current event, it immediately brings them to mind. In this way, it makes the world seem smaller and more interconnected to me.Advertisement