
Check In By                     
INGRID K. WILLIAMS

JULY 22, 2016
Rooms from 400 euros (high season), about $441.The lament that high-end hotels are beginning to look the same — the globalization of interior design — cannot be applied to G-Rough. Opened in March 2015, the boutique hotel is in a 17th-century Roman palazzo that has been renovated, thankfully, without the heavy hand that often turns beautiful old buildings into impersonal properties. Many of the 10 suites, spread over five floors, have original wood-beam ceilings and mosaic-tile floors. And all feature gorgeous antique furnishings from the ’30s, ’40s and ’50s, original pieces from Italian designers like Ico Parisi, Giò Ponti, Venini and Seguso.On a small square in the centro storico, the hotel is a block from Piazza Navona. Roma Termini, the central railway station, is a 20-minute bus ride away; the nearest bus stop is a two-minute walk from the hotel.In lieu of a room number, my third-floor suite was called “Joe,” after the late designer Joe Colombo. A heavy door opened onto a small sitting room with a crimson love seat and armchair by Carlo di Carli, a marble-topped coffee table and an Ico Parisi dressing table with a flip-up mirror. In the adjoining bedroom, a polished chestnut bed frame with built-in bedside tables and a matching wardrobe were designed by Silvio Cavatorta. The bedroom walls, a pale turquoise hue roughly sanded to impart an aged patina, appeared as old as the rustic coffered-wood ceiling from the 1600s. The wall-mounted television was more art than entertainment, cloaked in a tapestry cinematically embroidered with “Fine” (Italian for “The End”). And on the king-size bed were a pile of oversize pillows and white linen sheets so luxurious I wished that they were sold on-site.With walls clad in golden, mirrored tile by the design company Seletti and a pair of wall sconces that cast flattering light, the bathroom gleamed. The ceilings were dark coffered wood, as in the bedroom, while the floors were covered in postage-stamp-size marble tiles. A sink was fitted with matte brass fixtures, as was the walk-in shower, which was separated by a glass partition. In the shower was a rainfall showerhead and a selection of Malin + Goetz amenities. The toilet and bidet were in a compartment with bright-yellow walls and a sliding door.AdvertisementIn the bedroom, a mini ivory Smeg refrigerator was a stylish minibar stocked with an array of drinks and snacks. A welcome folder contained some surprisingly on-point dining suggestions. Wi-Fi was free but worked reliably only in the sitting room.Open all day, the ground floor G-Bar is a beautiful space with mirrored-tile walls, tall potted plants and a shiny golden bar. Continental breakfast (included in my rate) is served at tables set amid midcentury armchairs and love seats. Breakfast can also be delivered to the room (for a 10-euro delivery fee). My order — an enormous tray with baskets of bread and pastries, jams, yogurt, cappuccino and fresh-pressed orange juice — arrived shortly after the requested time. The rest of the day, room service comes from a nearby restaurant.AdvertisementLike a Fellini film, the G-Rough deftly balances the refined and the rugged, creating a sophisticated hotel with both a sense of place and a sense of style. INGRID K. WILLIAMSG-Rough, Piazza di Pasquino 69, Rome; 39-6-6880-1085; g-rough.it.A version of this article appears in print on July 24, 2016, on Page TR4 of the New York edition with the headline: Letting a Palazzo Reveal Its Charms.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »