

      By SETH SHERWOOD

JULY 21, 2016

This riverside city may be synonymous with fine food — Parma ham, Parmesan — but it also satisfies appetites for art, music and history.
Related Article
Your diet starts in 37 hours. Synonymous with famous delicacies and culinary legends — Parma ham, Parmesan cheese, Lambrusco wine, the Barilla pasta company, the Alma cooking school — this fetching northern Italian city last year was named a Unesco Creative City for Gastronomy, the first city in Italy to receive the honor. Numerous traditional restaurants and fine-food boutiques assure that no belly goes empty, and on Parma’s outskirts you’ll find museums related to everything from cured pork products to tomatoes. But the city, which was home to talents as diverse as the Renaissance painter Correggio and the 20th-century conductor Arturo Toscanini, also nourishes other appetites — religious, artistic, theatrical, musical, historical — given its wealth of ornate churches and monasteries, an excellent fine-arts museum, and a celebrated theater. Digest it all while pounding the pavement. The compact riverside city is a pleasure to walk.
Explore street view, find things to do in Parma and sign in to your Google account to save your map.
What does the “T” stand for in the name TCafè? Tasteful? The airy, white gallery-like space is certainly that, thanks to a mix of historical details (stone columns, wooden beams) and contemporary cool (design chairs, bubbly electro music).Trendy? The mix of local students and design-media types would suggest it. Or perhaps the “T” is for the Italian word tramonto (sunset), since the outdoor tables are the ideal spot for an end-of-the-day aperitivo while overlooking Parma’s octagonal medieval baptistery. A favorite local flower infuses the Violet Spritz (violet liqueur, prosecco, soda; 6 euros, about $6.60 ), while an Americano (8 euros, or $8.80) caters to classic tastes. All is accompanied (gratis) by another Parma staple, prosciutto. The 19th-century opera composer Giuseppe Verdi was another native of the Parma region, and fall’s Festival Verdi at the gilded 19th-century Teatro Regio is Parma’s annual music gala. The programming during the rest of the year is also impressive, encompassing everything from opera and ballet to jazz and experimental dance. To glimpse the opulent interior — noted for its painted ceiling, tapestry-like curtain, tiers of colonnaded loggias and massive French chandelier — you can take a guided 30-minute tour (5 euros), available mornings and afternoons. Consult the website for times and bookings. Vegans beware: Within the hushed, Old World confines of Cocchi — white tablecloths, oil paintings, patrician crowd — pork is prince and cow is sacred. Sure, you can start with pastas like spaghetti or tortelli, but the cured meats are the stars. Local prosciutto is pungent and soft as tissue, while culatello (a premium variant of prosciutto) is served in ultra thin red-white ribbons of meat and fat that melt like a lozenge on the tongue. Sliced beef in myriad permutations headlines the list of the main courses, along with a robust slab of veal marbled with Parmesan-accented potato purée. Even the marquee dessert — house-made vanilla ice cream — is sliced at your table from a huge chilled slab, just like deli meat. A three-course meal for two costs around 90 euros. Ascetics beware: Those Saturday crowds in Strada Matteo Renato Imbriani, alongside the stone arches of Santissima Annunziata church, aren’t celebrating the joys of temperance. On the contrary. The morning market is an emporium for pleasures of the flesh, notably fresh local fruits, vegetables, jams, juices, butter, cream, grains, wines — and especially ham hocks and cheese blocks. Whether your cold-cut proclivity is for salami, cultatello, prosciutto, gola (made from the pig’s throat) or cicciolata (a blend of nose, ears, back, fat and more), the stand called An.Fo.Ra can sate you. Pair your pork purchases with Parmesan cheese from Araldi, whose slabs and wheels are aged from 24 to 60 months. Swap turf for surf at the new F.I.S.H. restaurant, which opened this year. Simple and cute, the white-tiled space sports raw wood tables and raw wooden planks on the walls. Much of the seafood is raw too, notably the multiple carpaccios and tartares. For variety, the crudo platter includes tender and meaty red shrimp, sweet and smooth langoustine, and more. For those who prefer cooked creatures, the shrimp beignets are crispy outside and mushy-sweet within, thanks to an infusion of béchamel sauce. Even better is the thick branzino, which gets zesty Mediterranean accents from diced tomatoes and olives. Lunch for two costs around 40 euros. Got a ceiling you need painted? Talk to Correggio. That seemed to be the motto around Parma in the early 1500s — at least among religious authorities. In the Camera di San Paolo, part of a Benedictine convent, Correggio adorned the vaulted stone ceiling and walls with trompe l’oeil columns, playful cherubs and the Roman goddess Diana. More powerful, his interior dome of San Giovanni Evangelista church depicts a white-bearded St. John floating in a fiery red sky amid clouds piled with divine onlookers. The Cattedrale di Santa Maria Assunta, which contains Parma’s most highly decorated church interior, also boasts a Correggio cupola. A masterwork of perspective, “Assumption of the Virgin” shows Mary rising skyward through a whirlpool of dense clouds loaded with saints and angels toward a supernova of sun and divine grace. Think of nearby Via Nazario Sauro as Memory Lane — if your memories include 1970s Missoni dresses, rotary telephones and magic lanterns. Those objects and many more are for sale in the multiple vintage shops in the tiny passage, which hosts a monthly Saturday art and antiques market as well. Name notwithstanding, Vecchia America sells high-end European fashion, from iconic Valentino red dresses to quilted Chanel black handbags. For decades-old anatomical statues, science equipment, restaurant accessories and furniture, Invento is a fun and funky time-warp. Dustier and mustier, Credula Postero is like your loopy grandfather’s attic, bursting with walking canes, fencing foils, puppet theaters and toy soldiers. Parma is hardly a hotbed of culinary experimentation. And with such sublime traditional specialties, why should it be? For a small dose of imagination and modifications, however, Borgo20 serves them up in a cozy room of wooden beams and brick arches. Among starters, you might find poached eggs spilling a warm wave over crunchy green peas and smoky-fatty nuggets of pork cheek lard. After, Parmesan cheese-accented rice with plums and crispy bacon is a compelling interplay of salty, sweet, pungent and earthy flavors (though the portions of fruit and meat could be larger). And if pork with potatoes and onion is on the menu, hunt it down. The pig meat, pink and soft as Wagyu beef, is backed by smoky accents in the mashed potatoes and the cold, crunchy-sweet burst of a pickled onion. For a fully local finale, Lambrusco sorbet in Lambrusco sauce is an oenophile’s ambrosia. A three-course dinner for two, without wine, costs around 80 euros. How do you follow all that wine? With more wine, of course. Look for the upright wine barrels in Via Luigi Carlo Farini — a lively strip of bars and restaurants — and you will have found Tabarro, a cozy and rustic little wine bar. Stand at those same barrels (which double as tables) while sampling anything from bubbly white Franciacorta from the north to ripe Sicilian reds from the south. From in between, Tuscan Pollera Nera is a tannic, medium-bodied red with hints of pepper. To sample artisanal Italian beers, cross the river to Vecchie Maniere Birreria Parmigiana. The friendly brick-vaulted pub is festooned with miscellany — posters,T-shirts, photos, farm equipment — and serves suds by Brewfist, MC77, Hammer and other independent Italian breweries. Like a local Louvre, the Palazzo della Pilotta complex is a former palace that today houses museums devoted to art and archaeology. You enter through the soaring, cathedral-like Teatro Farnese. Built in the 1600s and blown up in World War II, the stunning wooden theater was reconstructed in the 1950s and leaves you gawking. So do the artworks in the Galleria Nazionale. The collection starts with medieval panel paintings of saints and martyrs and continues into the mannered portraits of the 19th century. Along the way, highlights include High Renaissance works from the Florentine school, Canaletto’s gold-bathed cityscapes of Venice, and Da Vinci’s sketch of a young girl’s face, “La Scapiliata” (sometimes on loan). Multiple rooms are devoted to works by Correggio, notably the spooky, nocturnal “Lamentation of Christ.” Admission, 10 euros. You’ve filled up on Parma’s cultural, religious, retail and culinary buffet, so treat yourself to dessert at Banchini gelato parlor. Opened this year by the venerable Parma-based Banchini chocolate manufacturer, the tiny shop stocks the company’s chocolate biscuits, chocolate bars and even chocolate “salami” (a chocolate tube in the form and wrapping of a cured meat). But the ice creams (2.20 euros for a small cup), from pistachio to hazelnut to dark chocolate, surpass them all. Your diet starts in 10 minutes. Gastronomy and hospitality converge at Parizzi Suites & Studio. The 13-room hotel is connected to the Michelin-starred Parizzi restaurant, which also offers cooking classes. You can try your skills in your suite or studio; each is equipped with a kitchen. From 85 euros.The 28-room Savoy Hotel sits along one of Parma’s main drags, Via Garibaldi, and is just a five-minute walk from the train station. Rooms are smallish but feature sleek modern design. Doubles from 88 euros.Flight and Hotel information provided by Google.Prices represent a snapshot of low fares and rates for weekend trips.The 36 Hours column on July 24, about Parma, Italy, described the goddess Diana incorrectly. She is from Roman mythology, not Greek.Advertisement