The lakes and forests of Minnesota’s Boundary Waters transport you to a time when nature was not a thing at the edge of civilization, but a world unto itself.By PORTER FOXOCT. 21, 2016
There are no roads here. No towns or airports. There are no gas stations, businesses, cars, airplanes, electricity, phone service. There is water. And if you are not on it, you are in the woods.The lakes and forests of Minnesota’s Boundary Waters are straight from the Pleistocene. Paleo-Indians navigated chunks of melting ice left by retreating glaciers when they hunted woolly mammoths and caribou in the area 12,000 years ago. Mastodons, saber-tooth cats and 500-pound beavers roamed the region then. When the first Europeans breached the wilderness west of Lake Superior in search of a route to China — and then highly valuable beaver pelts — the only way through was in a canoe. The United States-Canada border that wanders along the northern edge of the region, and gives it its name, follows their route almost precisely.Not much has changed since then. Legislation, including the watershed 1964 Wilderness Act, reversed time and returned the 1.1 million-acre Boundary Waters Canoe Area Wilderness to pristine backcountry. Outboard engines were outlawed in most of the 1,000 lakes there. Residents and businesses were evicted and buildings were demolished. Roads were closed and airplanes were prohibited from flying below 4,000 feet. Around 2,200 campsites and 1,500 miles of canoe routes were eventually established in what has become one of the most protected — and coveted — wildernesses in America.Even with 250,000 annual visitors — and a mining company pushing a $3 billion copper-nickel mine near the southwest border of the park — there are few signs of human presence in the area. From the air it looks like a green carpet, gouged southwest to northeast by glaciers. From the water it looks like another time — when nature was not a thing that grew at the edge of civilization, but a world unto itself in which humans were guests.The local Ojibwe (Chippewa) tribe still lives that way. As do Paul and Sue Schurke. The Schurkes have spent most of their lives getting away from civilization. In 1986, Paul was a member of the first expedition to reach the North Pole without resupply, using dog sleds and technical clothing stitched by Sue. The two have since traveled through remote regions of Greenland, Africa and Russia, with annual trips into the Boundary Waters from their home in Ely, Minn.AdvertisementSeventy Canadian Inuit dogs — which the Schurkes use for tours at their Wintergreen Dogsled Lodge — howled in their backyard the morning my wife, Sara, and I set out with them a year ago on a three-day paddle through the Boundary Waters wilderness. Paul’s instructions for packing the night before: “Wear pants, a shirt and an insulating layer and pack a windbreaker. Dry shoes are nice for camp.” Staying light is key on a Boundary Waters trip. Escaping civilization means lugging your gear — canoe on shoulders, gear on back, feet on trail — across dozens of winding portages between lakes. Most portages are a few hundred yards, Paul said, but some are up to a mile long.AdvertisementThankfully, Boundary Waters Outfitters in Ely has outfitting down to a science. The second-generation owner, Bill Forsberg, set us up with 42-pound Kevlar canoes, tents, sleeping pads, sleeping bags, portage packs and food — ziplocked and labeled by meal and day. Paul wanted to paddle a section of the International Boundary Route and set us up with a water taxi for the first 40 miles, which runs through perimeter lakes where motors are still allowed. We would propel ourselves the next 30 miles from Lac La Croix back to Ely.Paul drove as if he were running from the law on the straight dirt road connecting Ely with Crane Lake. He is 61 years old and 6-foot-2. Susan is 63 and about a paddle blade shorter, with short blond hair and blue eyes. Sue is sweet and meek until something needs to be attended to, at which point she narrows her eyes and whoever is standing in front of her does exactly as she says. Paul is more of a dreamer. He has endured extreme cold, extreme pain and isolation on his expeditions. Most times of the day he appears lost in thought, most likely contemplating another adventure.Ted Smith, who owned a lodge on Sand Point Lake for 39 years, met us at a dock on Crane Lake. Behind him was an aluminum boat and a million square miles of primitive wilderness. A good breeze had whipped up foamy whitecaps on the lake and Paul suggested we hurry up. “Use the bathroom if you need it,” he said. “You’re not going to see one for a while.”It was 9 a.m. when Ted pushed off. His twin-engine boat was fitted with canoe racks and an enclosed cabin for rough weather. The sun painted a white line from Crane Lake to Sand Point Lake. Everything around us was water, stone or wood. Red pine leaned over the shoreline, and long runs of granite split the forest in two. Ten-story granite bluffs rose from the depths, and flat swimming rocks the size of tennis courts crested a few feet above the waterline.The Boundary Waters mark the northern edge of the Vermilion Batholith, meaning most of the lakes are lined with granite. Fault lines run through Man Chain and Kahshahpiwi Lakes, cleaving perfectly straight granite and greenstone shorelines. Vera Lake is hemmed with jasper. Pink granite batholith circles Ensign Lake, and prehistoric “volcano bombs” — chunks of rock blown off the side of a volcano — lie at the bottom of Kekekabic Lake.Ted pulled up to a granite cliff in the cut between Crane and Sand Point Lakes and pointed to a series of dull red pictographs. The handprints and depiction of a large moose were hundreds of years old. Ojibwe artists made them by mixing hematite with sturgeon oil. The mixture chemically bonds to rock and can last thousands of years. A half-hour later — after signing in with Canadian Customs on a dock in the southern end of the lake — Ted showed us three cigar boxes at the resort he used to run filled with arrowheads, soapstone pipes French fur traders used and a copper spear that he said must have come from Michigan. His prized possession turned up six months before on a path he’d walked a few thousand times — an intricately carved soapstone fox.After a cup of coffee, Ted left us with the Zupancich family — known locally as the “Zups” — two miles away at Dawson Portage. We loaded the canoes on an ancient 1980s Suburban and drove to Wilkins Bay, where we took another water taxi to Mark, Kathy and Jennifer Zup’s lodge. The Zups have been welcoming canoeists in the Boundary Waters, and guiding fishermen to some of the best bass fishing in the world, since Mark’s father, Bill Zup, built one of the first lodges in the area in 1936 near Curtain Falls. The Wilderness Act required a couple of dozen lodges in the Boundary Waters to close in the 1960s, causing a small riot in Ely. Bill Zup had no choice but to pack up whatever he could, move to the Canadian side of Lac La Croix and start over.AdvertisementJennifer brought us one of the last “shore lunches” of the season before we took off. The meal began with hunks of fresh cornbread smeared with butter and two pitchers of lemonade. Next came a platter of breaded and fried walleye with tartar sauce and a side of potatoes. We took dessert — rhubarb-strawberry turnovers topped with whipped cream — and rolled into the boat to catch a ride to a rocky islet on the southern end of Lac La Croix.A silvery benchmark spike — with U.S. embossed on one side and CANADA on the other — driven into a boulder on the island marked the border. A pile of rocks in the middle used to be an Indian lookout station, Paul said. It sits directly in the middle of the fur traders’ route, where an Indian scout could see Europeans approaching and signal to his tribe to prepare their furs.We loaded the canoes with our gear and paddled south. Paul spotted a couple of tents on the tip of one island and a dozen other islands without a soul on them. We paddled past a few before Paul landed on one. There we unloaded our gear and hauled it to a large granite ledge that looked out at Warrior Hill — a short, steep mountain where legend has it Indian chiefs once tested braves before battle by making them run up it.The campsite was set around a tall fire ring and two log benches. Three perfectly flat tent sites behind the fire ring were nestled in the woods. There was a cast-iron grill built into the fire pit and a Dutch oven set beside it. Nymphs hatched in the silvery water and the western sky lit up like coals in a dying fire. Living in the Arctic will make a man appreciate a good fire, and Paul had one going before we unpacked our tents.We sat around for hours that night, drinking boxed riesling and swapping stories. Paul told us that a year after the Wilderness Act passed, President Lyndon Johnson’s daughter Lynda Bird Johnson paddled into the boundary waters with 11 canoes, 12 Secret Service agents, a few portable toilets and a staff of cooks and attendants. Ms. Johnson banned the press from the trip, but four reporters followed and camped on the same island we were on. They eventually bribed the Secret Service with a bottle of bourbon and got an interview. In their reporting the following week, they called Ms. Johnson the “Greta Garbo of the North Woods.”Paul had the beginning of a cold and went to bed early. I stayed up and watched the stars come out. The sky was reconstructed with constellations I’d never seen. Anthropologists speculate that Ojibwe rock paintings in the Boundary Waters relate to constellations. At nearby Hegman Lake, a painting of three paddlers, a moose, a wolf, a shaman and several dashes almost exactly corresponds with Ptolemaic constellations set around Orion. Beneath the painting, the artist drew a horizon as a reference — that would allow a hunter to calculate his latitude and distance from home.I followed the arc of the Milky Way — what the Ojibwe call the Path of Souls — until it disappeared into the shadowy canopy on the other side of the lake. The air smelled like pine and campfire smoke and a shrill loon call echoed off the granite shores. The last thing I saw before slipping into the dreamworld was a shooting star splitting the lake in two.The land of 10,000 lakes has closer to 20,000, if you count lakes under 10 acres. The combined shoreline of Minnesota is 45,000 miles — more than the sum of California’s inland and ocean coasts combined. Eight percent of Minnesota is water and the other 92 percent is home to an average of 67 people per square mile.AdvertisementEly is the capital of lake country. Sea kayaks, canoes, skiffs, powerboats, inner tubes, water skis, dories and dinghies lean against buildings and sit in driveways along Highway 169. A black-and-white photo in A Taste of Ely cafe on north Central Avenue is a window into the town’s past. In the picture, two 1960s station wagons wait at a traffic light on Sheridan Street. Two 16-foot canoes are lashed to the roof of one. The other is carrying a single canoe and two kids. Drivers and passengers wait patiently. They are here for the trip of a lifetime. That’s how outfitters describe a trip into the Boundary Waters.I didn’t see another person on the lake the next morning when we started paddling. I also couldn’t see where we were going. From three feet above the water, everything looked like one big lake. Thick pines onshore, long slabs of granite, streams and outlets all melted into an unbroken horizon.Paul and Sue have paddled the border route dozens of times and headed straight for a slot in the southeast corner of the bay. The stream led to our first portage to Bottle Lake and a second into Iron Lake. Sue demonstrated how to empty everything in the boat into one of two portage packs, then swing the canoe on top of your shoulders, upside down. Sara took the giant pack, and I tried to lift the canoe. The motion was like putting on a sweater except that the sweater was a 17-foot Kevlar hull. The canoe was lighter than I thought it would be, but balancing it was tough. I fell over the first few times I tried, but I eventually got the hang of it.There was a small gravel beach at the start of the first portage and a flat rock for launching canoes on the other. Pale corydalis and harebell grew near the shore; sphagnum, leatherleaf and Labrador tea in the swampy sections of the hike. Even though we had seen only a few people so far, all of the portage paths we walked were well-worn.It took an hour to paddle across Iron Lake. With two people paddling, the Kevlar canoe averaged three miles an hour. The motion became second nature after a while. My mind drifted off, and I thought about time before time, when the glaciers were receding and this country was gray and wet. It took decades for young spruce and prairie grasslands to crop up. Aspen, birch and other hardwoods came next.The Ojibwe did not arrive until the 1500s. The tribe came from the east and still speaks a form of Algonquin. They believe there have been three eras since the world was created. Animals and monsters were masters of the first. In the second, monsters died and people inhabited the earth. Humans and animals spoke to one another in this era and a half-man, half-god named Nanabush introduced hunting, fishing and the arrowhead. In the final era, which we live in today, humans and animals can no longer communicate. Shaman are the only conduit.We listened to nature for an hour at Rebecca Falls as Paul napped and we ate lunch. It didn’t sound like anything I’d heard before. Chickadees, white-throated sparrows, finches, grosbeaks and loons called out. A bald eagle glided overhead and an osprey crashed into the water a hundred yards away. The lake was layered with sweet flag, sedge, lilies, horehound, bulrush and buckbean. The air smelled like stagnant water, rotting wood, pine and sweet columbine. Wild licorice, fireweed, hawkweed, bastard toadflax and littleleaf pussytoes created a carpet underfoot. Thin, green marsh fern circled lakes alongside moonwort, rattlesnake fern and horsetail.Ten millenniums of photosynthesis and a century of legislation have kept it that way. But a decade of lobbying by a Chilean mining company, Antofagasta, Paul said, is threatening it now. The company is suing the federal government to renew permits for a $3 billion underground copper-nickel mine near where the South Kawishiwi River flows into the Boundary Waters Canoe Area Wilderness. Currents in the wilderness would carry toxic pollution from the Twin Metals mine through most of the border lake area in the Boundary Waters.AdvertisementThe Forest Service, the Interior Secretary, Sally Jewell, and tens of thousands of Boundary Waters supporters have voiced their concerns about the mine. Though Twin Metals’ future looks dimmer every month, the fact that it was even a possibility — and that there are other mining companies trying to exploit the region — calls into question the values, integrity and good sense of civilization in the 21st century.We took off again and crossed the border into Canada, paddling all afternoon past granite promontories and tiny islets. I could see an exact reflection of the forest and sky in the water. The only sound was water dripping off our paddles with each stroke. Paul found a campsite on a rocky point and we dropped our gear and portaged into Argo Lake for a scenic four-mile loop. Paul wanted to find a cave he had heard about that might have housed Paleo-Indians, but all we saw were swooping eagles and an osprey standing watch in her nest. It was almost dark by the time we got back to the site and Paul cooked chili and quesadillas on the fire while we set up camp.We sat by the fire that night listening to more stories about the Boundary Waters and the French voyageurs who opened them to the world in the 17th, 18th and 19th centuries. Voyageur is the name the French gave to canoe men who carried goods to remote trading posts and brought back furs. They wore a uniform of a red wool cap, deerskin moccasins, leggings and an Indian belt. They were expected to paddle 55 strokes a minute, 14 hours a day and carried an average of two bales of furs — 180 pounds total — over miles of portages between Montreal and the Mississippi. The most common cause of death: strangulated hernia.We wandered off to bed, imagining an extra 180 pounds on our backs on the next portage. A violent thunderstorm ripped across the lake an hour later hurling lightning, hail and heavy winds. Another blew through in the morning and slammed the tent with raindrops the size of nickels. I looked outside in the middle of it and saw Paul in his raincoat starting a fire. By the time the storm blew through he had a pot of coffee ready.The skies cleared at 8 a.m., and we took off for what was going to be a long day. The sun was still rising above the trees and everything in front of us was a silhouette. We crossed Crooked Lake into Friday Bay, then paddled and portaged between Papoose, Chippewa, Niki and six other lakes — including a killer mile-long portage from Wagosh to Gunn Lake.It rained on and off all day, forcing us to eat lunch under an overturned canoe at the end of a portage. An hour later, we ended up on a granite goat path winding along a stream. Hiking on the edge of a 30-foot precipice with a canoe on your head is an interesting challenge. It was almost dark by the time we made it to Mudro Lake, and it was raining harder. We made our way southwest along the lake and through tall reeds bordering the inlet in the dark. A thick mist settled and the watery scene morphed into something from a fairy tale. I almost fell out of the canoe when a beaver slammed its tail five feet away, sending a report through the marsh.The wind started up again and blew the bow of the canoe around. We had already traveled 17 miles and it was almost dark. Sara spotted a white sand beach ahead but we weren’t sure if it was real. Then I saw Paul and Sue stacking their gear and knew we must be at the end.We pulled up alongside them and heard a car door slam. It was a strange, unnatural sound. After a few days in the Boundary Waters, everything other than water, stone and wood seemed unnatural. Paul began loading gear and we hauled our canoe one last time to the car. The back seat of the Suburban felt incredibly soft when we got in, and five minutes later the car was 75 degrees. Paul got a cellphone signal and suggested we order pizza to pick up in Ely and, just like that, we slipped back into the modern world.An article on Oct. 23 misstated the size of the Boundary Waters Canoe Area Wilderness. It is 1.1 million acres, not 1.1 million square miles. The error was repeated in a picture caption on Page A3.Porter Fox’s book “Northland,” about traversing the United States-Canada border, is due out from W. W. Norton in 2018.A version of this article appears in print on October 23, 2016, on Page TR1 of the New York edition with the headline: Into the Wild.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »