

      By STEVE REDDICLIFFE

JULY 27, 2017

Get a weekend’s taste of this alluring area on Lake Superior, replete with waterfalls, trumpeter swans and hearty regional dishes.
Related Article
There’s almost nothing small about the Upper Peninsula. Lake Superior is the biggest of the Great Lakes. Tahquamenon Falls is one of the largest waterfalls east of the Mississippi River. In square miles, the Upper Peninsula is bigger than Maryland. Its beauty is outsize.But it is also remote. There can be ice on Lake Superior in June. Summers are short. All of which may explain why there are only about 311,000 Yoopers, as residents are known, many of whom are given to wry humor — Rodney Dangerfield in a deer blind. (In his book “You Wouldn’t Like It Here,” Lon L. Emerick, a Yooper himself, writes, “If you seek a polar climate, have a need to make yourself miserable or if you need to atone for a life of sin, then maybe you’re a candidate for our glacierland.”)A weekend is not enough time here, but in nonpolar weather it is sufficient to hike, kayak, bike and get a taste of the peninsula’s endless allure (whitefish and pasties will be served).
Explore the map and find things to do in the Upper Peninsula.
Fuel up with a loaf of sourdough from the North Star Brick Oven Bakery outside Newberry (the flavorful Sweet Citrus has orange rind and poppy seeds; $5.50) before heading to Tahquamenon Falls State Park ($9 for out-of-state visitors). The Upper Falls on the Tahquamenon River are over 200 feet across, with a drop of almost 50 feet. Their size and whoosh are impressive, and so is their Earl Grey tint (because of tree tannins). A path passes through sugar maples and American beech to viewing platforms, and a steep staircase gets you closer to the falls. The smaller Lower Falls can be reached by car, but opt for the four-mile River Trail that takes you across bridges, over streams, up ridges and at times within inches of the Tahquamenon. There are buttercups and blue flag irises along the way. Near the Lower Falls, on a sign embraced by cinnamon ferns, you’ll find the “Prayer of the Woods” (author unknown), which ends: “I am the bread of kindness and the flower of beauty. Ye who pass by, listen to my prayer: Harm me not.”Go to the Tahquamenon Falls Brewery and Pub for a post-hike Black Bear stout (stone fireplace, tons of taxidermy); you can also try an exemplary pasty — the pastry pocket that was a portable meal for miners in Cornwall who later brought it here ($7.99 for a small). The version made here by Mary Duflo features a flaky crust filled with beef, carrots and rutabaga. In the summer, Ms. Duflo, who has been making pasties for 40 years, turns out hundreds. “The crust part I learned from my mother,” she said. “I put my love into it.”It doesn’t matter what movie is playing at the Tahqua-Land in Newberry — the theater is the show. In the early 1970s Fred Dunkeld bought the old State Theater (built in 1930) and began renovating it, a process that involved 10,000 sheets of gilding, and the creation by Toronto artisans of 11 Greek-mythology-themed murals, many of them recreations of paintings by artists like Anthony van Dyck. What inspired Mr. Dunkeld? “A case of beer,” he joked. But seriously: “I wanted to go back to the days when movie theaters were grandiose.”In the early 1900s, a private company planned to drain much of the land near what is now the Seney National Wildlife Refuge (free). In the 1930s, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service made the refuge all about water, creating a series of pools that are host to Canada geese, common loons and great blue herons. There are other animals in the 95,000-acre refuge — turtles, beavers and deer — but Seney is biggest on birds. You can see (or hear) them on the one-and-a-half-mile Pine Ridge Nature Trail. The Marshland Wildlife Drive — seven miles — takes visitors deeper into Seney; nothing quite prepares you for the sight of dozens of gliding trumpeter swans. The swans were near extinction in the early 1900s, and Seney played a vital role in restoring the population of a bird that the Trumpeter Swan Society says “embodies grace, beauty and unspoiled wildness.”John Flanders had a reason for opening a restaurant in Munising: “I came to town and there wasn’t any good food.” So, after 20 years as a fine dining chef (including at Kinkead’s in Washington, D.C.), he started Johnny Dogs in 2008, serving delicious hot dogs made from his recipe with toppings ranging from traditional (chili in the Detroit-style Coney) to not-so (the North Carolina, with pulled pork, “orange-pop barbecue sauce” and slaw, from $3.50). Mr. Flanders smokes 90 pounds of pork butt each night, cuts his own fries, makes the sauces and salsas and soups. He opened the adjoining Johnny Tacos stand this summer, where the chicharrón-style pork taco with pineapple-mango salsa ($10.50 for three) is a standout.From the road or shore in Munising you’ll glimpse the colorful cliffs that give the Pictured Rocks in Lake Superior their name, but you don’t really see them until you are on the water. Northern Waters Adventures, owned by Carl Hansen, has been leading kayak trips in the Pictured Rocks National Lakeshore since 1991, taking paddlers close enough to touch the cool cliffs, slip through arches and feel the spray of Bridalveil Falls ($75). The rich palette — red, orange, blue — is the work of minerals like copper and iron seeping into the rocks. The colors change throughout the day, and even a cloudy afternoon, when fog floats along the cliff tops, can cast a spell. Mr. Hansen’s favorite time: “When the sun drops on the horizon — it shines its light on the cliff, and the colors that are awesome during the day become just like neon lights.”A fresh, lightly fried whitefish sandwich from the Fish Basket is the perfect post-kayak snack, and Sam Corp, who owns it, is possibly its most enthusiastic fan: “This may be the best fish sandwich you’ll ever eat” ($12 with fries). The fish is from Lake Superior. He loves that too: “It’s the largest and coldest and cleanest body of freshwater on earth.”It seems as if every mile along the Michigan 28 highway between Munising and Marquette offers an enticing crescent of Lake Superior beach, and the one at the Scott Falls roadside park on Au Train Bay is ideal for strolling and a splash or swim. Across the highway are the falls themselves, with a shallow pool for wading.The Landmark Inn is a hospitable hotel in the heart of Marquette, the biggest city in the Upper Peninsula (population 21,000). Built in 1930, the hotel has an airy lobby and two excellent bars. The stars of “Anatomy of a Murder,” including James Stewart and Lee Remick, were guests when they shot the movie in the late 1950s. (The author of the novel on which it was based, John D. Voelker — pen name, Robert Traver — was once a Marquette County prosecutor.) Some rooms are named for the people who once stayed in them; Amelia Earhart slept here.You can’t go wrong with the whitefish piccata at the Vierling, but Marquette has seen a recent wavelet of new restaurants, a wine bar (the sleek Zephyr) and brew pubs (the Ore Dock Brewing Company pours a quality pint). The executive chef Justin Fairbanks opened Steinhaus in 2013 because “we thought that German cuisine was familiar yet unfamiliar; at the end of the day schnitzel is just deep-fried pork,” he said. Steinhaus serves schnitzel, its own sausage and a tender short-rib sauerbraten with spaetzle and braised red cabbage (entrees from $20). The cabbage is local, and the greens in the house salad are from the Dancing Crane Farm, owned by the Fairbanks family). There’s dessert at Steinhaus, but the Lower Harbor Ice Cream Store in Mattson Park is a sweet option on soft summer nights.Take a bike ride from downtown to the city’s lovely Presque Isle Park (the Landmark Inn does rentals; from $20), past Shiras Park (with a popular swimming beach, McCarty’s Cove) and the Superior Dome at Northern Michigan University (reportedly the world’s largest wooden dome). Power up Peter White Drive and savor the panorama at Sunset Point; stop at the Black Rocks cliffs, from which generations of intrepid residents and visitors have taken the 14-foot plunge into Lake Superior. “That’s a rite of passage for everybody who comes here,” said Dave Campana, the mayor of Marquette.Inside the former city waterworks building, the Marquette Maritime Museum showcases an imposing Fresnel lens from the Stannard Rock Light on Lake Superior (the farthest lighthouse from land in the United States) as well as artifacts from shipwrecks (including a life ring from the Edmund Fitzgerald). Close by is the Marquette Harbor Lighthouse (museum or lighthouse admission $7; $12 for both), built in 1866. The landing at the end of a catwalk offers sweeping views of Marquette, encompassing the Lower Harbor ore dock that closed in 1971 and the one near Presque Isle (more than 1,200 feet long) that is still in operation.The sausage sandwich called the cudighi is a rarity outside of the Marquette area. Bustling Vango’s does a killer version, making its own pork sausage and topping it with mozzarella and house pizza sauce (go for the works — sautéed green peppers, onions and mushrooms; $6.85). The sausage is attributed to emigrant Italians, but the name itself is something of a mystery (a derivation of cotechino?). Matthew Gavin Frank, in the anthology “The Way North,” writes: “Say cudighi in Italy, and no one will understand you. It is ours now, the last true ours of the Midwest.” Follow up with ice cream or a house-made caramel at charming Donckers, in business since the 1890s. President Barack Obama, visiting in 2011, had a club sandwich and an armful of candy to go. I had a cherry phosphate, and followed the former president’s lead on the confections.Tom Lakenen has things to say, and he says them with scrap metal in his captivating 37-acre sculpture park, Lakenenland (free). Mr. Lakenen, a boilermaker, is a dedicated union member who vividly opposes right-to-work laws and corporate greed (his anti-Enron sculpture features a pooping pig). In one work, he pays tribute to the Marines; in others, to the lumberjacks and mining history of the region. Many of the 100 pieces are whimsical, including bright sunflowers, a bouquet of bowling balls. The genesis of it all: “I quit drinking, and that’s when I started building sculptures.”MacLeod House (6211 County Road 441, Newberry) is close to downtown Newberry—“the moose capital of Michigan,” per the village’s signs and website—and an easy drive to Tahquamenon Falls State Park. This is a pleasant bed-and-breakfast in an 1898 Victorian that was moved from town to its current bucolic location in 1989. The owners are Cheryl and Frank Cicala; Ms. Cicala is a cordial host who makes terrific omelettes. Three rooms; rates from from $75.The Landmark Inn (230 North Front Street, Marquette) is a handsome art deco hotel within a quick walk of restaurants, brew pubs, shopping and Marquette’s Lower Harbor. Signs throughout the hotel promote the Landmark as “bike friendly,” but they’re friendly to everyone. Two bars: The Northstar Lounge with memorable views of the harbor and Lake Superior and the cozy Northland Pub (where the cocktail called the Blue Buck—with New Holland blueberry gin, ginger beer and lime—is recommended). Some rooms are named for former high-profile former guests. Several years ago, my wife, not wanting to wake up the kids by turning on a light, bumped her head late one night. It hurt but she had to laugh—we were in the Abbott and Costello Suite. There are 60 rooms, six suites. Rates from $179.Flight and Hotel information provided by Google.Prices represent a snapshot of low fares and rates for weekend trips.Advertisement