
Q&A; By                     
JOHN L. DORMAN

OCT. 24, 2017
It’s understandable if it seems as though Marcus Samuelsson never sleeps. The affable New York-based chef and restaurateur, who recharged the Harlem dining scene with his restaurant Red Rooster in 2010, recently opened its first outpost, Red Rooster Shoreditch, along with the taqueria Tienda Roosteria, in London. He now operates a total of 15 restaurant brands, from Streetbird Rotisserie, also in Harlem, to Norda Bar & Grill in Göteborg, Sweden, where he grew up. Two restaurants are planned for downtown Newark and Greenpoint, Brooklyn.Last October, Mr. Samuelsson released a cookbook, “The Red Rooster Cookbook: The Story of Food and Hustle in Harlem,” an ode to the neighborhood’s cultural diversity, and he now narrates a tour of Harlem on the app Detour. “I’m committed to telling a layered journey of the African-American experience, which you have to really dig to find,” he said. “I think people have a strong thirst for this history, and a big part of it is here in Harlem.”Below are edited excerpts from a conversation with Mr. Samuelsson at Red Rooster.What influenced you to narrate an app tour of Harlem?When people come to Harlem, they see the Apollo Theater, stop by one of the famous restaurants, take a picture and get back on a bus. I want them to engage with us the way they would in other communities of culture. I’d like for them to go to Marjorie [Eliot’s] Parlor for jazz and see how a bakery looks in our eyes at Make My Cake. In Little Senegal, you can see what a market in Senegal would look like, but in an American city.AdvertisementRed Rooster, along with Ginny’s Supper Club, its music-driven sister, were game-changers for the uptown experience. What were your biggest learning experiences with these two venues?AdvertisementYou can’t force anything. I didn’t fully understand Harlem and wanted to make sure that I studied it, and not just Lenox [Avenue] and Frederick Douglass [Boulevard], but also [Holcombe] Rucker Park and Charles Gabriel [of Charles’ Country Pan Fried Chicken]. Once I fully understood the community, it was easier to create Red Rooster. Music is something that’s important, so I developed a larger stage for artists, which became Ginny’s.What led you to open the Red Rooster Shoreditch and Tienda Roosteria in London?Growing up in Sweden, London is always your New York City, especially when it comes to black culture. Red Rooster has a specific song and dance to it. I felt like the space could’ve been in Notting Hill or Brixton, but they’ve changed so much that I didn’t feel like it would reflect our voice. I started to stay in East London and the diversity in Shoreditch was different, with Jewish, Bangladeshi, African and Caribbean influences.You and your wife, the model and philanthropist Maya Haile, are native Ethiopians, and were married in Ethiopia. What was it like to have the ceremony there?Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.My wife has brought me so much love. Being in Ethiopia helped me understand the culture and understand myself. I will always remember it for that because it was so different, and exactly what we needed.What are some of your favorite Ethiopian foods?I love kitfo, raw beef, which came from the Gurage region where my wife is from. It is something that you eat on special occasions. I also love the dulet [a combination of beef, liver, and lamb tripe], which has an incredible level of flavor.You were the guest chef for the first state dinner of former President Barack Obama. How did it feel to take on such a huge task?Besides opening Red Rooster, it’s probably the biggest honor that I’ve had as a chef. The idea of being an immigrant in this country and cooking at the White House was amazing. Up until that point, most state dinners featured French food, but I thought we should have food connected to the guest of honor [then-Prime Minister Manmohan Singh of India]. Vegetarian courses with Indian influences were highlighted. We worked with purveyors from the Gulf Coast and used American wines.What do you miss the most about living in Sweden?I miss the real access to nature; it was never a field trip for us. During my school years, we would go in the woods and pick berries or mushrooms. It was unplanned, just like hanging out with your friends.In 2015, you ran the New York City Marathon, the largest marathon in the world. What was it like to train for the race?AdvertisementI enjoy the thinking process of getting up early. I was in the middle of writing the Red Rooster cookbook at the time, so I listened to many of my interviews to help me understand things. I’m one of the slowest Ethiopians and one of the fastest Swedes that you’ll ever find.A version of this article appears in print on November 5, 2017, on Page TR2 of the New York edition with the headline: Marcus Samuelsson on Touring Harlem.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »