By MICHAEL HARDYOCT. 23, 2017
The floodwaters have receded, the temporary shelters have cleared out and Houston has largely returned to normal since Hurricane Harvey dumped up to 51 inches of rain on the city in late August, destroying approximately 135,000 homes and killing 49 people. Today, a drive around the city reveals few signs of the catastrophic rainfall that turned highways into rivers and reservoirs into neighborhood-devouring lakes.Houston has bounced back from Harvey faster than anyone predicted, inspiring the Twitter hashtag #HoustonStrong.But for one sector of the economy— tourism—recovery is still a work in progress. Although never considered a top vacation destination like San Antonio or Austin, Houston has attracted a growing number of travelers in recent years, thanks to its award-winning restaurants and robust cultural offerings. Last year, a record 20 million people visited, a number bolstered by the Super Bowl in February.Leading figures in the local hospitality industry say they are cautiously optimistic that the city can regain its former momentum. “There’s a misconception that, wow, Houston’s in a bad place,” said the chef Chris Shepherd of Underbelly. “We had a lot of people affected in this city, and a lot of people are still trying to figure it out, so of course you’re going to have a loss of business. But it’s starting to come back.”AdvertisementMost of the city’s major attractions — including Space Center Houston; the Museum of Fine Arts, Houston; the Houston Museum of Natural Science; and the Galleria shopping center — suffered little damage and reopened shortly after the storm. All the top hotels and restaurants are up and running, as are the parks and sports stadiums.The city’s downtown theater district, another top tourist draw, wasn’t as lucky. Located just blocks from Buffalo Bayou, which rose about 40 feet during the storm, the district suffered widespread flooding. Water filled the basement of Jones Hall, home to the Houston Symphony. One of the recently renovated Alley Theater’s two stages was destroyed, along with all the company’s sets and costumes. At the Wortham Theater Center, which hosts the Houston Grand Opera and the Houston Ballet, the water rose almost to the lip of the main stage, putting the theater out of commission for at least a year.AdvertisementWhile the ballet, the symphony and the Alley were able to move this season’s performances to other concert halls around town, the Houston Grand Opera had to get more creative. The managing director, Perryn Leech, decided to build an entirely new venue, dubbed the Resilience Theater, inside the cavernous George R. Brown Convention Center. This presented a long list of challenges, including how to pacify season ticket holders (free Lyft rides to and from shows); where to place the orchestra (behind the stage); and how to finesse the acoustics (a work in progress). The opera opened its season on Friday night with a drastically scaled-down production of “La Traviata.”“Some of the greatest performances I’ve ever attended or worked on have been at temporary venues,” Mr. Leech said, putting an optimistic spin on the company’s predicament. “You wouldn’t necessarily have chosen this, but it’s an opportunity to take a main-stage opera and put it into a different space. Each performance is going to be an event in itself.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.One of the buzziest recent additions to the Houston arts calendar is the Day for Night multimedia festival. Last year’s event, headlined by Björk and Aphex Twin, drew two-thirds of its audience — about 17,000 people — from outside the city. This year’s installment will be held over a weekend in December, with performances by Thom Yorke and Nine Inch Nails, and a symposium on politics and art featuring Chelsea Manning, Laurie Anderson and Pussy Riot’s Nadya Tolokonnikova.“We feel like Day for Night is so important because it’s a chance to show how resilient Houston is,” said Omar Afra, the festival co-founder and the publisher of the underground newspaper Free Press Houston. “If Houston was a kid on the street, it would be that knucklehead who you push down but they keep getting back up. You’re just not going to stop us.”One of the city’s biggest draws remains its innovative restaurant scene, which has been garnering national accolades for years. Three of the past four winners of the James Beard Foundation’s award for Best Chef: Southwest have been Houstonians. One of them, Underbelly’s Mr. Shepherd, suggested a few culinary must-dos: a picnic lunch at Menil Park, beer and tacos on the crowded patio at Eight Row Flint, dinner in the outdoor garden of the intimate Italian restaurant Coltivare.“You don’t have to come here to help out,” he said. “You can come to enjoy yourself and have fun. It’s a beautiful time of year. The heat is pretty much coming down, and we don’t have hard-core winters. This is actually the best time of year to come to Houston.”A version of this article appears in print on October 29, 2017, on Page TR2 of the New York edition with the headline: After Storm, Houston Hopes to Regain Tourism Momentum.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.