By GUY TREBAYOCT. 26, 2017
MILAN — The fashion designer Massimo Alba is correct in calling his city a place “full of hidden surprises you can only discover if you know it well,” because Milan’s charms reveal themselves discreetly. Its choicest offerings are often hidden in plain sight. Take the specialty store on busy Corso Magenta, which I had passed for years without entering, until this summer a Milanese friend suggested stopping at E. E. Ercolessi for a pen.The pen was for her 12-year-old daughter, and as startling as it was to think of an adolescent’s employing analog technology was the fact that she uses a fountain pen. Less surprising, perhaps, was the existence in Milan of not one specialty store devoted to writing instruments but three. My favorite is the one we visited, established by Edgardo Ercolessi in 1921, and still family owned.Counters run along three sides of the small shop, with wood cabinets behind them displaying much of the stock. Though catalogs are available to help those with limited Italian, the professional staff is also eager to offer assistance, bringing up from the basement on a stock elevator classic offerings from manufacturers like Pelikan and Graf von Faber-Castell or the more plebeian Lamy we’d come to find.You can, of course, order these affordable plastic fountain pens easily enough on the internet. Yet what Ercolessi provides that Amazon does not is a brick-and-mortar atmosphere in which the simple act of writing is treated with something bordering on reverence. (E. E. Ercolessi, Corso Magenta 25)AdvertisementIn general, Milanese shopkeepers retain an old-fashioned approach to customer service, treating each decision of taste as essentially collaborative. Thus when you walk into Mr. Alba’s handsomely appointed shop on Via Brera, just 10 minutes on foot from La Scala, you immediately get a buzzy sense that some perfect article of clothing is waiting just for you.It is not only that Mr. Alba’s clothes distill the design lessons he acquired at a variety of storied Italian labels. It is that his elevated sportswear for men and women has a distinctly Milanese character — studiously quiet, well-cut, anonymous except to those who recognize quality — elements the handsome and low-key store manager, Alessandro Figliuolo, will point out for you in his Boston-accented English. (Massimo Alba, via Brera 8)AdvertisementIf at Massimo Alba the classics are revisited regularly with subtle alterations of color and details, at AD56, my favorite haberdashery in the city, the stock is never the same from one season to the next.I first learned of the place from Lapo Elkann, the Fiat heir and style avatar, who ordered his shirts there. The shop was near my usual hotel; somehow, I had passed it a thousand times without entering.Soon after my initial visit, I began placing regular orders for custom-made button-down cotton Oxfords tailored to my measurements, a bargain at 120 euros apiece (about $140). What draws me back to this shop and showroom, though, is its ever-changing assortment of ties, scarves, shawls and pocket squares, all milled especially for them.There is another reason. Family owned and in business for more than six decades, the shop (now in new quarters near the Duomo) offers a refuge from the hordes on the streets of the retail center, the so-called Golden Quadrilateral. “We want people to treat AD56 like a gentlemen’s club,” said Stefano Asnaghi, who runs the business with his brother Giovanni Maria, offering a beleaguered visitor a welcome espresso. (AD56, via Borgogna 7)A city consecrated to maintaining tradition, Milan is a paradise for those who prize specialization and anachronism — fuddy-duddy heaven. Where else, for instance, will you find 10 different bakeries competing to make the best pan dei morti, bread baked exclusively for All Souls’ Day?Though it is hard to gauge how much use anyone truly has for hand-forged nutcrackers, they are among the items stocked by G. Lorenzi, a storied accessories and cutlery shop saved from extinction after the doors of its central Milan store closed in 2014.“We couldn’t afford for it to disappear,” said Guglielmo Miani, president of the Montenapoleone Association and head of the family tailoring boutique Larusmiani, who courted Lorenzi’s longtime owner, 81-year-old Aldo Lorenzi, for months before persuading him to install an outpost of a landmark first opened in the 1920s in his own store.AdvertisementTrue, the new G. Lorenzi at Larusmiani stocks just a fraction of the 100,000 items once on offer — cigar cutters, nostril scissors, walnut cuff-link boxes, wicker picnic sets, badger-bristle shaving brushes, ebony shoehorns. Yet, happily for me, they still sell the handsome (and surprisingly affordable) horn-handled salad tongs and chrome corkscrews that are my preferred gifts for a hostess or host. (G. Lorenzi at Larusmiani, via Monte Napoleone, 7)A version of this article appears in print on October 27, 2017, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.