AdvertisementSupported byBy Shivani VoraThis article is part of a series aimed at helping you navigate life’s opportunities and challenges. What else should we write about? Contact us: smarterliving@nytimes.com.Note: We received a lot of feedback on this article — not all of it positive. Here is a collection of reader reactions and alternative tips. You’re a young woman with no qualms about traveling abroad on your own. Before you hit your bucket-list destinations, however, there are some factors to keep in mind when it comes to your personal safety and cultural mores around the world. Here, experts share their top tips for young women traveling alone.1. Some Destinations Are Better Suited Than Others While most places in the world are safe for solo female travelers, including parts of the Middle East like Oman and Qatar, they are more likely to feel welcome in certain destinations, according to Karen Schragle, a travel adviser and the president of Wayland Travel, who frequently travels by herself and also creates itineraries for other such women. These destinations include New Zealand, Australia, Vietnam, Singapore, Iceland, Japan, Canada and anywhere in the United States. “Culturally, these countries don’t frown upon women who are on their own, and often, the locals there even go out of their way to offer us their help,” she said.(Related: The best tricks to save on airfare)2. Dress Like a Local Ms. Schragle said that women should stick to clothing similar to what local women wear. “You’ll feel more confident navigating your way around and also avoid uncomfortable stares,” she said. Err on the side of modesty — in some countries, for example, women rarely wear shorts. A safe choice, even in places where ethnic clothing is the norm, is a long skirt, ankle boots, long sleeves and a jean jacket. If you are planning to visit holy sites or certain areas of the Middle East, it’s smart to have a head scarf or shawl handy. And avoid flashy jewelry, even of the costume variety, said Greg Boles, an associate managing director at Kroll Security Risk Management and travel safety specialist. “Thieves don’t know the difference between what’s real and fake, and you’re basically saying, ‘Come rob me,’” he said. “Play it safe by blending in with the crowds.”3. Plan Airport Transportation Don’t take a local taxi from the airport to your hotel. “It’s best to have transportation booked in advance from a trustworthy car service company because in some areas of the world, such as Mexico, it’s not uncommon for kidnappers to pose as drivers and pick up unsuspecting women at the airport,” Mr. Boles said. Find a reputable company through your hotel concierge, an on-the-ground tour operator or your travel adviser back home.4. Have an Itinerary (and Share It) Yes, the pleasure of a vacation is having unstructured time to explore, but both Mr. Boles and Ms. Schragle advised having a half-day of activity planned for each day of your trip and emailing a copy of this itinerary to a relative or friend. When you’re unfamiliar with a city and have too much free time, you risk wandering into areas where you shouldn’t go, and having an agenda lets others keep a tab on where you are. A travel adviser who specializes in your destination can help create your itinerary, and many don’t charge a fee for their service. Find one on Virtuoso.com, a global luxury travel network, or AmexTravel.com, a global travel network with 9,000 agents, or by emailing Signature Travel Network, a consortium of travel agents, at info@signaturetravelnetwork.com.5. Splurge on Your Hotel It may be tempting to save cash by booking a no-frills hotel or hostel, but when you’re traveling alone, Ms. Schragle recommends higher-end accommodations, which are more likely to have an in-the-know staff. “Your hotel staff will be able to give you tips on where to go for affordable shopping, the restaurants to dine in if you’re eating alone and be generally helpful with anything you need,” she said.6. Be on Guard at Nightclubs and Bars Of course it’s fun to get a taste of the local night life, but never let a stranger buy you a drink, said Mr. Boles, and watch the bartender vigilantly while he’s making your cocktail or pouring you that glass of wine. “Someone can easily slip drugs into your drink that leave you disoriented or unconscious, which makes you more vulnerable to sexual assault, and many times bartenders are the culprits or act in conjunction with the perpetrator,” he said. Also, since you’re probably leaving the venue late at night, book transportation back to your hotel through the property’s concierge.Want more? You might also like:• How to eat on a budget while traveling• How to pack your suitcase like a pro• 10 free (or cheap) travel apps worth downloadingAdvertisement