
Bites By                     
CHARU SURI

JULY 29, 2016
Among the spate of Montreal restaurants that opened late last year is Candide, in the Sud-Ouest neighborhood on a quiet street called Rue Saint Martin that makes you feel as if you have suddenly stepped into the countryside with its surrounding copse of black pine trees.Set in the former rectory of St. Joseph’s Church, built in 1861, the restaurant is the vision of John Winter Russell, 29, who had been the head chef at Van Horne. He said the last line of Voltaire’s “Candide” resonated with him: “but let us cultivate our garden.” So he spent two years with his business partner, Danielle Bitton, creating a prix fixe restaurant (uncommon in Montreal) where diners would be inspired by the bounty of the garden — and named it after the book.“The idea was to create a space that is warm and inviting, a little bit like home,” Mr. Russell said. “Hopefully people have a new outlook on plants when they leave.”Dishes are smaller versions of harvest-style feasts, peppered with a few unexpected ingredients, as if the chef composed them as he wandered through a field, picking up an herb here, a root vegetable there. There are a few roles for meat, but those feel more like cameos; vegetarians will feel at home.Every Saturday, get travel tips, destination coverage, photos from all over the world and more.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.At a recent spring dinner in the 43-seat, communal-style restaurant, my friend and I savored a tasting menu that started with beautiful dry-roasted carrots, served on top of smoked yogurt sprinkled with fresh tarragon. A slab of venison accompanied by rye grain cooked with wild fennel was artful. Succulent roasted sunchokes with black radishes sidling next to boletus did not feel like a forced marriage.AdvertisementA dessert of a dollop of cultured buttermilk cheese came with lettuce and camelina flowers. While the lettuce was a bit of a head scratcher, the dish successfully fused taste, texture and temperature.AdvertisementUnder the capable guidance of Emily Campeau, the sommelier, the wine list has grown to some 100 bottles, running the global gamut from rosés to rieslings.Despite the open-style kitchen and an attentive kitchen staff, dining at Candide is a quiet, almost spiritual affair. The furniture is made from wood recycled from mezzanine benches; table decorations are simple pine branches or local flowers.Many patrons are likely to forget, if only for an hour or two, that they are in a humming city.Candide, 551, rue Saint Martin; 514-447-2717; restaurantcandide.com. A prix fixe dinner for two is 90 Canadian dollars (about $69) and a tasting menu with wine pairings is 170 Canadian dollars.A version of this article appears in print on July 31, 2016, on Page TR3 of the New York edition with the headline: A Garden Downtown.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »