

      By JUSTIN BERGMAN

JULY 15, 2016

Thanks to the Korean pop culture wave, the once underrated South Korean capital, with its new museums, plazas and restaurants, is reveling in a tourism boom.
Related Article
Seoul was once one of Asia’s most underrated cities, but thanks to the Korean pop culture wave that has swept the fashion and entertainment industries from Beijing to Bangkok in recent years, the South Korean capital is currently reveling in a tourism boom. Visitor arrivals to the country are up — way up — nearly doubling from 6.9 million people in 2008 to 13.2 million last year. And every year brings exciting developments like the new Seoul branch of the National Museum of Modern and Contemporary Art, which opened in late 2013, and the Zaha Hadid-designed Dongdaemun Design Plaza, which opened in 2014 and last year hosted the premiere of the Affordable Art Fair Seoul. Throw in the coming of the Winter Olympics to nearby Pyeongchang in two years, and the time has never been better to catch the Seoul wave. (Note: Because addresses are sometimes difficult to find, a phone rental can be a huge help when navigating the city’s streets. The LG Uplus counter at Incheon International Airport rents smartphones.)
Explore street view, find things to do in Seoul and sign in to your Google account to save your map.
Priced out of gentrifying districts elsewhere, the city’s creative and coffee-loving crowd has migrated in recent years to a forlorn industrial wedge next to the Han River that is now drawing comparisons to Brooklyn in the local media. Amid the car-repair shops and shoemakers in the Seongsu-dong neighborhood are places like Zagmachi, a multipurpose space in a former printing factory that functions aspart-cafe, part-industrial lighting showroom and hosts exhibitions of Korean artists and pop-up design stores. For shopping, head to the year-old Common Ground complex, built from 200 shipping containers, which has Korean fashion brands like Jbans (dapper clothes for men and kids) and the Studio K (women’s designs in knits and denim). Naturally, there are food trucks, like the Kimchi Bus, serving beer and Korean-inspired tacos. Across town, trendy Hongdae is another playground for millennials. Among the bright lights and fast-fashion clothing stores is an atmospheric dinner spot —Namul Meongneun Gom — set in a 90-year-old restored hanok, or traditional Korean home. The name translates as “Bear Who Eats Greens,” the nickname of the owner’s elderly mother, who cooks nightly in the kitchen and makes kimchi from scratch — a rarity in Seoul where much kimchi is imported from China. The menu runs the gamut of Korean staples, from bibimbap made with locally sourced vegetables (8,800 won, or $7.70) to hwangtae haejangguk (8,800 won), a dried pollock soup that’s said to cure hangovers. While the place looks traditional, it isn’t stodgy — the Weeknd is on the stereo, and the crowd favors designer glasses and baseball caps. With a nearly 20-year run in Seoul, and touring shows around the world, the drum-pounding, food-throwing Korean theater show Nanta has a proven longevity that many K-Pop bands can only dream of. And the show is only getting bigger. Last October, a new Nanta theater opened in Hongdae — the third in Seoul. The show hasn’t lost its manic energy — the actors, chefs tasked with preparing a wedding feast, put on an entertaining, nonverbal performance that involves knife drumming on chopping boards, broom battles, plate tossing and cabbage shredding. One word of warning: Don’t sit on the aisle unless you want to be part of the show. Tickets from 40,000 won. In addition to embassies in the diplomatic enclave, Hannam-dong, there’s plenty of art and music. A short walk from the Leeum, Samsung Museum of Art is a new space devoted entirely to music, Stradeum (admission, 10,000 won). Designed in collaboration with the Japanese acoustic designer Sam Toyoshima and fitted out with Astell&Kern equipment, the space, which opened last year, has music lounges set up like theaters for listening to curated playlists, as well as a studio for performances and a rooftop cafe. Also in late 2015, Seoul’s Daelim Museum opened a new branch called the D Museum (8,000 won), whose first show featured spectacular light art by nine foreign artists. Nearby is a sister gallery, the D Project Space (free), exhibiting emerging Korean artists in a former pool hall. Hannam-dong is also a pleasant place to stroll and shop, particularly for Korean designers in achingly curated spaces. Head to Mo Jain Song for Jain Song’s casual women’s fashions, Joseph Bentley gardening tools and a plant-filled rooftop cafe; and the Series; Corner multibrand shop for men’s button-downs and skinny ties, eclectic upcycled fashions (imagine denim vests paired with pleated skirts) and wooden homewares. Maybell Bakery offers turmeric bread and straight-out-of-Monocle minimalist décor. Takeout Drawing, an art-filled cafe with floppy-haired folk singers, has been at the center of a legal battle with the Korean pop singer PSY over its lease. The cafe will close in August, but the owners have a second branch in nearby Itaewon-dong. There’s so much binge-worthy street food in Seoul, the only problem is finding enough time — and stomach space — to try it all. Century-old Gwangjang Market, one of the oldest markets in the city, solves the first problem by providing space for scores of vendors, each preparing a different delicacy and cajoling passers-by in a mélange of Korean, English and Chinese. Among the dishes on offer are duk mandu guk, a heavenly soup of rice cakes and kimchi-tofu or beef dumplings; kimbap, rice rolled in seaweed with pickled radish and carrots; bindaetteok, a mung bean pancake fried in oil until golden brown; and for the nonsqueamish, live octopus eaten straight from the tank, still squirming. Pace yourself — or pause for a nip of soju — to make it through the roving feast. Across from the market’s south gate is one of Seoul’s most surprising green spaces, the Cheonggyecheon Stream. The ribbon of water, which flows for miles through central Seoul, dates to the start of the Joseon dynasty more than 600 years ago, but became a polluted afterthought as the city grew around it and was covered by an elevated highway. In the mid-2000s, the city revitalized the stream and turned it into an urban park, which now teems with locals — office workers on lunch breaks, strolling couples and retirees taking pictures of tiny fish with zoom lenses. Set below street level, the stream is so quiet you can hear birds chirping in the trees. Stay in serenity mode with a dinner at Baru Gongyang, a temple food restaurant across from Jogyesa Temple and run by the Jogye Order of Korean Buddhism. After a recommended pre-meal chant (the English words are printed on the wall), the dishes in the set menu (from 30,000 won) arrive one by one to the door of your private room, each showcasing local, seasonal vegetables, such as mushrooms fried in a tangy gochujang sauce and sweet potato jelly topped with black-sesame cabbage and watermelon radish. It’s as artfully presented as it is nourishing for the soul.A few years ago, fashionistas wouldn’t have touched makgeolli, an unfiltered rice wine that has a long history but until recently had been derided as cheap hooch. Now, thanks to specialty breweries and trendsetting bars, the cloudy, slightly fizzy drink is experiencing a rebirth and showing up on menus alongside cocktails and craft beers. At Wolhyang, one of the pioneers in the makgeolli movement, boisterous office workers in suits and designer scarves down bottles of white- and brown-rice makgeolli (8,000-10,000 won) while nibbling on spicy octopus and pancakes made from wild greens. The food menu is in Korean, but the friendly English-speaking staff at the new Gwanghwamun branch is quick with recommendations. Not only does a visit to Changdeokgung Palace afford a glimpse of how Korean royalty once lived, you can also see where the country’s kings went to unwind —namely, to write poetry and host drinking parties — in the Secret Garden, a more than 70-acre green space laid out when the palace was built in the 15th century. It’s not a garden in the traditional sense; rather, strolling through the grounds feels like being in the middle of the wilderness, with the occasional pavilion and lotus pond set beneath maple, ginkgo and pine trees for quiet contemplation. So concerned are palace officials about preserving the garden’s pristine natural state, visitors can enter only as part of a 90-minute tour (8,000 won, with admission to the palace) under the close watch of eagle-eyed English-speaking guides. Ask many older Seoulites where they go for naengmyeon, a North Korean chilled buckwheat noodle soup, and they’ll most likely say Woo Lae Oak. Founded by a Pyongyang restaurateur who moved his family south of the border after World War II, the place became so popular over the years that the owners expanded to the United States. Little has changed, food-wise, at the main Seoul branch, where the buckwheat noodles in the naengmyeon (12,000 won) are made to order, and topped with sliced beef, pears, cucumber and cabbage in a rich, beef-based broth. For a little warmth with the soup, order a side of bulgogi (30,000 won), the restaurant’s other specialty.Opened in late 2014, the 319-room Glad Hotel (17-5 Yeouido-dong, Yeongdeungpo-gu; glad-hotels.com) may be in the Yeouido financial center, but this is no staid business hotel. Built by designer Suyong Joh’s Seoul-based firm, the hotel has a textural brick façade reminiscent of a traditional Korean home, park-like benches in the halls and quotes by Eleanor Roosevelt above the beds. Doubles from 150,000 won.Also relatively new, the 30-room Amass Hotel (11 Yulgok-ro 10-gil, Jongno-gu; amasshotel.com) boasts an open-air rooftop bar with glowing LED seating and views of Changdeokgung Palace across the street. The rooms have a spare, black-and-white theme, and in the basement is a gallery showing local artists’ works. Doubles from 85,000 won.한국어로 읽기 | Read in KoreanFlight and Hotel information provided by Google.Prices represent a snapshot of low fares and rates for weekend trips.The 36 Hours column on July 17, about Seoul, referred incorrectly to the days of operation of the restaurant, Baru Gongyang. It is closed on Sundays.Advertisement