
In Transit By                     
CHARU SURI

FEB. 2, 2016
Hostels are getting into history.Hostel Fish in Denver opened in June in a 120-year-old building that once was an adult bookstore and is now on the National Historic Register (rates from $45 a night for 80 rooms outfitted by local designers).Chad Fish, an owner, said that because the social component of a hostel experience is important, the property also offers ski trips to the nearby Rocky Mountains, pub crawls and other concierge-style services.The Society Hotel, a hostel-hotel hybrid, opened in early November in the Old Town/Chinatown neighborhood of Portland, Ore. The unreinforced 135-year-old Victorian-era brick building was renovated with a cast-iron facade into a four-story property; rates start from $35 a night.Some brands are consciously choosing historic buildings for character and value. In September, Safestay opened a hostel in Holland Park, London, steps away from Hyde Park. Located in Cope Castle, which dates to 1605, the building has entertained guests like the Prince of Wales, King James I and King William III (rates from $23 a night).AdvertisementIn Brazil, the house of the musician Antônio Carlos Jobim was converted to the Bonita Ipanema Pousada & Hostel, steps from Ipanema beach (rates from $13 a night).The Youth Hostels Association, a charity in England and Wales with a network of over 160 hostels, has seen a growing interest in its portfolio of historic properties, which includes a 600-year-old Dominican friary and castles like St. Briavels in Gloucestershire, built in 1205. A representative said that occupancy levels have been increasing every year. In 2013, the association converted a 13th-century farmhouse near Brighton into a 68-bed youth hostel (rates start at approximately $25 a night).AdvertisementKash Battacharya, the author of an e-book guide to luxury European hostels, said that he has noticed a new type of hostel that includes fine dining and the amenities of an upscale hotel. “The heritage hostel has become a destination in itself and offers guests a unique experience without the steep price tag,” he said in an email.A version of this article appears in print on February 7, 2016, on Page TR3 of the New York edition with the headline: Trending; Hostels Furnished With History.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »