AdvertisementSupported byWhere to Go NowBy Justin SablichDavid Bowie was a New Yorker for over 20 years. In Bowie years, that is practically an eternity considering the multitude of lives he lived — musically, geographically and otherwise — since he set out to become a star in the late 1960s.“I can’t imagine living anywhere else,” said Mr. Bowie, who was born in Brixton in South London and had stints in Berlin; Lausanne, Switzerland; and several other cities, “I’ve lived in New York longer than I’ve lived anywhere else. It’s amazing. I am a New Yorker,” he said in a 2003 interview.He somehow managed to settle into a domesticated life that resembled that of many others living in and around SoHo (though most do it without the supermodel wife and penthouse apartment): browsing the books at McNally Jackson and shopping for groceries at Dean & DeLuca, among other low-key adventures that he undertook in what the playwright John Guare called “this cloak of invisibility.”Soon after news spread of Mr. Bowie’s death on Jan. 10, two days after his 69th birthday and the release of his album “Blackstar,” fans started a makeshift memorial outside the SoHo apartment where he had lived with his wife, Iman, since 1999, joined the following year by their daughter, Lexi. Mr. Bowie and Iman purchased their first city home in 1992, a ninth-floor apartment at the Essex House Hotel on Central Park South, which they sold in 2002.“Just as each and every one of us found something unique in David’s music, we welcome everyone’s celebration of his life as they see fit,” Mr. Bowie’s family wrote in a statement.Should you be looking for a way to honor the musician in the city he called home, there is no shortage of activities to partake in, many of which Mr. Bowie enjoyed doing himself.From his apartment building on 285 Lafayette Street, Mr. Bowie was in walking distance of many of his favorite neighborhood haunts. Topping his list, according to The Independent, was Washington Square Park.He wrote of the park in a 2003 essay for New York magazine: “It’s the emotional history of New York in a quick walk.”Walking in general (the earlier in the day the better) was a preferred way for Mr. Bowie to experience city life.“The signature of the city changes shape and is fleshed out as more and more people commit to the street,” Mr. Bowie wrote. “A magical transfer of power from the architectural to the human.”The park is about a 10-minute walk from the apartment on Lafayette, where fans left notes, photos and flowers outside the building after hearing of his death, and where the musician Glen Hansard paid tribute recently with an acoustic performance of the Bowie classic “Ashes to Ashes.”The Strand (828 Broadway) was another one of Mr. Bowie’s destinations of choice. He wrote in 2003: “It’s impossible to find the book you want, but you always find the book you didn’t know you wanted.”He also frequented McNally Jackson Books (52 Prince Street). After his death, the book store tweeted:Consider one of the musician’s many biographies, or you could try one of his favorite books, like “A Clockwork Orange” by Anthony Burgess, “The Brief Wondrous Life Of Oscar Wao” by Junot Díaz, or one of the 98 others that were posted on his website in October 2013. Mr. Bowie first performed in the city in 1972, and made his Carnegie Hall debut later that year. Countless notable New York performances followed, including a memorable appearance at the Concert for New York at Madison Square Garden after the Sept. 11 attack.Before Mr. Bowie’s death, a concert at Carnegie Hall (881 Seventh Avenue) featuring the Roots, Perry Farrell and others was being planned to honor his career on March 31. It has since turned into a two-night tribute: An additional night of performances is scheduled at Radio City Music Hall for April 1 featuring Cat Power, Cyndi Lauper and others.Tickets for both nights are pricey on the secondary market, so consider doing what Mr. Bowie was known to do and stop by the Bitter End (147 Bleecker Street), the city’s oldest rock club, where live music happens just about every night.Numerous tributes at city music venues have sprouted up since Mr. Bowie’s death, and are likely to continue in the coming months.There will be a three-night performance by the Loser’s Lounge, for example, a long-running revue that pays tribute to pop stars and cult artists and is led by the former Psychedelic Furs keyboardist Joe McGinty, at Joe’s Pub (425 Lafayette Street) from Feb. 18 to 20. Tickets are $25.Mr. Bowie enjoyed shopping for rare vinyl at Bleecker Bob’s before it closed in 2013 after 45 years, only to be turned into a frozen yogurt shop. But there are plenty of fine vinyl purveyors still operating in and around Greenwich Village, including Bleecker Street Records (188 West Fourth Street). If you’re stopping there for vinyl on your Bowie crawl, do not expect much by the man himself, at least not for a while.Nino Perez of Bleecker Street Records said the store quickly sold out of most titles in the days after his death and it did not expect to have more copies of “Blackstar” until the end of February, because of the high demand.It’s a similar story at Generation Records (210 Thompson Street). “I sold out of his new album right away,” Jason Primavera said, referring to the vinyl edition, though he added that customers were asking for it even before he died, as its positive reviews piled up.Before stocks are replenished, consider taking home one of Mr. Bowie’s contemporaries, like Iggy Pop or Lou Reed, both of whom he met and befriended during a 1971 visit to Manhattan.Mr. Reed and the Velvet Underground’s debut album was one of Mr. Bowie’s first exposures to New York music, in the form of a gift from his manager, Ken Pitt, in 1966.“Everything I both felt and didn’t know about rock music was opened to me,” Mr. Bowie wrote in 2003.  “I was hearing a degree of cool that I had no idea was humanly sustainable.”The theater had long been part of Mr. Bowie’s creative world, dating back to his prestardom days working with Lindsay Kemp at the London Dance Center.In 1980 he earned positive reviews for his performance in “The Elephant Man” at the Booth Theater (222 West 45th Street).“Yes, more young people in designer jeans and leather now show up at the Booth Theater than before, and yes, they probably show up because Mr. Bowie is a celebrated rock star,” John Corry wrote in The Times in 1980. “Fortunately, he is a good deal more than that, and as John Merrick, the Elephant Man, he is splendid.”More recently, Mr. Bowie co-wrote “Lazarus,” a sequel to the 1976 feature film “The Man Who Fell to Earth,” in which Mr. Bowie, in his first major film role, portrayed Thomas Jerome Newton. The show at the New York Theater Workshop (79 East Fourth Street) closed Jan. 20.But there are other options. The Booth Theater has “Hughie,” starring Forest Whitaker, opening on Feb. 8. You could also see the musical comedy “She Loves Me” at Studio 54 (254 West 54th Street), featuring Laura Benanti, when previews begin on Feb. 19. Mr. Bowie may have spent a night or two there when it was a famed disco.Mr. Bowie relished his ability to blend in and not be bothered by his fans and fellow New Yorkers during his years in the city.“It’s so easy to be a person here, a regular guy,” he told The Miami Herald in 2003. “The family and I have no problem going out and eating.” Some of his usual spots included Caffè Reggio (119 Macdougal Street) for coffee or breakfast and Olive’s (120 Prince Street), where a chicken sandwich with watercress and tomatoes was a favorite of his. At Bottega Falai (267 Lafayette Street), an Italian cafe and grocery that Mr. Bowie used to frequent, he would regularly order the prosciutto di Parma sandwich, a cappuccino and a bomboloni, the restaurant’s owner, Danilo Durante, said.The musician was also known to shop for weekly groceries at the nearby Dean & DeLuca (560 Broadway).Mr. Bowie was a well-known lover of art, between collecting the classics and applying his own skills to paint and brush. “Art was, seriously, the only thing I’d ever wanted to own,” he told Michael Kimmelman of The Times in 1998. “It has always been for me a stable nourishment. I use it. It can change the way that I feel in the mornings.”To see some of Mr. Bowie’s favorite painters, such as Picasso, Rubens and Tintoretto, your best bet is most likely the Metropolitan Museum of Art (1000 Fifth Avenue).Ten years had passed between 2003’s “Reality” and 2013’s “The Next Day,” leaving some to speculate that Mr. Bowie had either retired or become a recluse.Neither was really true, as he still made his rounds around SoHo and was secretly working on “The Next Day,” but he seemed to enjoy his alone time more in his later years.“David is even more of a homebody than I am. At least I go to parties once in awhile,” Iman told The Guardian in 2014, adding that he liked his own company. “I also think there is nothing that he hasn’t seen,” she said.Therefore, if you want to honor Mr. Bowie with a quiet night at home, you have every right, and several of his movies and concert films are available on streaming services.An entire generation of ’80s kids were introduced to Mr. Bowie via Jareth the Goblin King in Jim Henson’s “Labyrinth” (1986), available to rent on Amazon Video, iTunes and Vudu.Though “Lazarus” has closed, you can still see the prequel, Nicolas Roeg’s “The Man Who Fell to Earth” (1976), in which Mr. Bowie “gives an extraordinary performance,” according to Richard Eder’s review in The Times. It is currently available on Vudu and Amazon Video.Other Bowie-related titles available to stream include “The Hunger” (1983), “The Last Temptation of Christ” (1988) and “The Prestige” (2006).The documentary “David Bowie: Five Years” (2013) can also be viewed on Hulu and Amazon Video via a Showtime add-on subscription.Follow Justin Sablich on Twitter: @JustinSablichAdvertisement