

      By CHANEY KWAK

JUNE 15, 2017

This quintessential Southern city with a complex past is ready to surprise you.
Related Article
Founded in 1871 at the junction of railroad lines, Alabama’s largest city is used to moving forward. Part stone-ground grits and part steely grit, Birmingham flourished so quickly that it earned the name “Magic City” during the heyday of its iron trade. But this melting pot has also been a pressure cooker of racial tensions, overshadowed by a violent history of segregation and brutality against African-Americans. Today, as you retrace the steps of demonstrators who changed the course of American history on the Civil Rights Heritage Trail, you’ll find a city experiencing an electrifying revival. Creative entrepreneurs are returning home, airy lofts breathe new life into downtown and Southern cooking gets global makeovers. Home of the nation’s first bike-share program that incorporates electric pedal-assisted bikes, Birmingham is ready to surprise you.
Explore the map and find things to do in Birmingham.
A cluster of eclectic merchants enlivens Forest Park, a stately neighborhood of early-20th-century homes. The vibrant gift shop Naked Art champions local artisans by stocking objects like hand-thrown pottery and delicate watercolors of local landmarks. The gallery also features prints by the owner, Véronique Vanblaere, who was so enchanted by the city during her high school exchange year that she relocated from Belgium in 1996. On the third Friday of each month, the shop teams up with nearby businesses like the consignment store Zoe’s in Forest Park and the bistro Little Savannah for the offbeat Tour de Loo, which invites guests to visit bathrooms transformed by artists into installations that often stay up for a month.Avondale, which used to be an unremarkable district of automotive parts shops and service stations, is now a walkable enclave chockablock with well-regarded restaurants concentrated around 41st Street. Returning home after stints at Per Se and Momofuku Ssäm Bar, John Hall runs the wood-fired pizzeria Post Office Pies. For a more local flavor, try the excellent fried chicken that is brined in sweet tea and cooked to a succulent and crunchy perfection ($7.69) at Saw’s Soul Kitchen.By day Saturn is a mellow hangout of freelancers and graduate students typing away to a soundtrack that swings from Buddy Holly to the Pixies. In the evening, its vintage arcade games and space-age mod décor attract revelers who congregate for a varied roster of performances. On a given night you may catch a concert by an indie rock band, a vaudeville show by a local burlesque troupe or a raucous game of bingo led by a foul-mouthed host commandeering a restored 1960s board.Over a hundred farm stands, food stalls and craft sellers sprout each Saturday morning from April to December at the popular Market at Pepper Place in the parking lot of a handsome brick complex that used to house a Dr Pepper factory. Graze for blackberries, buttery poundcake (made with a recipe by a matriarch named Big Mama) and sheep’s milk dulce de leche. For a sit-down meal, head to OvenBird, whose cast iron hearth sends out Spanish-meets-Southern dishes like fried chicken with chorizo ($13) and a pork belly B.L.T. with piparra chile ($15).Check out a flashy green Zyp bicycle from a bike-share kiosk next to Pepper Place ($6 for unlimited rides of up to 45 minutes each within a 24-hour period). Then explore the expansive grounds of Sloss Furnaces, which manufactured pig iron from 1882 for nearly a century. Now a National Historic Landmark building with a ruddy patina, this interpretive museum is not only a site for concerts and metal forging classes, but also a symbol of the city’s industrial foundation and green evolution.A pleasant 1.5-mile ride, which includes zipping down an abandoned railroad reborn in 2016 as the Rotary Trail, will lead you to Railroad Park. This 19-acre green lung, molded largely with materials reclaimed from the site where warehouses once occupied the heart of the city, has become a communal garden with ponds, streams, hills and a skate park. Dock your bike and join the joggers and stroller-pushers on the three-quarter-mile loop path to admire the skyline.The intimate (and free) Negro Southern League Museum views baseball through a distinctively local lens. As you browse the memorabilia, interactive displays and uniforms of players like the pitcher Satchel Paige, you’ll learn not only about how the sport has evolved, but also about how the United States changed in the 20th century, causing the league to rise and fall.Once deserted after business hours, downtown has made a dazzling comeback in the last decade, with lofts occupying historic buildings along First and Second Avenues North. Catering to the young professionals who flock here, the Pizitz Food Hall opened in February with globally minded dining spots like Eli’s Jerusalem Grill, which pairs a shawarma pocket ($7.79) with sweet tea, and Lichita’s, which scoops out Mexican-style (eggless) ice cream made with local fruits, all centered on a bar serving milkshakes and cocktails. Drop by Yellowhammer Creative, brimming with covetable dish towels, retro-style posters and T-shirts reading “It’s nice to have you in Birmingham.”Designated a national monument by President Barack Obama during his last days in office, the Birmingham Civil Rights District consists of sites like the A. G. Gaston Motel, where the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. met with activists, and the 16th Street Baptist Church, where a 1963 bombing killed four girls and injured many other congregants. Today the Romanesque church remains a thriving place of worship that testifies to the community’s resilience. Tour the adjacent Birmingham Civil Rights Institute ($15), which chronicles African-Americans’ continuing struggles through photographs, multimedia and objects like the bars of the cell where Dr. King wrote the “Letter From Birmingham Jail.” At the eerily quiet Kelly Ingram Park across the street are a number of sculptures, including a police dog lunging at a boy and three pastors kneeling in prayer.Spend your Saturday evening in Five Points South, where the idyllic neighborhood of Highland Park collides with the University of Alabama at Birmingham. The dynamic neighborhood is home to convivial gastro pubs as well as James Beard winners like Frank Stitt, who runs two French-accented restaurants, Highlands Bar & Grill and Chez Fonfon, side by side, and Chris and Idie Hastings, whose Hot and Hot Fish Club serves plates like rabbit roulade with crawfish and rice grits ($36). Afterward, sip a dessertlike martini at the intimate Blue Monkey Lounge or rock out with the town’s good-hearted revelers to live music at Marty’s PM, which stays open until 6 a.m.Red Mountain, a ridge named for its rust-colored hematite ores, was once the force behind Birmingham’s prosperity. Until the 1,500-acre grounds opened as the nonprofit Red Mountain Park in 2011, the ridge lay untouched after mining ceased in 1962. Today you can explore its 15-mile trail system that threads together panoramic views, tree houses and former mines. To enrich your hike, download the free TravelStoryGPS app to listen to former miners, park rangers and other interviewees share stories about life in Alabama’s Appalachia region. When you reach the trail’s northeastern terminus at Grace’s Gap Overlook, the Magic City’s silhouette will rise in the distance like an illusion.Get a preview of what’s to come in Birmingham with a stop in the Woodlawn neighborhood. The close-knit community is experiencing a resurgence led by businesses like the concept store Open Shop and the clothing and home accessory supplier Club Duquette popping up alongside recording studios and an old-time barbershop. Before leaving for the airport just two miles north, fortify yourself at Woodlawn Cycle Cafe with a cold brew, an oxtail empanada and a buttery brioche stuffed with bacon and Harvest Roots kimchi, made in Alabama.The 14-story Redmont Hotel completed its $20 million renovation in 2016. The oldest continuously operating hotel in Alabama, the 1925 downtown landmark offers 120 smart guest rooms in calm shades of gray, blue and white, as well as a rooftop bar with a bird’s-eye view over the city. Rooms from $129; redmontbirmingham.com.A dainty 1890s Victorian filled with porcelain and lace, Cobb Lane Bed and Breakfast has eight rooms and a breezy front porch in Five Points. Rooms from $99; cobblanebandb.com.Flight and Hotel information provided by Google.Prices represent a snapshot of low fares and rates for weekend trips.The 36 Hours column last Sunday, about Birmingham, Ala., misidentified a university there. It is the University of Alabama at Birmingham — not the University of Alabama, which is in Tuscaloosa. The article also described incorrectly an area known as Highland Park. It is a neighborhood in Birmingham, not a suburb.Advertisement