By SHIVANI VORAOCT. 4, 2017
When it comes to ride-hailing apps worldwide, Uber may be the most popular brand, but it is by no means the only one. So the 3.5 million people in London who have used Uber in the last three months will have plenty of options to choose from in the wake of the decision by London’s transportation agency not to renew its license to operate there. So, too, do the 3.5 million Uber users in New York, who don’t have to contend with losing the service altogether but may want alternatives during peak demand, when surge pricing becomes more common. Fortunately, each destination happens to have a robust network of ride-hailing apps, said Andrew MacDougall, the head of communications for Citymapper, an app that helps its users connect with local transportation in 40 cities. “New York and London have plenty of competitors to Uber,” he said.Below, a look at Uber alternatives in the two cities.The Service: KabbeeWhere It’s Available: LondonHow it Works: Kabbee connects users to more than 70 licensed minicab fleets in London, which have a range of vehicle options. Some fleets, for example, offer sustainable cabs while others specialize in luxury cars. A user requests a cab by typing in the details of the journey and instantly receives a quote of all options, along with pricing for each choice. It’s possible to book a ride up to three months ahead of time, and payment is done in one of three ways: through the app, via credit card or by cash directly to the driver. According to a company spokeswoman, the average wait time for a ride is seven minutes.The Prices: There’s never any surge pricing, and Kabbee claims that most rides are around 50 percent less expensive compared with what the same ride would cost in a London black cab.AdvertisementThe Service: GettWhere it’s Available: More than a 100 cities in Europe and the United States, including New York and London.AdvertisementHow it Works: The Gett app connects riders with several thousand of London’s black cabs, and the average wait for a ride is less than five minutes. Passengers also get two minutes of free waiting time before drivers start the meter and can pay through the app or directly to the driver in cash.The Prices: According to a company spokeswoman, the average fare in London is £15 (about $20) or less per trip. There’s no surge pricing — customers pay either the metered fare or can choose to pay a fixed fare, which is displayed on the app ahead of their ride.The Service: MytaxiWhere It’s Available: 70 cities and 10 countries in Europe; the Berlin-based company is particularly prominent in Germany, where it’s available in more than 40 cities.How it Works: Mytaxi connects passengers with registered local taxi drivers and works exclusively with licensed black cabs in London; the company has a network of more than 17,500 drivers in the city, and the average wait time for a ride is less than three minutes, according to a company spokesman. Payment is handled either directly through the app or else riders can pay their driver in cash. Mytaxi’s mission is to encourage riders to use the city’s black cabs.The Prices: Standard metered fares for London black cabs; there’s no surge pricing, but rides are a minimum of £10 on the weekends and before 10 a.m. and after 5 p.m. on weekdays.The Service: LyftWhere It’s Available: 49 U.S. states, with statewide coverage in 40.How it Works: Once users download the Lyft app and enter a prepayment method, they can request a ride by entering their pickup and drop off location. All of the cars in the company’s platform seat at least four passengers, Lyft Plus vehicles seat six, and Lyft Lux is a black car with an experienced and top rated driver. Users can also book Lyft Line, which pairs riders with overlapping routes and lowers the cost of the trip cost for all passengers. According to a company spokesman, the average New York passenger can receive a ride within minutes.The Prices: Rides in New York are based on time, distance, tolls and surcharges. The minimum fare for a classic Lyft is $7.19, and the minimum for a Lyft Lux is $13.47. During peak demand times, there is surge pricing.AdvertisementThe Service: CurbWhere It’s Available: 65 cities around the United States, but New York is the company’s biggest marketHow it Works: Curb connects riders with more than 13,000 of New York’s yellow and green taxis and works similar to other ride-hailing apps that allow users to request rides based on their location and pay through their stored payment method. It’s possible to book a cab up to 24 hours in advance or request one instantly. According to a company spokesman, the average wait time in the city for a ride is five minutes or less. For a more affordable trip, sharing a cab with another rider is also an option.The Prices: Curb charges a $1.95 service fee for each ride hailed through the app, but fares after that are standard New York taxi rates — the initial charge is $2.50, and thereafter, 50 cents per 1/5 mile or 50 cents per minute in slow traffic or when the vehicle is stopped. There’s never surge pricing.The Service: ViaWhere It’s Available: Chicago, Washington D.C. and parts of New York City (south of 125th Street in Manhattan; Williamsburg, Greenpoint and Downtown in Brooklyn; Long Island City, Queens; and to and from John F. Kennedy International Airport, La Guardia Airport and Newark Liberty International Airport.)How it Works: Via bills itself as an affordable and eco-friendly rideshare service: the app connects multiple passengers who are headed in the same direction, although it recently added the option to book private rides. To keep the rides efficient, passengers are picked up and dropped off at a corner within a block of their location or destination. Many cars on the platform seat at least six riders, and according to a company spokeswoman, the Mercedes-Benz Metris and the Chevy Suburban are two of the most popular models. The average wait time for a ride in the city is five minutes, and payment is handled through the app.The Prices: Many rides in New York are $5. Frequent riders can buy a weekly or monthly ViaPass, which offers further discounts.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »