AdvertisementSupported byBitesBy Matthew KronsbergTo eat Latin American or Caribbean food in Miami feels utterly natural, not just because South Florida is so deeply infused with those cultures, but also because the flavors and ingredients in those cuisines are a perfect fit for the region’s tropical environment.Niven Patel, a chef and Florida native, aims to add another cuisine to those, one equally suited to the state: Indian. At Ghee Indian Kitchen, which opened in Miami in May, Mr. Patel highlights his Gujarati roots while featuring the products of his farm, known as Rancho Patel, in nearby Homestead.“This is everything that I’ve always wanted to do,” he said. “This is what I grew up with, but I’ve never been able to unleash that side of the beast, you know?”Before opening Ghee, Mr. Patel spent three and a half years as chef de cuisine at Michael’s Genuine Food, in Miami’s design district. Now he has set up shop well off the tourist track in Downtown Dadeland, about 15 miles southwest of Miami Beach. One wall of the industrial-chic space is lined with jars of beans, spices, pickles and some of the 1,500 pounds of tomatoes Mr. Patel and his crew picked and processed.“I like that we can just go to the wall for inspiration,” he said. His wife, Shivani, works the floor, and his mother and mother-in-law “help with some of the very traditional Gujarati vegetable dishes.”A recent meal started with “backyard pakora”: crisp vegetable fritters shot through with onion, squash and patra (taro leaf), all grown on Mr. Patel’s farm. Though the menu often includes familiar favorites like chicken tikka masala and lamb shank biryani, it’s the fish — impeccably sourced and prepared — that’s not to be missed.Grouper collar was grilled and then braised in a stew of tomatoes, tamarind and tiny homegrown adzuki beans. Finding copious, succulent morsels in the collar’s nooks and hollows was like the culinary equivalent of discovering extra rooms hidden behind the appliances and closets of your apartment. Particularly good among the desserts is a house-made yogurt — sturdy as panna cotta, with a gentle tang that plays well against the loosely formed chai marshmallows and seasonal fruit that top it.For drinks, Mr. Patel has rounded up natural and biodynamic wines, and has also collaborated with a local brewer, J. Wakefield, on a saison-style beer called Paan Wala, made with betel leaf, lemon verbena and mango from Mr. Patel’s farm.Stepping out of the restaurant, I saw Mr. Patel’s mother-in-law and said hello. She asked about the meal, and if I had had the mango lassi. When I told her I hadn’t, she fixed her eyes on me with guilt-inducing intensity and said, “It’s made with yard mangoes” (the best kind, any Floridian with a mango tree will tell you). “You need to come back to try it.”Ghee Indian Kitchen, 8965 Southwest 72nd Place; 305-968-1850; gheemiami.com. An average meal for two, without drinks and tip, is $80.Advertisement