By SHIVANI VORAFEB. 22, 2017
The Melbourne-born actor Chris Hemsworth, 33, will tell you that there is no better place in the world than his native Australia, and he wants everyone else to know this, too: Mr. Hemsworth, who is most famous for playing the Marvel Comics superhero Thor in the 2011 eponymous movie and who is reprising the role in this fall’s “Thor: Ragnarok,” is on a mission to promote his homeland through his role as global ambassador for Tourism Australia, the country’s official tourism organization.Mr. Hemsworth is so attached to Australia that he moved back there three years ago from Los Angeles with his wife, the actress Elsa Pataky, and their three children, a daughter, India, 4, and twin boys, Sasha and Tristan, 2. Mr. Hemsworth was in New York City recently for a Tourism Australia event. Below are edited excerpts from a conversation with him.Q. Why did you decide to move back to Australia?A. I lived in L.A. for seven or eight years, but once I had kids, it got more difficult to get around with the paparazzi being there, and I wanted a more laid-back life for my family. Although I grew up mostly in Melbourne, we live in Byron Bay, a quiet town on the country’s east coast, which is one of my favorite spots on the planet. The beach is beautiful, and we wake up every day to views of the ocean in front of us, but there’s also a big farming community with lots of farmland and tropical rain forest. My wife and I went on a holiday there and fell in love with the area and chose to make it our home. Now, we have a chilled-out existence.Has Melbourne changed since you lived there as a child?I distinctly remember the city’s strong multicultural scene that I experienced as a kid, and that has only grown today. There’s such a diverse mixture of communities including Greek, Lebanese and Vietnamese, which means that the ethnic food is fantastic. The arts there are also rich.AdvertisementAre there any specific spots in Melbourne that visitors should hit?Definitely Flinders Lane, a street with lots of bars and restaurants that are great to hang out in. Bar hopping there is fun. And a meal at Matcha Mylkbar is a must. The restaurant serves only plant-based food and has one of the most inventive menus I have ever seen. I am not a vegan, but if I were, this is where I would go to eat.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.How is Sydney different from Melbourne? It’s very similar when it comes to the incredible diversity and culture, but the weather is warmer. It’s good for beach bums, but then again, much of Australia is.AdvertisementCan you suggest the ideal itinerary for a first-time visitor to Australia?If you’re coming from America, the journey to Australia is long, and you’ll need a few weeks. I recommend doing a big circle around the country. Start in Melbourne, go to Sydney and then drive to Byron Bay and other coastal towns. You’ll see a thick, rugged coastline and a tropical atmosphere. Then, go up to the Northern Territory, where I also lived as a child, for another world cultural experience. There are Aboriginal communities there, and you can see traditional dance and ceremonies and also see wildlife like buffalo and crocodiles. Then, go to the west, where you have great surfing and wineries.I think the hardest part of a trip to Australia is leaving. Besides the sights, the people are also a draw. They are so welcoming.If travelers to Australia bought one souvenir, what should it be?Tim Tams. They are incredibly wonderful chocolate biscuits.A version of this article appears in print on February 26, 2017, on Page TR2 of the New York edition with the headline: Chris Hemsworth on Australia and Tourism.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.