AdvertisementSupported byFORAGINGBy Shivani VoraWith its grand thoroughfares and stately 19th-century buildings, Stockholm’s Ostermalm neighborhood, in the eastern part of the city about a 10-minute walk from the city center, is elegant and refined. It’s also an upscale residential area that’s dotted with unique specialty stores, many of which have been around for several decades or more. Stockholmers come here when they’re on the hunt for an eye-catching item, be it an antique, a rare book or a piece of vintage furniture.Bibliophiles will be at home at this bookshop, which, with an inventory of 75,000 secondhand and rare tomes, is considered among the largest in the Nordic world. Around 40 percent of the
diverse reads, including fiction and subjects like art and photography, are in English, and what’s for sale is always a surprise. On a recent visit, a first edition of “A Clockwork Orange” by Anthony Burgess was a pick that the knowledgeable staff was most excited about. Birger Jarlsgatan 32, ronnells.se, 46-8-5450-1560When Stockholm residents are on the hunt for chic home goods such as napkins, glasses, pillows and furniture, they head to this spacious bi-level store on the waterfront. A local women named Estrid Ericson founded the company in 1924 and recruited the Austrian-born
designer and architect Josef Frank to oversee the creative side. Today, a team of freelance designers maintain his legacy.Strandvagen 5, 46-8-670-1600, svenskttenn.seMore than a century old, the family-owned Sibyllans is a required stop for tea and coffee drinkers. The more than 100 kinds of teas, including varieties of Ceylon from Sri Lanka, are
sourced from all over the world, as are the coffee beans, which are roasted in-house (Monsoon Malabar from India is among the most popular). There’s also a selection of teacups and pots.
Sibyllegatan 35, sibyllans.se, 46-8-662-0663Housed on the border of Ostermalm in late 19th-century stables, this concept store, cafe and exhibition space is a hubbub of activity thanks to its unique setting and the fun trinkets for sale, such as locally made jams, mini cactus plants, blankets and pottery. The contemporary wall art, also for sale, is by both Swedish and international artists and changes every few months, and the cafe serves tasty breakfast and lunch fare.Snickarbacken 7, snickarbacken7.se, 46-8-667-1022
Design fans are in for a treat: This sprawling, light-filled store has over more than three decades become an institution for vintage furniture and accessories from Scandinavian
designers. Most of the selections date from between 1910 and 1970, and can vary from vases and light fixtures to couches; a leather lounge chair from the 1950s and a beehive-shaped white ceiling lamp from the same period were among recent Instagram-worthy choices. Sibyllegatan 53, jacksons.se, 46-8-665-3350Advertisement