
                Travel Tips            By                     
SARAH AMANDOLARE

JULY 11, 2017
Travelers today face a wealth of good options when it comes to drinking wine and beer. “I think today you can be surprised most everywhere,” said Pascaline Lepeltier, the beverage director at the restaurant Rouge Tomate in New York City.But the variety can be overwhelming, especially when exploring a new place.Here, beverage industry experts offer their advice on how to find interesting selections wherever you go.TALK TO RETAILERS Before you travel, knowledgeable retailers can put you in touch with distributors that bring in wines relevant to your tastes and destination. Most distributors are open to emails from travelers and may respond with a list of restaurants, bars and wineries to visit at your destination, or may even introduce you to winemakers, said Brianne Day, a winemaker at Day Wines in Dundee, Ore.Bottle shops can also be a valuable resource at your destination. On her first trip to Paris, Ms. Day visited a wine shop around the corner from her hotel and left with a list of names and emails of producers throughout the country. “Keep talking to people until you get those answers about unusual or specific or small producers,” she said.AdvertisementUSE APPS AND INSTAGRAM Apps make the hunt for good beer significantly easier, said Josh Van Horn, an owner of Gold Star Beer Counter in Brooklyn. Beer Menus lets bars post their selections in real time, and sends alerts that keep travelers in the loop. Untappd also provides updated bar menus, along with user ratings of beers. Ms. Lepeltier recommends Raisin, an app that lists and maps natural winemakers as well as restaurants, wine shops and bars around the world that stock at least 30 percent natural wines.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Brewery Instagram feeds can tip off travelers to news and limited releases, Mr. Van Horn said, while food-focused Instagram feeds, such as Omnivore, which visits up-and-coming restaurants around the world, can be an excellent source for wine drinkers. “If you’re serious about your wine, you should be serious with food, and vice versa,” Ms. Lepeltier said.AdvertisementSERVERS AND BARTENDERS KNOW When an app or a personal recommendation leads you to a knowledgeable bartender or sommelier in a new city, seize the opportunity to ask questions. Beer communities tend to be close-knit and rely on word of mouth, which works in travelers’ favor, said Will Sperling, the general manager of Mikkeller, a craft beer bar in Los Angeles. His bartenders often field inquiries from travelers and offer suggestions on which bars and breweries not to miss.EVALUATE THE MENU Wine lists and bar taps can offer clues for travelers who want something special. “If I’m in the Midwest I don’t want to see a bunch of California IPAs or Belgian beers; I want to see what’s being made locally in small batches by the guys on the ground in the local scene,” Mr. Sperling said.A version of this article appears in print on July 16, 2017, on Page TR2 of the New York edition with the headline: Resources for Drinking Well.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »