AdvertisementSupported byBitesBy Ratha TepSome chefs serve commercial mayonnaise. For Peter Sanchez-Iglesias, the chef and an owner of Paco Tapas, and Dave Hazell, the head chef, making mayonnaise is a two-day process.Crab shells are roasted and then infused in vegetable oil for 48 hours. The flavored oil is blended with ingredients like cider vinegar distilled from apples grown in nearby Somerset. The luscious, tangy result is indicative of the kind of culinary rigor and experimentation expected of Mr. Sanchez-Iglesias, who earned his first Michelin star at 23.At Casamia, the modernist British restaurant where Mr. Sanchez-Iglesias and his brother, Jonray, made their reputations, experimentation might take the form of foams, liquid nitrogen and other sorts of kitchen wizardry. At Paco Tapas, near the Bristol Harbor, it manifests in nontraditional choices like the type of egg (from a Khaki Campbell duck, with an extra yolk added) used to make its tortilla española, with its decadently rich, golden interior. They are coloring within the lines but defining what makes color.“We’re taking stuff from our neck of the woods and turning them into something traditionally Spanish,” said Mr. Sanchez-Iglesias, who was born and raised in Bristol but has spent a significant amount of time in Seville, the hometown of his father, Paco.For a more rustic approach to cooking, Mr. Sanchez-Iglesias bought a large robata grill in which he burns coal and, for a local touch, British apple wood. It is used to cook most of Paco Tapas’s dishes, which I savored during a recent visit. Huevos a la flamenca, the traditional tomato egg stew flavored with salty strips of jamón, was pure comfort in a cazuela, and arrived still bubbling from cooking on the grates.Calçots (Catalonian green onions) were chucked directly onto the hot embers; their blackened outer skin was stripped away to reveal a delicately silky, leeklike inner flesh. They were served with a textured and nutty romesco that I wanted to eat by the spoonful.One notable tapa that eschewed the grill in favor of a deep fryer: golden crisp croquetas, which swapped salted cod for sweet Cornish crab, and seemed to melt in the mouth. It was served with that two-day mayo, an unnecessary (but welcome) indulgence.The short but well-curated sherry list includes complex-tasting fino en ramas and relatively rare palo cortados. In the first few weeks of Paco Tapas’s existence, oak barrels behind the bar dispensed sherry, but now serve another purpose: to barrel-age cocktails.Paco Tapas, 3A The General, Lower Guinea Street; 44-117-925-7021; pacotapas.co.uk. An average dinner for two, without drinks or tip, is about £55 ($71).Advertisement