AdvertisementSupported by5 PLACESBy Seth SherwoodSleazy bars. Sex shops. Streetwalkers. That was long the dodgy mix in Zurich’s fourth district, known locally as Kreis 4, a sprawling red-light area next to the city’s main railway station. Switzerland’s largest city, however, is gambling on an ambitious development known as Europaallee to burnish the neighborhood’s style and reputation. In addition to housing and office space, this new district, scheduled for completion in 2021, is already brimming with clothing boutiques, concept stores, cafes and restaurants, many devoted to native Swiss designers and delicacies. As Europaallee rises, Kreis 4 is increasingly on the right side of the tracks.Wine is the specialty at this buzzing bar and restaurant decorated in a funky mix of industrial, vintage, Baroque and bachelor-pad style. By night, sit among the bar’s Oriental rugs, wing chairs and exposed metal ducts while thoughtfully swirling Swiss syrah (not bad) or pinot noir (much better). Morning provides hangover brunch. The Swiss brunch, one of multiple brunch menus, will restore you with scrambled eggs, three cheeses, muesli with fresh fruit
and a coffee jump-start. Europaallee 15; 41-44-755-5050; loftfive.chFor more rugged outings or even urban adventures, this spot can outfit you. Start with funky rubber rain boots by Tretorn or wingtip combat boots from Aigle. Then move upward with a quilted gray military-style jacket by Victorinox. Complete the look with a Deejo designer jackknife.Lagerstrasse 82; 41-44-273-0101; kevininthewoods.comPair your bounty with rare spirits from this emporium full of wooden kegs and glass decanters, which moved to the district in 2013 after years in Zurich’s old town. The process is simple. First buy some fancifully shaped glass vessels, then fill them with your choice of elixirs. The selection includes Cuban rum, Spanish sherry and Italian grappa, but the real gems are the Swiss liquors. If aged Swiss single-malt whiskey isn’t unusual or potent
enough for you, fill up with Swiss absinthe. Europaallee 17; 41-44-260-4444; vomfass-zuerich.chGet your provisions from this vast neo-industrial restaurant and fine food emporium, which opened in 2015. In the airy and cheerful dining room, wolf down a specialty burger or healthy salad before stocking up on teas, chocolate bars and gummy bears. Gustav-Gull Platz 2; 41-44-542-8899; jackandjo.chWant a watch from outer space? Set a course for this lifestyle boutique, which showcases independent Swiss labels and designers like Werenbach, a maker of sleek timepieces using
metal from Russian booster rockets that have fallen back to Earth. Wear yours with jackets and knitwear from Adrian Reber, a former Hugo Boss designer with a fondness for recycling
furs, or 3-D printed jewelry by Digimorphé. Europaallee 33; 41-44-515-2356; gris.agAdvertisement