Where I LiveAmid the chic cafes and boutiques in the Marais, footnotes of antiquity around every corner.On Rue Pavée, outside the Hôtel de Lamoignon, one of the oldest mansions in Paris. It houses the Bibliothèque Historique de la Ville de Paris.CreditAlex Cretey-Systermans for The New York TimesSupported byBy Liz Alderman“Paris is an ocean. Explore it, and you still won’t know its depths.”— Honoré de BalzacThe streets of the Marais are narrow enough in some places that sunlight pierces the shadowy canyons between its soaring Renaissance-era buildings for just a few hours a day. At night the lanes take on a mysterious, medieval air when streetlamps sputter to life, casting a sheen on timeworn turrets, carved doors and stone mansions.Slip into a cobbled alley off the Rue des Francs-Bourgeois, a main artery, and you’ll find yourself standing where the Duke of Orleans was assassinated in 1407 by a power-hungry rival’s henchmen. Around the corner, the magnificent 18th-century Hôtel de Soubise palace, home to France’s national archives, showcases the last, anguished letter written by Marie Antoinette, bidding “adieu” to her sister before heading to the guillotine.Strolling amid the steep walls and angular slate roofs always transports me back to a bygone era — a storied past that vibrates beneath the ferment of the chic international crowds, designer boutiques, neo-bistrots, kosher delis and L.G.B.T. clubs.Fifteen years ago, I was lucky enough to find a quaint apartment on a small rue in the central Marais. I’d just moved from Washington, D.C., to be the bureau chief for a financial news agency covering the birth of Europe’s new currency, the euro, which I would go on to write about for the former International Herald Tribune and The New York Times. In short order, that historic project burst into a Continentwide financial, social and political crisis, the aftershocks of which I continue to report about today.As I was settling down, one thing became clear: Paris, in all of its sprawling grandeur, would take time to know. I began with fabled destinations: climbing the hill at Montmartre from the Moulin Rouge one weekend, then taking a picnic basket to the Luxembourg Gardens the next. I lounged at the Canal St.-Martin to watch games of boules, and searched for the tombs of Balzac, Delacroix and Jim Morrison at Père-Lachaise cemetery. On Friday nights, when the Louvre Museum closes late, I often lingered in the hall of Dutch painters, treasuring Vermeers and Rembrandts with the rooms nearly to myself. It called to mind Balzac’s observation of Paris: “There will always be a virgin place, an unknown den, flowers, pearls, monsters, something unheard-of, forgotten.”The list of my favored haunts grew to encompass places farther afield, especially the tree-lined, elevated Promenade Plantée, a secret in the sky behind the Bastille that inspired the High Line in New York. The Parc Montsouris offered open space with rolling green lawns and black swans gliding over a placid lake. My favorite sunny afternoon reading spot remains the Tuileries gardens, perched under a square-cut chestnut tree in what would be the shadow of the palace of the same name had it not been burned to the ground in 1871. This was Marie Antoinette’s luxe prison after she and King Louis XVI were forced to leave Versailles.Yet it was my own Marais neighborhood, with its footnotes from antiquity on every corner, that drew me in like no other place.I got hooked on reading historic markers planted on walls and streets. They signal, for instance, the site of a 13th-century fortress that was once the European headquarters of the Knights Templar, who built up the Marais. Near my home, the streets are named for medieval monastic orders, including the Guillemites and the Blancs-Manteaux, who bought land from the Templars and fortified the area. Behind the St. Paul church, signposts mark the remains of city walls that King Philippe Auguste ordered in 1190 to protect Paris from invaders.These days, whenever I return from a reporting trip, I head out for one of the historic Marais walks that I’ve carved out over the years. I might start near the Square du Temple, a sweet, verdant park where the Templar’s fortress stood, and where Marie Antoinette and the king were later imprisoned after trying to escape from the Tuileries. Then I amble down to the Seine toward the two islands on which Paris was founded, Île St.-Louis and Île de la Cité, where the stone towers of Notre-Dame stand witness to centuries of Paris’s turbulent, sublime history.Strolling at leisure can be a challenge, if not a chore, since the Marais is often packed with visitors. An explosion of designer boutiques here has accelerated, turning the area into a sumptuous outdoor shopping and art mecca that draws thousands on weekends to the pastime of “lèche-vitrine” — “window licking” to the French.Pedestrians jam the Rue Vieille du Temple, a main drag that once led to the Templar fortress, to ogle handbags in two Chanel pop-up stores that opened in a 17th-century mansion, the Hôtel Amelot de Bisseuil. At the entrance, ancient wood doors carved with Medusa masks have been updated with cherry-red lacquer. Rainbow-hued shoe and watch shops jostle with chocolatiers and boutiques offering $120 perfumed candles. Farther north, the Haut Marais is honeycombed with galleries, from the hip-hop displays at the Galerie Perrotin to the open space of the Galerie Thaddaeus Ropac.While the makeover of the Marais has drawn big business, the change hasn’t been lost on its residents. Butchers, bakers and tailors have been replaced almost entirely by chain boutiques. Near the  Rue des Rosiers, the gentrified Jewish district where boutiques are overtaking Judaica shops and delis, an Izod Lacoste store stands in a former boulangerie: The buzz was that the company offered madame, the owner, a sum that allowed her to retire immediately.The Marais is hardly the only area of Paris facing change. Today, the city is in the midst of an ambitious expansion project called Le Grand Paris, which aims to enlarge Paris’s boundaries by stitching its core to the banlieues — the neglected outer suburbs — with a new transport system. Major roads, including parts of the Rue de Rivoli, the quarter’s main thoroughfare, may eventually close to traffic to make the center pedestrian and environmentally friendly. Pioneering architecture, like the glass canopy at Les Halles and the bubble curves of the Fondation Louis Vuitton, keeps transforming the cityscape.For the Marais, the crowds testify to a rebirth. The first Golden Age came in the early 17th century, nearly 500 years after the Templars cleared vast marshland — or marais, in French — to enlarge their domain. When King Henry IV set up at what is now the Place des Vosges in 1604, the aristocracy followed, building the sumptuous mansions that imbue the area with glamour today. After the French court later moved to the Tuileries Palace, the Marais deteriorated for nearly two centuries and was almost razed until the government protected it in 1964.It is these traces of history that I follow on my walks, dipping in and out of the quarter’s ancient charms, perhaps pausing for a glass of wine, handcrafted tea or a raspberry meringue at a clutch of mod cafes and pâtisseries that have followed the retail influx.Spring is my favorite season, when the pocket gardens are in bloom and lilacs perfume the air. Three years ago, I introduced my new love, now my husband, to a hidden oasis off the Rue des Francs-Bourgeois at the Hôtel de Soubise, where Marie Antoinette’s letter lives with documents dating from the fifth-century Merovingian dynasty, France’s ancient founders. Most people stop in the imposing stone-paved courtyard just to see the mansion. But advance to the colonnaded porch, and a path to the right opens onto four manicured French gardens, gilded with pines, laurels, hydrangeas and Japanese anemones. Hand in hand, we savored birdsong and breathed in the open sky from a bench tucked among the trees and roses. The city bustle beyond the walls seemed far away.Braving the weekend crowds, we pick up our walk on the Rue des Francs-Bourgeois (closed to traffic on Sunday afternoons) past the spot at No. 38 where the Duke of Orleans was knocked off, igniting a civil war. The spangled boutiques inhabit a phalanx of regal hôtels particuliers where Renaissance aristocrats held salons. Passing them is to breathe the air drawn by Racine, Molière and La Fontaine.At the intersection of the Rue Pavée, an unusual square turret stops people in their tracks. It’s part of the Hôtel de Lamoignon, one of the oldest mansions in Paris, which played host to French luminaries until it was converted to a prison during the Revolution. At the entrance, a marker recounts the sordid fate of one of its inhabitants, the Princess de Lamballe, a confidante of Marie Antoinette who was set upon there by a mob.After the Revolution, Marais hôtels like this one were transformed into workshops and factories, the shells of which are now largely occupied by retailers hawking skinny jeans. I sometimes work on my laptop in the backside of the mansion (closed temporarily for renovation), which houses the Bibliothèque Historique de la Ville de Paris, a light-bathed hall filled with old manuscripts, maps and books.My husband and I sometimes stop for brunch nearby at Le Loir dans La Théière, a Mad Hatter-themed cafe that serves quiches and desserts, including a lemon pie with a teetering meringue. Another favorite is Benedict on the Rue Ste. Croix de la Bretonnerie, a Scandinavian-design brunch bistrot. Artéfact on the Rue des Blancs-Manteaux offers hand-brewed coffee and mixed teas in an airy setting with minimalist art.On the same street, we plunge back into the past by stepping into the Église des Blancs Manteaux, originally a 13th-century monastery for Augustine monks built on land owned by the Templars. (The Duke of Orleans’s body was brought here straight after the murder.) Then we navigate the Rue Vieille du Temple and cross the Rue de Rivoli to the winding Rue des Barres. Stepping onto the 13th-century cobbles — once a pathway for the Templars to the Seine — leads you to a rare medieval timbered house leaning into the lane toward the Église St.-Gervais, a Gothic behemoth atop an original seventh-century church. At the front of the church, an elm stands where an ancient one once stood, under which medieval judges mediated disputes.Advancing to the Pont Louis-Philippe rewards us with a panoramic view of Notre-Dame soaring above the tip of the Île St.-Louis, where Parisians picnic and Chinese newlyweds have their photos snapped.Even near Notre-Dame, you can escape the crowds by deviating onto the narrow Rue de la Colombe, so named for a legend about two amorous doves that nested there in the Middle Ages. A tiny wine bar, La Réserve de Quasimodo — good for cheese and pâtés — abuts a 13th-century house (dated by archaeologists who tested DNA from a cat skeleton found in the ceiling), while the glassed-in front offers a stunning view of the Hôtel de Ville.After a day’s stroll, my husband and I often circle back to the Square du Temple in the Haut Marais for dinner, where inventive néo-bistrots flourish beside the Carreau du Temple. A former covered market near the Templars’ ancient enclosure, it was recast with a soaring glass roof into a light-filled communal hall with concerts and a recording studio.On the Rue Dupetit-Thouars, Máncora Cebicheria serves exuberantly marinated Peruvian ceviche in pools of kiwi or lime, flecked with vivid dashes of beet purée and perfumed violets. Go early: The small, whitewashed dining room is filled by 7:30 p.m., a shockingly early dinner date for trendy Parisians.Down the street, Les Chouettes is a three-story French gastro pub with a glass ceiling and interior modeled on the Eiffel Tower’s iron architecture. A winding staircase leads to an Old World bar with leather chairs and a small library.We step back out into the night. The Square du Temple is quiet under lock and key. A streetlamp casts a pale light over the tops of trees and illuminates a sign describing how the Knights Templar occupied a premier position of power, only to fall in the unrelenting tide of history. It is a reminder to visitors that no matter how avant-garde Paris gets, they will always be walking in the shadow of its fraught and glorious past.Liz Alderman is the Paris-based chief European business correspondent for The New York Times.Advertisement