By ALYSON KRUEGERFEB. 16, 2017
James Niehues is not a typical landscape artist. Yes, he uses watercolors to depict mountains and valleys, the sun and shadows and trees and waterways. But though the results are gorgeous, they are also entirely practical: He paints trail maps for ski resorts.Since 1987, he’s captured almost 200 of the world’s most famous collections of runs, including Aspen Highlands, Squaw Valley and Big Sky, and ones as far afield as China, New Zealand and Serbia. Mr. Niehues, 71, is on the road to retirement, and taking on fewer projects. Throughout his career, he’s been fully aware how real people were using his creations.“I always used to worry about whether, if I didn’t put a tree in and someone hits the tree, are they going to sue me?” he said.Today, his pieces are being appreciated as art. His work was shown in 2011 at Apexart, a nonprofit exhibition space in Lower Manhattan. And his map of Mount Baker in Washington State was the cover on “Mind the Map,” a collection of illustrated cartography sold in art museums. Here are edited excerpts from a conversation with Mr. Niehues.AdvertisementQ. Why do ski resorts employ map artists?A. A trail map is not perfectly accurate. It is something that interprets the mountain. My maps relate to what people visually see from the ground. You are exaggerating to make the scene, and if you enlarge one thing you have to reduce something else.How do you create a trail map?First I go up in a plane or helicopter to get aerial photographs, or I get aerial photographs supplied by the mountain. Then I produce a black-and-white sketch from those photographs that show the mountain trails and its structures. I even draw in the shadows. Then I transfer it onto an illustration board and add in the color and details with watercolors. I like to show the mountain at the time of day when the shadows are just catching the snow. That way you can actually see the surface of the slopes.AdvertisementHave you ever messed up?Once I had to go back and change the direction of the shadows. It was a cloudy day when they took the photos, and there was no Google Earth to check, so I had the shadows running the wrong way. It taught me to really be sure of where the sun is, even if it isn’t showing up in my photographs. I go to great extremes to make sure the map is correct. Sometimes I ski the mountain, and the resort personnel, who know these mountains like the back of their hands, look it over.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.What is it like to be in the air taking photos of the ski areas?It’s a real thrill to fly so close to the mountain and to get a view that many don’t get to see. One of my most enjoyable flights was at Grand Targhee in Wyoming [above]. It was a perfect day, no wind at all and nice sun, and the plane we took had windows from the knees down so you could look down. We were so close to the Grand Tetons that I remember looking at a snow bank and thinking, “If I jumped out of this plane, I bet I’d live.”Will computers replace artists?When computers make the maps, you don’t get the real feel of the outdoors, and it’s hard to show the skier the terrain they are in. For example, it’s important to show the difference between deciduous trees and conifers because if you are out skiing and you want to go through the trees, conifers are different.Are there any ski resorts you believe are overlooked?Bridger Bowl in Montana, which is really rugged. I’m working on Montana Snowbowl, and they are expanding their trail system. All of the ski areas in Washington are really special, including Crystal Mountain.How should skiers use trail maps?Trail maps get you down a hill, but they are also an important tool for marketing the mountain. There is probably not another image that is as identified with a resort. You should look at a trail map and then be encouraged to go and ski the mountain.Because of an editing error, the Q&A column last Sunday, with the artist James Niehues, misstated the year he began making ski trail maps. It was 1987, not 1997.A version of this article appears in print on February 19, 2017, on Page TR2 of the New York edition with the headline: James Niehues on Mapping Ski Trails.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.