
In Transit By                     
ELAINE GLUSAC

JAN. 15, 2016
IN MIAMI, AUTO SHOW MEETS DINNER THEATERPart gallery, part nightclub, the new Miami Supercar Rooms is slated to open in Miami’s art-filled Wynwood neighborhood Feb. 5. The project places a collection of luxury automobiles within a night-life destination, including dining pods, costing $3,000 a night, that accommodate up to six people for the evening, with food and drink. The British auto collector Elo, who goes by one name and also founded the London Motor Museum, is behind Miami Supercar Rooms. With indoor and outdoor exhibit space, it will showcase a rare 1955 SL 300 Mercedes Gullwing, 1958 450 S Maserati racecar and a 1953 Lamborghini tractor, purportedly one of only three remaining in the world. The dining pods, where a seasonal menu often themed to the cars will be served, can be closed for private dining or open to viewing the D.J. and bar. By day, the venue will be open for fans of the luxury cars, with the full nightclub experience operating on Friday, Saturday and Sunday nights.AT WYNDHAM GRAND, A TOAST TO COFFEEWyndham Grand hotels just introduced a new culinary concept called Brew Parlor that merges bar and coffeehouse cultures. The company hired the chef Stephanie Izard, a former “Top Chef” winner who runs several restaurants in Chicago, as its “Chef de Caffeine,” overseeing cold-brewed coffee drinks such as Five Spice Shaken Iced Coffee. The mixologist Ivy Mix of Brooklyn, founder of the Speed Rack competition for bartenders, handled bean-based cocktails that go well beyond the White Russian. Brew Parlors launched yesterday at Wyndham Grand pilot hotels in Chicago; Doha, Qatar; Shenzhen, China; and Istanbul. Designed as happy hour alternatives, the lounges are open weekdays 4 to 6 p.m.SNOW SPECIALS, EAST AND WESTSkiing is notoriously pricey, but Visit Telluride in Colorado is doing all it can to tempt skiers and snowboarders to the slopes, already blanketed by 13 feet of snow, with new stay and ski deals. Starting at $98 per person, the packages bundle overnights and lift tickets at a range of properties from high-end to budget through the end of the winter season.This month, the bus service Hampton Jitney has introduced new service to Stratton Mountain in Vermont. Through March 27, the coach service will depart Manhattan (at 44th Street and Third Avenue) Fridays at 5:45 p.m. and return from Stratton at 4 p.m. Sundays, with Monday returns on Martin Luther King Day and Presidents’ Day. Fares for the four-hour ride cost $79 one way and the bus offers Wi-Fi service, snacks and beverages.AdvertisementThe company will also offer day-trip service to Hunter, Plattekill and Belleayre Mountains in New York with four departures each through March 6 at $99, including a lift ticket. A weekend trip to Lake Placid’s Whiteface Mountain will run Feb. 19 to 21 priced from $549 a person, including transportation, two nights’ accommodations, breakfast and lift tickets.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.THE GALÁPAGOS BY BIKEWhile most visitors to the Galápagos Islands explore via ship, the tour company Tripsite is offering a new 10-day trip there via bike. Riders will pedal over 62 miles across four islands: San Cristobal, Floreana, Isabela and Santa Cruz. Aimed at fit travelers, the trip is rated difficult and includes multisport options such as hiking up a volcano, kayaking and snorkeling with sea lions as well as excursions via motorboat. The trip costs $4,999 a person, double occupancy, with two 2016 departures, May 13 and Oct. 21.AdvertisementIN CALIFORNIA, A JACK LONDON CENTENNIALThe author, adventurer and social activist Jack London, best known for the novel “The Call of the Wild,” died Nov. 22, 1916, in his home state of California where his centennial will be celebrated throughout the year. Most of the festivities take place at Jack London State Historic Park in Sonoma County including a documentary screening, themed hikes, literary events and spring photography walks. The Klondike Challenge, which encourages hikers to log 500 miles walking throughout the Bay Area, pays homage to London’s 500-mile trek during the Canadian gold rush.BEHIND THE SCENES AT THE IDITARODThe Iditarod Trail Committee, which sponsors the annual 1,000-mile sled dog race from Anchorage to Nome, Alaska, is newly offering a behind-the-scenes trip to the event, which starts March 5. Named the Burled Arch Extravaganza, the package, for two, includes a two-night pre-race stay in Anchorage, round-trip airfare to Nome for the finish, three nights in Nome, a tour of Iditarod operations there, a flight to view the race from a checkpoint, V.I.P. viewing for the finish and a photo with the 2016 champion. The V.I.P. experience costs $35,000, with proceeds supporting the nonprofit organizing committee. Bids start at $750 for a seat in a musher’s sled for the 11-mile ride at the ceremonial start of the race in Anchorage, but bidding closes at 4 p.m. Alaska time today.A SEVEN-DAY HOTEL AND SHOW PACKAGE IN NEW YORKThe extended-stay luxury hotel AKA Times Square plans to launch an “Ultimate Theater Package” on Tuesday, Jan. 19, the start of NYC Broadway Week, which offers two-for-one theater tickets through Feb. 5. The seven-day hotel package for two includes seven nights of shows and themed dinners — for example, the Cuban-American musical “On Your Feet,” is paired with dinner at Havana Central — as well as a backstage tour at a Broadway theater and a class in improv comedy, dance or trapeze. The package costs $10,000, and is available on an ongoing basis.A version of this article appears in print on January 24, 2016, on Page TR3 of the New York edition with the headline: Scenes; Luxury Cars and Dinner, Too.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »