By SHIVANI VORAJAN. 29, 2016
Skiers above the age of 50 are like the Rodney Dangerfields of the ski world — at least according to Jon Weisberg, co-founder of the online magazine SeniorsSkiing.com. “They don’t get that much respect,” he said.An avid skier for more than 60 years, Mr. Weisberg, 72, sought to change that with his magazine.Since its introduction in October 2014, SeniorsSkiing.com has attracted an average of 7,000 visitors a month, according to Mr. Weisberg, and has become a community for a growing segment of the ski population.Following are edited excerpts from a conversation with Mr. Weisberg.Q. Why did you decide to start a magazine for skiers who are 50-plus?A. Skiing is associated with youth, glamour and sexiness. It is all those things, but there are also plenty of people who aren’t so young but are into the sport. They’re increasing in numbers because baby boomers are getting older, and as they have entered retirement or are getting close to it, they have more time and are turning to skiing, either again or for the first time.AdvertisementIs it difficult for an older crowd to keep up with the sport?It’s actually easier now than it used to be and for a few reasons.AdvertisementThe way that many of the latest skis are shaped — wider in the front and back and narrow in the middle — gives skiers more control when they are going downhill so the chances of getting injured are less. Also, the quality of joint replacements is so much better today, and that helps older people stay active.What amenities at ski resorts should older skiers look for if they’re considering a ski getaway?Discounted tickets is the biggest one. Some resorts let you ski for free, while others will give some sort of break. One example is Sundance Mountain Resort in Utah — an all-day lift ticket is $21 this season if you’re 65 or older compared with the regular price of $65.Accessibility is also important. You don’t want to fly into an airport and then rent a car to drive for multiple hours to get to your resort, because it’s more stressful and tiring.A third factor is having easy access from parking lot to ski lift because ski gear is bulky, and it’s cumbersome to schlep it far.What are some senior-friendly resorts to keep in mind?According to our surveys and research, in North America: Lake Louise Ski Resort in Alberta, Mt. Hood Skibowl in Oregon, Waterville Valley in New Hampshire and Alta in Utah are great. In Europe, it’s Zermatt and Verbier in Switzerland, Chamonix and Megève in the French Alps and St. Anton in Austria.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Almost every ski resort has a ski school. Is there anything that seniors should keep in mind if they want to take a lesson?Whether it’s a group or private lesson, make sure that your instructor has experience working with an older clientele. Some resorts even have special programs like Vail Village Ski School in Colorado, which has a Ski Younger Now program where the instruction is designed for older people.There’s no shortage of high-priced ski equipment on the market. What do older skiers need to invest in?AdvertisementWe’ve found that older skiers tend to have older equipment, which isn’t ideal, but, if you only ski a few weeks a year, you can rent from a resort instead of buying.Ski boots are something worth paying for. A good pair will cost between $400 and $1,200, but they are critical because you use them to maneuver your skis.What do you tell your readers to do during the off-season to get ready for the coming year?Whatever your age, you should stay as fit as possible. Having a strong core, good muscle tone and cardiovascular stamina are keys to being a good skier and not hurting yourself.A version of this article appears in print on January 31, 2016, on Page TR3 of the New York edition with the headline: Jon Weisberg, Website Co-Founder, on Skiers Over 50.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.