
In Transit By                     
SHIVANI VORA

JAN. 19, 2016
Making a new year’s resolution to get healthy is easy. Sticking to that goal as the months go by? Not so much. Next month, a number of hotels are trying to help keep their guests motivated by introducing long-term fitness initiatives and packages.Meadowood Napa Valley in California, for example, is introducing the Healthiest Year Yet package, including overnight accommodations; a 90-minute outdoor fitness class; a personal-training session; unlimited fitness classes like Zumba; and unlimited sports like tennis and golf. Prices from $1,800 for two for two nights.The package was created specifically to keep guests excited about their goals to exercise more, said Kerry Brackett, the Meadowood health and fitness manager. “New Year’s resolutions help set the tone for your year,” she said, “but follow-through is often difficult, and we wanted to find a way to keep the momentum going.”Also next month, Hotel Domestique, a 13-room boutique property in the Blue Ridge Mountains in South Carolina, is introducing its three-night Mountain Biking Adventure package. Guests receive mountain bike rentals, two days of guided riding in the Pisgah or Dupont forests, lunch daily and $100 to spend on dinner at its restaurant. Prices from $2,000 for three nights for two people.Esperanza, an Auberge Resort in Los Cabos, Mexico, is introducing a wellness concierge, Barbie Alvarez, who works with guests to create a personalized fitness program. A 60-minute session is $175; nightly room rates from $500.The Mulia Bali  in Indonesia is restarting its wellness program with fitness classes such as combat martial arts, and menus with dishes 300 calories or less. It is open to both guests and nonguests; prices from $465 for a half-day.And in New York City, the Refinery Hotel is starting a series of monthly fitness classes next month; they will be held on the rooftop and are available to guests and nonguests. On Feb. 13, teachers from the yoga center Y7 Studio will offer a cardio-based vinyasa class set to hip-hop music ($35 a person).A version of this article appears in print on January 24, 2016, on Page TR3 of the New York edition with the headline: Trending; At Hotels, Fitness Programs for the New Year.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »