
Footsteps By                     
 ROSIE SCHAAP
 
AUG. 3, 2016
It didn’t start with history, and it certainly didn’t start with Roger Casement. After a trip a few years ago, during which I spent a few days each in Belfast, Cork and Dublin, I returned home feeling I’d failed myself, and perhaps failed Ireland, by limiting myself to cities. Next time, I would find a cottage in the countryside, where I would read, and write, and take long head-clearing walks. That was the only mandate I gave myself: the promise of an Irish pastoral in real time.Hours of daydreaming led me to the website of the Irish Landmark Trust, a nonprofit organization that restores and maintains historic properties in Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland, often in states of severe disrepair, and rents them to the public as comfortable vacation homes. The page I kept returning to was for Magherintemple Lodge, a sincere-looking, stony-faced gatehouse built in 1874, set in the sheep-spotted, cow-crossed, gently rolling terrain of County Antrim, Northern Ireland, near the town of Ballycastle, with distant views of the North Atlantic.There were other, prettier houses, but none had a history quite like this one’s. According to the website, the estate on which the gatehouse sits belonged to one John Casement. “Many of the next generation of the Casement family took to seafaring,” the website said, “while the fate of another member of the family, Sir Roger Casement, is well known.”It was decided then. I chose the house because of its connection to Roger Casement. I’ve often made pilgrimages to sites connected to my literary heroes. This would be my first trip in honor of one of my human-rights heroes. What would that look like? What might it mean?AdvertisementJust how well known the fate of Roger Casement is is debatable — and this, I discovered during three weeks in Ireland spent on his trail this year, is true of nearly all things Casement. Perhaps more than any other figure associated with the 1916 Easter Rising (there are events all over Ireland celebrating its centenary this year), Casement endures after death in a swirl of controversy. His cleareyed, damning reports on atrocities both in Africa and South America, and his advocacy on behalf of native people in those places, have given him status as an early, major, human-rights activist.AdvertisementTo some, his activity with Irish republicanism has made him a martyr to Ireland. Arguably to his own detriment, he wrote indefatigably: Explicit disclosures of his homosexuality in his so-called “Black Diaries” — and their impact on his fate — cast him as a figure in gay Irish history second perhaps only to Oscar Wilde. (Two handwriting experts confirmed the authenticity of the “Black Diaries.” Their legitimacy is accepted by most, but not all, Casement scholars.)Casement, in short, pushes a lot of buttons. I first heard of him when I was in college and read Yeats’s poem, “The Ghost of Roger Casement.” Its refrain echoes: The ghost of Roger CasementIs beating on the door.He would likely have been known to English and Irish readers of the poem when it was published in Yeats’s 1938 collection, “New Poems.” But to an American student reading it in 1993, the allusion was opaque. I would have to find out who he was. And nearly a quarter of a century later, I would have to discover if I might encounter his ghost in his native country.Roger David Casement was born in County Dublin in 1864 to Protestant parents (his mother later converted to Catholicism). By the time he was 13, both of his parents had died, and he and his siblings became wards of their uncle John. After more than a decade working in Africa in various capacities — he was appointed a British consul in 1892 — he started a formal investigation into forced labor in the Congo in 1895. In 1910, he began to look into, and report on, the treatment of rubber workers in the Putumayo. The next year, he was knighted for his humanitarian work.But the horrors he witnessed in Africa and South America altered his perspective on empire. They also transformed his feelings for Ireland. His involvement with Irish republicanism led to an ill-conceived mission in Germany to generate support, and to secure arms and possibly volunteers, in the midst of World War I. In Germany, he felt betrayed — and, afforded little in the way of help or arms, he wanted to stop the Easter Rising, because it seemed doomed to failure.On Good Friday morning, 1916, Casement and two other Irishmen were deposited from a German U-boat near the shores of Banna Strand, outside Tralee, County Kerry. He was captured at an ancient ring fort now known as Casement’s Fort. One hundred years ago, on Aug. 3, 1916, he was hanged in London for treason. His “Black Diaries” were not presented as evidence at his trial, but portions were circulated by British authorities after his conviction and prevented any chance of a clemency. They gave his enemies more reasons to revile him — and supplied some supporters with cause to turn against him. The notion of a gay hero in 1916 was, for many, unacceptable.Once you start looking for Casement in Ireland, you start to see him, everywhere. One of the largest Gaelic Athletic Association grounds in Northern Ireland is Casement Park, in Belfast. The train station in Tralee, the county town of County Kerry, is named for him. He recurs like a motif, and, right now, he is having a moment.In a Socialist bookshop in Dublin’s Temple Bar neighborhood, I bought a Casement refrigerator magnet. When I went to mail postcards, I found that Ireland’s one-euro stamp bears his image. And two major museum exhibitions devoted to him are on display, in Dublin and Tralee.AdvertisementAt Magherintemple Lodge, I met Patrick Casement — a great-great-grandson of John Casement, the uncle with whom Roger was sent to live after his parents died — who lives in the big house on the property, where Roger spent much of his teenage years and the place that he regarded as the closest thing to home. Patrick Casement confirmed what I’d heard: that, for many years, Roger Casement’s name was not spoken at Magherintemple, not because of the revelations in the “Black Diaries,” but because he was a traitor.But Patrick speaks of him openly, and with pride in his achievements in human rights. He gave me a tour of the Victorian part of the house, where, among other artifacts, there stands in a parlor an impressive credenza made of jacaranda wood, with a shipping tag signed by Roger Casement still attached to a drawer. As we walked through the high-ceilinged rooms, Patrick told me that in April he attended the ceremony at Banna Strand, commemorating Casement’s arrest there, and saw the exhibition about him at the Kerry County Museum. I would have to get to Kerry, too.But my next stops were in Dublin. At Dublin City Gallery the Hugh Lane, “High Treason: Roger Casement,” part of a larger series of programs called “The Artist as Witness in Society,” is on view through Oct. 2. At its heart is Sir John Lavery’s massive, finely detailed painting, “High Treason: The Appeal of Roger Casement.” It depicts the packed courtroom (Lavery was invited to paint it by the presiding judge) where Casement was tried and sentenced, and all of the major legal players involved.There are other, more recent works, too: My friend Cormac, who joined me at the gallery, and I were especially struck by a small 2015 oil painting by Elizabeth Magill called “Roger and the Swans,” a forceful but delicate work showing Casement’s head embedded with the wings of swans — a tiny, whole swan appears to be affixed to his forehead — evoking both the Irish legend of the children of Lir, who were turned into swans by their jealous stepmother, and the Greek myth of Leda and the Swan, wherein Zeus, in the form of a swan, rapes Leda. (There’s a famous Yeats poem on the subject, called “Leda and the Swan.”)From the Hugh Lane, Cormac and I took a rambling 25-minute walk deep into Dublin’s north side to Glasnevin Cemetery, where Casement is buried. His gravestone is inscribed in Irish (he studied the language), which Cormac roughly translated for me: “Roger Casement, who died for Ireland on 3 August.” My emotions are highly susceptible to graves, and I expected to be deeply affected by Casement’s. I wasn’t. That may be because, for all its beauty and history (it is where many Irish revolutionary heroes are interred), Glasnevin is not where he wished to lie. He had written of his desire to be buried at Murlough Bay, near Magherintemple. But Glasnevin is a better resting place than the yard at Pentonville Prison in London, where his remains lay until they were repatriated to Ireland in 1965.The next day, I took a DART commuter train to Sandycove, an affluent seaside suburb, to see where he grew up. There’s a plaque (also in Irish) marking the spot of his boyhood home, a short walk from the tower where James Joyce’s “Ulysses” begins. (Joyce mentioned him in the Cyclops section: “Did you read that report by a man what’s this his name is? – Casement, says the citizen. He’s an Irishman.”)My train pulled in to Tralee’s Casement Station the next afternoon. On the Fourth of July, I had an appointment with Helen O’Carroll at the Kerry County Museum, where she curated “Casement in Kerry: A Revolutionary Journey,” a richly informative exhibition that will remain there until March 31, 2017. Casement spent only an estimated 32 hours in Kerry altogether, but they were 32 crucial hours, all explained in a timeline lining the walls of the galleries.The most remarkable item on display is the dinghy in which he came to shore at Banna Strand; it looms over the whole exhibition, and imparts an uncanny sense of his presence there: It was the closest I’d yet come to a meeting with his ghost. I told Ms. O’Carroll that I planned to hire a taxi to take me to Banna Strand and Casement’s Fort. She wouldn’t hear it (this is Ireland), and insisted on driving me to the sites herself.Murlough BayBallycastleA2Magherintemple LodgeA44BelfastAtlanticOceanNorthernIrelandGlasnevinIrelandDublinIrish SeaSandycoveBallyheigueTraleeCorkBanna Strand50 milesAUG. 2, 2016
That was my great fortune, as she is a terrific source of Casement knowledge, a captivating storyteller — and, as a local with deep family roots in the corner of Kerry where Casement was captured, even has personal connections (Ms. O’Carroll was long told the story that her grandmother served him tea at her farmhouse, but she now suspects the tale may not be true).AdvertisementIt was fiercely windy at Banna Strand, and we climbed up the dunes so Ms. O’Carroll could show me the spot where it is believed the U-boat left Casement and the other men, and the place on the shore where they are likely to have landed the dinghy. A monument stands nearby — as does another, smaller one at Casement’s Fort, where Ms. O’Carroll took me next. Flowers have been left for him there, and an Irish tricolor. Next, we visited a statue of Casement at nearby Ballyheigue: It is at least life-size, with his feet apart and firmly planted, his hands tightly folded in front of his body.The exhibition had shown how his time in Germany, and the trip back to Ireland, had aged Casement. At these locations, I could almost imagine his ordeal there: a broken man, debilitated both by malaria and disappointment, knowing that he would be unable to stop an action he expected to be a blood bath, knowing that he himself would certainly be captured, and killed.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Yet Casement wrote to his sister Nina, “I was for one brief spell happy and smiling once more.” Later he continued, “all around were primroses and wild violets and the singing of the skylarks in the air, and I was back in Ireland again.”I thought about how traveling had galvanized Casement’s empathy. My own travels were nothing in comparison, but my empathy for Casement was deepening, too. He remained mysterious, but had become more human, more alive to me. In an email, the Irish studies scholar Lucy McDiarmid, professor of English at Montclair State University, who had seen photos I’d been posting from my trip, wrote: “now you’re a Casementista,” a term she used in a chapter about Casement in her book “The Irish Art of Controversy.”I circled back to the Antrim countryside for my final stop on my tour of Roger Casement’s Ireland: remote, sublime Murlough Bay, where he wanted to be buried, near Magherintemple. To get there, one takes a steep, narrow and curvaceous coastal road. Few signs lead the way, and even Seamus, my very capable driver, got turned around en route. But we got there.The site is marked by a sign, in Irish, and a tall, plain wooden cross. Seamus parked the car, and we walked uphill, beyond the sign, beyond the cross, to a place where Casement himself might have stood, and might have looked out across the glistening, turquoise bay under a sky big and vivid as the one we beheld, and considered his end.Weeks earlier, Seamus had driven me to Magherintemple, and I’d told him about my intervening stops on the Casement trail. “I really feel something here,” he said. “I feel history here.” I did, too. And, more powerfully than anywhere else, I felt Roger Casement there, where he wished to exist in eternity, and does.Dublin City Gallery the Hugh Lane. A public gallery (free admission) focusing on modern and contemporary art (Charlemont House, Parnell Square North, Dublin; 353-01-222-5550; hughlane.ie). Showing until Oct. 2, “High Treason: Roger Casement,” an exhibition featuring Sir John Lavery’s magisterial painting “High Treason: The Appeal of Roger Casement,” and other pictorial works depicting the activist, hero and traitor.AdvertisementGlasnevin Cemetery and Museum. A peaceful, beautifully landscaped cemetery sprawling across 124 acres on the north side of Dublin. (Finglas Road, Glasnevin, Dublin; 353-01-882-6500; glasnevintrust.ie). Casement is buried here in the company of Michael Collins, Daniel O’Connell and Charles Stewart Parnell,among other major figures in Irish history.Kerry County Museum. A museum dedicated to the material culture and heritage of County Kerry (Ashe Memorial Hall, Denny Street, Tralee; 353-66-712-7777;kerrymuseum.ie). “Casement in Kerry: A Revolutionary Journey,” on view untilMarch 31, focuses on Casement’s brief but pivotal time in the county after his landing at Banna Strand, while providing a thoughtful overview of his life and achievements.The Irish Landmark Trust. A nonprofit organization that restores unusual and historic properties in Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland, and offers them as vacation rentals (Top floor, 11 Parnell Square, Dublin; 353-01-670-4733;irishlandmark.com). These include lighthouses, miniature castle follies and Georgian Dublin townhouses, but only Magherintemple Lodge, in County Antrim, has the Casement connection.John Kavanagh. Established in 1833 and adjacent to Glasnevin Cemetery, this beloved pub is widely known as the Gravediggers (1 Prospect Square, Glasnevin, Dublin; 353-87-296-3713), and some say it has the best Guinness in the city.Betty’s Bar. A wonderfully cozy spot with a fireplace, a shelf packed with books, weekly traditional music sessions and a dedicated crew of regulars (101 Strand Street, Tralee; 353-66-712-1405), just a seven-minute walk from the Kerry County Museum.An article on Aug. 7 about following in the footsteps of the Irish human-rights activist Roger Casement misstated the religion of his mother when he was born. She was Protestant, and later converted to Catholicism.A version of this article appears in print on August 7, 2016, on Page TR10 of the New York edition with the headline: Chasing a Rebel Ghost on the Emerald Isle.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »