
Bites By                     
DAVID FARLEY

JULY 8, 2016
Hearing the words “hotel” and “restaurant” in succession can often be a red flag for a discriminating diner. It’s even worse if “view” is tagged on — the eye-pleasing sights from high above somehow always outshine what emerges from the kitchen. So while I rode the elevator up to the seventh floor to dine at the Watch Rooftop Kitchen & Spirits — the highest restaurant in Charleston, in the recently refurbished hotel the Restoration — my gut felt skeptical.As soon as I entered, my concerns, at least about the location, right in the center of town, were allayed. The Watch, which opened in January, offers a simple interior — plain, light-hued walls and an ample number of windows; nothing could compete with the views over this 350-year-old city. I sipped an Old Exchange, a riff on the Old Fashioned using locally made Virgil Kaine rye whiskey, bitters and an orange slice; perused the menu; and stared out at the church steeples looming in the distance.Chad Anderson, the chef, has concocted a menu that blends Lowcountry fare and international dishes aimed at tourists who need a break from (or may balk at) the hearty local cuisine. You could order the falafel, ratatouille or Maine lobster roll. Better, turn to the Lowcountry staples, which even locals may find intriguing as many are refreshed with a creative twist.“It’s a challenge putting my own spin on classic Lowcountry dishes because they’re often just perfect the way they are,” Mr. Anderson said. “However, I feel that there is always room for an inspired chef to make their mark with a particular dish by bending the rules a little.”The hush puppies are accompanied by pimento cheese and a house-made pepper jelly (best consumed all together). Deviled eggs are topped by strips of unctuous thick-cut bacon. And then there is the crispy chicken skin, mingling in a bowl with bold blue cheese, fried scallions and hot sauce, offering a textural sensation on the palate and flavor strata of spicy, sour, salt and umami all in one bite. Who needs the actual meat when you’ve got this much flavor in one bowl?Even the classic shrimp and grits gets a twist: Cajun spice is infused into the bacon and tomato gravy that drenches the creamy grits and freshly caught shrimp, giving the dish a slight kick. When I asked the server if there was some connection to Louisiana or a reason for the addition of the spice, he shrugged and then pointed out the dazzling pink sunset on the horizon.The Watch Rooftop Kitchen & Spirits,  75 Wentworth Street, 843-518-5115; therestorationhotel.com. An average meal for two, without drinks or tip, is about $50.A version of this article appears in print on July 10, 2016, on Page TR13 of the New York edition with the headline: Lowcountry Classics, Twisted.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »