The upbeat New Louisville district is buzzing with cool eateries, shops and thriving businesses, with a distillery and a hotel opening just in time for Derby season. By CEIL MILLER BOUCHETBangkok’s Ari neighborhood is increasingly a thicket of sleek high-rise buildings and indie cool-kid hangouts radiating international flavors. By SETH SHERWOODChicago’s storied Uptown neighborhood has emerged from a decades-long slump with new restaurants and cultural centers.By JOHN L. DORMANMeet the monks of Mepkin Abbey, a Trappist monastery in South Carolina, who are trying to maintain age-old religious traditions in a rapidly evolving world.By STEPHEN HILTNERBelfast’s lively city center is a compact pedestrian-friendly area where the shopping gems are independently owned establishments. By SHIVANI VORAPelota mixteca has been played for hundreds of years by indigenous people throughout the Americas. But it’s more than a competitive event. By WALTER THOMPSON-HERNÁNDEZMeet the roller derby athletes who are “reclaiming” their space, promoting female empowerment and standing up for indigenous people.By HARRIET CONSTABLE and RACHEL CLARA REEDNashville’s Wedgewood-Houston neighborhood was long a run-down part of town. After creative types moved into the area, trendy restaurants, galleries, distilleries and other business have followed.By SHIVANI VORAMeet the people who gather for the extravaganza known as the Bronner Bros. show in Atlanta.By MALIN FEZEHAIGastronomic Montmartre is on the rise. Arty younger Parisians are flocking to this atmospheric old working-class quarter, which has seen a wave of new and reasonably priced restaurants. One was just awarded a Michelin star.By ALEXANDER LOBRANOMeet the superfans of a struggling franchise in the National Football League.By STEPHEN HILTNERThompson's Point, a formerly run-down industrial zone west of the city center in Portland, is today the city’s most unlikely hot spot.By INGRID K. WILLIAMSLos Angeles’ Highland Park neighborhood is seeing an influx of younger residents. Cool bars, restaurants and shops have followed.By SHIVANI VORAPiazza Gae Aulenti, a futuristic-looking square, sits at the heart of a recently developed part of town, where shiny new high-rises are redefining the cityscape. By SHIVANI VORABridgeport, on Chicago's South Side, once had an outsiders-unwelcome reputation, Now the Daley family's storied neighborhood ranks among the city's most diverse hubs.By LYNN FREEHILL-MAYEIn the Basque city of San Sebastián, Spain, Gros is a low-key neighborhood behind Zurriola beach that caters to residents, with shops focused on what's local,By INGRID K. WILLIAMSThe Bayview neighborhood is coming into its own as a hub for creative, genre-bending craft alcohol producers.By LAUREN SLOSSAt only an hour’s domestic flight away from Nairobi, Diani Beach is becoming one of the most popular sun, sea and sand destinations in Kenya.By GRACE BANKSIn recent years, Kifissia, an upscale Athens suburb, has attracted an appealing mix of stores and restaurants.By SHIVANI VORAA hipster haven in the mountains near Los Angeles, Ojai is drawing fashion types and foodies with new shops, restaurants and cool places to hang out.By SHEILA MARIKARThe upbeat New Louisville district is buzzing with cool eateries, shops and thriving businesses, with a distillery and a hotel opening just in time for Derby season. By CEIL MILLER BOUCHETBangkok’s Ari neighborhood is increasingly a thicket of sleek high-rise buildings and indie cool-kid hangouts radiating international flavors. By SETH SHERWOODChicago’s storied Uptown neighborhood has emerged from a decades-long slump with new restaurants and cultural centers.By JOHN L. DORMANMeet the monks of Mepkin Abbey, a Trappist monastery in South Carolina, who are trying to maintain age-old religious traditions in a rapidly evolving world.By STEPHEN HILTNERBelfast’s lively city center is a compact pedestrian-friendly area where the shopping gems are independently owned establishments. By SHIVANI VORAPelota mixteca has been played for hundreds of years by indigenous people throughout the Americas. But it’s more than a competitive event. By WALTER THOMPSON-HERNÁNDEZMeet the roller derby athletes who are “reclaiming” their space, promoting female empowerment and standing up for indigenous people.By HARRIET CONSTABLE and RACHEL CLARA REEDNashville’s Wedgewood-Houston neighborhood was long a run-down part of town. After creative types moved into the area, trendy restaurants, galleries, distilleries and other business have followed.By SHIVANI VORAMeet the people who gather for the extravaganza known as the Bronner Bros. show in Atlanta.By MALIN FEZEHAIGastronomic Montmartre is on the rise. Arty younger Parisians are flocking to this atmospheric old working-class quarter, which has seen a wave of new and reasonably priced restaurants. One was just awarded a Michelin star.By ALEXANDER LOBRANOMeet the superfans of a struggling franchise in the National Football League.By STEPHEN HILTNERThompson's Point, a formerly run-down industrial zone west of the city center in Portland, is today the city’s most unlikely hot spot.By INGRID K. WILLIAMSLos Angeles’ Highland Park neighborhood is seeing an influx of younger residents. Cool bars, restaurants and shops have followed.By SHIVANI VORAPiazza Gae Aulenti, a futuristic-looking square, sits at the heart of a recently developed part of town, where shiny new high-rises are redefining the cityscape. By SHIVANI VORABridgeport, on Chicago's South Side, once had an outsiders-unwelcome reputation, Now the Daley family's storied neighborhood ranks among the city's most diverse hubs.By LYNN FREEHILL-MAYEIn the Basque city of San Sebastián, Spain, Gros is a low-key neighborhood behind Zurriola beach that caters to residents, with shops focused on what's local,By INGRID K. WILLIAMSThe Bayview neighborhood is coming into its own as a hub for creative, genre-bending craft alcohol producers.By LAUREN SLOSSAt only an hour’s domestic flight away from Nairobi, Diani Beach is becoming one of the most popular sun, sea and sand destinations in Kenya.By GRACE BANKSIn recent years, Kifissia, an upscale Athens suburb, has attracted an appealing mix of stores and restaurants.By SHIVANI VORAA hipster haven in the mountains near Los Angeles, Ojai is drawing fashion types and foodies with new shops, restaurants and cool places to hang out.By SHEILA MARIKAR