
In Transit By                     
ELAINE GLUSAC

JAN. 12, 2016
A dog bed and a free rawhide bone may have represented the hospitality vanguard for pet friendliness a decade ago, but now the bar has been raised, not just by hotels supplying monogrammed doggy robes and play parks, but even tour operators that welcome canine companions.In Miami Beach, 1 Hotel South Beach is building a 3,000-square-foot Bark Park, complete with an “adventure zone” with a tube for pets to run through, a beam to walk on and a box of free squeaky toys. At check-in, four-legged guests of 1 Hotel in New York as well as Miami Beach receive a BarkBox amenity kit from Bark & Co. that includes a water bowl, treats and a toy. In Key West, Fla., the Gates Hotel also issues a BarkBox to guest pets, and a map identifying pet-friendly stops.Among luxury perks, fluffy monogrammed robes greet man’s most pampered friend at the Peninsula Beverly Hills. The fashion designer Cynthia Rowley created dog mats featuring white hearts on black backgrounds that guests booking the dog package at the W New York-Times Square can keep after checkout, through March 30.Need an activity for your dog? Try the Bacon Scavenger Hunt for pups at Calistoga Ranch in Napa Valley. Staffers hide smoked bacon in the surrounding vineyard and then lead a guided scent-and-search walk to sniff them out. Beyond bacon, the resort’s in-room canine dining options include braised short ribs over brown rice and organic chicken with pasta.AdvertisementGuests of the Rosewood CordeValle south of San Jose, Calif., can take their dogs out to dinner on the outdoor terraces of two of its restaurants.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.To capture the pet point of view, the Pines Lodge, a RockResort in Beaver Creek, Colo., now rents GoPro cameras with pet harnesses for romps on dog-friendly trails.The Miami-based Art Deco Tours  welcomes well-socialized canines. When pets are not allowed inside, a designated petsitter will keep them company outside.Advertisement“Travelers want to see Miami Beach and they don’t want to leave their dog in a hotel all day,” said Christine Michaels, owner of the company. Cats and other manageable pets are welcome, too. “Usually we get small dogs but we even had a parrot once.”A version of this article appears in print on January 17, 2016, on Page TR3 of the New York edition with the headline: Trending; Hotels Offer Perks for Four-Legged Guests  .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »