By THE NEW YORK TIMESJAN. 4, 2016
Minh Uong’s piece last month recalling his flight from Vietnam in the wake of the fall of Saigon and his return home over the summer inspired a wave of response from readers, including those who served there, others who also escaped and still others who were simply moved. Here are edited excerpts from a few of the comments online.I was one of the American soldiers who served in Vietnam. I was in the infantry and was stationed in Northern I Corps, near the DMZ. I remember traveling the countryside many times looking at the architecture, or what was left of it, thinking how beautiful the country must have been before the wars had begun. I often thought that I would like to visit it now, returning to those very places that we had patrolled and possibly became involved in firefights, and seeing the country for what it really was and could be again. When the North invaded the South, I recall feeling despair and disgust. Despair over all the blood shed for nothing and disgust over having been involved in the war in the first place. I often read articles like this one and think about how horrible the lives of the Vietnamese people had become, largely because of the involvement of the West.I wish that the United States would be as quick to send those of us who were in the country for war back to experience the same country in peace. Sadly, that will never happen. The politicians who make war wouldn’t understand my feelings, and most likely don’t understand Minh’s feelings either.PAUL TABONEYou were lucky and didn’t get caught like I did. It was a brutal (beat up and no food) seven days in Cong San prison. Unfortunately others died in the ocean; their engines died, ran out of fuel and they lacked food and fresh water. Or by Cong San or Thai pirates. However, we are lucky and made it.Every Saturday, get travel tips, destination coverage, photos from all over the world and more.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.LINH NGUYENI was aboard U.S.S. Coral Sea my very first time at sea covering the evacuation as a 19-year-old seaman. It was a very depressing time for us as we all felt like we were running out on our friends. It is amazing that the author’s parents survived. The North routinely sent assassination squads into each community as they took it. Any intelligentsia, anyone perceived as having ties to the government of the South or any prostitutes were taken to the edge of town, shot and dumped in a ditch. Many died that way in the immediate aftermath. Many others were sent to re-education camps. Very little about that war was happy. Glad that the author and his family were able to find each other and find peace.AdvertisementBILL TERRACE BRITISH COLUMBIAHopefully in decades ahead we will read similar stories of Syrian families finding safe haven in America.AdvertisementLS BROOKLYNGreat article for Europeans to read to understand what it means to be a war refugee, in the context of our refugee crisis. I am personally not attracted to go and visit Vietnam as a tourist because of the memory of that war.LANNOO EUROPEI read an essay like this and realize how very lucky I am. True, America is not a perfect country. True these are perilous times. I have lived as an expat for eight years. I have been impressed by other countries, especially in Northern Europe. But this is my home and I am grateful for it. Grateful to have done my time in uniform so I can feel I have worked off the debt I owe to those who made a place for me. Grateful I do not have to escape and live in fear of a return home. Grateful for a small, simple life without dread. I do not know that I would want to sustain the author’s pain.ROBERT D. NOYES OREGONThank you for sharing your story. The courage of parents during war, the will to save their children and the resilience of humanity is what is so painful yet encouraging in this story. It has made me cry. That is the horror of war. But your resilience and your family’s will to survive gives me hope for all refugees. Your history shows that we must not close our doors or our minds to the hope that other humans have to live in peace.PATSY MINNEAPOLISA version of this article appears in print on January 3, 2016, on Page TR12 of the New York edition.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.