
Check In By                     
CAROL HUANG

JAN. 4, 2016
From $185 to $200 a night.Tbilisi’s first Design Hotel is a dash of 21st-century chic in a city more than 1,400 years old. Centrally situated off the city’s primary thoroughfare, Rustaveli Avenue, the eight-story building was a publishing house during Soviet rule before gaining a new facade of reclaimed wood and black metal trim. Opened in September 2014, it is the third hotel in Georgia from Adjara Group Hospitality, the Georgian company led by Temur Ugulava, a casino entrepreneur whose passions furnish the property: a McIntosh sound system, Vivienne Westwood carpets in vivid prints, works by Georgian artists, and bellhops attired in retro uniforms like extras in “The Grand Budapest Hotel.” Masculine, clubby and dark, with plenty of exposed beams, the hotel is popular among Georgian politicians and V.I.P.s who pull up in shiny black cars with drivers.You will pass major sights while going to Old Town and Freedom Square, both less than two miles away. Bustling Rustaveli, named for a 12th-century Georgian poet, is a destination in itself, with sidewalk bands and elderly street vendors peddling mittens in front of pricey stores such as Cartier. The avenue’s attractions include the Rustaveli National Theater and the Tbilisi History Museum, as well as steep cobblestone streets that lead to the funicular that climbs to Mtatsminda peak. There, a fancy restaurant in a building that predates the Soviet era reopened in 2014 after extensive renovations. There is a grocery store across from the hotel, and Vake, the upscale district favored by expats, is a few blocks away.Cozy with a dark wood floor and deep-red wallpaper with a black, leafy pattern. Heavy red drapes had hems that pooled at the floor. Our basic Urban Queen room, at 230 square feet, had a wooden desk, an easy chair, an ottoman, a 40-inch flat-screen television, a minibar and a Wild & Wolf rotary telephone from Britain. Instead of a closet there was a tasteful entry rack with hooks and also bins for shoes.It was small with hardly any counter space. There were hand-held and wall-mounted showerheads.The hotel’s restaurant, the Kitchen, is a hot social scene, with patrons glancing up to see who’s who. The young chef, Francesco Manalo, whose résumé includes entry-level stints at the French Laundry and Per Se, successfully creates New American dishes around seasonal ingredients. The menu changes weekly, and the wine list includes selections from Georgian vineyards. Continental breakfast is complimentary, and room service off a different menu is available all hours.There is no gym, but there are Marshall Stanmore Bluetooth speaker systems with a retro look and free Wi-Fi throughout. The hotel has appealing common spaces, including a lobby lounge with hand-painted red and orange floor tiles. A rear alley serves as a garden bar where black-and-white movie clips play on a brick wall. An outdoor deck with table service overlooks the front street. Walls of paned glass offer urban views from the lobby, bar and lounge, where low seating and dim lights invite lingering with a book or laptop — or a cocktail.Sumptuous overall, a good choice for anyone wanting to see what Georgian sophisticates are up to.Rooms Hotel 14 Merab Kostava Street; 995-32-2020099; roomshotels­.com/tbilisi.A version of this article appears in print on January 3, 2016, on Page TR4 of the New York edition with the headline: For V.I.P.s and Sophisticates Alike.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »