

 Lucas Peterson
 

FRUGAL TRAVELER
JULY 13, 2016
While drawing up an itinerary for my trip to Cincinnati, I came across @cincygram, an Instagram account with over 33,000 followers curated by a native, Dave Schmidt. I admired his shots of the city, many of which were taken late at night or early in the morning (Mr. Schmidt has a family and works full time as a retail store manager).Once I had arrived, we sat down one morning for a late breakfast at the downtown outpost of the cafe chain First Watch and I asked him how he started his account. “I didn’t have any photography experience,” he said. “I used to run all the time but then I hurt my knee. But I still liked to be outside, so one day I went out and took my iPhone with me and just started taking pictures.”I had a good start on an agenda for the “Queen City,” but I got a couple of great suggestions from Mr. Schmidt that helped complete a picture of a former boomtown that was once called the “Paris of America” because of its inspired architecture and ambitious engineering projects. I discovered that Cincinnati has a complicated and fascinating history that bridges (quite literally) the Northern and Southern United States. There are, of course, great opportunities for the budget-conscious traveler: gorgeous buildings, interesting museums, open-air markets and good food, including Cincinnati’s famous chili.I did, however, have a problem finding cheap, centrally located lodging for the time I was there. I ended up paying $91 per night at a satisfactory Quality Inn north of the University of Cincinnati. When I picked up my rental car from the airport ($23 a day from Enterprise), the guy at the counter seemed concerned: “Well gosh … who the heck put you up there?” he asked. The neighborhood wasn’t great — akin to a highway off-ramp — but it was only a 10-minute drive to downtown.AdvertisementOnce I had made that commute, it was easy enough to find a place to stash my car and explore. (A frugal bonus: the downtown parking meters offer the first 10 minutes free. You just push a little button and voilà, you have enough time to run a quick errand or get coffee.)I had to hit a ballgame, of course — Cincinnati is fiercely proud of its two pro sports teams, the Reds and the Bengals. I picked up a cheap upper deck ticket at the Great American Ball Park for $14 (take that, Yankees fans!) and grabbed a “hot mett” — a spicy smoked sausage — for $5.75. I struck up a conversation with a young man named BJ Dabbain, who works in Lexington, Ky. His girlfriend couldn’t make the game and he very generously offered me her ticket — a $55 seat on the infield. I bought him a beer ($9.25) and we watched the Reds lose to the Mariners.AdvertisementNear the ballpark is one of Mr. Schmidt’s favorite Cincinnati sights: the John A. Roebling Suspension Bridge, which leads into Smale Riverfront Park. The bridge, which was completed in 1866, served as a prototype for the Brooklyn Bridge, which Roebling would also design. The Roebling bridge was, for a time, the world’s longest suspension bridge, spanning the Ohio River and connecting Cincinnati with Covington, Ky. Mr. Schmidt told me his favorite way to enjoy Cincinnati’s most iconic structure: “Drive over to the Kentucky side at night and park under the bridge,” he said. “Then walk across it. You get this beautiful view of Smale Park.”I parked under the bridge in Kentucky, making the roughly five-minute walk across the gently lapping Ohio, and was met by the colorful neon lights of Smale Park, which hugs the foundation of the bridge and runs along the river. Combined with traffic whizzing by on the old iron-and-sandstone bridge, it was a perfect urban greeting.I visited a couple of Mr. Schmidt’s other suggestions, including Spring Grove Cemetery. On a muggy spring day, I walked around the spacious, beautiful grounds of the second-largest cemetery in the United States, which is notably the final resting place of 41 Civil War generals. I also visited the Cincinnati Museum Center, a beautiful old Art Deco train terminal (“We locals just call it Union Terminal,” Mr. Schmidt said) that was refashioned into a museum center. The building is worth checking out but being renovated, meaning many activities are canceled  for the next two years.Just as well — my own cultural priorities hewed more toward the culinary. Near the top of the list was to try that Cincinnati chili, a concoction frequently served on spaghetti or hot dogs (“Coneys”) and smothered in various toppings like diced onion and Cheddar cheese (“ways”). I went to three specialists: Skyline Chili, Camp Washington Chili and Gold Star Chili. Skyline, a popular chain, is synonymous with Cincinnati chili. I grabbed a stool at the counter at Skyline on Ludlow Avenue in the Clifton neighborhood and ordered a 3-way and a cheese Coney.The 3-way was a dish of spaghetti covered in chili and a mountain of bright orange cheese. The chili is more of a thin, meaty paste — with a texture like a mushy soup — flavored with cinnamon and allspice. Beans or onions can be added to make it a 4- or 5-way. I liked, but didn’t quite love, it. It could have been a bit hotter, both in temperature (my spaghetti was a little tepid) and spice level. But it’s certainly idiosyncratic and fiercely defended by Cincinnatians, and visitors should try it. Gold Star was not substantially different from Skyline, but has a slightly more fast-food atmosphere to it. I actually liked the chili at Camp Washington a bit more than the others, finding it not quite as sweet.I am willing, though, to give a couple of other spots a full-throated endorsement. After drinking a $4 pale ale in the outdoor courtyard of Neons Unplugged, a laid-back, pet-friendly drinking establishment with a giant Jenga set, I walked down the street to Cincy by the Slice, a casual dive-pizzeria.AdvertisementI occasionally encounter food items I’ve never tried before but somehow seem so familiar that I wonder how I ever lived without them. “Pickleroni” pizza is one of those things. The conceit is so simple: sliced dill pickles and pepperoni as pizza toppings. The tartness and acid of the sour pickles are the perfect foil to greasy cheese and processed meat. If you like pickles and pepperoni, it might blow your mind a little bit.The other thing I loved was a simple malt from United Dairy Farmers, a local convenience store chain that looks a bit like a 7-Eleven but has particularly good ice cream. For $3.59 I got a thick, perfectly creamy chocolate malt in a pink-and-red paper cup.If you’re looking to mix your food consumption with some great people-watching in a lively setting, Findlay Market in the Over-the-Rhine neighborhood is a worthwhile destination. At the market, which debuted in 1855, there are dozens of vendors both in and around a large, central building that serves as Findlay’s fulcrum. Inside, there’s almost anything you could wish for: butchers, a bakery, a cheesemonger, even gelato and waffles. There was a long line at Mama Lo Hizo, which sells tacos in the $2.25 to $3 range.Outside the main confines, I wandered into Daisy Mae’s Market, which has a vast selection of Amish jams and jellies. The owner was offering a free bunch of grapes with any $10 purchase. I did a couple of loops around the market, finally settling on a croissant ($3) from Blue Oven Bakery and a macchiato ($3) from Urbana Cafe, where Daniel Noguera slings espresso from a cute Ape car.My walk from downtown to Findlay Market was notable for the sudden flashes of gentrification every couple of streets. Walking up Vine, one block would have upscale shops and bougie brew pubs and on the next, nothing but bleak, abandoned buildings.An Uber driver I spoke to later, Colleen, confirmed the changes that were happening in the neighborhood. “They’re moving all the Section 8 out,” she said, referring to the low-income housing program. “That building was particularly hard,” she said as we passed the corner of 13th and Walnut. “Had at least 75 families in there.” The displacement of lower income residents in the Over-the-Rhine neighborhood, many of whom are black, is a sensitive subject.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Cincinnati’s location, on the border of Ohio and Kentucky (historically, Ohio was a free state, Kentucky a slave state) gave it a prominent role in the nation’s complicated, painful history with race. Harriet Beecher Stowe, the American abolitionist and author of “Uncle Tom’s Cabin,” lived in Cincinnati when she was just Harriet Beecher. Her former house, now a museum, can be visited but has irregular hours.Ohio was also a crucial state in the Underground Railroad, the secret network that led to the freedom of tens of thousands of slaves in the 19th century. The Ohio River, on which Cincinnati sits, was a meaningful border for many slaves looking for freedom. I visited the National Underground Railroad Freedom Center ($15 admission), a museum that takes an unflinching look at the history of slavery and its abolition. Other exhibits, like “Invisible: Slavery Today,” explore modern-day human trafficking.I found “The Slave Pen” to be the museum’s most powerful exhibit. A building from the early 1800s that’s roughly the size of a small house, it was discovered in Kentucky and reassembled, in its entirety, within the museum. The two-story cabin was essentially a slave jail, serving as a way station before its prisoners were moved farther south. Men were kept on the second floor; women on the first. Thick iron rings are jammed into support beams, demonstrating where slaves shackled.There’s an odd quietness in the pen, which visitors are allowed to enter: an almost ghostly chill. It’s a potent piece of history, and one of the more impressive artifacts I’ve encountered in any museum, anywhere.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »