AdvertisementSupported byBy Justin SablichMaybe gaming isn’t your thing, but you’d like to know what all the fuss is about Pokémon Go, the mobile game that in the second week since its release is already rivaling Twitter in popularity in the United States.If you do decide to try it out, you may actually find it more useful than the typical diversion.For the uninitiated, Pokémon Go is a smartphone app from Nintendo that places your avatar on a map based on your location. Only instead of restaurants and other sites that augmented-reality apps like Yelp’s Monocle call out, it uses Niantic’s A.R. technology to show virtual features called Pokéstops, where you can find Pokéballs, virtual “gyms,” where you can train and join teams, and creatures called Pokémon, which you capture by swiping Pokéballs at them. You start off on your own, but can join a team once you reach Level 5.Confused? I was too. I didn’t know my Pikachu from my Pokédex before firing up the app for the first time, but it didn’t take long to see that hunting Pokémon could be an interesting way to tour a city. Here are a few tips on how and where to play the game as a traveler.I hit the streets, and had no problem blending in with the majority of other folks in New York City preoccupied with their phones.I started my journey in Midtown Manhattan near the Museum of Modern Art, and my map showed several Pokéstops nearby. When you get close enough to these spots, you are not only rewarded with Pokésballs, points and other things that I’ve yet to figure out what to do with, but are also shown a photo of the real place you are standing near and, sometimes, given information about the site.Just outside MoMA, I spied a Pokéstop labeled “Berlin Wall Slabs.” I followed my map, and, sure enough, there were five painted slabs of the Berlin Wall in the lobby of 520 Madison Avenue. I doubt I would have discovered these on a typical day in the city.Not surprisingly, popular destinations like Rockefeller Center and Radio City Music Hall were designated as Pokéstops. But the app continued to point things out that I, a New Yorker for more than 10 years, never knew existed, or at least never paid attention to.The app led me to easily overlooked architectural details like the three circular plaques located above Radio City’s famous facade on 50th Street.This was one of the many artistic features doubling as a Pokéstop, as was a “Toynbee Tile.” While the app did not provide any information on the tiles and their strange messages, I was inspired enough to do my own research. I came across several compelling theories about their origins and a 2011 documentary called “Resurrect Dead” that dives into the mystery.Once I had the hang of it, I headed to Central Park, which, with all its historic nooks and crannies, seemed like a potentially informative place to capture a Doduo bird or two.The park did not disappoint. There were plenty of Pokéballs to be had at the statues of Christopher Columbus and Rutherford B. Hayes, and lots of Spearows lurking near the Bethesda Fountain.The app will lead you to well-known landmarks, of course, like the Naumburg Bandshell or Strawberry Fields, but will also highlight obscure yet historic trees, bridges and works of art.A dedicated Pokémon trainer could easily spend an entire day roaming the park from top to bottom.MoMA is a Pokéstop, and my map also indicated stops at MoMA’s Sculpture Garden, including in front of three sculptures of bodies there.This got me thinking: Could there really be Pokéstops throughout MoMA?To find out, I entered the lobby and quickly realized that Pokémon are brash little buggers, and that they’ll mess with you no matter where you are.After buying a museum ticket and trapping a Horsea in the lobby, I proceeded to the galleries. But all I got there were funny looks from people who were contemplating art rather than throwing imaginary balls at virtual creatures inside the exhibition “Edgar Degas: A Strange New Beauty.” While my sound was off, it was not hard to figure out who was really there for the show.Therefore, I learned that you can hunt Pokémon pretty much anywhere, but that private areas that may require an admission fee will not have Pokéstops. So there is no added value for those seeking knowledge, as well as trying to get to Level 5.But with some adjustments, like relegating Pokémon to the lobby to limit distractions, and maybe a marketing partnership, it’s not hard to imagine Pokémon Go becoming a viable alternative to an audio tour guide as a means of learning about art and history.By the way, there have been complaints about smartphone-wielding people showing up to play (and pump their fists) at inappropriate places like the Holocaust Museum. So knowing where to play is just as important as knowing when to put the phone down.My top pet peeve in New York City is the phone-consumed commuter, walking very slowly in front of me, often when I’m late for work.This game lends itself to annoying behavior like this, and I’ll admit that I literally bumped into at least one person while playing.But it’s possible to be courteous while adding to your Pokédex. Stay on the edges of heavily foot-trafficked areas, and wait to stand still before flicking your Pokéballs.This will also help keep you safe. The game itself tells you to be aware of your surroundings when it first loads, and for good reason.There have been  reports of players being distracted to the point of harmful contact, both on foot and in vehicles. In Missouri, robbers used the app’s geolocation feature to lure players to a secluded location.These events led to a statement by the National Safety Council urging “gamers to consider safety over their scores before a life is lost.”City departments are also taking to social media with warnings of their own.Because Pokémon Go tracks your location via GPS, your phone’s data, as well as its battery, are going to take a hit.If you have a battery-powered phone charger, bring it along for any extended journeys. You can also adjust your phone settings by  lowering your screen brightness and disabling background apps, to extend the life of your battery.Server crashes have also caused the app to freeze and prevent users from playing for periods. Other than restarting the app, there’s not much you can do until improvements are made by Nintendo and the game’s developer, Niantic, to better accommodate the heavy usage.It would be nice to have a detailed history of the places you visit and may want to revisit or research more on.Unfortunately, the app’s “journal” tracks only the time and date of each Pokéstop, but does not identify the place by name.If you come across something interesting along the way, take a screen shot so you have something to look back on.Advertisement