By CHRISTINE NEGRONIAUG. 1, 2016
TALLAROOK, Australia — On the last afternoon of my bike ride through a rural part of the Australian state of Victoria, I pedaled past a whimsical sculpture of a motorcyclist who had plowed headfirst into a bale of hay.Had I seen it earlier, I would have considered it a warning. Now, it was a reminder of just how fortunate I had been.The distractions along the Great Victorian Rail Trail are many, as the path runs through remarkable scenery: wetlands and farmland, over bridges and through valleys, past cows and Clydesdales and, yes, kangaroos.According to the nonprofit organization Rail Trails Australia, Victoria leads the country in converting disused railroad rights of way for the use of bikers, hikers and horseback riders: It now has almost 530 miles of trails, compared with just 30 miles in New South Wales, home to Sydney.AdvertisementIn 2012, Victoria linked several short trails to create an uninterrupted 83-mile stretch it named the Great Victorian Rail Trail. It is the country’s longest trail, although the 100-mile Brisbane Valley Rail Trail in Queensland is scheduled to be completed in 2017.AdvertisementI was not alone in thinking a long-distance trip on two wheels through a part of Victoria would be intriguing. In 2015, about 5,475 people were estimated to have ridden the trail from end to end, according to Judy Dixon of the government’s Tourism and Economic Development office.The trail begins at Tallarook, north of Melbourne, and runs west to the town of Mansfield. I elected to start from Mansfield, so I could pay an early visit to Healesville Sanctuary, a conservation and education center, for a primer on area wildlife like the ground-dwelling echidna and the wombat, the nocturnal river-dwelling platypus and the tree-inhabiting possum.The area’s biggest birds were also represented, including the ubiquitous (and raucous) yellow-tufted cockatoo and the enormous wedge-tailed eagle, a significant character in the Aboriginal creation story. I was to see many of these animals in the days to follow, but the porcupine-like echidna remained elusive.After picking up my rental bike, a black all-terrain model, and stowing my gear in panniers on the back, I began my ride at Mansfield’s old rail station. It was early on a Monday morning, and the museum housed in two vintage rail cars and a caboose parked at the station platform was closed. I did not know it then — I was pedaling alone and without a guide — but there would be many other opportunities to learn about the role of the railroads along my way.Overnight stops had to be planned to match available housing, which is listed on the trail website, and the first day’s arrangement was a challenge. Bonnie Doon, with its scenic bridge spanning an arm of Lake Eildon, was only about seven miles from Mansfield — not much of a ride. But the next lodgings were another 20 miles along, in the tiny town of Yarck. Clearly I would not be easing into this adventure.In the center of Yarck, there was a small hotel, as well as two little churches that had been turned into accommodations. (Ms. Dixon said that as traffic increased on the trail, she expected the housing options to grow; during my trip, I rarely saw other cyclists.) I stayed in the four-bedroom Yarck Cottage, just across the street from the churches, and by the time I got there, I was bushed.It wasn’t the distance that felled me, it was the flat tire only a couple of miles short of Yarck. That, in combination with blisters I had developed from riding on an unfamiliar and too-wide bicycle seat, had me longing for the day to end.AdvertisementPaul van Kan, the photographer traveling with me, tried to repair the flat but the replacement tube in the emergency kit was not the right size, so we had to walk the bikes as quickly as we could into town as night fell. To avoid wasting time, we arranged for someone from the bike shop to deliver a replacement tube before our morning departure.)The blisters, however, were there to stay and would grow increasingly uncomfortable as my ride progressed. It taught me a lesson most experienced long-distance riders already know: Travel with your own bicycle seat.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The next day we made a short side trip by car to the Timber Tramway and Museum in nearby Alexandra, to take a look at its three small rooms of artifacts, photographs and scale models that chronicle 50 years of logging in the Rubicon State Forest above the town.I was back on the bike after lunch, a bit more than 15 miles between me and Yea, the largest town I would see on the trail and, with more than 1,000 residents, big enough to have a shop selling padded bike shorts. For that alone I was inclined to like it.In fact, the highlight of the stop was the Y Water Discovery Centre, a large wetland area for hiking and nature watching. Ron Litjens, a volunteer at the center and an amateur naturalist, provided a tour early the next morning, naming for me dozens of the plant and animal species and helping me locate the bright yellow bellbirds, which are difficult to spot, in spite of their distinctive and relentless chirping.As we approached the bridge leading to the wetland’s exit, a blue-and-red azure kingfisher sat on a branch over the river, preening itself in the sun. It seemed to be posing, so Mr. Litjens and I accommodated and snapped lots of photographs.Back on the trail by noon on the last leg of my adventure, I thought I saw some kangaroos out of the corner of my eye. I had ridden more than 60 miles without spotting a single one; now three appeared to be under the shade of a tree. The bike wobbled unsteadily as I spun around to watch them bounding off. Had there been a haystack ahead of me, I have no doubt I would have pedaled right into it.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.