By JUSTIN SABLICHSEPT. 9, 2017
Amid complaints of airlines taking advantage of those trying to flee Hurricane Irma, Senators Richard Blumenthal and Edward J. Markey have written to Transportation Secretary Elaine L. Chao, asking her to look into reports of possible price gouging.A tweet that went viral earlier this week sparked outrage over suspected price gouging by airlines of Hurricane Irma evacuees.
            Shame on you @delta. Jacking from $547 to over $3200 for people trying to evacute responsibly? #IrmaHurricane pic.twitter.com/O2nfPHQUAh Many others have used social media to chastise the airlines’ supposed bad behavior throughout this past week:
            Ppl may die and airlines are charging $1500 for one way tickets to escape #IrmaHurricane . Shameful price gouging. Retweet to bring action        
            won't happen under this administration and congress, but there should be a goddamn law against airlines price gouging in evac situations        
            These airlines price gouging, taking advantage of people who wanna be safe. SCUMMMMM @jetblue @delta @AmericanAir @spirit @EVERYOTHERAIRLINE        Florida residents have been logging their compaints about unfair pricing of items like water and gasoline, along with airfares, with the office of Pam Bondi, the attorney general of Florida. There have been more than 7,000 since Monday, the attorney general said on Friday.In their letter to Transportation Secretary Chao, Senators Blumenthal and Markey wrote:“Airlines certainly have a right to a reasonable return for services rendered and vagaries in pricing are to be expected; but airlines have no right to impose exorbitant, unfair prices on Americans simply trying to get out of harm’s way.”AdvertisementFlorida Representative Charlie Crist also wrote a letter to Ms. Chao, calling for an investigation of United Airlines after receiving several complaints over airfare increases.AdvertisementThe optics aren’t good for an industry that has had plenty of bad press recently, but the price increases causing the most recent public relations nightmare might just be business as usual.“Sure, some are high, but last-minute fares are often more expensive in general,” George Hobica, the founder of AirfareWatchdog.com, wrote in an email. “I don’t think airlines would be callous or stupid enough to be consciously jacking up fares.”Airfare data by Hopper shows that the price hikes that took place this past week are similar to those from two weeks ago, suggesting that the price changes are typical for a week of departure flights.“If there’s any gouge, it’s just the last minute walk-up airfares that are designed for desperate business fliers,” Mr. Hobica said. “It’s just the computer programs doing what they do when it’s last minute and seats are scarce.”Delta, the target of the initial viral complaint, has denied changing its pricing structure leading up to Irma’s arrival and has capped its one-way fares out of South Florida at $399 through Sept. 13 (other airlines like JetBlue lowered one-way fares to as low as $99.) Delta also quickly responded to the tweet, earning some rare praise from the Twitter user.
            .@Delta reached out & helped tremendously. Note to travelers, always call airline directly if something doesn't look right.#IrmaHurricane https://t.co/vZwYkUJqYi Follow Justin Sablich on Twitter: @JustinSablichWe’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.