The Heinz History Center and the F. Julius LeMoyne House document Pittsburgh’s role in the Underground Railroad, but some sites, sadly, are gone.By PHOEBE ROBINSONFEB. 24, 2017
When one thinks of Pittsburgh, the typical hallmarks come to mind: its nickname, the Steel City, thanks to the long run the highly profitable steel industry had in the area; the Pittsburgh Steelers football team; and, given all the Oscar buzz for Viola Davis’s performance as Rose in “Fences,” the playwright August Wilson, who is most known for his series of 10 plays that captured the African-American experience.But to walk the streets of Pittsburgh is to see that the meaningful role it played in the Underground Railroad is hiding in plain sight.There’s the North Star display, which commemorates the first meeting of the Pittsburgh Anti-Slavery Society. It lights up at night yet during the day could be easily missed if you don’t know to look for it. It’s in Market Square, a public space that has been renovated with restaurants and bars.There’s also the Chatham Village Historic District, home to the historic landmark Bigham House, once a safe house for slaves. These days, it’s tucked away among countless red-brick and slate-roof apartment buildings and townhouses. Driving past it, one could assume it’s just another place for housing and not a remarkable piece of history.AdvertisementAnd then there’s the Hill District, Pittsburgh’s oldest black community, which was home for middle-class free blacks. Though this area may not look it now because of decades of economic decline, it used to be vibrant, full of A.M.E. churches, restaurants, jazz clubs and black-owned businesses.AdvertisementWhat’s clear from all these locations is Pittsburgh’s significance in the history of the Underground Railroad. What is also clear is that it seems that along the way, that information stopped being taught in school. Sure, many of us probably learned the basics: Pittsburgh’s involvement in the Underground Railroad helped approximately 100,000 slaves escape.Impressive, but at least in my education, that is the beginning and end of the discussion. It was only after spending time with Dr. Kimberly Ellis, a founder of the Historic Hill Institute; with the staff at the F. Julius LeMoyne House (Dr. LeMoyne was a noted abolitionist) and the Bigham House; and visiting the “From Slavery to Freedom” exhibit at the Senator John Heinz History Center that it became abundantly evident just how important Pittsburgh was.On a rainy afternoon — Martin Luther King’s Birthday, to be exact — I went to the exhibition at the Heinz center. It takes the museumgoer on a journey from the get-go: as you enter, audio plays, re-enacting slaves screaming and talking in their native language. And the speaker blaring this? It’s above a life-size display of an African lying on a wooden slate in order to give a sense of what it was like for slaves to be transported to America.20 miles279BridgewaterAllegheny R.PittsburghPennsylvaniaSenator John Heinz History CenterOhio R.PittsburghMarket Square376376Monongahela R.CHAthamVillageBigham House1/2 mileFEB. 24, 2017
It’s incredibly raw and emotional, but it’s not all doom and gloom. Many of the exhibit’s rooms are brightly colored; there are plaques relaying tales of how runaways gained their freedom, and sections are dedicated to abolitionists such as Martin R. Delany, who established The Mystery, the first African-American weekly newspaper west of the Allegheny Mountains. A statue of him is displayed prominently, and you can hear one of his impassioned speeches. It’s quite moving, and at the end of “From Slavery to Freedom” there are photos of former President Barack Obama.In a matter of an hour, anyone can relive the journey blacks have gone though in this country. And during my time there, what was most promising was that except for me, the people walking through this exhibit were white. Before I could even wonder if this kind of ratio happens outside of Martin Luther King’s Birthday or Black History Month, I overheard snippets of a mother explaining to her son as best she could the ugliness of slavery, or couples telling each other, “Oh, I didn’t know that” after reading a piece of information. Turns out “Oh, I didn’t know that” would be a common refrain during my time in Pittsburgh.The next day, during a three-hour tour with Dr. Ellis, a historian who modestly mentioned that she is August Wilson’s niece more than halfway into the tour, I got a crash course about Pittsburgh, looking at landmarks and making a pit stop at Market Square. She told me that Delany’s office was near the North Star display, but it’s now gone. All that remains is a sign, briefly noting Delany’s achievements and significance.I asked Dr. Ellis about the erasure of landmarks like that. “That’s part of racism that goes on in Pittsburgh, unfortunately,” she said. “Maybe you can ask yourself, ‘Did they know?’ and perhaps they didn’t. But there is a lot of segregation in Pittsburgh, and as a result, some things get erased when they should be celebrated.” A sobering thought and a reminder that those who record history control so much of what gets remembered.AdvertisementOne location serves as a daily reminder: Point State Park, which is stunning. A massive fountain that lights up at night is the clear focal point.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.At the park I told Dr. Ellis that I still wasn’t sure why Pittsburgh played such an important role in the Underground Railroad. She explained that the antislavery Republican Party had its roots in the city. Many businessmen opposed slavery because they feared the competition. While this was less than altruistic, what matters was that it meant there could be safe houses, places where runaways could get a meal; there were barbershops they could sneak into, wash up and be given fresh clothing as they continued their journey to Canada.Or, and this is the amazing part about the antislavery movement in Pittsburgh, they could, by the 1800s, remain in the Hill District, so that they could start their lives over there instead of having to trek all the way to Canada.We were looking out at the fountain as Dr. Ellis told me this, and then we looked toward the three rivers: the Allegheny, the Monongahela and the Ohio. They are a major reason that Pittsburgh had a profound role in the Underground Railroad — runaway slaves relied on the rivers to bring them to the city.“Hillside,” Dr. Ellis said, “there were plenty of places to hide in caves and abandoned buildings.” Unfortunately, most of the safe houses along that area are now gone.But Dr. Ellis, who has lived here since she was 5 and deeply loves the city, didn’t want to focus solely on what has not been preserved. “What I love about Pittsburgh’s History and Landmarks Foundation,” she said, “is they do a really good job of marking historical places.” Despite the demolition that has been taking place (the day before our tour, on Martin Luther King’s Birthday, a safe house in Bridgewater, Pa., was torn down), Dr. Ellis explained, the institute and other organizations are going into conservation mode to retain what’s left from the past.One place that is being preserved is the F. Julius LeMoyne House in nearby Washington, Pa.. It was declared a National Historic Landmark in 1997, and inside this 200-year-old structure you can see where F. Julius and his father, both doctors, used to entertain guests, work out of their office and operate their pharmacy. F. Julius and his wife, Madelaine, believed that everyone should be treated equally, and he was the only doctor in Washington County who treated African-Americans.My guide, Chuck Edgar, took me into the bedroom and told the story of a night when Madelaine was alone, and a bounty hunter came knocking.“And in those days,” Mr. Edgar explained, “if you suspected someone was harboring slaves, you could go into the home and search and that’s what this bounty hunter did. So she had seven fugitives hide under the bed and then got in, pulled the covers over herself and pretended to be sick. She said, ‘Sir, are you going to come into my room while I’m sick in bed and my husband is not in town?’” The bounty hunter backed off and left the house.AdvertisementA harrowing story and one that, in my opinion, is not told too often. Partly because it takes funding to keep people educated about the past. Mr. Edgar said that schools used to take annual field trips to the house, but since Pittsburgh and surrounding cities have been struggling financially, the trips have stopped. This is a shame because houses like this and the Bigham House are such wonderful links to the past.As my tour with Dr. Ellis wrapped up, I was reminded that progress is being made to keep this part of Pittsburgh’s extraordinary history alive. I thought back on the “From Slavery to Freedom” exhibit, which gives people like Martin R. Delany a place to shine. I remembered Point State Park and how those bodies of water were once used as a path toward freedom.On our last stop, Dr. Ellis took me by the house that was used in “Fences” (she was a marketing consultant for the film) and talked about not only the recognition the city received from the director and star Denzel Washington wanting to shoot there, but also the financial boon.I’m feeling hopeful because with Mr. Washington, the legacy of August Wilson and Dr. Ellis fighting for the history of Pittsburgh that is too oft forgotten, the city is in good hands.An article on Feb. 26 about Pittsburgh’s involvement in the Underground Railroad referred imprecisely to the location of a huge fountain that is a focal point of the area. It is in Point State Park — not in Three Rivers Park, which is the name of a system of parks that includes Point State.Phoebe Robinson is the author of “You Can’t Touch My Hair: And Other Things I Still Have to Explain” and the co-host of WNYC Studios’ “2 Dope Queens.”A version of this article appears in print on February 26, 2017, on Page TR5 of the New York edition with the headline: History Preserved, and Not.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.