AdvertisementSupported byIn TransitBy Sara LiebermanToday, Louis Vuitton is a luxury fashion label, a status symbol that usually hangs from a shoulder or elegantly dangles from a wrist by way of a leather logoed handbag. But rewind to 1835, and the name belonged to a man who left his home at the age of 14 and began walking 280 miles from eastern France to Paris. Upon arriving two years later, he worked as a box maker and packer before starting his own company in 1854, designing ergonomic trunks — or “specialty packing for fashion” as it was advertised — for the wandering elite.Vuitton’s “Trunk of 1906,” with beechwood, brass corners, patent lock and monogram canvas exterior not only embodies the brand’s history and sensibility, but is also the prototype for modern luggage, making it the most appropriate piece to welcome visitors into the new “Volez, Voguez, Voyagez” exhibition at the Grand Palais in Paris that runs through Feb. 21. (The exhibition is expected to be shown in other cities in 2016, with Tokyo being a potential destination.)The extensive, nine-room retrospective covers 160 years, four modes of transport and hundreds of signature pieces by a handful of Vuitton descendants and designers, all of which portray the brand’s inventiveness and elegance.“We wanted to talk about the story of Louis Vuitton and to show how even contemporary pieces conform to past pieces,” said Olivier Saillard, the director of the Palais Galliera Musée de la Mode in Paris and the show’s curator.This explains why “Volez, Voguez, Voyagez”— Fly, Sail, Journey — is by no means chronological. While the exhibition still manages to unfold seamlessly from room to room, each of which is marked by themes like “Expeditions” and “Sophisticated Dandies” with elaborate set design from the stage director Robert Carsen; the most delightful displays are those that show a clear progression from “then” to “now.” The transformative time lapse is realized in the placement of an aluminum gilded trunk from 1892 next to a chrome-plated bronze sculpture of the Keepall bag from 2001 by the artist Sylvie Fleury.Be it air, train, boat or automobile, there was a sack to suit one’s flight of fancy both in form and function. Whether it was the invention of a tumbler lock that allowed one unique key to unlock several pieces, or the durable woodwork of the stackable flat trunks, there wasn’t a piece of clothing, shoe, hat, hairbrush or typewriter that didn’t get its own carefully curated carryall.“Every life is a body of work,” Mr. Saillard writes in the exhibition’s extensive hardcover catalog from Rizzoli, available for 140 euros or about $151 at $1.07 to the euro, in the gift shop and online. “Louis Vuitton’s life can be seen mirrored under the light of his work. The generations that succeeded him maintained that reflection because the radiance of a mission we call the art of living still shines.”Some highlights (with pictures) from the exhibition:Designed in 1936 by Louis Vuitton’s grandson, Gaston-Louis, a publisher and journalist who eventually took over the business from his father, Georges, this 35-pound portable desk-piece features space for a typewriter, books and other office items that all stayed in place once folded. According to the brand’s extensive customer files, similar models were ordered by the American embassy and Ernest Hemingway. “I wanted to create a special atmosphere [to show] the art of writer, which is as important as fashion,” Mr. Saillard said of the “Heures D’Absence” room where the piece is displayed.Originally designed to hold dirty laundry on long sailing trips, during which passengers often changed five times a day, this soft canvas bag from 1901 was the predecessor of the modern gym bag. “It’s the grandfather of every bag you see in the world,” Mr. Saillard said. This particular piece once belonged to Gaston-Louis and therefore bears his tricolor V monogram, which became a house signature and is still in the line today.This nearly 90-pound piece unfolds to become a bed, complete with a cotton mattress and pillow. “It was invented for the explorer,” Mr. Saillard said. A specific one, in fact: the French expeditioner Pierre Savorgnan de Brazza commissioned the first one in 1905 for his trip to Dakar, during which he contributed to the Republic of Congo becoming a French protectorate.Lined in Moroccan leather and red silk, this Art Deco toiletry kit, first made for the 1925 Exposition of Modern Industrial and Decorative Arts, features more than 50 items from a nail clipper and a shoehorn, to hair brushes made of ivory that resemble a silhouette of the American skyscrapers when stored in one of the three removable trays. “It’s probably the most delicate piece in the collection,” Mr. Saillard said.First appearing in the 1930s, this duffel-like tote became the prototype for all weekend bags. “The Keepall is a kind of sport bag, which influenced many bags for fashion, but also for daily life,” Mr. Saillard said. Originally constructed in cotton canvas, through the years this iconic, tube-shaped sack also came in cowhide and has been reinterpreted by various artists and designers like Takashi Murakami and Yayoi Kusama. The exhibit includes 10 different models in four different rooms in the exhibition.The final room is dedicated to music, and features one of the few contemporary pieces — this record box designed by Helmut Lang in 1996 to celebrate the centennial of the monogrammed canvas. “It was important for me to end the exhibition with music in order to indicate how there’s some special commode for everything you want — even the most vulnerable things you have to pack, like an instrument,” Mr. Saillard said.Advertisement