With the caucuses weeks away, a road trip reaffirms that our nation, beginning with Iowa, is full of unsung surprises.By ROBERT DRAPERJAN. 15, 2016
On a Monday morning in early December I drove a rental car out of Des Moines and eventually made my way down a slender country road that cut a forthright path through cattle pastures and cornfields not yet glazed by snow. My destination was Winterset, the county seat of Madison County, whose covered bridges Robert James Waller immortalized more than 20 years ago in his best seller, “The Bridges of Madison County.” Mr. Waller’s treacly love fable is not my personal favorite, but I confess to detouring at the sign for Hogback Bridge and being stirred by the lonely spectacle of that wooden sentry crouched over the North River in an unprepossessing crease of Middle America.My reasons for visiting Winterset, however, were more political than sentimental. Donald Trump had descended on the town a few months back, reportedly making a “yuuge” impression on the local Republican kingmakers, and also wowing a gathering of working-class locals with the promise that if elected president his hairstyle would most likely be a casualty, as he would be too busy “working my ass off” to fuss with it.The venue for Mr. Trump’s remarks had been the John Wayne Birthplace and Museum, which another presidential candidate, Rick Santorum, would soon be visiting. I wasn’t so much interested in joining Mr. Santorum’s “Take Back America” tour as I wished to bask in the magnetic force that Winterset’s favorite son, the former Marion Michael Morrison, exerted on political hopefuls. And so I conducted my own hourlong tour of the small but strangely affecting museum, with its fake-blood-stained cowboy costume and movie posters of blockbusters (“True Grit”) and duds (“Big Jake”) alike. Tender and affable though the sendup was, the myth being evoked — that of the rugged individualist galloping to the world’s rescue — remains as politically potent as any in America.
CreditTony Cenicola/The New York Times        After departing that temple of crinkly-eyed, taciturn masculinity, with a “Rooster Cogburn” Christmas ornament in hand, I saw that it was lunchtime. Nearby was the local Pizza Ranch, an Iowa chain mysteriously popular among G.O.P. politicos, where Mr. Santorum would be hosting a town hall the next day. Hunched in the booths around mine in the brightly lit restaurant were a dozen or so men quietly discussing the weather and grain prices in between trips to the pizza buffet station. With their flannel shirts, wind-beaten cheeks and factual manner of speech, they struck me as agrarian replicas of the Duke himself. I found myself wondering what a politician like Mr. Santorum might say to men like these, given that soon — sooner than anyone else in America — they would say their piece at the ballot box.AdvertisementIt’s again that season, occurring once every four years, when men and women who imagine themselves as the next president of the United States are obliged to make their case to the public in quiet swaths of America’s midsection that they would otherwise never deign to visit. Accompanying these candidates are campaign strategists and members of the political press who themselves are strangers to what some sneeringly refer to as “flyover country.” The collision of the two worlds is often abrupt and ghoulish — diners under siege, a crazed network of boom mikes, a staged “moment” in search of actual momentousness. But it can also be salient, an opportunity for the nation’s elite to confront their own ignorance as they see the expressions and hear the stories of people whose ordinary lives are directly affected by the bloodless everyday machinations of Washington.AdvertisementThis ritual encounter begins in Iowa — blessedly so, I might add, despite the frequent lament that the state’s Republican voters are too conservative, that its caucus system is too arcane and exclusionary. Let’s put all that to the side for the moment. Iowa is not just a reminder that America is more than the sum total of its skyscrapers and safe spaces. It also reaffirms that our nation, beginning with Iowa, is full of unsung surprises.Iowa is what we have in mind when we speak of America’s heartland: situated between the nation’s East and West Coasts, owing little cultural debt to either; economically driven for the most part by the blue-collar sectors of agriculture and manufacturing; and possessing both a gently undulating land mass (56,272 square miles) and population (3.1 million) that statistically place the state in the nation’s middle. As with elsewhere in America, Iowans are increasingly urban, and the state’s capital and largest city, Des Moines (with over 200,000 inhabitants), possesses an eclectic, upwardly mobile vibe akin to that of Seattle or Austin. But Iowa as a whole is essentially white, working-class and right-of-center — though, true to its middling status, ranks 24th among America’s 50 states when it comes to self-identified conservatives.Some may suggest that there are better times of the year to visit the state than in winter. But since my migratory patterns are keyed to the reporting I do during the election cycle, I associate Iowa with steely skies, skeletonized trees, humans bundled up like Michelin men and campaigning like it’s 1999.Des Moines, to me, is the convivial bar in the lobby of the downtown Marriott, where the traveling press can reliably be spotted decompressing after filing their gaffe-of-the-day stories. It is Centro, the sleek and always-full Italian restaurant that has supplanted the city’s grand steakhouse, 801, as the place to spot candidates. It is Raygun, the self-described “printing, design and clothing company owned and operated by extremely attractive Midwesterners,” where this year’s featured T-shirt is a montage of grimacing Bernie Sanders images. (Mr. Sanders gamely submitted to a YouTube moment alongside a child who was wearing the shirt.)Des Moines is also the Continental, a dark and dignified restaurant around the corner from Raygun in the city’s East Village. I spent a recent evening there sipping a whiskey-and-egg-whites-based drink called the Filibuster with the G.O.P. communications specialist Tim Albrecht — formerly with Mitt Romney in 2008 and 2012, now with Jeb Bush — while he wistfully recalled Mr. Romney’s last campaign rally before Election Day: “Ten thousand people waiting for him at the airport. We thought we had it in the bag.”And Des Moines is Carl’s, a boisterous dive in the Sherman Hill neighborhood where Ronald Reagan once lived while working as a sportscaster for WHO Radio. Both the bar and the neighborhood are nowadays heavily populated by Democrats, I was told by a member of the loyal opposition, a longtime Iowa G.O.P. strategist named Grant Young, whom I found beside a steaming pot of chili drinking a Coors Light with a shot of whiskey and cinnamon — and who, in midexplanation, fist-bumped an arriving patron, Matt Paul, the state director of Hillary Clinton’s campaign.I woke up the next morning after that boozy evening and shuffled over to the edge of downtown, where Carly Fiorina was conducting a town hall in the conference room of an insurance company. The candidate’s “Blueprint to Take Our Country Back” would prove to be — and I say this with gratitude — the lightest fare of the day. Iowans are great innovators when it comes to caloric multiplier effects. In the town square of Oskaloosa later that morning, I stopped for a latte at Smokey Row Coffee, a theatrical cafe where, above one special table, an actual movie marquee announces who is sitting directly beneath it. (“Happy birthday, Senator Grassley!”) The soup of the day was cheeseburger chowder — literally, a burger half-submerged in a small ocean. I forewent this delicacy because I knew I would soon be having lunch in Iowa City, at the famed Hamburg Inn No. 2, a scruffily hip diner festooned with they-were-here photos of candidates — Bill Clinton, Barack Obama and others. My server there advised me to follow my cheeseburger with something called a pie shake — “Try the pumpkin, it’s in season.” True to its description, the experience was akin to drinking a pumpkin pie, complete with crust.40 MILESTempletonIowaIowa CityCoon RapidsWest BranchDes MoinesHogback BridgeOskaloosaWinterset/John Wayne Birthplace and MuseumMaharishi Vedic CityFairfieldIll.Mo.JAN. 15, 2016
Just outside Iowa City, in the sleepy town of West Branch, is the presidential museum of its native son Herbert Hoover. The tourist site, housed in a building not far from the two-room cottage where Hoover spent his earliest days before becoming orphaned at the age of 9, is notable for its sparseness. Unlike the edifices dedicated to more recent or more beloved presidents, a visitor can stroll through the life of our nation’s 31st chief executive without anyone else around, lending poignancy to Hoover’s experience as the man widely blamed for failing to prevent the Great Depression. To its credit, the museum devotes significant space to Hoover’s fall from grace following his landslide loss to Franklin D. Roosevelt in 1932, and subsequent despondency, while reminding visitors that he ultimately regained his status as a statesman, working with President Harry S. Truman to help resuscitate Europe’s economy following World War II. Here in Iowa was another great national motif — that of America as the land of second chances.AdvertisementI was now in the eastern side of the state, with no set itinerary. As a native Texan, I am not one for driving in snow. But the weather was merciful and the rural roads well paved, offering a near-seamless tableau of shorn acreage upon which the occasional silo or farmhouse materialized in a state of heartbreaking isolation. Just outside Kalona on Route 1, I came upon a profusion of buggies ferrying Amish families. But traffic was otherwise nonexistent, and so I made my way unharried, in a kind of fugue state, until a beeping notified me that I was almost out of gas. I had just enough to get me to tiny Keota — where, at the town’s one high school, Martin O’Malley was describing trickle-down economics to a mildly interested crowd of about 200. A reporter for the local paper told me where to find the nearest gas station, adding with a sweet smile, “I know it means a lot to the folks who organized this event that you came all this way.” A few minutes later, as I meandered through Keota, she flagged me down on the street and gently advised me that I would find what I was looking for in the opposite direction.Less than an hour from Keota, I found the turnoff to Vedic City — or, rather (as a sign proclaimed it), “Maharishi Vedic City: Capital of the Global Country of World Peace.” Iowa, as it turns out, boasts one of America’s foremost Transcendental Meditation temples, shimmering on the plains like an alien spaceship. The filmmaker David Lynch was a habitué; Oprah Winfrey had paid a visit; Jim Carrey gave a commencement speech to the 2014 graduating class at Maharishi University of Management in Fairfield. The community’s other main attraction is the Raj, a rather sumptuous spa where the ancient healing rites of Ayurveda are practiced. I was tempted to book a room, but the Raj requires a three-day commitment, and with my reporter’s laptop and ever-buzzing iPhone, I seemed a dubious fit anyway. Instead, I found a hotel in neighboring Fairfield, a new-agey city ominously self-described in one sign as “a cast of 10,000 as themselves.” Ron Paul, I was later told, had a strong following in Fairfield.Western Iowa’s unofficial corn corridor is Route 141, an Uberless world of uneven cellphone reception and agrarian infinity, gorgeous in its forlornness. In Coon Rapids, a quiet town of 1,300 astride the Middle Raccoon River, I went searching for the farm that an agriculturally curious Soviet premier, Nikita S. Khrushchev, came to visit in 1959. After a few fruitless turns, I pulled into the main square and walked into the newspaper office of the Coon Rapids Enterprise. A yellow Labrador puppy joyfully assaulted me as I walked in. “That’s Margaux,” the paper’s editor, Charlie Nixon, informed me as he restrained his pet. “We name all of our dogs after wines we can’t afford.”The newsroom’s walls featured several vintage photos of prominent Iowa politicians, which Mr. Nixon narrated for me with a string of appropriate profanities. He then showed me a framed photo of the bald Soviet leader standing beside a white-haired farmer. “Roswell Garst owned a big seed company,” he said, adding that the Iowan had visited the U.S.S.R. to study its farming techniques at the behest of Khrushchev, who shared Mr. Garst’s interest in preventing famine.The editor directed me to the old Garst farmstead, a rustic, two-story, wood-framed structure on a 5,000-acre land trust that is now a bed-and-breakfast replete with plaques and photographs memorializing the rather astounding 1959 summit of the Garst and Khrushchev families, one that had earned Mr. Garst the epithet of “Communist sympathizer” rather than the capitalist visionary he actually was. Like the Maharishi temple in Vedic City, the Garst property utterly belied the political caricature of Iowa as an ecosystem of rural rigidity.A few miles west of Coon Rapids, another wrinkle in the Iowa tapestry came into view: Templeton, home of one of the country’s most skilled Prohibition-era bootleggers, so goes the legend. Near the little town’s center, I beheld a Christmas tree made entirely of whiskey barrels and realized that I had discovered the tasting room of Templeton Rye. The walls inside its handsome tasting room were covered with old newspaper articles describing how Al Capone favored the smooth moonshine crafted by this community of farmers, who had apparently turned to the illegal pastime when corn prices went south. Today, Templeton Rye’s bottles bear the signature of Deirdre Capone, the mobster’s grandniece who has a promoting agreement with the company.“We don’t dabble in politics — just in our right to make whiskey,” the tasting room operator, Lisa Halbur, proclaimed as she poured me a shot of the now-legal stuff. That right, she admitted, was still prohibited in the “controlled state” of Iowa. As a result, her company’s whiskey is in fact distilled in Lawrenceburg, Ind., and later bottled in Templeton. “I guess we could use a good lobbyist,” Ms. Halbur said.AdvertisementI asked her if there was anyplace else in Templeton where one could find remnants of Iowa’s bootlegging trade. Her answer led me to a small cemetery outside the town’s one Catholic church. After wandering among the graves for a few minutes, I discovered the attraction in question. It was a monument to a former parish priest, a Father Schulte, with a little door on the tombstone featuring a chalice into which one would ordinarily place candles and pictures of the Virgin Mary … but which in Templeton was where customers knew to look to find their treasured bottle of hooch.I returned to my day job, and to the suburbs of Des Moines, that afternoon. Hillary Clinton would soon be hosting a town hall in Urbandale, and denouncing Mr. Trump’s denunciation of Muslim refugees to an overflow crowd, just a few hundred yards from where I had begun the day dining on pecan pancakes among a gathering called the Westside Conservative Club, while those present grilled the speaker, a Republican mayor, about his tax cuts. (Short version: He could stand to cut more.) After Mrs. Clinton fielded a few softball questions with a shortstop’s aplomb, I headed off to dinner to meet with a G.O.P. strategist, then to quiz a prominent local Democrat at Wellman’s, a watering hole that in the previous two cycles was legendarily overstuffed with Obama campaign staffers. The Democrat in question was as skilled a storyteller as he was proficient a drinker. Still, I had an early flight to catch the next morning, to that other early decider in the presidential sweepstakes, New Hampshire — a state that is much remarked on by the political class for its flinty local interrogators and for the pride they seem to take in negating the referendum delivered by Iowans a week earlier.But as I drove back to my hotel that night, I could not stop thinking of the many quirks I had encountered throughout my week in Iowa: a self-made cowboy, a remade statesman, a farmer who welcomed the world’s leading Communist into his home, Maharishi followers and bootleggers, pie shakes and cheeseburger chowder. This was the Iowa I had not known, the America I knew in my bones was there all along. Its votes came first for good reason.Marriott Des Moines Downtown, 700 Grand Avenue; marriott.com. This large and centrally located property is the state’s epicenter for visiting politicos. Double rooms begin at $139.The Raj, 1734 Jasmine Avenue, Vedic City; theraj.com. On a 100-acre complex of meadows and east-facing spaces established for the practice of Transcendental Meditation, this 18-room health spa attracts devotees of the ancient wellness treatment known as Maharishi Ayurveda. Rooms and treatment packages begin at $660.80, with a three-day minimum.Whiterock Conservancy, 1436 Highway 141, Coon Rapids; whiterockconservancy.org. The former farmstead of the Iowa agriculture innovator Roswell Garst — and the site where Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev visited in 1959 — is now a secluded country bed-and-breakfast that can accommodate up to 22 guests, with three nearby cottages. Double rooms begin at $85.Centro, 1003 Locust Street, Des Moines; centrodesmoines.com. Among both the political and nonpolitical class, the capital city’s busiest, buzziest Italian restaurant features excellent pasta dishes, steaks and wood-fired pizzas. Dinner for two excluding wine, $80.Hamburg Inn No. 2, 214 North Linn Street, Iowa City; hamburginn.com. A cheery and unoppressively hip diner festooned with the photographic images of visiting celebrities, from Bill Clinton to Mike Ditka. Its menu features several “pie shakes,” which are exactly what the name suggests, and exactly as delicious (the pumpkin pie shake, with cheeseburger, is pictured above). Lunch for two, $30.AdvertisementSmokey Row Coffee, 109 South Market Street, Oskaloosa; smokeyrow.com. This indigenous chain of coffeehouses has several locations, but the most celebrated is in Oskaloosa, where one large table is positioned under a movie marquee. Excellent coffee and sandwiches, as well as high-calorie adventures like cheeseburger chowder. Lunch for two, $30.John Wayne Birthplace and Museum, 205 John Wayne Drive, Winterset; johnwaynebirthplace.museum. The Duke was born here, and the modest dwelling of his youth is preserved near a modern museum in which the famous actor’s memorabilia are enshrined, and an adjacent gift shop hawks all manner of Wayne-related merchandise. Admission $15.Templeton Rye, 209 East Third Street, Templeton;  templetonrye.com. This sleepy farm-belt town was once a thriving community of bootleggers, and the modern version of the local moonshine can be sampled in a tasting room that is itself a small museum of Prohibition-era industry. Tours can be reserved on the company website.Herbert Hoover Presidential Library and Museum, 210 Parkside Drive, West Branch; hoover.archives.gov. The repository of America’s 31st president is a somber tribute to both the humble beginnings of West Branch’s native son and his episodic career. Admission $10.The cover article on Jan. 17, about going beyond politics in Iowa, misspelled the name of a town visited by the writer. It is Oskaloosa, not Oscaloosa. And the article, and an accompanying picture caption, characterized incorrectly buggies outside of Kalona, Iowa. They are Amish buggies, not Mennonite — although Mennonites do live in the area.An earlier version of a caption for picture No. 1 in an accompanying slide show misidentified the city in Iowa where the Hamburg Inn 2 restaurant is located. It is in Iowa City, not Des Moines.Robert Draper is a contributing writer for The New York Times Magazine and National Geographic.A version of this article appears in print on January 17, 2016, on Page TR1 of the New York edition with the headline: Iowa’s Uncontested Pleasures.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.