
In Transit By                     
DAVE SEMINARA

JAN. 8, 2016
Noah Strycker was in a hotel room in Ethiopia when he saw news that Oregon’s Malheur National Wildlife Refuge had been occupied by an armed group protesting the federal government’s imprisonment of two local ranchers. He had just completed a record-breaking “Big Year” of birding, in which he often spent 18 hours a day, without taking a day off, observing some 6,042 species of birds in 41 countries on seven continents. Mr. Strycker’s obsessive pursuit had taken him to the ends of the earth, but news of the occupation brought Malheur to mind as the place where he first fell in love with birding.Fifteen years ago, when he was 14, he saw a barred owl get into a fight with a great horned owl over a snake that one of them had caught, just steps away from the Malheur buildings now being occupied.“I’ve been addicted to watching birds ever since,” said Mr. Strycker, who lived and worked at the refuge in 2003 as an intern. “Malheur is a life-changing place.”With no resolution to the standoff in sight, Mr. Strycker and other birders are concerned that one of the nation’s premier observation spots for birds and other wildlife will be off limits until the occupiers leave or are removed from the refuge. Thirty miles south of Burns, in Oregon’s High Desert, the refuge is a 187,000-acre oasis, where more than 320 species of birds and 58 mammal species have been observed.AdvertisementMalheur (pronounced Mal-hear) opened as a national wildlife refuge on Aug. 18, 1908. At the turn of the 20th century, feathers were in fashion, and plume hunters had decimated the local white heron population. Theodore Roosevelt, who established 51 such wildlife refuges around the country, sought to address the problem by setting aside what was then unclaimed land as a preserve and breeding ground for birds.AdvertisementThanks to its location on the Pacific Flyway, a major north-south bird migration route, Malheur is a bucket-list destination for birders. They come in search of watch-listed species like the Western snowy plover, long-billed curlew, Franklin’s gull and Brewer’s sparrow, along with hundreds of other more common species like the white-faced ibis.Tim Hunt, an Oregon birder who has been visiting Malheur for more than 35 years, said he adored the place, but said few people visit the refuge in the dead of winter, when birds are more scarce. If the occupation drags into spring, he said, when binocular- and scope-toting birders dot the landscape, many more birders will be affected. Mr. Hunt said he didn’t believe that the wildlife would be affected by the standoff or the influx of news media covering it.Every Saturday, get travel tips, destination coverage, photos from all over the world and more.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“The birds will come back,” he said. “They always do. They’re not following this in the newspapers and on TV.”Others like Bob Sallinger, the conservation director of the Audubon Society of Portland, are more concerned about the impact of the occupation. Mr. Sallinger penned a scathing condemnation of the occupation, on behalf of the Oregon and Washington chapters of the National Audubon Society.“Birders are angry,” he said in a telephone interview, “and they should be, because we don’t know what these guys are doing there. Going in with guns and trying to take over public lands to pursue their own agenda is a crime, and it ought to be prosecuted.”The refuge, he said, is already understaffed, and the occupation will further delay important conservation work. The situation is particularly concerning for the Audubon Society, Mr. Sallinger said, because it fought to have the area protected more than 100 years ago. Images of slaughtered Malheur bird populations taken a century ago by the group’s Oregon founder, William Finley, inspired Roosevelt to protect the place.“Now it appears as though the goal of these occupiers is to eliminate this protection and undo that heritage,” he said.AdvertisementHis passion for Malheur is also personal. It’s the place where his two oldest children, Peter and Annie, became birders, after spotting 50 species there in a single day several years ago. But he also acknowledged that there may be a silver lining to the Malheur situation: All the media attention may motivate people to visit the refuge and inspire them to help preserve it.For birders who want to experience Malheur, the Harney County Migratory Bird Festival, scheduled for April 8 to 10, is a great introduction, as is the Audubon Society’s Gonzo Trip, set for May 13 to 15. But these and other Malheur birding excursions are contingent on a timely resolution to the standoff.Mr. Strycker decided to delay a winter trip to Malheur, he said, adding that most birders will avoid the place until the occupation is over but will come back with a vengeance when it’s safe to do so.“There are birders who will go into war zones to see birds,” he said, “so at least a few will go regardless. They’re angry about the situation, and the closer we get to spring, that anger will build.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »