AdvertisementSupported byFORAGINGBy Shivani VoraIn St. Petersburg, with its palaces of the imperial court and the magnificent State Hermitage Museum, shopping is not at the top of the list for most tourists. But beyond the heralded confines of the city’s rich history and culture, there is much for the sartorial-minded to explore. The locally owned boutiques along Bolshoy Prospekt, a wide street that is a 20-minute walk from downtown and lined with 19th-century buildings, are where visitors can find chic clothes by Russian designers. Sorry, men, though there are a few places for you, most cater only to women.Accessories and clothes for women are the draw here, created by emerging and established female designers from Russia, mostly from St. Petersburg. While the styles span from slightly edgy to classic, colorful merchandise — reds, light greens, blues — is a definite theme. There is also jewelry that is fun, including leather cuffs with gold spikes and long necklaces with pendants that are modern takes on the traditional Russian stacking dolls. The inventory is
refreshed often, yielding different finds on each visit. Bolshoy Prospekt P.S., 70, vk.com/shop_adress, 7-812-939-8539Women’s clothes with personality, courtesy of 25 to 30 local designers, are on display at this small space. The garb is meant to attract stylish daughters along with their mothers. Some pieces are simple: shirts and tops in solid colors. Others lean toward the artistic, like a short-sleeved knee-length blouse with large vivid orange flowers that was recently for sale.Bolshoy Prospekt P.S., 28, modanew.spb.ru, 7-812-405-8205The eponymous St. Petersburg fashion designer showcases his women’s clothing at this light-filled, minimalist space. Many pieces have a fantastical element, such as a dark blue vest adorned with black fringes that feels like silk but is made of polyester; others are multifunctional, like reversible jackets and dresses that can be worn in different ways. Everything is produced in a workshop near the store. Bolshoy Prospekt P.S., 55/6, ianischamalidy.com, 7-812-448-3315At a boutique with gleaming black floors, the namesake St. Petersburg designer, well-known
among fashion circles, prides herself on creating for women who are unapologetically feminine, colorful and energetic. Whatever the design — a light-green silk corset, perhaps, or a silvery velour jacket — she only produces one or two pieces of each work.Bolshoy Prospekt P.S. 16/1, iyayots.com, 7-799-9041-2192With its concrete floors and walls, this bilevel multibrand clothing store for both genders has an urban, industrial feel. The entry is where women find upscale everyday pieces from about 15 Russian designers, while men head upstairs to peruse Russian and international brands; casual wear like jeans are part of the inventory, but there is also a selection of dressed-down business wear such as smart jackets and tailored slacks. Bolshoy Prospekt P.S., 84, 7-812-245-3784Advertisement