AdvertisementSupported byPursuitsBy Keith O’BrienThis is the time of year when folks in Camden, Me., begin thinking about ice. Not the ice on the roads or the ice on the driveway, the slick, hazardous stuff that one must avoid, scrape, salt or clear. But the all-important ice on Hosmer Pond, just south of town, and the 440-foot wooden chute that spills out onto it.Without a solid sheet of slippery ice on the chute, and the pond, there can be no toboggan races in this seaside community set on the rocky Atlantic coast 190 miles north of Boston. And without local residents squaring off in the annual races, to be staged this winter on the weekend of Feb. 10, what would be the point of the other festivities: the snowplow parade on Main Street, or the fireworks over Penobscot Bay? In Camden, anyway, it would hardly feel like winter. And this is a place where folks revel in that feeling.Every year since 1991, Camden has staged the U.S. National Toboggan Championships. The name suggests a competition of professional sledders with years of training on a luge. But the races are less Olympics and more winter festival, a reason to gather in the coldest, darkest months of the year and compete on the ice chute, at the foot of the Camden Snow Bowl, the local ski mountain, owned by the town. Anyone with a wooden toboggan meeting specifications can enter the competition. No experience is necessary. Just pay your registration fee and you’re in.Still, expertise matters. There are gurus of the ice chute, regulars who compete every year. Perhaps more important, there are the residents who know how to build the perfect sled, created from ash, as the native peoples did it long ago. Four hundred teams participate, traveling from down the road or as far away as San Diego for the thrill of the races. More than 5,000 attend, setting up their snowbound tailgates, where mulled wine and beer flow easily, warming frozen spirits and providing liquid courage to the meek.The chute itself, after all, is no joke: steep, high and frightening to the novice. Sleds reach speeds approaching 40 miles per hour. Think of a roller coaster, on ice, with no cab doors, seatbelts or steering mechanisms. Then think of this: Once the toboggans hit the bottom of the chute, whistling through the surrounding trees, the wooden creations come screaming onto the ice of Hosmer Pond, like rudimentary rockets, wild and unleashed.I had visited Camden in the summer, when the harbor is dotted with sailboats, the salty air is warm (or as warm as it ever gets here), and Interstate 95 nearby is a parking lot of S.U.V.s with out-of-state plates laden with bicycles, kayaks, and enough beach gear to mount an invasion of Canada. And without a doubt, the town is worth a visit then.Camden — a town of 4,850, roughly midway between Portland and Bar Harbor — reads like a postcard from New England, written to itself. It rests on the shore of Penobscot Bay, a tight bundle of old Yankee structures hemmed into a strip of land where the mountains roll right into the sea. The Native American name for the Camden area is Megunticook, or big mountain harbor, and it still fits today.Mount Battie, with hiking trails and a motor road, rises 800 feet above downtown, rocky and wooded. In 1614 it was considered by Capt. John Smith to be “a kinde of fortresse” against invading enemies. Today, it’s just scenic. The view from the top looks out over the ocean, all the way to Acadia National Park on clear days, and on the town down below, with its hip breakfast joints and cozy restaurants serving fresh seafood.My wife and I soon learned that the hardy travelers, the frostbitten New Englanders and ice-fever adventurers, enjoy Camden in winter. And we knew right away: We wanted to be like them. We were recent transplants to the area, having moved from New Orleans to New Hampshire, and we wanted to assimilate, wanted to be fearless in the grips of the ice chute and bold in the face of bitter cold.We wanted to be toboggan racers.“It’s like regular sledding,” I assured my two children, ages 8 and 6, last winter, adding quietly, “Only a little faster.”Like any good parent, I was lying, of course, bending the truth to favor our plans. This wasn’t going to be anything like regular sledding. It was going to be better.On the eve of the coming toboggan races, to be held three weeks from now, I bring you one family’s humble story from last year’s championships.Ski helmets? Check.Snow gear? Check.A toboggan? A real sled? Meeting race specifications, and worthy of the chute?It was time to make some phone calls.My first was to the father of a friend who had grown up in Camden. Tom Cox was his name, and he came with bona fides. Mr. Cox, a retired high school teacher, wasn’t just a former toboggan race champion — he was the official toboggan inspector, charged with registering sleds at the chute on race weekend. If anyone could help me build, or acquire, the right toboggan, it was him.“Do you have a table saw?” Mr. Cox asked me on the phone two months before the races.No, I replied, cursing the measly circular saw I keep in the garage. “But I could get one,” I added, trying to sound resourceful. To me, building a toboggan seemed like part of the whole Maine experience.They are native to the region. Algonquin and Penobscot tribes used them to help transport items, in the snow and upon frozen rivers, but also in tidal flats, lugging supplies or buckets of fish after throwing a tow rope across their chests. In his 1940 book “Penobscot Man,” the anthropologist Frank Speck wrote that natives “use the sled continually.” And new settlers from Europe, fishermen and shipbuilders primarily, would do the same. Nineteenth-century Mainers who toiled all day building giant, wooden four-mast schooners found no challenge in using scrap wood to construct 10-foot sleds.But me? A New Englander-come-lately? Different story. Even if I had a table saw, Mr. Cox explained, I would face other challenges at this late date, because building a proper toboggan requires more than just tools; it takes time. You start with 15-foot lengths of ash, cut with the grain, not against it. The wood needs to be pared down into slats, two to three inches wide, and maybe a quarter of an inch thick. “Three-sixteenths is even better,” Mr. Cox instructed me. The slats then need to be steamed and made pliable, and bent over a mold to give them that toboggan shape.“You’re going to break some,” Mr. Cox said. “I guarantee it.” That’s why tobogganers seek out green wood, recently cut stock that isn’t kiln-dried. Ideally, again, it will be ash. “I’ve never done anything except ash,” Mr. Cox said. So in addition to a table saw, I would need to find some ash — not kiln-dried — and a steam box, and a mold, and the time for building, at least a couple of weeks, probably more. “It’s a pretty big chore,” he said. Which left me with two options: rent a toboggan, for $100, or buy one, for more like $350.By this point, I had developed a sort of sledding fever. In my mind, we were beginning a new family tradition: We would race our toboggan in winter. We needed a sled. So I called the Camden Toboggan Company (“Toboggans Built to Last, and Built to Win!”) and placed an order for one sled, fast and true. It was to be built by a man in nearby Rockport named Dave Nazaroff, a native Mainer and a contractor and homebuilder by trade. Toboggan building, for him, was just a sidelight; seasonal work. “My toboggans,” he told me, “are always fast.”I winced, knowing I would surely fail him. With just our two children on board, we wouldn’t have enough weight to be fast, no matter what Mr. Nazaroff did to the sled. Our plan was to enjoy the ride, survive the cold and compete in something we, as New Orleanians, understood: the toboggan race’s costume contest.The problem now was ice, enough on the chute and on Hosmer Pond to make the races possible. “We worry about that stuff all the time,” Mr. Cox told me. Last winter, because of unusually warm temperatures in the Northeast, the concerns in Camden reached panic levels.Across New England, soaring, springlike temperatures were forcing local officials to scrap beloved rites of winter. Ice fishing derbies: postponed. Sled-dog championships: canceled. Snowmobile trails were closed; pond hockey games moved. It wasn’t looking good for the tobogganers. Then, just before the races, it got worse.Temperatures, already nearly four degrees above normal for the month of January, spiked all across Maine. For three days last February in Camden, thermometers topped 50 degrees, unheard-of highs for Maine in winter. The already tenuous ice on Hosmer Pond, a 54-acre body of water, began to melt, worrying the planners, the would-be participants and me. Even a last-minute snowstorm the day before the races couldn’t save us.The snow, and the cold, had come too late. Town officials declared the ice on Hosmer Pond too thin, and for the first time in three decades the chute was closed. Two days of racing would be condensed into one, to be held on a makeshift toboggan strip built out of snow, into the mountain itself. The real competitors scrambled, adjusting to the radical shift from hard ice to damp snow. The top teams were shooting to win in seven seconds, a challenge on the slushy snow.Some rubbed their sleds with ski wax; others used onion powder. “I think we’ve got a chance,” I heard a man tell his teammate at the check-in. I knew our team did not. Still, the kids were excited, and my wife and I were, too. Back at the hotel, we had made final adjustments of our own.“Where’s the duct tape?” I asked my wife.Our costumes were almost ready. In the morning, my whole family was going to be covered entirely in purple, green and gold duct-taped stripes, a nod to where we had come from, New Orleans, and to where we were going. The theme at the toboggan races was Mardi Gras. Our team name: Purple, Green and Cold. It was time to take our shot at the holy grail of toboggan race times.“You get in the sevens,” one competitor told me, considering the conditions, “and you got yourself a good shot at this thing.”In the morning, more than 325 teams came out to compete. A couple thousand came to watch. We weren’t even close to being in the sevens, or anywhere respectable. With my older son riding in front, followed by my wife, my younger son and me, we came in at 11 seconds flat. Better than Just for Funzies (14.50), the Big Kahoonas (15.51) and the Party Animals, Bolt II and the Bandana Boggin Boys, all of whom crashed. But nowhere near the top sleds. The Local Yokels (8.00), Curiouser & Curiouser (8.15), Rocky Balboggan II (8.21) and the Dirigo Pups (8.79) led the way into the final round, which we watched, still clad in duct tape, standing in the cold with Abe Goodale, a local artist and the leader of the Pups.Mr. Goodale was the man I wished I was: a Mainer, born and raised. He had made the toboggan his team was now racing, using techniques he had learned as a boat builder. And now, as darkness fell on the mountain, his team, competing for the first time, was poised to win it all, surging into the lead in the finals.“I’m so nervous,” he told his teammates, eyeing the scoreboard. “This is crazy.”There are some locals who don’t attend the races anymore. They say they’ve gone too commercial, charging for parking spots and attracting too many outsiders. But the trophy ceremony revealed that the soul of the U.S. National Toboggan Championships remains intact, ice or no ice, no matter who is racing.The crowd still remaining at the end of the night, perhaps 100 people, stood in a circle, awash in the headlights of someone’s car, among the busted-up hay bales at the bottom of the makeshift chute. The license plate on the car read GRZZLY. The plates were from Maine. The winners stepped forward to collect their trophies, which were shaped like miniature wooden toboggans.A team named Birthday Muscles had won the two-person division. Another, named Schooner Olad, claimed the three-person title. Goodale’s Pups won the coveted four-person trophy, and the family in duct tape, those Southern transplants, Purple, Green, and Cold, won best costume.My beaming children — they wanted this — stepped forward to accept the trophy while I half-apologized to Mr. Goodale, ashamed of the winnings in light of my inadequate sled-building skills. I wished that I had made my own toboggan, and that it had been faster, and that we had competed with the likes of teams named Rocky Balboggan. Mr. Goodale just smiled.“No,” he assured me. “You’re awesome.”I wondered if he was just being nice. But one thing was indisputable. We were champions, with the hardware to prove it. We weren’t Mainers. But we had spent 10 hours outside, in the cold, on a mountain, in the middle of winter, dressed in duct tape, racing wooden sleds. We were in.“See you next year,” Mr. Goodale said.Keith O’Brien is a freelance writer and an author based in New Hampshire. He can be reached via Twitter @KeithOB.slide showAdvertisement