By JESSICA COLLEY CLARKEJAN. 11, 2017
After the feasting and revelry of the holidays, attention in January often turns to fitness and health. Domestic and international hotels have designed packages with spa treatments, fitness classes and eating cleanses to help travelers detoxify.At Gurney’s Montauk Resort and Seawater Spa on Long Island in New York (pictured above), rates drop in the winter. In addition to on-demand audio meditations by Deepak Chopra and Terri Cole, the nightly rate includes fitness classes like stand-up paddleboard yoga in the indoor seawater pool, spin and barre (January rates start at $320 a night versus $685 a night in the summer). The Seawater Spa Package (two-night minimum stay) offers additional value with a $125 per person spa credit.In Miami Beach the Confidante hotel has teamed with V Art of Wellness to provide complimentary fitness classes (rates in January from $229 a night). The daily 60-minute classes led by Christopher and Tracie Vlaun include boot camp on the beach, dynamic flow yoga and beach body blast (a high-impact class with cardio kickboxing). Another partnership in Miami Beach is focused on stomach health, with the Faena Hotel offering a spa package that includes consultations with Matthew Cooper, a licensed digestive health specialist. The Enzyme Dr. Program ($1,500 for two-day package versus a regular price of $2,000) includes blood work, a massage, a nutritional consultation and a customized fitness program.In a destination not necessarily known for detoxing, the JW Marriott Cancun Resort & Spa has a Wellness Beach Retreat package that includes a healthy breakfast, fitness classes and a “stress victim” spa treatment (three-night minimum, from $459 a night with promo code ZJ1). The daily 50-minute fitness classes include cardio boxing, spinning, “yogalates” (a combination of yoga and Pilates) and high intensity interval training. The 80-minute “stress victim” spa treatment includes a 30-minute back, neck and shoulder massage followed by a 50-minute facial. Healthy options at breakfast include juices such as Jugo Verde with cactus and pineapple, and a variety of smoked seafoods including salmon, oysters, mackerel and trout.A version of this article appears in print on January 15, 2017, on Page TR5 of the New York edition with the headline: Affordable Getaways  That Put Good Health Atop the To-Do List.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.