
In Transit By                     
ELAINE GLUSAC

JAN. 8, 2016
HAMILTON, THE TOUR The success of the Broadway hit musical “Hamilton” has inspired destinations both at home and abroad to encourage travelers to explore the life of the founder of the nation’s financial system, Alexander Hamilton, whose 259th  birthday falls on Monday, Jan. 11. In New York, Hamilton Grange, the founding father’s former home, now a National Memorial, will celebrate his birthday with talks and tours throughout the day Saturday, Jan. 9. There will also be lectures Saturday on Alexander and Thomas Jefferson at the nearby Morris-Jumel Mansion and on Monday at both Federal Hall National Memorial and Trinity Church on Wall Street. Hamilton was born on the Caribbean island of Nevis, where the Museum of Nevis History is housed in his birthplace, site of a birthday event this afternoon.PALM BEACH HIRES A CONCIERGEThe Cultural Council of Palm Beach County, a nonprofit membership organization representing 200 cultural organizations in the county, has modeled its new tourism initiative after hotels by hiring a destination concierge. As of late December, Bama Lutes Deal, a musicologist with a Ph.D. and arts teacher with nearly 30 years of experience, is acting as the new cultural concierge assigned to help travelers plan cultural outings including concerts, plays and art exhibits while they are visiting. Visitors can reach her through the council’s website or email her at concierge@palmbeachculture.com to ask what’s on, receive recommendations and make bookings. The service promises more than just ticket fulfillment; it will include tour recommendations and guides with arts specialties. The service is free and like any good concierge promises perks, including possible seat upgrades at theaters or personal welcomes by stage managers. The cultural council says its members offer 42,000 events each year.CELEBRATING ENGLISH GARDEN DESIGNThe 18th-century British landscape designer with the impressive name, Lancelot “Capability” Brown was said to make nature more natural in his gardens at more than 250 estates, parks and castles across the realm. Nicknamed “Capability” for his propensity to tell clients that their property had the “capability” for improvement, Brown revolutionized garden design, freeing it from the formal French style to looser and more organic shapes — rounded forms where the reigning style was geometric and straight — while integrating the great house within the setting. In 2016, fans will celebrate his 300th birthday with exhibits, tours and walks. Most events run March through October and include the exhibition “Capability Now” at the Orleans House Gallery in London (Feb. 13 to June 19). Many estates designed by Brown, including Syon Park in London, Blenheim Palace in Oxfordshire and the grounds of Highclere Castle, familiar to viewers of “Downton Abbey,” are open to tours regularly, and some will offer their own special tributes to the landscape designer.BOOK A ROOM AND A BOAT IN CANCÚNIn Cancún, Nizuc Resort & Spa has just launched a 56-foot catamaran available on call around the clock for guests booking a four-night package. Accommodating up to six guests, the boat comes staffed with a butler and chef and is provisioned with champagne, caviar and other food and drink for trips down the Riviera Maya, out to Isla Mujeres or to scuba dive. Guests stay overnight on land at the resort, but the ship is available to sail at any time. The package costs $16,000, including accommodations, the use of the boat and meals.A version of this article appears in print on January 17, 2016, on Page TR3 of the New York edition with the headline: Tours; A Garden Designer’s Legacy.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »