
In Transit By                     
SHIVANI VORA

FEB. 29, 2016
It happened again: Less than a month after Royal Caribbean’s Anthem of the Seas vessel returned earlier than scheduled to its port of origin in Cape Liberty, N.J.,  after facing 120 m.p.h. winds off Cape Hatteras, N.C., the ship ended another cruise early in anticipation of a severe storm expected in the same location.Anthem of the Seas departed Cape Liberty on Sunday, Feb. 21, for a 12-day trip to the Eastern Caribbean, and instead of returning as scheduled on March 4, the ship will return two days earlier on Wednesday, March 2.In an emailed statement, the company said that a weather system is gaining strength off the coast of Cape Hatteras. “Based on the most recent weather forecast, if Anthem of the Seas continues on its regular scheduled itinerary, the ship would encounter the brunt of the large and powerful storm on the return to Cape Liberty,” it said.The email directly referred to the incident earlier in February stating, “On a recent sailing, Anthem of the Seas experienced bad weather that was much worse than forecast; therefore, we want to be extra cautious about our guest’s safety and comfort when it comes to weather in the area.”AdvertisementGuests on the ship will receive an onboard credit in the amount of two days of the fare they paid for the Feb. 21 sailing on Anthem of the Seas; the credit will be applied to their onboard account to be used for any purchase or service, and any unused balance will be refunded to them in the form of payment they used to buy their ticket for the trip.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Those who had booked shore excursions in Bridgetown, Barbados, and Basseterre, St. Kitts — where the ship was to stop — will also get their money back, and Royal Caribbean will pick up the cost for any airline change fees as a result of the change in itinerary, according to a spokeswoman, Cynthia Martinez.AdvertisementAlso, all guests will receive a cruise certificate for 50 percent of the cruise fare they paid for their Anthem of the Seas sailing; the certificate must be used within a year.Royal Caribbean is still dealing with the fallout from Anthem of Seas’ ill-fated voyage earlier this month. A guest on that journey, Bruce Simpson, a Delaware resident, is suing the company for negligence and accuses the captain and crew of being aware of the storm and knowingly putting passengers at risk.In an email to The New York Times on Sunday, Ms. Martinez said that the company doesn’t believe the case has merit. “The fact is that our captain kept our guests and crew safe and our ship seaworthy in a storm that far exceeded forecasts,” she said.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »