AdvertisementSupported byCompiled by John L. DormanWith recent high-profile terrorist attacks in Barcelona, London and New York City, along with the proliferation of intense hurricanes this year, many travelers are placing even greater scrutiny on their vacation destinations. Every trip comes with a level of uncertainty, but the thought of visiting a country with a heightened terror threat level or shortening a trip because of an approaching storm will is likely to make most people reconsider their options. In an ever-changing world, here is some inspiration to travel the world and some ways to plan for the unknown while you do.The writer Paul Theroux makes the case for travel, noting that it opens the door to life-changing experiences. Absorbing different cultures, eating new foods and gaining unique perspectives about the world develop the thrill of exploration. While certain locales may not be particularly safe because of political or socioeconomic turmoil, you may end up in unexpected regions after they stabilize. Today’s no-go zone may be tomorrow’s must-see. In a recent essay, David Shaftel suggests that traveling more frequently is the best way to ease fears about taking international trips during turbulent times. As terror threat levels ebb and flow, it can be difficult for many people to assess what parts of the world are riskier than others. However, increasing your familiarity with a new destination and feeling comfortable enough to focus on smaller issues (like diaper-changing, if you’re a new parent) can assuage even the most cautious travelers.Planning a trip can be exhausting, but an added sense of dread about terrorism or political upheaval only creates more anxiety. To combat this feeling, check for travel warnings from the U.S. State Department and stay away from tourist-heavy areas (or restrict the time spent in these areas), among other things.Much of the Caribbean, along with U.S. coastal states like Florida and Texas, have been battered by a succession of powerful hurricanes this year. Some islands are still struggling, with no timeline for the reopening of many attractions that previously brought millions of people to the region each year. But some islands have fared better than others. Here’s a shortcut to help you figure out which did.International travel is exciting, but with so many changes comes the need to learn about destinations and weigh the risks accordingly. While the threats of global terrorism and Zika have been widely-publicized in recent years, most people don’t realize that motor vehicle accidents are actually the leading cause of nonnatural deaths among Americans traveling abroad. Maintaining a sense of calm and traveling with confidence can go a long way to easing any lingering fears.Advertisement