
                Travel Tips            By                     
SHIVANI VORA

OCT. 21, 2017
Amid the stresses of daily life, it’s easy to lose some of the magic in a romantic relationship, said Claudia Palma, the director of romance at Las Ventanas al Paraiso, a Rosewood Resort in Los Cabos, Mexico. A relaxing vacation, she said, is the ideal opportunity for couples to reconnect and remember why they first fell in love.Ms. Palma’s job is to help couples who are guests at Las Ventanas plan romantic getaways to Los Cabos; here, she shares her advice on how to have one with your other half.GET PERSONAL Sure, there are the standard rose petals on your bed at turndown and requesting a bottle of Champagne as a welcome amenity, but tailoring romantic gestures during your trip to what your partner appreciates will make it that much more special. If you’re visiting a destination that you have visited together before, for example, you can enlist your hotel’s concierge to help you enlarge pictures from that past trip and display them in your room prior for your arrival. If you’re married, you can request that the restaurant where you’re having dinner play your wedding song in the background or have a bottle of your partner’s favorite wine so that you can enjoy it with your meal.PLAN SURPRISES Surprises, Ms. Palma said, never get old, and incorporating unexpected elements throughout your trip is a fun way to restore your romantic bond with your partner. These can be small gestures like breakfast in bed or more extravagant such as a private beach dinner, a romantic sunset cruise or even a fireworks display. “I love seeing the joy on our guests’ faces when they’re surprised by their partner,” Ms. Palma said. “You can tell that they’re never going to forget that moment.”AdvertisementDISCONNECT TO RECONNECT It’s important to be present with your partner when you’re on a romantic vacation, Ms. Palma said, and being on your phones and other devices takes away your attention from one another. “I advise our couples to switch off their phones and TVs at night in order to enjoy conversation and quality time together,” she said. Once you return to your busy life, you’ll cherish these quiet moments you savored together.TRY A NEW ACTIVITY Never been horseback riding on the beach or taken an off-road ATV ride to spot local wildlife? Consider trying either one out — or another new activity — on your romantic trip. Ms. Palma said that getting out of your comfort zone and experiencing something new together as a couple can help bring you closer.AdvertisementWRITE A LOVE LETTER It may seem old-fashioned, but a love letter is a simple, beautiful way to show someone you care. At Las Ventanas, Ms. Palma encourages guests to hand-write a letter to their partner and then arranges to have that letter delivered alongside breakfast in the morning or with a cocktail at the pool; the staff at the hotel even puts letters in glass bottles for guests to discover during a sunset walk on the beach. Find a creative way to deliver a love letter to your partner at some point during your vacation. If you’re stumped for ideas, ask your hotel’s concierge staff for help.A version of this article appears in print on October 29, 2017, on Page TR2 of the New York edition with the headline: Surprises Enhance a Romantic Vacation.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »