The quiet neighborhood of Coyoacán captures the capital’s understated cultural soul and, in many ways, is a getaway within Mexico City itself. By LUCAS PETERSONCredit card points are generally more valuable than points or miles attached to a specific airline or hotel group. The reason? Flexibility.By LUCAS PETERSONThe food is delicious. The access to natural beauty is even better.By LUCAS PETERSONThe city has all you could want — museums, green spaces, good music and exciting new restaurants — plus that distinct Midwestern friendliness. By LUCAS PETERSONAn unparalleled economic powerhouse and megacity of 24 million people, the Chinese city was a frugal challenge. But it can be done (plenty of delicious dumplings helped). By LUCAS PETERSONOne of the oldest cities in China proved to be one of the less expensive trips our columnist has taken in the past year.By LUCAS PETERSONExploring one of China’s most exciting, progressive cities on a budget.By LUCAS PETERSONA handful of practical tips to help make sure your next trip to the world’s most populous country is smooth sailing from start to finish.By LUCAS PETERSONThere’s always the music, of course, from the Opry to hideaways like Santa’s Pub. The food is memorable, too, including Indian-Southern fusion.By LUCAS PETERSONThere is no shortage of history, sultry beauty and architectural delights. And a visit needn’t cost you much.By LUCAS PETERSONEight tips to help keep your travel expenses nominal and your wallet fat this year.By LUCAS PETERSONAlexandria, which has reinvented itself frequently over the centuries, still delights — and provides great deals for travelers, too.By LUCAS PETERSONThe Egyptian capital is as engaging as ever — and is a particularly great destination for bargain seekers.By LUCAS PETERSONEthiopia is one of the more exciting places to visit in the world right now: An attractive mix of ancient tradition and rapid modernization.By LUCAS PETERSONTaking a high-end itinerary in the charming South African city and, keeping its general spirit, remaking it on a more modest budget.By LUCAS PETERSONA 26-hour ride from Johannesburg to Cape Town paired perfectly with emotional visits to Joburg and Soweto.By LUCAS PETERSONNot only can the Ethiopian capital be done inexpensively, you will also find fascinating cultural landmarks, wonderful food and an almost unparalleled coffee culture.By LUCAS PETERSONExploring Lincoln Square, Beverly and Roscoe Village as a way of rediscovering the city that played such a large part of our columnist’s childhood.By LUCAS PETERSONNot only should traveling sustainably not break the bank — it’s frequently a more enjoyable product than its nonsustainable counterpart. Some tips on how to make it happen.By LUCAS PETERSONA fishing expedition was part of a cheap getaway that centered around the states’ spectacular natural beauty — with some quality food in the mix.By LUCAS PETERSONThe quiet neighborhood of Coyoacán captures the capital’s understated cultural soul and, in many ways, is a getaway within Mexico City itself. By LUCAS PETERSONCredit card points are generally more valuable than points or miles attached to a specific airline or hotel group. The reason? Flexibility.By LUCAS PETERSONThe food is delicious. The access to natural beauty is even better.By LUCAS PETERSONThe city has all you could want — museums, green spaces, good music and exciting new restaurants — plus that distinct Midwestern friendliness. By LUCAS PETERSONAn unparalleled economic powerhouse and megacity of 24 million people, the Chinese city was a frugal challenge. But it can be done (plenty of delicious dumplings helped). By LUCAS PETERSONOne of the oldest cities in China proved to be one of the less expensive trips our columnist has taken in the past year.By LUCAS PETERSONExploring one of China’s most exciting, progressive cities on a budget.By LUCAS PETERSONA handful of practical tips to help make sure your next trip to the world’s most populous country is smooth sailing from start to finish.By LUCAS PETERSONThere’s always the music, of course, from the Opry to hideaways like Santa’s Pub. The food is memorable, too, including Indian-Southern fusion.By LUCAS PETERSONThere is no shortage of history, sultry beauty and architectural delights. And a visit needn’t cost you much.By LUCAS PETERSONEight tips to help keep your travel expenses nominal and your wallet fat this year.By LUCAS PETERSONAlexandria, which has reinvented itself frequently over the centuries, still delights — and provides great deals for travelers, too.By LUCAS PETERSONThe Egyptian capital is as engaging as ever — and is a particularly great destination for bargain seekers.By LUCAS PETERSONEthiopia is one of the more exciting places to visit in the world right now: An attractive mix of ancient tradition and rapid modernization.By LUCAS PETERSONTaking a high-end itinerary in the charming South African city and, keeping its general spirit, remaking it on a more modest budget.By LUCAS PETERSONA 26-hour ride from Johannesburg to Cape Town paired perfectly with emotional visits to Joburg and Soweto.By LUCAS PETERSONNot only can the Ethiopian capital be done inexpensively, you will also find fascinating cultural landmarks, wonderful food and an almost unparalleled coffee culture.By LUCAS PETERSONExploring Lincoln Square, Beverly and Roscoe Village as a way of rediscovering the city that played such a large part of our columnist’s childhood.By LUCAS PETERSONNot only should traveling sustainably not break the bank — it’s frequently a more enjoyable product than its nonsustainable counterpart. Some tips on how to make it happen.By LUCAS PETERSONA fishing expedition was part of a cheap getaway that centered around the states’ spectacular natural beauty — with some quality food in the mix.By LUCAS PETERSON