
Pursuits By                     
JAMES CARD

JAN. 24, 2017
The greatest sign posted at a public fishing access spot in the United States is on the South Branch of the Au Sable River at a place called the Mason Tract. It reads: “Sportsman slow your pace … ahead lies the fabled land of the South Branch. Here generations of fisherman have cast a fly on one of the great trout streams of America. Hunters, too, have roamed these hills in the solitude so bountifully offered. The land is rich in tradition and stands ready to renew your soul. Tread lightly as you pass and leave no mark. Go forth in the spirit of George W. Mason, whose generous gift has made this forever possible.”George Mason was a Michigan industrialist who upon his death in 1954 donated 1,500 acres along the Au Sable River to the state with the caveat that it never be sold or developed. It was just as he left it: a pristine trout stream flowing 138 miles through the north country woods of the northern Lower Peninsula until it finally dumps into Lake Huron.My car was parked in front of the sign. I leaned against the hood as I kicked off my wet waders. I had spent a couple of hours fly fishing there and it was a satisfying afternoon, one that thousands of other anglers have experienced on this river. However, there is great worry about the health of the Au Sable, and many people believe the river is threatened by, of all things, more trout.It’s in the form of a fish farm in Grayling, a nearby city. A hatchery was built there in 1914. It was operated by the Michigan Department of Natural Resources back when trout were regularly stocked in the river. When the Au Sable produced sustainable populations of wild trout, the stocking ceased and the hatchery was taken over by Crawford County, which ran it as a seasonal tourist attraction that was difficult to keep in the black.AdvertisementIn 2012, the county approached Dan Vogler, a fish farmer, who said he had figured out how to make it a profitable enterprise. It was a decision that would eventually polarize the community and land Mr. Vogler in court.AdvertisementI drove back into Grayling. The river runs through the heart of this town. It runs past Camp Grayling, the largest National Guard training center in the country.It flows past the elementary school, through backyards, next to downtown and eventually out into the country.The Grayling hatchery is right in town, next to the health care center. The gate was locked but from the bridge I could oversee the Au Sable as it flowed into the raceways, a network of regular concrete canals blocked with metal grates that keep the trout in but allow the Au Sable to flow through and out.Nobody was at the hatchery when I visited, but I later spoke with Mr. Vogler by phone. He lives in Harrietta, Mich., about 75 miles away, where he runs Harrietta Hills Trout Farm, also a flow-through hatchery, on Slagle Creek, a tributary of the Manistee River. It, like the Au Sable, is considered one of the best trout rivers east of the Rockies.In 2001, Mr. Vogler and his father bought a private fish farm in Harrietta, which he says is about the same size as the Grayling hatchery. At first, they sold trout to people who wanted to stock their ponds, but now their primary business is growing and selling trout to restaurants and grocery stores.When Crawford County asked Mr. Vogler to consider operating the Grayling hatchery, he determined it was a low-revenue business and not worth the trouble, but after a hard look, he figured the only way he could keep the historic hatchery open for tourism was to be able to raise fish there year round and sell those fish to his customers. He obtained a permit in summer 2013 and signed a long-term agreement with the county. Within 60 days, the Sierra Club and the Anglers of the Au Sable challenged the permit.“It is a discharge permit that does allow for the controlled release of a certain amount of nutrient from our facility, but it’s also an amount that has been determined by the Department of Environmental Quality to be nonharmful to the receiving waters,” Mr. Vogler said in an interview.“And of course, that’s where the argument starts. That’s been the thing that’s resulted in a rather lengthy hearing in an administrative law court,” he said, whose ruling he is still awaiting.Advertisement“How much fish I produce is in a lot of ways irrelevant,” Mr. Vogler said, explaining that his permit controls how much waste from the fish can be discharged. “It doesn’t matter if I raise one fish or one million fish, I cannot exceed those limitations. It’s a hard limit. Thou shalt not discharge more than this.”Mr. Vogler is 47, the father of six and a Scoutmaster. He chuckles that he has been described as an aquaculture version of corporate Big Ag. “We’re a small family business,” he said. “I sit in my office with my dad and our office assistant literally back-to-back in the basement of my house. That’s our world headquarters.“I’ve got dirt under my fingernails, calluses on my hands, and we work hard every day to produce a healthy, affordable, local, fresh food product for people to eat. How does one have local food if one does not allow local production?”I got a tip from a local guide to head to the Ralph A. MacMullan Conference Center, a rustic lodge south of Grayling, on the shore of Higgins Lake. He said a lot of “river people” would be there that night.People chatted, sipped on beer and took their seats after some mingling. John Clark, the organizer of the event, explained the concept of a newly formed group called Celebrate Michigan Rivers. As he explained, there were many conservation groups fighting for the protection of rivers, but that evening was about taking a break from the fight and expressing appreciation for rivers.It was a refreshing evening as Michiganders have fought hard in recent years to protect rivers and clean water. In 2009, grass-roots conservationists settled a 10-year court battle against a Nestlé/Ice Mountain bottling plant to reduce the amount of water pumped from trout streams. In northern Michigan, fracking looms as a danger to rivers. And then there is the Flint River water crisis.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.I spoke with Josh Greenberg, author of “Rivers of Sand: Fly Fishing Michigan & the Great Lakes Region” and the owner of the Gates Au Sable Lodge, a historic fly fishing camp on a section of the river called the Holy Water. It is said that if God were to make a perfect trout stream, this would be it. He is a member of the Anglers of the Au Sable, one of the parties challenging the hatchery discharge permit.Mr. Greenberg said that an expert for the anglers’ group indicated that in the summer, the river was already running at levels that exceeded limits for dissolved oxygen set by the State Department of Environmental Quality. “So any additional phosphorus would only prove detrimental,” he said. “To me it boils down to: We know this is the most valuable brown trout fishery in the state and this is the largest fish farm. With no great reason economically to do the fish farm, why are we risking the Au Sable fishery for a few jobs?”AdvertisementCrawford County requires Mr. Vogler to have liability insurance for accidents and property damage, but his opponents say that isn’t enough. They want a performance bond in place in the event the river becomes degraded and restoration work needs to be done.The next day I stopped at the Old Au Sable Fly Shop and spoke with Andy Partlo, a co-owner. He is part of a long line of outfitters who have provided guide services in the Au Sable at the same site since 1868. After some talk about the latest fishing conditions, I asked him about the fish farm.“If you hold up a bottle of Au Sable river water, it’s going to look a lot like a bottle of Evian,” he said. “You hold up a bottle of agricultural runoff, I wouldn’t want to drink it, but boy you could grow some pretty damn big tomatoes.”The tomato-enriching water Mr. Partlo refers to contains phosphorus, a universal element in plant growth. In agriculture, phosphorus often comes in the form of animal manure that is later used to enrich farm fields. The effect on an aquatic environment is no different. Before the Clean Water Act, the City of Grayling dumped sewage into the river, which temporarily made the fishing even better, with heavy hatches of insects and fattened trout.“Why wouldn’t you want that?” Mr. Partlo continued. “Here’s what else we know: It’s an artificial fishery. The fishing went through this for a while and everything was fine and all of a sudden, we get this massive weed growth in the right conditions in the summer. That takes the dissolved oxygen out of the water and you get massive fish die-offs.” In those times, more trout would be stocked back into the river, he said, “so then it becomes an artificial fishery.”The trout are wild. That is a point of pride among anglers on the Au Sable. Much of the river is considered a naturally reproducing trout fishery. There is some stocking near the town of Mio under a dam. The fish get big there. The spot is nicknamed the “trophy waters,” but purist fly anglers stick upstream to pursue the wild ones.“When you catch an old brown trout, he hasn’t been caught since he was 10 inches long and now he’s the crafty old giant whitetail of the woods,” Mr. Partlo said. “You did something. It’s wild. You’re part of nature. You beat them at their game. That’s what we stand to lose and that’s the problem.“You don’t stand to lose the fishery. I’d be just as busy. I’d lose a lot of customers, but I’d have a whole bunch more that came in that don’t even care. But that’s not what the Au Sable is about.”Advertisement“I’d move,” he added. “I’d literally move away.”That afternoon, I fished with Terry Warrington on the North Branch of the Au Sable. Huge explosions thundered in the distance. It was like the beginning of “Red Dawn” and rural America was under attack and Terry and I were out fly fishing amid the opening salvos of World War III.“Sounds like the National Guard is doing some training over there,” he said as he waved his fly rod past the tree line. The camp is a large contributor to the local economy. Grayling has little industry and poor soil for agriculture. There is limited logging in the forests cut many times over.In 1998, Mr. Warrington retired from teaching biology and chemistry at Michigan Tech and he and his wife moved to the Grayling area to be close to the Au Sable. At 76, he still fishes the river almost daily.In the air were the blue-winged olives, mayflies no bigger than a speck of fuzz. Mr. Warrington cast his zero-weight fly rod — one of the smallest rods manufactured — toward a seam of rising trout.His line and rod snapped tight and a small brook trout splattered the water. He brought it in and released it.“So many people suffer from big fish-itis,” he said. “It’s that they forget what they are out there for and that is for fun.”For the next hour, we took turns casting to the feeding trout. I lost count how many I caught, maybe five or six, and I missed plenty of others.“You were asking about that fish farm,” Mr. Warrington said. “As you can see now there are hardly any weeds. I remember 40 years ago there were so many weeds you couldn’t even fish. If phosphorus gets into this river it will turn it into a weed bed. And without this river, Grayling wouldn’t exist.”A version of this article appears in print on January 29, 2017, on Page TR10 of the New York edition with the headline: A River With Too Many Fish.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »