By JOHN L. DORMANJAN. 12, 2017
Cathy Salustri, the author of “Backroads of Paradise: A Journey to Rediscover Old Florida,” delights in letting people know that to really discover Florida, you have to turn off the congested Interstates and explore the state’s towns and cities. “Legally, we’re one state, but we’re really a bunch of different states,” she said. “I want people to see that there’s actually a lot of Florida beyond the theme parks.”Ms. Salustri, the arts and entertainment editor at Creative Loafing Tampa, took a 5,000-mile road trip across Florida. She sought to retrace the routes taken by a collective of writers in the 1930s, which included Stetson Kennedy and Zora Neale Hurston. The group of writers was commissioned to document the state with the Federal Writers’ Project (F.W.P.), part of the Works Progress Administration (W.P.A.), which culminated in the book “Florida: A Guide to the Southernmost State.”Below are edited excerpts from an interview with Ms. Salustri.Q. During your road trip, what was the most eye-opening route for you? A. I was blown away by the Florida Panhandle. I grew up in Pinellas County, on the western peninsula, so I knew they had beaches. When we went up into the northern Panhandle, there is red clay soil and our highest point in the state (Britton Hill, in Walton County). When you’re in the area and you start to see cotton and tobacco farms, you try to reconcile that in your mind with Walt Disney World or the Florida Keys. It’s gorgeous. But what surprised me is how much it charmed me.Why do you think so much of the state is under-the-radar?I think we do the job of selling ourselves. We do such a good job, though, that we feel like we have to hide these other parts.AdvertisementWhat influenced you when writing this book?The structure of the book is patterned exactly after the W.P.A. Guide from the 1930s. My writing is very influenced by author Bill Bryson. Not to flatter myself, but I really hope that I was able to use that kind of braided narrative.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.More than many other states, Florida has a mystique to it. Why?We’re a paradise. That’s what we’ve promoted ourselves as before it was really a paradise. We don’t have a state income tax and don’t have many industries left other than tourism. It’s a very manufactured thing, and I don’t say that in a bad way. For example, Key West is considered an arts community. What people don’t realize is that the whole idea of Key West as an arts community was actually a W.P.A. project to save the economy. The government shipped in artists and people worked on the beaches.Why do you prefer taking U.S. Highway 41, known as the Tamiami Trail, south of Naples headed to Miami?AdvertisementYou’re going through the swamp if you’re on U.S. Highway 41. If you exit Interstate 75 near Naples and turn onto Highway 41, there’s a Circle K, CVS, and a Tractor Supply. And then there’s less and less around you, and then you’re in the swamp. You can feel yourself start to slip off the edge of North America. One of the most beautiful things I’ve ever seen in my life was when I was driving to South Florida to catch an early flight. I was going east across the Everglades before sunrise. Within five minutes of actual sunrise, I saw wave after wave of birds take off from the trees. I watched the Everglades wake up. It was such a mind-clearing experience. It reminds you that Florida is so much more than a meme. We are just an incredible beauty. There’s nothing else like the Everglades anywhere in the world.A version of this article appears in print on January 15, 2017, on Page TR2 of the New York edition with the headline: How the Writer Cathy Salustri Found ‘Old Flordia.’.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.