By NELL McSHANE WULFHARTAUG. 3, 2017
The musician and television star Big Freedia — the best-known name in the energetic New Orleans style of hip-hop called bounce music — performs around the world and appears in Beyoncé videos and Terrence Malick films. But she always comes home to New Orleans. The sixth season of her reality show, “Big Freedia Bounces Back,” has its premiere Sept. 12 on Fuse.All of her work travel takes up more than half of the year and sometimes requires an entourage. “It depends on what the gig is,” she said, “but if it’s a full show I have to have my D.J. and my dancers.” Shopping is a favorite perk of all the travel. “New York is my favorite place to go in the U.S.,” she said. “I love the fast pace and energy and people. And I go shopping. It can be Saks, Gucci, H&M, any and everything. I always like to find different stuff, so I’m in all the stores.”When in Los Angeles, Cosmo and Nathalia is a must visit. “It’s like a mom and pop, a very creative store,” she said “They design all their stuff. I have to go there to get something very unique for my shows. The outfit I wore on stage with Beyoncé, I got it there.”This is what she takes on every trip:Wig supplies“I usually travel with one wig (on my head), and if it comes off when I sweat too much when I’m performing, I’ll clean it up and reglue it. I also bring alcohol pads to clean the excess glue off the wig.”AdvertisementMakeup“I bring about six different colors of lipstick. The color really depends on what I put on, and when I’m performing, what matches with the outfit. I bring my MAC powder, my brush, my eyeliner pencil and foundation, in case I can’t find a makeup artist, and I have to try to hook my face up myself. If my makeup artist can’t come with me, I’ll try to find someone there that can do it or I’ll go to a MAC store.”Bonnet“It’s to put my hair in and wrap it up. I like to wear it when I’m on the plane. I put it on once I get in my seat so my hair won’t be all over my head when I wake up. On those long flights, it’s bedtime.”AdvertisementLaptop“I take my laptop for movies, in case I don’t want to watch what they have on the plane. I saw ‘Hidden Figures’ recently. It had me in tears, it was so good.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Kools“I have to bring my cigarettes. They don’t have my kind in the duty free, so I bring them with me from the states when I go overseas. I buy a carton for a week.”Performance clothes“They always change, depending on what the colors are for the night, what I told the dancers to bring. We might do denim one day. We might do red and black. We might do pink and black. It depends. I do something that stands out: I’ll wear another color or my outfit will be all solid if I told them [the dancers] to wear two colors. It all gets shoved into a suitcase, and I figure it out when I get there.”Plane snacks“I have to have either some Elmer’s Chee-Wees or some Zapp’s chips from New Orleans. They’re good for late-night snacks, if things are going to be closed when I arrive. Something to munch on when I get there. I miss those things when I’m gone, so I try to bring them with me.”Fake eyelashes“I wear the Huda ‘Samantha’ brand; they are the perfect fit. I can’t leave without some diva lashes.”A version of this article appears in print on August 6, 2017, on Page TR2 of the New York edition with the headline: For Big Freedia, Just One Wig But A Lot Of Cigarettes.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.