By ELAINE GLUSACOCT. 5, 2017
Although the U.S. Department of State recently issued a travel warning on Cuba, a number of cruise lines plan to add itineraries to Cuba next year.The Sept. 29 statement, which “warns U.S. citizens not to travel to Cuba,” is based on a series of mysterious illnesses that have befallen U.S. Embassy workers in Havana.But several cruise lines operating ships in and around Cuba have released statements pushing back on the warning, noting that no tourists have been harmed in these incidents.They also say cruising is compliant with new travel restrictions that were imposed in June by President Trump, who essentially rolled back President Obama’s easing of sanctions in 2014. The new rules make independent travel more difficult, essentially funneling interested travelers to tour companies, including cruise lines. Although the Trump administration’s expulsion of Cuban diplomats this week in retaliation for the American diplomats’ ilnesses suggests that relations are becoming more fraught between the two nations, travel remains legal, and non-Cuban-born Americans seeking to visit Cuba may still receive their visas to do so through their airline, cruise line or tour operator. It is possible, given the skeleton crew operating at the Cuban embassy, that the visa process could slow, but at present tour operators say they have visas on hand.AdvertisementSeveral cruise companies had already announced significant expansion of their Cuba operations before the warning was issued. Carnival Cruise Line launched its Cuba itinerary aboard the Carnival Paradise in June and recently announced five new sailings in 2018. Departing from Tampa, the mix of four-to-eight-day cruises include Havana as a port of call along with other Caribbean island stops (from $589 a person).AdvertisementNorwegian Cruise Line is adding four-day cruises to Cuba from Port Canaveral next May. The trips also visit Key West and offer an overnight in Havana (from $599 a person).Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Especially when venturing beyond Havana, which is relatively well-equipped for tourism, cruise ships provide accommodations in places where they are scarce and offer comfortable conveyance getting there.Touting a more immersive experience, the small ship operator Victory Cruise Lines will venture to Cuba next year on two-week sailings that circumnavigate the island. Trips will depart from Miami and call at Santiago de Cuba, Trinidad, Cienfuegos and Havana, offering overnight stays in most. The all-inclusive trip aboard the 202-passenger Victory 1 starts at $8,957 a person, with a $3,000 discount per cabin if booked before Oct. 13.SeaDream Yacht Club recently announced its new Cuba-only cruises operating between Havana and Cienfuegos and set to begin in 2019. Seven-day trips aboard its 112-passenger ship SeaDream II will call at Trinidad and visit a series of Cuban islands including Cayo Largo, Isla de Juventud and Maria La Gorda. Trips start at $4,599 a person.SeaDream will offer water sports from a special deck off the back of the ship, but the trips focus on cultural exploration through shore excursions.“People selecting Cuba are really looking at the culture, history and background and doing what others have not done which is to explore Cuba while it’s still relatively new and very, very interesting,” said Bob Lepisto, the president of SeaDream Yacht Club.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »