By NELL McSHANE WULFHARTOCT. 11, 2017
Martha Stewart keeps famously busy. She co-hosts a television show with the rapper Snoop Dogg, “Martha & Snoop’s Potluck Dinner Party,” now in its second season on VH1. Her latest book, “Martha Stewart’s Slow Cooker,” was published in August, and she launched her own wine company in the spring.Work keeps her on the move; she travels at least once a month and often much more.“I try to make that work trip always pleasurable in that I look for a new restaurant or something to see. I’ve recently been to Detroit twice and discovered quite a few very nice places that I hadn’t visited before. And I’ll also revisit some places that I’ve been many, many years ago, like Pewabic Tile. It’s a fantastic place. They are innovators in handmade wall and floor tiles. I try to visit a botanic garden. I try to enliven the business trip with something that’s personally interesting. And that will also give me a blog [post]. I’m always getting a blog out of my travels.”When asked if she is ever tempted to lounge in bed and order room service, she says never. “I find the best breakfast place in town. In Detroit I found Astro Coffee, that’s such a good place. And I found Detroit Institute of Bagels, and I did a whole blog on how to make a bagel and ate a delicious bagel sandwich. That’s what I really do when I travel.”She recently returned to the Galápagos Islands on a family vacation. “It was sad to us. Twenty years ago it was phenomenal, but it’s changed drastically. The water has warmed tremendously and it looks like there’s 50 percent less wildlife. It was pretty devastated. So that’s why I’m trying to see places I haven’t been before.”AdvertisementDespite so much travel, she’s slow at packing. “I do not like packing. But I have to pack so often and so much. Every day in my car I have three outfits I have to bring. It’s really a pain. I’m pretty organized about it; it’s just time-consuming. Even in my own houses I always want something that’s not there, so I’m always packing. I am a bag lady.”Here’s what she takes on every trip.Wardrobe changes“I’m not a light packer, so I will definitely pack enough variety of clothing to cope with weather, events and surprises. I’m not embarrassed to take two suitcases. My carry-on is the largest possible that will fit into the compartment. I really love the Rimowa luggage. I’ve actually Instagrammed me with seven suitcases when I had to go out and do my show with Snoop. I had 20 wardrobe changes.”Three iPads“One’s just for books, one’s for TV show series, and one’s for movies. I load them up with enough movies so that I have one per day. I don’t sleep well on land so I like to watch movies in the night. I have three because I’m always running out of space. I don’t like erasing all my movies.”Shahtoosh“I always take a very comfortable shawl, a shahtoosh. They weigh almost nothing and they’re as warm as a down comforter. It’s paper thin, it goes through a wedding ring.” [Update: After this article was published, Ms. Stewart hastened to clarify that the shawl is made from cashmere and is not an actual shahtoosh, which uses the hair of an endangered Tibetan antelope.]AdvertisementWorkout gear“I take a workout outfit so I can go to the gym in the hotel, with good footwear. I oftentimes take my Pilates ring and my yoga strap and a block to do stuff in my room if there’s no gym. I work out every day when I travel.”Food“If it’s a long flight I’ll take some very good food that I know I’ll want to eat on the plane. I might make a delicious smoked salmon sandwich on seven-grain bread; I might take a tabbouleh salad. I take homemade yogurt with apple sauce. I try to avoid plane food most of the time. I just don’t find it very appetizing. And my hard-boiled eggs are just so much better than any eggs on the plane. They’re from my own chickens. I take them for everybody I’m traveling with.”Soap“I bring all my own bath things. A lot of hotels put out soaps with so much perfume; they’re awful. I wish they would do unscented high-quality soaps and things. I always bring my own soaps, like Dr. Orentreich’s silicon soap and Mario Badescu’s A.H.A. soap.”A version of this article appears in print on October 22, 2017, on Page TR2 of the New York edition with the headline: Hard-boiled Eggs, iPads and More, but Don’t Rush Her.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.