She didn’t start the trip as a big fan. But after visits to Penny Lane and Strawberry Field, she feels fine.By LIZ ROBBINSCan a cruise skeptic enjoy four days on the high seas with his family, Mickey and a bunch of princesses? By DAN SALTZSTEINHotels, shops, bars, restaurants — dogs are welcomed warmly just about everywhere. For Pip (a.k.a. Pierre), the prancing was never better.By SUSAN SAITER SULLIVAN and N. R. KLEINFIELDTwenty years after my first visit to the Vietnamese city, would the people I love most love the land I love most?By MATT GROSSGuests have many reasons for spending a week of yoga and meditation in Gokarna, but reflection and rejuvenation are priorities.By CAREN OSTEN GERSZBERGAfter my mother died, my father bought back the beloved boat they had sailed on together years before. A trip with him was full of memories and moonrises.By KAREN SCHWARTZA visit to the volcano during an eruption was unforgettable: Heat, flying slag and a fortunate escape.By STEPHEN S. HALLCharming villages. Inventive meals. A gorgeous glacier to hike. What’s not to like? (That rain was pretty loud.)By BOB MORRISI celebrated Christmas with relatives in the village of Shutromynsti. There were many courses, multiple toasts, piercing memories and joyful singing.By GREG STRICHARCHUKParis is a good place to mourn. I would say this even if my uncle Richard hadn’t lived there, but all the more so that he had.By TAFFY BRODESSER-AKNERThe heavy portable shrine is known as the mikoshi. I was invited to help carry it in a local festival. It was a strenuous lesson in community.By KENAN CHRISTIANSENKoyasan is one of the premier destinations for Buddhist pilgrims in Japan. As its popularity peaks, can it still be enjoyed by a visitor seeking quietude?By ANNA HEZELWould I be an outsider in a country that had banned travelers from Muslim nations and was shutting its doors to immigrants? I hit the road to find out.By SARAH KHANFrom the Jewish districts of historic cities to small, out-of-the-way towns once known as shtetls, the author finds remnants of the past at every turn.By CHARLY WILDERThrough the years, a strategy has emerged — book a hotel for the night before you arrive, never worry about the weather, make a few (only a few) reservations.By WENDELL JAMIESONRomania is a bargain compared to other countries on the continent. It has everything you need for an affordable and impressive family trip.By DIONNE SEARCEYThe “Future Energy” pavilions at Expo 2017 in Astana celebrate solar, wind and thermal power. There also are live bands — and Nathan’s hot dogs.By ED ZUCKERMANAs the city changed, I met a friend who came to define my time there. When I returned to search for him, it awakened the ghosts of my youth.By NICHOLAS KULISHThere was sightseeing, but the real focus of a trip organized by Altruvistas was to educate travelers about exploitation — and how to combat it.By DANIELA PETROVAWarm Showers, run by a network of volunteers, pairs cyclists with hosts in 175 countries. There is no fee, but there might be Hawaiian pizza.By KATIE KRAMONShe didn’t start the trip as a big fan. But after visits to Penny Lane and Strawberry Field, she feels fine.By LIZ ROBBINSCan a cruise skeptic enjoy four days on the high seas with his family, Mickey and a bunch of princesses? By DAN SALTZSTEINHotels, shops, bars, restaurants — dogs are welcomed warmly just about everywhere. For Pip (a.k.a. Pierre), the prancing was never better.By SUSAN SAITER SULLIVAN and N. R. KLEINFIELDTwenty years after my first visit to the Vietnamese city, would the people I love most love the land I love most?By MATT GROSSGuests have many reasons for spending a week of yoga and meditation in Gokarna, but reflection and rejuvenation are priorities.By CAREN OSTEN GERSZBERGAfter my mother died, my father bought back the beloved boat they had sailed on together years before. A trip with him was full of memories and moonrises.By KAREN SCHWARTZA visit to the volcano during an eruption was unforgettable: Heat, flying slag and a fortunate escape.By STEPHEN S. HALLCharming villages. Inventive meals. A gorgeous glacier to hike. What’s not to like? (That rain was pretty loud.)By BOB MORRISI celebrated Christmas with relatives in the village of Shutromynsti. There were many courses, multiple toasts, piercing memories and joyful singing.By GREG STRICHARCHUKParis is a good place to mourn. I would say this even if my uncle Richard hadn’t lived there, but all the more so that he had.By TAFFY BRODESSER-AKNERThe heavy portable shrine is known as the mikoshi. I was invited to help carry it in a local festival. It was a strenuous lesson in community.By KENAN CHRISTIANSENKoyasan is one of the premier destinations for Buddhist pilgrims in Japan. As its popularity peaks, can it still be enjoyed by a visitor seeking quietude?By ANNA HEZELWould I be an outsider in a country that had banned travelers from Muslim nations and was shutting its doors to immigrants? I hit the road to find out.By SARAH KHANFrom the Jewish districts of historic cities to small, out-of-the-way towns once known as shtetls, the author finds remnants of the past at every turn.By CHARLY WILDERThrough the years, a strategy has emerged — book a hotel for the night before you arrive, never worry about the weather, make a few (only a few) reservations.By WENDELL JAMIESONRomania is a bargain compared to other countries on the continent. It has everything you need for an affordable and impressive family trip.By DIONNE SEARCEYThe “Future Energy” pavilions at Expo 2017 in Astana celebrate solar, wind and thermal power. There also are live bands — and Nathan’s hot dogs.By ED ZUCKERMANAs the city changed, I met a friend who came to define my time there. When I returned to search for him, it awakened the ghosts of my youth.By NICHOLAS KULISHThere was sightseeing, but the real focus of a trip organized by Altruvistas was to educate travelers about exploitation — and how to combat it.By DANIELA PETROVAWarm Showers, run by a network of volunteers, pairs cyclists with hosts in 175 countries. There is no fee, but there might be Hawaiian pizza.By KATIE KRAMON