Novice and veteran travelers alike will find a lot to love in Copenhagen. Before you go, check out our local guide for tips and pack these essentials for your trip.By ALAN HENRYIn the design-savvy, food-obsessed Danish capital, the only problem for travelers is keeping up with all that is new.By INGRID K. WILLIAMSIn the Portuguese capital, a weekend’s worth of seafood feasts, chic rooftop bars, undulating streets and landmarks, both Old World and futuristic. By INGRID K. WILLIAMSA blend of Old World Europe and 21st century style, Lisbon is worth a spot on your travel bucket list. Before you visit, check out our local guide to plan your trip, and pack these essentials. By ALAN HENRYOn lush Vancouver Island, this urban jewel offers innovative restaurants, gorgeous parks and gardens, and museums that celebrate the area’s many cultures. By SUZANNE CARMICKVictoria is known for natural beauty, but there’s more to see and explore. Before you go, follow our guide to plan your visit, and pack these essentials for your trip.By ALAN HENRYNew bars, Michelin-starred restaurants and indie boutiques are enticing, but so are age-old attractions, like Buda Castle and Turkish-era thermal baths.By EVAN RAILA new bike share program, museums, music and, yes, barbecue await visitors. Of special interest this spring: the commemoration of the 50th anniversary of the assassination of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.By ELAINE GLUSACThis multicultural hub in the highlands of southern Mexico is known for its mild climate, rich culinary and craft traditions, and complex history. By FREDA MOONThe New Zealand city is laid-back and outdoorsy, but its sophistication shines in its expanding art scene, thriving fashion industry and a new generation of chefs embracing native ingredients. By ELAINE GLUSACThe city’s treasures lie just below the surface: world-class restaurants, Brazil-class music and an ever-ebullient arts scene.By SETH KUGELThe gastronomic scene has been growing by leaps and bounds. And then, both within and beyond the city’s boundaries, there’s the wine: malbecs, torrontés and more.By NELL McSHANE WULFHARTFrom upstart creative spaces and obscure bars to neighborhoods where a surprising urban tranquillity reigns, Bangkok remains ripe for discovery.By SETH SHERWOODBeneath the grit of South Africa’s biggest city, there’s a kinetic urban energy that can be savored in its street art, restaurants, music clubs and markets.By SARAH KHANDon’t equate Orlando with mouse ears and thrill rides: The city is a checkerboard of intriguing neighborhoods filled with intriguing galleries, shops and restaurants.By ELAINE GLUSACA new generation of chefs is championing locally sourced menus, and a relaxation of liquor production laws has led to a boom in microbreweries.By ELAINE GLUSACNo longer does the city dubbed “the swamp” by its inhabitant in chief have the starchy, insular appearance of a white male fiefdom. There’s a dynamism that, along with its fabled history, qualifies it as a great American city.By ROBERT DRAPERMore than 20 years after the horrific genocide in Rwanda, Kigali is emerging as a proud city, known for its progressive start-ups, energetic art scene and great dining and coffee.By DEBRA KAMINFar from just a time capsule of imperial palaces and fin-de-siècle flourishes, this multicultural metropolis of 1.8 million has long been at the crossroads of cultures.By CHANEY KWAKA visit here becomes an exercise in peeling back layers of sooty, hard-working history to arrive at a shinier, bustling and hopeful present.By SUSANNE FOWLERNovice and veteran travelers alike will find a lot to love in Copenhagen. Before you go, check out our local guide for tips and pack these essentials for your trip.By ALAN HENRYIn the design-savvy, food-obsessed Danish capital, the only problem for travelers is keeping up with all that is new.By INGRID K. WILLIAMSIn the Portuguese capital, a weekend’s worth of seafood feasts, chic rooftop bars, undulating streets and landmarks, both Old World and futuristic. By INGRID K. WILLIAMSA blend of Old World Europe and 21st century style, Lisbon is worth a spot on your travel bucket list. Before you visit, check out our local guide to plan your trip, and pack these essentials. By ALAN HENRYOn lush Vancouver Island, this urban jewel offers innovative restaurants, gorgeous parks and gardens, and museums that celebrate the area’s many cultures. By SUZANNE CARMICKVictoria is known for natural beauty, but there’s more to see and explore. Before you go, follow our guide to plan your visit, and pack these essentials for your trip.By ALAN HENRYNew bars, Michelin-starred restaurants and indie boutiques are enticing, but so are age-old attractions, like Buda Castle and Turkish-era thermal baths.By EVAN RAILA new bike share program, museums, music and, yes, barbecue await visitors. Of special interest this spring: the commemoration of the 50th anniversary of the assassination of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.By ELAINE GLUSACThis multicultural hub in the highlands of southern Mexico is known for its mild climate, rich culinary and craft traditions, and complex history. By FREDA MOONThe New Zealand city is laid-back and outdoorsy, but its sophistication shines in its expanding art scene, thriving fashion industry and a new generation of chefs embracing native ingredients. By ELAINE GLUSACThe city’s treasures lie just below the surface: world-class restaurants, Brazil-class music and an ever-ebullient arts scene.By SETH KUGELThe gastronomic scene has been growing by leaps and bounds. And then, both within and beyond the city’s boundaries, there’s the wine: malbecs, torrontés and more.By NELL McSHANE WULFHARTFrom upstart creative spaces and obscure bars to neighborhoods where a surprising urban tranquillity reigns, Bangkok remains ripe for discovery.By SETH SHERWOODBeneath the grit of South Africa’s biggest city, there’s a kinetic urban energy that can be savored in its street art, restaurants, music clubs and markets.By SARAH KHANDon’t equate Orlando with mouse ears and thrill rides: The city is a checkerboard of intriguing neighborhoods filled with intriguing galleries, shops and restaurants.By ELAINE GLUSACA new generation of chefs is championing locally sourced menus, and a relaxation of liquor production laws has led to a boom in microbreweries.By ELAINE GLUSACNo longer does the city dubbed “the swamp” by its inhabitant in chief have the starchy, insular appearance of a white male fiefdom. There’s a dynamism that, along with its fabled history, qualifies it as a great American city.By ROBERT DRAPERMore than 20 years after the horrific genocide in Rwanda, Kigali is emerging as a proud city, known for its progressive start-ups, energetic art scene and great dining and coffee.By DEBRA KAMINFar from just a time capsule of imperial palaces and fin-de-siècle flourishes, this multicultural metropolis of 1.8 million has long been at the crossroads of cultures.By CHANEY KWAKA visit here becomes an exercise in peeling back layers of sooty, hard-working history to arrive at a shinier, bustling and hopeful present.By SUSANNE FOWLER