
In Transit By                     
SHIVANI VORA

JUNE 27, 2016
“It’s annoying to be in a great destination and not enjoy it because your body isn’t adjusted to the current time,” said Michael Holtz, the founder of the New York City travel consultancy SmartFlyer, who makes more than two dozen international trips a year.Hotels, with new jet-lag-specific treatments, aim to help globe-trotters like Mr. Holtz recalibrate their body clocks.Spa Nalai at the Park Hyatt New York recently introduced the 90-minute jet-lag therapy intended to combat the swelling and shoulder tension that can result from long flights. The service includes the application of a gel to relieve water retention, a body massage to promote circulation and a re-energizing scalp massage with peppermint oil. The price is $350.Even longer is the two-and-a-half-hour Jet Lag Travel Prescription at the new Guerlain Spa at the One & Only the Palm in Dubai. Travelers begin with a 90-minute facial that includes acupressure of meridian points for relaxation and then are given an hourlong body massage to induce sleep ($413).AdvertisementFeet and hands are the focus of the 50-minute Jetlag Reflexology at Rancho La Puerta in Tecate, Mexico ($90).Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.More time-pressed travelers can avail themselves of the 45-minute Jet Lag Reviver at the Aman Spa at the Connaught in London, which features a back cleanse, scrub and massage (£100 or about $138).Travelers don’t always have to pay to fight let lag. Guests at Las Ventanas al Paraiso, a Rosewood Resort in Los Cabos, Mexico, are treated to a 10-minute neck and foot massage at check-in, and the welcome amenity at Halekulani in Oahu, Hawaii, is a 15-minute free foot or scalp massage.AdvertisementWhether these treatments are effective jet lag cures may not matter, Mr. Holtz said. “You feel good getting them,” he said, “and sometimes, that’s all it takes to get over jet lag.”A version of this article appears in print on June 26, 2016, on Page TR2 of the New York edition.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »