
In Transit By                     
ELAINE GLUSAC

JAN. 25, 2016
JETBLUE ADDS GATE-TO-GATE WI-FIJetBlue announced today that it will make free high-speed Wi-Fi access available on land as well as in the air as part of a fleet-wide redesign of its Airbus A320 models that make up the majority of the airline’s aircraft. The first overhaul of its 130 A320 planes since launching in 2000, the renovation will include a new Internet-connected in-flight entertainment system with more than 100 channels (currently there are 36) and a library of over 300 movies available on demand. New 10-inch seatback screens will be about twice the size of existing TVs, and each seat will feature a power outlet with a USB port. The overhaul will begin in early 2017 and wrap up in 2019. In addition, 15 of its 25 A321 aircraft will be renovated in the second half of 2016 to include gate-to-gate Wi-Fi.NEW EXPRESS BUS SERVICE FOR DENVER AND BOULDERDenver’s Regional Transportation District has introduced express bus service from Denver to Boulder that takes advantage of 18 new miles of express lanes on U.S. Route 36 between the two cities. The highway shoulders have been widened to allow the new bus, called the Flatiron Flyer, to bypass traffic backups, and the one-way, roughly 30-mile trip takes between 38 and 42 minutes, depending on time of day. The 57-passenger coach-style bus can carry up to eight bikes and equips each seat with an electrical outlet and USB port. Between Denver’s Union Station and downtown Boulder Station, the ride costs $4.50 one way. The new bus service is part of a larger transportation plan being implemented in the region, including a new train connecting Denver International Airport to downtown’s Union Station scheduled to begin service in April.CRUISE LINES CANCEL PORT CALLS IN TURKEYTwo cruise lines have announced this month that they are canceling port stops in Turkey after the terrorist bombing in Istanbul. MSC Cruises said that the MSC Magnifica, to be based out of Venice beginning March 26, will replace its scheduled weekly calls in Istanbul and Izmir with two in Greece, Athens and Mykonos, until further notice. In a statement released last week, the line noted, “This decision was made by the company amid growing concerns by guests as a result of the tragic events in Istanbul.”Earlier this month, Crystal Cruises said it would revise the route of the Crystal Symphony’s April 24 and May 1 sailings, replacing calls at Istanbul and Kusadasi with stops in Greece. Its small ship Crystal Esprit will also be diverted from scheduled Turkish stops in April and November.AdvertisementFROM KAYAK, A GUIDE TO GOOD DEALS The airfare and hotel search site Kayak has released its 2016 Travel Hacker Guide, which analyzes its more than one billion searches in 2015. Among the results, it identified the Far East — specifically Hong Kong, Bangkok and Beijing — as among the best destinations for deals based on the greatest declines in airfare over the year. Not exclusively exotic, that top 10 deal list also includes Dallas, Cleveland, Chicago and Atlanta.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.DELTA GETS ROMANTIC FOR VALENTINE’S DAYDelta Air Lines is planning to romance its trans-Continental passengers flying Sunday, Feb. 14, Valentine’s Day. Passengers flying between New York’s Kennedy and San Francisco or Los Angeles will receive free mini bottles of Veuve du Vernay Rosé sparkling wine and a three-pack of Baked by Melissa cupcakes each. Those in the Delta One front cabin will get free bubbly poured by the glass.A BEIJING MUSEUM ON A ROYAL CARIBBEAN SHIPRoyal Caribbean International has announced that its ship Ovation of the Seas, launching in April, will feature art and artifacts on loan from the Palace Museum in Beijing’s Forbidden City. In addition, museum staffers will consult with the ship’s interior designers on its décor and art to reflect traditional Chinese culture, and experts from the museum will offer periodic lectures on Chinese history and culture aboard the ship, to be based in Tianjin. The new ship is largely positioned to attract the growing number of Chinese cruisers, and promises plenty of other contemporary diversions, including bumper cars and a machine that simulates sky diving.AdvertisementA FOURSQUARE APP FOR SHARING TRIP RECOMMENDATIONSFoursquare, the mobile app that provides results of local searches and offers location-based recommendations, plans to introduce a feature today called Trip Tips that allows users to create an itinerary and share it with friends to get their recommendations. Users bound for Brazil, for example, can create a list of things they want to see and places they want to eat and then share it across social media platforms and via a web link that allows others, including those who don’t use the app, to post suggestions to that list. The app will also create an in-app map featuring those points of interest. The app is free for iPhone and Android.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »