By VICTORIA BURNETTMARCH 22, 2016
Dreary hotel rooms with no hot water. Or no hotel room at all. While Cuba has many lures, the quality and even availability of its accommodations are not among them.Now, though, the re-entry of major American hospitality chains into Cuba’s overstretched hotel market could alter the landscape, adding competition to an industry dominated by Cuban state tourism companies and their European partners.Later this year, Starwood Hotels and Resorts is expected to begin managing two Havana hotels, one near the city’s Capitolio building and another near the business district. Marriott International is reported to be in discussions with Cuban officials about running or developing hotels on the island.If there are rooms available, they will become easier to find and book quickly after Booking.com, the Amsterdam-based online hotel-reservation service, said on Monday that it had reached agreements with a dozen Cuban hotels to join its booking system. Leslie Cafferty, vice president for global communications at the Priceline Group, which owns Booking.com, said it would begin offering booking services in Havana in the next few weeks and planned to extend to locations like Cayo Coco and Cayo Santa María on Cuba’s northern coast, and the eastern town of Baracoa.AdvertisementEddie Lubbers, founder of Cuba Travel Network, said that having American brands join the hotel market in Cuba would help raise standards and expand options for travelers.“For the industry, it’s a game changer,” Mr. Lubbers said. American hotels were not necessarily better, he said, but catered to American expectations, which include bigger bedrooms and wider beds. Americans would be drawn to brands they knew from home, he said.AdvertisementBetween having American hotels in Cuba and new rules that make it much easier for Americans to travel without organized groups, “things become more normal,” Mr. Lubbers said.The deals to run the Hotel Inglaterra and Hotel Quinta Avenida, which Starwood plans to refurbish, will take a little pressure off a hotel sector that tourism operators said has been “overwhelmed” by the surge in bookings to Cuba since the United States announced a détente with the island in December 2014.Cuba received a record 3.5 million visitors last year, an increase of about 25 percent over the previous year. Travelers are trying to cram into the country’s few high-quality hotels and thousands of private homes, nearly 4,000 of which are now advertising on airbnb.com.But Havana has only a half dozen properties that meet international five-star standards, and many more deals like the Starwood one are necessary if the hotel sector is to meet surging demand from visitors, tour operators said.As hundreds of Americans traveling as part of President Obama’s entourage arrived in Havana this week, hundreds of visitors were packed off to stay in hotels in Varadero, a beach resort 90 minutes away, tour operators said. Lucy Davies, founder of Cubania Travel, said that her organization stopped taking bookings for the first half of 2016 in October last year because they could not guarantee hotel rooms.Every Saturday, get travel tips, destination coverage, photos from all over the world and more.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Bob Guild, a vice president for Marazul, which offers travel services to North American travelers visiting Cuba, said Havana would need to at least double the number of high-quality hotel rooms in the next few years.AdvertisementThat could be done through deals like Starwood’s, to refurbish and manage existing properties. The Cuban tourism ministry also has plans for a big five- or six-star hotel on the Parque Central near Old Havana, which is home to several of the city’s top hotels, and is developing properties to run as boutique outfits, he said.These hotels, however, “will sell out instantly,” Mr. Guild said. The number of American travelers who booked through Marazul in 2015 — excluding Cubans and Cuban-Americans going to visit family — rose 67 percent.In addition, said Mr. Guild, the city needs “clean economy hotels” to accommodate student groups and other American travelers who cannot afford top rates. Many hotels start the season in decent shape, he said, but deteriorate as visitors arrive back-to-back and the staff is unable to keep up with maintenance.How quickly the Cuban state-run tourism companies would develop new hotel infrastructure was unclear, travel agents said. Cuban officials may be wary that the next president will reverse recent changes and clamp down on travel to the island.Mr. Guild said United States elections may be “a factor for them and whether it is worth making these investments.”A version of this article appears in print on March 27, 2016, on Page TR2 of the New York edition with the headline: Cuba Hotels Now Leave Much to Be Desired. But Wait. ….  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.