AdvertisementSupported byBy Elaine GlusacSometimes cruise shopping feels like car shopping. You know there’s a deal out there; you just have to find it. Cruise lines regularly run sales, and the current batch will reward procrastinators and shoulder-season sailors.If you can travel later this month, Adventure Life is offering 50 percent off its 10-day Arctic trip to North Spitsbergen in Norway departing June 29. Billed as an eco-volunteer cruise, the trip assigns 50 passengers to pick up ocean garbage in the remote Svalbard archipelago, while the other 50 take part in an excursion. They swap roles in the afternoon and cancel cleaning entirely if polar bears are in the area. Discounted rates start at $2,450 a person.Head to the Caribbean this summer with MSC Cruises which is offering an all-inclusive package on its MSC Divina ship priced from $798 a person for a seven-night trip that includes unlimited drinks, Wi-Fi and one shore excursion. The offer, starting at $798 a person, is good on select summer sailings starting the week of June 25 as well as a few fall and winter dates. Travelers must book by July 9 to get the deal.The luxury line Silversea is running a Silver Select promotion through July that includes a $1,500 per-suite spending credit on its ocean-going itineraries that can be used for shore excursions, spa treatments and more. Or travelers skip the credit and get a two-category suite upgrade, or 50 percent off a second cabin. The deal is good on many sailings, including a nine-day trip from Athens to Monte Carlo on the Silver Spirit departing Aug. 31 with rates starting at $7,050 a person. The fare includes round-trip economy air travel, transfers, two nights in a hotel before the cruise, shore excursions and Wi-Fi.Through July 6, Princess Cruises’ Red White and Blue Sale waives the gratuities usually added to cabin rates and offers discounted fares on select North American departures in the fall, including a four-day getaway from Los Angeles priced from $299 a person and five days visiting Canada’s Atlantic provinces from $599.Boston-based Vantage Deluxe World Travel is offering 11-day French river cruises from $2,399 a person September through November. The trips to the Burgundy, Beaujolais and Provence regions offer wine tastings, tours of Avignon and Lyon and lectures on board. To book, travelers must call 888-342-2402 and mention the promotional code WB66600.Another opportunity in the Arctic offers a deal based on a late-season departure Sept. 13. Poseidon Expeditions is holding a sale on its 11-day East Greenland trip that starts and ends in Reykjavik, Iceland. The fall timing aims to provide glimpses of the Northern Lights. Rates start at $3,395, representing a $1,500 savings.Some sales benefit the farsighted. Abercrombie & Kent is offering $1,000 off per person on new Cuba by Land & Sea cruise departures next March if booked by July 31. Discounted fares start at $9,995 a person.Advertisement