By DIANE DANIELJAN. 22, 2016
Pegi Vail, 53, an anthropologist and the associate director of the Center for Media, Culture and History at New York University, studies backpacker subculture and the impact of travel on communities and on biodiversity. Her documentary, “Gringo Trails,” has been shown at dozens of festivals and in more than 20 countries since 2014, and recently was released on DVD (it is also available on iTunes and Amazon Video). Here are edited excerpts from an interview with her.Q. Why the focus on backpacker culture?A. I backpacked throughout my 20s. My first trip was to Europe, and I got inspired to do more. I went through China, Southeast Asia, Africa. For a young traveler on a budget, backpacking offered the possibility of more immersion, or so I thought. It did to a certain point, because you go to smaller villages, use local transportation. When I went to graduate school for anthropology, I decided to study my own tribe.Describe a typical backpacker then and now.Most are still in their 20s, equally male and female and even if they’re on a shoestring, the majority are from middle- to middle-upperclass families. However, the racial and ethnic profiles have changed with the education and income levels in different countries. So now there are many more travelers from Asia, Brazil, Russia and India. And they’re using social media as much as, if not more than, Lonely Planet. That element of being connected, among themselves and to people back home, is the biggest change.You begin your film with the story of Yossi Ghinsberg, who in 1981 was lost in the Bolivian jungle for a month. His book about his adventures sparked a boom in backpacker travel to the town of Rurrenabaque. Your film showed how locals created canned adventures for the travelers who poured in.That’s a very typical example of what can happen. In the case of Rurrenabaque, there aren’t any policies that limit the numbers. Communities really need to plan ahead or at least react quickly to save their cultural and environmental resources.AdvertisementYour most jarring example of backpacker tourism run amok was Haad Rin, a town on the Thai island of Ko Pha Ngan, which went from a little-known beach to a giant party place, famous for its full-moon parties. What is the situation now?AdvertisementI was there in 1987. There were just a few huts to stay in, and in my youthful notions of paradise, that was it. Back then, it was really chill and beautiful. Now it’s mostly buildings. I went after another backpacker told me about it, so of course I was part of that process. It keeps growing and now they have half-moon and quarter-moon parties.One example you show of tourism done right is the Chalalán Ecolodge in Bolivia, a natural and cultural immersion experience that Mr. Ghinsberg helped create. As one of the first community tourism businesses in the country it’s commendable, but a two-night, three-day package there costs $800 for two people. Do backpackers partake?Chalalán is a great example because the people there have really become stewards of their own land and culture. We actually saw a number of backpackers who had decided to splurge at Chalalán; also, you can often get cheaper rates when you sign up in person. It’s really about the things people value. Some backpackers don’t blink about spending tons on beer.A version of this article appears in print on January 24, 2016, on Page TR3 of the New York edition with the headline: Pegi Vail, Once a Backpacker, Now Studies Them.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.