
In Transit By                     
SHIVANI VORA

MARCH 22, 2016
Cruising to Cuba from the United States is now a reality. Carnival Corporation announced Monday that it will offer cruises to Cuba starting May 1, after Cuba granted approval for the company to begin travel there; it’s the first time in more than 50 years that a cruise ship has permission to sail from the United States to Cuba.In a telephone interview with The New York Times, Carnival’s chief executive, Arnold Donald, said that the company is launching the cruises because of the high interest in Cuba among U.S. travelers. “We take people to destinations they want to go, and there is a huge demand to see Cuba,” he said.Carnival will operate the 704-passenger Adonia to the country through its newest brand Fathom on seven-day itineraries departing from the Port of Miami in Florida with stops in the cities of Havana, Cienfuegos and Santiago de Cuba. After the May 1 voyage, the Cuban Sunday-to-Sunday sailings will take place every other week.Every Saturday, get travel tips, destination coverage, photos from all over the world and more.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Passengers on these trips will be able to choose from an array of activities on the ground such as art, architecture and historical walking tours at each port; trips to coastal villages like Cojimar, a favorite of Ernest Hemingway’s; meeting local entrepreneurs; and exploring the burgeoning culinary culture through dining at private restaurants, known as paladares, as well as interacting with local chefs.AdvertisementOnboard programming will complement these shore excursions, according to the Fathom president Tara Russell, with options including salsa and meringue lessons, Cuban music performances, showings of Cuban films and classes on making popular Cuban cocktails like the mojito; the dining menus on the ship will also incorporate in Cuban-inspired dishes. Carnival worked with the Havana-based Havanatur Celimar as well as Rosamaria Caballero, a Cuban-American based in New York City, to plan these activities.Carnival first announced plans to sail to Cuba following the U.S. authorization granted last July, and Ms. Russell said that the company has received several bookings and much interest for the maiden voyage since then but expects a spike in reservations following Cuba’s approval. And, Carnival wants to make it easy for travelers to go. She said that the company will assist in securing the visa that American travelers need to enter Cuba. “Once you book with us, we will help you with the visa process,” she said.AdvertisementPrices for seven-day itineraries to Cuba start at $1,800 per person, excluding Cuban visas, taxes, fees and port expenses and including all meals on the ship, onboard experiences and several on-the ground activities. Reservations can be made at www.fathom.org/cruise-to-cuba. We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »