
Pursuits By                     
DAVE SEMINARA

MARCH 21, 2016
In a lifetime of offbeat travel experiences, searching for mating sage grouse in a snow squall may rank as one of my oddest pursuits.My guidebook suggested that in March “lucky early morning visitors” might experience the sage grouse’s unique mating ritual while hiking on the Sagehen Hill Nature Trail in Harney County, Ore. But the wind was howling, a passing flurry was coating my glasses in a film of wet snow, and on a brisk walk I saw nothing but miles of the arid, melancholy High Desert landscape.It was almost 9 a.m. and the sage grouse were apparently either (very sensibly) courting in a more discreet place or enjoying a post-coital smoke somewhere. Birding, I was to learn, is a pastime that requires patience and a sense of humor.For the third time in seven weeks, I was on my way to Burns, and ultimately the Malheur National Wildlife Refuge — site of an armed, 41-day occupation that sparked a national conversation about the use of federal lands. The occupiers, many of whom split off from a peaceful protest over the reimprisonment of a pair of ranchers convicted of setting fires, said that the federal government had no right to control lands, like Malheur, and should turn them over to local control.AdvertisementDuring my first two visits to this vast, largely unpopulated county in eastern Oregon, I was there as a reporter, marooned for stretches of time at an F.B.I. roadblock with a pack of media, and a small assortment of occupation sympathizers, two miles outside the entrance to the refuge.AdvertisementDusty Wilson, the first person I met in the county, took me to the small home where he and his wife, Darre, raised 10 children, when I asked him where I could find a bathroom.“I don’t really trust media, but you seem all right,” he said. “You can write your story here, and if you need a place to stay, we have a spare bedroom.”After mixing with the Wilsons and many other friendly locals, and interviewing a host of passionate, angry birders who were frustrated that their favorite place to bird was closed, I resolved to return as soon as the refuge reopened, so that I could better understand its allure.On March 14, I received a green light from a United States Fish and Wildlife Service official who said I could visit the refuge, which was still closed to the public, at the time, but is now open, save for the headquarters area, where the occupiers lived. Tim Blount, a first-rate birder and the executive director of the Friends of Malheur, would be my guide. Elated, I left my home in Bend, and drove early the next morning.Burns is an unpretentiously charming town of about 2,000 roughly halfway between Bend and Boise. Aside from the demise of the timber industry, it hasn’t changed much since 1948, when The Saturday Evening Post called it an “unsung” place of “effortless fun” whose residents had “the ability to look fate in the eye and wink.”Seated behind a mountain of brochures in her downtown office, Chelsea Harrison, the executive director of the county’s chamber of commerce, told me that locals had essentially done just that.“The publicity has been huge for us,” she said, noting that interest in the county’s Migratory Bird Festival, scheduled for April 8 to 10, has surged this year.Advertisement“But we don’t want sympathy visits,” she said. “We want people to come here for the natural beauty, the solitude, the friendly people who live here.”Outside her office, red “unity” bows line Broadway, the town’s main drag. But more than a month after the end of the occupation, the town is still divided. When I called a woman whom I’d interviewed on my previous visits, she declined to meet me at a business near the refuge, arguing that she didn’t want to patronize this establishment because the owners were said to have been sympathetic to the Bundys, the now imprisoned brothers who led the occupation.Others I met cited stores that have been boycotted by some based on the perception, real or not, that they supported the occupiers. And the Crystal Crane Hot Springs, a favorite local spot for a relaxing soak, has received a number of critical reviews on Yelp and TripAdvisor after the Bundys and other occupiers held a meeting and soaked there. I drove out to the hot springs to hear their side of the story, and spoke to Diana Davis, the office manager, who said that the attacks were unfair.“We got blindsided,” she said. “We thought it was just a ranchers’ meeting. We didn’t know the Bundys were coming. But I swear, we didn’t give them anything for free, and we’re neutral.”Every Saturday, get travel tips, destination coverage, photos from all over the world and more.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.I met Jarvis Kennedy, a member of the Burns Paiute tribe’s Tribal Council, at the Bella Java & Bistro in Burns, and he too underscored that the tribe and the wider community had not healed yet. The council had recently been granted access to parts of the refuge, and he spoke bitterly of the defensive trenches the occupiers had dug, and the damage they caused to tribal burial grounds and artifacts.“The best way I can describe it to white people is, imagine if someone went to Arlington National Cemetery and went to the bathroom on the graves and rode a bulldozer over them,” he said.Mr. Kennedy told me about how in the 1870s the tribe, which now has about 300 members but was once much larger, was decimated after being forced off the land where the refuge now exists.And at the wonderfully informative and colorful Harney County Historical Museum in Burns, Jan Capernall, the museum’s curator, showed me a map illustrating how the tribe’s reservation (now just 770 acres) once sprawled across what is now a 187,000-acre wildlife refuge.Advertisement“After the Indian Wars, they were all marched out of here,” she said, before showing me the museum’s most visible reminder of the long presence of Native Americans in the region: a 9,000-year-old pair of sagebrush sandals that were found in a nearby cave.Ms. Capernall led me to a display case featuring vintage feathered women’s hats, and a photo from 1907, depicting plume hunters and a barn wall full of dead swans.“You see,” she said, pointing to the photograph, “That’s why we had to protect Malheur.”Tim Blount is a serious birder. He adores Malheur so much that he chooses to live and work on the refuge, an hour away from the nearest grocery store. He treasures it enough that he was willing to drive all night across the Cascades, from a speaking engagement in Salem, to spend a day birding with me at the refuge.“You don’t have to thank me,” he said, when I tried to do just that. “I get to spend the day birding.”As we drove down lonely country roads on our way to the refuge, Mr. Blount’s enthusiasm was infectious. “Look, sandhill cranes!” “Over there, red-tailed hawk!” he’d exclaim.We parked on the side of a road, just outside Burns, to observe a flock of about 1,000 snow geese gathered on a field, and Mr. Blount told me how the occupation had upended his life and changed his job. He hadn’t been able to stay in his home and had been living at another wildlife refuge near Portland.“But membership in the Friends of Malheur has gone from about 250 to more than 1,800,” he said, passing me his pair of binoculars. “That’s the silver lining.”Mr. Blount said that during the occupation, his expensive camera equipment and binoculars were stolen from his office, which is in one of the refuge buildings the occupiers used. A Go Fund Me campaign he established to replace the equipment was quickly financed, and a company that makes high-end binoculars sent him a free pair.AdvertisementI was a little ashamed of my $29 binoculars, bought from Kmart years ago, and my inability to correctly identify birds. But Mr. Blount put me at ease and coached me on local etiquette, chiding me when I failed to wave at other drivers. “We wave hi to each other around here, Dave,” he said more than once.The roadblock leading to the refuge was gone, and Mr. Blount explained that the Fish and Wildlife Service had decided to open the refuge, but not the headquarters area where the occupiers were based, without publicity. An officer waved us through the service entrance to the headquarters area, and Mr. Blount gave me a short tour, pointing to the bunkhouse where many of the occupiers slept, the tower where they stood watch (reportedly dislodging some nesting great horned owls), the tractors and bulldozers they commandeered, and the offices they occupied.A “Closed for the Holidays” sign that Mr. Blount had placed on the locked door of the refuge’s visitors’ center was still there. The last bird sighting — a white-throated sparrow — recorded on a magnetic board, was on Oct. 27. Some of the refuge’s employees were back at work but most of the bird feeders were empty.I went to use a bathroom and Mr. Blount said, “You better not, they overflowed the sewer system.” We took a walk and, despite the trenches and other damage, Mr. Blount said that the place was mostly as he remembered it. There were few birds around, but he said, “The season hasn’t started yet, pretty soon all these trees will be full of birds and there’ll be birders everywhere.”Inside the refuge’s small museum, I learned more about the plume-hunting trade, which was the impetus for the creation of Malheur, the 19th of 51 refuges created by President Theodore Roosevelt (there are now 550 National Wildlife Refuges in 50 states, protecting some 94 million acres of land). A display claimed that in the 1880s, an ounce of breeding feathers was worth more than an ounce of gold.Mr. Blount and I spent the rest of a blissful day birding, feeling very much like we had the whole refuge to ourselves. We had a tasty lunch in Frenchglen, a hamlet of eight year-round residents named after Peter French, a rancher who owned most of the land where Malheur now sits, at the century-old Frenchglen Hotel. John Ross, the owner, told us that unlike the hotels and restaurants in Burns who profited from the media influx during the occupation, they had seen no boost.And at Peter French’s Round Barn, Dick Jenkins, who operates a small museum and gift shop on site, told us that the cowboys who came in to guzzle stubby bottles of Coors were his only steady customers.“The roadblocks killed us,” he said, right before an older cowboy came in and ordered a Coors, as if on cue. “All the customers were scared away.”AdvertisementWe took the long way back to Burns, traversing gravel roads, stopping often to view birds as the sun came out, reminding us that spring, and many more birds, would soon be here. On the Crane-Buchanan Road, known locally as “Raptor Alley,” Mr. Blount spotted a pair of majestic bald eagles. As I watched them in flight through his binoculars, I felt a surge of joy that is hard to describe. Before we parted, I asked Mr. Blount for tips on what I might see on my way back to Bend. “Look up on the power lines right after you pass Hampton, a tiny little ghost town,” he said.Sure enough, I saw a total of four bald eagles, one more magisterial than the next, right where he said they’d be. Each time I spotted one, I pulled over and indulged in leisurely looks as cars zoomed past me, a few honking in disgust. I wanted to jump up and down, flag them, “Look! Bald eagles!” But they were all on cruise control, going 75, not noticing a thing, just as I had been on my previous trips.I may not have understood the point of birding when I was off looking for courting sage grouse, but in that moment I understood why birders are about to return to Malheur with a vengeance. We fly through life on cruise control, going 75, not knowing what we’re missing. Birding forces us to slow down, to be observant, to savor our surroundings. As the last bald eagle I saw soared out of sight, I thought of the last bit of advice that Mr. Blount had given me, “Just pay attention,” he said. “Look around, because you never know what you might see.”The Malheur Refuge is about a three-hour drive from Redmond Municipal Airport, or about four hours from the Boise Airport.The Harney County Migratory Bird Festival runs April 8 to 10. Many, but not all, of the birding tours are sold out, but visitors don’t have to be on a tour to visit the refuge (855-438-8625; migratorybirdfestival.com).The Audubon Society of Portland leads trips to Malheur, including one June 4 to 8, and other birding destinations around the region (503-292-6855; audubonportland.org). The Burns Paiute Tribe has a powwow on Oct. 13 every year (541-573-1910; burnspaiute-nsn.gov). The Harney County Historical Museum has an impressive collection of artifacts and displays on local history (18 West D Street, Burns, 541-573-5618; hchistoricalsociety.com).The Round Barn and Jenkins Family Visitor Center has an interesting gift shop and small museum, open daily from 9 to 5 (51955 Lava Bed Road, Diamond, 888-493-2420).AdvertisementThe Sage Country Inn in Burns has three nicely appointed rooms in a lovely home built in 1907. From $105 per night, including a hearty country breakfast (351-1/2 West Monroe Street, 541-573-7243; sagecountryinn.com).The Frenchglen Hotel has good food and rooms with shared bath from $75, and rooms with private bath in the Drovers’ Inn, right behind the historic property, from $115 (39184 Highway 205, Frenchglen, 541-493-2825; frenchglenhotel.com).If you want to stay where F.B.I. agents billeted during the occupation, there are spartan rooms at the Malheur Field Station on the refuge (34848 Sodhouse Lane, Princeton, 541-493-2629; malheurfieldstation.com). Dormitory lodging (groups only) from $22; rooms with kitchenette from $55.The Pine Room Cafe in Burns has great steaks and pork chop dinners, which come with shrimp cocktail, soup, salad and fresh bread. A waitress named Autumn Larkins recommends the two-pork chop special — she likes to eat one for dinner and have the other cold for breakfast the next day (543 West Monroe Street, 541-573-2673; facebook.com/ThePineRoomBurnsOregon).The chef Michael Johnson serves up high-end food at affordable prices, including a superlative lamb gyro at Rhojos (83 West Washington, Burns, 541-573-7656; facebook.com/Rhojos-99288139990).The Frenchglen Hotel serves breakfast fare, homemade soups, decadent bacon cheeseburgers and chocolate-chip pecan cookies at reasonable prices (39184 Highway 205, Frenchglen, 541-493-2825; frenchglenhotel.com).A version of this article appears in print on March 27, 2016, on Page TR11 of the New York edition with the headline: After a 41-Day Standoff, Birding Is Back.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »