AdvertisementSupported byChasing the dealValue-seeking travelers interested in a London vacation for this fall and winter have their pick of affordable trips.By Shivani VoraLondon never goes out of style, especially for travelers from the United States. Both luxury travel network Virtuoso and American Express Travel report the city is consistently a top destination.“For Americans, London is an easy pick for a getaway because the city has no language barrier and offers great cultural attractions, from theater to museums,” said Misty Belles, Virtuoso’s global head of public relations. “And, since the value of the pound has dropped since Brexit, visiting is less expensive than it has been for many years.”Value-seeking travelers interested in a London vacation for this fall and winter have their pick of affordable trips, many offering budget-friendly options and tempting luxury amenities.British Airways Vacations, for one, has several hundred air-inclusive packages to London departing from more than 20 cities in the United States. Each option is valid for specific travel dates, and the inventory is updated frequently. One recent deal is a trip from Jan. 20 to 25, which includes round-trip flights from Los Angeles International Airport to Heathrow Airport, four nights’ accommodations in a four-star hotel in central London and breakfast, for $1,455 a person. Book through ba.com.In addition to these packages, British Airways has many round-trip flights through the winter from its gateway cities in the United States to London for around $500, according to Caroline Niven, a spokeswoman for the airline. Go to Ba.com/London for a list of available deals.Also, the luxury travel company Skylark has more than a dozen high-end but attractively priced winter London trips. One option, from Jan. 26 to 29, for $2,483 for two people, includes round-trip flights on Virgin Atlantic from Newark Liberty International Airport to Heathrow Airport, three nights’ accommodations at the Rosewood London, one of the most upscale hotels in the city, breakfast and an 85-pound credit to use on food or drinks or at the property's spa. Book by calling 212-759-5275.Millennial travelers may want to consider the three-day London Explorer from Contiki, a tour operator specializing in trips for those between the ages of 18 and 35. The trip includes accommodations, round-trip airport transfers, breakfast, a city bus tour and a ticket to a West End musical. Prices start at $295 a person. Book online at contiki.com.Hotels in London are offering fall and winter deals, too. The Ned, near St. Paul’s Cathedral and set in a building that dates back to 1924, has several packages suited to quick getaways. The Sunday Spruce and Sleepover, for example, includes accommodations on a Sunday night, Sunday brunch with a bottle of wine, and a £50 credit to use at the hotel’s spa and breakfast. Prices start at £175, about $238. Stays for subsequent nights begin at £250. Book by emailing reservations@thened.com.Advertisement