

      By SHIVANI VORA and 
    
GORKA SAMPEDRO

MARCH 17, 2016

Are you a fan of big cruise ships with all the bells and whistles or do you prefer smaller boats with fewer frills but more intimacy? While cruising styles and the benefits of a larger versus more compact ship are subjective, there’s no disputing the facts and numbers that make these vessels different. With that in mind, below is a side-by-side comparison of the 4,200 passenger Norwegian Escape and the 22 passenger Safari Quest, part of Un-Cruise Adventures. See how they stack up against each other, and choose your cruise. Safari Quest Norwegian Escape Safari Quest 120 feet. Norwegian Escape 1,069 feet. Safari Quest 10.5 knots. Norwegian Escape 17 knots. Safari Quest A seven-night roundtrip from Juneau, Alaska, with stops in Port Houghton and Baranof Island; or a seven-night roundtrip from Seattle exploring British Columbia with stops in Victoria and the Gulf Islands. Norwegian Escape Seven-day Eastern Caribbean from Miami; stops include St. Thomas, Tortola and Nassau, in the Bahamas. Safari Quest 11, from 100 to 168 square feet. Norwegian Escape 2,175, ranging from 99 to 1,740 square feet. Safari Quest Flat-screen televisions with DVD players, iPod docking stations and heated bathroom floors. Norwegian Escape Flat-screen televisions, USB charging ports at each night stand, hair dryers. Passengers who book one of the 95 suites in Haven, an upscale area accessible by key card, get 24-hour butler service and Bulgari toiletries. Safari Quest 22 passengers. Norwegian Escape 4,200 passengers. Safari Quest 1 to 2. Norwegian Escape Nearly 1 to 2.5. Safari Quest The nine crew members are all American. Norwegian Escape About 70 nationalities are represented among 1,742 crew members. Safari Quest One dining room serves three meals a day. Ingredients are locally sourced whenever possible. The salmon, for example, comes from Taku River Reds, a small family fishery in Alaska, and a dedicated pastry chef bakes all breads, pastries and desserts daily. Though menus change frequently, recent breakfast choices included lemon ricotta pancakes and an omelet with red pepper walnut relish. Lunch is served plated with a choice of two entrees including a vegetarian option like Southwestern quinoa cakes. Dinner consists of three courses: One starter, like a Thai peanut cabbage salad or mushroom and onion soup; a choice of three entrees such as black cod with miso or citrus braised pork shoulder; and one dessert, molten chocolate cake with caramel ice cream and blackberry clafoutis. Freshly baked cookies such as chocolate chip or gingersnaps are served every afternoon in the lounge area. Norwegian Escape There are 16 dining outlets onboard including a tapas bar, Brazilian-style steakhouse, upscale French boîte and a classic Tuscan restaurant; the ship also has Bayamo by Jose Garces, a Latin restaurant from the James Beard Award-winning chef, and the first Jimmy Buffett’s Margaritaville at Sea restaurant. In addition, there’s a gelato stand, grab-and-go bakery and room service.  Safari Quest A full bar with top-shelf liquors and wines. The ship has a 6 p.m. cocktail hour daily; a cocktail of the day and hors d’oeuvres are served. Norwegian Escape 21 bars and lounges including a craft beer hall with 50 different bottled beers and 24 on tap, an elegant wine bar with indoor and outdoor areas and a mojito bar. Safari Quest Evening presentations from expedition experts on topics like local marine life and wildlife, as well as on the geology and cultures of the destinations the ship visits. Sarah Scoltock, a spokeswoman for the company, says that the destination is Safari Quest’s main entertainment. “We are exploring remote wilderness areas, with few if any port calls. We anchor out and launch kayaks, skiffs, paddle board and go explore,” she said.  Norwegian Escape A comedy club and three shows: the Broadway musical “After Midnight,” the 1980s-themed “For the Record: The Brat Pack Live” and the comedy “Wine Lovers — the Musical,” a performance guests watch while being served lunch and a selection of wines. The ship also has a water park with four water slides, a casino, a nightclub for teens, a three-story ropes course that the company says is the largest at sea, five zip lines and a sports complex with a basketball court, bocce court and miniature golf course.Safari Quest An outdoor hot tub, a recumbent bike and an elliptical machine on deck, a small library, and an underwater microphone that guests can use to listen for whales and other sea animals. Also, when passengers return from an excursion, they’ll find a bartender waiting on deck with a drink of the day, available virgin or with a kick of spirits. Norwegian Escape A two-level spa with 24 treatment rooms and more than 50 services; a salon; a barbershop; a licensed med-spa doctor offering treatments such as Botox Cosmetic and Restylane. The spa also has a fitness center with the latest cardio equipment and two group fitness studios with classes such as yoga, Pilates and boot camp. For children, the ship has a free kids club divided by age groups, and a nursery for children as young as 6 months. Safari Quest None. The ship is purposely unplugged.  Norwegian Escape High-speed Wi-Fi is available — unlimited use is $25 a day; onboard text messaging to other guests only is $8 for the duration of the cruise; and there’s a free onboard app, iconcierge, that lists ship events and allows guests to make dining and entertainment reservations, find their stateroom and view in-port shopping options. Advertisement