
In Transit By                     
THE NEW YORK TIMES

MAY 27, 2016
Memorial Day weekend celebrates service members who died in the line of duty in tributes across the country, including ceremonies at Pearl Harbor in Hawaii. In Gettysburg, Pa., site of the bloodiest battle of the Civil War with over 50,000 casualties, the 149th Memorial Day Parade is scheduled for May 30, honoring veterans in and attending the event. The route ends at the Soldier’s National Cemetery, where President Lincoln gave his famous address.At the nearby Gettysburg National Military Park, run by the National Park Service, Civil War historians dressed in period style bivouac the battlefield Memorial Day weekend, and every weekend from April 2 to Oct. 30, offering a living-history look at the armies. Visitors can walk among them to learn about battle strategy and period weapons.ELAINE GLUSACIt’s an affordable safari to Kenya with luxury accommodations, and international airfare is part of the deal. For a limited time, South African Airways Vacations is offering the seven-night “Discover Kilimanjaro and the Masai Mara” package, which includes a stay in Nairobi as well as three lodges in, or adjacent to, some of the country’s most renowned national parks, each with unique geography: Amboseli National Park, in the foothills of Mount Kilimanjaro; Lake Nakuru National Park, a two-hour drive northwest of Nairobi and home to more than 450 species of birds including thousands of flamingos; and Masai Mara National Reserve, in the southwest and full of expansive grasslands.Travelers can expect to see lions, elephants, cheetahs and herds of wildebeest. Prices from $3,699 a person, which includes round-trip airfare on SAA from John F. Kennedy International Airport in New York, accommodations, game drives and activities, most meals, a boat ride near Lake Nakuru and transfers. The trip must be booked by June 30 for travel between Sept. 23 and Dec. 9 this year.SHIVANI VORAA version of this article appears in print on May 29, 2016, on Page TR2 of the New York edition.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »