By SHIVANI VORAOCT. 7, 2016
As a travel adviser selling luxury trips, Stacy Small, 46, the owner of the Los Angeles-based consultancy Elite Travel International, spends more than half the year traveling for her job, but her severe celiac allergy, diagnosed in 2001, has made life on the road challenging — at least in the past. “It wasn’t too long ago that finding food without wheat was nearly impossible, even at upscale hotels,” she said.Now, according to Ms. Small, the options seem almost limitless: In London, she enjoys decadent gluten-free teas, complete with scones, at hotels like Claridge’s, and on the Amalfi Coast in Italy, the lemon pasta at the Hotel Santa Caterina, handmade with wheat-free noodles, is a favorite. In Tokyo, there’s the tempura at the Mandarin Oriental, Tokyo, fried in a dedicated gluten-free fryer, and on her trans-Atlantic journey on Cunard’s Queen Mary 2, pancakes for breakfast and pastries midafternoon — all without wheat — were staples. “For the first time,” she said, “I am not stressed when I travel about what I’m going to eat.”She may not be the only one. Travelers with dietary restrictions, whether they are because of religion, allergies or personal preferences, can relax when it’s time to eat because of the way hotels and cruise lines are increasingly accommodating their needs.Healthy or vegetarian options on cruises and at hotels aren’t a novel concept nowadays. Green juices? Yes. Low-carb, vegan and gluten-free? No problem. What is new, however, is the unprecedented level with which both are catering to guests’ diets. Some are expanding their kitchens or are creating separate areas within existing ones where chefs prepare dishes, long an amenity on airlines, that adhere to various food plans such as kosher, vegan, Halal, and soy-free. Some have dedicated nut-free and vegetarian kitchens, and some have gone so far as to have separate cooking utensils and plates for guests with restrictions. And guests usually don’t pay extra for such meals.AdvertisementPart of this growing attention may be connected to the rise in food allergies — 15 million Americans have them today, compared with 12 million in 2011, according to Food Allergy Research & Education, a nonprofit in McLean, Va., and as more travelers have certain “no” foods, the hospitality industry is trying to please them with cuisine that is a “yes.”AdvertisementThe other reason, according to Claire Bennett, the executive vice president of American Express Travel, a global travel network of 9,000 counselors, speaks to a larger trend in hospitality of customization. “Whether it’s choosing the pillow in your hotel room or crafting an itinerary to suit your interests, travelers today expect a certain level of personalization, and food preferences are a key aspect of that,” she said.Cruise Lines International Association, a trade association for the cruise industry, recently released a statement about the progress cruise ships have made in accommodating a wide variety of diets from diabetic and dairy-free to no sodium and Halal.The luxury cruise line Crystal Cruises, for example, has a separate area in the main kitchens of its two ocean liners where a chef cooks kosher meals; for other special requests such as Indian vegan, as was the case on a recent cruise from Stockholm to Copenhagen, there is a designated chef who prepares the meals at a special order station. Crystal created the section about a year ago, according to the vice president of food and beverage Toni Neumeister, because of the rise in the number of special requests.Norwegian Cruise Line, with 14 ocean liners, is also increasing its efforts for guests with food restrictions. To avoid any chance of cross-contamination, for example, all the ships have gluten-free sections in the main kitchen where chefs bake muffins, cakes and other wheat-free food. Also, vegetarians don’t have to worry about meat or seafood accidentally ending up in their dishes because each boat has a vegetarian kitchen with its own pots, pans and fryers. And at onboard specialty restaurants, where guests pay extra to dine, such as a steakhouse or tapas bar, almost any diet need can be met with advance notice, said Karl Muhlberger, Norwegian’s vice president of food and beverage.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.River cruise lines, too, have this kind of personalization, including Uniworld Boutique River Cruise Collection, with a fleet of 21 ships, where customized menus are available for anyone who needs them. Gerard van Helvoort, Uniworld’s head of culinary, said that on some cruises, chefs design a dozen different menus for a dozen different guests, each with a unique diet. “That’s a lot considering we have around 130 guests on most cruises, but no request is an imposition,” he said.Like cruises, the situation has also improved at hotels for travelers, like Ms. Small, who must, or choose to, avoid certain foods. Jim Bendt, the founder of the Minneapolis-based travel consultancy Pique Travel Design, said that when his clients ask for specialty meals on their trips, he no longer struggles to find hotels for them. “I recently had one family going to Zimbabwe with a son who is allergic to gluten, fructose and nuts, and the lodges they’re staying at weren’t fazed by this at all and, in fact, wanted to know all his favorite foods so the boy would be happy,” he said.Allergy-safe, appealing meals in the midst of the African wilderness? Many safari lodges offer tailored menus. At Singita Sabi Sand, a game reserve in South Africa next to Kruger National Park that has two lodges, chefs section off an area of the kitchen to prepare meals for guests on special diets. Popular requests include kosher, semi-Orthodox, egg-free and nut-free meals, according to the head chef, Dylan Pitallo.The Peninsula Beverly Hills has made a serious commitment to adaptability. The property’s kitchen completed a $3 million renovation in January, which was redesigned with dietary considerations in mind. The roughly 7,500-square-foot space has nut-free mixers and several designated fryers that are either soy-free, nut-free or strictly vegetarian; there are also separate cutting boards, knives and cooking utensils for each of these diets, and for kosher guests, the executive chef David Codney not only uses a new set of pans and utensils to cook their food but also has waiters serve them their meals on new plates and glassware so that there is no chance they were in contact with shellfish or a combination of meat and dairy (no shellfish and not mixing meat and dairy are customary in a kosher diet).AdvertisementThe Four Seasons Hotel George V, Paris, approaches food in a similar manner, even at its three Michelin-starred restaurant, Le Cinq, where seafood is the focus. A part of the restaurant’s kitchen is nut-free, and another part is seafood-free, because, yes, some diners at seafood restaurants are allergic to fish. Chefs in France weren’t always so open-minded, said the executive chef Christian Le Squer. “The menu either worked for you or didn’t, but as people come to us with more dietary needs, we want to find a way to make our food work for them,” he said.These kinds of modifications could be frustrating for chefs, who often pride themselves on showcasing their cooking style, but that’s not always the case.Mr. Codney, for one, said that guest requests inspire his creativity. There was the time when a family asked for meals, as per their Jainism (an ancient Indian religion), that were vegetarian, and without eggs and root vegetables, such as onions and carrots. The menu he created for them included seared cauliflower steaks with curried chickpeas, a curry with English peas and black mustard, and sweet corn in a spicy and creamy tomato gravy.The food was so tasty, he said, that he now makes the dishes for himself.A version of this article appears in print on October 9, 2016, on Page TR3 of the New York edition with the headline: Kosher, Vegan or Gluten-Free? No Problem.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.