AdvertisementSupported byQ. and A.By John L. DormanFor Mike DeFrino, the chief executive of Kimpton Hotels and Restaurants, opening a boutique hotel is a very careful process. “For each location, we think about how much people are willing to pay to whether there will be a need for parking,” he said. “We want properties that are embraced locally.”Bill Kimpton, an investment banker-turned-hotelier, founded Kimpton Hotels and Restaurants in 1981. Mr. Kimpton was a leader in converting old buildings into hotels. Today, the boutique pioneer continues to grow, and opened its first European hotel last month. The company’s well-regarded Karma Rewards program includes bar and minibar credits, along with free Wi-Fi service.Below are edited excerpts from a conversation with Mr. DeFrino. Kimpton properties include many older buildings that have been turned into grand hotel spaces. What influences your company to do this?We have a long history of taking underutilized, rundown buildings and converting them to small boutique hotels. A recent example of this was the renovation of the historic Schofield Building in downtown Cleveland, which had previously been covered with a metal cladding, and had its original terra-cotta exterior restored, in turn becoming the Kimpton Schofield hotel, with apartments on the upper floors.More people, especially millennials, are spending less of their disposable income on material goods and more on specialized travel experiences. What is Kimpton doing to attract this type of guest?Part of our DNA from the beginning has been to create experiences. The modern traveler is always looking for real interactions and it is hard to do that if you’re sitting in a room. One thing we do is keep coffee in the lobby. Over the years, we started to spend more on bars and restaurants, which can be a social experience in itself.You recently opened the De Witt, the first Kimpton hotel in Europe, in Amsterdam, with a second hotel in Paris scheduled to open in 2020. What went into choosing the Amsterdam location?The InterContinental Hotels Group, our parent hotel company, had a property for sale and we thought it was a perfect fit. We shut down the hotel for a year and brought it to life.You currently have 10 Kimpton properties in Washington. Why is the city such a strong market for you?We went into Washington with five hotels and had our own development team. If a building is going to be a hotel, we’d rather run it versus someone else. From there, we spread into diverse locations, from Capitol Hill to Glover Park.There is a daily, hosted wine hour at each Kimpton property. How did this idea come about?Bill Kimpton used to keep a case of wine in his office and developed the idea of the wine hour to welcome guests to his hotel and forge a community.Where else is Kimpton looking to grow?Secondary markets are thirsty for boutique hotels, and we’ve had successful openings in Milwaukee and Cleveland. Our properties have a bit of a coastal vibe, which has really been well received. We have a commitment to the South and have opened the Brice in Savannah, Ga., and the Kimpton Cardinal in Winston-Salem, N.C., with a new location in Nashville and an expansion in Charlotte.What are some of your favorite destinations?I love a beach vacation and prefer having my feet in the sand. We just opened a property on Grand Cayman last year, and my wife is a diver, so that was a wonderful experience. The island is great for couples and kids. I think Miami has a great attitude and love to go there for a long weekend. For a leisurely weekend, Austin is a lot of fun. It’s an outdoorsy town, with nice music, food, bars and people.Advertisement