
In Transit By                     
ELAINE GLUSAC

MARCH 4, 2016
DEALS ON HISTORIC HOTELSThroughout the month of March, Historic Hotels of America and Historic Hotels Worldwide will offer discounts of up to 65 percent on over 100 hotels. Travel windows vary by property, but the sale includes rooms at the Broadmoor in Colorado Springs from $230 a night, a 40 percent savings, valid on stays through April 30; and the 1927-vintage Hotel New Grand in Yokohama, Japan, from $83 a night, a 65 percent savings, through May 25. Other properties on sale include the Fairmont Sonoma Mission Inn & Spa in Sonoma, Calif.; the Jekyll Island Club Hotel in Georgia; and the Sagamore in Adirondack State Park in New York.IN PUGLIA, A FARMHOUSE RESORTA southern Italian farmhouse, or “masseria,” will open March 18 as the 19-room Masseria Le Carrube, a boutique resort near Ostuni in the Puglia region. Rooms in the whitewashed stone farmhouse, which dates back to the 17th century, retain their rustic quality with the addition of modern conveniences like air-conditioning and Wi-Fi. Outside, the former sheep pen will be the site of two swimming pools, including one that is heated, and a garden is planted in orange and olive groves. Indoors, an ancient olive oil press resides on the ground floor and the restaurant will serve vegetarian food. The property is the latest from San Dominico Hotels, which runs other intimate properties in Puglia and in London. Rooms start at 140 euros ($153), including breakfast.A GALAPÁGOS SAFARIInternational Nature & Cultural Adventures is launching a 12-day Galápagos Safari combining eight days aboard the 16-passenger yacht Integrity and three days on Santa Cruz Island in an upscale safari-style camp. On the island, guests will stay in furnished tents set on wooden platforms with access to amenities including a swimming pool. The land stay offers opportunities to hike up the volcanic cone of Puntudo, mountain bike around a crater, see giant tortoises in the wild and visit the Darwin Research Station. The sea portion of the trip visits a series of islands in search of wildlife, and the vessel carries kayaks and snorkeling equipment for guest use. The trip, which includes two nights in Quito, starts at $6,995 a person. IN MICHIGAN, A HEMINGWAY CELEBRATIONThe 32-room Hotel Walloon, on Walloon Lake in northern Michigan where Ernest Hemingway spent many boyhood summers, is offering a three-day special event in tribute to the writer. Called “The Last Good Country,” it features a reception with Valerie Hemingway, his daughter-in-law and personal assistant, a boat tour of the lake and a fly-fishing demonstration marking the opening of trout season. Named after the writer’s description of the area, the special event takes place April 29 to May 1. Package rates start a $920 for two, including two nights, double occupancy, and all events.AdvertisementCYCLING THROUGH THE TULIPS ...The cycle touring marketplace Tripsite is offering eight-day Tulip Tours that combine biking and barge cruising through the blooming fields of Holland in early April. From Amsterdam, travelers use one of several barges, ranging in size from about 14 to 20 passengers, as a hotel and jumping-off point for daily cycling excursions. Bikes are provided and used to cycle in the famous Keukenhof gardens, around Gouda, home of the namesake cheese, and the Aalsmeer flower market. Trips start at 985€ ($1,076) a person.... AND WITH A CHEFThe high-end bike vacation company DuVine is offering a Chef on Wheels cycling tour with the New York-based chef Seamus Mullen in Provence, France, May 29 to June 3. The six-day trip goes through lavender fields, vineyards and olive groves en route to medieval villages and local markets, where riders will accompany the chef in selecting fresh ingredients. Daily rides range from about 18 to 32 miles, and the chef, who runs several restaurants in New York including Tertulia, will prepare several evening meals at the private ninth-century estate where the group will reside when not in the saddle. The trip costs $6,295 a person.AdvertisementNATIONAL PARKS BY RVThe RV vacation specialist Tracks & Trails is offering a new 13-night trip from Las Vegas stringing together all five of Utah’s national parks and the Grand Canyon. The service provides the RV, of course, as well as the campsite reservations, maps and itineraries with suggested adventures. Offered May to October, the itinerary includes Zion, Bryce, Capitol Reef, Arches and Canyonlands national parks in Utah, as well as the Grand Canyon, with an extra stop among the sandstone buttes of Monument Valley in the Navajo Nation. Suggested activities include hiking, rafting and biking. Trips start at $8,600 in a vehicle that sleeps four.A version of this article appears in print on March 13, 2016, on Page TR2 of the New York edition with the headline: Tour and Resort News: Discounts on Historic Hotels; Tulip Trip.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »