
In Transit By                     
ELAINE GLUSAC

FEB. 26, 2016
CHRISTO ACROSS THE WATER IN ITALYThe installation artist Christo will unveil his latest project, a series of buoyant polyethylene cubes laid across Italy’s Lake Iseo that will create a nearly two-mile-long walking path, in June. Wrapped in vibrant yellow fabric and designed to undulate with the waves, the Floating Piers, which are about 50 feet wide, will appear on the small lake near Bergamo in northern Italy from June 18 to July 3, with about another mile of fabric lining the pedestrian streets of the shorefront towns of Sulzano and Peschiera Maraglio. The project will be open to the public (admission details are to be determined), but the luxury travel company Black Tomato is offering V.I.P. access to it that begins with a bird’s-eye view of the installation via a private helicopter transfer from Milan to Lake Iseo. Guests then tour the lake by vintage boat and have exclusive skip-the-line access to the Floating Piers to walk on them. The trip starts at $6,100 per person, including three nights at the Bulgari Hotel Milan.IN PORTLAND, JAPANESE GARDEN REOPENSAfter a six-month closure to build a Cultural Village outside its gates, the Portland Japanese Garden will reopen March 1. The hillside garden, which covers about 5.5 acres, is in the midst of a $33.5 million expansion to 9.1 acres with the addition of the village designed by the Japanese architect Kengo Kuma. It will remain under construction until next April, but the spring mosses, stone gardens, clipped shrubbery and weeping cherry trees will again be open to viewers in time for cherry blossom season.MAPLE SYRUP TASTING IN NEW YORKA sure sign of spring, the New York State Maple Producers Association is gearing up for its Maple Weekend, actually two of them, March 19 to 20 and April 2 to 3. Roughly 160 farms and museums will be open for sugar house tours, tree-tapping demonstrations, pancake breakfasts, and even maple cocktail tastings.WATCHING WHALES AND SHARKSMarch to May, an estimated 20,000 gray whales migrate north from their breeding grounds off the Baja Peninsula, eventually reaching the Bering Sea. On Vancouver Island in British Columbia, the Pacific Rim Whale Festival, March 12 to 27, celebrates the whales’ return to the calm, food-rich waters of Clayoquot Sound with talks by National Geographic photographers, whale-watching outings with marine researchers, storytelling and concerts. Long Beach Lodge, with rooms from 229 Canadian dollars ($166), will offer daily whale-watching tours and access to festival events on the property including a cedar weaving workshop with a First Nations artist March 16.AdvertisementLike many humans, leopard sharks swarm the warm, sandy, shallow waters off the coast of La Jolla near San Diego in summer. Best sightings of the spotted leopard sharks, considered harmless to humans as they forage for crabs and small fish, take place between July and September when the Birch Aquarium at Scripps Institution of Oceanography offers two-hour leopard shark snorkeling tours to those who have their own gear. If you don’t, the tour company La Jolla Kayak offers guided 90-minute snorkeling trips in season for $39, including gear.AdvertisementA NEW TOUR OF NORTHERN IRELANDHoping to extend interest in Ireland beyond St. Patrick’s Day, Driftwood Irish Journeys of Discovery has put together a new Northern Island Tour that focuses on Northern Ireland. The six-day, 16-guest trip focuses on the scenic splendor of the north of the island, visiting the hexagonal-shaped basalt rocks at the Giants Causeway, the rope bridge at Carrick-a-Rede and the Glens of Antrim, a setting for the HBO series “Game of Thrones.” In the capital of Belfast, the trip includes a mural tour by cab and a visit to the Titanic Visitor Experience near the shipyards where the fated ocean liner was launched. The trip, offered monthly April through September, costs $1,415 a person, double occupancy.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.DEALS FROM SLOPES TO CITIESIn Ski Country …From Feb. 29 until late March, Sun Valley, Idaho, is offering stay-and-ski packages starting at $172 a person, including one night’s lodging at the Sun Valley Inn and one lift ticket. The rates for an overnight and a lift ticket drop to $92 a person during the last week of ski season, March 28 to 31.… at the Beach…In May, once the slopes close down and before school lets out, a number of New England beach hotels are discounting room rates. In Edgartown on Martha’s Vineyard, Harbor View Hotel has rooms from $159, versus the normal starting rate of $319, and the 18th-century Kelley House inn is offering rates from $117 compared with $252 in season. On Cape Cod, Sea Crest Beach Hotel offers rates from $134 a night in May (normally rooms start at $266) and a heated indoor pool that will sub for dips in the ocean.… in the City…Millennium Hotels and Resorts is offering room deals from March 1 to May 31 at its 14 hotels across the country. The rates are discounted 10 percent with an additional 10 percent off food and beverages at the properties, and complimentary Wi-Fi access. Rates start at $98 a night in New York, Boston, Chicago and Los Angeles and $89 a night in Cincinnati, Minneapolis, Nashville, Scottsdale, Ariz., and others.… and Far BeyondMountain Travel Sobek is offering $1,000 off its 18-day tour of Nepal’s Mustang region in 2016. Called Mystical Mustang: Nepal’s “Forbidden Kingdom,” the trip visits the Himalayan former kingdom of Lo, now known as Mustang, on a 13-day trek to remote monasteries, temples and villages, with a two-day-stay in the ancient walled city of Lo Manthang. Prices start at $5,995 before the discount on departures in May and September.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »