

 Lucas Peterson
 

FRUGAL TRAVELER
FEB. 17, 2016
Things were in full swing when I arrived at the Fremont Street Experience, a covered outdoor street fair that functions as the throbbing party vein of downtown Las Vegas. Occasional screams emanated from above as kids whizzed by on a zip line that runs the length of the street 12 stories up. I grabbed a draft beer at one of the casino bars and walked by an Elvis impersonator and his backing band blasting through a solid rendition of “Hound Dog.”Young women in barely-there outfits danced on bars all along the street, peddling alcoholic slushies; performance artists played bucket drums, donned moderately soiled super hero costumes and hustled for photographs or covered themselves in silver body paint and stood perfectly still, moving only when someone tipped them. Countless lights attached to casino hotels like the Fremont and Four Queens made it seem like midday, even though it was 9 p.m. I felt as if I was in the center of everything Vegas.Except I wasn’t on the Las Vegas Strip. I was on a mission to prove that all of the worthwhile things about Vegas could be had without touching the 4.2-mile stretch of Las Vegas Boulevard between Sahara Avenue and Russell Road. In fact, I was hoping that getting away from the Strip would yield experiences that one wouldn’t normally associate with Vegas, and I could see a side of the city most tourists miss.Things had started out on a tricky note, though: Finding a cheap room was more difficult than I’d anticipated. I happened to pick a week that three of the biggest conventions of the year were in town. The fabled rock-bottom-priced opulence of Vegas I’d dreamed about — $20 or $30 for a nice hotel room — would be out of reach. Lesson learned: research conventions. (There are a few websites I discovered too late, like vegasmeansbusiness.com, that would have helped.)AdvertisementNevertheless, I landed a decent $70 rate at the California Hotel & Casino, one block from the Fremont Street Experience. (Many downtown hotels overlook Fremont. Do not book one of these rooms unless you are a heavy sleeper.) My room was spacious, clean and more than adequate for my needs. After checking in I made my way through Fremont and crossed into the Fremont East Entertainment District. First stop was the Beat Coffeehouse & Records, which had all manner of coffee drinks, as well as liquor and draft beer (when the taps are working, which they weren’t that night). There were also crates of vinyl for sale, $4.99 per record, sitting on big glass display cases. I ordered a $1.99 iced green tea and took a seat at the bar.AdvertisementIt was Open Mic Night. “This next one is called ‘Scattered Words,’ ” said a young woman with an acoustic guitar, and she broke in to a plaintive tune that reminded me of Vampire Weekend. The crowd was young, impressively diverse and thoroughly entranced.I started talking to Joe, a native Iowan working on the crew of a movie that was shooting in and around Vegas. After the open mic, we grabbed a bite at the Badger Cafe, which opened in 1979 and had a homey, Midwestern feel (the badger in question is the University of Wisconsin mascot). Joe and I each got “build-your-own” half-pound burgers for $5.49 (includes lettuce, onion and pickles) and shared some gut-churning chili cheese fries. My burger, served on a sesame seed roll, was excellent: fresh, juicy and full of flavor. The waitress ribbed us on our choice of light beers — “Y’all want some more water?” she asked, then smiled and went back behind the counter. When we settled our bill, we asked her what there was to do in the neighborhood. Her response: “Y’all been to the Pinball Hall of Fame?”Old Las Vegas Mormon Fort Las Vegas NaturalHistory Museum15515California Hotel & CasinoThe Beat Coffeehouse & RecordsFreemont Street ExperienceFreemont East Entertainment DistrictLas VegasBlue Sky Yoga/The Arts FactoryHop Nuts BrewingMap data by OpenStreetMap1 mile95515Las Vegas15Las Vegas StripSpringValleyEllis IslandPinball Hall of FameBadger CafeParadiseGun GarageMcCarranInternationalAirportFEB. 18, 2016
I hadn’t, but given that A) it was on the next block and B) I have a longstanding fascination with electronic games, I couldn’t really pass this up. The Pinball Hall of Fame is an enormous quadrangular warehouse jam packed — surprise! — with pinball machines. The clamor of bells, bumpers and flippers batting steel balls echoing merrily off the walls creates a near constant buzz in the space. There’s an impressive array of newer and vintage games, many of which can be purchased outright from the Hall, which is run by Tim Arnold. I played “Star Wars” and a few others before finding Joe again. His workmates were going for drinks and karaoke at a casino called, of all things, Ellis Island, and I was invited.The classic way of getting free and cheap stuff in Vegas is to spend a lot of money — or at least to give casinos the impression that you spend a lot of money. For those of us on a budget, however, a different strategy is needed: one that exploits the system.My mark, so to speak, was the steak dinner, an iconic Vegas meal. The cafe at Ellis Island has a reputation for serving a particularly good one — $7.99 for a steak, vegetable, mashed potatoes or fries, and soup or salad, if you sign up for the casino’s rewards program and do a little gambling (which you were planning to do anyway, right?).All casinos have rewards programs. You sign up, get a little card with a magnetic strip, and as you spend money you collect coupons for freebies and discounts. At Ellis Island, they’ll give you that cheap steak dinner (normally $12.99) if you play just $5 worth of slots. But isn’t that just breaking even? Well, in addition to it just being a little mindless Vegas fun, you can push it further: If you play $10 worth of slots instead of $5, not only do you get that discount on the steak dinner, Ellis Island also rewards you with bonus play money — a random amount between $10 and $500.I got my card, put $10 on it, and blew through it on a slot machine. A notification came up: I had $66 in additional slot play. I played through that and, in the process, won $30. I cashed out and claimed my coupons for the steak dinner. The casino had, in effect, paid me to gamble and eat at their restaurant — and the steak, a 10-ounce top sirloin, was delicious. It was at least an inch thick, flavorful and cooked to a perfect medium-rare. I said goodbye to Joe, who I found in the karaoke bar listening to someone mangle “Sweet Caroline.”Advertisement(Vegas, incidentally, isn’t just surf-and-turf and all-you-can-eat buffets. Chinatown — well, more like China Strip Mall — is on Spring Mountain Road. I ventured there late one night and was able to score an enormous, hearty beef roll for $7.50 at Noodle Pot.)Hoping to burn off some of the steak, the next day I stopped in for a class at Blue Sky Yoga, which works on a donation-based model (suggested $12 minimum). The instructor, Cheryl Slader, led about eight students, including me, through an invigorating series of poses. I asked her afterward whether the donation-based method was working financially. She chuckled and said, “No, not really.” In a transient city like Las Vegas, she explained, it’s not easy to build a regular stable of clients. “I work a lot of other jobs to make this work,” she said, motioning to her studio, the walls of which are covered with local artists’ works. But it’s worth the effort: “I don’t think money should be a barrier to anyone who wants to practice yoga.”The yoga studio is housed in the Arts Factory, which functions as the heart of the city’s Arts District — less a neighborhood and more a handful of buildings clustered around Charleston Boulevard, but it’s a wonderful side of Vegas many don’t know about. After class, I wandered into the studio of Joseph Watson, an artist influenced by cityscapes and urban life, peeked into a steampunk-inspired gallery called Hiptazmic, then wandered upstairs and took in wonderfully macabre exhibits by Rebecca Hood and Lisa Dittrich.Every Saturday, get travel tips, destination coverage, photos from all over the world and more.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Just south of the Arts District, I encountered a thriving but underappreciated side of the city: Las Vegas’s craft beer scene. I came across a middle-aged couple from Dallas, Mike Kwasnick and Sharon Blackstock, who were waiting for Hop Nuts Brewing to open for the day. Soon we were chatting, and I found myself sharing some flights of house-made beers they’d purchased. “She’s not feelin’ too good, so you’re gonna have to help me drink all this,” Mr. Kwasnick said. I was happy to oblige. Our excellent bartender, Jessie Dennis, lent some perspective on life as a Vegas native. “You definitely grow up pretty fast here,” she said. “On the other hand,” she added cheerfully, “I pretty much got everything out of my system by the time I was 16.”Museums aren’t Las Vegas’s strongest suit, but later that afternoon, I headed to one of the city’s more interesting (and cheaper) ones — the Las Vegas Natural History Museum, a $10 admission. (There is a two-for-one adult admission coupon that is readily Google-able.) Most of the exhibits — wonders of ancient Egypt, a giant animatronic T-rex — would be great for kids, though I wouldn’t necessarily recommend them for lone adult travelers. Better for grown-ups (and considerably cheaper) is the Old Las Vegas Mormon Fort next door: for a mere dollar, you can tour the settlement, created by 30 missionaries in 1855, who promptly said “No, thanks” and went back to Utah in 1857.As I was getting ready to leave, perhaps inspired by the SHOT Show, the enormously popular firearms trade show in town, I made an impulse purchase: $27.20 (with a 20 percent discount code) for a “Quick Shooter Experience” Groupon at the Gun Garage, a gun store and firing range west of the Strip. Two gregarious young women greeted me there and helped me pick my gun. “So, the Uzi is more popular in, like, movies and rap songs,” one of them said. I ended up going with an M4 carbine. A range officer introduced himself and went over some rules: Wear eye and ear protection, keep the weapon pointed downrange and, interestingly, no head shots on the paper target: body shots only. He loaded my gun, showed me how to hold it and how to position myself. Then he took off the safety and put a hand on my shoulder. “O.K., you’re fully automatic now,” he said.It was over in under 20 seconds; I found it frighteningly easy to rattle off an entire clip. Lori, one of the women at the counter, said, “Not bad for a first timer!,” which I’m sure she would have said no matter what. I was running late and heading to the exit when she called after me, “You might want to wash your hands, depending on where you’re going.” I told her I was rushing to the airport. “You’re definitely going to want to wash your hands,” she said. Apparently, a lot of residue comes off when you’re firing a gun — something T.S.A. agents check for when they randomly wipe your hands at security. I said farewell and headed off to the airport, thanking my lucky stars; it was the most valuable travel advice of my trip.Room rates off the Strip can vary wildly. I visited five different hotels walking around one day and asked what the room rates were for that very night. Then, I asked what the room rate would be in exactly one week.AdvertisementI found the biggest range at the Plaza Hotel & Casino, which quoted a price of $209 for a standard room that night; in one week, the rate would be $55.Sin City Hostel advertises rates of $15 per night for a spot in a co-ed six-bed dorm on a weeknight.An important detail for Vegas-goers: Many hotels tack on a “resort fee,” typically anywhere from $10 to $30 per night. So a $60 rate at the Rio might look great, until you realize you’re paying closer to $90 once the fee is added.Should you rent a car? I got one because I knew I wanted to do some exploring. There’s free parking at the California Hotel & Casino, and for the rate I got from Budget — about $10 a day through their website — it was a no-brainer. Around the Strip, though, it’s best to use taxis or a rideshare service: Traffic is usually a nightmare.Lucas Peterson is the new Frugal Traveler columnist.A version of this article appears in print on February 21, 2016, on Page TR1 of the New York edition with the headline: In Las Vegas, Not All the Neon Is on the Strip.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »