
In Transit By                     
SHIVANI VORA

MARCH 7, 2016
NEW TRIPS IN NATIONAL PARKSThe National Park Service is turning 100 this year, and the tour outfitter Intrepid Travel is celebrating the landmark with four new trips ranging from seven to eight days that give travelers a chance to explore some of the country’s most renowned parks. The trips are all active-focused and include hiking and kayaking in Yellowstone; biking in Zion and Bryce Canyon in Utah; hiking in Sequoia in California; and snorkeling and sailing in Dry Tortugas off Key West, Fla. Prices from $1,785 a person.DELTA MAKES A COMMITMENT TO CHARITYDelta Air Lines wants to make charity a big priority: The company’s president and incoming chief executive Ed Bastian recently announced that, starting this year, the airline will contribute one percent of its net income from the previous year to charitable organizations. In 2016, that is $37 million. Delta plans to fulfill the commitment through cash contributions, in-kind travel and grants from the Delta Air Lines Foundation. The airline is based in Atlanta, Ga. — a state where the Senate recently passed legislation that allows businesses to refuse service to same-sex couples if it violates their religious beliefs. An airline spokeswoman, Elizabeth Wolf, said that Delta supports the Glaad Media Awards in Los Angeles and New York City and Pride celebrations in more than a half-dozen cities around the country including Atlanta.IN MANHATTAN, A ROOM WITH A WARDROBEIndulgent amenities tend to be a perk when staying in a suite at a luxury hotel, and for women, the benefit of booking the penthouse suite at the Surrey on Manhattan’s Upper East Side is more creative than the norm. Those who check into the 1,200-square-foot room will find a closet filled with a high-fashion wardrobe customized to their sensibility and size. The clothes and accessories are courtesy of FiveStory, the Upper East Side women’s boutique; Claire Distenfeld, the owner of FiveStory, selects them based on a phone conversation she has with guests before their stay. Women can wear the clothing throughout their visit and also receive a $1,000 credit to use toward buying their favorite pieces. The stay includes a bottle of Veuve Clicquot Champagne, a candle, a $50 credit for the property’s Cornelia Spa and the cost to ship all purchased items to guests after their departure. Nightly rates from $5,000.BOULUD MENUS FOR AIR FRANCEThe two Michelin-starred chef Daniel Boulud has teamed with Air France to design a menu of French dishes with global touches for first and business class fliers; the meals are available as of this month to customers traveling to Paris from select cities in the United States including New York and Los Angeles. Mr. Boulud has created a menu of five dishes for first class such as lobster with curried coconut sauce, black rice and bok choy and lamb chop with zucchini pesto and cheese polenta; the business class menu includes four dishes like chicken tagine with cauliflower and couscous and salmon with fennel, chickpeas and sumac.IN TURKEY, A NEW CANYON RANCH Canyon Ranch is opening online bookings today for Canyon Ranch Wellness Resort at Kaplankaya in Turkey, scheduled to debut in July. It is the brand’s first international outpost and will have 141 rooms, all with views of the Aegean Sea, a 107,000-square-foot spa and two restaurants. Nightly all-inclusive rates for two from 1,580 euros ($1,715).A version of this article appears in print on March 20, 2016, on Page TR2 of the New York edition with the headline: Tours: Exploring Parks.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »