By THE NEW YORK TIMESJUNE 2, 2016
If you’re going on vacation, chances are you’ll spend some time waiting — in the car, in a security line at the airport — or simply lolling around on a beach. The architect Rolf Myller kept his hands busy creating visually stunning mazes, some of which were published in his 1976 book called “Mazes,” during his downtime. Feel free to try to solve them with your family during yours. Click here for printable versions of two of his mazes, including the one below, and here for the solutions.We also asked readers and staffers to share the deviceless games they play to pass the time while on the road. Below are edited versions of seven that topped our list. Share more in comments or tweet us @nytimestravel.1. Name of the game: CanaryThe rules When you see a yellow vehicle you simply say canary; the goal is to reach 20. Once you’ve called it, it is yours. If you have new passengers in the car, you do not reveal the rules of the game or even hint that you are playing.How to win Reach 20.Pro tips Seeing how long it takes the new passenger in the car to catch on to the game is part of the fun. Small children love playing, but never like to lose!AdvertisementCHARLENE TIPTON BAKER, VIA FACEBOOK2. Pub CricketThe rules When it is your inning, on each pub sign you see, you count the legs and that equals how many runs you get. For example, Red Lion = 4 runs as it has 4 legs, but if you pass something with no legs, for example the Queen’s Head, you’re out and the next player is in.AdvertisementHow to win The victor has the highest score at the end of the journey.Pro tip Brilliant fun for kids on a long road trip!VAMOOCH, VIA FACEBOOK3. BingoThe rules We design a bingo board before we go — cow, water tower, police car, unusual “fusion” restaurant — and cross the items off during the trip.How to win Cross off a whole row, and yell “Bingo!”Pro tip Think about what you’ll see before you design that board.BRANDY WINDHAM, VIA FACEBOOK4. License PlateThe rules Check off each state as you see the plate go by on a car or truck, and you can refine it to count only cars, which makes it a lot harder.How to win Being entertained is a win for everyone.Pro tip There are now a number of apps for this.WIL-GREWE MULLINS, VIA FACEBOOK AND PAUL BENCIVENGO, VIA TWITTERPlease verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.5. AlphabetThe Rules Find the letters A-Z in order as you spot them outside the car in license plates, signs, etc. Say them out loud as you find them.How to win You can add scoring but you don’t have to.Pro tip Not the best on long, isolated roads.ANNE FLORENZANO, VIA TWITTER6. “Guess What I Saw?”The Rules On your turn, other passengers try to guess what you saw. Once they do, move on to the next passenger.AdvertisementHow to win Everyone’s a winner.Pro tip On long trips on remote roads, you may want to include things inside the car.@SWEETSHADELANE, VIA TWITTER7. The Cow GameThe rules You have two teams, one on the passenger side and one on the driver’s side. As you travel, each team counts cows on their side of the road. The catch: If you drive past a graveyard, all of your cows pass away and you have to start over.How to win The team with the most cows at the end of the trip.Pro tip Drivers, try to keep your eyes on the road more than on the cows.JEFF SUTTON, VIA FACEBOOKA version of this article appears in print on June 5, 2016, on Page TR10 of the New York edition with the headline: I Spy a Yellow Cow From California.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.