By SHIVANI VORASEPT. 17, 2016
It’s a new season with new hotel openings. Although fall usually sees a glut of splashy properties making their debut, that’s not the story line this year, according to the hotel specialist Bobby Zur, who owns Travel Artistry, a consultancy in Franklin Lakes, N.J. “It’s not uncommon for hotels to delay their openings, but the holdups are especially pronounced this fall for a number of reasons including the U.S. elections, European volatility and concerns over Zika,” he said.Delays aside, there are a number of notable accommodations that travelers will be able to check into before the end of 2016.Here are seven, chosen with the assistance of industry experts.Opening: Oct. 15Set in Tel Aviv’s vibrant Magen David Square, the 40-room Poli House is near the Mediterranean beachfront and has contemporary interiors created by the designer Karim Rashid and a rooftop pool with city views. Because most hotels in Tel Aviv are larger chains, the Poli is a welcome change and will draw in younger travelers, said Leah Smith, the president of the Denver travel consultancy Tafari Travel. Rates from $185 a night, including breakfast.Opening: Nov. 1 At 22 acres, this 77-villa property is a retreat with a “water amphitheater,” a spa, a nature center and a dive center. Stacy Small, the founder of the Los Angeles-based consultancy Elite Travel International, said that travelers tend to have an instant level of comfort with the St. Regis name so the property should have no problem attracting loyalists. Prices from $1,770 a night, including breakfast.AdvertisementOpening: Sept. 19The 189-room Four Seasons, set in part of a new 82-story Robert A.M. Stern-designed skyscraper in Lower Manhattan, will attract both business and leisure travelers: “The Four Seasons is near a lot of businesses, but the downtown area has really developed as a destination, and the hotel has plenty to draw in vacationers,” Ms. Smith said. Property highlights include the steakhouse Cut by Wolfgang Puck, the chef’s first restaurant in Manhattan; a seven-treatment-room spa; and a 75-foot-long lap pool. Prices from $599 a night.AdvertisementOpening: Mid-OctoberSet in a striking 18th-century building in Barcelona’s Gothic Quarter, this 57-room property has Gothic architecture and an aesthetic that blends modern and rustic. Amenities include an Italian restaurant, a rooftop with city and sea views and a spa. “Soho House does a great job with accommodations and has a big following,” Ms. Smith said. Prices from 220 euros a night (about $250).Opening: Dec. 15This hotel, in San Diego’s Gaslamp Quarter, is the debut of Pendry, the luxury brand from Montage Hotels & Resorts. The airy property has 317 loft-like rooms, a rooftop pool, a spa and six restaurants and entertainment venues. Mr. Zur of Travel Artistry predicted that Pendry would appeal to millennials. “The hotel has a great design sense, and you get the Montage level of service at a more affordable price tag,” he said. Prices from $495 a night.Opened Sept. 5Charleston has lacked a luxury hotel, according to Ms. Small, but that scenario may have changed with the opening of the Dewberry, overlooking the city’s historic Marion Square. The property has 155 rooms, each with eclectic furniture; there’s also a spa and a Southern restaurant, Henrietta’s Brasserie, that has been open since June and is already a local favorite. Prices from $325 a night.Opening: early NovemberThe Thai hospitality brand Akaryn brings much-needed upscale accommodations to the capital city of Laos, Ms. Smith said. “The landscape and culture in Laos are stunning and still haven’t been discovered by tourists compared with other parts of Southeast Asia such as Vietnam, but this hotel will certainly be a lure,” she said. The 32-suite resort has a prime position near attractions like the Haw Phra Kaew Temple; there is also a large spa, six food and beverage outlets and an outdoor infinity pool. Prices from $345 a night.A version of this article appears in print on September 18, 2016, on Page TR2 of the New York edition with the headline: Spacious Spas, Pools With Views: 7 Notable Newcomers.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.