By SHIVANI VORADEC. 7, 2016
The holiday season in New York is one of the most vibrant and picturesque times to visit but also its busiest and most expensive period — the city has more than five million tourists between Thanksgiving and the New Year, according to NYC & Company, the city’s official destination marketing organization. And hotel rates are at their peak: According to the Hotel Association of New York City, which represents 300 hotels or about 95,000 hotel rooms, the average nightly rate for a hotel in the city is upward of $350 during the first two weekends of December and from Dec. 27 through Jan. 1.But a holiday season vacation to New York City, while still an indulgence, doesn’t have to involve paying top dollar. Most travelers are unaware that they can get a break for a few days — hotel rates in town between Dec. 23 and 27 drop to an average of $250 a night (that includes more than 100 budget hotels where nightly rates are under $200), making it more affordable to soak up the city’s holiday spirit and attractions like the Rockefeller Center Christmas tree.“It’s been a long-kept secret that if you’re willing to be in the city for Christmas, you’ll find fewer crowds and lower hotel prices,” said the hotel association’s chairman, Vijay Dandapani.The temporary dip, he said, is because business travel is at a lull, and tourists generally prefer to celebrate Christmas at home or travel to visit family for the holiday.AdvertisementBut in addition to offering lower room rates, many properties help their guests celebrate the season during these few days with free holiday-themed amenities ranging from hot chocolate stands to gifts for children — additions that can be the equivalent of more than $100, according to Mr. Dandapani.AdvertisementBelow are seven New York City hotels to consider checking into this Christmas. While prices for the majority are higher than the $250 average nightly rates mentioned above, the stays include attractive amenities and are designed to help travelers get into a festive mood.Park South, a boutique hotel in Midtown Manhattan, is offering a Holiday at the Park package, valid from Dec. 23 through 27 and with prices beginning at $599. Included are a two-night stay, a welcome amenity of a bottle of wine and a baked-goods basket, a Christmas Eve dinner at the property’s Mediterranean-inspired restaurant, Covina, and breakfast at Covina on Christmas morning.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Z Hotel NYC, in Long Island City, Queens, has nightly rates from $155 from Dec. 23 to 26, which includes transportation to and from Manhattan and a breakfast buffet on Christmas morning.The Redbury New York, in the NoMad neighborhood, has nightly rates from $229 on Christmas Eve and is offering all guests gift-wrapping services and milk and cookies.The following packages are pricier than the ones above and more suited to travelers seeking luxury.The Pierre, across the street from Central Park, has nightly rates from $675 on Dec. 24, 25 and 26. Perks on these dates include a hot chocolate stand in the lobby with toppings such as marshmallows and peppermint bark, and a turndown dessert of a chocolate yule log and holiday cookies. Also, on Christmas morning, children are invited to the hotel’s lounge, Two E, in their pajamas, where they can search underneath the Christmas tree for a present with their name on it (these gifts, such as Lego sets, are personalized based on the child’s age) while their parents enjoy pastries and coffee.The Peninsula New York, in Midtown Manhattan, has nightly rates from $761 over Christmas. All guests receive a welcome amenity of a white chocolate Christmas tree, and children receive a personalized Christmas gift and a turndown dessert of milk and cookies. Children and adults alike can visit the property’s old-fashioned candy shop in the lobby to fill up bags with candies such as caramels, lemon drops and peppermints.The Lowell Hotel, on the Upper East Side, has nightly rates from $552 on Dec. 24 and 25. A stay includes breakfast, gifts for children, ironing and laundry and hot chocolate and hot cider, available throughout the day in the lobby. Also, on request, the hotel’s decorating team will decorate rooms with Christmas trees and stockings.W Hotel-Times Square has the Winter Wonderland package on Dec. 24 and 25 with nightly rates from $614. The price includes two ice skating passes for the Rink at Rockefeller Center, a winter gear set (hat, and hand and foot warmers), valet parking, hot chocolate and late checkout.A version of this article appears in print on December 11, 2016, on Page TR2 of the New York edition with the headline: It’s Christmastime in New York City.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.