By ALLISON AMENDJUNE 20, 2017
You’ll want comfortable shoes, a couple of swimsuits and, of course, plenty of sunscreen. But to really get the most out of your Galápagos trip, the editors at The Wirecutter, a product review website owned by The New York Times Company, recommend a few extras:Snorkeling gear: Some tours provide snorkeling sets, but the U.S. Divers Lux Snorkel Set is a high-quality budget pick that’s compact enough to pack.Day pack: Tucking a packable day pack like the L.L. Bean Stowaway into your larger luggage takes up almost no space, yet insures you have a comfortable backpack to carry water, snacks and gear on day trips.Sun hat: The Galápagos are notoriously sunny, so you’ll want protection beyond a regular dose of sunscreen. A proper sun hat, like the Sunday Afternoons Ultra Adventure Hat will protect your neck and shoulders in addition to your face.Camera: If you want to upgrade from your phone, the Nikon Coolpix B700 superzoom camera offers 60x zoom so you can get close up shots of creatures without scaring them away. For those who want to capture the action of diving, hiking and snorkeling, try the waterproof GoPro Hero5 Black action cameraAdvertisementBinoculars: Since wildlife viewing is the main attraction in the Galápagos, a great pair of binoculars is a must. The Athlon Optics Midas ED are a great choice.Bonus pro tip: While you won’t need a jacket in the Galápagos, you’ll desperately regret not packing one when you’re waiting for your connecting flight in Quito, which is high in the Andes and often very cold. Any fleece or non-cotton insulated jacket you already own would suffice, but if you’re shopping around, Patagonia’s Nano Puff hoodie is a versatile favorite among travelers and outdoor enthusiasts.AdvertisementFor more recommendations, see The Wirecutter’s guide to the best gear for travel: thewirecutter.com/reviews/travel-guide.A version of this article appears in print on June 25, 2017, on Page TR5 of the New York edition with the headline: What to Pack.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.