AdvertisementSupported byIn Tanzania, Bolivia, India and Thailand, visitors can experience places that are breathtaking but hard to get to.By Nora WalshMobile camping experiences, with easily movable tents and gear, are popping up in some of the remotest corners of the world, allowing travelers to explore unspoiled landscapes while leaving a light footprint.Around the World“Authentic connection with the natural world is hard to find when staying in traditional accommodations,” said Tom Marchant, a founder of the luxury travel outfitter Black Tomato regarding its new mobile camping service Blink, which lets guests customize their experience, from choosing the location to designing their tents. Camps can be set up anywhere in the world — glaciers, deserts, jungles, coastlines — and come with a butler, private chef, local guide, driver and masseuse. (All-inclusive rates start at approximately $10,000 per person excluding airfare.) After guests depart the entire camp disappears without a trace.Tanzania, AfricaIn Tanzania’s central Serengeti, Roving Bushtops’ compact camping trucks unpack into six 1,000-square-foot luxury safari tents. The area is abundant year-round with zebras, wildcats, giraffes and elephants, including herds of wildebeests that migrate past the camp from November to March. When taking a break from daily game drives, guests can linger on their private decks, enjoy unlimited complimentary massages or take balloon rides. All-inclusive rates start at $990 per person per night including butler service, à la carte dining and a private 4WD vehicle.Uyuni Salt Lake, BoliviaThe landscape of Bolivia’s Uyuni Salt Lake is so surreal that “Star Wars” is featuring it as a fictional planet in its coming film. Travelers can experience its otherworldly appeal with Crillon Tours’ camping expeditions in fully loaded Airstream campers equipped with comfortable beds, a kitchen table, hot showers and a stocked minibar. A private driver, guide and chef accompany guests as they explore the salt flats’ giant cactuses and flamingos and surrounding Andean villages. Rates for one- to three-night packages start at $2,499 per person.Tarutao National Park, ThailandIn Southeast Asia, Smiling Albino offers a mobile camping excursion in Tarutao National Park. Guests arrive by power boat to the island of Ko Ra Wi, where a tent fitted with a king bed, dressers, reading chairs, fans, a kitchen and Western-style bathrooms awaits. A camp manager is on hand to organize water activities, hiking and sailing around the archipelago. Local fishermen provide a daily catch, which a private chef prepares for sunset dinners overlooking the Andaman Sea. All-inclusive rates start at $42,000 per couple for three-night stays.Botswana, AfricaEquestrians can explore the Okavango Delta with travel outfitter Timbuktu’s weeklong horse safaris led by guides from Ride Botswana. The camp is transported by mokoros (traditional dugout canoes), while guests spend their days on horseback cantering elephant trails and spotting wildlife like buffalo, giraffes and antelopes. Meals are prepared over log fires and travelers sleep in spacious lightweight tents featuring stretcher beds, bucket showers and bathrooms. Rates start at $3,550 per person; dates are offered monthly throughout 2018.Antigua and Lake Atitlán, GuatemalaMaya Trails recently introduced a four-day trek from the colonial town of Antigua to Lake Atitlán. The nearly 27-mile hike traces sky-high ridgelines surrounded by volcanoes and winds through highlands, rivers, fruit plantations and coffee farms. Nightly fireside camping includes chef-prepared meals, high-tech tents and hot Guatemalan coffee served each morning. Hikers also have the chance to meet local farmers and weavers keeping the ancient art of backstrap weaving alive. All-inclusive rates start at $249 per person per day, based on two people.Mount Kilimanjaro, AfricaOn Mount Kilimanjaro in Tanzania, hut-to-hut hiking has typically been the most comfortable way to summit Africa’s highest peak. Now travelers can navigate the Lemosho Route’s rain forest and arctic terrain with REI Adventures’ “Signature Camping” experience. Each evening, REI staff sets up large mobile tents with cushy cots for guests and warm dinners are served in a stand-up dining tent. The 11-day package starts at $5,999 and includes most meals, bilingual guides, camping and hotel stays. Trips depart monthly, except March through May.Central Highlands, IndiaRothschild Safaris’ new 11-day “India Under Canvas” adventure tracks tigers and other wildlife through India’s Central Highlands, and includes a two-day camping experience at Satpura National Park, home to native bison, antelope, leopards and wild dogs. At Jamtara Wilderness Camp in Pench National Park, guests can sleep under the stars in a traditional machaan, an open-air platform bed built on high stilts, which allows guests to witness the jungle come alive at sunrise. Rates start at $4,910 per person (based on two people) including domestic connecting flights.Advertisement