
In Transit By                     
ELAINE GLUSAC

FEB. 22, 2016
LOW FARES TO PARIS The low-cost airline Norwegian Air has announced it will begin flights between Kennedy Airport in New York and Charles de Gaulle in Paris this summer with fares starting at $175 one way, or $350 round trip. The service will run four times each week starting July 29. The carrier also plans to initiate twice-weekly service between Los Angeles and Paris from $299 one way, and weekly Fort Lauderdale-Paris flights will begin Aug. 4 from $175 one way. The company has an aggressive plan to add to its fleet, from the current eight Boeing 787 Dreamliners to 38 by 2020.NEW CRUISES IN ICELANDLaunched last summer as Iceland’s first locally owned expedition cruise line, Iceland ProCruises has announced new itineraries for 2016 that head beyond home base to northerly neighbors from the Faroe Islands to Greenland. Its sole ship, the 224-passenger Ocean Diamond, will start the season on a new tour from Hamburg, Germany, and island-hop to the Orkney, Shetland and Faroe Islands before skirting the northern coast of Iceland and finally docking at Reykjavik. The 14-day trip starts at $2,695 a person, triple occupancy. The ship will then spend the majority of the summer on trips that circumnavigate Iceland or break away to Greenland. Two new seven-day Northern Lights and Whales itineraries in Iceland close out the season in September (from $1,685). All itineraries focus on the natural wonders of the north and offer off-ship excursions by small boat to spot whales, visit villages or get close to icebergs.NEW LOUNGES FROM AMERICANAmerican Airlines has announced an overhaul of its premier lounges to include a new dining program that offers full-service preflight meals. Most airline lounges cater to their elite travelers with food and beverage service, often via a buffet. American aims to elevate the dining experience available to first-class customers flying internationally or on transcontinental routes at four of its hubs, including Kennedy in New York, Dallas-Fort Worth, Los Angeles and Miami. It will debut in early 2017 at Kennedy Airport with complimentary meals featuring seasonal menus. American also plans to build a new set of lounges, to be called Flagship Lounges, serving first- and business-class fliers with more space and modern furnishings at Kennedy, Chicago’s O’Hare, Dallas, Los Angeles, Miami and Philadelphia airports. Two of its existing Admirals Club lounges, in Phoenix and São Paulo, have been newly renovated with others underway. The airline plans to add clubs at Houston and Orlando later this year.ONE-CLICK TRANSIT IN EUROPEThe two-year-old Berlin-based transportation search engine GoEuro has grown with the recent addition of the French rail service SNCF to offer travel options that include train, bus and air services in 11 European countries. Travelers can input their start and end destinations — for example, Amsterdam to Brussels next weekend — and receive a list of travel options for getting between them, in this case a bus ride for $10, train for $49 and airfare at $155. GoEuro operates as a search and booking website for transportation in Austria, Belgium, Germany, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Poland, Spain, Switzerland and Britain as well as France.AdvertisementPASSPORT EXPIRING? THERE’S AN APP FOR THATThe passport expediting service ItsEasy.com has launched a smartphone app that it says is the first to help travelers renew their United States passports. The U.S. State Department is anticipating a flood of renewal requests this and next year, the 10-year anniversary of the Western Hemisphere Initiative that required Americans traveling to Canada, Mexico and the Caribbean to hold passports (most passports expire in 10 years). ItsEasy’s free app, now available for iPhone and coming soon to Android, allows users to enter the required information and take passport photos. The service then emails the appropriate documents, and a shipping label, to the customer to be printed, signed and returned to the company for handling. In addition to the State Department’s passport fee , ItsEasy charges $29.95 to use the app and receive the renewal documents.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.MORE FLOTILLA TRIPS IN ITALYLe Boat, which rents self-skippered boats in Europe, will expand its flotilla trips to Italy this year. The flotilla trips, available over five dates in 2016 and led by a guide, take place over a week in which four to eight rental boats, ranging in size from two to 12 passengers, travel together around Venice. The service is designed to appeal to small groups and novice boaters. Rates start at $1,925 for a boat for a week.The company will also add a ship this year, the five-passenger Horizon, which hosts two bedrooms, a bathroom with a separate stall shower, and a sun deck with furniture and a barbecue. It is available for booking in 11 regions across England, France, Germany, Holland and Italy. Rental rates start at around $2,690 for seven nights.AdvertisementFROM AIRBNB, A SALE ON EXOTIC STAYSTravelers booking a selection of treehouse dwellings and island locations from Airbnb by March 13 will get $100 off their total bill. The deal, good for travel before Sept. 30, applies to stays totaling at least $400. Nightly rates start at $78 for a treehouse in Spain and range up to $1,500 for a private island in Vanuatu. Minimum stays vary by property.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »