AdvertisementSupported byIn TransitBy Elaine GlusacSKI DEALS ACROSS THE AMERICAN WEST ...Vail Resorts will hold a 96-hour sale on hotels, ground transportation, ski rentals and more across its properties in the Rockies and beyond next week. Running Feb. 23 to 26, the deal includes rooms at Keystone Lodge & Spa in Keystone, Colo., from $179, a 45 percent reduction; condos in nearby Breckenridge from $173, which is 40 percent off; and the Lodge at Vail, a RockResort, also 40 percent off starting at $253. Travelers can also book ground transportation from Colorado Mountain Express for $15 off per person, and ski rentals at 20 percent off. The ski-country savings are eligible for travel through the end of the ski season, which varies by property but is usually in early April, and is also available for trips in November.... AND A WELL-CHILLED DRINK APRES-SKI IN CANADASkiers at Fernie Alpine Resort in the Canadian Rockies have a new — and truly cold — way to chill out, the Ice Bar at Lizard Creek Lodge. Unlike ice bars at seasonal ice hotels, this one is indoors, and permanent, with a bar made of an ice block kept inside a 200-square-foot refrigerator unit-cum-lounge. Up to 20 people at a time can hit the bar in loaner Helly Hansen down parkas for a shot of vodka from a global selection.NEW BIKING TRIPS, AT HOME AND ABROADBicycle Adventures has announced 14 new trips for 2016, ranging from Midwestern rails-to-trails routes to rides beneath snow-capped volcanoes in South America. Its seven-day tour on the Katy Trail, the longest former rail route repurposed as a cycling path, will cover 240 miles through Missouri in July (from $3,124 a person), and the six-day ride on the Mickelson Trail in South Dakota’s Black Hills region includes visits to nearby Badlands and Mount Rushmore National Parks from June to August (from $2,444). The four-day trip along the Hiawatha Trail in northern Idaho, a former rail route with tunnels and trestles intact, also runs June to August (from $2,294). Abroad, the company has introduced a new 10-day trip in southern Chile’s Lake District available in March (from $4,946) and a 10-day summer trip in Spain’s northern Basque Region that travels along the sea, through the Rioja wine region and to the Pyrenees Mountains (from $6,096).A PANORAMIC PERCH IN ROMEStarwood Hotels & Resorts has announced it will open the Le Méridien Visconti Rome by year-end with a rooftop terrace overlooking the Villa Borghese. The company will spend about $20 million to renovate the existing Visconti Palace Hotel into the 240-room newcomer. Rooms will be understated in modern style, with organic materials including wood and stone and neutral tones. Public spaces aim to be social, including the lobby, which will host a coffee and spirits bar stocked with coffee table books on Italian art and food. Room rates have not yet been determined.BAR TREKKING IN SANTA FELouisville has a bourbon trail, Scotland has a malt whiskey trail and now Santa Fe aims to add its own boozy route with the Margarita Trail. Beginning May 5, the project will identify restaurants and bars with margaritas distinguished by their design and ingredients that will be compiled into a printed passport, sold for $3. Following the trail, passport holders collect a stamp for each establishment they try, with a maximum of two stamps per day to ensure responsible quaffing. Once completed, they can turn it in at a Santa Fe Visitors Center for a free T-shirt and bragging rights.Advertisement