By MASHA GONCHAROVAFEB. 18, 2016
This is the first in a series of interviews with the creators of some of the most-followed accounts on Instagram — those who travel for a living, whether it be surfing down the coastline in Chile, organizing a participatory art project in Paris, or orbiting the Earth. @jrStreet artist795,000 followersNew Yorkers will recognize the work of the street artist called JR on Avenue of the Americas in TriBeCa, where a ballerina does an arabesque on the side of a building across the street from the Roxy Hotel. The French-born JR won the TED prize in 2011 and used the $100,000 in prize money to start the Inside Out Project, a participatory street art program. His works have been pasted on “buildings of the slums around Paris, on the walls in the Middle-East, on the broken bridges in Africa or the favelas in Brazil,” according to his website, jr-art.net.Using Instagram, JR offers “shout outs” when he would like to invite people to participate in his projects. The latest shout out came from Paris, where JR collaborated with the film director Darren Aronofsky on “#TheStandingMarch,” a video featuring more than 500 participants who responded to JR’s Instagram invitation. Because marching in public was banned after the Paris attacks, #TheStandingMarch allowed people to show their support for meaningful progress at the COP21 climate change conference. #TheStandingMarch video was projected onto buildings across Paris in early December.Following are edited excerpts from a phone conversation with JR.Are you the sole owner of your Instagram? Advertisement100 percent. I’m always involved. I post and I write the captions myself. (Laughing) And that’s why there are a lot of spelling mistakes, because I do them when I’m on the road.How does it work for you? For me, it’s more of a way to reveal how I make a project, or to reveal the projects themselves and to explain the layers behind my work. But I use it most often as a road diary. Most of the time people ask me, “Where were you last week?,” but I don’t remember where I was because I travel so much. I post [photos on Instagram] so I remember. I’ve never been one to take the time to write in a journal, but I’ll post so I remember all those journeys, all those scatterings.AdvertisementSo is it a travel journal?When I post a photo, it’s like a page in a book. I even included an entire section of Instagram photos in my book, “Can Art Change the World?” published by Phaidon Press, 2015. And I selected 45 of my published Instagram photos and transferred them onto wood as art pieces at the Perrotin Gallery in Paris.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Why wood? It’s a good way for me to engrave the photo forever, so to speak. What looks ephemeral on digital would become permanent on a piece of wood.Let’s talk about your #TheStandingMarch project in response to the Paris attacks. How did it come about? When we started working with [the film director Darren] Aronofsky on COP21, we started thinking about different projects, and then the attacks happened. Marching was forbidden, and people were not allowed to gather in Paris anymore. So we started to think of how to represent that visually. There could be a standing march. We could have just spread it online, without projecting it on buildings, but the fact that people could go and see it made it interactive. Everyone made their own artworks out of our projections. So, symbolically thousands of people marched individually.You have a loyal French following. But you’ve also got quite a large international following. I always look when people tag me in photos, and how they shot it. I get a lot of places, like rooftops or bridges where people take photos. I get a lot of inspiration from that. After I did my Times Square billboard [as part of the Inside Out Project] in New York a few years ago, one day we saw a photo on Instagram that a guy shot from his apartment, and you could see just my billboard. We wrote to the guy, and he said to come meet him after work. We met up in that apartment, and he told us that the only billboard he ever saw was the “Phantom of the Opera.” And now, that was the only piece of art. The craziest thing was that I had actually met the guy in Japan a couple months before. He was traveling there and saw on my Instagram [a post about] the opening of my show. He came and we met each other for a minute. And now there I was in his parents’ apartment! The photo he took is amazing. I actually made an artwork out of it that’s also in my book. When I posted it on Instagram it got a lot of hits, because it’s just the night coming out of the buildings. It says to me that we’re all at different apartments, but we’re all collecting the angles [from which] to see the world.What’s the most direct way you’ve seen your Instagram influence travel?A lot of the time, I tag the location, so for example, the people in Tokyo know that I’m working in the north of Japan, because I posted it. And they travel to see my art. I’ve actually met a lot of people like that. I’m not saying people in Paris would travel to the north of Japan, but because of Instagram, people relatively close can come. During the Times Square project, for example, I met people who came from the five boroughs, from Connecticut, who told me, “We saw that you posted, we took the kids, we made a day of it.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.