AdvertisementSupported byIn TransitBy Elaine GlusacSNORKELING THE NORTH POLEIt’s one thing to cruise the Arctic in search of polar bears and icebergs, quite another to jump in the frigid water. But that’s exactly what Australia-based Aurora Expeditions is newly offering this summer in polar snorkeling excursions. On small-ship cruises to Spitsbergen in northern Norway and Greenland, passengers will have the opportunity to jump in at the edge of Arctic pack ice to view it from below. The cruise line will provide dry suits, hoods, gloves, boots and full snorkeling kit, as well as experienced guides. The optional activity costs $975 a person, and cruises start at $4,583 for 11 days.LEARN CPR DURING AN AIRPORT LAYOVERA new interactive training kiosk designed to teach CPR in as little as five minutes was installed last week at Chicago’s O’Hare International Airport, with plans for more to be installed at another four airports in March. Sponsored by the American Heart Association and the Anthem Foundation, the kiosk offers a touch-screen video presentation on how to perform hands-only cardiopulmonary resuscitation, followed by a practice session with a rubber torso mannequin and a 30-second CPR test. Practice on the mannequin provides feedback on hand placement, pressure and rate of compressions. Use of the kiosk is free. A pilot program featuring the kiosks in airports was launched at Dallas-Fort Worth in 2013, and the 2016 rollout will station the training devices at airports in Atlanta, Baltimore, Indianapolis and Las Vegas.BARGE TRIPS ON SALE IN EUROPEThe barge cruising company European Waterways is holding a sale on many of its 2016 charter boats and barge cruises for spring and summer travel booked by March 29. Sales on the charters, which are entire boats privately booked by a single party and operated by a staff of four including a chef, range up to $12,000 off the 12-passenger Panache in Alsace-Lorraine in July and August, for a sale price of $45,000 over a six-night trip. Several barge cruises on the Panache, in which passengers book cabins individually, are selling for $2,500 off in April and May, for a discounted price of $8,000 per double-occupancy cabin for a weeklong trip. Another ship, the eight-passenger Anjodi operating on the Canal du Midi in southern France, is offering weeklong charters in May, June and August at $8,000 off, for fares starting at $27,000. Discounted rates on six-night standard cruises aboard the Anjodi start at $8,130 for each double cabin on select dates in June, July and August, reflecting a $1,250 savings.A DEAL ON LOS ANGELES-TO-STOCKHOLM FLIGHTSScandinavian Airlines, known as SAS, is offering a $99 one-way fare from Los Angeles to Stockholm to mark the launch of new flights between the two airports, beginning March 14. The deal is good for travel between March 14 and 25 and must be booked by March 6.IN EUROPE, A NEW RIVER SHIP (JAZZ LOUNGE INCLUDED)The new 176-passenger  River Voyager will launch March 10 from Vantage Deluxe World Travel. It will be the fifth European-based river ship owned by the tour operator. Features of the 442-foot ship include a sun deck with a track for walking and running, a salon offering massages, a jazz-themed lounge branded by the Blue Note label and complimentary bicycles for sightseeing on shore. Designed with American travelers in mind, cabins offer access to many popular U.S. television channels, and menus include both American and European dishes. Spring itineraries in Holland and Belgium start at $2,999 a person for 10-day cruises.Advertisement