What does going upscale mean for your vacation? Our Frugal Traveler finds out in Ecuador, where he gets the royal treatment — but has to look elsewhere for the serendipitous adventure he prefers.

 Seth Kugel
 

FRUGAL TRAVELER
FEB. 3, 2016
I was not surprised when applause broke out as the pilot touched down at the Quito airport, high in the Ecuadorean Andes. In five and a half years as the Frugal Traveler columnist, I’ve learned that cheering a safe arrival is a standard (and lovable) practice in some parts of the world.What struck me was how muffled the merriment sounded, through the curtains that separated their cramped quarters from my opulent perch in seat 1A. Apparently, those of us who can afford business class don’t cheer. But why? That’s the sort of mystery I hoped to solve on this journey.I had been separated from the thrifty throngs — my people — through the whim of an editor, who, for my final column, decided it would be entertaining to send me on a luxury trip. My counteroffer: I’d do the first half high-end, and close with a frugal flourish.I’ve been suspicious of high-end travel since long before I started this job in 2010 with a 13-week bus, boat and train trip from São Paulo to New York. My skepticism has only deepened as I so often watched my skimpy budget lead to serendipitous adventure. “The more you spend, the less you see,” I say with annoying frequency.AdvertisementThen again, I’m no absolutist. I’ve been known to drop $30 on an entree in New York after a long solo trip gorging on greasy street food. I’ll admit to sleeping better alone on a plushly appointed king-size bed than on an upper bunk in shared youth hostel quarters.So my trip to Ecuador would be an investigation: In what ways can spending more money make travel better? The country turned out to be an appropriate choice, one so cheap that even budget travelers can opt for moderate luxury.AdvertisementPerhaps an hour later, my taxi wound through Quito’s astonishingly well-preserved historic center and approached the Casa Gangotena, a mansion-turned-hotel that ranked No. 1 in South America on TripAdvisor in 2014.My arrival caused a commotion. One staff member cleared away the cones that protected the precious parking space at the front entrance. Another took my bag; a third came forth with a magenta welcome drink. It was an agua de frescos, brewed from 10 Andean herbs and flowers — “What people offer to guests in southern Ecuador,” I was told, though I wondered if tradition required forcing it on guests before they could even sit down.I was experiencing what I had only previously read about in press releases: a luxury hotel striving to introduce its guests to a stylized version of the local culture. The drink was as delicious as its rushed delivery was preposterous.Waiting for me in my elegant $370 room (taxes included) — which could be reached directly from the elegant garden via the elegant sitting room — was a hand-signed welcome note and, on the bedspread, a little hand-knit yarn blob that turned out to be a tropical fish. On the embossed business card next to it was scribbled a note: “To: Your Inner Child.”Perhaps this is standard luxury treatment, but I found such coddling extraneous, even a bit creepy. The plate of fresh Ecuadorean fruits left by the window, however, was welcome. If only I had read the accompanying instructions before biting through the bitter skin of a tree tomato.colombiaECUADORArea of detailGalápagos IslandsbrazilperuQuitoQuitoAv. AméricaZazuCotopaxiSanta Clara MarketLatacungaSalcedoCasa GangotenaLa Ronda 1 mile40 milesecuador            CuencaQuingeoSaraguroPeruÑamarínFEB. 4, 2016
I understand why business travelers might appreciate being spoon-fed local culture in the few minutes between meetings, counting on everyone to speak English, having their underwear cleaned for $3 a pair. (Ecuador operates on U.S. dollars.) I get it, I do. In fact, I sent my underwear out the next morning.AdvertisementBut I was here to experience Ecuador, not strike a deal. So I took advantage of the hotel’s splendid location and hit the streets, diving into the crowds that had come to the final day of Quito’s annual Fiestas. I went over to La Ronda, Quito’s famously narrow cobblestone street turned humble restaurant row, stopping for a $1.50 canelazo, an alcoholic cinnamon drink, from the wackily named Exquisitas Empanadas de Morocho del Olímpico, where the young woman ladled it from a pot on a stove and spiked it. “Just let me know if you need more alcohol,” she said — not to me, but to a group of Ecuadoreans. Could she sniff the Casa Gangotena on me?After two deep-fried-before-your-eyes 75-cent empanadas, I returned to the hotel’s restaurant for dinner. By all reports Cedrón was an excellent place to blow some cash.That turned out to be half right. I ordered the meal-course-size version of locro, an Ecuadorean potato soup presented with avocado, fried corn, cheese, pork cracklings and six house-made salsas, all on the side. Swirling it all together, the soup was a circus of flavors and textures — a simple classic raised several levels. The service was perfect, if annoyingly deferential.Just one problem: It was a total bargain. The soup was $10, which included not just an amuse-bouche, bread and sparkling water, but also (gasp) tax and service. Just to run up the bill, I ordered a $9.50 dessert trio of alfajores, coconut panna cotta and a dollop of spiced ganache, then added an extra 10 percent to the service.The next afternoon, I met Juan Carlos Guerra, my $40-an-hour tour guide. (For Ecuador, that’s a lot.) His English was polished, his knowledge of the city deep, his car comfortable. On the free walking tours I’ve taken in other cities, I’d tolerated lovable young balls of energy with well-practiced laugh lines but superficial knowledge. If they were student tour guides, Juan Carlos was a tenured professor.We covered precolonial volcano-worship, syncretic elements of the astonishing local churches, the Quito School’s artistic traditions. At the old-fashioned Santa Clara Market, he plucked a yellowish ovoid fruit called a taxo off a fruit stand and cracked it open to reveal countless seeds enveloped in bright orange globules, like alien eggs. A relative of the passion fruit, but sweet rather than sour, it is my new favorite tropical treat.And he pointed out a lot that I would have missed on my own — candles made of animal fat that he used on his children as a treatment for raw noses, and borojó, a fruit added to drinks as an aphrodisiac (“It’s why there are so many children in Ecuador”). As he took me by the stands selling medicinal herbs, he mentioned that the women working there perform “cleansings” for $5.My frugal instinct took over, though I knew a fancier $49 version could be arranged through my hotel. I was taken by a young woman named Laura to a rundown back area of the market, led into a narrow tile stall decorated with an image of the Virgin of Guadalupe and told to strip to my underwear. Then she had at me, slapping my entire body, front and back, with a loose bouquet of herbs and plants, most notably stinging nettles. It felt as if I were running (almost) naked through a field of thorns.AdvertisementAfterward, she told Juan Carlos I had needed the cleansing. “She said she felt you were under a lot of stress,” he said. Apparently, spending money makes me tense.Was a private guide worth it? Yes, especially at Ecuador prices. But the spoon-fed approach (almost literally in the case of that taxo fruit) was still bugging me. Stinging nettles notwithstanding, the day had felt distinctly adventure-free.I had made a reservation for that evening at Zazu, an upscale restaurant across town that had drawn raves for its upscale take on Ecuadorean cuisine. Tired of being shuttled around, I decided to take a 25-cent Trolebus to a $60 seven-course tasting menu. The trolley ran efficiently, though it was packed and I didn’t get a seat. A freestyle rapper with a portable speaker performed much of the way. Here’s one stretch that struck me, in inelegant translation:We are all people, we are all equal,We were all made of the same materialsWhich is why material things cannot measure your worth.Upon arrival, I was sent to Zazu’s bar to wait for my table, and ordered the most expensive cocktail on the menu, a $16 “Galápagos” martini. As if to prove the rapper’s point, the restaurant promptly forgot about me. Almost an hour later, I asked the bartender to check on my table. Though empty tables dotted the restaurant, I was seated without apology.The tasting menu was lovely — I especially enjoyed Zazu’s replication of the Ecuadorean “helado de paila” process of making ice cream, using liquid nitrogen to whip up a passion fruit sorbet tableside, dolloping it on my lobster dish. But the service was, again, annoyingly deferential, and when you’ve been made to wait alone at the bar for almost an hour, nothing tastes as good as it might otherwise.Hoping to explore the Avenue of the Volcanoes between Quito and Cuenca, I went with the ultimate luxury: hiring someone to take care of literally all my plans and be with me every step of the way.That someone was Antonio Jaramillo, assigned to me by the high-end tour operator Tropic, whose slogan, “Creating high-end personalized and sustainable experiences for the discerning traveler,” is so good it deserves a slogan of its own. (“More buzzwords than your average catchphrase”?) I had negotiated a three-day, two-night tour from Quito to Cuenca, for $1,335. That would include transport in a spiffy S.U.V., lodging, all activities and most meals.To avoid being further spoon-fed, I decided to seize control of Antonio’s tour, telling him I’d be willing to stop anywhere, endure discomfort, eat by the side of the road — and that we would be doing this all in Spanish. He acquiesced. (Of course, it was his job to acquiesce.)AdvertisementWe were to get as close as we could to Cotopaxi, Ecuador’s most famous volcano. The Cotopaxi National Park was closed because of the volcano’s recent activity, which meant a jaunt on horseback from the Hacienda el Porvenir ranch into the páramo, a treeless alpine tundra with yellowish-green grasses that my horse, Carbón, found irresistible.Alas, an overcast day partly obscured what looked on their website like a gorgeous view. (Too bad money can’t buy good weather.) But I enjoyed the ride, as well as our folksy guide, Rafael, who recounted ash raining down upon the ranch. “It’s our beloved volcano,” he said. “We’re not afraid of it.”Our next stop was a personal tour of a rose plantation called Equatoroses, where 160,000 flowers are cut a day, from among 156 varieties with fancy names like Dark Engagement and Hot Merengue. An agronomist led us through the greenhouse-covered flower beds, then to the processing areas, which include what could be the world’s most colorful assembly line: workers trimming, sorting, labeling and boxing a kaleidoscope of flowers into refrigerated trucks, bound for the international airport.Our next two stops were impromptu and frugal-friendly. We stopped at a town called Latacunga and ducked into a hole-in-the-wall restaurant for chugchucaras, a local dish of deep-fried pork served with a number of side dishes — more culturally charming than culinarily compelling. Then we veered away from our route along the Pan-American Highway into Salcedo, famous for its ice-cream-on-a-stick, specifically a version in which four layers of ice cream form the shape of a volcano. The town’s many ice cream shops were empty; Antonio explained that the new highway had decimated a longstanding pit stop tradition. “You can’t imagine the traffic jams that formed, especially on weekends,” he said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.It had been a packed day, but by the time we pulled into our hotel, I was, curiously, not exhausted. I had sat in an air-conditioned S.U.V. all day and been driven around, told what to do. I had probably learned more about Ecuadorean ecosystems, volcanoes and flower production than I ever would have on my own, but the convenience had been isolating.The next day’s highlight was the ultra-touristy but very impressive switchback train ride down near-vertical Nariz del Diablo mountain, the trickiest point in a route that in 1908 finally connected Quito with the Ecuadorean coast. The stop included an indigenous dance performance, narrated in English by a group member named José, who told me afterward that he had toiled for nine years in London restaurants before returning to his village.Antonio was great, but the following day I was greatly relieved to board a rattling public bus and head (I hoped) to Cuenca’s long-distance bus station for some real adventure. Relieved to be uncomfortable, relieved to be nervous I might be on the wrong bus.I took a bus to Saraguro, home to the indigenous people of the same name — which I had read was known for its community tourism efforts. Its square was out of a tourist brochure, full of flowers and well-tended bushes, with elegant U-shaped benches and a church on one end that filled for Mass with men and women in traditional black clothing — a contrast to more brightly colored shawls and skirts on women of other groups I had seen from Antonio’s S.U.V.I had called in advance to arrange a village homestay through Saraurku, a local organization that said I might have to stay in the affiliated hostel, Hostal Achik Wasi, the first night (for $20) but would place me elsewhere the next morning.AdvertisementI had to bug the hostel staff several times about the homestay — they said the Saraur-ku director was away — but the next morning they finally collected $35 from me and sent me in a pickup truck (for $2 extra) to the village of Ñamarín and the Spanish-speaking home of María Delfina Cartuche and Marcelo Cirilo Nastacuaz. On a slope in full view of Mount Puglia, their solid if haphazardly designed house of tile, brick and concrete block was set amid a little rural paradise. Trees bore oranges, peaches, tree tomatoes, greengage plums, avocados and figs; countless flowers bloomed and one purple-flowered quinoa plant shot straight up from the soil. Squawking hens wore peculiar outfits: white and blue plastic bags that, the family told me, prevented eagles from swooping down and carrying them away.A whole room of the house — really kind of a separate wing — had been set aside for visitors, furnished with rustic beds made by Marcelo and covered in thick, coffee-colored blankets made by María with wool from sheep they kept up the hill behind the house. (María also sells $10 wool hats and scarves, all colored with natural dyes.)A bit later, the family’s youngest member, 6-year-old Genesis, handed me a leaf to sniff from plants she had picked from the garden. “Cedrón,” she said — lemon verbena, and, I recalled, the name of the restaurant at Casa Gangotena. “It’s for my mother’s horchata.” I sampled the bright red herbal brew later that afternoon; it was warm and welcoming — and a more pleasant presentation than the agua de frescos I had shoved in my face at the Quito hotel.A smart, delightful couple, María and Marcelo had met in Quito and moved back to Ñamarín to raise their four children. Their lifestyle was a curious kosher-Mormon-hipster amalgam: They do not drink alcohol or coffee, avoid dairy, don’t touch pork or shellfish, refuse to buy commercial eggs and build their own furniture.But they lived in a truly traditional world. On a tour of the village, María explained to me how the indigenous justice system — enshrined in the Ecuadorean constitution — worked. When issues came up, long meetings were held in the community center that could last into the early hours, as women hand-spun wool into yarn.She recounted how they had even brought down a cattle-rustling ring in the region, eventually punishing the accused with “cleansings” much harsher than the one I had had in Quito — “with a much stronger kind of nettle” she said, and drenched in the freezing water from a large waterfall. “It’s not torture,” she responded, when I asked. “It’s the police that torture people, that hit people. We gave them a cleansing, a purification.”Shortly before I left, when I told her I was a writer and might write about them, she rushed to get a business card. Though she worked with Saraurku as well, Ñamarín had its own community tourism initiative. The nightly cost of staying there, with three meals included: $20. That’s $15 less than if you book through Saraurku and, if you’re keeping track, $340-something less than a night at Casa Gangotena.I returned to the Cuenca bus terminal by midafternoon on a Saturday, and tried to figure out how to get to my final destination, the obscure town of Quingeo.AdvertisementI had found Quingeo simply by noticing it on Google Maps. Its odd name caught my eye, as did the way it seemed to be floating in the middle of nowhere, no roads marked anywhere around it. A place that Google Maps could not find its way to was a place for me. (I then found a 2008 article from Ecuador’s El Tiempo newspaper that sealed the deal. Its headline: “Quingeo, a Solitary, Astonishing Place.”)The one bus from the terminal to Quingeo that day had already left, I was told, but I could take a taxi to the bus stop “across from Colegio Garaicoa,” and wait there. Sure enough, I was soon boarding a standing-room-only, music-blasting bus for the one-hour, 65-cent ride to Quingeo.I asked a man named Miguel, who got off the bus with me, lugging a sack of foodstuffs, whether anyone in town rented out rooms. “We’ll ask the priest,” he said. We walked a few blocks up a dirt road into a tiny town that, were it not for a few modern details (Internet cafe, pickup truck), could have existed a century in the past. Adobe buildings with beams and balconies surrounded the town square; a block beyond were hills and farmland.The priest was nowhere to be found, but Miguel brought me to a woman named Laura Reynoso, who looked as if she had walked out of a coffee-table book on Andean grandmothers. “Could you find a bed for this gentleman?” he asked her. She showed me to a room in one of the square’s more beautiful homes, painted a mustardy yellow with a second-story balcony held up with chocolate brown wooden beams. I asked her what I could pay her. “Whatever you think is right,” she said. “But tomorrow.”The lone restaurant on the square, Papá Morales, was closed. But I managed to get invited by Ms. Reynoso to a dinner of pork ribs, rice and llapingachos, potato and cheese patties. Her son, Patricio — a schoolteacher in Cuenca during the week, owner of a small market on the square on weekends and a big Beatles fan — later invited me to sit outside with him to drink Zhumir, an Ecuadorean sugar cane spirit, and listen to Paul McCartney. Soon after, we adjourned to a wooden shack labeled BAR, run by his son, Lennon.The next morning, vendors set up a modest market around one half of the plaza; I stopped at one stall run by Papá Morales restaurant (which remained closed) and enjoyed a $2 bowl of encebollado, the restorative Ecuadorean fish soup. Soon, a competitive six-on-six soccer tournament started up, as it did every Sunday, run by Papá Morales’s owner, Jorge Morales, who, as it turned out, I had met at the wooden shack the night before.He kept up a steady patter over a portable public address system as the teams, mostly from surrounding villages, played: “Representatives of Barcelona and Real Madrid are here, looking for talent to contract, so get moving!” And a bit later, when he found out I had tried his soup: “Seth from New York is visiting the greatest soccer tournament in the world — he found it on the Internet and came just to try Papá Morales’s encebollado!”I had probably learned more about Ecuador with my guides, Juan Carlos and Antonio, and maybe even listening to a waiter at Cedrón explain the origins of the six salsas on my table.But on my own in Saraguro and Quingeo, I had returned to my natural travel state, one in which challenges, discomfort and sometimes even stress had led (as it had, time and time again in the past) to adventures, new friends and the unmatched rush of feeling at home in a truly foreign place.AdvertisementDoes that mean budget travel is inherently better than luxury travel, at least for those driven more by curiosity than a need to relax? To me, it does. But perhaps I simply never learned to travel luxuriously. Maybe, with another five and a half years of practice, I could learn how to incorporate fine dining, attentive guides and comfortable transport into a trip full of street food, local friends, serendipity and adventure.Would anyone like to fund that research? I’m available.The only nonstop flights from New York City to Quito are via the Ecuadorean carrier Tame (tame.com.ec), and take about six hours. A recent search found round-trip tickets in mid-March for as low as $508. Round-trip flights with modest stops (under nine hours total) on a variety of airlines frequently dip below $500. Over the summer those rates increase by about $100 to $200 across the board, although there are still bargains flying Copa through Panama City, with slightly longer layovers.Casa Gangotena (casagangotena.com) is situated on the Plaza de San Francisco, virtually dead center in Quito’s historic district, one of the original Unesco World Heritage sites. Rates start at $439 a night, including taxes, though not breakfast and afternoon tea (the official currency of Ecuador is the U.S. dollar), but discounts are sometimes available through online booking sites. Other luxury hotels in Quito’s historic center can be had for less.Juan Carlos Guerra (jclandscapes@hotmail.com; tourguideecuador.com ) is available for Quito city tours as well as tours throughout the country.Tropic (tropiceco.com) runs individualized tours throughout Ecuador, including the Amazon and the Galápagos. You can expect personalized service and extreme attention to detail, though it comes at a cost. Many tour companies in the country offer much lower rates.For homestays in Saraguro villages, have a Spanish speaker book either through the community tourism operator Saraurku (593-7-220-0331; turismosaraguro.com), which charges $35 a night, or directly through María Delfina Cartuche (593-98-607-3002) or her sister, María Juana Cartuche (593-98-126-6356), for $20 a night. Meals are included in both prices. You can also stay at the Hostal Achik Wasi for $20 a night per person, including breakfast (593-7-220-0058).Quingeo can be reached by regular buses labeled “Quingeo” that stop across from Colegio Garaicoa (65 cents), above. Express Sigsig (593-7-226-6340) also has infrequent weekend buses to Quingeo from the Cuenca terminal. For lodging there, you’re on your own, but it’s certainly possible to go and come back on the same day. Buses leave Quingeo a block south of the town square.Seth Kugel has written the Frugal Traveler column since June 2010. This is his last column. His successor, Lucas Peterson, will start later this month. A version of this article appears in print on February 7, 2016, on Page TR1 of the New York edition with the headline: The Flip Side of Frugal.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »