AdvertisementSupported byCheck InBy Adam H. GrahamRooms from 180 euros ($201).New hotels directly on Lake Como are rare, so this year-old modernist property is a welcome addition. The six-story mini-tower is owned by a local Italian family and is a member of Design Hotels. Rather than highlight Hollywood glamour like other Lake Como properties, Filario emphasizes the region’s natural appeal, offering guests outdoor activities like kayaking, stand-up paddle boarding, nighttime fishing and vineyard hikes. What’s more, it has a private beach, an infinity pool, and spacious and sophisticated rooms with balconies offering arresting views. The hotel has 13 guest rooms and 10 larger “residence units” that require a three-night minimum stay.Filario occupies the site of a former wire factory in the village of Lezzenno, located on the quiet shore of Lake Como’s southwestern leg. It overlooks a stunning stretch of campanile-studded mountains, Comacina Island, the 18th-century Villa del Balbianello and the town of Tremezzo. It’s a 15-minute drive to the car ferry to the charming but touristy village of Bellagio and 40 minutes to the city of Como.I booked a standard “superior room,” but was upgraded to a junior suite because of an overbooking error. All rooms are large, but my 700-square-foot suite felt enormous. Ash-colored wood floors, neutral-toned walls and linen lampshades allow the vivid greens and blues of the mountains and lake to shine as the main décor. Oversize hurricane lanterns, a comfortable king-size bed dressed in white Frette linens, and walk-in closets enhanced the suite’s roominess. So did the 800-square-foot private terrace, which included a jetted plunge pool. Unfortunately, guests in the neighboring suite watched iPad movies on their terrace and I could see and hear everything from my bed. But a quick call to reception quieted the noise. A minibar included Menabrea Italian beer, Aranciata soda and €5 whiskey and gin nips, while a wine menu listed bottles from €35 to €135. Coffee and organic teas were free, as was Wi-Fi.The roomy bathroom, tiled in wine-hued stone and straw-colored marble, had a long, deep tub and glass-encased shower with a powerful rain shower head. The toilet and bidet were in a separate room. Fragrant bath products were from the Italian company Reall.Public spaces are limited. Off the narrow lobby is a sitting nook with velvet wingback chairs, and a tiny, windowless exercise room packs in a few Technogym treadmills. Massages are done in-room. Service was friendly and efficient in person, but email and phone communication was terse. There’s the outdoor infinity pool as well as a pebble beach on the property that makes it possible to swim or launch kayaks and paddle boards. Water taxi service is available, as are boat rentals, which start at €143 for two hours, a steal for Lake Como.The restaurant, called the Bistro, was disappointing. My chatty server talked up the expensive dishes and told me the tap water wasn’t drinkable. (It’s fine.) My meal, a humdrum pasta and slightly better vitello tonnato, was nothing special. There’s an extensive selection of Italian wines, but by the glass they’re a bit overpriced by Italian standards at €7 and up. The Italian breakfast buffet, included in the room rate, included cakes, cheeses, meats and melon but also the nice addition of chia seeds, goji berries and smoked salmon.Filario’s sleek modernist design, dramatic views, comfortable rooms and outdoor activities offer a value that’s hard to beat. It’s a world apart from Como’s villa gawkers and George Clooney-seeking crowds.Filario Hotel & Residences, Strada Statale 583; Lezzeno, Italy; 39-031-914-035; filario.it.Advertisement