AdvertisementSupported byBitesBy Ann MahKallaloo, a mass of greens and okra, pork and crab, slow-simmered into a deep, darkly flavorful stew, is a dish usually best found at granny’s house — if you’re lucky enough to have a West Indian granny. Or you could head to Balter, in St. Croix’s historic Christiansted, where the homespun dish takes on a gloss with foraged leaves of sea purslane and house-pickled peppers adding pops of color and crunch against a luxuriously soft background. The result is the sort of artful twisting of Caribbean comfort food that characterizes this elegant restaurant, which opened in April.Belying its name, which comes from an archaic Danish word meaning to dance clumsily, Balter has a polished charm. Housed in 18th-century slave quarters, dark beams stripe the ceiling, local art adorns the walls, and wooden shutters shade the windows. When the founders Patrick Kralik and Digby Stridiron discovered the building, it was a wreck. Their loving two-and-a-half-year restoration incorporates colonial elements like a decorative Danish brick oven and a bar fashioned from the building’s original roof planks. “We wanted to evoke pieces of St. Croix,” Mr. Kralik said.This homage extends to the menu, which reads like a primer of West Indian cuisine. “I was inspired by the recipes and techniques of the people who lived here,” said Mr. Stridiron, also the restaurant’s executive chef, who worked in the Florida kitchen of Norman Van Aken before returning to his native St. Croix. (Mr. Kralik is from Charleston, S.C.) Influences include the indigenous Taino people, Danish and French colonists, and neighboring Puerto Rico, as well as African flavors brought by the former slave population.On my recent visit, the kallaloo (also spelled callaloo), laced with seared pork belly, came ladled over fungi (pronounced FOON-jee), a soft porridge of cornmeal and okra that has its roots in slave traditions. A pan-seared fillet of wahoo was nestled into a mound of mofongo, a savory Puerto Rican staple of mashed plantains, garlic and pork. Indeed, tropical fruits and vegetables like plantain, passion fruit, guava berry and chayote are sprinkled throughout the menu. (Mr. Stridiron said that 90 percent of the restaurant’s produce comes from St. Croix.)Desserts, too, are uniquely Caribbean: rum-laced bread pudding, for example, and red grout, a red guava tapioca pudding adapted from a Danish dish. A parade of house-made ice creams and sorbets featured local fruits — my favorites were the sapodilla, similar to pear, and egg fruit, creamy and sugary. They dispelled the heavy heat, leaving behind a burst of tropical sunshine.Balter, 39A Queen Cross Street; 340-719-5896; balterstx.com. An average meal for two, without drinks or tip, is about $100.Advertisement