By ELAINE GLUSACSEPT. 23, 2017
Yoga has left the studio as traveling yogis hit the road, guiding practice before more exotic backdrops on rivers, at full moon celebrations and in the great outdoors.During one December departure, the river cruise company Aqua Expeditions will turn its Mekong River ship in Cambodia into a floating fitness studio with classes led by the Singapore-based trainer Alex Salihin. The trip, running Dec. 15 to 19, will include morning yoga classes on the sun deck, meditation classes and one-on-one training sessions in addition to active sightseeing excursions via bike and kayak. Rates from $5,140 a person.Farmscape Yoga celebrates the seasons on an organic farm in Interlaken, N.Y., in the Finger Lakes region, with farm-based and barn-based classes held each quarter. A winter session will take place Jan. 7, and cost $45.Combining hiking and yoga in various parks in the Finger Lakes area, Hikyoga participants trek to a scenic site where they stop, drop and pose while taking in the scenery ($16 a class).AdvertisementMonthly, the Madinat Jumeirah hotel in Dubai holds public full moon yoga classes on the beach. The 90-minute classes are set to a soundtrack of naturally crashing surf and recorded classical music (AED 99, or $26.95). For those who can’t make the lunar events, the hotel holds daily sunset yoga sessions on the beach.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Yoga with goats has led a critter craze to classes with cats, dogs and rabbits. But the coming women-only yoga and horses program at the Home Ranch in Clark, Colo., advocates twice-daily yoga sessions as a means to improving horsemanship.“Fifteen years ago, I started practicing yoga and discovered it was exactly like horsemanship. It’s all about balance,” said Tammy Pate, a rancher and wrangler who leads the riding portion of the program. “When you’re riding you’re trying to stay balanced, mostly emotionally.”AdvertisementBetween yoga sessions, led by the instructor Janice Baxter, participants work on their riding skills and drive cattle. Rates for the one-week sessions — the next is scheduled Oct. 8 to 14, start at $4,050 a person, and no experience -– either with horses or with yoga -– is required.A version of this article appears in print on October 1, 2017, on Page TR2 of the New York edition with the headline: Yoga Is All Around You.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.