
Personal Journeys By                     
ALLISON AMEND

APRIL 27, 2016
I am perched on a slippery roof ridge at the Buffalo Peaks Ranch in the rain, feet sliding on ancient asphalt shingles atop rotting plywood decking, tethered only by a rope. For fun.With me on the roof are five other volunteers who are donating their time and brawn to create a live-in rural library in Colorado, helping the booksellers Jeff Lee and Ann Martin realize their dream.In the course of their 20 years at the independent Denver bookstore Tattered Cover, Mr. Lee and Ms. Martin have accumulated more than 32,000 volumes on the American West (my first novel, “Stations West,” is among them). Seeking to share the books, and their love of Colorado, the pair, who are married, have leased the Buffalo Peaks Ranch, about two hours from Denver, to house their collection.But before the property, which they are calling the Rocky Mountain Land Library, can become a haven for lovers of the West and Western literature, it must be restored. A working ranch from 1862 until the mid-1980s, the buildings at Buffalo Peaks have fallen into disrepair. Enter HistoriCorps, a service organization dedicated to historical preservation.AdvertisementVarious funding sources and grants supply materials and professional help, but volunteers like me make up the bulk of the work force. Last summer, in addition to Buffalo Peaks Ranch, HistoriCorps volunteers worked on preserving former slave quarters in Virginia, an archaeology museum and field school in Michigan, and a mining town in Colorado, among other projects.The ranch currently consists of four dilapidated and waterlogged residential buildings and two enormous, sun-dappled barns for horses, cattle and sheep, now the residences of birds and rodents. There are two tasks at hand — we HistoriCorps volunteers are to strip the bunkhouse of its asphalt shingles, shore up the roof and reshingle it. We are also to reshingle the much steeper and higher cookhouse with historically accurate cedar shingles.AdvertisementThe first morning, I arrive in my brand-new work pants, expecting a gaggle of aging hippies, but my fellow volunteers are 20- and 30-somethings, as new to construction as I am. (My previous building experience consists of a semi-failed attempt to put together a futon with an Allen wrench, and I once wielded a hammer to hang a photo.)Our patient project supervisor, an expert in historical preservation, is Steve Harris, whose addiction to movement and work is both inspirational and exhausting. His HistoriCorps partner for the summer is Megan Potter, a preternaturally cheerful crew leader and camp cook, who seems impervious to the unpleasantries and inconveniences of the field.Rounding out our crew are two emerging journalists/writers, an adventurer from England, and a Ph.D. candidate interning with the group for all three weeks of the project.One of our rank, 78-year-old Bill Yett, holds the HistoriCorps record for the number of volunteer hours, having worked on about 15 projects. “I should probably count them.” He is also the owner of the most amazingly appointed pop-up camper I have ever seen (I have seen one). A hot shower! A sofa! A full-size bed! A sink! A DVD player! A refrigerator! Used to the fumblings of city folk dabbling in historical preservation, Bill has boundless patience, though he laughs every time I bang my hard-hatted head on scaffolding, which is to say about once an hour.After the first morning’s extended safety briefing (the expected warnings against sunburn, dehydration and back injuries, and also the odder cautions against feral pigs and hantavirus), we begin by constructing scaffolding. Steve is an excellent engineer and teacher, and by the end of the day we have a lattice of metal poles ready for us to climb. And to hit our heads on.That night, after a camp dinner of stir fry, I retire to my bed-and-breakfast in thenearby town of Fairplay. Everyone else is camping on site, but I am camping-intolerant. Situated on the high plains (elevation 10,000 feet) in the middle of Colorado, in the South Park National Heritage Area (yes, that South Park), Fairplay serves as a cheaper alternative to ski lodging in Breckenridge in the winter, and an angler’s/hiker’s/gold-panner’s paradise in the summer, with a requisitely quaint Main Street of knickknack shops, art galleries and souvenir stores.AdvertisementThe Hand Hotel has 11 themed rooms (I am in “Rancher,” with lariat and rocking chair), run-down but comfortable and friendly. Exhausted, I can barely manage a shower before I fall asleep. The next morning I am treated to the hotel’s ample continental breakfast, served in a sunroom overlooking “Fairplay Beach” on the South Platte River.Mornings at HistoriCorps projects start with a Safety Circle where we stretch, get to know one another and share a safety concern. All five days I reiterate how important it is to wear a hard hat, what with the attacking scaffolding and all. The dings as my hard hat hits the metal provide a percussion punctuation to the day. Everyone else seems to heed their safety concerns — there are no strained backs or falls from the roof.The next two days on the job site are spent tethered to safety ropes, prying shingles off the roof, an amazingly satisfying activity. When thunder and lightning bring us down from the roof, we explore the old cattle barn. It still holds its original scale and chutes, as well as one scattered cow skeleton. Its hayloft will eventually house the bulk of the book collection, but at the moment it just seems a likely location for hantavirus-carrying feral pigs, so I poke my head in and come back down the ladder. In one of the stalls, which will be turned someday into artists’ studios, a sparrow learns to fly, cheeped on by its mother.It’s cold in the rain, in the 50s, and I nap curled up in a towel on a lawn chair in the mess tent while others play cards until the storm moves past. When the sun comes out, we roast as the temperature climbs into the high 80s, a merciless high-altitude sun accompanied by swarms of Hitchcockian mosquitoes.One can see for miles on a clear day (summer days in central Colorado are mostly clear, with a predictable afternoon shower). The weather warns you of its approach politely on the horizon, cresting the peaks of the Fourteeners (14,000-foot mountains) on the Mosquito range. There are few trees, just short grass and wide, sloping prairie land ideal for ranching. From most vantage points the landscape seems unchanged from the previous century, or even from its prehistoric origins.Over the next two days, our work crew replaces rotten boards on the roof and lays down sheathing in preparation for the shingles. Steve demonstrates proper shingling technique, but we have to wait for the inspector, so we move over to the cedar roof.Cedar shingling requires greater creativity, as the shingles are not standard, and the chooser must paw through the pile to find one that is the perfect width to overlap its neighbors. They smell lovely, like a winter closet, and with the sun shining this is the most pleasant part of the work crew, swinging a hammer (the two nail guns are otherwise occupied) as the new roof begins to take shape.There is a constant dance of equipment sharing and locating, of putting everything away in anticipation of rain (though we work unless there’s thunder and lightning) and taking it out again. Meal times are sacrosanct, and I devour Megan’s pancakes, burritos, chili, sandwich fixings, salads, burgers and other camp favorites. An easy camaraderie develops among us as we chat during our work — fondness turns to light teasing, we develop inside jokes, we start to get to know one another’s likes and dislikes, become attuned to the rhythms of our work.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The week passes quickly, especially because I get nightly showers and a bed, though everyone else seems content to camp in the field by the worksite in their tents. Jeff and Ann visit on Thursday to prepare the ranch for a weekend tour, and they share a bit of their vision for the Land Library, thanking us for our help. Almost daily, someone stops by, having heard about the ranch from the New York Times article that inspired many of us to come here, and we put down our tools and play tour guide for a minute or two, proud of our affiliation.AdvertisementJeff and Ann’s passion for literature about the American West is based on the exceptional nature of this region, which looms so large in the American imagination. Like the valley in which it sits, the Land Library funnels together individuals enthusiastic about preserving what is in danger of extinction — books and historic places. We are students, Jeff says. “Even before we’re able to put our first books on the shelf, the Land Library at Buffalo Peaks Ranch is all about learning, and gaining new skills.”A travel experience in which you preserve and contribute rather than consume is invigorating and sustaining. It is no surprise that after we leave, three participants start Garo, an arts and writing blog inspired by the ranch and the library.The Land Library may be several years and several million dollars away from completion, but I’ve played my own small role in bringing it closer to fruition. I return to civilization sore and exhausted, but with a renewed energy for my own writing as a result of spending time helping Jeff and Ann pursue their dream of creating a home for books and those who love them. Thanks to them and to HistoriCorps, I am now a competent cedar and asphalt roofer, an emerging preservationist, a fan of service vacations and a hard hat evangelizer.The Hand Hotel has rooms from $64. 531 Front Street, Fairplay; handhotel.com.At Fairplay’s north end is the picturesque courthouse, along with the South Park City Museum. Also worth a visit in the southern end of town is the burial plaque dedicated to Prunes the burro, faithful companion of Rupe Sherwood, who is buried next to him. Information about Fairplay can be found at fairplayco.us and at colorado.com/cities-and-towns/fairplay.More than 40 historical buildings (including blacksmiths, dry good stores and barbershops) have been restored and moved to the South Park City Museum. Open May 15 to Oct. 15 (hours vary). fairy-amp.com/SPCMuseum/South_Park_City_Main.html.Visitors can tour or attend a workshop at Buffalo Peaks Ranch/Rocky Mountain Land Library. Be sure to admire the new roofs. landlibrary.wordpress.com/about.South Park Steakhouse, a high-country steakhouse. 456 Front Street, Fairplay.South Park Saloon has burgers, wings and ribs, all solid, and the beers on tap are varied. Everyone sings along to classic rock. 24 North Main Street, Alma, six miles north of Fairplay. southparksaloon.comHistoriCorps is a national volunteer organization dedicated to saving America’s special places. A list of volunteer opportunities can be found at historicorps.org.A version of this article appears in print on May 1, 2016, on Page TR9 of the New York edition with the headline: A Home for the Lore and the Lure of the West.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »