
5 Places By                     
MAGGIE SHI

AUG. 31, 2016
For years, Burnet Road in Austin was mostly seen as a tatty stretch of car repair shops, old-school food joints, gas stations and derelict businesses. But the well-trafficked major thoroughfare, about 15 minutes from downtown, is becoming a hot spot in this fast-growing city, with sleek, amenity-filled condos and sparkling new outposts for up-and-coming and already proven Austin restaurants. You’ll still find used car lots and lighting stores on Burnet Road, but the strip is evolving. “It’s symbolic of the new Austin,” said Eric Silverstein, founder of the Peached Tortilla, a food truck operation that opened its first restaurant on the street in 2014.This farm-to-table restaurant with the James Beard-nominated Bryce Gilmore at the helm relocated to its current Burnet spot this January, with double the seats, a central open kitchen and a new craft cocktail program. Order a Basil on Basil cocktail (with basil-infused Basil Hayden’s bourbon), and don’t miss the too-cute pig face bun, filled with a mix of crushed peanuts, pork and local bananas.6555 Burnet Road; 512-394-8150; barleyswine.comOpened in July 2015, this is the second Austin location of a hyper-local shop that gets its milk and cream from a small family-owned dairy in McGregor, Tex., and makes everything — syrups, jams and cones — from scratch. In addition to standbys like dark chocolate with olive oil and sea salt, there are seasonal flavors like back porch iced tea, with black tea and a generous pour of Paula’s Texas Lemon and Grapefruit liqueurs.6555 Burnet Road; 512-609-8029; ilikelick.comThe lively Peached Tortilla expanded on its beloved Asian-Southern tacos and sliders, adding innovative cocktails in a colorful space that formerly housed a plumbing supply store. Try the flat, wide rice noodles tossed with brisket and kale for a twist on chow fun, then wash it down with a Margarita de Peached, spiced up with habanero-infused tequila and Thai basil.Advertisement5520 Burnet Road; 512-330-4439; thepeachedtortilla.comRegulars of this 24-hour cafe favor the Spicy Monkey Mocha, laced with cinnamon and cayenne pepper; if that doesn’t do the trick, a Four Ton Gorilla, made with four espresso shots, might. Free Wi-Fi and plenty of tables make it a perfect place to camp out with a laptop.5353 Burnet Road; 512-505-8033; monkeynestcoffee.comJean Heath’s trove of impeccably restored vintage Danish and midcentury modern furniture is tastefully curated in a homey 6,000-square-foot space. Snag a Florence Knoll chrome and marble coffee table, or Arne Jacobsen swan chairs with original chartreuse wool fabric.Advertisement5111 Burnet Road; 512-452-1200; uptownmodernaustin.comA version of this article appears in print on September 4, 2016, on Page TR8 of the New York edition with the headline: Tortillas and Cocktails Amid the Car Repair Shops.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »