By ETHAN HAUSEROCT. 26, 2016
I can tell you with complete assurance that 532 miles is not too far to travel for a sandwich. That is the distance between my home in Ridgewood, Queens, and the Skylight Inn in Ayden, N.C., where a man in a black apron fills the cutout between the kitchen and the cash register and wields cleavers as if they were weapons from “Game of Thrones,” one in each substantial hand. He stands above twin slabs of butcher block that were once flat but which now resemble dugout canoes, from decades of metronomic chopping. “We like to say our wood tastes better than most people’s meat,” one of the countermen said to me.You could dream this stuff up. Or you could go to jetblue.com, ignore the window that pops up to warn you that you’ve booked departure and return flights on the same day, and head south.This being North Carolina, the barbecue is pork, cooked low and slow over logs from the mountainous piles out back, with only a few added flavorings. The menu choices are a tray (meat, coleslaw, cornbread) or a sandwich (meat and coleslaw in a bun), the option I had journeyed for. I declined the slaw — the Southern humorist Lewis Grizzard once said that God sent North Carolinians Jesse Helms as punishment for the sin of putting slaw on their ’cue — and watched as a handful or two of meat was stuffed into the kind of pillowy bun that would spur a thousand Brooklyn-blog posts on the evils of white bread.I came to my barbecue obsession semi-honestly. “Semi” meaning I grew up outside of Boston, far from the barbecue capitals of the world. My childhood was rich in many things — love, talk (two psychotherapist parents), Red Sox heartbreak — but impoverished in pleasures of the porcine variety. There was bacon, occasionally, though the disposal of the resultant grease inspired a level of panic others reserve for nuclear spills.AdvertisementMy interest in pulled pork was cemented when I moved to Greensboro, N.C., for graduate school. There, I scoured the area for the best places, going so far as to ask a roomful of English comp students, on their (and my) first day of class which joints they favored. Partly this was to distract me from my stage fright as a new teacher, but mostly it was because I wanted to know if there were good sandwiches out there I hadn’t tried yet.They were not very helpful. A couple of them even had the temerity to suggest a restaurant that used gas instead of wood. Though now I’m wondering whether, hearing my lack of a North Carolina accent and immediately pegging me as an outsider, they were just mocking me.We somehow got through that first, terrifying — for me, at least — class and tacitly agreed to not speak of the subject again. We stuck to grammar, essays, sentence structure. If I were them, I think I might have preferred we continue discussing barbecue rather than subject-verb agreement, but young people make bad decisions all the time. It’s how you learn to live with all the unfurling regret that awaits you later in life.AdvertisementTo get to the Skylight Inn, which I think is the second-best barbecue place in North Carolina, if not the world (Lexington Barbecue is No. 1, but I had been there more recently, so I was ready to visit the Skylight, where I had eaten only once before, at least a decade ago), you fly to Raleigh, rent a car, and then drive 102 miles. Very quickly, as you head east toward the salty coast, the exurban sprawl of the Research Triangle cedes to farmland.It is not a lovely drive by most standard definitions. It is flat, largely featureless, the vegetable fields and grazing acres dotted now and then by a factory or a forbidding convenience store with men in front swigging Gatorade or more numbing beverages. I was in heaven, since I like these back-road trips best, where you have to work a little harder to find the dignity and allure.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.I had not slept well the night before. Those familiar with the Christmas Eve mania of children may conclude that it was the waves of expectation that were keeping me awake. Me, however, I think it was more likely because of the half an Ambien I took, which is probably why “bite off half” is not generally F.D.A.-approved prescription language.The alarm woke me at 5:30 a.m. and I stumbled into the shower and was soon in a taxi winding through Queens and Brooklyn toward Kennedy Airport.I’ve done this before: taken an impulsive trip partly as a kind of exposure therapy for my fear of flying. The last time was to the Chinati Foundation in Marfa, Tex., which, like Ayden, is a trek.What I remember of that drive was how brown everything was, until you arrive at Marfa’s simple, transcendent reward, magic-hour light writ huge on Donald Judd’s minimalist sculptures.On my drive to Ayden I was guzzling soda to stay alert, and I knew I was getting close when the GPS began ordering me to turn in ever smaller mileage increments. I passed the Minges Pepsi bottling plant — there is no Coke at the Skylight, in deference to its proximity to New Bern, N.C., where Pepsi was invented — and started allowing myself to believe that this was one of those rare moments when reality would equal expectation.Despite the death of its legendary pit master Pete Jones in 2006 (locals often called the place Pete Jones’s Barbecue), the Skylight remains much the same. Jones’s kin run the place now, and they were wise enough to not futz with much. The menu board seems to have been upgraded; there are T-shirts and a bottled sauce for sale. There is even a second, slightly fancier branch, though we won’t speak of such things.Yet most everything else is unchanged, including, of course, the barbecue. It is Eastern North Carolina style, with a sauce seasoned minimally with vinegar and pepper. (Other parts of the state use tomato sauce as a base, which has its own fierce loyalists.) Crackles of skin fleck the meat, and it has a mild, addicting vinegary bite. Mostly it tastes of smoke and comfort, and it seemed entirely logical to me, sitting there, that I should spend much of a day and cross a huge chunk of airspace to be in the presence of something that had undergone many hours of careful, committed preparation.Five hundred thirty-two miles. Truth is, I would have gone even if it were double. There are fewer and fewer places like this in the world, and they deserve to survive, if not thrive. Not just because they are a necessary corrective to our overanxious, go-ballistic-over-high-fructose-corn-syrup age, but because of their graceful assertion that many stories are worth preserving.A version of this article appears in print on October 30, 2016, on Page TR7 of the New York edition with the headline: 532 Miles Later, Heaven on a Bun.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.