
Check In By                     
LYNN FREEHILL-MAYE

JUNE 2, 2017
Rooms from $350.At the upriver end of the River Walk in San Antonio is the Hotel Emma, a 146-room boutique hotel that upends visitors’ perception of this low-key city. The hotel was refashioned from a section of the Pearl Brewery, an imposing 1894 building. Victorian style isn’t always easy to make unfussy, but the design firm of Roman & Williams created a sleek makeover of the property, which opened in late 2015. The luxurious lobby still holds industrial touches, like an apple-red ammonia compressor and the room’s original cooling fans. Old beer vats have been made into surprising round banquettes inside the lobby bar. The hotel is part of the commercial Pearl Brewing complex, which includes the Culinary Institute of America, more than a dozen boutiques and about 20 restaurants. Since early this month, private in-room spa treatments have been offered to hotel guests from the new Hiatus Spa & Retreat next door.The seven-story hotel stands at the north end of the River Walk, once a pedestrian dead zone, which has emerged as the happening, 16-block Pearl District. The San Antonio Museum of Art is a waterside stroll, a half-mile away. The heart of downtown is about two miles south along the walkway. Rio taxis stop outside the waterfront hotel for guests who would rather cruise there by boat.With its black four-poster bed, leather chairs and simple mesquite table, our room was more subdued in design than the splashy lobby. My husband and I found our room on the small side but barrel-vaulted concrete ceilings soaring 15 feet opened up the space.The ample bathroom features a Victorian nautical motif, with brass fixtures, lighting so flattering I seemed to look fresher at midnight than I had all day, and wavy tile. Malin & Goetz toiletries were provided.AdvertisementAlthough we checked in past 11 p.m., just as it was closing, the bar still delivered free welcome margaritas. (The “icebox” labeled minibar included a citrus press and fresh limes for making our own; for an additional charge, it also stocked Modelo beer, farmhouse cheese, sausage and Topo Chico mineral water.) Overlooking the River Walk is a spacious, well-equipped gym. The outdoor pool was pleasant enough, with plenty of umbrellas but no bar. A more unexpected amenity was the stunning two-level, guests-only library, with volumes from writers as varied as Marilynne Robinson and Salman Rushdie. The Wildsam Field Guide to San Antonio — with hand-drawn maps and sketches — which the hotel commissioned from the trendy guidebook series, was included in the room.Room service, from the hotel’s farm-to-table restaurant Supper, was delivered within three minutes of the time we had requested. With duck confit, molasses and sour cream, the spiced waffle — like the bagel with egg, bacon, caramelized onion and jalapeño cream cheese — made for a decadent, delicious breakfast. The hotel also has a provisions store, Larder, and a cocktail-and-small-plates bar, Sternewirth.AdvertisementThe Hotel Emma’s inspired design and location make it a fitting vantage point for seeing the city’s fresh Mexican and Southwestern influences in design and art.Hotel Emma, 136 East Grayson Street, San Antonio; 210-448-8300; thehotelemma.com.A version of this article appears in print on June 4, 2017, on Page TR3 of the New York edition with the headline: Sleek Lodging From a Fussier Era.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »