AdvertisementSupported byTravel TipsThese tips will have you mingling with locals and drinking local specialties the next time you travel.By Shivani VoraIf checking out the bar scene in your destination tends to be a vacation highlight, why not hit watering holes frequented by locals? Going to bars where locals imbibe isn’t just about drinking, said Camille Ralph Vidal, the Global Brand Ambassador for the French elderflower liqueur St-Germain. “You’ll also get to mingle with the people who live in town and get a feel for the destination’s night life,” she said.Here, Ms. Ralph Vidal shares her advice on how to find the bars locals love and what to order once you do.Ms. Ralph Vidal suggested posting a query on Facebook for ideas on the must-hit bars in the city you’re visiting. “I’ve found many incredible bars around the world through my social network,” she said. Another idea is to follow well-known bartenders on Facebook or Instagram (Nico de Soto, Naren Young and Carina Soto Velasquez are some examples) because they travel often and tend to go to the most authentic bars wherever they are. They also share their trips on social media when they visit, along with some suggestions on what you might try when you go.Yes, some hotel bars around the world are well-known, but they usually aren’t where the locals drink, and they’re certainly not budget friendly. “Iconic hotel bars are worth a visit if you’re in the mood for a fancy aperitif, but they are usually overpriced and won’t give you a flavor of the local drinking culture,” Ms. Ralph Vidal said.Bartenders, including ones who work at your hotel or in any of the restaurants you try while traveling, can give the best advice on the bars you shouldn’t miss. Ms. Ralph Vidal has tapped bartenders for suggestions on numerous occasions, including a recent trip to Sydney. “The bartender at my hotel gave me a list of his favorite bars, and the next day, I ran into him at one of them and ended up having a great time drinking with him and his friends,” she said.Well-regarded sites likes Eater, Barchick and PunchDrink are trusted sources for finding out about the bars most tourists don’t know about. Some “even have posts on the dos and don’ts of a particular bar and give tips on the drinks to order there,” Ms. Ralph Vidal said. Don’t forget to search for local blogs as well in the city you are visiting — big names often have great tips, but sometimes there’s no replacement for a local blog written by someone who knows the neighborhood.Reviews on Yelp and Trip Advisor may seem like a useful way to discover unknown bars, but keep in mind that unflattering reviews aren’t always an accurate reflection of that bar. “Many online reviews are written by out-of-towners, who might not understand the culture of the bar,” Ms. Ralph Vidal said. Craft cocktail lovers, for example, wouldn’t enjoy a night out at a popular dive bar where locals sip cold beer, and they may be apt to write a review of the bar which isn’t particularly favorable.Almost every country, or even city, is known for a particular drink or spirit, whether its sake in Japan, whisky in Scotland or tequila or mezcal in Mexico. On your lineup of bars to hit, Ms. Ralph Vidal advised finding at least one famous for the local specialty. Tokyo, for example, has some bars which only serve sake and have a menu with more than a hundred varieties. Mexico City has several bars where tequila-based cocktails have won awards at international competitions. “These bars aren’t necessarily where locals go everyday, but they are popular for special nights out, and going to them is a fun way to see them when they’re in a celebratory mood,” Ms. Ralph Vidal said. Advertisement