
Heads Up By                     
 LAURA RYSMAN
 
SEPT. 21, 2017
Milan has no sea. It has no river or lake, just a few ebbing canals. But this landlocked city is famous for some of the best seafood in the long, double-coasted peninsula of Italy, thanks mostly to the concrete warehouse of the Mercato Ittico that my guide, Sandra Ciciriello, had sneaked me inside.Ms. Ciciriello, a fishmonger who became the procurer and sommelier of Milan’s renowned Alice restaurant, has spent 30 years of achingly early mornings here at Italy’s biggest fish market, and she feels entitled to smuggle journalists into her turf.The best catches end up at this market, won by Milan’s high-spending dealers at dockside auctions as the fish arrives on shore. In a city where the heavy traditional cuisine of cotoletta and saffron risotto doesn’t inspire the rhapsodies of other Italian regional cooking, this is how seafood becomes the surprising champion of an inland food scene.Though a football field of marine life was laid out before us, there was only a whiff of fish in the air. “Good fish doesn’t smell,” Ms. Ciciriello said. Around us, good fish was for sale in every direction: live baby squid; upside-down octopus splayed like tentacled stars; a pair of swordfish lay poised on a wood crate, their beaks crossed in a petrified duel. Ms. Ciciriello gripped a prismy snapper — “I fell in love with this work for the colors,” she told me. The colors? “The fish — they’re like oil paintings.”AdvertisementShe picked with her eyes, selecting boxes of bonito, branzino, clams and gurnards for the day’s meals at Alice, which she founded with the chef Viviana Varese a decade ago — a rare female team in charge in Italy. Since 2014, the Michelin-starred fish restaurant, whose name translates to “anchovy,” has made its home on a second-floor space inside Eataly’s teeming emporium of Italian delicacies. Inside the restaurant, serenity reigns, with sloping glass walls that look down on a piazza below inducing the woozy, soothing impression of being aboard a boat in central Milan.Sit down at a table, and you will hardly use a fork. Salad comes in a finger-food bouquet with edible flowers. Creamed codfish is served in a cone and topped with orange rind shavings, like a fragrant, savory ice cream. Declawed scampi nestled in an oversize spoon are poured over with a sauce of five apples, then devoured in a single bite. “My starting point is Italy, but I’m cooking to widen your palette,” Ms. Varese said. This restaurant is tasting menu territory, and though it doesn’t come cheap, the grand seafood journey created by Alice’s masterful and inventive chef is a profound reminder of the revelatory pleasures of eating out.AdvertisementThe flavor explorations that Ms. Varese serves are a rarefied treat, but for the straightforwardly simple pleasures of Italian seafood, Milan is blessed with Langosteria, which last year added to its higher-end restaurant and nearby bistro a third cafe location behind the Duomo. The restaurant is pervaded by a sultry, date-friendly light and a crowd of Milanese scenesters.Beyond the new restaurant’s bronze central bar is an open kitchen lined with window boxes of oysters, mussels, shrimp and lobster waiting to be steamed and piled on icy plateaus. The signature dishes are plain-spoken versions of Italian classics: orecchiette pasta with a tangy marriage of shrimp and fava bean cream; meaty Cantabrico anchovies served on bread with whipped butter. “A dish should be easy to read, otherwise it’s mute,” Enrico Buonocore, the owner, said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.More humbly low-key, Pescheria I Pesciolini is a neighborhood joint in Milan’s center. “You’re dining at a fish stand with tables,” owner Simone Rozza said. The seafood purveyor expanded with a full restaurant in 2016, but it’s the vitrine stocked with the day’s catches that greets you.The absolutely beachiest feeling in this midland city was imported straight from the shores of Puglia, where fish vendor Bartolo L’Abbate and local friends opened the first location of the seafood sandwich shop Pescaria by the waterfront. Last September, they inaugurated their Milan outpost, supplied by their longtime southern fishermen rather than the city’s market. Just steps from Corso Como, the narrow hallway of a space is crammed with young locals most days, the tables shimmering with glasses of white and rosé under fisherman-basketed lights.It feels sunny against the sometimes gray backdrop of Milan, especially when an order of briny delicacies arrives: a savory Pugliese cartellata of deep-fried dough piled high with tuna carpaccio, buttery stracciatella cheese, and green chili peppers, alongside a sandwich of crunchy fried octopus topped with chicory greens and soft ricotta. I was biting into the octopus when Mr. L’Abbate leaned in my direction. “It tastes just like being by the sea,” he uttered, his eyes wistful, his smile full of pride. And hours from the seaside, I tasted it.A version of this article appears in print on October 1, 2017, on Page TR3 of the New York edition with the headline: In Landlocked Milan, Try the Catch of the Day.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »