AdvertisementSupported byTravel TipsBy Shivani VoraNo matter the time of year, with the December holidays being the exception, a luxury vacation to Australia on a limited budget is definitely doable, according to John Cantrell, an Australia specialist with the New York City travel company Indagare.“Australia isn’t exactly a bargain destination, but you can make your money go further if you know where to spend it there and where not to,” he said. Mr. Cantrell has a few other tips on how to enjoy a high-end getaway to Australia without breaking the bank.Fly, Don’t DriveCar rentals in Australia can be expensive. Domestic flights, on the other hand, on Australian carriers such as Qantas, Virgin Australia, Jetstar and Tigerair are very reasonably priced. Round-trip airfare between Sydney and Melbourne, for example, can be as low as $150. Flying is also much more convenient. “You’ll find several dozen flight options a day from multiple destinations around the country,” Mr. Cantrell said. Unless you specifically want the driving experience, opt for a flight.Join the LocalsSome agencies and operators that arrange trips to Australia try to sell tourists pricey experiences such as a private charter of a luxury catamaran to sail around Sydney Harbor, an excursion that can run $1,000 or more. Most of these tours aren’t worth the money, Mr. Cantrell said.“Your trip will be more authentic and affordable if you follow in the footsteps of the locals,” he said. Much of that same view from the expensive private catamaran, for example, can be enjoyed on the ferry that transports Sydney residents from Circular Quay to Manly Beach. Similarly, there’s no need to splurge on prime seats for the opera or a concert, even at the Sydney Opera House. There are plenty of last-minute inexpensive tickets available there, or to operas and outdoor concerts all over the country. Money-conscious Australians buy these, and you should, too.Stretch Your Dining BudgetWhen he’s helping families with their Australia travel itineraries, Mr. Cantrell has two suggestions to save on food costs. First, he encourages picnic lunches. His top recommendation: “Pick up produce, cheese and other food from farmers’ markets and specialty gourmet shops, along with a bottle of delicious local wine, and enjoy a bargain feast on Sydney’s Bondi Beach.”Second, take advantage of the country’s many lively cafes. They’re a big part of the local culture and offer tasty and inexpensive meals, including local favorites.Compare Prices at Upscale HotelsFive-star hotels in Australia have a wide range of pricing, even when they are in the same region. Near the Great Barrier Reef, for example, a stay at Heron Island Resort comes at much lower prices, compared with other hotels nearby. Before you commit to any one hotel, Mr. Cantrell said, be sure that you’re getting the most value for your money by comparing rates, especially if you can be flexible with your check-in and checkout dates. In Sydney and Melbourne, Rent an ApartmentGet the true flavor of these popular destinations by renting an apartment instead of booking a hotel room. “The magic of these cities is integrating with the local lifestyle, and that’s sometimes hard to get when staying at a hotel,” Mr. Cantrell said. “Both Sydney and Melbourne have many picturesque neighborhoods, where apartment rentals can be inexpensive.”Peruse the plethora of options on sites like Airbnb and Luxico. Similarly, an Australian travel specialist, such as Mr. Cantrell, can also help you find rentals.Advertisement