By ROBERT SIMONSONFEB. 28, 2017
Come June, expect your local tiki bar to be understaffed. Every Hawaiian-shirt wearing, orchid-bearing, coconut-sipping tiki nut will have packed his ukulele and flown to Fort Lauderdale, Fla., to attend the Hukilau, an annual festival that is Christmas, New Year’s and Fourth of July combined on the tiki calendar. The Hukilau, which was first staged in Atlanta in 2002, is named after a traditional Hawaiian feast. For many years it has been held at the Mai-Kai, a sprawling, 600-seat, Polynesian restaurant-bar-theater-garden compound that has survived largely intact (waterfalls, thatch roofs) since it opened in 1956. Entertainment goes well beyond navy grog and steaks cooked over oak in a Chinese oven, to include a time-warp stage show called the Polynesian Islander Revue (fire dancers, headdresses, pulsating drums). Since 1991, it’s been run by David Levy, the chief executive, who was born in Tahiti and is the stepson of the founder Bob Thornton. Following are edited excerpts from a conversation with Mr. Levy.Q.  I imagine you get a lot of people who travel to Fort Lauderdale just to come here.A. Exactly right. All year round, it would average about 65 percent of our customers. If you go in the bar right now, everybody knows each other. We get phone calls for reservations, saying: “We were here last summer. We’re flying in for the weekend and we’re coming to the Mai-Kai.” We have devoted customers.Has it always been that way? Was there ever a fallow period?Only one time, when the nouvelle cuisine came around. People wanted to try something new. After a year or so, people came back.Have you kept the same food over the years?Same cuisine: Sichuan, Hunan, Cantonese, Vietnamese. If you look at the menu 50 years ago, it’s exactly the same. We just perfected the dishes.AdvertisementDuring the decline of tiki culture in the United States in the 1980s and ’90s, a lot of places like this closed. But the Mai-Kai survived. Why?In Fort Lauderdale, people have been coming here for many years. We always recognize your name when you call. Our drinks are the same recipes. Nothing has changed since 1956. Identical drinks. Let’s say you were here in 1975 and you haven’t been back since. You come in and have a rum barrel and say, “Oh, it’s exactly the same.” They grew up here, moved to different states, got married, come back 15 years later and it’s the same. Everything is the same. The maître d’ just retired after 55 years at the Mai-Kai. Angel Vega — busboy, waiter, captain, maître d’. My mother [Mireille Thornton] is the choreographer of the show. Every year she changes the show — new choreography, new costumes. And people come to see the new show.You’re unique. There are other tiki bars, but they don’t have floor shows.It’s hard. The dancers don’t want to leave the islands [principally Hawaii, Samoa and Tahiti] anymore. They used to like the adventure. They don’t mind leaving, but only for a couple months, and then they want to go back home. But they have to stay two to three years, or else it’s too expensive to fly them back and forth and teach them the new show and get them costumes. It’s impossible.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Are most of the dancers from the islands?All of them.Tiki culture has staged a comeback in the last several years. Did you expect that to happen?AdvertisementWhen the Hukilau started, I thought there was a big chance it’s going to come back.Have you ever thought of opening another Mai-Kai?Not another Mai-Kai, but more bars. This is too big. Finding three acres in the middle of a city somewhere, how would you do that? I have talked to several people and we’re in the process. New Jersey, New York, California, Texas. No restaurant, no show, just the bar, with all the same atmosphere.When I came in, they told me to take off my hat. You have a no-hat policy? My father was very strict back in the old days. No hats, no T-shirts, no shorts, no flip-flops. He wanted his place to be a very high-end Polynesian restaurant. I kept it the same.A version of this article appears in print on March 5, 2017, on Page TR2 of the New York edition with the headline: David Levy on Tiki Time in Ft. Lauderdale.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.