

      By BONNIE TSUI

MAY 19, 2016

Beyond the island’s densely populated south shore, you’ll find a heady mix of rugged natural beauty and a rich cultural heritage.
Every day, planeloads of visitors arrive in Honolulu, ready to make a beeline to Waikiki and other iconic spots around Hawaii’s capital: places like Diamond Head, Chinatown, Pearl Harbor and urban beach gems like Kapiolani and Ala Moana. Many don’t stray far from Oahu’s densely populated south shore (and, indeed, Honolulu is especially worth visiting for Kamaka Ukulele, the venerable ukulele factory that turns 100 this year), but they’re missing out on the easygoing pace that rules the rest of the island. As you head north, frenetic rush-hour traffic gives way to old pickup trucks inching along, their drivers flashing the thumb-and-pinky shaka sign and taking the time to watch surfers shooting down 30-foot waves at Waimea Bay, about an hour north of Honolulu. On North and East Oahu, you’ll find a heady mix of rugged natural beauty — glorious whether you’re lookingmauka, toward the mountains, or makai, toward the sea — and deep, rich cultural heritage, those things that Hawaii does best.
Explore street view, find things to do in Oahu and sign in to your Google account to save your map.
Haleiwa’s plantation-era wooden buildings, topped with corrugated aluminum roofs and painted with bright colors, are the signature architecture here. Next to the post office, surfboards hang on the wood-plank walls inside the Beet Box Cafe, where organic vegetarian dishes feature intense, satisfying flavors that won’t leave carnivores disappointed. The cafe serves breakfast and lunch all day, plus smoothies, fresh juices and acai bowls. Take a cue from the dewy-skinned surfers and yogis eating here and order the “healthy plate of food,” a pile of broccoli, kale, beets and mushrooms sautéed with ginger and garlic, served alongside brown rice, black beans and avocado ($12.50) — so hearty and delicious that you’ll be craving your next fix before you’ve even left. On your way out of town, stop by the calm, blue-green waters of Haleiwa Beach Park and put your toes in the sand. The Polynesian Cultural Center theme park and museum manages to hit all the right notes for families, with a daylong schedule of entertaining shows, craft demonstrations and exhibits for à la carte exploration (ticket packages from $59.95). But evening is special: The center puts on one of the best-loved luaus on the island, as well as the dramatic “Ha: Breath of Life” show, a vivid, energetic production that highlights song and dance from the indigenous cultures of the South Pacific, and features student performers who hail from these cultures and attend nearby Brigham Young University, Hawaii. For those looking ahead to next year, the center is also known for the World Fireknife Competition, an annual spring celebration that was held earlier this month and involves flaming knives and crowd-pleasing, daring athletic dance. The Hans Hedemann Surf School has been teaching people to surf for two decades and has a dedicated shop location at Turtle Bay Resort (lessons from $95). Instructors know the spots for every condition on the North Shore, from sheltered Kawela Bay on a big swell day to more exposed breaks along the coast. After you’ve practiced your pop-ups and bottom turns, head over to watch the pros at work on waves at Sunset Beach, Banzai Pipeline andWaimea Bay, the sites of some of the most famous international surf contests. On a recent wintertime visit, 40- to 50-foot waves drew surfers from around the world for the legendary Quiksilver in Memory of Eddie Aikau, a tournament held only when open ocean swells reach a minimum of 20 feet to create ideal 30- to 40-foot wave conditions in Waimea Bay (before this year, the last event was held in 2009). As his wife, Brenda, will tell you, Paul Wroblewski is “a glass float guy.” Distinctive handblown glass fishing floats (starting at about $15), used in the pre-World War II era to buoy fishermen’s nets, are a specialty of the Only Show in Town, an antiques and collectibles shop at the Tanaka Plantation Stores. The emporium is rich with other vintage Hawaiiana: old Waialua soda bottles, postcards, aloha shirts, “anything unusual.” After all, the best kind of souvenir has a story. When you’re through browsing, head across the parking lot to order a spicy garlic shrimp plate ($13) from Fumi’s Kahuku Shrimp Truck — sourced fresh from the adjacent shrimp farm and served with green salad and a pineapple slice — and enjoy it at one of the shaded picnic tables. For more than seven centuries, the steep rain forest terrain of the Waimea Valley was the spiritual headquarters of the native Hawaiian kahuna nui, or high priests. Today, its 1,875 acres include botanical gardens, waterfalls, hiking trails and some of the most sacred native Hawaiian archaeological sites: temples, burial caves, fishing shrines. Hikes for all abilities are possible, from a relaxed 1.5-mile round-trip botanical garden and waterfall walk (bring your swimsuit!) to a seven-mile climb to steep ridgelines and ocean views (admission $16). Hula, music and craft demonstrations are included with admission. If you’re looking for a scenic spot to have a drink or dinner, Turtle Bay Resort is the place. Start at Lei Lei’s Bar & Grill, designed to be the “19th hole” of the resort’s Tom Fazio golf course; it has a casual pub feel that attracts a nice mix of locals as well as visiting golfers, surfers and hotel guests. Grab a seat at the open-air bar and order an oyster shot, spicy with horseradish and redolent of the sea ($3.50); specialty cocktails include the house lemonade, with vodka and black raspberry liqueur ($10). For sunset and ocean views, stroll over to the Point, the resort’s pool bar overlooking Turtle Bay, and order a plate of grilled fish tacos with pineapple slaw, made with the local catch of the day ($17). There’s often live music in the evening — chances are you’ll also see surfers, turtles and stand-up paddlers cruising the waters, and your evening’s conversation will be punctuated by spouts of water through the coast’s “blowhole,” as ocean surf spews through the rocks in front of the bar. Wind your way down the windward coast through verdant valleys and little towns to Kailua for brunch at Uahi Island Grill, which offers fresh takes on the Hawaiian plate lunch — braised kalua pork with kale ($9.95), say, or ahi coconut curry ($14.50), served with brightly flavored sides like Korean slaw and green papaya salad. You’ll want to cruise the shopping strip afterward, but make your way back to the Local Hawaii, a shave ice counter tucked inside Aloha Beach Club, a boutique selling locally made, hipster-appropriate clothing and products (trucker hats, T-shirts, tank tops). While you shop, put in an order at the front counter, which turns out next-level shave ice withpiquant syrups, all made from farm produce grown in the islands ($5.50). Along a stretch of Kailua that includes a general store, an outrigger canoe workshop and various auto-body garages, the pocket-size Lanikai Brewing Company has been quietly perfecting its brews for a year and a half. Owned and operated by four beer-loving surf and sailing buddies — “the more we surfed, the more boards we damaged, the more beer we made,” thebrewmaster Steve Haumschild has said about his friendship with Brandon Cody, a co-founder — the brewery now offers tastings of its IPA, porter,saison and small-batch chocolate stout ($1 to $2 each), as well as tours of its attached brewing facilities. Then head over to Lanikai Beach, a quiet, family-friendly stretch of white sand and one of the prettiest spots on this side of Oahu. From just above Lanikai Beach, hike up to the Lanikai Pillboxes, along the Kaiwa Ridge Trail. A favorite with families and locals, it’s a 20- to 30-minute climb to the first of two old military pillbox bunkers and mind-altering views of Oahu’s windward side and offshore islands. The trail can be scree-covered and muddy, so wear appropriate shoes. But the serene panoramas from up here are well worth the effort. The expansive yet laid-back Turtle Bay Resort (57-091 Kamehameha Highway, Kahuku; turtlebayresort.com) has tennis courts, pools, horse stables, a spa, and two golf courses, as well as access to a protected swimming beach and several surf breaks right in front of the hotel. Rooms from $280 in May. CQTen miles from Kailua, Paradise Bay Resort (47-039 Lihikai Drive, Kaneohe; paradisebayresort.com) overlooks Kaneohe Bay and offers a quiet, residential feel, with rooms from about $200 in May.A 36 Hours column on May 22, about Oahu, Hawaii, incorrectly implied that alcohol consumption is permitted on Lanikai Beach. It is not allowed on Oahu’s public beaches without a permit.Advertisement