By KAREN SCHWARTZSEPT. 20, 2016
Does a bear poop in the woods? Of course it does, and so, apparently, do a whole lot of humans.Discarded toilet paper is just one of the problems that Rocky Mountain National Park has been dealing with as it leapfrogged ahead of Yellowstone and Yosemite in popularity last year. Its 4.16 million visitors in 2015, an increase of 21 percent from the year before, is behind only Great Smoky Mountains National Park, with 10.71 million guests, and Grand Canyon National Park, with 5.52 million.“With that increase, we started to see a different behavior in our visitors,” said Kyle Patterson, a Rocky Mountain National Park spokeswoman.While most people behave properly, the number engaging in illegal activity increased so much that the park this summer issued a plea for assistance in trying to educate visitors about park etiquette. The “Please Help Your Friends to Behave Better to Protect Rocky Mountain National Park” statement covered a variety of topics, including avoiding the park between 10 a.m. and 3 p.m. during the summer and fall, restrictions on campfires, keeping a distance from wildlife, not taking items from the wild, the prohibition on pets in most places, parking and, yes, bathroom habits.“If your friend is a frequent pooper, suggest taking care of that before hiking. If nature calls, plan ahead — bring a waste bag, or research tips on how to poop in the woods,” it said. “Friends don’t let friends go to the bathroom near water sources. Just think, you might be drinking from that water source the next day!”AdvertisementEtiquette issues in the parks aren’t new, nor are they unique to Colorado. Last year, Glacier National Park posted a blog on its website about “the not-so-rare wildflower called the ‘toilet paper bloom’ ” that gave instructions on how to properly pee and poop in the woods. In fact, nearly every park website offers some sort of guidance about etiquette, whether it’s a reminder to turn off cellphones for night sky viewing at Joshua Tree National Park or advice on how to behave with the villagers at the National Park of American Samoa.AdvertisementWith three straight years of record visitation, “we’ve heard anecdotally, especially from the major parks, that citations for minor crimes and misdemeanors are up,” said Jeffrey G. Olson, a spokesman for the National Park Service in Washington, D.C.Even though Rocky Mountain has half the staff of Yellowstone and a third of the staff of Yosemite, the call for help that was shared on Twitter and with the park’s 500,000 Facebook followers, posted on its website and sent to various news outlets, wasn’t intended to encourage vigilantism, Ms. Patterson said.“We certainly have a lot of visitors reaching out to other visitors,” she said. “Sometimes that goes well, sometime it doesn’t. We have had altercations about parking spaces, arguing about who got the parking space first. People trying to save parking spaces and other people yelling that they can’t.”A few years ago, a man was punched in the face after politely telling another visitor that he needed to stay off the tundra to protect the fragile ecosystem, Ms. Patterson said.Rather than encouraging people to engage with strangers, the lighthearted primer “was truly meant to connect with park visitors to be able to share with their friends what the rules and regulations are and why,” she said.It’s easy to understand the challenges that many of the park’s 400 summer employees (including 175 year-round staff), are experiencing.A trip to one of the most popular parts of the 415-square-mile park on a Saturday in late summer put a spotlight on a variety of visitors who either didn’t know or didn’t care about park rules.AdvertisementChoice parking lots like Bear Lake were filled before 8 a.m. Drivers arriving after that were sent back down the hill to a Park and Ride lot. Once the Park and Ride lot fills, usually around 9:30 a.m., access to Bear Lake Road is restricted. Drivers are stopped lower down and directed to the parking lots at the visitor centers, where free shuttles take passengers to trailheads.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“This guy might be a problem,” Billy Webb, a park volunteer, radioed ahead after he sent a white S.U.V. to the Park and Ride lot.Mr. Webb was worried the driver would pull forward and stop, insisting on waiting for a spot to open. When drivers do that, it snarls traffic, incites road rage and blocks the way for the shuttles and emergency vehicles.As the lots filled, some drivers parked on the wild grass by the side of the road, risking damage to the native species, and the chance that they would be towed. Friends are advised to discourage this behavior by reminding the driver that they wouldn’t allow someone to park on their prized rose bushes.On the Saturday of my visit, about 10,000 vehicles entered the park. While there are more than 350 miles of hiking trails in the park, there was a steady flow of people on the 5.6-mile trail to Mills Lake, including some who broadcast music from their phones as they walked along.Nonetheless, all seemed polite, nodding hello and stepping to the side to let others pass, or in the case of one fellow, to take a hit of his Boost Oxygen supplement as he approached 9,500 feet and the spectacular vista as the lake comes into view amid a stunning mountain backdrop.But I was only an hour into my hike when I noticed a woman squatting behind some limber pines near the trail. Soon after, the confetti of toilet paper became increasingly noticeable along the side of the trail.Already, the park provides free bags to pack out waste at the Backcountry Office and also from a dispenser near the 13-mile Lumpy Ridge Trailhead, a popular site for climbers.“What we will be doing within the next couple of years is looking at long-term solutions, engaging the public on what that looks like,” Ms. Patterson said.AdvertisementUntil then, the staff will continue to walk a fine line between host and enforcer, all while trying to educate the public.As I rode back to my car in the shuttle, I noticed there were advertisements on the inside of the bus, not unlike a New York subway. The subject matter, however, was decidedly different.“Go Before You Go,” read one. “Use restrooms at trailheads. Although bears do it in the woods, we’d rather YOU don’t.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.