

      By NELL MCSHANE WULFHART

NOV. 23, 2017

Whether you seek retro restaurants that haven’t changed in 50 years, or innovative galleries and American-style brunches, you’ll find it here, in the capital of Paraguay.
Related Article
Asunción is a fascinating, under-visited city, a place of decaying old buildings and uneven sidewalks, bits of Guaraní (an indigenous language) mixed in with Spanish in speech and on signs, and a recent infusion of cosmopolitan cool visible in coffee shops and industrial-chic hotels. Whether you seek retro restaurants that haven’t changed in 50 years, where locals eat fish stew and manioc in many forms, or innovative galleries and American-style brunches, you’ll find it here.
Explore the map and find things to do in Asunción.
Take a look at one of the dark periods of Paraguayan history at the Museo de las Memorias (free). Housed in an unremarkable building that was once a center for detention and torture by the Gen. Alfredo Stroessner dictatorship (1954-1989), its signage and exhibits are in Spanish, but the photos and instruments of torture — whips, electric shock machines, tools for pulling out fingernails — speak for themselves, as does the ugly evidence of American collusion. In the back are the cells where prisoners were kept, with horribly realistic “bodies” wrapped in rags. Parked at the entrance is a red custom Chevrolet, the car used to bring detainees to police stations and detention centers — a symbol of fear.Labyrinthine alleys crowded with stalls selling counterfeit sneakers, toys and anything else you might ever need: This sprawling market, the Mercado Municipal (known as Mercado Cuatro), is a place to explore for hours on end. You’ll find heaped vegetable stands, staffed by women cutting the kernels off cobs of corn or peeling garlic, and smoky food stalls serving grilled sausages. Stop at one of the tables covered in bundles of fresh and dried herbs. These are yuyos, herbal medicine; tell the seller what ails you, whether it’s an unsettled stomach or a headache, and they will macerate the appropriate herbs with a mortar and pestle.Forage for dinner at the Mburucuya Food Park, a welcoming outdoor space strung with lights, bordered by trees and filled nightly with people and music. Children entertain themselves in the bouncy castle, parents sample craft beer on draft from the local Sajonia brewery (which makes a great Indio ale), and friends share plates of fried yucca and sausage sandwiches. Many of the 25 food trucks serve Paraguayan beef in various forms, like artisanal burgers and steak sandwiches, but best of all are the Braford steaks from the Osso food truck — straight off the grill and cooked to perfection. Dinner for two, around 100,000 guaraníes, or about $17.35.The chic Mariano Domingo Bar is part of the Chaco, an unabashedly dated hotel. The bar, which opened a year ago, uses what was once a section of the hotel’s reception area; it’s a sleek little space that pairs its ’70s-style furniture and fittings with craft cocktails made with care (and considerable flair — the tattooed bartenders have Tom-Cruise-in-“Cocktail”-style moves). On weekends there’s a D.J. and live jazz that draws the cool kids. A few blocks away, just by the train station, a disused rail yard and enormous train shed is home to La Cachamba, where bartenders turn their own infused liquors (made with mint, ginger and even manioc) into creative cocktails sprinkled with flowers, dried orange peel and fresh mint.It’s possible to see most of the historic sites in the city center in a few hours. Start at the Palacio de los López, the neoclassical seat of government, built by and named after the 19th-century political dynasty. Stroll east along the riverside parks (some with sobering tent cities) to the Cabildo (free), a cultural center that once housed the senate and is now worth visiting primarily for the room of shamanic crowns made from feathers, costumes worn for initiation ceremonies, and other items collected from indigenous groups. From here, swing by the Panteón Nacional de los Héroes, a chapel and mausoleum for the bodies of fallen soldiers and Paraguay’s first president. Then loop west again to visit Casa de la Independencia (free), a stunning colonial house that was the site of Paraguay’s declaration of independence. Get caffeinated at Café Consulado — which has the best coffee in town, and often has interesting art exhibits as well.A small gallery in a beautiful residential space, Hepner represents Paraguay’s up and coming artists (they also deal in 19th- and early-20th-century work). A recent show of Waldo Longo’s work, “Bestia Pop” (beast pop), displayed bright, cartoonish paintings by the dynamic local artist. If you drop by for a visit, ask to see work by Fidel Fernandez and Enrique Collar, both names to remember. Afterward, take advantage of the adjacent Parque de Salud (health park), which has jogging paths and patches of trees so dense there have been reports of monkey sightings. It’s a much-needed refuge from the Asunción heat, which can be intense.Head to Villa Morra, one of the city’s tonier districts, for a late brunch at El Café de Acá. With outdoor and indoor seating, this is a favorite in all seasons, with a menu of American-style breakfasts like waffles and French toast, plus local treats like churros with dulce de leche and eggs scrambled with manioc and cheese. If you’ve wanted to try the tereré (iced yerba mate), this is one of the few places that has it on the menu. Brunch for two, around 130,000 guaraníes.The more expensive eastern neighborhoods of the city are home to boutiques specializing in housewares, crafts and clothes by local designers. Pick up colorful braided rugs at Nde Valé, which also sells delicately glazed ceramic plates and cups. The tiny boutique Oh! Sí, a 20-minute stroll southeast, is an essential stop for locally made, chic women’s clothing, from strappy summer dresses to bikinis in bright colors.For a deep dive into Paraguayan culture, from visual arts to indigenous traditions, explore the Museo del Barro (free). Its three spaces are connected: One is a collection of contemporary Paraguayan art; another displays artifacts that begin with pre-Colombian ceramics and includes Christian icons and statues from 17th- and 18th-century Jesuit missions. The most powerful is the collection of indigenous art. The elaborate shamanic costumes, masks, feathered headdresses and crowns made from jaguar fur are awe-inspiring and powerful, and a testament to the strength of the country’s indigenous cultures.Tierra Colorada, helmed by the chef Rodolfo Angenscheidt, is the heavyweight of Asunción’s fine dining scene. Mr. Angenscheidt’s focus is on traditional dishes, which arrive in unusual formats, gussied up with out-of-the-ordinary ingredients. Surubí, a river fish usually found in stews, comes grilled on volcanic stones with carrot cream and roast vegetables, while a starter of pajagua, a fried patty commonly made with yucca and beef, is stuffed instead with langoustines and served with a yellow pepper purée. While part of the menu sticks with European classics, they’re often given a local twist, like gnocchi made from manioc flour. Dinner for two, with wine, around 450,000 guaraníes.Sundays are quiet, the perfect time for a self-guided tour of the city’s incredible murals in the historic center. Pick up a couple of chipas, traditional ring-shaped cheese bread snacks, at Ña Eustaquia before walking to Calle Estrella, which is lined with orange trees and home to stunning street art that often references the country’s indigenous heritage. Highlights include “El Reservista Purahéei,” at the corner of Calle Ayolas, depicting a soulful soldier with a guitar; the enormous vertical renderings of a man and woman, painted with a panther, bird and other jungle symbols, on the side of the Zaphir Hotel between Montevideo and Colon; and, at the corner of O’Leary and Oliva, partly obscured by a bank, a somber mural of a woman from the Maká indigenous group by the Peruvian street artist Decertor. Bolsi is a diner in the best sense of the word, a place where everyone in Asunción, from politicians to college students, comes to sit at the counter, chat and eat comfort food. It’s more than half a century old, but the menu has been updated, with tuna melts and Paraguayan-made Herken craft beer, as well as local favorites like fish stew and the milanesa (steak that’s been breaded and fried) sandwich. Stop in for Sunday lunch, but leave room for dessert: The bakery counter would put a New York diner to shame. Lunch for two, around 120,000 guaraníes.The enormous rooms and buzzy public areas of La Misión Hotel Boutique (Dr. Eulogio Estigarribia 4990; lamision.com.py; doubles from $176, including breakfast) are convenient to the city’s swankiest shopping malls and high-end restaurants; there’s also a rooftop pool with a view and a small gym.Industrial chic meets 19th-century gentlemen’s club at the gorgeous Factoría Hotel (Dr. Francisco Morra 813; factoriahotel.com.py; doubles from $140), where the 17 rooms are big enough to host entire families and the restaurant serves a top-notch breakfast (included).Flight and Hotel information provided by Google.Prices represent a snapshot of low fares and rates for weekend trips.Advertisement