By ELAINE GLUSACFEB. 1, 2017
The travel industry responded by turns critically and cautiously to President Trump’s executive order issued last week that bans travelers from seven predominantly Muslim countries from entering the United States for 90 days.The order applies to citizens of Iran, Iraq, Libya, Somalia, Sudan, Syria and Yemen, prompting protests at airports across the country over the weekend as airlines and immigration agents scrambled to comply with the new directive.The American Airlines chief executive, Doug Parker, called the order “divisive” in an open letter to employees posted on the company’s website on Monday.Expedia is supporting a lawsuit filed by Washington State against the president’s order.The chief executive of TripAdvisor, Steve Kaufer, published an open letter on LinkedIn that criticized the policy, calling it “not only heartless and discriminatory, but also against the principles that make our country great.”AdvertisementBrian Chesky, the chief executive of Airbnb, went further on Twitter, posting that the company will provide temporary free housing to refugees. A company spokesman said that Airbnb hosts may offer their rooms without charge or receive a subsidy from Airbnb. He added that the company was working on requests from people affected by the ban but did not provide more information.AdvertisementOf the seven nations singled out by the executive order, only Iran drew significant interest on the part of leisure travelers. Among North American travelers, trips to Iran with Intrepid Travel had grown 35 percent in the past year, on pace with Iceland, Japan and Sri Lanka, three other trending destinations. Cox & Kings said it had doubled its traffic to Iran in the past 12 months. Wilderness Travel went from offering one itinerary in 2016 to three in 2017. The founder of Abercrombie & Kent, Geoffrey Kent, singled out Iran as a top destination in 2017.These and other operators say previously announced trips will run. They have taken a wait-and-see position regarding whether Iran will retaliate with its own travel ban, as its government has suggested.“Our customers are very adventurous and want to travel, so probably there would be a shift in travel rather than canceling and staying home for a year,” said Warren Chang, the chief operating officer of Cox & Kings.Getting into Iran requires a visa that travelers can apply for no sooner than 90 days before their trip, said Annie Lucas, vice president of Mir Corporation, a tour operator based in Seattle that has been guiding trips in Iran for close to 20 years.“You can’t get one a year in advance,” Ms. Lucas said. “There’s a timeline. That’s what calls it all into question. There are a lot of people waiting for approvals.”The presidential directive set a 90-day deadline to review the United States’ procedures for vetting travelers from the seven countries.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I’m hoping if the Iranians retaliate it will be three months on their side,” said Steve Kulay, who runs Iran Luxury Travel in North Carolina. “I’m not optimistic. They don’t like being pushed around.”SmarTours, based in New York, had just begun selling its first trips to Iran in January and still plans to run that first group departure in July, with monthly departures thereafter.Advertisement“There’s an element of Iran as the new Cuba, with a few twists,” said Greg Geronemus, a chief executive of SmarTours. He said the company booked more trips since the president’s order than accepted cancellations.“I get a sense of a spirit of resolve and defiance among those booking these trips,” he said. “I think it’s one of the ways they’re saying they disagree with the policy.”Frank Rosemond, 80, of San Francisco, said he did not plan to alter his booking with SmarTours to visit Iran in October. He said he was excited to see the ancient ruins of Persepolis and the beautifully tiled mosques of Isfahan.“We understand the people are friendly, and once again it’s government to government that’s the problem,” Mr. Rosemond said.Whether Americans venture to Iran or elsewhere, some experts think the order will have a chilling effect on travel in general.“It just contributes to a sense of unease,” said Jason Clampet, the editor in chief of the travel news website Skift.com. “Not knowing what the government might do means people will make a safe choice, if they make a decision at all. The flip side is most Americans with summer vacations do them domestically.”Inbound tourism, already challenged by weak exchange rates against the dollar, is another question. Based in England, the agency Responsible Travel said it had experienced a 57 percent decrease in revenue from trips to the United States over the past year and put the country on its “not hot” list for 2017.“The U.S. was already positioned to have a poor year because of the strength of the dollar,” said Mr. Clampet, “and this contributes to another reason not to go.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.