
Bites By                     
 MELENA RYZIK
 
MAY 27, 2016
Black-and-white photos of Italian noodle-makers and vintage menus from Hong Kong dim sum parlors decorate the Honey Paw, billed as a “nondenominational” noodle joint and the latest relatably cool restaurant from one of Portland’s most winning chef-restaurateur teams, Andrew Taylor and Mike Wiley. Along with their managing partner Arlin Smith, they had already colonized a stretch of Middle Street, near the Old Port, with the critical favorites Hugo’s and Eventide Oyster Co. When the Honey Paw opened next door in April 2015, it quickly delivered on the expectation of success — Eater named it the state’s restaurant of the year.The original premise, of a global noodle-centric spot, has given way to a focus on Asian flavors, but with culinary techniques borrowed from across the world. The chef de cuisine, Thomas Pisha-Duffly, is of Chinese and Irish descent, with roots in Indonesia and Massachusetts. All of that is reflected in the changing menu at the Honey Paw, where shrimp toast, a dim sum standard, has morphed into a lobster-and-scallop mousse tartine. “That was one of the first dishes that we conceptualized for the space,” Mr. Pisha-Duffly said. “It kind of epitomizes the way we think of cuisine.” On the night I visited, it was sprinkled with bits of seaweed and fresh radish for an out-of-this-world Asian-New England-French mash-up.The nose-to-tail approach means a regular entree of cumin lamb moo shu is served with lamb breast one night and hearts another. “It’s like a make-your-own taco,” our server said. Yes, and piled on masa pancakes, with salsa verde and buttermilk cheese, it could rival David Chang’s Momofuku pork buns in addictiveness. Ditto the crisp-fried spoonbread with uni butter — umami heaven.The handmade noodles, which come in many sizes, include a fermented rice variety, and the Thai-style coconut chicken curry had a broth so rich it was almost textured. The lighting is soft and the service unstuffy.The homey vibe is helped by the seating: A counter extends all around the space, with a huge shared table in the center. There are no individual tables, because, Mr. Pisha-Duffly said, “part of this style of food that we love is the communal aspect of dining.” In summers, the restaurant swells from 38 seats to 50, thanks to a patio, where soft-serve flavors like caramelized honey with honeycomb will probably taste even sweeter.The Honey Paw, 78 Middle Street; 207-774-8538; thehoneypaw.com. Average price for a meal for two, without drinks and tip, is about $45.A version of this article appears in print on May 29, 2016, on Page TR5 of the New York edition with the headline: Asian Flavors Reimagined.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »