
Heads Up By                     
CHRISTOPHER HALL

MAY 24, 2016
With a white facade that billows outward like a crinkled origami cloud, the new addition to the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art (SFMoMA) lends a touch of unearthly beauty to the vibrant South of Market neighborhood. But for the crowds who have been drawn to the greatly expanded museum since it reopened May 14 after a three-year, $305 million makeover, beauty is proving far deeper than a fiberglass-reinforced polymer skin.Inside the museum, the more than 5,000 visitors who snapped up all opening-day tickets in advance, and the tens of thousands who followed in the ensuing days, encountered entire constellations of a single artist’s work, installed throughout seven floors of open yet intimate-feeling galleries.There were rooms of Warhols, including his early silver-toned portraits, and of Chuck Close’s pixelated renderings of friends and family in media ranging from oil paint to paper pulp. Two dozen photographs by Diane Arbus had a room of their own, while an octagonal gallery was devoted solely to seven of Agnes Martin’s serene abstract paintings. The mobiles in an Alexander Calder gallery gently moved when doors were opened to the adjacent sculpture terrace (one of six at the museum), where more Calders were backed by a lush, living wall of 19,000 plants.Founded in 1935, SFMoMA  was the first West Coast museum devoted to modern and contemporary art. In 1995, after decades of sharing a building with other civic and cultural institutions, it moved to a new home, a five-story postmodern composition in brick by the Swiss architect Mario Botta. “We soon became a victim of our own success there in terms of attracting visitors and gifts,” said Neal Benezra, museum director. “By 2006, it was clear we needed more gallery space.”The museum turned to the Snohetta architecture firm, whose notable public projects include the Norwegian National Opera and Ballet in Oslo and the entryway pavilion of the National September 11 Memorial Museum in New York. For SFMoMA, the firm designed a 10-story annex whose airy, free-flowing interior meshes with the reconfigured spaces of the adjacent Mario Botta building, the exterior of which was left untouched. “We saw it as a very strong building,” said Craig Dykers, a founder of Snohetta. “It was nice to have a good dancing partner.”AdvertisementWith 170,000 square feet of indoor and outdoor galleries — nearly three times more than before — the museum now ranks among the largest modern art museums in the country. All the extra space finally allows it to showcase the exceptional depth of its own 33,000-plus holdings in art and design, not to mention those of the private Doris and Donald Fisher Collection, whose 1,100 works by top postwar and contemporary artists like Gerhard Richter, Barbara Hepworth, Roy Lichtenstein and Ellsworth Kelly will stay at the museum for at least 100 years. The new Pritzker Center for Photography, the largest space devoted to photography in any American art museum, increases SFMoMA’s longstanding strength in that medium.Museum officials predict that first-year attendance will exceed one million, up from an annual figure of 650,000 before the expansion. The museum is also expected to further enhance the arts-centric profile of its neighborhood, which already is home to galleries, performance venues, movie theaters and several other museums.AdvertisementFor visitors needing a break, a fifth-floor cafe with seating on the sculpture garden offers pastries and boxed lunches like lemon-thyme grilled chicken. On the third floor, the local small-batch roaster Sightglass Coffee serves espresso drinks and individual pour-overs. In Situ, a full-service restaurant, is to open next month for lunch and dinner. A project of Corey Lee, who earned three Michelin stars cooking at Benu in San Francisco, In Situ will feature a changing menu of dishes from recipes contributed by René Redzepi, Alice Waters, Andoni Luis Aduriz and other famous chefs.In an attempt to draw a diverse audience, an endowment ensures free admission in perpetuity for visitors 18 and under. A free app for iOS devices uses indoor positioning technology to deliver a variety of themed audio tours ranging in tone from philosophical to irreverent, including a “This Is Not an Artwork Tour,” in which comedians from the TV show “Silicon Valley” debate the artistic merit of works like Marcel Duchamp’s “Fountain” urinal.Additionally, 43,000 square feet of temporary exhibition space on the ground floor is open free to the public. In one of those galleries, a monumental Richard Serra walk-through sculpture of slope-walled, interlocking steel ellipses (on view for the next few years) can be seen through sidewalk-level windows near the new Howard Street entrance. Not surprisingly, the sculpture is attracting throngs of passers-by, who detour into the museum, slowly walk the sculpture’s strangely disorienting path, and then briskly continue on their way.A version of this article appears in print on May 29, 2016, on Page TR5 of the New York edition with the headline: Hugely Expanded, a Museum Is Reimagined.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »