By NELL McSHANE WULFHARTMARCH 29, 2017
Rob Corddry is a comedian, former “Daily Show” correspondent and the creator of “Childrens Hospital,” a subversive parody of medical television shows. He’s now starring in “Ballers,” an HBO comedy about N.F.L. players and their entourages.Based in Los Angeles, Mr. Corddry travels by air for work, but with his family he often prefers to go by car. “My wife and I love road trips and the kids are old enough that they’re into it as much as we are; they’re 8 and 10. Our plan was, once they grew out of the ‘annoying on an airplane or in a car’ age, we started starving them of any sort of video entertainment [at home]. So then when we give them iPads in the car, they’re just gone.”But getting the children to look up from the screens and out the window is a struggle. “We’ll do the requisite family games, spying things with our little eyes. Sometimes my wife and I will sing, but my kids have reached the age where they’re starting to roll their eyes. This summer, though, when we did a little New England road trip, we were heavy into the ‘Hamilton’ soundtrack. I would take the Aaron Burr part and my 8-year-old would take the Hamilton part, so that was really fun.”One regular journey is a family trip to Telluride, Colo., for Presidents’ Day weekend. “I do a very small comedy festival there, but it’s just an excuse to see some snow once a year,” Mr. Corddry said. “ My kids take ski lessons every time we go, but my wife and I, over the years, our ski time has dwindled. Now that I’m 46, I have a knowledge of my own mortality. I’m just afraid of it now; the fun does not outweigh the fear.”AdvertisementHere’s what he packs for each trip.Medications“The inside of my bag looks like it belongs to Woody Allen. If you have an ailment traveling with me, I have something for it. Pepto-Bismol, Emergen-C, Aleve, Advil, Excedrin, cough drops, Wet Ones to wipe down that dirty airplane tray — I travel with what’s practically a first aid kit.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Cables and chargers“I have a designated bag of all kinds of outdated computer wires, every connector imaginable. I should probably go through it and throw out my USB printer cable — who needs that anymore? Do I need two micro USB connectors? I don’t remember plugging them into anything. I’m an Eagle Scout and the Boy Scout motto is ‘Be prepared,’ so I’m prepared. To go back in time.”AdvertisementAquaphor“If I find myself on a six-hour flight without a spare tube of Aquaphor for my lips, I’ll start freaking out. I’m — let’s say I’m dependent on it. In my drawer right now I’ve got five tubes. If I leave my house and I don’t have my Aquaphor there’s a little flutter, I panic a little bit. My lips don’t actually get dry; it’s a mental tic I have. I’ve got to be equipped with at least two tubes of Aquaphor everywhere I go.”Guitar“I’m teaching myself how to play guitar. So I bring my acoustic or an electric. When I bring the electric I have this little headphone amplifier called the Line 6 Pocket POD, and it’s this really comprehensive amplifier. You can make any sound, basically, that a guitar can make, through headphones. It’s really neat.”Comic books“I usually go to the comic book store before I travel. I will read anything by Jeff Lemire: I also like Jason Aaron, Grant Morrison and Warren Ellis. The kids don’t like football, no matter how much I try, but with comic books I got in early and they love them.”A version of this article appears in print on April 2, 2017, on Page TR2 of the New York edition with the headline: Rob Corddry Packs Music and Medications.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.