
Heads Up By                     
ELAINE GLUSAC

SEPT. 14, 2016
On a sultry Tuesday night in Miami, plaid-clad and boho-chic hipsters gathered around the pool at Broken Shaker bar, sipping herb-filled cocktails under strings of soft light bulbs. There was nary a bouncer or bikini in sight, replaced by a neighborly mix of artists, professionals and off-season tourists drawn to this denlike bar in a candlelit alcove by the pool.“We wanted a place where everyone was welcome and the mentality is laid-back but the product is really well put out,” said Gabe Orta, a co-owner of the bar, Broken Shaker (thefreehand.com), at Freehand Miami, a hip Mid-Beach hotel and hostel.Mr. Orta and his partner, Elad Zvi, are among Miami’s cocktail vanguard, emphasizing locally grown ingredients and changing the menu every three weeks. Originally a pop-up in 2011, the bar became a permanent fixture at the hotel in 2012. “I wanted to show people the real Miami, which is laid-back and all about friends,” Mr. Orta said. “Clubs are about tourists.”For decades, Miami’s night life revolved around raucous clubs lubricated by undifferentiated drinks or inflated bottle service. But a new wave of cocktail lounges has scaled back on the boisterous scene while improving the craft of the quaffs.AdvertisementThe quality-before-quantity movement has most conspicuously taken root at a series of new Miami Beach hotels, many in the emerging Mid-Beach area, with destination cocktail bars that appeal as much to locals as to visitors and allow both to enjoy the atmosphere for the price of a drink rather than a hefty overnight bill.The seeds of Miami’s cocktail renaissance were sown in 2007, observers say, at the now-defunct Florida Room, then run by John Lermayer, in the Delano, the seminal South Beach boutique hotel. He went on to design the original menu at the Regent Cocktail Club (regentcocktailclub.com), a retro gem that opened in 2013 in the back of the 1940s-era Gale South Beach hotel with intimate booths, swagged drapes and fresh daiquiris that come frothing from the shaker.Advertisement“Regent Cocktail Club is rooted in classics,” said Mr. Lermayer, who has since left the club. “Miami needed a classic cocktail bar as a foundation for everything else to grow off from.”Newer spots line up — conveniently for pedestrians — along Collins Avenue, beginning with the Confidante Miami Beach hotel in Mid-Beach, home to Talde Miami Beach (taldemiamibeach.com). This restaurant, from the Brooklyn-based chef Dale Talde, has a lively lounge with a gritty urban feel and a late-night following for such drinks as the Green Lightning, made with green tea, vodka, cucumber and lime ($12), and a noodle menu offered on Fridays and Saturdays at midnight and served until 4 a.m. The hotel also plans to turn a historic 1930s-vintage Mediterranean-style ranch into a craft cocktail bar by the year’s end.A dozen blocks down the road, the Miami Beach Edition, a collaboration between the hotelier Ian Schrager and Marriott International, houses several bars and even a basement nightclub. But its Matador Bar (matadorroom.com), run by the chef Jean-Georges Vongerichten and located outside the circular midcentury Matador Room restaurant, is its most sophisticated spot to savor a Mexican Bull (reposado tequila, pineapple, lime and cardamom syrup, $18) and ogle the images of matadors taken by the French photographer Lucien Clergue.Several bars inhabit the sprawling 1 Hotel South Beach nearby, including a rooftop pool lounge, but its lobby spot Tom on Collins (1hotels.com/south-beach) best showcases the culinary director Tom Colicchio’s farm-to-glass approach with a seasonal cocktail menu and cut herbs, grown on the patio garden, perched on the bar.Five blocks south, the Drawing Room Bar & Lounge (shelbornewyndhamgrand.com), at the renovated Shelborne Wyndham Grand South Beach hotel, features house-made herbal elixirs and botanical essences in cocktails that change quarterly to reflect the seasons.Some of the city’s cocktail kings have recently opened hotel-free establishments. Mr. Orta and Mr. Zvi, of the Broken Shaker, broke away from the beach last spring to open the trendy Anderson Bar (theandersonmiami.com) back across the causeway along Biscayne Boulevard, near the Little Haiti neighborhood. It revives a former piano lounge, decorated in red plaid wallpaper and red tufted booths, with drinks spanning craft cocktails like the rye-and-mezcal Mr. Anderson ($12) and more playful ’80s homages like the rum-cola Nobody Puts Baby in the Corner ($12).Back in South Beach, Mr. Lermayer, formerly of the Regent Cocktail Club, opened Sweet Liberty Drinks & Supply Company (mysweetliberty.com) last fall. This 75-seat bar, near the Bass Museum of Art, has a vintage vibe and a drink menu rooted in Americana. “The cocktail is America’s first epicurean contribution to the world,” Mr. Lermayer said.AdvertisementExcellence, he added, has replaced attitude when it comes to cocktailing in the city. “You don’t need to get past a velvet rope or a big doorman to enjoy Miami any longer,” he said.A version of this article appears in print on September 18, 2016, on Page TR4 of the New York edition with the headline: A New Wave of Bars Rolls In.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »