By CONCEPCIÓN DE LEÓNJUNE 13, 2017
Italy’s libraries, many of which were once reserved for the elite, see the confluence of grand architecture, scholarly influence and deep historical significance. To travelers they offer a microcosm of Italy’s charms, and to readers, a setting of intense beauty and meaning. Here, two books that use the library as a backdrop, and one that chronicles the rise and fall of the Medici family, whose commitment to literature left an imprint on a nation.THE NAME OF THE ROSE (1983) By Umberto Eco502 pages; HarcourtThis novel, Umberto Eco’s first, became an overnight best seller in Europe and, once it was translated into English, the United States. Set in the 14th century, the novel follows William of Baskerville, a renowned monk, and his apprentice, Adso of Melk, as they investigate several murders in a monastery in northern Italy. The mystery revolves around a labyrinthine library, and William refers quite often to philosophical principles and works — in particular Aristotle’s lost book on comedy and laughter — throughout his investigation. Eco devoted much time to studying what books may be found in a medieval library and provides detailed descriptions of those, as well as of the structure itself.THE MEDICI (2016) Power, Money, and Ambition in the Italian RenaissanceBy Paul Strathern464 pages; Pegasus BooksThe Medici family’s contributions to the Renaissance were tremendous, not the least of which was establishing what is said to be the first public library in Europe. Cosimo de’ Medici, whose power stemmed from his great wealth as a banker, collected rare texts, hand copying manuscripts himself for a private collection. (His handwriting would eventually inspire the italic font.) Eventually, 400 of these manuscripts would become the foundation of the Medici Library. Cosimo was constantly adding to the library, hiring copyists to produce replicas of original works. “The Medici” highlights these literary accomplishments in detail, as well as the story of how the Medici became the Renaissance’s most influential family.BY ITS COVER (2014) By Donna Leon237 pages; Atlantic Monthly PressInspired by the real-life looting of the Girolamini Library in Naples, this book adds to Donna Leon’s best-selling Commissario Guido Brunetti series. When the commissario gets a frantic call from the director of Biblioteca Merula telling him that pages have been stolen out of several rare books, all signs seem to point to Joseph Nickerson, an American academic who had requested the volumes, as the culprit. Yet as the investigation progresses, more suspects emerge. Ms. Leon’s description of the setting is vivid. And she doesn’t shy away from politics, either, with her passion for preserving national institutions such as the library shining through.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.