AdvertisementSupported byQ. and A.By Shivani VoraIt’s not just about conscious uncoupling and recipes for “superpowered avocado toast.”Goop, Gwyneth Paltrow’s lifestyle site, may be most famous for being the place where the Oscar-winning actress popularized a way to describe divorce and a forum to share her commitment to health (with accompanying products for sale). But it’s also where she shares her passion for travel and writes about finds from her trips.In fact, chances are high that most sightings of Ms. Paltrow, 43, these days are of when she is on the road. Though she lives in Los Angeles, she says she travels at least a few times a month, both for work and pleasure, and counts Austria, Paris, Barcelona, Hong Kong and Deer Valley, Utah, among her recent trips.Ms. Paltrow was in New York City recently to promote her new six-piece skin care collection, Goop by Juice Beauty, and spoke about wellness on the road, traveling with her children and where she most wants to go. Below are edited excerpts.Q. Do you keep up your exercise regimen when you’re traveling?A. Recently, no. If I’m in Paris, I’d much rather take a walk and discover something amazing than be stuck on a treadmill at my hotel. If it’s more than a few days, I will work out because my body is so used to it, but my last trips have been short ones, and I haven’t.Do you have a regular routine you follow when you’re on planes?I drink tons of water, and I have a vitamin sachet that I put in it. Also, I moisturize my skin and put on a mask. I try not to eat rubbish either. I’ll pack salad and fruit. If I’m going on an overnight flight, I’ll drink whiskey or a glass of wine and then go to sleep, but on day flights, I try not to drink. When I land, I try to find a sauna to sit in for 20 minutes to help me sweat out all the germs from the plane.Do you indulge in meals when you’re on the road?Absolutely. When I’m traveling, I would rather eat what I want and come home and tighten it up. I don’t want to be in Paris and not have a croissant or goose fat potatoes. I love pasta in Italy, bread and cheese in Spain and wine everywhere. You don’t have to indulge all day, every day, but I think it’s important to your psyche to have flexibility and genuinely enjoy the food wherever you are.Is there a meal that sticks out as the most memorable?There’s a restaurant on Koh Kood Island in Thailand called Benz’s. You get on a boat and go up a river to get there. It is the most exquisite, spicy Thai food I’ve ever had. The flavors were incredible.Traveling with children, especially on long flights, isn’t easy. How do you make travel with your two children more manageable?Keeping them entertained is important. I pack games like UNO and Battleship. And the iPad is essential! On the plane, they can play all the games and watch as many shows as they want.Do you have a favorite vacation spot?I love going to Mexico. There’s a resort there called Cuixmala that’s incredible for kids. But the best vacation I’ve ever taken was with my kids to Indonesia. We stayed at a resort in Bali and then slept on a wooden boat for three or four nights and also hiked with the Komodo dragons. It was a magical trip.You’ve stayed in more than your fair share of hotels. What do you think makes for a great property?Service and food are important. Also, good sheets and a comfortable bed. It doesn’t necessarily have to be fancy. Some of the best hotels I’ve stayed in were basic in terms of the physical room but had great food and service.What destinations haven’t you been to that are on your wish list?I’d love to go to Bhutan, Nepal, Cambodia and Vietnam. I would also love to do something more adventurous like Iceland in the winter.Both the Zika virus and terrorist attacks have made people more apprehensive to travel. What’s your attitude about traveling given these recent concerns?You have to educate yourself about what’s safe and not, but you have to keep living your life. Right after the Paris attacks, I was meant to go to a Real Madrid soccer match and was feeling a bit shaken so didn’t, which is rare for me. But, we’re going to Buenos Aires for spring break. I think it’s a case-by-case situation.Check-in luggage or carry-on?Carry-on. The only time I check in is when I am going to a cold destination and have to bring lots of warm clothes.Advertisement