By SHIVANI VORAJULY 14, 2017
Croatia is a popular vacation destination this year for travelers from the United States. Expedia has seen air ticket demand to the country double this summer, compared with last summer, and on the travel search engine Kayak, searches to Croatia between Jan. 1 and May 25 this year for travel from May 26 to Sept. 5 were up 25 percent, compared with the same periods last year.A holiday to Croatia, even during the peak season in August and September, doesn’t have to be expensive, according to Wanda S. Radetti, the owner of Tasteful Croatian Journeys, a company specializing in custom private trips to Croatia. “Despite the high demand for Croatia, you can find reasonably priced, nice accommodations and affordable group tours in beautiful, historic locales,” she said.Attractive airfare prices may be another incentive to consider Croatia: Data from Expedia indicate that airfare from the United States to both Dubrovnik and Split this summer is 30 percent lower than it was last summer.Options for Croatia trips in August and September include a seven-night getaway on the island of Vis, offered by WearActive, a company specializing in active trips. Guests stay in a seaside stone cottage, and activities include yoga, snorkeling, biking, hiking and kayaking. Prices from 990 euros (about $1,130), including accommodations and most activities and meals.AdvertisementExpedia has several dozen air-inclusive packages to Croatia in August and September. One choice, available from Sept. 13 to 18, includes round-trip airfare on United Airlines from Newark Liberty International Airport to Dubrovnik Airport and a four-night stay at Valamar Dubrovnik President Hotel, a luxury beachfront property where all guest rooms have sea view terraces and breakfast is included. $1,270 a person.Intrepid Travel also has several Croatia itineraries in August and September, including the eight-day Croatia Sailing Adventure-Split to Dubrovnik, where guests travel on a yacht along the country’s Dalmatian Coast and stop at several islands including Hvar and Korcula. Prices from $1,600, inclusive of accommodations on a yacht.AdvertisementFor families with children who are at least 7 years old, Intrepid Travel has the eight-day Croatian Active Family Holiday. Guests stay in an apartment in the town of Starigrad Paklenica, near the Adriatic Sea and enjoy activities like hiking through Paklenica National Park, known for its rock formations and scenic views, and white-water rafting on the Zrmanja River. From $1,570 a person, inclusive of accommodations, some meals and most activities.A version of this article appears in print on July 16, 2017, on Page TR2 of the New York edition with the headline: Croatia Beckons.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.