By SHIVANI VORAJAN. 29, 2017
Though there have been protests at airports across the country, the actual routine of daily tourism seems to be largely unaffected by President Trump’s executive order banning people of seven predominantly Muslim countries from entering the United States.Citizens of the affected countries — Iran, Iraq, Libya, Somalia, Sudan, Syria and Yemen — are a relatively small segment of the inbound traffic to the United States, and a handful of airlines swiftly responded with a raft of fee waivers and refunds as the president’s policy continued to evolve. But domestic carriers and airports did not report significant disruptions to their operations.Etihad Airways, based in Abu Dhabi, is among the carriers offering flight changes or refunds to affected customers. “A number of our passengers have been affected, and we are continuing to assist them to identify issues before they fly to the U.S.A.,” Katie Connell, a spokeswoman for the airlines, said in an email. “Where permitted, the airline has offered changes or refunds and rebooked passengers, as per our updated policy.”British Airways and the Dubai-based Emirates said they would be offering rebooking and refund options to affected passengers as well.AdvertisementAmong the carriers, Air Canada outlined its policies in the most detail: Customers who bought a ticket by Jan. 29 for travel to or via the United States can change their flight free; travel to an alternate destination without paying a change fee (though any fare difference will apply); or request a refund or credit toward future travel.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Delta has also said it would reach out to travelers affected by the ban in advance to offer rebooking or refunds. And United posted a statement on its site that said customers who meet the qualifications of the ban by Mr. Trump, a Republican, will not be permitted to board a United- or United Express-operated flight to the United States. “If you have travel plans that are affected by this new regulation, please contact the United Customer Contact Center,” the statement said.At the same time, rallies at airports in American cities did not largely affect travelers. Morgan Durrant, a spokesman for Delta, said that the airline is “aware of protests at several airports but as of now there is no operational impact.”AdvertisementKennedy International Airport cautioned travelers to allow additional time for travel, and Los Angeles International Airport also steered people to alternate areas for passenger pickup because of the protests. On Twitter on Sunday, Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport advised travelers to arrive early for their flights: “Operations are normal @atlairport. However, due to a large protest between 4-6pm, we advise you to plan ahead and arrive early.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.