
In Transit By                     
SHIVANI VORA

FEB. 17, 2016
FROM MOXY, TWO NEW U.S. HOTELS Moxy Hotels, Marriott International’s millennial-focused brand of affordable and stylish properties, debuted in September 2014 with the opening of Moxy Milan. This spring, the brand is entering the United States with two properties, Moxy Tempe in Arizona and Moxy New Orleans.Moxy Tempe opens in Arizona on March 18; it has 186 rooms, a pool and a free-flowing indoor/outdoor space that is separated by roll-up garage doors. Moxy New Orleans, near the city’s French Quarter, is opening on April 15 and has 108 rooms. In both properties, the guest rooms have motion-sensor lighting and plenty of USB outlets; the hotels also feature public quiet zones, free Wi-Fi and an area for self-service snacks that is open 24 hours a day.STAY AT A PALAZZO, MAKE A PIZZAPalazzo del Vice Re, an upscale boutique hotel in the fishing village of Lezzeno on Lake Como, Italy, is reopening for the 2016 season on March 24 with a tasty new amenity: a pizza-making class with one of the owners, Alessandro Pertusini, and his parents, Laura and Bruno Pertusini. The session takes places in the elder Pertusinis’ home near the property. Guests start with an aperitif in their orchard before moving into the kitchen, equipped with a wood-burning oven, where Mrs. Pertusini, known as Mamma Laura, teaches them how to make and roll out pizza dough and gives them the chance to create their own pies. Lunch accompanied by wine and Prosecco follows. Classes from 84 euros (about $94) a person. Room rates from 200 euros ($224) a night.BEAUTY AND THE HAWAIIAN BEACHThe St. Regis Princeville in Kauai, Hawaii, has partnered with Violet Grey, the popular Los Angeles beauty boutique, to assemble a set of products tailored for a seaside getaway. Called the Island Essentials Set, it includes 10 products, and several are from lesser-known but well-respected brands — sunscreen for the body and a body shimmer oil from Soleil Toujours, based in Bronxville, N.Y.; blotting sheets from the Japanese line Tatcha and a hair and body oil from the French company Leonor Greyl. The set retails for $300 and is available to purchase at the St. Regis Princeville, the Violet Grey boutique or online at VioletGrey.com.AdvertisementFOR PENINSULA CHICAGO GUESTS, A VAN GOGH TOUR-The Peninsula Chicago is giving its guests the chance to get an insider look at the highly anticipated exhibition “Van Gogh’s Bedrooms,” showcasing the artist’s trio of paintings of his bedroom as well as more than 30 of his other works; the show opened at the Art Institute of Chicago earlier this month and closes on May 8. Guests at the Peninsula can book a visit to the show through the hotel’s Keys to the City service, a program offering unique experiences in Chicago; they get private access to the museum before opening or after closing along with a private tour of the Van Gogh exhibition given by a senior lecturer in art history. The cost is $1,500 for up to 10 guests and exclusive of accommodations.AT AIRPORT CLUB, COCKTAILS ARE ON THE MENUCreative cocktails and eclectic eats are making a three-month appearance at the Virgin Atlantic Clubhouse at John F. Kennedy International Airport. The airline is collaborating with Employees Only, the Prohibition era-inspired cocktail bar in New York City, on three drinks and three dishes; the menu is available from February through April and is complimentary for Clubhouse guests. Cocktails include the Manhattan, made of Rittenhouse Rye, Italian vermouth, Grand Marnier and Angostura bitters; the West Side, made of lemon vodka, lemon juice and mint; and the Besos Calientes, which includes tequila, lime juice, grapefruit cordial and habanero bitters. The trio of savory dishes includes bone marrow poppers, Reuben croquettes and truffled grilled cheese.AdvertisementThe Clubhouse at Kennedy Airport is available to Virgin Atlantic’s Upper Class fliers and Flying Club Gold members; it is also open to Delta Air Lines passengers who are flying Delta One or are Diamond, Platinum or Gold Medallion members with same-day nonstop trans-Atlantic flights to and from Britain.A version of this article appears in print on February 28, 2016, on Page TR2 of the New York edition with the headline: Hotels: Catering to the Young.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »