

      By SHIVANI VORA

FEB. 25, 2016

Though what’s for sale in each varies from shoes to chocolate, these lesser-known shops are all French brands with names that locals rely on when shopping.
Related Article
The Bordeaux region in France is famous for producing some of the world’s most highly regarded red wines, but in the namesake riverfront city itself, travelers aren’t limited to imbibing. One of the attractions in the compact 18th-century historical center are the boutiques scattered along the crisscross picturesque streets lined with three- and four-story buildings on Bordeaux’s Left Bank near the famous Grand Théâtre de Bordeaux. Though what’s for sale in each varies from shoes to chocolate, these lesser-known shops are all French brands with names that locals rely on when shopping.Known for its durable and comfortable yet stylish footwear for men and women, this small established shoe chain has a devoted following throughout France. Many pairs are hand-sewn and made of leather like the women’s oxfords with a slight heel in a range of shades and the ankle lace-up boots for men, available in solid colors as well as combination hues like brown, red and navy — all in one shoe. Prices from 340 euros. 14, place des Grands Hommes, 33-5-5643-6600; heschung.com.Micheline Favreau-Cerrato, the elegant owner of this tiny perfume atelier, is usually on hand to help her customers find their ideal scent from among her selection of about 30 small European fragrance houses such as Caron from Paris. There’s also the bottle she created called L’eau de Bordeaux, an alluring blend with notes of bergamot and grapefruit. Prices from 13 euros (about $14.50). 10 bis allées de Tourny, 33-5-5679-2929, parfumerie-opera-bordeaux.fr.The irresistible aroma of fresh chocolate greets customers as soon as they set foot inside Bordeaux’s most revered chocolatier, opened in 1915. A small team of chefs makes the confections by hand daily in the kitchen underneath the store, and the many temptations include milk and dark chocolate bark studded with whole hazelnuts and almonds, and solid chocolate lollipops. The not-to-be-missed specialty is called le pavé — red wine-macerated raisins mixed with chocolate praline and rolled with cinnamon.Prices from 1 euro. 7, place Gambetta, 33- 5-5644-2149, darricau.com.This longtime fine foods and gifting establishment stocks a wide range of goods. There’s foie gras and coarse sea salt infused with red wine, both made in the surrounding countryside, and teas and olive oils from around the country. Most impressive of all, however, is the collection of vintage-inspired trays and tins with playful illustrations such as one of early 20th-century children relishing ice cream cones. Prices from 1.5 euros. 68, rue des Remparts, 33-5-5644-8863.Named after its founder, Petrusse Reynen, this Bordeaux-based brand stocks a collection of scarves and shawls for both genders inspired by Ms. Reynen’s travels to India. The pieces are made with high-quality silk, cashmere, virgin wool and linen. While many are in rich colors like deep red and have flower, paisley or other prints, there are also more subtle options such as scarves for men in solid hues, including soft green and cream. Prices from 60 euros. 8, allées de Tourny, 33-5-5652-0202, petrusse.com.Advertisement