
In Transit By                     
THE NEW YORK TIMES

JAN. 24, 2016
The snow may have stopped falling but the blizzard that brought travel in the Northeast to a standstill is still wreaking havoc on transportation and tourism. Here is how it is affecting your trip.More than 3,900 flights were canceled on Sunday and there have been more than 4,100 delays, according to FlightAware. More than 900 flights on Monday have already been canceled.That is largely because two of the three major airports with service to Washington, D.C., Reagan National and Dulles, were still not operating on Sunday, and though Baltimore-Washington International was open, it had extremely limited service.All three of the airports serving New York City, Newark, La Guardia, and Kennedy are open but more than 950 outbound and more than 900 inbound flights at those airports were canceled on Sunday and more than 200 outbound and 140 inbound flights have been canceled on Monday, so passengers are urged to check with their airlines to see if they are up-and-running.AdvertisementAnd the Philadelphia International Airport slowly resumed on Sunday but cautioned that many carriers were not flying there.AdvertisementAmerican Airlines was the carrier with the most cancellations on Sunday. It canceled all flights to Baltimore and the three New York-area airports. The carrier plans to resume those flights Monday as well as those to Dulles and Reagan. It restored very limited service to Philadelphia on Sunday. American is waiving fees for itinerary changes on flights scheduled throughAnd United Airlines expects to gradually resume service at the airports serving Washington, D.C., on Monday. It said it would resume limited operations on Sunday at its Newark hub and other New York airports. United will waive fees for flight changes in affected areas through Tuesday.Delta will waive change fees on flights through Monday. The carrier restarted operations at Kennedy Airport on Sunday and at Philadelphia’s airport as well.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.There were extensive travel delays and cancellations beyond the areas struck by the blizzard. American, JetBlue and United and Delta have listed on their websites the destinations for which they will waive fees for changes and cancellations.Amtrak halted service this Sunday between Washington, D.C., and Virginia destinations and between Washington, D.C., and stations in the Southeast. On Monday, its Acela Express and Northeast Regional service between Boston and Washington, D.C., will be among the routes on which it is operating on a modified schedule. It asks passengers to consult its site for schedule information.The travel ban in New York has been lifted but Greyhound says to expect cancellations or extensive delays.Many of the specials that had been on offer to guests stranded by the storm are expiring. But In New York, the Loews Regency Hotel’s special snow rate from $229 a night ends on Sunday (book using the code SNOW to get the deal).If you do happen to be still stuck in New York, there is entertainment to be had. Broadway theaters will be performing shows, and major museums, including the Metropolitan Museum of Art, and the American Museum of Natural History, are open.In Washington, D.C., however, the Smithsonian museums and National Zoo remain closed. Though presumably Tian Tian is still having fun in the snow.Elaine Glusac contributed reporting.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »