AdvertisementSupported byCheck InBy Adam H. GrahamFrom $149This 200-room Starwood hotel opened in April 2015 as part of a major revitalization of Jekyll Island, Georgia’s historic barrier island 25 miles from the Florida border. The five-story hotel’s boxy exterior is generic. But inside, the modernist décor is warm, with a cavernous lobby featuring glassy fireplaces, sea-green carpets and driftwood sculptures. Bellhops were absent during my arrival to assist with bags, and service from the reception staff was uneven.The Westin is only the second hotel to open on Jekyll Island in the last 40 years and is part of a new “beach village,” with a frozen yogurt shop, convenience store, pub and shops. The hotel itself is parked on the beach overlooking the Atlantic and surrounded by dunes and tall sea oats. A convention center, golf course and turtle rehabilitation center are a 20-minute walk away. Savannah is a 90-minute drive; Jacksonville, an hour away. The island was recently evacuated during Hurricane Matthew, but hotel officials said the property suffered only minor damage, because of the island’s natural dune barrier, and reopened three days after the storm passed.I booked a Grand Deluxe room, a notch above a basic unit. Even though the hotel occupancy was low the December night I stayed, I was given a cramped room with no ocean view. There was no bathtub and only one queen bed instead of two, which I’d booked. The room, at least, was tasteful with dark wood trim, beveled mirrors and a beige carpet. The “Heavenly Bed,” which Westin promotes, was dressed in quality white sheets and a duvet, but was no more comfortable than most beds of this hotel category. The room came with a Mr. Coffee maker and plenty of plugs with USB outlets. After calling reception twice to ask if I was in the right room, they asked me if I wanted a free upgrade to an oceanfront room, which was slightly bigger. I did. Several fees were levied during my one-night stay including an annoying resort fee of $15, an 11 percent tax, an additional $5 city tax and a $6 entrance fee to the island. A catalog selling everything from the sheets to showerheads felt more crude than savvy.For a new hotel, the bathroom showed a lot of wear, with nicks and cracks in the wall, the mirror and the brown and beige vertical tilework. There was one small sink and white tea-scented bath products. While there was a nice rain showerhead, the “Heavenly Bath Tub” in my upgraded room was plastic and felt cheap.There was a fitness studio and a small outdoor pool. Beach chair and umbrella rentals cost $30 a day for two guests.The Reserve is an elegant beachfront dining room with glowing lanterns and a small terrace overlooking the dunes. Its menu features healthy options like kale chicken salads and beet smoothies and popular local classics like fried shrimp and sweet Vidalia onion straws. Salty’s is a casual poolside cafe serving burgers, wings and daiquiris, while a rooftop bar offers small plates and upscale cocktails on weekends. The breakfast buffet is a pricey $18. Room service, available 24/7, promptly delivered a tasty grilled chicken salad, grilled cheese sandwich and onion rings.While Jekyll Island’s quiet beach and secluded dunes are relaxing and lend inspiration to the hotel’s interior design, the constant nickel-and-diming and heavy sales pitch for products detract from an otherwise tranquil spot.Westin Jekyll Island, 110 Ocean Way, Jekyll Island, Ga., 912-635-4545; westinjeklyyisland.comAdvertisement