AdvertisementSupported byBy Elaine GlusacThe winter storm that has hit the East Coast this weekend has scrambled travel plans, leading to 10,850 flight cancellations and more than 5,000 delays since Friday, according to FlightAware. Airlines, ground transportation providers, hotels and attractions are all adjusting their schedules and policies. The following is what’s happening so far.Flights to and from Philadelphia International Airport have been canceled on Saturday. The three major Washington, D.C., airports, Washington Dulles International, Reagan National and Baltimore-Washington International, are not operating flights. And all three New York airports, La Guardia, J.F.K. and Newark, have canceled flights.The flight delays and cancellations have rippled across the country. Airports from Chicago’s O’Hare to Los Angeles International are experiencing significant delays, according to Flightstats.com. Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport was the hardest hit beyond the Northeast, with flights leaving an average 43 minutes late on Saturday.American Airlines was the hardest hit of the carriers, cancelling almost one third of its flights Saturday (896 flights) and a total of 1,720 flights Friday and Saturday.American Airlines canceled all flights to, from and through Charlotte Douglas International Airport  on Friday and plans to resume limited operations on Saturday afternoon. It has canceled all flights to and from all three major New York area airports, including Newark. It plans to resume operations at those airports Sunday. United has been affected as well and has canceled all its operations at Newark Airport, one of its hubs, and plans to resume them on Sunday.Most airlines are encouraging passengers slated to travel this weekend to rebook rather than wait out a cancellation at an airport. To do so, they are waiving the normal fees for booking changes. Passengers whose flights are canceled are entitled to a refund from their carrier.American, Delta, United, JetBlue, Southwest and others have announced fee waivers for rebooking in select cities Jan. 22 to 24.Amtrak is operating a modified schedule in the Northeast this weekend. Among cancellations, the Cardinal train from New York to Chicago is canceled for Saturday, and the Crescent from New York to New Orleans will not operate Friday or Saturday. Other cancellations will be listed on Amtrak’s website; its refund and exchange policy is found here.Megabus has canceled many East Coast routes for Jan. 22 and 23 and says it has notified affected travelers via email. Passengers booked on Megabus this weekend can log onto the site with their reservation number, email address and credit card used to make the booking to determine if their trip is canceled.Greyhound canceled service between New York and Washington, Philadelphia and Norfolk, Va.; Philadelphia and Washington and Pittsburgh; Washington and Richmond, Va., and Pittsburgh; Richmond and Fayetteville and Charlotte, N.C., and Knoxville, Tenn.; Columbus, Ohio, and Charlotte; Baltimore and Atlantic City; and Norfolk and Virginia Beach. Passengers will be rebooked on the next available bus once service resumes.While hotel airports are likely to fill with stranded passengers, hotels in some affected areas are reacting to the storm with deals. The Omni Homestead Resort in Hot Springs, Va., is offering all in-house guests a rate of $99 a night to stay past their scheduled departure in order to avoid travel during the storm.In Washington, the Jefferson hotel is offering 20 percent off room rates Jan. 22 to 24. And the Embassy Row Hotel, a Destination Hotel, is offering rooms for $99 a night, including Wi-Fi, to those using the booking code JONAS.In New York, the Loews Regency Hotel is offering a special snow rate from $229 a night on Friday, Saturday and Sunday nights (book using the code SNOW to get the deal). The hotel will entertain guests in-house with games available in the bar, coloring books and crayons for children and adults, cocktail deals and two loaner sleds for guests to use in Central Park. The hotel has had about $15,000 in cancellations over the past two days.More staycation incentives from Sixty SoHo hotel: 25 percent off rates this weekend.The Gregory hotel in Herald Square and the Renwick in Midtown are waving cancellation fees this weekend and are offering extended checkouts, extra blankets fireside in the lobby and free hot cider on Saturday and Sunday.More deals in New York include: The Hyatt Times Square is offering 15 percent off rooms today until Sunday by using this link and signing up for My Hyatt loyalty program. Rates start at $144. The Royalton near Bryant Park is offering rooms from $199 with free Wi-Fi, late checkout and complimentary cocktails (use the booking code SNOWDAYSANCTUARY).In Arlington, Va., the Ritz-Carlton, Pentagon City is offering weekend rates from $189 including parking, breakfast for two and in-room movies. The Ritz-Carlton Washington, D.C. is offering rooms from $249.In Boston, the XV Beacon is offering 15 percent off rates this weekend.Marriott International is waiving fees for all weather-related cancellations. Still, travelers are better off informing their hotels and asking for a fee waiver rather than letting the automatic penalty for a no-show to kick in.Virgin Hotels in Chicago issued the following statement: “Our general policy is that if you let us know that you need to cancel, no sweat. But if you don’t let us know, then there is a charge of one night of your reservation rate plus tax.”In Washington, national park visitor facilities overseen by the National Capital Regional Office, including sites on the National Mall, President’s Park at the White House, Harpers Ferry National Historical Park in West Virginia and along the George Washington Memorial Parkway, closed at noon Eastern Friday. The Washington Monument, like others on the National Mall, will be closed until at least Monday, Jan. 25, and will not be staffed by rangers, though U.S. Park Police will be on duty. Restrooms around the National Mall will also be closed.Arlington National Cemetery will be closed to visitors Saturday and Sunday. Arlington House, the Robert E. Lee Memorial, closed Friday morning and will remain closed through Sunday.In New York, there is a travel ban, and many attractions are closed, including the city’s public libraries, zoos and aquarium. The city has suspended bus service, and has halted service on above-ground subways.And Broadway theaters, which throughout much of the day had planned for its shows to go on, announced that all shows were canceled on Saturday, the Broadway League said.Advertisement