By ALYSON KRUEGERAUG. 23, 2017
When Veronica Hershey was planning a trip to Las Vegas, her friend told her about an unadvertised suite at the El Cortez Hotel and Casino.It was the former penthouse of Jackie Gaughan, a famed Las Vegas casino owner with eccentric taste. After a renovation, the owners decided to preserve the 2,700-square-foot space in his honor. The bathroom has a pink marble tub with gold swan faucets. The living room walls and floor are upholstered. There is a romper room covered with oversize shag pillows. It was recently used as the set for one of Ellie Goulding’s music videos.The hotel considers this suite a gem but doesn’t promote it. It isn’t even listed as an offering. Rather, it’s kept under wraps, available only to guests who learn it exists through word of mouth and request it.Intrigued by “the secret factor,” Ms. Hershey selected it for her trip. “The experience was outstanding,” she said. “The room was immaculate with two living rooms, full kitchen and even a retro wet bar. I was torn between telling everyone I know or just keeping the secret for myself.”AdvertisementWhile ordering off-menu items has become trendy among knowing foodies, few travelers realize that they can do something similar when they book a hotel room. Across the globe, many properties have accommodations that are hidden from everyone except those clued in to their existence. The hotels use them as a way to delight valued guests or generate buzz.AdvertisementMany of these rooms, like the Jackie Gaughan suite, have exceptional histories or aesthetics.At the Warwick New York in Manhattan, there is a corner suite named after Cary Grant, who lived there for 12 years. From the hallway, it resembles any other room. Inside, guests find a wraparound terrace and wood furnishings and floral curtains similar to what Mr. Grant, or other famous guests like the Beatles, would have enjoyed. Many people learn about the room from previous guests; it can be booked by contacting Angela Calabrese, the director of reservations. “This is what hospitality is all about,” she said, “having some secrets we only share with our special guests.”Union Station Hotel in Nashville has Room 711, where a ghost named Abigail is said to linger. The property was once a train station, and according to one legend, Abigail threw herself in front of a train there after losing her lover in World War II. While the rest of the hotel has a modern, chic design, this room comes with antique furnishings like a four-poster bed and artwork inspired by her tale.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Only guests who know about this legend request to stay in her room. It’s a selling point, said Kate Thompson, the director of sales and marketing. “What better way to intrigue and delight guests than give them an unexpected twist on the experience.”Other secret rooms come with features or amenities unavailable to other guests.Ed Valente, a financial services professional who splits his time between São Paulo, Brazil, and Milan, visited the Uxua Casa Hotel and Spa in Trancoso, Brazil, almost a dozen times before learning there was a private, unlisted villa. It was offered to him when the hotel was fully booked, and he was surprised by not only its existence but also its near invisibility to other guests (it is inside a garden). “When you come and go, you almost feel like you’re popping out of nowhere,” Mr. Valente said.Named Casa Frozina after a beloved local who called it home, the villa comes with an outdoor hot tub, a spacious veranda, a garden with sofas and hammocks, and furnishings made by a local artisan. Guests staying there even get access to a camouflaged path that leads to the town square.Suite 5000 at Mandarin Oriental, New York features a private art collection, a Swarovski crystal wall, a curated record collection and floor-to-ceiling views of Central Park. It, too, is available only to those who know about it (travelers can request it when they call to make a reservation).Once guests land one of these secret rooms, most face the dilemma of whether to keep them secret. Should they boast about their experience on social media or retain the intrigue for future guests? “Honestly, I try to keep it to myself,” Mr. Valente said. “After all, a secret should not be shared to many, only to those in the know.”A version of this article appears in print on August 27, 2017, on Page TR2 of the New York edition with the headline: Do You Want to Book a Secret?.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »