By CONCEPCIÓN DE LEÓNNOV. 20, 2017
After decades of decline, largely as a result of the collapse of the auto industry, a bankruptcy settlement has allowed Detroit to begin rebuilding. Here are three books that trace the city’s past and present.THE TURNER HOUSEBy Angela Flournoy341 pp. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. (2015)In this family epic about 13 siblings and their ailing matriarch, Viola, Flournoy alternates the narrative primarily between Cha-Cha, the eldest sibling, and Lelah, the youngest. When we meet them, Viola has moved in with Cha-Cha, and the family must decide what to do with the empty house she left behind. It is 2008, and Detroit is plagued by a housing crisis — the Turners’ home is worth about a tenth of the $40,000 mortgage. Cha-Cha is grappling with inappropriate feelings for his psychologist and Lelah with an addiction to gambling. Through flashbacks, readers also learn about the generations of family secrets that have been kept hidden. Our reviewer compared Flournoy to Gabriel García Márquez for her introduction of an abundance of characters and the hint of magical realism in the novel, writing also that Flournoy “gets at the universal through the patient observation of one family’s particulars.”BLACK DETROITA People’s History of Self-DeterminationBy Herb Boyd416 pp. Amistad/HarperCollins Publishers. (2017)In a book spanning more than three centuries, Boyd (whom our reviewer called Detroit’s “griot”) tells the city’s history from French trading outpost to auto manufacturing hub to a symbol for urban decline, but he places black people at the center of it all. Boyd guides us through a number of social movements that flourished in Detroit — abolitionism, union organizing and civil rights, for instance. He introduces a wide range of characters, including enslaved Africans, the founders of the city’s first black newspaper, the first black congressman, and many more. His book culminates in his account of the black power era in the 1960s, of which Detroit was a prominent home. Despite Detroit’s current state of crisis, black Detroiters “have been steadfast in their resolve and optimistic about the future,” wrote Boyd.DETROIT RESURRECTEDTo Bankruptcy and BackBy Nathan Bomey297 pp. W.W. Norton & Company. (2016)According to our reviewer, this book is “the most thoroughly reported account of the largest municipal bankruptcy in American history.” Bomey, who reported for The Detroit Free Press during the bankruptcy, writes about why the city went broke, chalking it up to fiscal mismanagement and a reliance on Wall Street to foot the bill; he also details the particulars of the debt negotiations and how they gave the city hope for resurrection. There was disagreement over whether certain city-owned assets, such as valuable works from the Detroit Institute of Arts, should be liquidated, and what to do about the billions owed to retired city workers in pensions and health care benefits. But the deal worked out favorably, and for once, wrote our reviewer, Detroit “seemed to catch all the breaks.”An earlier version of this article misspelled the surname of the author of “The Turner House.” It is Angela Flournoy, not Fluornoy.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.