
In Transit By                     
SHIVANI VORA

APRIL 13, 2016
In the world of travel, April 18 — this year’s deadline for filing tax returns — is an incentive for hotels to create packages to lure guests who might be feeling flush with extra cash. According to Nancy Millett, the global consumer business tax leader for Deloitte, many taxpayers get a refund because they don’t adjust their withholding to take into account their projected deductions and exemptions. “As a result, they get money back at the end of the year,” she said.Spending this money on travel is common, said Adam Weissenberg, the head of Deloitte’s travel, hospitality and leisure group. “Travel deals pegged to tax day may be gimmicky, but they benefit the travel industry because people are more willing to spend on trips when they have a pool of cash,” he said.Here are 10 offers designed with tax day in mind:The Danforth Inn in Portland, Me., has the File Your Taxes and Have a Drink package. It includes a two-night stay, a Champagne breakfast daily, a three-hour class on cocktail-making with the property’s mixologist, Trevin Hutchins, and a tasting dinner with cocktail pairings at the in-house restaurant, Tempo Dulu. Prices from $795.Fairmont Miramar Hotel & Bungalows in Santa Monica, Calif., is offering No Taxation Without Relaxation. Guests receive 15 percent off their room rate with a stay of at least two nights and a $100 resort credit per stay. Rooms from $389 a night.AdvertisementIt’s the Tax Day Hot Springs Detox at the Ted Turner-owned Sierra Grande Lodge & Spa in Truth or Consequences, N.M. The package includes three nights’ accommodations, nightly dinner for two at the Restaurant at Sierra Grande, a $300 spa credit, a spa robe per guest, two soaks per day per guest at the on-property hot springs and a guided half-day tour of the area. Bookable now for stays through May 31. Prices from $1,780.AdvertisementMarriott is offering Tax Day Savings in Washington, D.C., with up to 20 percent off regular rates at participating JW Marriott, Autograph Collection, Renaissance, Marriott, Courtyard and Residence Inn properties. Guests who stay three nights save 15 percent off their room rate; the savings is 20 percent with a four-night stay. The deal is valid for stays between May 26 and Sept. 5.Guests who make a reservation on Monday, April 18, for a future stay at the Time New York Hotel in New York City receive a 10 percent discount on room rates as well as a credit equivalent to the tax on their room to use at the hotel’s cocktail lounge, LeGrande. Book with the code Taxthat. Rooms from $199 a night.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Westin New York Grand Central in Manhattan isn’t charging guests tax with the Tax Is On Us promotion. Because lodging taxes in the city are around 15 percent daily, guests save that amount for each night they stay. Book online through May 17 for stays through the end of the year using the code Taxbrk. Rooms from $185 a night.At the Hyatt Regency Aruba Resort Spa and Casino, guests can book the “No Tax, Just Relax” package; included is a fifth free night, no room taxes, a $40 casino coupon and a free cocktail per person. Packages must be booked by April 25 for travel through Dec. 18. Rooms from $355 a night.Guests at the Avenue of the Arts Costa Mesa, a Tribute Portfolio Hotel in Costa Mesa, Calif., get a tax-free stay (an 11 percent daily savings) when they book a room before April 30, for a stay by June 30. Rooms from $199 a night.The Fearrington House Inn, a Relais & Chateaux property in Pittsboro, N.C., is offering the one-night Tax Day Getaway. The package includes accommodations, breakfast, a traditional afternoon tea, a three-course dinner at the Fearrington House Restaurant and a $25 gift card to use at any of Fearrington’s shops. Bookable now for stays through May 31. Rooms from $520 a night.With Royal Caribbean’s offer, travelers can book a tax-free cruise on sailings six nights or longer to the Bahamas, the Caribbean and round trip to the Mediterranean; this deal includes itineraries on the brand’s newest and biggest ship, Harmony of the Seas. The offer is valid April 14 to 18, for travel May 15 through March 31 next year.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »