AdvertisementSupported byPursuitsBy Chris WohlwendAs 8 a.m. approached on a spring Saturday, a crowd of 70 to 80 patiently waited outside the front door of a cafe in the hamlet of Breaux Bridge in the heart of Louisiana’s Cajun country. Inside, Cedryl Ballou & the Zydeco Trendsetters were finishing their sound-check as bartenders filled cups with Bloody Mary and mimosa mixers.As the door opened, the distinctive sounds of accordion and washboard announced that another zydeco breakfast had begun in this town along Bayou Teche.The dance floor began to fill with the first accordion runs and was packed by the start of the second tune. Many of the dancers had begun lining up outside as early as 6:30 a.m.Eggs, zydeco and dancing are a year-round Saturday morning tradition in Breaux Bridge, but on this particular morning in late April last year, the crowd also included a smattering of partyers from the Festival International de Louisiane in nearby Lafayette, including a group from the French-speaking Caribbean island of Martinique.The breakfast crowd is a microcosm of Louisiana’s culture, both Creole and Cajun, a culture heavily seasoned with zydeco music. And that is what the festival, which began in 1987, is about. Lafayette will welcome an estimated 300,000 revelers over five days, April 26 to 30, with the peak attendance on Friday and Saturday. The music will include zydeco along with its antecedents and influences from Africa, the Caribbean, Europe and Southeast Asia.So maybe the “let’s dance” mind-set is in the blood of Louisiana, a state with a long tradition of music and partying. The breakfast I witnessed was at the tiny Café des Amis, which closed late last year for renovations. So Buck & Johnny’s, a block or so away, quickly stepped up to host the breakfast every Saturday morning, year round.“It was important to Breaux Bridge that we keep the tradition going,” said Coatney Raymond, the managing partner of Buck & Johnny’s. “We weren’t doing breakfast before, so we had to develop a menu, and it’s turned out to be really popular. Our specialty is Italian, so we have things like the Ti-Na-Na, a special pizza with boudin sausage, along with a crawfish étouffée grits dish.”Efforts were also made to cool the dance floor by tinting the windows and adding large ceiling fans. “Zydeco is part of our culture, and we want to make sure everyone who comes in has a great time,” she said.Having a good time was certainly the theme when I attended, whether the dancer was young or old, native Cajun or Creole, tourist or Gulf oil-rig worker maximizing shore leave.Dancing veterans favored cowboy boots — their leather soles and heels suited for the two-steps and waltzes of zydeco.What the revelers wore offered a glimpse into the variety of backgrounds and ages: boot-cut jeans and colorful swirling skirts; fancy sequined tops; silver-decorated belts; restrained pantsuits on the tourists; cowboy hats on men and women. And the shirts — some western-style, some polo-style, a couple had Hawaiian prints, and there were T-shirts with logos celebrating the Allman Brothers Band and the Doors, the Long Beach Yacht Club, the Museum of Modern Art and Northeastern University.Andy Miles, an oil worker who said he was “Cajun, Creole, Indian, Yankee, Italian and West Indian,” was visiting for the third time. Recognizing several other regulars, he ordered a double bourbon before joining them on the dance floor.Matt and Dana Segraves of New Orleans brought their daughter, Louisa, to her first zydeco breakfast. Only 18 months old, she, too, soon joined the dancing.I had been tipped to the breakfast tradition a couple of days earlier by Scott Feehan, then president of the festival and now its executive director, while I accompanied him as he directed the crew in final preparations. He rode around downtown Lafayette in a golf cart, fielding phone calls and troubleshooting.Though the festival’s full-time staff is only four people, with two seasonal additions, as festival time approaches they are joined by more than 2,600 volunteers.Mr. Feehan, whose day job is centered on his shop Scott’s Drum Center and the lessons he gives, is a native of the area, fluent in French and the music. While I was with him, he dealt with a concern over whether Scotch whisky had been ordered for the drink booths and with a panic about the estimated arrival time for the drums at the main stage — all while providing an escort for the truck pulling an office trailer to its temporary home in a parking lot.The festival began, Mr. Feehan explained, as part of an effort to revitalize Lafayette’s downtown. Like many midsize cities (population: 121,000), it was moribund by the mid-1970s. The plan was to work with other Francophone entities in Africa, Asia, the Caribbean and Europe. Sister-city agreements were reached, business and trade agreements were made, and sponsors were found so that attendance at the festival would be free.And the music and dancing began. By 2011, the crowd estimate was up to 300,000. And downtown Lafayette was once again vibrant year-round, with restaurants, clubs, art galleries and the kinds of retail businesses, such as shoe stores, that once defined city life.“In the festival’s first 10 years, downtown was rebuilt,” Mr. Feehan said.Official guests this year will represent 25 countries. Though a visitor might not be surprised to hear French as well as English, a keen ear could pick up accents that go beyond the native Cajun and Creole, possibly including dialects from Africa, Belgium, Cap d’Antibes, the Caribbean, Paris and Southeast Asia.Louisiana has long had a reputation for great music, starting with the ragtime and jazz of the late 1800s, all of it heavily influenced by Acadian and Creole backgrounds. Acadian — Cajun — brought in the European accordion, a frequent element of the emotion-laden French chanson, or song.The Creole contribution included blues and its call-and-response tradition from Africa.The party tradition goes back about a century, as the Creole people living in rural Louisiana set up “house dances” on Friday and Saturday nights. Furniture would be moved back and a two-person band — accordion and washboard — would be recruited to provide the music. The dancing would often go until daybreak.Everything came together with American make-do spirit, perhaps best exemplified by the frottoir, a Creole invention developed from the corrugated-metal washboard, and the primary rhythm instrument in zydeco.Herman Fuselier, who writes about entertainment and hosts a Saturday afternoon radio show called “Zydeco Stomp” on the local NPR affiliate, KRVS, points out that the instrumentation strikes many as unusual.“It takes a lot of people by surprise — an accordion used in music that sounds like blues, soul, rhythm and blues, even rap these days,” he said. “But it’s a big part of the music around here now.”Mr. Fuselier grew up in nearby Opelousas in an environment rich with music from Sinatra to zydeco. “I was a teenager in the disco era of the late ’70s,” he said. “Only my close friends knew I listened to zydeco; it was something just for old folks. But even the young musicians are into it now.”The New York writer and music producer Ted Fox agrees. “It’s always been a hybrid music,” he said, tracing his own introduction to Clifton Chenier, who died in 1987 and is credited with spreading the music beyond Louisiana and East Texas.Growing up in Brooklyn, Mr. Fox said, “I had been listening to rhythm and blues, but it sort of clicked when I first saw Clifton and how dynamic a performer he was.”But it was a sausage that brought Mr. Fox to Chenier and zydeco. He was traveling around the country in 1983, he said, writing about food, when he visited the area to sample boudin, the local rice and pork specialty. The food connection makes sense — zydeco itself is a corruption of the French term for snap beans: haricots.Mr. Fox then wrote about the music he heard for Audio magazine. “It was an incredible, vibrant, little-known scene, amazing to me,” he said. “I was totally enthralled.”On one trip, Mr. Fox met the accordionist Stanley Dural Jr., known as Buckwheat. “He really opened my eyes to the music,” Mr. Fox said. “We became great friends.”One thing led to another and Mr. Fox became the manager for Mr. Dural, whose stage name was Buckwheat Zydeco. Mr. Dural died in September after a fight with cancer, at age 68. This year’s festival lineup includes a tribute to him by his band, Il Sont Partis.Understandably, classic Louisiana cuisine is a major element of the festival — vendors feature jambalaya and étouffée, boudin and beignets, catfish and crawfish. Gumbo, the stew made from rice, seafood, chicken, andouille sausage, tomato and okra, is representative of south Louisiana culture.And zydeco is its musical counterpart. As Mr. Fuselier pointed out, today’s practitioners might incorporate many types of music into their playlists.Though the accordion is a European invention, Lafayette’s Martin family supplies many of the button-style instruments favored in zydeco and Cajun bands.Clarence Martin (“everybody calls me Junior”) taught himself how to make them by “just taking one apart,” he said. Now he and his brother Anthony produce about 200 a year.The Martin Accordions shop in north Lafayette is a popular stop for tour buses, with the family providing an hourlong show for tours that request them in advance. Featured is a history of the music, with examples expertly provided by Mr. Martin’s 31-year-old grandson, Joel, who first picked up the instrument when he was a toddler.For a frottoir, Lafayette visitors can call on Tee Don Landry, whose father, Willie Landry, made the first ones in 1946 with the pioneer washboard player Cleveland Chenier (Clifton’s brother), who got the idea of taking corrugated steel and elongating it with shoulder straps, freeing both hands for playing. Now, as the head of Key of Z Rubboards, the younger Mr. Landry makes and sells thousands worldwide.Traditional groups like the Red Hot Louisiana Band led by Clifton Chenier’s son, C. J., and Jeffery Broussard & the Creole Cowboys, are on the festival lineup this year, along with diverse acts including the new wave Tom Tom Club and the Louisiana country music star Marc Broussard.Last year’s festival began on a Wednesday night after a storm delay with an outdoor performance by Chubby Carrier, followed by Chris Ardoin. Both Mr. Carrier and Mr. Ardoin are descendants of zydeco accordion legends, and both mix up their sets, adding rhythm and blues and soul numbers to zydeco classics.Despite the downpour that resulted in flooding in many downtown streets last year, more than a thousand spirited dancers participated, most showing their own versions of the two-step.Area natives Shay Laporte and his friend Katie Frith did not let the weather keep them away. “We just love this culture,” Mr. Laporte said. “You can’t find this kind of stuff anywhere else.”According to Dancehalls, a brochure from the Lafayette Convention and Visitors Commission, visitors can find the live music year-round at more than two dozen sites. That was what brought at least one of the revelers to the area permanently. Near Mr. Laporte and Ms. Frith, an older dancer was impressing all with his moves.Tom Rippolon, 70, is a native New Yorker who moved to Lafayette 15 years ago. He was dressed for the occasion, wearing a bright yellow shirt, his long gray hair tied into a ponytail. When asked what drew him to Louisiana, he did not hesitate. “I’ve always been a dancer,” he said. “I really dance all the time and you can do that down here — these people are always dancing.”Carriage House Suites with outdoor pool and tennis courts. $200 to $350. 1100 Camellia Boulevard, Lafayette. cityclubatriverranch.com/carriage-house.Louisiana Cajun Mansion Bed and breakfast in a garden setting. Starting at $135. 4304 Decon Road, Youngsville (nine miles south of Lafayette). louisianacajunmansion.com.Pat’s Fisherman’s Wharf Restaurant in Henderson, a few miles north of Lafayette, is still run by the family that opened it in 1948. The waterfront complex includes the adjoining Atchafalaya Club, where up to 1,200 guests can dance to zydeco and Cajun bands. 1008 Henderson Levee Road. patsfishermanswharf.com.Buck & Johnny’s is in a converted car dealership in downtown Breaux Bridge. The menu features an eclectic mixture of Italian, Cajun and Creole. 100 Berard Street. buckandjohnnys.com.Chez Jacqueline includes traditional French cuisine as well as Cajun and Creole. Music on Saturdays. Closed Tuesdays. 114 East Bridge Street, Breaux Bridge. 337-277-4938.Pop’s Poboys in downtown Lafayette features the classic Louisiana sandwiches, adding variations such as Italian meatball and a take on a Cuban sandwich. 740 Jefferson Street. popspoboys.com.The Festival International de Louisiane festivalinternational.org.Martin Accordions, 2143 West Willow Street, Scott, La. martinaccordions.com.Advertisement