
Heads Up By                     
ROBERT SPUHLER

FEB. 23, 2016
The view from the Boulevard Pool at the Cosmopolitan of Las Vegas was breathtaking and ridiculous, a pairing the city knows well; the fourth-floor oasis sits above the Strip with sightlines to the fountain shows of the Bellagio and the Eiffel Tower model of Paris Las Vegas to the north and the signature golden lion of the MGM Grand to the south.But the Boulevard Pool now also has a different sight on many nights: a touring, buzzed-about music act, on a stage at its south end. Thanks to an emphasis on attracting new and younger visitors and an increased availability of bands touring the Southwest, Las Vegas is quickly becoming a destination for one-of-a-kind concert experiences featuring indie musicians and music festival favorites.Live music fans have long been at a loss here, especially those not interested in big-name headliners or past-their-prime lounge acts. The House of Blues at Mandalay Bay (houseofblues.com/lasvegas) was nearly the only major player in town for club- or theater-size touring bands since its introduction to the city in 1999. That began to change when the  Cosmopolitan (cosmopolitanlasvegas.com) opened in 2010, with its resort-wide emphasis on music on Las Vegas Boulevard, from multiple stages for live performances to more than 20 “audio zones,” with unique playlists as background music, scattered throughout the property.“We knew, based on the strategy we wanted to employ and the kind of guests we wanted to attract, that music was going to be a core component of how we were going to be different,” said Lisa Marchese, the former chief marketing officer for the Cosmopolitan.AdvertisementSince then, concert spaces have become major facets of development across the city. The Las Vegas outpost of the Brooklyn Bowl (vegas.brooklynbowl.com), with its 2,000-capacity concert venue, is an anchor tenant for Caesars Entertainment’s open-air shopping center, the LINQ. Caesars also renovated its theater at the Planet Hollywood Resort and Casino, the AXIS, to lure Jennifer Lopez and Britney Spears for long-term residencies. Even the Cosmopolitan had to do some retooling after opening: The resort found itself in need of a stage suited to a headline-size act, so it turned its Chelsea Ballroom into the Chelsea, a 3,500-capacity theater that hosted a Bruno Mars residency and a Lady Gaga/Tony Bennett New Year’s Eve show.The Chelsea is one of several places in the city that specialize in “underplays” — events for which a major band or performer plays in a space that is much smaller than usual. It can give an audience an intimate experience, one difficult to replicate in larger markets. In 2013 and 2014 on his “Moonshine Jungle” tour, Mars played major arenas like Madison Square Garden and the Barclay Center in Brooklyn, venues four to five times bigger than the Chelsea.AdvertisementMany of those bookings are related to Coachella, the trendsetting music festival held each April on a dusty polo field near Palm Springs in neighboring California. In 2012, the festival began running on two consecutive weekends, giving bands twice the audience but also a dead week in between. This has led many performers to head across the border to Las Vegas during that downtime; in 2015, more than 30 acts made the drive.The Cosmopolitan even runs its own mini-concert series, called “Valley to Vegas,” which in 2015 included festival acts like St. Vincent, Hozier and Interpol playing headliner-length sets in one of the resort’s major venues.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The cumulative effect now in Las Vegas is a sort of music festival for those who may not be able to tolerate music festivals: full sets by bands, plenty of downtime activities and, most important, indoor plumbing. For a middle-age writer like me, weary of fending off the elbows of intoxicated teenagers while keeping wind-whipped desert sand out of his eyes at Coachella, attending these shows in the city is a way to enjoy performances rather than merely survive them.Even Las Vegas nightclubs, long seen as high-profit ventures, are making way for live performance rooms. The SLS Hotel & Casino opened in 2014 with LiFE nightclub as its major attraction; it was home to the Las Vegas residency of the dance music superstar Steve Angello, and it routinely hosted world-touring D.J.s like Erick Morillo, Fedde Le Grand and Gareth Emery. Now, LiFE has turned into the Foundry (foundrylv.com), a 1,800-capacity venue which opened with performances by the electro-rock act Awolnation and the hip-hop legend Lil Wayne on Super Bowl weekend.“People want to feel like they’re seeing a form of entertainment, instead of spending $50 or $100 to walk into a nightclub,” said Matt Minichino, vice president for nightlife and entertainment at SLS. “There’s still a huge need for night life, but some people do want a little bit more for their entertainment dollar.”A version of this article appears in print on February 28, 2016, on Page TR4 of the New York edition with the headline: A New Way to Play Las Vegas.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »