
Check In By                     
INGRID K. WILLIAMS

FEB. 12, 2016
From about 150 euros, or $158 at $1.05 to the euro.The NH Collection Torino Piazza Carlina opened last winter in a 17th-century palazzo that was, in the early 1900s, the home of Antonio Gramsci, the politician who co-founded the Communist Party of Italy. The 160-room hotel is part of the NH Hotel Group but offers slightly more luxurious lodging than is typical for the Spanish-based brand, known for its basic rooms and moderate prices. The historic five-story property has been given some modern touches, like the futuristic light installation and artistic photo-collage that greet guests at reception. But many period details have been preserved, including beautiful stone mosaics in a large central courtyard surrounded by arcades, which are suggestive of the covered walkways called portici that hug miles of boulevards and vast piazzas around the city.Conveniently located in central Turin on the southeastern corner of Piazza Carlo Emanuele II, the hotel is equidistant from the Po River and the grand Piazza San Carlo. It’s a short walk to the train station, most museums and tourist attractions, as well as to the historic quarter’s many restaurants and aperitivo bars.My third-floor room was a study in Italian minimalism. Neutral hues and natural wood floors served as the backdrop for simple furnishings: a plum-colored armchair, a desk and desk chair, two bedside tables and the bed, which was actually two double beds pushed together. The walls were free of decorations or art; the only flourishes were a pile of Italian fashion magazines beside the bed, an enormous framed mirror on one wall, and a tray of minibar treats temptingly arranged on the desk. The ceilings were unusually high, and light streamed through the tall windows and glass-paned French doors, which opened onto a narrow balcony facing the central courtyard.Spacious and bright with white subway tile and hardwood floors, the bathroom had a generously sized, well-lit vanity and an array of NH-branded toiletries. There was also a bidet beside the toilet, a warming rack for towels and a large shower stall with sliding glass doors and both rainfall and hand-held showerheads.AdvertisementOn the top floor of the hotel, a wood-paneled atticlike space has been outfitted as a gym with equipment and cardio machines, some tucked in window alcoves. On the rooftop, two terraces offer panoramic views of the city, including the slim spire of Turin’s most recognizable landmark, the Mole Antonelliana. And off the lobby, a bar area is a cozy refuge with low-slung lounge chairs and a handsome cedar bar. In all public areas and rooms, there’s free Wi-Fi.An elegant, two-room restaurant serves traditional Piedmontese cuisine at lunch and dinner, and a daily breakfast buffet (included in my rate) is offered beside the courtyard, with tables set up nearby in the sunny arcade. Room service is available around the clock (five-euro delivery fee), with a menu that consisted mainly of simple salads, sandwiches and pastas. Breakfast can also be served in the room, and my order — a tray laden with pastries and rolls, muesli with yogurt, cappuccino and fresh orange juice — arrived promptly.AdvertisementA dash of history and tasteful design in a city-center location is a winning combination, whatever your political affiliation.NH Collection Torino Piazza Carlina, Piazza Carlo Emanuele II, 15, Turin; 39-011-860-1611; nh-collection.com/hotel/nh-collection-torino­-piazza-carlina.A version of this article appears in print on February 14, 2016, on Page TR4 of the New York edition with the headline: Minimalism, With a Dash of History.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »