By SHIVANI VORAJUNE 7, 2016
Airport security lines are so long that hundreds of fliers at several airports have reported missing their flights, and the head of the Transportation Security Administration recently warned passengers to continue to expect delays over the summer. While signing up for T.S.A. Precheck, a program that makes preflight risk assessments, is the most common piece of advice to fliers looking to shorten their waits, there are other ways, according to Michael Holtz, the owner of SmartFlyer, a global travel consultancy specializing in airfare. Below, he shares his tips for speeding through airport screening.Pick the Shorter Line. Mr. Holtz said that most airports have two security areas. “One of the areas is usually far more crowded than the other because there are more flights going out of the gates near it,” he said. “Seek out the security screening point that’s less busy. You’ll likely have to walk farther to get to your gate once you get past security, but you’ll save time not being held up at security.”Navigate the Security Line as You Would a Crowded Bar. Actually getting in an airport security line can waste precious time, he said. “There is usually a bottleneck at the beginning of the line because passengers are fumbling around trying to find their IDs and boarding passes, but have yours out and ready to go, and navigate your way to the front of this crowd like you do at a bar when you want to order a drink,” he said. Also, another time saver, he said: If you have a boarding pass on your email, take a screenshot of it just in case the Wi-Fi signal at the airport is weak and you can’t load it.Pick Your Flight Times Wisely. During the weekdays, avoid travel early in the morning or from 5 to 8 p.m., Mr. Holtz said, because these are the hours when business travelers tend to fly. Also, Saturdays, in general, are a good day to fly to many destinations because leisure travelers usually head out for their trips on Fridays and return on Sundays, and there is limited business travel.AdvertisementPay the Airlines. For fliers with a more flexible budget, Mr. Holtz said that a handful of carriers in the United States have fee-based programs that help travelers whisk through airport security. Delta, for example, has a separate entrance that is part of Terminal 5 at Los Angeles International Airport where Delta One (business class) passengers can check in and are led through expedited security via a private elevator.American Airlines has a Five Star Service program for first- and business-class customers; it’s available in 12 domestic airports and five international airports. For a starting price of $250 for the first adult and $75 for each additional adult, services include a curbside meet and greet and priority security screening, where available.AdvertisementJetBlue’s program is more affordable: Passengers flying out of more than 60 domestic airports can buy an Even More Speed add-on to their ticket for $10, which gives them access to expedited security lanes. The expedited security perk also comes with an Even More Space ticket for a roomier seat.A version of this article appears in print on June 12, 2016, on Page TR2 of the New York edition with the headline: How to Zip Through Airport Security.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.