AdvertisementSupported byThe GetawayBy Stephanie RosenbloomPractically every major airline and hotel loyalty program has recently changed or is on the road to being upended, be it the new American Airlines award chart, which went into effect on March 22, or a potential merger of the Starwood Preferred Guest and Marriott Rewards programs.Yet the travel industry is rife with other rewards and membership programs — offerings that don’t get as much attention but can make a trip cheaper and easier. That independent boutique hotel you love? It may be part of a program you’ve never heard of that could earn you free stays. From receiving early check-in at your hotel, to spending a layover in a lounge with a glass of wine instead of with a crowd at an airport gate, here are some lesser-known programs that deserve a closer look.Leaders Club This membership program for the Leading Hotels of the World, which is made up of over 375 luxury hotels in 75 countries, comes at a price: $150 a year for the introductory level membership. But that includes breakfast for two each day of your stay, Internet access, a room upgrade (depending on availability at check-in), early check-in and late checkout (depending on availability), a welcome gift, exclusive rates on Leading Hotels, and the ability to earn one free night at participating hotels for every five stays. There are some knockout luxury hotels in the program, such as Le Bristol Paris and the Ciragan Palace Kempinsky in Istanbul. The program’s highest membership tier, Unlimited Level, $1,200 a year, allows you to earn free nights faster (every four stays instead of five), and it includes all of the above as well as free airport transfers (in certain cities) to your hotel, three free one-year Leaders Club memberships to share with family members, a free Priority Pass membership (see below for details about the program) and guaranteed late checkout at 4 p.m. Lhw.com/leaders-club.Stash Hotel Rewards This program is much smaller and includes a range of independent hotels in the United States, including Hawaii, the Caribbean and Panama, such as Beach House in Turks and Caicos and the Honua Kai Resort & Spa in Hawaii. But it’s free to join and members earn five points per dollar spent, which can then be used toward free nights at participating hotels. And there are no blackout or expiration dates. A recent search found that a standard room at the Sunset Marquis in Los Angeles on a Saturday in May was $315, or 29,166 Stash points. Another search found a “classic room” midweek in June at the Kennebunkport Inn in Maine for $209 a night or 16,362 Stash points. Stashrewards.com.Think you know all the tricks for getting the lowest airfare and the most out of your miles programs? Test your knowledge, based on Stephanie Rosenbloom’s weekly Getaway column.iPrefer Members of this program for Preferred Hotels and Resorts receive perks at the brand’s more than 600 hotels, including a number of luxury properties, in more than 85 countries, be it the Stafford London; the Ohla Ciutat Vella in Barcelona, Spain; or the Royal Palm Hotel Galapagos. It’s one of the largest such programs and it’s free to join. Benefits include free Internet, a room upgrade when available, early check-in and late checkout when available, and points for stays. Members receive 10 points for each dollar spent for a stay; Elite members (those who earn 50,000 points within one year of their membership anniversary date) receive 15 points for each dollar spent for a stay as well as a welcome gift such as a bottle of wine, chocolates or a resort credit. Points can be redeemed not only for free stays, but also for spa services and dining. Preferredhotels.com/iprefer.Hotels.com Rewards When it comes to online booking rewards programs, many travelers think of Expedia and Priceline. Hotels.com also has a program, which includes some 235,000 hotels. It’s free to join and members receive one “rewards night” for each night they stay. Once they amass 10 rewards nights, they receive a free night at an eligible hotel. The value of that free night is equal to the average rate of the 10 nights you stayed to earn it — in other words, if you stay 10 nights at a hotel akin to a Best Western, don’t expect to get a free night at the likes of a Park Hyatt. If a hotel you want to book costs more per night than your free night, you can still use it toward the more expensive room and pay the difference. If you redeem for a night of lesser value, however, you forfeit the difference. Hotels.com.Priority Pass This isn’t a loyalty program, but it’s worth considering if you’re a lounge lover without elite status on a particular airline, or if you fly a lot but tend to use different airlines. Priority Pass is an independent airport lounge program that gives members access to more than 850 lounges around the world — no matter which airline they happen to be flying. You’ll find the lounges in major airports, including Chicago O’Hare International Airport, Narita International Airport in Tokyo, and Heathrow Airport in London. The standard membership is $99 a year plus $27 for each visit; “standard plus” membership is $249, which includes 10 free visits a year and then costs $27 a visit thereafter; and “prestige” membership is $399 a year for unlimited free visits. You may bring a guest into the lounge, but the fee is $27, regardless of your membership level. While that may sound pricey to those who don’t use lounges, the $399 membership is a good buy compared with the cost of membership in just one major airline’s club. For instance, an individual membership to Delta Sky Club is $450 a year (plus $29 if you want to bring in a guest). An “executive membership,” which includes unlimited visits for the member and up to two guests per visit, is $695 a year. Note: American Express Platinum card members can receive a free Priority Pass membership. PriorityPass.com.Thanks Again Members of this airport rewards program can earn points when they shop, park and dine at certain retailers in and around over 100 airports worldwide, including New York City area airports like Newark Liberty International and John F. Kennedy International. It’s free to join; members just register their existing American Express, MasterCard or Visa card, which they can then pair with a rewards program such as Hilton HHonors or United MileagePlus. When they spend at a participating airport business, they receive points or miles for each dollar spent. How many they receive depends on things such as the retailer, and how much they spend. An app allows you to see where and how many miles or points you can earn. Thanksagain.com.Uber The ubiquitous car service isn’t just a way to get home after late-night high jinks. It has a partnership with Starwood Hotels and with American Airlines. For every dollar you spend using Uber, you’ll receive 1 Starpoint after linking your Starwood and Uber accounts (and using Uber during a hotel stay earns even more points). American Airlines frequent fliers have a limited window for racking up points: If you have an AAdvantage Aviator MasterCard and use it to pay for your Uber rides, you can earn two additional bonus miles for every dollar spent through July 31. Uber.com.Advertisement