
In Transit By                     
THE NEW YORK TIMES

SEPT. 2, 2016
A New Trip to Saudi ArabiaMountain Travel Sobek has just announced its first trip to Saudi Arabia. The nine-day trip, running Dec. 1 to 9, is a rare opportunity to tour the kingdom with an operator from the United States. The culture-focused trip visits Mada’in Saleh, a lesser-visited counterpart to Petra, Jordan, in the Nabatean kingdom with its own architecture carved into rocks, as well as the Murabba Palace, Fort Masmak and the National Museum in Riyadh, and the red rock canyons of Al Ula. There’s a strong element of adventure to the four days spent in the Rub al Khali, or the Empty Quarter, considered the largest sand desert in the world. Travelers cross the dunes in four-wheel-drive vehicles and sleep in tents in desert camps. The trip, led by Mountain Travel Sobek’s chief executive, Kevin Callaghan, and the Saudi Arabia travel specialist Brid Beeler costs $11,195 a person. ELAINE GLUSACTours by Air in AlaskaFloatplanes are a vital mode of transportation in Alaska, where even the state capital, Juneau, is inaccessible by road. Considered the busiest seaplane airport in the world, Lake Hood Seaplane Base in Anchorage handles more than 400 aircraft on a busy summer day. Regal Air, which operates from Lake Hood, is now holding a “Talk on the Dock” Q. and A. session with its bush pilots at the Lakefront Anchorage hotel on Lake Hood every Wednesday, Friday, Saturday and Sunday at 6:30 p.m. until Sept. 15. After the 20-minute talk, which is free, travelers have the option of taking a 15-minute tour over Anchorage in a five-passenger floatplane for $30 a person. The program is open to the public, but rooms, for those interested in watching more takeoffs and landings, start at $199. ELAINE GLUSACA Museum for Derek Walcott in Saint LuciaTo commemorate the talents of the Nobel-Prize winner Derek Walcott, the poet’s childhood home in Castries, Saint Lucia, has become a museum.The two-level home houses Mr. Walcott’s many watercolor paintings as well as exhibit photographs of his childhood and decades-long career. Called Walcott’s Place, the pale yellow house with white trim is at the intersection of Chaussee Road and Grasse Street. Located a few blocks from the home of the Nobel-Prize winning economist Sir Arthur Lewis, the museum also honors Mr. Walcott’s twin brother who died in 2000, Roderick, who was a playwright and theater director.The home has served as a reference point for many poems by Mr. Walcott, including his epic work, “Omeros.” A studio space for art and writing workshops will be completed in a few years.Suggested donations are $5 for adults and $2 for children under 12. CHARU SURIWe’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »