AdvertisementSupported byFrugal TravelerBy Lucas PetersonTechnology has changed the way we travel, from lodging to flight information. But it can also save us money on planning and beyond.Lucas Peterson, our Frugal Traveler columnist, joined our readers for a Facebook discussion on these topics, suggesting tools and techniques for the budget-conscious traveler.Here are a few tips from that chat — read it in full on our Facebook page.1. To Save, Try SIM CardsOverseas phone plans can be complicated and expensive. The Frugal Traveler recommends giving SIM cards a shot. Stop into a local carrier’s shop and get one — just make sure your phone is unlocked first. If you’re planning to visit several countries in one trip, you may want to get an all-in-one card (like this one, good in Europe) for a slight premium.2. When to Buy a Ticket? There’s a Tool For ThatKayak.com offers a “fare predictor” that can give you a general sense of when to buy your plane tickets. If you’re stuck at the last minute, don’t despair: We’ve got tips for that scenario, too. Try Priceline.com — though you’ll need to be flexible in your options.3. Keeping Track of Multiple Destinations Is DoableThe Frugal Traveler likes Skyscanner.com for a few reasons. It offers price alerts, but it can also give you options if you aren’t sure of your exact destination (or have vague parameters, like “cheap and warm”). A reader also recommended Kiwi.com for this scenario.4. Is Airbnb Your Best Bet? Depends on Who Are You.Business travelers, for example, will likely want certain reliable amenities that Airbnb doesn’t always provide (24-hour check-in, reliable Wi-Fi). Hotels can be just as good of a deal at the last-minute — and might be easier in some respects (no meeting up to exchange keys, for example).5. For an Overseas Power Source, Go SmallWhat device is essential to powering and charging overseas? The Frugal Traveler likes the tiny Anker charger.Read more tips from the Frugal Traveler — and readers — on the chat’s Facebook thread.Advertisement