By SHIVANI VORAJAN. 15, 2016
There are not a lot of Indian hotel chains with international recognition, but Oberoi Hotels and Resorts in New Delhi is an exception. The family-run company has 30 properties, mostly within the country but also in locations like Bali, Mauritius and Dubai. It also operates two small cruise ships on the Nile River in Egypt.Oberoi is best known for its four especially luxurious Vilas resorts. These replicas of historical buildings and palaces, all in India, include Udaivilas in Udaipur, Rajvilas in Jaipur, Amarvilas in Agra and Vanyavilas, which is a short drive from Ranthambore National Park in Rajasthan. A fifth, Sukhvilas, is to open this summer or early fall near Chandigarh, in the north.Oberoi’s executive chairman, Prithvi Raj Singh Oberoi, 86, developed the Vilas properties and is in charge of expanding the more than 70-year-old business. Below are edited excerpts from a conversation with him.Q. How did your family get into the hospitality business?A. In 1934 my father, Raj Bahadur Mohan Singh Oberoi, bought a property called the Clarkes Hotel in Shimla, which is in the Himalayas and is still open. He got the idea to start the Oberoi brand in 1943. At the time, there were very few nice hotels in India, and he wanted to build and operate luxury properties. We didn’t want to be the biggest, but we had to be the best.AdvertisementWhat can travelers expect when they stay at an Oberoi?Tastefully decorated rooms that are never gaudy, good food and excellent service. We hire our staff carefully and spend several months training them, and our philosophy is that we will do anything for our guests, without being overbearing.AdvertisementThe Vilas properties have been particularly successful for your company. What makes them different from a standard Oberoi, and what will Sukhvilas be like?We opened the first one in 1997, and they are resorts built on large pieces of land and stand out because of their extensive gardens. Also, they have no more than 100 rooms each, and since maintaining them is a big undertaking, they have more staff than our city hotels, which makes them more luxurious as well. Sukhvilas is on 20 acres of land next to a 400-acre forest. Its spa will be a big focus, offering both Western and ayurvedic treatments.Several other upscale properties in the same locations as the Vilas are in historic buildings or palaces. Since there is no shortage of these in India, why did you build the Vilas from the ground up?We did look at historic buildings, and found that most were not suitable to convert into a luxury hotel, because the government has restrictions on what you can do to them. You can’t break down certain walls, for example, and that meant we wouldn’t be able to offer our guests large suites.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Sex crimes against women in India in recent years have raised safety concerns about women traveling alone. Does Oberoi offer any amenities for solo female travelers?It’s an area we are paying more attention to, especially since we have seen an increase in female guests who are on their own — and the effort is led by our female employees. Women who need to be picked up at the airport are assigned female chauffeurs and are taken to their rooms by female butlers. Also, they are given rooms near the elevators and have female staff members looking after them.For first-time travelers to India, the Delhi, Agra and Jaipur circuit is the go-to itinerary. Do you recommend a different initial trip?No. It might be a cliché, but I do think that it’s a smart first trip because by visiting those cities you get a sense of what so many people associate India with. In Delhi, there is the iconic Red Fort and the buildings built during the British rule. Agra has the Taj Mahal and Jaipur has the beautiful palaces you see in movies and in pictures.What are some undiscovered destinations in the country worth seeing?Northern India has several. There’s Darjeeling, where the scenery, deep-green tea plantations surrounded by mountains, is absolutely breathtaking. Sikkim, in the west, has stunning Buddhist monasteries, and Assam, in the northeast, also has tea gardens as well as wildlife. These areas don’t have a lot of infrastructure in place yet for tourists, but they should still be seen.A version of this article appears in print on January 17, 2016, on Page TR3 of the New York edition with the headline: Prithvi Raj Singh Knows a Bit About Luxury Travel.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.