AdvertisementSupported byFrugal TravelerBy Lucas PetersonDuring strolls along its quiet, tree-lined boulevards, there is a decidedly intimate, rustic feel that pervades Kobe, Japan, despite its population of nearly 1.5 million. But there is also a distinctly cosmopolitan air — one that comes partly from its history as one of the first cities to be forced to open trade following Japan’s centuries-long policy of sakoku, or isolation from the rest of the world, until the mid-19th century.The result is a city that is a fascinating mix of both tradition and adopted customs, a mostly seamless amalgam of different cultures. I visited sake breweries dating back to the 1700s; that same night, I watched a jazz trio burn through standards at a swank Kobe club. I relaxed with locals at a Japanese onsen, or hot spring, on a hilltop on a nearby island, Awaji. I also went on a walking tour of Kitano-cho, a neighborhood that contains foreign residences like the Weathercock house, a red brick structure with an Art Nouveau interior that feels as though it wouldn’t look out of place in the hills of Bavaria. And, naturally, I went in search of a thrifty way to enjoy Kobe beef, the expensive and much sought-after product of Tajima cattle raised in Hyogo prefecture, where Kobe lies.Kobe is a long city, positioned on the coast between mountains, to the north, and Osaka Bay to the south. (Kobe is just 40 minutes from Osaka by train; you can read more about Osaka’s great food here.) I exited the train at the Hyogo station on the JR Tokaido-Sanyo line (using my same Suica card I purchased when I was in Tokyo; see more details about train logistics in Japan in my Tokyo article) and made the short walk to the Kobe Luminous Hotel, where I’d found a room for $79 per night on Hotels.com. It wasn’t grand or inspired by any means, but my single was clean and sufficient for the solo traveler.Best of all, I was only a few stops — less than 10 minutes — from Kobe-Sannomiya station, in the heart of downtown. I was in the mood for some of the above-mentioned Kobe beef one afternoon, and so I strategically targeted the lunch hour. As any good bargain hunter knows, lunch is when many expensive restaurants offer deals, serving similar (or exactly the same) meals as during dinnertime, but for a fraction of the price. I ducked into a small street and looked at the lunch menu for a restaurant called Ishida. The Kobe beef lunch options there ranged from 3,300 to 8,800 yen (about $31.40 to $83.85) — a bit more than I was looking to pay. I went around the corner and found one of a small restaurant chain called Nishimuraya, which had a menu more in my price range: 1,980 yen for a serving of Kobe beef, rice, soup, salad and pickles.The restaurant had no English signage outside, and I discovered it purely by accident. I slid open the outside door and headed up a quiet, narrow staircase. Everything was done in wood and there was some music playing I had originally noticed; I could pick out a few notes here and there from the melody of a jazz song. I entered and was greeted by the host and the chef, who was in the back, and was shown to a table booth with a large charcoal burner in the middle. I ordered my lunch, and a man with a pan of glowing hot charcoal fed the burner on my table, then placed a metal grate on the top.The beef came out quickly, as did the accompaniments (the mushroom and tofu soup was outstanding). I took the small slices, reddish-pink and streaked with white fat, and placed them on the grill. The fat sizzled, droplets hitting the coal, and each piece quickly turned a beautiful shade of brown. Per my server’s suggestion, I dressed each piece with only a small amount of a salt-and-pepper mixture that was on the table. The taste of the beef was sensational: each piece was a flavor bomb of protein and fat. The simple salt dressing was a perfect complement, highlighting the sweetness of the fat but not obscuring the taste of the beef.Working off the beef would prove easy enough: Kobe is a delightful and interesting place to walk around. I followed a suggestion that came from a follower of the Frugal Traveler Twitter account and went in search of the Kobe Mosque, opened in 1935, the first mosque in Japan. When I saw two minarets peeking out from some pink cherry blossoms, I knew I had arrived. I removed my shoes and went inside. An elderly man greeted me and offered me a date, which I took. There weren’t any worshipers when I was there, but I went inside the musalla (prayer hall) for a few minutes before looking at some old pictures that illustrated the history of the mosque, including how it survived Allied bombings during World War II.From the mosque it was an easy and meandering walk toward the mountains and up through Kitano-cho, or foreign residence neighborhood. You can wind up passing through some quiet streets and alleys and glimpse old houses, built in a European style, which used to house merchants and foreign residents of Japan. There are roughly 20 houses that can be toured — you may not want to see all of them, but it’s an interesting bit of history. Two particularly notable houses are the Weathercock house, built in 1909 and the Moegi house, built in 1903. You can purchase tickets to tour each house individually for 350 yen; I bought a dual ticket for 650 yen that allowed me to walk through both Weathercock and Moegi.At the nearby tourist information center, I had a nice, if slightly labored conversation (due to my lack of Japanese) with some lovely old women who worked there. They patiently recommended that I visit one of Kobe’s onsen. I set out late one afternoon in search of one I’d randomly decided on based on poring over the area Google Maps.I began the journey at the foot of the Akashi Kaikyo Bridge, a massive piece of construction that has the longest central span of any suspension bridge in the world. From Maiko station (about 20 minutes west of downtown Kobe), it’s a separate 410-yen bus ride across the bridge to Awaji Island. The bus is not the easiest thing to find — it requires walking up four or five flights of stairs and meeting the bus directly on the bridge itself. I asked a local woman for help (a good habit if you don’t read Japanese) and was led to the correct bus.From where I exited the bus to my destination seemed a reasonable 18-minute walk. There was just one problem: I couldn’t find it. I looked and looked; I asked around, hunted for signs, but there was nothing. Finally, as it was getting dark, I imposed upon a group of university students who were studying in a nearby building. They informed me that my destination was, in fact, another 3 kilometers away. So I started walking. I did it so you don’t have to, but my recommendation is: Don’t make that walk. It’s dangerous. Call a taxi, if possible. There are too many areas with no sidewalk and at night, it’s a bad idea.I did make it to my onsen, though, and once there, managed to let my ire toward the bad maps experience melt away as I looked out over Akashi Strait from an outdoor bubbling pool of soothing hot water. Admission to the springs is 700 yen; a very thin towel costs 200 yen, and you’ll need additional 100-yen coins to use as deposits for the lockers. There are separate male and female sides — once you’re in your section, check any Puritanism you may have at the door and be prepared to hang out with a large number of naked people. Relaxing in the outdoor pool, while looking out over the mammoth bridge I’d crossed a couple of hours before, was one of the best moments of the trip.But it wasn’t the only good moment. I spent one afternoon walking around the Nada district, one of the top sake-producing areas of the country. It’s said by many in Japan that Kobe is a perfect place to brew sake, with the availability of quality rice, a good water supply, conducive weather and proximity to the harbor for exporting. I took the train to Mikage station and walked to the Hakutsuru Brewery Museum. Over two levels, the sake-making process from centuries past is illustrated, from rice preparation to fermentation to storage in giant wooden casks. I then made the brief walk — about 15 minutes — to another brewery/museum called Shu-Shin-Kan. They have a full-on sake bar at Shu-Shin-Kan, and I got a very nice (and free) sake tasting from one of the employees. One sake I tried, Daiginjo, tasted smooth, clean and floral. Another, called Junmai-shu, was subtle and mellow.Drinking always goes better with music, however, and I remedied that with a visit to the legendary Sone jazz club. Established in 1969 and considered by some to be the birthplace of the Japanese jazz scene, Sone is all wood, polished brass, whiskey and sharply dressed waiters. The place emanates cool, the way a jazz club should. When I went in, the jazz trio was midway through their set. I paid the 1,140-yen cover, took a seat alone at a table, and ordered a beer for 790 yen. After a few songs, a singer, Junko Koyanagi, joined the trio and made some introductions in Japanese. Then, as if someone flipped a switch, she began singing jazz standards in perfect English. “Just squeeze me, but please don’t tease me,” she crooned over the trio, belting the 1941 Duke Ellington classic. She went through a few other standards, including a flawless “Route 66” — no mean feat, as “Kingman, Barstow, San Bernardino” doesn’t exactly roll off the tongue.The set ended — far too soon — and the group took their bows. It’s often said that music has no language or, rather, that it is its own language. That proved to be true that evening in Kobe, as I was reminded that even halfway across the world, it’s possible to feel entirely at home.Advertisement