

      By INGRID K. WILLIAMS

OCT. 20, 2016

Beyond the beach, this seaside resort’s enticements include art, architecture and, of course, dining on delectable small plates at pintxo bars.
The identity of San Sebastián as a seaside resort began over a century ago, when this wild stretch of Atlantic coast was favored by Spanish royals on holiday. Since then, Donostia — as the alluring city is known in Basque — has also established itself as a world-class gastro-paradise. And now, as a 2016 European Capital of Culture, the city has begun to again reinvent itself, this time as a cultural destination. So when fall’s cooler temperatures force all but the hardiest surfers to abandon the beaches, you’ll still find myriad enticements to feast on — from fine art and architecture to local design and craft beer — before the pintxo bars beckon.
Explore street view, find things to do in San Sebastián/Donostia and sign in to your Google account to save your map.
Filigreed balconies and Belle Époque sandstone edifices lend the city its classical elegance, but fans of contemporary architecture can also seek out three works by Rafael Moneo, the Pritzker Prize-winning architect from nearby Navarra. Start a tour by admiring the Kursaal, his futuristic pair of cubelike glass structures overlooking Zurriola beach. Next, head a block south to Edificio Urumea, an apartment building distinguished by an undulating beige-and-brown facade facing the Urumea River. Follow the river for about a mile to find Mr. Moneo’s most recent contribution in town, the boxy white Iglesia de Iesu. Completed in 2011, this austere structure gives little hint of its religious affiliation aside from the cross formed from negative space near the top. Naturally fermented ciders have long enjoyed favor in this region of Spain, but some young Basque microbreweries are starting to produce craft beers that could sway local preferences. For a taste, visit Mala Gissona Beer House, a brewpub that opened last winter with a dozen taps pouring artisanal brews. Ask for a zurito (small pour) of their amber-hued Apatxe Pale Ale, brewed in nearby Oiartzun, or the hoppy Amuitz lager from Bidassoa Basque Brewery, another area newcomer. The cardinal rule of pintxo-bar dining is to never stop moving. But an exception may be made for one stellar bar’s raciones, larger plates to be shared. Far from the throngs clogging the Parte Vieja, Antonio Bar is a locals’ favorite where plates of tantalizing seafood — octopus, anchovies, sardines, salmon — occupy the bar, ready to be scooped atop pieces of freshly toasted bread. But the best order here is the ración of carpaccio de atún rojo, a platter draped with paper-thin slices of glistening tuna and sprinkled with slivers of red-and-green guindilla peppers (15 euros, or about $16.60). A close runner-up is the hongos, foie y yema ración — a decadent umami-rich mix of sautéed mushrooms, seared foie gras and egg yolk (€22). Leave the beach clubs to the packs of teenagers guzzling contraband booze out of soda bottles and instead delve into the Donostia music scene at Dabadaba, a basement-level clubhouse that has been hosting a party more or less nonstop since opening in 2014. Show up at this cavernous hangout by day and you might find a Spanish folk duo or a laid-back jazz session, whereas after dark the dance floor fills during performances by various artists and D.J.s — an Australian punk band one night, an American all-girl surf-pop group the next. A serviceable cortado can be procured at any cafe in town, but for a proper espresso — or Chemex, or cold brew — go to Sakona Coffee Roasters. This third-wave coffee shop opened in February in an airy, uncluttered space with sleek wood benches, beans from their roastery in nearby Irun, and a worth-the-wait pour-over served in small glass carafes tied with tiny handkerchiefs (€3). Afterward, march to Bar Zabaleta. Like everyone else at this no-frills pintxo bar, you’re here for one reason: the tortilla. This superlative rendition of the traditional potato-and-onion omelet has an oozy consistency and sunny orange hue reminiscent of soft-boiled farm eggs (€1.80). After breakfast, spend some time shopping in Gros, a pretty neighborhood of tree-lined plazas, playgrounds and new stores stocked with creative local goods. Start at Le Carburateur, a small shop and gallery with roots across the border in French Basque Country that opened in December selling cheeky art prints with colorful Donostia-themed designs. Then head to Belgrado, a new multifaceted cafe with specialized retail areas — wine store, cheesemonger and gallery among them — and picture windows framing ocean views. Visit the boutique area for clothing from the local label Letitare and artistic cityscape illustrations from Koloreka, a three-year-old print shop headquartered across town. On one of the busiest lanes in the Parte Vieja, Casa Urola appears to be just another pintxo bar — crumpled napkins on the floor, legs of jamón strung from the ceiling. But pass the bar and climb the wooden stairs to enter its hidden second-story restaurant, where about a dozen tables draped in white linens fill with a well-heeled crowd conversing in an easy mix of Spanish and Basque. For lunch, focus on dishes highlighting the outstanding seasonal produce, like asparagus from Navarra with truffle mayonnaise, or heavenly tear-shaped spring peas known as guisantes lágrima, served with jamón consommé. Lunch for two, about €100. Any European Capital of Culture worthy of its designation will boast a shiny multidisciplinary cultural complex. In San Sebastián, that role is played by Tabakalera, a former tobacco factory that reopened last year as a center for contemporary culture. The enormous six-level complex presents an ever-changing mix of exhibitions and events, from film screenings and photography displays to artist talks and impromptu magic shows. But don’t miss the observation deck on the roof for bird’s-eye views across the city to the coast. Preparing to eat pintxos in the Parte Vieja? Compile a list of pintxo bars and you’re halfway there. To plan properly, you should also know the house specialty, particularly at old-school places that excel with a single ingredient or dish. At Bar Paco Bueno, that specialty is gambas a la gabardina, fresh-from-the-fryer battered shrimp. But at Bar Txepetxa, you want plump boquerones (vinegar-cured anchovies) layered on crusty bread and topped with diced peppers and onion. Haven’t got a cheat sheet? Then go nouveau at Borda Berri, a younger bar striving for a menu with breadth over depth. Regular fixtures on the chalkboard menu that rarely disappoint include crisp roasted octopus, creamy risotto and sublimely tender beef cheeks. Each pintxo costs about €2 to €3. At this time of night, it can feel as if the whole town has congregated on the steps of the Basílica de Santa María del Coro, lounging beneath the church’s Baroque facade with gin tonics smuggled from Atari Gastroteka, the packed-to-the-gills bar across the plaza. But for the most artfully prepared gin tonic around, leave the crowds behind and head to La Gintonería Donostiarra, a slick wedge-shaped gin bar in Gros. Here the shelves are lined with dozens of premium gins, so choose something unfamiliar — the floral Nordés Gin from Galicia, perhaps — and then watch the mesmerizing cocktail-making process. It begins with dry-ice fog billowing from a copa de balón (bulbous glass), and will involve the addition of infusions and aromatics — a drop here, a spritz there — and an appropriate garnish before the masterpiece is complete. The wide, half-mile-long promenade that backs Zurriola beach accommodates a cross-section of the city — strolling families, dripping surfers — and doubles as an open-air art gallery: Last summer brought an installation of six massive bronze sculptures by Henry Moore, but the stunning beach scenes are on display every day. There’s also indoor art on the promenade at Sala Kubo-Kutxa, a spacious gallery in the Kursaal complex exhibiting contemporary Basque artists, like a recent retrospective of the Bilbao-based painter Jesus Mari Lazkano. Meeting friends for a glass of vermouth — ¡vamos a tomar el vermut! — is a Sunday afternoon tradition that can easily last until dusk if you turn it into a tasting tour. Start at Txurrut, a pub that serves vermouth preparado (a watered-down preparation) to tables on the atmospheric Plaza de la Constitución. Then visit A Fuego Negro, a pintxo bar with a subversive spirit that regularly brings in D.J.s to spin through a supersized hour of vermú; ordering a marianito will get you the special house blend in a small glass with a wedge of orange and an olive. Finish around the corner at Sirimiri, a narrow bar with a wide selection of vermouths to sample, like Casa Mariol’s Negre and the txakoli-based Txurrut Vintage. If you get hungry, the bar’s tasty pintxos are never far away. Opened in 2014 on a quiet street in Gros, the Okako Hotel (Iztueta 7; 34-943-326-000; okakohotel.com; from €120) has 13 clean, cozy rooms with all the necessary comforts, including air conditioning and Wi-Fi, within a few minutes’ walk of Zurriola beach and the Parte Vieja.For a home of your own, book a short-term rental apartment. Feelfree Rentals (Peña y Goñi 3; 34-943-56-36-54; feelfreerentals.com; from about €200) offers everything from stylish studios to luxurious apartments with kitted-out kitchens, modern furnishings and multiple bedrooms. An all-day service center ensures the check-in experience is hassle-free.Flight and Hotel information provided by Google.Prices represent a snapshot of low fares and rates for weekend trips.Advertisement