SEPT. 21, 2016
Maria Bamford has built a career on turning her experience with bipolar disorder into hilarious, addictive comedy. Her latest project, in which she stars, is “Lady Dynamite,” a Netflix show inspired by her own life. The second season is due in 2017.Ms. Bamford, 46, always flies Delta, because her mother told her to. “For the points. And it’s the hub for when I go home to Duluth. I have gold status on Delta, which gives you pleasures untold,” she said. “Sometimes they give you a free banana if you’re sitting closer to first class. An extra inch of leg room is a tiny victory.”Before she married, in 2015, she said, “I would go on odd vacations that did not always turn out well. I used to go see my family a lot in Duluth, although I’ve heard many times at support groups in L.A. that that is NOT a vacation. I once went on a book club vacation to Toronto, where myself and a number of women over the age of 70 discussed books. The book I chose for discussion was ‘A History of God.’ I think I may have been depressed when I chose that trip.”Rather than go abroad, she said, she prefers to stay close to home in Los Angeles.“Recently I have been meeting people from Twitter and rehearsing my stuff in front of them, in coffee shops or their homes in L.A. I don’t know how it is for them, but it’s been wonderful for me. Only in my ZIP code, though. I’m not insane.”Here’s what she packs on every trip.Meds and medallions“I bring all my medications in a Ziploc plastic baggie. That’s fun. And I have one of those gold medallions now that I wear around my neck, with my meds on it, because if something happened to me I would never want to be off them or experience any withdrawal symptoms. Sometimes people think I’ve gone hip-hop.”AdvertisementCurling iron“I always bring a curling iron, because I like to curl. It’s a therapeutic event for me. My favorite thing is getting ready to perform a show and watching TLC — when I’m in a Hampton Inn, I find that very comforting. Usually it’s a treat because I’ve gone through my jokes, I’ve rehearsed so I’m not too nervous, I have a diet cola with ice from the machine down the hall, and I’m truly enjoying myself.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Laptop “I do my own bookkeeping and I like to do it on the plane. That’s my plane thing. It’s a great time to get things done. It’s both business and personal, so both Quicken and QuickBooks. I like numbers and little graphs and reports; that’s entertaining for me.”AdvertisementBooks“Usually I have a self-help book of some kind, something on general self-improvement. I got married, so I got the [John and Julie] Gottman book, “10 Lessons to Transform Your Marriage,” which is sort of the four horsemen of the apocalypse in terms of not doing certain things. On the way there I’ll bring a used book and on the way back I’ll have bought myself a ‘treat book’ in the airport for full price, a best seller or something.”Her calendar“The most important thing I bring is my calendar, which is sort of a vision board. I cut things out and paste and staple them, and also hand-write all sorts of things, like affirmations. It’s a little bit like what a crazy person would make, and that’s probably what I am becoming. Sometimes I write down everything that I spend and what I eat. I have nine nieces and nephews so I have pictures of them to help me remember their names. There’s a picture of Mindy Kaling and a picture of Gloria Steinem and, very close to them, is a picture of Syrian refugees in a boat. And then I have a letter from my mother with all the reasons she’s proud of me. It was unsolicited.”Nell McShane WulfhartA version of this article appears in print on September 25, 2016, on Page TR2 of the New York edition with the headline: Maria Bamford Packs a Therapeutic Curling Iron.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.