AdvertisementSupported byWhat is the vacation destination like after a gunman killed 58 people in October? Weddings and gambling go on — but there is new vigilance as well.By Mike SeelyI was sitting at a bar near the far-flung N Gates at Seattle-Tacoma International Airport, awaiting a flight to Nevada nearly six weeks after a high-stakes video poker player named Stephen Paddock killed 58 people and wounded hundreds more before taking his own life in Las Vegas. Heavily armed, Mr. Paddock fired on a crowd of 22,000 country music fans at an outdoor festival across the street from his room on the 32nd floor of the Mandalay Bay Resort and Casino on the far south end of the Las Vegas Strip, marking one of the deadliest mass shootings in American history.This tragedy did not appear to be on the minds of the quartet of women seated next to me, who were headed to Sin City to celebrate a 50th birthday. They ordered a round of tequila shots and chased them down with beer, a routine one imagined out loud would be repeated more than once during their excursion. Their unburdening of starch-collared decorum had commenced before they had even boarded the plane, suggesting that Vegas is a state of mind as much as it is a physical destination.As for me, I was venturing to Las Vegas to assess the mood of a town that stands as America’s undisputed champion of fun and risk. It would go against Vegas’s very essence to curl up and hide; how does a place this uniquely outgoing steel itself in the wake of such a tragedy?Touching down at McCarran International Airport, Mandalay Bay was the first thing I saw out my window. But the way I knew I was in Las Vegas was by its scent, a singularly pungent bouquet of cologne, cigarette smoke, steak and sewage. It’s not especially pleasant, but it awakens you — and nobody comes to Vegas to sleep.Nobody, that is, except for those who live and work here. Jordan Peck, a twentysomething bartender at the Hard Rock Hotel & Casino, is one such person. Born in Utah, he moved to Las Vegas when he was 2 years old and has been here ever since. Asked what someone who works on or near the Strip does for fun, he half-jokingly replied, “Go home.”Since the shooting, Mr. Peck’s out-of-town customers haven’t blinked. “Everybody here seems exactly the same,” he said of the tourists.But among locals or those who witnessed the horror at the Route 91 Harvest Festival, the story is quite different.I sat down at Mr. Peck’s bar and ordered a Manhattan, which he gracefully placed atop a digital gambling console. This being the Hard Rock, Tom Petty’s “Learning to Fly” filled the air.Mr. Paddock committed his atrocities on Oct. 1; Mr. Petty passed away on Oct. 2. On Oct. 7, Jason Aldean, the artist who was onstage when Mr. Paddock opened fire, made a surprise appearance on “Saturday Night Live,” where he opened the show with a cover of Mr. Petty’s hit song “I Won’t Back Down.” It was a crippling confluence, and plenty profound.Business was slow for Mr. Peck on this Thursday night, which gave him ample time to chat with his friend Renee McKinley, a Las Vegas native who works in a dental office. Today marked her first trip to the Strip (although the Hard Rock sits a few blocks off it) since the tragedy. When she drove past the “Welcome to Fabulous Las Vegas” sign, which became a public shrine after Oct. 1, she started crying.Growing up in Las Vegas, Ms. McKinley said, she viewed her hometown as a soulless entity. But the local response to Mr. Paddock’s crime has called this belief into doubt.“The way our community stepped up, it proved me wrong,” she said.To this end, Mr. Peck pointed to how so many people rushed to give blood in the wake of the shooting that a waiting list had to be established, and how volunteers flooded hospitals — not to get treatment, but to help clean up.This sort of embrace could be felt through fiber optics, too. Shortly after the shooting, Ms. McKinley had to place an out-of-state call to verify a patient’s insurance coverage. As she said the words “Las Vegas,” her voice quivered. On the other end of the line, the woman felt her anguish and, said Ms. McKinley, “was hugging me through the phone.”It was the weekend of Las Vegas’s Rock ‘n’ Roll Marathon, which, with 25,000 participants, was to be the largest public event on the Strip since the Route 91 Harvest Festival. Sauntering through a sleepy Mandalay Bay casino on Friday morning were a pair of guests from Florida, Terri Monken and Jenny Glew, who were in town to run the half-marathon.They had booked their rooms in March and gave no thought to canceling after the massacre. “We’ve got to keep it going,” explained Ms. Monken, praising her accommodations and the employees she had encountered as “beautiful.”Ms. Glew then offered an assessment that I’d hear more than once over the course of my four-night stay, theorizing that Mandalay Bay “has got to be one of the safest places” in town in the wake of the tragedy. This was true in a visible sense, as the facility has beefed up security in order to reassure guests.Up an escalator from the casino floor is a mini-mall called The Shoppes at Mandalay Place. At 10 a.m., Leanne Nevico opened The Guinness Store. Featuring beer gear galore, hers is the only outlet of its kind outside of Ireland.A Connecticut native, Ms. Nevico moved to Las Vegas nearly a decade ago “for a man,” she said. She’s now been married to that man for five years; the pair met playing the interactive video game “Final Fantasy II,” and she described their home south of the Strip as “a gamer’s paradise.”Like Ms. McKinley, Ms. Nevico said it’s been “really rough” driving by the Welcome to Las Vegas sign on her way to work each day, and she has been similarly moved by the way the community has rallied, recalling scenes of Uber drivers showing up to shuttle shooting victims to the hospital for free. Ms. Nevico wasn’t working when Mr. Paddock opened fire, but her employees had to shelter in place overnight. They were fortunate to have access to an adjacent pub that Guinness’ owners also operate, whereas a friend of hers who works at a sandal store had it a whole lot rougher absent food and a proper restroom.The day after the shooting, Ms. Nevico said, “The casino was a ghost town.” But she opened her store — which features a bar from which she pours Guinness products — at 1 p.m. “for people who were stuck.”“A lot of people just came in to drink and to share their stories,” she said.Ms. Nevico said she has noticed a significant increase in the amount of police and private security patrolling the Mandalay Bay grounds, and noted that the resort has been stricken with an unusually high vacancy rate in the wake of the shooting. (A spokeswoman for MGM, which owns the Mandalay Bay, confirmed as much, adding that business is slowly returning to normal.) Mandalay Bay was recently named as a defendant in a lawsuit brought by 450 shooting victims, whose lawyers claim the resort and concert organizers didn’t do enough to prevent the tragedy. “People are more vigilant,” said Ms. Nevico, who has noticed several “rubberneckers” angling for a look at the crime scene. “I don’t know what it is we’re looking for, but we’re more vigilant.”A few miles north on Las Vegas Boulevard at Graceland Wedding Chapel, officiant Cecelia Cajueiro was preparing to renew the vows of a Brazilian couple, Fabio and Tatiana Costa, when Elvis Presley entered the building, wielding a guitar.Portrayed by the chapel’s towering, hyperactive, pompadoured owner, Brendan Paul, the King incongruously plucked out melodies by AC/DC, Kiss and Metallica as the encore bride danced alongside him. Escorted by Elvis, Ms. Costa walked toward the altar to “Can’t Help Falling in Love,” ultimately cinching the Portuguese service with “Viva Las Vegas,” which Mr. Paul belted out on a microphone over a canned backing track.Mr. Paul, clad in a black suit with red sapphires and no undershirt, has owned the chapel since 2003. Having cut his teeth playing in Los Angeles punk bands, he’s an unlikely proprietor and impersonator, and unflinchingly liberal.“Every other Elvis I know is for Trump,” Mr. Paul said.In part because Mr. Paul’s core clientele is international, the shooting down the street hasn’t affected his bottom line, he said. But it’s definitely been on his mind.“People are just angry,” he surmised. “I think it’s because of Trump. It’s exhausting.”West of the chapel, in an otherwise desolate neighborhood where tumbleweeds would find ample room to roll down roads, sits a funky drinking establishment called ReBar. Everything inside the bar — including the stools — is for sale, having been sourced or scavenged by the owner, Derek Stonebarger, a hip, energetic cancer survivor who heads up the Las Vegas Arts District Neighborhood Association.A handful of Main Street businesses — a vintage clothing store here, a craft cocktail lounge there — anchor this fledgling, resident-focused scene in an area that “was always sort of a dumpy part of town,” said Jack Doré, a ReBar bartender.“You used to come down here to buy drugs or get stabbed, or maybe both,” explained Mr. Doré, who rented a cheap studio apartment in the Arts District upon relocating from his native southeast Louisiana in 2014.Late Sunday morning, he had ReBar’s television sets tuned to N.F.L. football and was doling out $1 Avery Real Peel I.P.A.s and locally butchered hot links to a smattering of customers.Of the shooting, Mr. Doré said, “No one really talks about it. The first couple of weeks were pretty slow, but it’s back to normal. I don’t know if there will be a normal, though. People are wary of going out in groups. But, most of all, people are just brushing it off.”Having hosted numerous country music awards shows, not to mention the Route 91 Harvest Festival, Las Vegas has become a sort of Nashville West in recent years. At the center of its local country community is Stoney’s Rockin’ Country, a spacious nightclub in a shopping mall south of Mandalay Bay that offers all-you-can-drink Pabst for $25 and line-dancing lessons before live shows.As I entered Stoney’s to take in a performance by the insurgent band A Thousand Horses, I was asked to raise my hands as though I were passing through security at an airport. This is a milder approach than the metal-detecting wands the establishment’s bouncers wielded in the weeks immediately following the massacre, said Stoney’s spokesman Toad Higginbotham, who was backstage with his girlfriend at the Route 91 Harvest Festival when shots rang out.“We just ran,” he said of his reaction to the gunfire.Stoney’s patrons Kristi Klein and Julie Cavender of Orange County, Calif., were at the festival as well. They were also staying at Mandalay Bay in a room overlooking Mr. Paddock’s. The two friends couldn’t bring themselves to book a room there for this return trip, instead opting for The Wynn.“The reality is we all have PTSD,” Ms. Cavender said.Added Ms. Klein, “That’s why we’re here.”Advertisement