
MARCH 23, 2017

We gave six families 360-degree video cameras to show us a trip through the eyes of a child. The kids’ views varied widely and wildly by age, according to child development experts, including Dr. Perri Klass, a longtime health contributor to The New York Times. Dr. Klass talked about the perspective of children from the ages of 3 to 15 and how families can better understand what experiences would be the most compelling to them.
Rafferty, 3Lila, 9Dean, 10Anna, 4Kobe, 3, in Whistler, Canada; Nina, 5, at the Joshua Tree National Park in California; and Sasha, 4, at the Exploratorium in San Francisco.Dr. Klass recalled visiting the Sistine Chapel with her children and trying to discuss Michelangelo’s fresco, “The Last Judgment.” The many nude figures in the scene caused a scandal when the fresco was first painted, and the Florentine Renaissance master included his own self-portrait. “An older child might accept the challenge to find the self-portrait,” she said, “but a younger child might be more interested in the question of who is and who isn’t wearing underwear.” Parents should also consider that a lot of displays and exhibits in museums are positioned at eye level for adults, so their young children may only get a view of other people’s backs in a crowd or empty wall space. Children in this age range may want to touch or interact with any items at eye level to them, which would require parents to monitor them heavily. “One of the things you want to do as a parent traveling is, look for places where you can interact a little more with objects and push the buttons,” Dr. Klass said.Lily, 8, in Yangshuo, China; Nahla, 7, on a Carnival Cruise ship; and Soyeon, 9, at the Eiffel Tower in Paris.“You can bring a bunch of 7-year-olds into a room, and some will be drawn to sports equipment, some drawn to animals. They have really distinct interests you’ll want to play to,” said Dr. Klass. “Also if they can be with kids their own age, it makes them brave and willing to try.” This age group has a widening understanding of the world because they can communicate ideas verbally and proficiently in writing, making them more self-aware. According to Dr. Klass, “They are more independent and less needing to be led by hand.”Mackinzie, 15, at the Terracotta Army Museum in Xi’an, China; Charlotte, 13, Victoria, 13, and Felix, 14, in Moscow, Russia; Merrajoudine, 15, at the Eiffel Tower in Paris; and Audrey, 12, in Yangshuo, China.Children who are not quite teenagers are, to a certain extent, still happy to be with their parents, so it’s a good idea to communicate personal excitement about or interest in an upcoming trip or experience. “They haven’t yet decided that anything you’re interested in may not be the coolest thing. And they probably still want to know what you are excited about,” explained Dr. Klass. “One of the themes for traveling with children is to think about the stuff they are really interested in and try to tune the trip to their passions. But the other part is trying to explain what you think is exciting and what it means to you. As for teenagers, they may want to lead the way, and they may show you things about the world you never knew.”Produced by Maureen Towey, Meghan Louttit and Angelica McKinley; Editing by Joshua Thomas; Photo and video by Siegurd Weber, Kristin Pichaske, Stefania Rouselle, David Maurice Smith, Courtney Davis, Michael Rohd, the Bailey Family, the Hill Family, and the Warne-McGraw FamilyAdvertisement