AdvertisementSupported by5 PLACESBy Diane DanielThe sprawling factory complex in Eindhoven that housed the Dutch manufacturing giant Philips is now a vibrant hub showcasing design shops, dining spots, a gallery of cutting-edge art and festive events. After Philips moved its headquarters in 1998 to Amsterdam, nearly 80 miles away, this company town reinvented itself as a center for design and technological innovation. Nowhere is Eindhoven’s makeover more evident than at Strijp S (pronounced “Stripe S”), the former Philips complex. Dormant factory space has become residential lofts, shared creative workspaces, boutiques and restaurants. The complex also serves as center stage for the monthly food and craft FeelGood Market and the annual Dutch Design Week.When this art space relocated from downtown Eindhoven to Strijp S in 2014, it doubled its space, allowing ample room for large installations and edgier experimental art. Shows often mix design, music, technology, new media and social commentary. Every fall MU organizes an exhibit to complement Dutch Design Week.Torenallee 40-06; 31-40-296-1663; mu.nlWith its location on a main square of the complex, large deck and cozy interior in what was a boiler house, the Ketelhuis serves as the pulse of Strijp S. It stands apart in its reliance on local produce.Ketelhuisplein 1; 31-6-87-24-73-48; ketelhuis.comNearly every visit to this cheery jumble of individually rented kiosks offers a new discovery. It includes a trendy barbershop, children’s wear, bicycles, and, most recently, goods from Iceland and Iran.Torenallee 60-02; urbanshopper.nl; no phoneA spinoff of the local design firm of the same name, Yksi was the first retail outlet in Strijp S, in 2011, and grew to be the region’s most comprehensive source of Dutch design items, many from Design Academy Eindhoven graduates. A recent store revamp reserves less space for objects, more for rotating exhibits of known and emerging designers, who also give talks and demonstrations.Torenallee 22-04; 31-40-780- 5033; yksi.nlThis microbrewery and beer cafe opened in 2015 in the new Vershal (Fresh Hall), a kiosk market with everything from cheese and flowers to spices and slices. Along with concocting a few namesake brews, the third-generation cafe owner Daan van Stiphout aims to give a big stage to small regional brewers.Torenallee 86; 31-6-13-81-26-16; brouwerijhetveem.nlAdvertisement