By NELL McSHANE WULFHARTDEC. 22, 2016
The chef and television star Rachael Ray is always starting projects (TV shows, magazines, now a home furnishings collection), but she is a creature of habit when it comes to travel.“I regularly go to just three places,” she said. “I don’t get a lot of vacations, so when I take time off, I head to Italy — it’s the go-to vacation spot for my husband and I. We were married in Tuscany, and every year in September we go back to the scene of the crime.“This year we stayed at Monteverdi, outside of Montepulciano. My friends run a collection of villas there, and I cooked for 25 or so of my musician and chef friends.”She also makes regular trips to Austin, Tex. “I run a food and music festival called Feedback there. We go to Austin often. It’s very community-oriented, and it’s the one place where I see no racism, sexism or discrimination against dogs.” She stays at the St. Cecilia, because each room has a record player. “My husband and I are vinylphiles, and we have 2,000 records at home.Advertisement“The third place I love to go to is Copenhagen. We stay at the Nimb, where our favorite room is in the middle of a garden, and the peacocks who live there come to our window for blueberries every morning. I don’t like staying in hotels that look like hotels, or hotels that look the same no matter what city you’re in. I like a place with a kitchen so I can cook.”Here is what she packs on every trip:Art supplies“I always take a small gold basket to carry my art supplies. I make my own thank-you cards by doodling recipes and illustrating them: The cover of the card is the list of ingredients, then the back of that page has the instructions.”AdvertisementLip balm“I bring a tin of Smith’s Rosebud Salve everywhere. I have a big mouth and I talk a lot, so I need it.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Reading material“I live next to the Strand Book Store [in New York City] and I love the feeling of a book in my hand. So I always have a ‘real’ book that I’m reading, and I also have my Kindle with my backup books. I can read an entire thriller in one plane ride, so when I get there, I need more. Right now I’m reading ‘The Last Days of Night,’ which is fabulous.”Notebooks“I’m constantly writing for the following week’s ‘Rachael Ray Show’ or a six-months-from-now Rachael Ray Every Day magazine issue, and I bring two composition notebooks with me everywhere. One is for show or magazine notes, and the other is for what I’m cooking at home.”Zip-lock bag“I don’t have a makeup case, because it all has to go into a clear bag anyway. You’d be very impressed with what I can fit into a baggie: I bring a face spray, toothpaste, Visine and containers for skin cream, toner and face wash. I have a three-day supply of any meds I’m taking in case my bag gets lost, plus my vitamins and Aleve gel caps. Then I have packets of Shout wipes because I’m very sloppy, Band-Aids because I’m accident prone and Off wipes because bugs love me.”Empty folders “I always have empty folders. When I travel, I buy magazines, and then I rip them to shreds; I tear out gift ideas, food ideas from other parts of the world, cool design ideas, and I organize them in my folders. I buy food magazines in languages I don’t speak, and I try to figure out what the dish is; it’s a weird game.”A version of this article appears in print on December 25, 2016, on Page TR2 of the New York edition with the headline: Rachael Ray Doodles While She Travels.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.