
Heads Up By                     
 ERIK PIEPENBURG
 
MAY 4, 2016
What do you call a Philly cheese steak with no cheese and no steak?It sounds like the setup to a punch line. But there’s nothing to laugh at when it comes to eating vegan in Philadelphia, which, in the last few years, has blossomed into a dynamic universe of vegan food, from old-school doughnuts to adventuresome tacos. Veganism is so hot that the city declared last Nov. 1 Philly Vegan Day.“There’s a new energy here,” said Mike Barone, the owner of Grindcore House, a vegan coffee spot in South Philadelphia, famously an Italian neighborhood that’s undergone a restaurant renaissance near the grand Passyunk fountain. “You can go out to more places that are vegan. A lot of other places are accommodating, and that’s snowballing.”Philadelphia’s vegan cheerleaders say what’s happening comes from living in a food-curious city where it’s cheap to explore new ground.“It’s affordable to live in and do business here,” said Jeff Poleon, a co-owner of Dottie’s Donuts, a wholesale bakery where doughnuts are made with coconut milk and egg substitute, and the glazes are infused with homemade preserves and nut butters. “People are willing to try something new. The fact that it’s vegan is almost secondary.” Mr. Poleon opened a brick-and-mortar shop in March in West Philadelphia.AdvertisementMuch credit for the city’s vegan boom goes to Richard Landau and Kate Jacoby, a husband and wife team whose “vegetable restaurant” Vedge (vedgerestaurant.com) opened in 2011 in a townhouse near the trendy 13th Street neighborhood. (Horizons, their previous restaurant, helped endear the city to vegan eating.) The menu emphasizes seasonal vegetables and hearty, savory proteins like tofu and seitan (wheat gluten).Advertisement“We are cooking good food,” Mr. Landau said. “I don’t think most of our clientele care that it’s vegan.” Last year Philadelphia magazine named Vedge and V Street among  the best 50 restaurants in town, calling Vedge “our favorite place to send anyone looking for a true taste of Philly talent.”In 2014 Mr. Landau and Ms. Jacoby opened V Street (vstreetfood.com), a street-food restaurant in the tony Rittenhouse Square neighborhood that focuses on “the spicier, edgier stuff,” as Mr. Landau put it. There you’ll find Korean fried tempeh tacos to go with your crispy Peruvian fries.Also igniting the city’s vegan fire is Nicole Marquis, who runs a mini-empire of vegan restaurants. Bar Bombón (barbombon.com), which opened last August near Rittenhouse Square, upends the typically meat-heavy cuisines of Latin America with vegan versions of foods like fish tacos and chorizo-filled empanadas.“I’m trying to appeal to the masses, to the person who never thought it was possible to eat a meatless meal but tries the food and goes, ‘I like this,’ ” said Ms. Marquis, whose mother is Puerto Rican.Among the hot restaurants lining 13th Street is Ms. Marquis’s Charlie Was a Sinner (charliewasasinner.com), an upscale restaurant offering small plates like tofu and bean sausage and, for dessert, chocolate pot de crème with rum-soaked bananas. (The name of the restaurant “felt like the first sentence of a novel,” said Ms. Marquis.) Hip City Veg (hipcityveg.com), near Rittenhouse Square and University City, is Ms. Marquis’s fast-casual concept that does a brisk business in its juicy battered “chick’n” sandwich. New locations are set to open in Washington, D.C., this spring and near City Hall in Philadelphia this summer.Although her veganism is rooted in a “deep personal mission to end animal suffering,” Ms. Marquis said she’s focused on an “approachable brand with delicious food,” not preaching.“No one wants to hear about factory farming when you’re about to order a sandwich,” she said. “But we have the same outcome: There’s one less meat-filled meal that’s eaten every time I serve a sandwich.”AdvertisementPolitical veganism is at home at Grindcore House (grindcorehouse.com), a vibrant storefront cafe with a logo drawn in the style of a death metal band. In addition to serving seasonal cream cheeses with a side of metal on the sound system, Grindcore is a meeting place for animal rights groups and a hangout for straight-edge vegans who eschew not just eating animals and animal products but also drugs, alcohol and smoking. It also attracts many nonvegan artists, musicians and other professionals who call South Philly home.“The staff is pretty welcoming despite how abrasive it might look,” Mr. Barone said with a laugh.Mark Mebus, a co-owner of the Society Hill all-vegan pizzeria Blackbird (blackbirdpizzeria.com), said the enthusiasm that’s driving Philadelphia’s vegan scene reminds him of his early days as a vegan convert.“We’d heard that the natural flavors in ketchup contained beef powder so none of my friends ate ketchup because of that,” said Mr. Mebus, whose restaurant serves vegan reboots of cheese steaks and calzones. “We were kids. We were gung-ho about everything.”A version of this article appears in print on May 8, 2016, on Page TR3 of the New York edition with the headline: Vegans Thrive in Cheese-Steak Heaven.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »