

      By INGRID K. WILLIAMS

UPDATED May 3, 2016

Seek out the less-heralded towns on this 30-mile stretch of Italian coast, and discover the untrammeled charm that drew the likes of John Steinbeck.
Related Article
In a 1953 Harper’s Bazaar essay, John Steinbeck drew back the curtain on Positano, most likely changing the course of history for the most picturesque town on the Amalfi Coast. This romanticized 30-mile stretch of Italian coast on the southern edge of the Sorrentine Peninsula still impresses with cliffs towering above pebbled coves and villages hugging improbably steep slopes. And famed Positano, now oppressively overcrowded, continues to monopolize the attention of most travelers. But seek out less-heralded towns — from neighboring Praiano, in the west, to the central coast’s twin beach towns of Maiori and Minori, to the hilltop hamlet of Ravello and the eastern fishing village of Cetara — to discover the untrammeled charm and enduring beauty that exist all along the Amalfi Coast. Decades later, Steinbeckian awe awaits anew.
Explore street view, find things to do on the Amalfi Coast and sign in to your Google account to save your map.
Reaching the Amalfi Coast is typically an arduous journey involving multiple modes of transport — ferry, train, bus — or a precarious drive on the narrow, winding coastal road. To refresh, head straight to the central village of Conca dei Marini, which has relaxation options for every budget. For the high-end, ascend to Monastero Santa Rosa, an exclusive cliff-top resort in a former monastery with a new bliss-inducing spa. Book a massage featuring aromatic Santa Maria Novella oils, and a session of thermal bathing in the sauna, steam room and restorative hydrotherapy pool (from 90 euros, or about $100). For the low route, literally and figuratively, descend hundreds of steps leading from the main road to Marina di Conca, a small cove with a pebble beach from which you can freely soak up the sun or wade into the emerald Tyrrhenian Sea. West of Conca dei Marini, the town of Praiano boasts captivating coastal views anchored by a colorful tiled cupola. But its most interesting attraction is down by the sea: Torre a Mare, an 800-year-old limestone watchtower built on a rocky outcropping that is now home to the gallery and studio of the artist Paolo Sandulli. If he is painting by a window inside, pay a visit and climb the rickety spiral staircase to admire terra-cotta busts with wild tufts of hair made from dyed sea sponges. Afterward, follow the walkway toward the waterfront for an aperitivo at Il Pirata, a lounge and restaurant in an unbeatable location with tables on a stone terrace beside the sea. Right on Amalfi’s main beach, Ristorante Marina Grande could easily coast on its location alone. But the beautiful setting is almost secondary to the restaurant’s startlingly creative food. On a spring evening, there was house-made tuna prosciutto with green asparagus (8 euros); black squid-ink-and-spring-onion spaghetti with cuttlefish, clams and beets (16 euros); and octopus prepared three ways — grilled, carpaccio and tempura (14 euros). For wine, try the Costa d’Amalfi Furore, a flowery white from the nearby Marisa Cuomo winery. After dinner, head to Masaniello Art Cafè, which opened last year, for live music (bands play everything from jazz to classic Canzone Napoletana) and a nightcap. On a coast dominated by rocky and pebbly beaches, the town of Maiori is an outlier, with a wide swath of sand and a palm-lined promenade perfect for peaceful morning strolls. After a walk, turn away from the water for a cappuccino at Pasticceria Napoli, a cafe that also serves exemplary sfogliatelle, scallop-shaped, ricotta-filled pastries native to the Campania region. Once energized, head up the hill to Santa Maria a Mare, a lemon-colored church with panoramic views and a hidden basement museum filled with religious curios (hours vary but polite requests for entry are often accommodated). From Maiori, it’s a pleasant 20-minute walk west along the coastal road to Minori, a pint-size village that hosts a surprising archaeological gem: Villa Romana, the excavated ruins of a Roman residence from the first century. Begin a visit in the site’s museum (free) before exploring the ancient mosaics, porticos and Roman garden, now patrolled by gangs of neighborhood cats. On the spectrum of Italian food specialties, most revered are products named after their place of origin, like prosciutto di Parma and aceto balsamico di Modena. Add to that list alici di Cetara, anchovies from the fishing village of Cetara on the eastern side of the coast (easily reached by bus). After meandering around the harbor, filled with fishing boats, settle in for a seafood feast on the terrace of Ristorante San Pietro. Take the advice of the amiable proprietor, Francesco Tammaro, regarding specials like bluefish carpaccio and bottarga risotto, but don’t miss the pasta with colatura di alici di Cetara, an umami-rich sauce made from barrel-aged local anchovies. Lunch for two, about 50 euros. A series of switchbacks leads high above the sea to Ravello, a town whose sublime views can stir emotions like a work of art. For the most unforgettable tableau, follow the stone footpaths to Villa Cimbrone, a historic residence turned hotel with enchanting gardens (admission, 7 euros). Built on a rocky outcropping, the property has been masterfully landscaped with wisteria-covered pergolas, beds of English roses and blooming hydrangeas. Through the flora, a long walkway leads to the Terrazzo dell’Infinito, or Terrace of Infinity, so called because of the endless views spanning the dramatic coastline. But beware: a peek over the railing will reveal a stomach-churning drop of more than a thousand feet to the sea below. Many foreign tongues can be heard in tourist-friendly Ravello, and they can all be satisfied at Babel Wine Bar Deli & Art, which opened on a side street in 2014. This bright space has only a handful of tables, and it doubles as a gallery with colorful ceramics and paintings from area artists. The wine list also highlights local producers, so try a fruity Tramonti rosato from Ravello’s A.Sammarco winery. And to eat, the bruschetta with burrata and confit tomatoes recently paired well with a bowl of refreshing gazpacho mixed with creamy mozzarella and crisp prosciutto. Finish the meal with delicious ricotta-and-pear cake and a chilled shot of local limoncello. Dinner for two, about 40 euros. Stick around after dinner for an evening sonata or symphony. For decades, the Ravello Concert Society and the annual Ravello Festival have lured the world’s most talented musicians to the self-described “City of Music.” Despite its remote location and small population, Ravello hosts performances most weekend nights in various locations: the spectacular outdoor stage overlooking the sea at Villa Rufolo, the futuristic curved-dome auditorium designed by Oscar Niemeyer, and more intimate venues like the Annunziata Historic Building and the new Ravello Art Center. Starting times and locations vary, so verify the evening’s program in advance. Before day-trippers descend en masse on Amalfi’s narrow lanes, ascend the steep steps to the Duomo, with its spectacular facade of gilded mosaics and black-and-white-striped arches (admission, 3 euros). Linger in the Chiostro del Paradiso, a 13th-century cloister where sunbeams peek through the palm fronds and interlaced Romanesque arches, and then tour the ancient basilica and the adjoining Baroque cathedral adorned with ornate frescoes and friezes. Afterward, pause at Pasticceria Pansa, a classic cafe in the shadow of the cathedral that is popular among Amalfitani as much for the prime people-watching as for the delizie al limone, a domed, lemon-scented confection. Then pop across the piazza to Mirkò Fine Art Gallery, a newly opened space showcasing bold, colorful works by the mononymous area artist Mirkò.The famous coastal road snaking to Positano is beautiful but routinely clogged with traffic. For better views and less congestion, head to Bomerano, a mountaintop hamlet, to hike Il Sentiero degli Dei, or the Path of the Gods. As the name suggests, the up-in-the-clouds views are spectacular along this well-marked trail. Though not recommended for anyone prone to vertigo, it’s a relatively easy three-hour hike to the town of Nocelle, where hundreds of steps then lead down to the beach at Arienzo and a well-deserved dip in the sea. Those less sure of their footing can instead enjoy stunning coastal scenery from a different perspective by boarding the Travelmar ferry to Positano (8 euros), which sails past coves carved into the cliffs and the impressive fjord at Furore. Upon arrival in Positano, climb aboard a dinghy headed to one of the secluded spots you spied while cruising this cinematic coastline.Base yourself in Amalfi for easy access to transport (bus and boat) and a central location on the coast. The newly renovated bed-and-breakfast DieciSedici (Piazza Municipio 10, Amalfi; diecisedici.com; from 100 euros about $113) opened last year with six stylish rooms featuring mosaic floors, chandeliers and modish furnishings on a quiet piazza in the historic center.Those intent on following in Steinbeck’s footsteps can check in to one of the 58 rooms and suites at Le Sirenuse (Via Cristoforo Colombo 30, Positano; sirenuse.it; from 480 euros). Behind the cherry-red facade, Positano’s premier luxury hotel retains the feel of a private home, albeit one whose swimming pool boasts a postcard-perfect view and whose terrace transforms into the romantic, rose-scented Champagne and Oyster Bar at sunset.Advertisement