
Check In By                     
ADAM H. GRAHAM

AUG. 5, 2016
Rooms from 240 Swiss francs (about the same in dollars).Zurich is flush with overpriced five-star resorts, but it woefully lacks midrange options. The Kameha Grand, a quirky Hawaiian-themed hotel, promised to fill the gap when it opened in a glassy office-park building in March 2015. The property is the second in the German-based Kameha chain (the other is in Bonn), and a member of Marriott’s Autograph Collection. To call the 245-room business hotel a train wreck is an insult to wrecked trains. The Dutch designer Marcel Wanders’s overwrought décor has Swiss and Hawaiian motifs competing against one another — a cowbell lamp here, a lei there. Ukulele music, fondue pots, flocked floral wallpaper and mounted antlers all mingle together in an attempt to be Swiss by way of Maui. Employees were attentive, but inexperienced and careless during my visit last summer. When I asked about restaurants, a reception clerk told me the in-house Japanese restaurant was closed, but failed to mention the property’s Italian restaurant that was open.The neighborhood, Glattpark, is a nondescript office development scheduled for completion in 2020. Via the city-run No. 10 tram, the hotel is 20 minutes from the old town and main train station, 11 minutes from the airport.The lobby’s kitschy, disjointed décor found its way to Room 539. An Alpine folk art-inspired headboard clashed with a trompe-l’oeil wall rendering of stacked gold bullion — a dated reference to the country’s former tax shelter reputation — and made the compact room feel smaller. Old-timey bank-safe knobs were fitted to the minibar, desk and chocolate bar-shaped closet door. But the bed had comfortable down pillows and quality cotton sheets. Rooms were sound-proofed. The blackout-blinds — standard in Swiss hotels — were closed. After opening them to see an active smokestack from Zurich’s garbage incinerator, I understood why.The small charcoal-slate space had luxurious touches. There were fluffy towels, waffle-knit robes and Molton Brown bath amenities. But busybody drawbacks lurked. A scented oil reed diffuser occupied valuable sinktop real estate, and a bizarre mural inside the shower, featuring an underwater scene of sunken cowbells, floating keys and a submerged woman in a red dress, was creepy.The six-story hotel has a variety of leisure spaces. The Puregold Bar, festooned with faux Swiss gold coins lining the walls, redeemed itself with inventive cocktails emphasizing house-made ingredients like crème de violet and walnut bitters. There’s also a cigar lounge, a hookah lounge and a rooftop with a small exercise room, a spa with four treatment rooms, and a sauna and a steam room.At the casual Italian restaurant L’Unico, the bad design veered toward Epcot Italy: oversize amphorae-shaped columns and giant teacups mounted on the ceiling set the tone. Fortunately, the staff recommended affordable dishes like a truffled spaghetti, cooked al dente. But midmeal my waiter popped by the table with a three-foot-high peppermill, rounding out the cartoony silliness. The hotel’s Japanese restaurant Yu Nijyo received a Michelin star in October 2015 but changed its concept and name to You in early 2016. The breakfast, served in L’Unico, cost a whopping 39 Swiss francs but offered only the standard omelet stations, cheeses, meats and bread. Room service is 24/7.Service was adequate, food was affordable and tasty, rooms were quiet, and beds were comfortable. But its tacky design and office park location made it feel more like theme park lodging than a quality hotel.Kameha Grand Zürich, Dufaux-Strasse 1; 41-44-525-5000; kamehagrandzuerich.com.A version of this article appears in print on August 7, 2016, on Page TR4 of the New York edition with the headline: Where Cowbells Meet Ukuleles.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »