
AUG. 24, 2016

Aug. 25 marks the 100th anniversary of the U.S. national parks system. Here is a selection of our travel coverage from recent years – great reads, how-to guides and highlights from our archives.
In July, we asked five writers — three novelists, a memoirist and a poet — to recount times when a national park left a mark on their lives. Here, Cheryl Strayed on how her greeting to a bison led to an unexpected, and heart-pounding, experience.Alexander Chee on Acadia: Maine’s Bright FaceAdelle Waldman on Glacier: Return TripsKate Christensen on Grand Teton: Truth in BeautyPatricia Lockwood on Grand Canyon: An Absence of WorldWe asked readers to share their photos of themselves and fellow parkgoers in action — hiking, camping, stargazing, running — using the hashtag #nationalparksNYT. Here are some of the highlights from the hundreds of submissions.Op-Ed: Are We Loving Our National Parks to Death?Of the surviving three vintage cataract boats on the Colorado River, only one remains in use today, the “Sandra,” and we were sitting in it.For this year’s 52 Places to Go list, we selected a lesser-known park: Theodore Roosevelt, in North Dakota. Roosevelt arrived there in 1884 as a young New Yorker ready to raise cattle and heal from the deaths of his wife and mother. Transformed and inspired, he would go on to create the national parks system. Sea, sand, history and climate forecasts are all part of a trip to the Dry Tortugas, an aquatic paradise at the edge of the Gulf of Mexico. Maine is loaded with islands. But Isle au Haut, dangling way out at the edge of the Gulf of Maine, is an outlier among them, larger, taller and wilder than most, with half its area protected as a waterbound outpost of Acadia National Park.Drive the speed limit. Use paper maps. Avoid interstates. After 10 months and 45 national parks, a writer learned how to do a road trip right.An idyllic place yields plenty of surprises, including a warm welcome by American Indian villagers and a restorative dip in a stunning natural pool.Private airboating inside the pristine Everglades National Park, a pastime that stretches back decades, is ending. An obsession with the least-visited National Park Service property in the country animates an argument for vanishing.With “glamping,” or glamorous camping, spiking in popularity, a handful of companies offer luxury getaways at America’s most celebrated playgrounds.Chris Santella’s new book, “Fifty Places to Camp Before You Die,” showcases some of the world’s most beautiful campsites. We talked to him about camping in the national parks. “You would think it would be things like wildlife, raging rivers and stuff like that,” an official says. But you should worry about little things like ticks.“Tomorrow will be an important day in Western North Carolina and Eastern Tennessee, with President Roosevelt dedicating the Great Smoky Mountains National Park to fullest public use.” (The Great Smoky Mountains is now the most-visited national park, by a large margin.)“Winter-conscious Americans having discovered that their national parks in snowtime are among the most wondrous beauties of the world, proud park officials have opened wide the last doors of invitation. Midwinter nature study has been added to the curriculum for those with hardihood to brave zero weather and twenty-foot snowdrifts.”“This will be the only national park that the motor car cannot penetrate; its passengers will need to go afoot within its confines.”“Taps are about to be sounded for bear hunting in the Great Smoky Mountains of Eastern Tennessee and Western North Carolina.”“So large are the crowds of tourists already en route to the National Parks in different sections of the country that a record year for the number of visitors to these playgrounds is foreshadowed. In 1927 more than 2,300,000 people visited them. It would not be surprising if this figure were exceeded by 50 per cent.” (More than 305 million people visited the national parks in 2015.) “Indications that a new high record will be set this year in the number of visitors to Yellowstone Park were shown from the fact that when the park was opened for the season on June 20 a total of 733 persons was admitted during the day and 93 automobiles.” (Yellowstone got 4.1 million visitors in 2014.)“One does not hear much talk of vacation journeys in this year of war, when universal attention is cen tred on the stern business upon which the country is entering. Nevertheless, since people will continue to work and grow weary, the Summer months will see streams of holiday makers setting forth to mountain and forest and seashore.”“The President has prepared a proclamation setting apart 136,000 acres of land on the south side of Lake Tahoe, Cal., as a forestry reserve and park.”“The legislation asked for the protection of the Yellowstone National Park deserves the prompt attention of Congress.”Advertisement