
Bites By                     
ADAM H. GRAHAM

AUG. 12, 2016
In the era of new Nordic cuisine, diners have experienced everything from fried moss to sheep-dung smoked whiskey. But what about old Nordic cuisine? When would fermented mutton make its way to a menu again? Surprisingly, this nearly forgotten gastronomy never left the shores of the semiautonomous Faroe Islands, partly administered by Denmark. In May, the islands saw the opening of what might be the world’s first “fermented” restaurant: Raest, entirely dedicated to traditional Faroese fermented foods.“Raest” means fermented in Faroese. Unlike the wet fermenting process for yogurt and pickled herring, the Faroes’ salty, brisk air creates ideal conditions for air-drying meat and fish, a process done in hjallur, food-drying sheds scattered across the islands.During a recent visit, I dipped chewy strips of air-dried cod into Faroese butter and tasted mutton sausage that whiffed gloriously of Scottish haggis. A bowl of tangy fermented lamb soup was silky and specked with kelp. There are no waiters; chefs serve the tables, using the opportunity to explain the unusual dishes to guests.“Because we eat these dishes at home, the idea of a restaurant serving Faroese food seems senseless to locals,” said Johannes Jensen, the owner, who runs a few restaurants on the islands. “When my mother heard I was opening Raest, she told me it would close within months.”AdvertisementTo the uninitiated, dishes can sound downright Dickensian: turnip pâté, fermented lamb intestines, sauerkraut in mustard cream. For dessert, rhubarb porridge. But to locals, it recalls a time before Continental produce was imported. The old-fashioned flavors — some a very acquired taste — are pungent, but also reveal the hardscrabble history of the Faroes, where until recent decades locals had to subsist on what they could source locally.To lighten the austere mood, Mr. Jensen and his golden-bearded chef, Kari Kristiansen, have imported fermented lambic beers and “vin-nature” wines to pair with the food. They’ve even begun brewing a beer with Faroes seawater and seaweed.AdvertisementThe restaurant itself is in Torshavn, the capital, on the main island of Streymoy, in a creaky 400-year-old house that makes Ingmar Bergman sets look Baroque. The narrow dining room’s floors, walls and ceilings are built of salvaged driftwood. Communal tables seat 27 and are made from the reclaimed Douglas pine of an old schooner’s mast. A Delft stove once fueled by blubber oil sits in the corner. It’s a reminder that Scandinavian minimalism was never a choice in these islands — it was a necessity.Raest, Gongdin 8; Torshavn; 298-41-14-30. Average price for a meal for two, without drinks or tip, is 1,200 kroner, about $180.A version of this article appears in print on August 14, 2016, on Page TR4 of the New York edition with the headline: Fermented, on the Faroes.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »