
Heads Up By                     
SHIVANI VORA

MAY 4, 2017
The arrival of tapas on a weekday afternoon last April at Tinta Fina, a restaurant in the heart of Granada, Spain, happened leisurely. A heaping plate of cuttlefish fritters, glistening with oil, arrived with the first glass of wine, a Spanish rosé. With the second glass, this time a crisp white from the country’s Galicia region, the bartender presented cubes of manchego cheese and a pile of anchovies marinated in a peppery olive oil. Another drink and, an hour later, we were onto meaty rings of fried calamari and hunks of crispy dogfish.We hadn’t ordered any of these tapas, but in Granada, locals rarely do. In a culture almost unique to the city, situated in the province of Andalusia in southern Spain, bars and eateries around town serve tapas to patrons at no cost, whenever they order a drink. With every drink comes a different tapa, often more substantial than the one before, and several rounds of drinks means a full meal can be had, — the only cost being the couple of euros paid for every glass of wine.“If you sit at a bar anywhere in town and ask for a tapas menu to order from, it’s a surefire sign that you’re a tourist because Granadians would never to think to pay for them,” said Pablo Romero, a lanky guide and native of the city.“And since the food is high quality and comes in good portions,” he added, “these tapas are a substitute for lunch or dinner.”AdvertisementGranada’s main attraction is undoubtedly the Alhambra, the stunning hilltop Moorish fortress that was home to the emirs who ruled the area in the 13th and 14th centuries. And while the majestic, ochre structure, a Unesco World Heritage site, is what mostly draws visitors here, there is perhaps no better way to unwind than to savor tapas gratis. Few travelers are privy to the tradition, but now, stylish newer spots like Tinta Fina, a sleek space with dark wood finishes, are bringing attention to the custom by sticking with it instead of following the latest food trends.A few streets away, Sibarius, another newer establishment, is also adhering to convention. The bi-level contemporary boîte has a menu of Spanish, Asian and Peruvian dishes, but a glass of wine, a brandy or even a sparkling water means a hearty tapa is in store. The options change often, but a recent first round, referred to as una primera, was a bowl of steak-like tuna chunks in a pool of locally produced olive oil and garnished with orange zest and whole peppercorns.AdvertisementOne of the newest eateries to bow to this beloved culinary pastime is Filigrana Delicatessen. The airy space has been a popular hangout for locals since it opened last year, and pleasing this crowd is a top priority, said Alvaro Huertas, an energetic owner. “Free tapas are a way of life in Granada,” he said through an interpreter. “It’s what locals are accustomed to, and if I don’t follow this way, they won’t come.”Tapa choices vary; the una primera on a Friday night last spring was bread crumbs mixed with sausage and peppers, while a ramekin of spicy chorizo accompanied by a thick slice of crusty white bread was the second.More recent eateries like Filigrana Delicatessen are reviving the enthusiasm among locals in long-established joints in town and helping to attract tourists.Opened in 1942, Bar Los Diamantes, is one such example.The classic tapas bar, operating in five locations in and near Granada, has a no frills décor; the stellar small plates of seafood are lure enough.There are about eight options, said Miguel Arias, an owner at Bar Los Diamantes, and the average bill with two or three glasses of Spanish wine is about 10 euros a person.Another Granada institution seeing a bump in patrons is the more than 70-year-old Cunini, where seafood tapas are also the star. Plates, meant for sharing, include prawns with the heads on, called quisquillas, seafood risotto and potato salad with baby shrimp.AdvertisementAnd at the rustic La Tana, which is more than two decades old, Jesus Gonzalez Martin, an owner, said that traffic among both city residents and tourists had picked up. “Tourists, especially, are curious to see how the new and old tapas bars compare,” he said through an interpreter.On a busy weekday afternoon, plates of tomato purée on toast topped with sardines, assorted sausages and omelet wedges layered with potatoes emerged from the tiny kitchen as crowds congregated around the handful of small wood tables and the bar.For Mr. Romero, the tour guide, the evolving scene makes for a pleasurable tapas crawl.“What ends up happening today that didn’t before is that we weave between the old and the new,” he said.A picture caption in a previous version of this article misidentified a dish at Tinta Fina, in Granada, Spain. The tapas dish included anchovies, not cuttlefish fritters.A version of this article appears in print on May 7, 2017, on Page TR3 of the New York edition with the headline: A Toast to More Tapas … on the House.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »