OCT. 18, 2016
An article on tips for young women traveling alone got a big response on Facebook — not all of it positive. Readers had a range of alternatives to our advice. Here are some of the tips women shared, edited for length and clarity.I’ve traveled around 28 countries and 6 continents on my own. I disagree with the recommendation to splurge on a hotel. I’ve found that staying in a no-frills hotel or hostel means more money to spend on experiences (e.g. food, entertainment, excursions), and allows me to meet other solo travelers. Take recommendations from other travelers, reputable travel sites, and guidebooks regarding lodging — hopefully, you’ll be out and about exploring all the area has to offer, and not spending much time in your hotel, anyway! Happy travels! — Jaime OliverUse Priceline. I did it for 10 years as a solo touring musician. Always clean, safe, comfortable rooms and hotels, sometimes as low as $45 for rooms advertised as $400-plus a night. Parking is usually higher ($20 to $35 a night) as is hotel food (skip room service), and tipping can cost upwards of $30 to $40 since they have unions that require valets or porters to handle your cars or bags, but it’s still worth it. The later you can book, the better your deal. Save a handful of instances because of conventions or special events selling out the city, I always got a room in the city I wanted booking the night before or day of. — doria robertsUgh, someone needs to debunk the idea that spending more money yields more safety and better information. Choose accommodations that have more people staying there and are in a busy area. Crime is less likely to happen when there’s transparency and foot traffic, and being able to speak to other travelers will give you better information about where to go than hotel staff, who get commissions on the tourists they refer. Also your itinerary should be sent to the Department of State, so the embassy has the most update information about where you are. — Syamala KrishnamsettyAdvertisementTake public transportation to and from airport — the least expensive option, and you will be surrounded by other travelers. Unless you have very little time and there are specific things you want to see, do not have an itinerary. Live in the moment and see where it takes you — and do not hesitate to change your plans if something interesting comes your way. — Jocelyne MarchandPlease verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.What’s the point of traveling, if not to wander? That’s how you explore, develop your creativity, and learn. As for dangerous areas, we have smartphones, maps, and brains — just like men. It’s a sexist and dangerous world for sure, and I welcome a conversation about how women can more freely navigate international travel. But this article was disappointing. — Rebecca Bn-rAdvertisementBring a couple of doorstop alarms with you, so you wake up if anyone tries to come in. The rest of the floor will also hear the alarm and the miscreant will also back off. One alarm for the door and the other for the sliding glass door. — Cynthia MooreWhat about carrying a slash-proof bag and pepper spray? — Emily LardnerI’ve travelled alone since I was 17. Aside from the tip about dressing to fit in, which is true, everything else is overkill. Wherever I’ve been, I’ve stayed in tiny hotels, took public transportation everywhere, never made an itinerary. Get to know people, walk confidently (don’t stand around at 2 a.m. flipping through a paper map looking confused), and use common sense like you would anywhere else. The world isn’t as dangerous as we make it out to be. — Frances OlsonWant more? You might also like:• Best international destinations for the solo traveler• 52 places to go in 2016• The smartphone way to inner calmWe’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »