

      By INGRID K. WILLIAMS

MARCH 9, 2017

The capital of Hokkaido has more to offer than snow: urban parks and a spate of new galleries, shops and restaurants make this a city for all seasons.
Related Article
Sapporo was once synonymous with winter, thanks to its annual snow festival, its famed snow crab and the white powder that reliably blankets the surrounding mountains. But much has changed since the city hosted the 1972 Winter Olympics. Today the capital of Hokkaido, the northernmost of Japan’s main islands, is proving itself to be fertile ground for homegrown creativity, with basements and passageways and crumbling old houses being transformed into galleries and shops and exciting new restaurants. Green urban parks, laid-back residents and an outdoorsy spirit have many comparing the city to Portland, Ore., Sapporo’s sister city on the opposite side of the Pacific. To judge for yourself, speed north on the new Hokkaido Shinkansen; the bullet train began service last year, making this newly dynamic city easier to reach in every season.
Explore street view and find things to do in Sapporo.
There are parks, and there are sculptures, but an entire park that is itself a sculpture? That was the idea behind Moerenuma Park, designed by the Japanese-American sculptor and landscape architect Isamu Noguchi and constructed atop a landfill on the northern edge of the city. Opened in 2005, this 400-acre park features various structures, including a glass Louvre-like pyramid and a fountain, harmoniously placed amid grassy lawns, sloping ridges and a conical mountain standing over 200 feet high. The circuitous paths are popular among dog owners walking curly tailed shiba inus, but the best way to explore the entirety of this sprawling outdoor artwork is on two wheels (bike rentals from 100 Japanese yen, about 90 cents, per hour). A single letter in elegant script marks the entrance to Q, a stylish subterranean restaurant that opened in 2014 and that serves ramen by day and upscale yakitori at night. Heave open the heavy sliding door to reveal a vaguely industrial space — minimalist concrete walls, steel beams, exposed ceiling — dominated by a glass-topped communal table straddling a Zen-like garden. Once seated, order expertly grilled skewers of crisp chicken skin, curried thigh meat and tender tails with salt, as well as the bacon-wrapped egg, which is sliced tableside to reveal oozy yolk. Pair these plates with the smooth, chilled sake from Tatenokawa. Dinner for two, about 7,000 yen. Don’t let the ubiquity of the city’s namesake lager fool you: There is a thriving local craft beer scene afoot in Sapporo. Taste it at the cozy Beer Bar North Island with a glass of its Coriander Black, a rich, coffee-scented ale brewed in neighboring Ebetsu. Then stroll a block to Tsuki to Taiyo Brewing, a newer brewpub with wood-paneled walls, a long blond-wood bar and tables in the rear that invite lingering. Ten taps are devoted to a rotating selection of excellent Japanese craft beers, often including one brewed on-site, which pair well with the kitchen’s scrumptious snacks, like sizzling handmade gyoza with citrus-ponzu sauce or fried Hokkaido potatoes with crisp purple, red and orange flesh. End the night farther down the road at Provo, a third-floor loftlike hangout with graffiti art on the walls, well-worn leather couches and a dance floor where D.J.s keep the party going late. Start the day south of the city center at the Sapporo Art Park, a theme park for art lovers: ateliers and genre-specific studios for learning crafts, exhibition spaces, seasonal festivals and even a museum. But the biggest draw is the outdoor Sapporo Sculpture Garden, a wooded tract where over 70 sculptures have been installed along meandering trails (open from April). Works range from minimalist rusted-metal panels by Lee Ufan and somber Nordic figures from Gustav Vigeland to a contemporary conga line of canary-yellow silhouettes by the Japanese sculptor Shigeo Fukuda. Admission, 700 yen. There is a Swedish proverb that says, “The one who waits for something good never waits too long,” which is a worthwhile mantra to repeat while standing in line outside the ramen shop Menya Saimi. Lunch at this modest spot invariably involves a wait because the beautiful bowls of miso ramen (750 yen), the mellow style native to Sapporo, are considered the best in the city. And for good reason: The noodles are perfectly chewy, the aromatic broth is subtle yet complex, and the toppings form a colorful medley of bamboo shoots, green scallions, roast pork and bright yellow fresh-grated ginger. The work of Hokkaido’s designers at the Museum Store. Credit Andrew Faulk for The New York Times A three-story Taisho-era wooden building near the Nijo fish market became the unlikely epicenter of a growing creative scene when a cutting-edge retail-and-gallery complex opened there in 2014. Visit the first-floor Museum Store to browse boxy knits from the Sapporo-based label Esther, handcrafted Hokkaido-deerskin bags from 24K and leggings printed with wacky designs like tall stacks of pancakes dripping with syrup. Then climb the staircase to the second-floor Clark Gallery & Shift, a white-walled space where contemporary art from emerging local artists is showcased in a collaborative project with the online magazine Shift, whose offices are also on-site. Instead of parsing the flavor nuances of different single-origin coffees, try distinguishing the characteristics of single-origin cacao beans from around the globe at Saturdays Chocolate Factory Cafe, a two-year-old artisan chocolate producer with a cool on-site shop and cafe. Watch the production of small-batch chocolates in the glass-enclosed back-room factory, shop for bars in pretty patterned wrappers or indulge in a frozen chocolate shake, a sinfully rich refreshment topped with a few frozen berries and served in half-pint glass jars (480 yen). A recent exhibition at Clark Gallery & Shift. Credit Andrew Faulk for The New York Times A creative repurposing of unused space has turned two underground sites into free art galleries. The first, in a subway passageway, is the Sapporo Odori 500-m Underground Walkway Gallery, which spans a third of a mile of corridor where protective glass is the only barrier separating harried commuters from contemporary paintings and sculptures from young Japanese artists. Another unlikely gallery nearby, called CAI02, is beneath a food court in a subbasement. Small in size but not ambition, this pioneering gallery recently hosted a kinetic installation by the sound artist Junichi Oguro involving fans that buoyed a crinkly golden sheet midair. Hokkaido is a seafood paradise whose bounty surfaces in more places than just high-end sushi bars. One excellent example is Tempura Kobashi, a refined tempura restaurant hidden on the third floor of a nondescript high-rise. Duck under the white noren (curtains) and take one of the nine seats along the smooth, L-shape counter, behind which the cheerful chef deftly prepares tempura sourced mainly from the sea. The omakase meal (from 4,500 yen) includes a series of delicately fried pieces, presented one at a time, which recently included crisp shrimp heads, tender fillets of local kisu fish and seasonal Hokkaido asparagus. A rice bowl with tempura-fried crab, a Sapporo specialty, signals the impending end of the meal that culminates with a sensational plate of vanilla ice cream nestled against a steaming sweet potato with candylike flesh and flash-fried skin. Evening entertainment doesn’t get much more dazzling than the unobstructed panoramic views from atop Mount Moiwa, a small mountain southwest of the city center. To reach the newly renovated observation complex at the summit, the Mount Moiwa Ropeway ferries visitors in large gondolas to a midstation, from which small cable cars complete the journey (1,700 yen round trip). The outdoor viewing platform boasts daytime vistas spanning the surrounding mountains, but more impressive is the twilight version when the city sparkle stretches for miles toward the Sea of Japan. Dunkin’ Donuts this is not. At DxM, a spacious two-floor cafe in eastern Sapporo, pour-over coffee from the local cult roaster Morihiko is served alongside creatively flavored seasonal doughnuts like cherry-blossom-scented sakura. The warehouselike space is outfitted with rough-hewed tables and counters lined by wooden school chairs, often occupied by studying students.What do you get when you cross golf and croquet? Park golf, a sport that was born in Hokkaido in the 1980s and is now wildly popular with Sapporo’s retirees. Join them for an entertaining round at one of the grassy 18-hole courses along the Toyohira River (1,000 yen for two). You’ll get one driverlike club and a colorful oversize ball to thwack down the 100- to 200-foot-long holes. If the weather is uncooperative, flex your muscles at the Sapporo Winter Sports Museum, where you can play out Olympic daydreams in events like bobsledding and ski jumping, on simulators developed long before Wii Sports (600 yen).The Cross Hotel Sapporo (23 Kita 2-Jo Nishi 2-Chome, Chuo-ku; crosshotel.com/sapporo; from 15,000 yen) is a rare boutique property in a city filled with business-focused hotels. Occupying a modern high-rise in the central entertainment and commercial district, this slick hotel stands out for its contemporary, crimson-accented design, and 181 rooms decorated in three styles: urban, natural and hip.Another upmarket option, the JR Tower Hotel Nikko Sapporo (5 Kita 5-Jo Nishi 2-Chome, Chuo-ku; jrhotels.co.jp/tower/english/; from 19,000 yen) is situated in a skyscraper atop the JR Sapporo train station. This luxury business hotel features 350 rooms located on the 23rd to 44th floors, multiple dining options and a 22nd-floor spa.Flight and Hotel information provided by Google.Prices represent a snapshot of low fares and rates for weekend trips.Advertisement