By DAN SALTZSTEINMARCH 22, 2017
Michael Solomonov has become an ambassador of sorts for Israeli cuisine. The chef is an owner of five restaurants in Philadelphia, including Zahav, his award-winning flagship, and is the co-author of “Zahav: A World of Israeli Cooking.” He is also the host of the documentary “In Search of Israeli Cuisine,” directed by Roger Sherman, which just opened in New York and will be shown in many cities in the next few months. Shot in restaurants, home kitchens, farms and markets across the country, the film shows the radical shift in modern Israeli cuisine, as cooks embrace local ingredients and the country’s myriad cultures.Moments before we spoke, Mr. Solomonov was named a James Beard award finalist for outstanding chef. The day before, he had returned from a trip to Israel. “It was like it always is — there’s all these places you want to hit,” he said. “Just as many places that you haven’t been to that have just opened up. And just as many places that have been there for, like, 300 years that you’re just finding out about. I feel like that’s the story with Israel.” Following are excerpts from an interview with Mr. Solomonov.The most striking thing about the documentary is the dramatic evolution of Israeli cuisine over the last few decades.What’s happening is people are realizing the diversity you find over there. That and the physical environment, the amazing agriculture and the fact that it was between the spice and the silk routes, between the mountains and the sea, make it the perfect place. You’ve got over 100 different cultures that have brought with them or maintained cooking traditions. The Jews that came post-diaspora, they brought with them cuisines of the land they lived in temporarily, but through the lens of Jewish cooking. So you have this little country you could fit it in your pocket, and it’s got so much. And that is what Israeli cuisine is.I think what’s happened, in the last decade or so, is that people have really embraced that. We’ve got amazing olive oil, amazing lamb, amazing za’atar. I was there a few days ago and we were foraging. The fields, and even the cities, stunk of orange blossom. The Galilee has its own microclimate that you don’t find anywhere else.AdvertisementHow do you view your interpretations of Israeli cuisine versus what has become modern cuisine in Israel?AdvertisementWe are in eastern Pennsylvania. Right now, I’m looking at snow on the ground. Even if we were to import Israeli tomatoes, they wouldn’t taste right. So we have to get creative. The tabbouleh, for example, it’s winter stuff: kale, that we mince with walnuts and pomegranate and we serve with apples. It’s not something you’d necessarily have in Israel, but when you close your eyes and eat it, it transports you there.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.If you had to send someone to eat in one place in Israel, where would it be?I like the north a lot — Caesarea and up along the coast, Zikhron Ya’akov, Kerem Maharal, Ein Hod, Ein Chud — it just has it all. You’ve got a lot of Druze influence and a lot of Arab influence. The things that grow up there are amazing. A lot of wine production. There are some really cool restaurants now in that area that are little holes in the wall.What about tips for traveling in Israel?Things that you need, especially if you’re spending a lot of time outside: sunglasses, a hat, tons of water. And breakfasts are awesome, especially in most hotels. Eating chopped Israeli salad three times a day sounds redundant, but it’s such a treat and a gift.And you can’t swing a cat without hitting something that’s 5,000 years old. Or something that represents the birth of monotheism. You know, you can go from the Church of the Holy Sepulcher in Jerusalem to the top of Masada — the first church and the first synagogue — in under two hours.A version of this article appears in print on March 26, 2017, on Page TR2 of the New York edition with the headline: Michael Solomonov on Israel’s Food Scene.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.