AdvertisementSupported byCheck InBy Lindsey TramutaFrom 190 euros a night, about $200.The 10th Arrondissement has long been a draw for its exuberant night life, but left a lot to be desired in design-forward lodging. In October 2015, the 18-room Hôtel Providence, the first hotel venture from the night life mogul Pierre Moussié and his wife, Elodie, became one of a smattering of boutique properties in the area that locals claim as post-work gathering spots and visitors make their base as they explore the thriving Right Bank.The mid-19th-century, six-floor building sits on a quiet square about a five-minute walk from the Place de la République. Some of the city’s best street food, cocktail bars, neo-bistros and bakeries are within a one-mile radius, but for farther journeys, guests have access to public transit lines.Stylistically, the rooms are a cross between an English country inn and a retro Parisian apartment, a result of the sharp mixture of luxurious design treatments and Art Deco styling. To wit: velvet wallpapers by House of Hackney, the high-end British lifestyle label; vintage squat armchairs in mustard and brick; antique brass chandeliers; crown moldings; velour furnishings; marble night stands and antique artwork. I spent the night in a superior corner room that was small but bathed in natural light (it faced the street on two sides and had a window in the bathroom). It also had a color scheme of shades of green and a custom gold-tinted wood headboard in the form of a sun that lent a bold Hollywood Regency vibe. In all rooms, office desks are replaced with bars that are stocked with the essentials for guests to make their own cocktails, but that could also double as a work space.The medium-size bathroom had a large pedestal sink, but a small mirror made grooming slightly difficult, despite good overhead and sconce lighting. Other distinctive features were the Art Deco door handles and the tuberose-scented bath amenities, designed for the hotel by the French perfumer Buly 1803.The sitting room, with its cozy fire in the fireplace, and the spacious terrace are inviting spots for afternoon tea, cocktails or a bite from the full restaurant menu. But given its built-in cocktail bar, staying in the hotel room is equally pleasant. Though the hotel does not have a gym, private training sessions with a coach are available for a fee. Guests can borrow a smartphone for the duration of their stay; in the next few weeks, bikes will be available, too.The hotel’s restaurant offers modern updates of classic French dishes like sea bass with an orange-ginger beurre blanc sauce, Normandy oysters, or sirloin steak in a veal gravy. Most desserts come from a nearby high-end grocer, Julhès. The restaurant menu is available in-room, as is the breakfast, which was delivered promptly at the requested time. The free breakfast buffet in the restaurant has a more robust selection, including soft-boiled eggs and farm-fresh yogurt. But French pastry fanatics should skip it altogether and walk 10 minutes to the award-winning bakery Du Pain et Des Idées near the Canal Saint-Martin.With its classic-chic design, cozy restaurant and convenient location, the Hôtel Providence is a fashionable and affordable resting spot in one of Paris’s most dynamic neighborhoods.Hôtel Providence 90 Rue René Boulanger; 33-1-46-34-34-04; hotelprovidenceparis.com.Advertisement