
Where to Go Now By                     
 JOSHUA BARONE
 
MARCH 1, 2016
An art fair in New York may seem redundant. After all, the city already has offerings for new art spread among hundreds of galleries in centers like Chelsea, SoHo and Bushwick, in Brooklyn. What’s more, many of them don’t charge for admission.So what’s the value in paying about $25 for any of the several big art fairs that pop up around Manhattan every March? Ken Johnson, an art critic for The New York Times, said that more than anything, they provide a chance to take the temperature of global culture.Mr. Johnson is aware of how ambitious that sounds. Gauging the international art scene can easily take its physical toll if visitors don’t approach it with a marathon-like mentality. Seeing every major art fair is nearly impossible, he said, and attending only one even requires a “high capability” for looking at art. “You’ll get exhausted mentally, and your feet get tired,” he said. “A malaise can fall over you.”This year he will review the Armory Show, which with over 200 gallery exhibitions is arguably the largest annual international art fair in the United States. His strategy is to treat it and other art fairs like a magazine: You can flip through the pages and occasionally stop to take a closer look at something that catches your eye. “I walk up and down the aisles and scan,” he said. “Different genres are instantly recognizable, but it helps to keep an open mind.”AdvertisementIf possible, Mr. Johnson said, speak with the art dealers about any exhibitions that you find interesting. The opportunity of having so many of them in one place is rare, and dealers are generally experts on the art they are involved with. “Oftentimes, they know more about it than any critic or historian,” he added.AdvertisementWith several major art fairs spread across multiple locations, Mr. Johnson said, it can feel difficult to choose where to begin. He recommended knowing in advance what you’re interested in seeing. Below is a guide to help you get started.Despite its name, the Armory Show is located at two piers on the Hudson River. (There is, however, an unrelated fair at the Park Avenue Armory. More on that later.) Now in its 22nd year, this art fair provides a global survey of 205 exhibitions from 36 countries.Mr. Johnson said that nearly everyone he speaks with about the Armory Show has the same complaint: “They say, ‘I went, and it was amazing and terrifically exciting for the first half-hour.’ Then suddenly you hit a wall. You’ve got to break that up somehow.” Visitors should plan to be at the Armory Show for at least two hours, he said, and even then the trip should involve many stops for refreshments.(From noon to 7 p.m. March 3 through 6 at Piers 92 and 94, at West 55th Street in Manhattan; $45 for one-day general admission; other tickets range from $25 to $80; thearmoryshow.com)The Armory Show’s affiliate, Volta NY, is smaller and more focused. Its exhibitions, billed as rigorously curated, are by invitation only and feature just one artist each. Getting a sense of one person’s art is more manageable than the sprawling pavilions of larger fairs, Mr. Johnson said, and Volta is a good opportunity to speak with dealers about the works they represent.(Free public preview from 8 to 10 p.m. on March 2; from noon to 8 p.m. March 3 through 5, to 6 p.m. on March 6; Pier 90, at West 50th Street in Manhattan; $25 for general admission; other tickets range from $20 to $60; ny.voltashow.com.)This annual fair, presented by the Art Dealers Association of America, is “pretty manageable and viewer-friendly,” Mr. Johnson said. Its focus is on mainstream American galleries, many of which tend to put on curated or solo shows.Advertisement(From noon to 8 p.m. March 2 through 4; to 7 p.m. on March 5; to 5 p.m. on March 6; Park Avenue Armory, at East 67th Street in Manhattan; $25; artdealers.org/the-art-show.)Over the years, smaller art fairs have popped up with niche themes, often reacting to the mainstream. Independent New York, for example, aims to be more of an art exhibition than a trade fair. This year, it opens in its new downtown digs, with 25,000 square feet of open, flexible space.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.(From noon to 7 p.m. March 4 and 5; to 6 p.m. on March 6; Spring Studios, 50 Varick Street in Manhattan; tickets sold on-site; independenthq.com/2016/new-york.)Pulse New York prioritizes contemporary art, with an eye to cutting-edge works and emerging galleries.(From 1 to 6 p.m. on March 3; 11 a.m. to 8 p.m. on March 4 and 5; to 5 p.m. on March 6; Metropolitan Pavilion, 125 West 18th Street in Manhattan; $25 for general admission; other tickets range from $10 to $45; pulse-art.com/new-york.)As the name suggests, Art on Paper features sculptures, drawings and paintings by artists who work with paper as their medium. The fair is back for another round after its debut last year.(From 11 a.m. to 7 p.m. March 4 and 5; from noon to 6 p.m. on March 6; Pier 36, at Clinton and South Streets in Manhattan; $25 for one day, and $35 for all days including the preview at 7:30 p.m. on March 3; thepaperfair.com.)Mr. Johnson admitted he would likely miss most of these smaller fairs. But he may make a point of visiting one of his favorites: Spring/Break Art Show. “If you really want the best stuff coming out of the studios in New York, this is the place to start.” This year’s theme for the fair, which features hundreds of works from emerging artists, is “⌘COPY⌘PASTE.”(From noon to 8 p.m. March 2 to 7; Skylight at Moynihan Station, 421 Eighth Avenue in Manhattan; $10 in advance, and $15 at the door; springbreakartshow.com.)We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »