AdvertisementSupported byIn TransitBy Shivani VoraLEAP YEAR, LOWER PRICESLeap year falls every four years, and hotels around the country are celebrating Feb. 29, 2016, with deals on rooms.On Feb. 29 from 2:29 to 6:29 p.m., the Charles Hotel  in Cambridge, Mass., is selling rooms for $229 a night (normal rates range from $299 to $499) for stays between March 14 and 31.Gurney’s Montauk Resort & Seawater Spa in Montauk, N.Y., is offering 29 percent off rates on bookings made on Feb. 29 for stays through May 26. Guests must use the promotion code 022916 to get the promotional rate. Prices from $300 a night.The Embassy Row Hotel in Washington, D.C., is giving guests an extra night for free and a $50 daily credit to use toward valet parking or food and drinks when they book two nights on Feb. 29 for a future stay. Prices from $140 a night.Mayflower Grace in Washington, Conn., has a two-night package for a stay that includes Feb. 29 inclusive of accommodations, two glasses of Champagne, daily breakfast, dinner for two and a $100 spa credit. Prices from $510.The Vanderbilt Grace in Newport, R.I., is offering a free stay on Feb. 29 for guests who book for at least two nights; meals at the property’s restaurant, Muse, are free, and daily breakfast is included. Prices from $620 for two nights.Ocean Edge in Brewster, Mass., on Cape Cod, is offering guests 29 percent off future stays for one-bedroom villas when booked on Feb. 29 using the code LEAPYR. Stays must be a minimum of two nights. Prices from $150.At the Manchester Grand Hyatt in San Diego, guests who book the penthouse or presidential suites at the best available rate on Feb. 28 get the second night for $29. Regular suite rates start at $1,919 a night.At Tanque Verde Ranch in Tucson, Ariz., guests who book three nights between Feb. 25 and March 4 get a fourth night free. All meals and activities such as horseback riding, yoga and fishing are included. Prices from $550 a night.At L’Auberge de Sedona in Sedona, Ariz., guests who reserve for three nights beginning Feb. 26 get the fourth night for $29. Prices from $420 a night.At the DoubleTree by Hilton Hotel Park City in Park City, Utah, guests who book between Feb. 22 and 29 will receive a $29 discount each night. The offer is valid for stays before April 10.. Prices from $99 a night.Guests at the Art, a hotel in Denver, Colo., on Feb. 29 will get 29 percent off the best available rate. Prices from $309. The hotel’s restaurant, Fire, will offer a special cocktail menu that day with cocktails priced at $2.29 each.COOKING AND CULTURE IN JAMAICAYou could go to Jamaica and have an ordinary beach vacation, but Paul Salmon, the owner of the Rockhouse Hotel in Negril, wants his guests to also engage with the local culture during their stay. To help, he’s created Passport, a program featuring activities that are meant to reflect the island’s beauty and culture. There are more than a dozen options, such as a lesson with the property’s executive chef, Warren Rowe, on the fundamentals of Jamaican cooking, workshops on Caribbean drumming and dancing, a Bob Marley portrait painting class, field trips to local food purveyors and a visit to a school part of the Rockhouse Foundation, a nonprofit that Mr. Salmon founded to support education in Jamaica. There is no cost to participate in most of the activities part of Passport.A NEW HOTEL IN ASBURY PARK (WITH PINBALL)The Asbury, a hotel in the seaside town of Asbury Park, N.J., is opening on May 26 and accepting reservations as of today. The property is the initial phase of the redevelopment of Asbury Park by the real estate company iStar and is the town’s first new hotel to open in more than 50 years. It’s situated in a former Salvation Army building and has 110 rooms ranging from those with bunk beds that accommodate eight guests to suites with king-size beds; there is also a rooftop garden with ocean views, a pool, a beer garden and a lounge with a Ping-Pong table and pinball machines. Anda Andrei, the former design director for the Ian Schrager Company, is in charge of the contemporary, playful aesthetic while the hotelier David Bowd, co-founder of the Salt Hotels brand, is overseeing the operations. Prices from $125 a night.Advertisement