
5 Places By                     
LIZA WEISSTUCH

APRIL 14, 2016
Central City is far from the pandemonium of Bourbon Street. An area sandwiched between the French Quarter and the Uptown residential neighborhood, its main thoroughfare, Oretha Castle Haley Boulevard, was a thriving shopping and cultural district in the late 19th century and a hub of civil rights activism in the 1960s. But the area eventually became rundown. Now, thanks largely to investments from the New Orleans Redevelopment Authority and resolute entrepreneurs, Central City is re-emerging as a cultural and commercial destination.The history of Southern food customs and culinary ephemera are on display at this museum and demo kitchen. In 2014, it opened in what was once a vast market. Known as SoFAB, the building also houses the Museum of the American Cocktail, which chronicles the business — and pleasure — of drinking in America.1504 Oretha Castle Haley Boulevard; 504-569-0405; natfab.orgOpened last spring in a former department store, this sleek, minimalist space, lined with tall windows, is permanent home to the long itinerant New Orleans Jazz Orchestra. A 450-seat performance hall hosts music and theater, and the airy lobby frequently features live music at night, a bar that sells coffee all day and a library space where the public can browse through 750 jazz books and an extensive digital jazz archive.1436 Oretha Castle Haley Boulevard, 504-371-5849; www.phnojm.orgTwo years ago, this cafe moved from down the street to the sprawling lobby of Zeitgeist Multi-Disciplinary Arts Center, a shabby-chic movie theater. Locals linger over ground-to-order coffee drinks and bites like avocado toast and salads. Mismatched furniture and weathered free-standing doors capture the neighborhood’s bohemian attitude.Advertisement1618 Oretha Castle Haley Boulevard; no telephone; churchalleycoffeebar.comClassic Mexican fare and frequent live music draw locals to this festive cantina. Fans swear by the sumptuous mole dishes and the margaritas. It’s in an 1891 Greek Revival house that was refurbished by the owner, Hugo Montero, an artist and Mexico City native, with brightly colored Latin pop art, music-themed objects and repurposed stained glass windows.1719 Oretha Castle Haley Boulevard; 504-427-0654; casaborrega.comThe well-known local chef Ryan Hughes opened this modern Southern restaurant in the SoFAB building in January 2015. The open kitchen has wraparound seating, and the regionally focused menu blends fine dining and finger food. Popular picks include a hush-puppy-topped salad and the Southern Board, an arrangement of pimento cheese, smoked lamb and fried pickles.Advertisement1504 Oretha Castle Haley Boulevard; 504-324-6020; nolapurloo.comThe Surfacing column last Sunday, about the Central City neighborhood of New Orleans, misstated part of the name of an organization investing in the neighborhood. It is the New Orleans Redevelopment Authority, not the New Orleans Redevelopment Association.A version of this article appears in print on April 17, 2016, on Page TR4 of the New York edition with the headline: In Central City, a Quiet Break From the Bustle of Bourbon Street.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »