By JUSTIN SABLICHOCT. 18, 2016
Robert Zimmerman came to New York in January 1961, looking for Woody Guthrie. He would soon find much more.He found a new name and his purpose in the city, particularly in Greenwich Village.“New York City, the city that would shape my destiny. Modern Gomorrah. I was at the initiation point of square one but in no sense a neophyte,” Bob Dylan wrote in his memoir “Chronicles.”He quickly moved from the Village coffeehouses to the stages of Carnegie Hall, Town Hall and other larger stages. Many of the songs were written in New York, and some were specifically about his new home.Here are 12 tracks to accompany you while you explore Bob Dylan’s New York.
            You can follow this playlist on Spotify by clicking here. 1. “Talkin’ New York” Advertisement“Bob Dylan” (1962)A Woody Guthrie-inspired bluesy narrative with references to his early days in the city, including trying to find gigs in Greenwich Village and dealing with the harsh winter.Advertisement“New York Times said it was the coldest winter in 17 years / I didn’t feel so cold then.”2. “Song to Woody”“Bob Dylan” (1962)Mr. Dylan wrote his Woody Guthrie tribute at the Mills Bar on Bleecker Street. It’s hard to argue against the fact that there would be no Bob Dylan. He modeled his style after him, and has said that finding Mr. Guthrie was the main driving force bringing him to New York.It was, along with “Talkin’ New York,” his only original compositions on his debut album, “Bob Dylan.”3. “This Land Is Your Land’ (Live in New York City, 1961)“The Bootleg Series Vol. 7: No Direction Home: The Soundtrack”This version was recorded on Nov. 4, 1961. Woody Guthrie wrote what is one of the most recognizable American folk songs in 1940.Mr. Guthrie’s original version contained several different lyrics and was really a protest song:“There was a big high wall there that tried to stop me / The sign was painted, said ‘Private Property.’ But on the backside, it didn’t say nothing / This land was made for you and me.”4. “Hard Times in New York Town”“The Witmark Demos: 1962-1964 (The Bootleg Series Vol. 9)” For the melody and some of the lyrics, Mr. Dylan borrowed from an early 20th-century folk song called “Down on Penny’s Farm.”AdvertisementThe lyrics are more of Mr. Dylan’s first impressions of New York, some with a sarcastic slant:“Old New York City is a friendly old town / From Washington Heights to Harlem on down.There’s a-mighty many people all millin’ all around / They’ll kick you when you’re up and knock you when you’re down.”5. “No More Auction Block” (Live at the Gaslight, 1962)“The Bootleg Series Volumes 1-3 (Rare and Unreleased) 1961-1991”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A traditional folk song recorded at the Gaslight, the one Village coffeehouse Mr. Dylan seemed to prefer over the others.The Gaslight “had a dominant presence on the street, more prestige than anyplace else,” he wrote in “Chronicles.”6. “Blowin’ in the Wind” (Live at Town Hall, 1963)“The Bootleg Series Vol. 7: No Direction Home: The Soundtrack”Mr. Dylan wrote this song at the Commons on Macdougal Street in the early 1960s, and first played it backstage at Gerde’s Folk City. This performance was recorded on April 12, 1963, at Town Hall.“I was actually most afraid of death in those first years around New York, when I started writing all of those songs and everyone started calling me a genius,” Mr. Dylan told Robert Shelton. “I knew it was bull, because I hadn’t written what I had wanted to.”Mr. Dylan called the song “a lucky classic song.”7. “The Times They Are A-Changin’ (Live)”“Bob Dylan Live at Carnegie Hall” (1963)Mr. Dylan’s parents were in attendance to see him headline Carnegie Hall on Oct. 26, 1963. It is believed that all of the songs on “The Times They Are A-Changin’ ” album were written in New York, and shaped by the city.Advertisement8. “Boots of Spanish Leather (Live)”“Bob Dylan Live at Carnegie Hall” (1963)9. “Spanish Harlem Incident (Live)” “The Bootleg SeriesVol. 6: Bob Dylan Live 1964 — Concert at Philharmonic Hall”Recorded on Halloween, 1964, at the then two-year-old venue,  Robert Shelton in The Times wrote that the show was “an engrossing program” and that Mr. Dylan “made the most of his small voice. His diction was clear and his singing was frequently moving and evocative.”10. “A Hard Rain’s A-Gonna Fall (Live)”“The Bootleg Series Vol. 6: Bob Dylan Live 1964 — Concert at Philharmonic Hall”11. “It’s All Over Now, Baby Blue”“Bringin’ It All Back Home” (1965)There are numerous theories behind the meaning of this song. Some say “Baby Blue” is Joan Baez, whom Mr. Dylan had been romantic with; others believe it’s a farewell to the Village folk scene. For the purposes of this playlist, we’re going with the latter.12. “Visions of Johanna”“Blonde on Blonde, 1966”With its references to “all-night girls” who “whisper of escapades out on the D-train,” the song is believed to have been written by Mr. Dylan when he was living in the Chelsea Hotel with his wife, Sara, on West 23rd Street.Follow Justin Sablich on Twitter: @JustinSablichWe’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.