By JESSICA COLLEY CLARKEOCT. 15, 2016
Horseback riding has long been considered a costly pursuit, especially when payment for individual rides is required. Choosing an all-inclusive ranch is one way to keep costs down, and there is an additional value when those properties offer specials.Some ranches offer significant discounts on limited dates. The all-inclusive Hideout Lodge and Guest Ranch in Shell, Wyo., has two sets of fall promotions: from Oct. 23 to Oct. 29, and Oct. 30 to Nov. 5. These six-night packages include an airport transfer (normally $195 round trip) and waive the supplement for solo travelers ($275). A party of two would pay $5,370 — including horseback riding on the 300,000-acre ranch — during the fall promotion versus $6,399 during nonpromotion weeks.The Triple Creek Ranch in Darby, Mont., offers a 10 percent discount on a five-night stay with the Montana Getaway package (cost of $6,300 versus $7,000). The all-inclusive ranch is an adults-only property. Guests can sign up for as many horseback rides as they wish, including more than one a day. While some ranches send out large troops for rides, Triple Creek focuses on smaller groups. “We do not send out more than four guests with a guide,” said Kristen Snavely, the head wrangler at Triple Creek. “Our guests all get individual attention.”Properties that normally charge per ride occasionally offer riding packages. At the Alisal Guest Ranch and Resort in Solvang, Calif., the $525 per night rate does not include trail rides ($85 per rider). But the horseback riding special costs $495 per night and includes daily group rides. A similar package is available from the Red Mountain Resort in Ivins, Utah. The Western Adventure Retreat package costs $415 per night, down from the regular rate of $463, and includes riding excursions (normally $150 per person). Longer stays also offer good value. Guests at Lone Mountain Ranch in Big Sky, Mont., who book four nights receive a fifth night free.Some ranches offer credits to enhance value. At the all-inclusive Tanque Verde Ranch in Tucson, a flight credit package is available through Feb. 15, 2017. Guests who book four nights or more will receive a $399 airfare credit. The property has more than 160 horses for daily lessons and trail rides. “There is nothing like experiencing a desert sunset on horseback,” said Rita Cote, the owner and general manager of Tanque Verde.A version of this article appears in print on October 16, 2016, on Page TR2 of the New York edition with the headline: Horse Riding for Less.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.