AdvertisementSupported byBy Jonah Engel BromwichSept. 30th was International Podcast Day.As with many holidays, unofficial and not — National Siblings Day, National Hot Dog Day, National Ferris Wheel Day — it was engineered to promote a cause.International Podcast Day was created by Steve Lee, the founder of a podcasting network called the Modern Life Network. But this year Mr. Lee’s holiday came amid renewed interest in podcasts that had everything to do with one particular show.“Serial,” last year’s hit show, told the story of a crime committed in Baltimore in 1999. It quickly became the most popular podcast in the history of the form. It has been downloaded more than 90 million times, and has incited plenty of talk about the medium’s bright future.Entire podcasting networks, with multiple series to their name, have entered the field since the end of “Serial,” including Panoply, a group of shows produced by the parent company of the website Slate, and Gimlet Media, which has produced such hit series as “StartUp” and “Reply All.”“There’s been an explosion in the amount of attention paid to the medium,” said Matthew Lieber, co-founder of Gimlet Media. He called President Obama’s appearance in June on Marc Maron’s “WTF” show “a milestone.”Still, Nicholas Quah, who works for Panoply and writes an industry newsletter, said podcasts are on the rise because of funding and media attention, rather than a major increase in new listeners. (Our technology columnist agrees.)Mr. Quah lamented problems with distribution and discovery of new showsIndeed, it is often difficult to find good, new podcasts. So I asked both Mr. Quah and Mr. Lieber for their recommendations (barring shows produced by or associated with their networks) and have provided a few of my own.Mr. Lieber’s recommendations:“Science Vs.”On “Science Vs.,” the journalist Wendy Zukerman applies simple science to controversial issues. Mr. Lieber described it as “rollicking and high energy and really, really interesting.”“For Colored Nerds”Eric Eddings, a consultant in digital strategy, and Brittany Luse (who is employed by Gimlet, but works on “For Colored Nerds” on the side) have intense discussions, often revolving around music and pop culture with a dose of politics thrown in.Mr. Quah’s recommendations:Grantland’s “Hollywood Prospectus”Grantland writers Andy Greenwald and Chris Ryan delve deep into the cinematic and televisual landscape, discussing pet theories, cult classics, and their love for screens big and small.“Re/code Decode”The tech reporter Kara Swisher talks to Silicon Valley luminaries (and occasionally others).Mr. Lieber and Mr. Quah both mentioned:“Death Sex and Money”This podcast, which is produced by a public radio station in the New York area, WNYC, covers normally impolite subjects (some of which are mentioned in its title), with its host Anna Sale interviewing guests about the things that are often hardest to talk about.“Longform”The Longform podcast is associated with Longform.org, which selects nonfiction articles that run many thousands of words. Accordingly, the podcast comprises interviews with the authors of such pieces, and gives listeners an inside look at writers, journalists and other media stars.Also worth a listen:“Invisibilia”This NPR show investigates the unseen elements that help to determine how we live our lives: Episodes from the first season included deep dives into empathy, different forms of therapy and the way our expectations of ourselves shape our reality.“Mystery Show”From the Gimlet Media network, “Mystery Show” explores life’s everyday puzzles. The host Starlee Kine gathers clues and answers questions for both friends and strangers.“You Must Remember This”A podcast for those interested in the golden age of Hollywood, “You Must Remember This” travels back in time to tell the story of famous figures of film. The movie critic Karina Longworth hosts this show, which is associated with Panoply, covering such stars as Buster Keaton, Frank Sinatra and Marilyn Monroe.Advertisement