By HIROKO TABUCHISEPT. 30, 2015
Ralph Lauren, the American style icon who stunned fashion insiders by announcing on Tuesday that he would soon cede the role of chief executive at his company, had an urgent message for his employees the very next day: I’m still in charge.News media reports of his announcement had ignited “misconceptions” about how involved he would be in the company once the changes took place, Mr. Lauren said in a memo on Wednesday.“I am not stepping down, nor am I stepping back,” asserted Mr. Lauren, who retains roles as executive chairman and chief creative officer at the company he has led for 48 years.“I am stepping up,” he said.As the largest individual shareholder, Mr. Lauren said at the time of Tuesday’s announcement that Stefan Larsson, his replacement as chief executive, would report to him. But his memo, obtained by BuzzFeed and confirmed by a company spokeswoman, appeared to be an attempt to dispel any notion that Mr. Lauren would no longer be in charge or cede the final decision-making power.Investors seemed to cheer the choice of Mr. Larsson, the president of Old Navy, who is also a former H&M executive.AdvertisementRalph Lauren stock surged 14 percent in trading on Wednesday, as the markets appeared to welcome the clarity that the move seemed to offer on the fashion house’s succession plans. Mr. Larsson is a rising star in retailing, most recently credited with turning around Old Navy, Gap’s low-cost brand.Advertisement(Ominously for Gap, its shares spiraled almost 6 percent lower, over concerns that the company was losing its standout executive. Gap has announced that Jill Stanton, Old Navy’s vice president for global product, will succeed Mr. Larsson in an interim leadership role until a permanent replacement is named.)The leadership change at Ralph Lauren is seen as a bid by the company to get its financial house in order. Its stock had declined by about 40 percent within the last year. The move may also signal the company’s willingness to learn some tricks from mass labels like Old Navy in response to pressure from a stronger dollar and tougher competition in luxury retailing.“A new C.E.O. could have a free hand to eliminate sacred cows” like cost, Michael Binetti, a retail analyst at UBS, wrote in a research note.But if Mr. Larsson is not given such free rein, Mr. Binetti said, revamping branding and increasing revenue at Ralph Lauren could be a challenge.Still, the enthusiastic reception of the new chief executive — and the suggestion that Mr. Lauren was preparing for his succession — appeared to have caused some unease for Mr. Lauren.In an interview on Tuesday before the announcement, Mr. Lauren called Mr. Larsson his “partner” and pledged to keep a hand in design until the fashion world started “designing things I can’t understand.”And he seemed to anoint Mr. Larsson the heir to the Ralph Lauren empire.Asked whether Mr. Larsson would make a good successor, Mr. Lauren replied, “I would say so.”A version of this article appears in print on October 1, 2015, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Lauren Asserts His Control After Naming of New Chief .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.