
White Collar Watch By                     
PETER J. HENNING

NOV. 9, 2016
The surprise election of Donald J. Trump as president raises questions about the changes he will make to the leadership of the Justice Department, including the possibility of a shift in the focus of prosecutors to different areas. Just as important, with Republicans still in control of Congress, there may be an opening to change the Securities and Exchange Commission’s enforcement program.Here are some thoughts on how things might change, and where they are likely to remain largely the same.New leaders mean new priorities, but most investigations and prosecutions are handled by career lawyers in the Justice Department. Cases that involve routine violations of the law are unlikely to be affected by those taking over the top positions, so the day-to-day work of prosecuting cases will continue with little difference in how the government proceeds.Unlike the election cycle, which follows a predictable schedule, investigations develop at their own pace. Incoming prosecutors will inherit cases that may turn out to draw significant attention. For example, Preet Bharara, the United States attorney in Manhattan, who took office in August 2009, found himself just two months later announcing one of the signature prosecutions of his tenure. The case started with the arrest of the hedge fund manager Raj Rajaratnam and others for insider trading and landed Mr. Bharara on the cover of Time magazine in 2012 with the headline “This Man is Busting Wall St.” The case eventually led to dozens of convictions.AdvertisementIn the campaign, Mr. Trump did not say much about white-collar crime apart from assailing Wall Street greed, a standard refrain in the populist playbook, and Hillary Clinton’s use of a private email server. Apart from some criticism of financial overhaul enacted in the Dodd-Frank Act and a promise to restore the division between commercial and investment banking from the Glass-Steagall Act, there was little discussion about how the financial markets would be policed.AdvertisementDoes that mean business as usual for federal prosecutors? The answer is probably yes, at least in the short term, because the transition to the new administration will take time.The new attorney general, with speculation  that it could be Rudolph W. Giuliani, the former mayor of New York, will want to put a stamp on the Justice Department by putting in place new priorities. In a budgetary environment in which spending cuts are likely because of tax cuts and programs dealing with the infrastructure improvement that Mr. Trump promised during the campaign, the Justice Department can expect fewer resources from Congress.One area that is easy to cut is the money devoted to white-collar crime. These cases require a significant commitment of resources for investigations and prosecutions, and they often take years to develop. There is rarely any great hue and cry about fewer prosecutors being available to pursue health care fraud or price-fixing, the types of cases that do not generate big headlines, so moving people out of those areas is unlikely to draw much notice.Starving white-collar investigations to devote more attention to other priorities has been seen before. The New York Times reported in 2008  that the Federal Bureau of Investigation struggled to deal with possible fraud during the financial crisis because so many agents had been shifted to national security after the Sept. 11 attacks. That may be one reason there were few prosecutions of individuals involved in the packaging and sales of residential mortgage-backed securities even though big banks paid billions of dollars in penalties for violations.If there are budget cuts, one area that is likely to continue to thrive is the enforcement of the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act, which prohibits paying bribes to foreign officials to win business in their countries. The Justice Department depends in large part on companies to self-report violations of this law and conduct internal investigations to determine the scope of the misconduct.The roots of the government’s crackdown on overseas corruption can be traced to the administration of George W. Bush, and it was continued aggressively by President Obama. Many of the cases involve foreign companies that have paid millions of dollars in fines, and they are a way to show the public that global enterprises are being overseen to ensure compliance with American law.One domestic corporation likely to resolve a case under the new administration is Walmart, which has already spent more than $600 million to investigate bribe payments in its foreign operations after reporting by The New York Times revealed questionable conduct in 2012. The giant retailer was reported  to have rejected an offer from the Justice Department to pay a $600 million penalty, but that opening gambit signals that the investigation is nearing a settlement that Mr. Trump’s new attorney general can announce.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The benefit of how the foreign bribery cases are pursued is that the cost is borne by the private sector. Although prosecutors proclaim they do not necessarily accept the findings of the law firms hired to ferret out misconduct inside a company, there have been few cases in which the government committed significant resources to investigate on its own. It is unlikely that Mr. Trump would want to be seen as going soft on corruption after some of his rhetoric during the campaign, so the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act is likely to remain a featured player in white-collar enforcement.AdvertisementThe Securities and Exchange Commission has become a punching bag on Capitol Hill, with regular efforts to cut its budget and restrict its rule-making authority. President Obama was able to fend off most of that, but with the House and Senate still in Republican control, and a Republican administration, there is a chance that significant changes will be imposed on the agency.Any reduction in its appropriations will hit the S.E.C.’s enforcement program, which  has reported annual increases in the number of fillings each year under its chairwoman, Mary Jo White. Those statistics were padded a bit by cases for minor violations, a reflection of Ms. White’s “broken windows” approach that emphasizes enforcement for small transgressions in the hope that it will prevent large problems. Interestingly, Mr. Giuliani pushed that same policy to reduce crime when he was mayor of New York.Of greater concern for the S.E.C. may be a change in its authority to pursue cases in administrative hearings outside of federal court. The Dodd-Frank Act gave the agency the authority to obtain penalties against any defendant in these proceedings, so it had the choice of where to file an action. An administrative case can be pursued more quickly because the rules do not allow for broad discovery of evidence by a defendant, and the initial ruling is decided by an internal judge working on a tight deadline, not by a jury.A number of challenges were made over the S.E.C.’s use of this process for cases traditionally filed in federal district courts, but none were successful. The issue did draw the attention of Congress, however, with bills proposed to give defendants the choice to shift a case from the administrative forum to federal court.Representative Jeb Hensarling, the Texas Republican who was chairman of the House Financial Services Committee in the last Congress and is likely to remain there, offered a broad overhaul called the Financial Choice Act  that would roll back a number of provisions of the Dodd-Frank Act.One provision would allow a defendant in an administrative proceeding to force the S.E.C. to refile the case in a Federal District Court, and then require that proving a violation would be by “clear and convincing evidence,” a higher standard than the usual one applied in a civil enforcement action. This would effectively eliminate the use of administrative hearings because the S.E.C. would probably end up in court with a more difficult burden to prove its case, so it would simply file there first.If Mr. Hensarling introduces the same bill in the new Congress, it will have a much greater chance of passage.Mr. Trump said little about what role he expects the S.E.C. to play or what type of commissioner he is likely to nominate. He has been quite critical of the compensation of chief executives, so he may want members who will view Wall Street with a jaundiced eye.With the Republicans in control of Congress, the S.E.C. may not be able to fend off efforts to rein in its authority and cut its budget, especially if Mr. Trump is willing to go along with them. That may put Wall Street’s chief regulator on the defensive from the beginning of his administration.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »