AdvertisementSupported byBy Amie TsangDonald John Trump has been elected the 45th president of the United States.His campaign railed against the establishment, as did his voters. In the end, they delivered a huge upset and a repudiation of Hillary Clinton.The response was immediate: Mr. Trump’s victory roiled global financial markets.Wall Street futures fell as much as 5 percent, indicating that a sell-off looms when American markets open. Futures pointed to the Dow Jones industrial average opening more than 2 percent lower. Futures on the broader Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index fell by the 5 percent limit, although they have since recovered a little.Markets across Asia and Europe also dropped sharply, while the dollar weakened. Oil suffered because investors were worried about trade friction.The uncertainty created by the result has propped up gold and the yen, both haven assets. Bitcoin also soared, as Quartz reports.Japanese economic officials even convened an emergency meeting in response to the swings in financial markets.The Mexican peso weakened sharply against the dollar in Asian trading, and the country’s central bank will hold a joint news conference with the finance ministry at 8 a.m. Eastern time. Mexico has taken the brunt of Trump-related swings as 80 percent of Mexico’s exports go the United States and the peso is an easy currency to trade, making it a popular gauge of market sentiment.Mr. Trump’s victory has been compared with Britain’s vote to leave the European Union, but this could reverberate further.“This is a far bigger deal as this creates instability on a much wider, international scale,” said Nigel Green, the founder and chief executive of deVere Group, a financial consultancy.Some international allies may already be worried about his willingness to adhere to international economic partnerships.As we have mentioned before, the plunge in markets was expected, but the long-term effects are harder to determine because it is unclear how Mr. Trump will lead.The early signs are contradictory: Mr. Trump contrasted his victory speech with his explosive campaign, by appealing for unity and offering warm words for Mrs. Clinton, saying she was owed a “major debt of gratitude for her service.”Mr. Trump will take the oath of office on Jan. 20.If you want to read more coverage of election night, it’s free through Wednesday.• More live updates here.• The detailed results are here.• How the night panned out.Follow Amie Tsang on Twitter @amietsang.Advertisement