
Breakingviews By                     
ANTONY CURRIE and


DOMINIC ELLIOTT

NOV. 9, 2016
Donald J. Trump’s surprise election victory should bring some welcome relief to banks. A Republican Party in control of Congress also usually appeals to the financial markets.The president-elect’s erratic positions on other important issues, however, could turn those short-term gains into long-term pain.Bank stocks rallied early Wednesday after investors learned that Mr. Trump was set to become America’s 45th president. As with Britain’s vote in June to leave the European Union, gyrations in government debt and currency markets could mean brisk business for traders of bonds, currencies and commodities.A commitment to spending on American roads and bridges, reinforced in Mr. Trump’s victory speech, is also a good sign for Wall Street. A repeal or significant reform of Dodd-Frank, President Obama’s 2010 law reining in banks after the financial crisis, is more likely, too, and may help the bottom line of financial institutions. The next Treasury secretary, Securities and Exchange Commission chairman and head of supervision at the Federal Reserve also could be friendlier to the industry.AdvertisementHigher interest rates would be an additional benefit, and Mr. Trump has supported the idea. A one percentage-point increase could add billions of dollars to the top line of the biggest American lenders within a year and act as yet another stimulus to the trading desks of banks like JPMorgan Chase, Goldman Sachs and Bank of America.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Trump’s inconsistency over financial policy and regulation could cancel out those gains, though. This year, he spoke in favor of low rates, for example. If he names a replacement for the Federal Reserve chairwoman, Janet L. Yellen, uncertainty would abound.AdvertisementThere is also ambiguity over his attitude to structural bank changes. Last month, Mr. Trump called for a modern-day version of the Glass-Steagall Act, the Depression-era law that kept retail and investment banking separate. That implies replacing current regulation with other revenue-sapping regulation.America’s banks would be better placed than their European peers. Mr. Trump’s protectionist leanings imply that foreign banks with big United States operations, such as Deutsche Bank and Credit Suisse, might face even more punitive oversight than now, for example.The prospect of trade wars and a tax policy that could add $5 trillion to the deficit, as one research outfit has estimated, also may spell bad news for the economy. The banking industry would be among the first to suffer. More trading revenue will not offset all that.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »