By MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDNOV. 3, 2015
Few corporate executives are better tasked to think about the long term than the chief executive of a $4.5 trillion investment behemoth. And that man, Laurence D. Fink of BlackRock, thinks there isn’t nearly enough thinking about it.To Mr. Fink, there isn’t enough preparation for retirement. There isn’t enough thinking about what prolonged stock buybacks mean. There isn’t enough work being done to shore up the country’s infrastructure.Speaking at the DealBook conference at the Whitney Museum of American Art, the BlackRock chief spoke on a broad range of topics. Perhaps most germane to his company is how corporate America continues to borrow money to finance special dividends and stock buybacks to please shareholders, including activist investors (such as Carl C. Icahn, a speaker scheduled for Tuesday afternoon).Mr. Fink noted that companies in the Standard & Poor’s 100-stock index are paying out 108 percent of their earnings to shareholders.“That can’t last,” he said.As one of the world’s biggest overseers of exchange-traded funds, baskets of stocks that function much the same as mutual funds, BlackRock has been working to address issues that arose with E.T.F.s this summer, he said. But the market has been saturated with what he believes is too much extreme alarm over those troubles.AdvertisementWhen asked about various governmental issues, Mr. Fink offered a mixed report card. He raised a familiar complaint about the lack of a comprehensive plan to fix the nation’s infrastructure, but he said that financial regulators have thought long and hard about whether to deem investment managers like BlackRock as systemically important financial institutions, subjecting them to stricter oversight.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Today, they’re looking at activities of all asset managers,” he said, adding that he believes the day is approaching when regulators will test mutual funds for financial stress. Their main focus, he believes, are financial instruments that are inherently leveraged and carry debt.How about Mr. Fink’s own long term? When asked whether he would consider a move to Washington — he has long been mentioned as a potential candidate for Treasury secretary — the executive demurred.Advertisement“I’m happy where I am,” he said.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.