By MICHAEL J. de la MERCED and CECILIA KANGNOV. 10, 2016
Deal makers took notice last month when Donald J. Trump declared that he would seek to block AT&T’s $85.4 billion bid for Time Warner on the grounds that it would radically concentrate power in too few companies.But after an initial period of turmoil, deal advisers say that it is unclear whether a Trump administration — led by an avowedly pro-business real estate mogul — would really make life difficult for mega-mergers.At the moment, AT&T’s planned takeover of Time Warner, the biggest merger of the year and one that is poised to reshape the world of media and telecommunications, appears to be the most likely candidate for hazing. The president-elect was among the first politicians to criticize the deal, vowing to block it if he became president.Mr. Trump said it was “an example of the power structure I’m fighting.” He also opposed a similar union between Comcast and NBCUniversal in 2013, which he called “poison.”AdvertisementTougher antitrust enforcement on the telecommunications and cable industry would be popular among consumers, who consistently rate it among the worst for customer satisfaction.AdvertisementThe particular focus on giant media corporations, which he railed against during his campaign, could be a personal priority and one his base of voters would support.But antitrust specialists and Republican strategists say a Trump administration may not fulfill his campaign promises.The key to the chances of AT&T’s bid for Time Warner will be the appointments Mr. Trump makes to the Justice Department, which is expected to review the merger, and the Federal Communications Commission, which may also examine it. Those are rarefied worlds that require specific legal and economic expertise.“He’s going to fill them, but I don’t think Republicans are going to fill these spots with people who are instinctively negative on M.&A. transactions,” David N. Shine, a partner at the law firm Paul Hastings, said of the vacancies.The deal makers who helped develop the AT&T offer for Time Warner are likely to bet that even if Mr. Trump impels the Justice Department to file a lawsuit to block the deal, any court that hears the case will apply traditional antitrust standards to clear the transaction. The two companies have argued that theirs is a “vertical” merger with little overlap, unlike a traditional “horizontal” merger that removes a competitor from the industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.All the same, AT&T sought to find common ground with Mr. Trump. John J. Stephens, chief financial officer of AT&T, said at an industry conference on Wednesday that the company agreed with Mr. Trump on matters of building infrastructure and creating jobs.“We’ve been the leading investor in this country for more than five years running, and our Time Warner transaction is all about innovation and economic development, consumer choice and investment in infrastructure with regard to providing a great 5G mobile broadband experience,” Mr. Stephens said. “So we look forward with optimism to working with the leadership and providing benefits to consumers and to our shareholders.”Time Warner declined to comment.Aside from AT&T, the outlook for mergers is less clear. In the short term, potential market gyrations could delay merger talks, although major stock market indexes rose modestly on Wednesday. Time Warner shares, however, fell 1.5 percent on Wednesday, to $86.60.AdvertisementBut longer term, conditions could fall into place for more sustained deal activity. While Mr. Trump took aim at two big media mergers, he is generally considered to be more favorable toward business. And he will be pressured by Republican leaders and his transition team, led by Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey, to appoint officials who believe in free markets and might be more receptive to mergers than a Democratic administration.Some industries may benefit. The stocks of drug companies like Pfizer rose as the potential for tough regulations and prohibitions on mergers appeared to subside. But shares in hospital operators, like HCA Holdings and Community Health Systems, fell on investor concerns that efforts to unwind the Affordable Care Act could jeopardize their new government subsidies.Shares of Sprint and T-Mobile USA rose as the possibility of another attempt to merge the two appeared more plausible under a Trump administration.Some deal makers even speculated that if Mr. Trump fulfills a campaign promise to clamp down on global trade, it will force American companies to find growth at home — and that could include buying competitors.“Once the markets get their land legs back, I think people are going to realize there are real M.&A. opportunities next year,” Mr. Shine of Paul Hastings said.Emily Steel contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on November 11, 2016, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Future of Big Mergers Under President Trump? It’s Unclear.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.