NOV. 10, 2016
On Thursday, Andrew Ross Sorkin talked to the nation’s top business leaders for the first time since the election results. The annual DealBook conference, held this year in the Time Warner Center in Manhattan, featured conversations with chief executives and other thought leaders, who gave their reactions to the election of Donald J. Trump.The interview lineup included:■ Eric Schmidt of Alphabet, Google’s parent company ■ Roger Goodell of the National Football League ■ Indra Nooyi of PepsiCo ■ Shari Redstone of CBS and Viacom ■ Mark Bertolini of Aetna ■ Priscilla Chan of the Chan Zuckerberg Initiative ■ Lloyd Blankfein of Goldman Sachs ■ Howard Schultz of Starbucks ■ Richard Plepler of Home Box Office, a unit of Time Warner ■ William A. Ackman, the activist investorOne billionaire investor has come out in support of another billionaire businessman.William A. Ackman told an audience on Thursday that he woke up Wednesday morning “bullish on Trump.”It was somewhat of a twist for Mr. Ackman, who is known for his support of liberal causes. Mr. Ackman, who runs a $11.6 billion hedge fund, Pershing Square Capital Management, said he liked the idea that the president-elect would run the country like a business.Advertisement“We are going to get a lot done,” Mr. Ackman said in the final segment of the DealBook conference in Manhattan.AdvertisementMr. Ackman had harsh words to say about what he called the “fraudulence of the media,” taking a swipe at a recent portrayal of him in Vanity Fair and coverage of the election.As for his hedge fund firm, he conceded it had been a difficult year; his Pershing Square Holdings are down 20.7 percent so far this year. But Mr. Ackman sought to explain it away by saying the poor performance was largely caused by just one bad trade.“We’ve had one problem: Valeant,” Mr. Ackman, 50, said.Shares of the troubled pharmaceutical company have plunged to $17 a share from the average $190 a share his firm paid in 2015, Mr. Ackman said. Pershing has a roughly 10 percent stake in the Valeant. While he acknowledged the stock was unlikely to get back to $190 anytime soon, he outlined what he said was a plan for the company and share price to recover.Mr. Ackman also brushed off suggestions that investors might lose patience with him given the poor performance this year. He said the other stocks Pershing owns had performed better, adding that the firm had a “good batting average.”As for his best-known bearish stock call — Herbalife — Mr. Ackman said he would still be proved right and the stock would eventually go to zero. But he also struck a humble note, saying he had learned his lesson and would have been “better off staying in the shadows” and not going public with claims that the nutritional supplements company was a pyramid scheme.He added: “This is my last public short.”— ALEXANDRA STEVENSON and MATTHEW GOLDSTEINLloyd Blankfein may be known for making winning investment calls, but like so many on Wall Street the Goldman Sachs chief made the wrong bet in the presidential election.During the campaign, Mr. Blankfein had voiced support for Hillary Clinton’s candidacy and had been personally featured in a television ad portraying the Democrats as puppets of the global financial elite.AdvertisementBut on Thursday the Goldman chief sounded willing to see how Donald J. Trump governs.“I know a lot about Trump the campaigner,” Mr. Blankfein said. “You go into that office and think about your place in history.”Mr. Blankfein said he was not surprised by the two-day rally in the stock market, even as some analysts had predicted a big dip if Mr. Trump was elected, because the Republican’s policies — most likely a mix of corporate tax cuts and regulatory rollbacks — will be “market supportive.”He was asked about a media report on Thursday indicating Mr. Trump was considering JPMorgan Chase’s chief executive, Jamie Dimon, for Treasury secretary.“He would be a great Treasury secretary,” said Mr. Blankfein of Mr. Dimon.He said Mr. Trump’s finance chairman during the campaign, Steve Mnuchin, a former Goldman executive, is ”a highflier, a partner at a young age. He did very well. He is a smart, smart guy.”On Wall Street issues, Mr. Trump has put forth seemingly contradictory proposals. He has said he will repeal the Dodd-Frank financial overhaul law, though his party’s platform calls for breaking up the big banks.Mr. Blankfein said he thought that neither proposal would gain much traction. “If you want to be good for bankers you have to have policies that drive economic growth,” he said.Even as Mr. Blankfein struck a relatively optimistic tone about the impending Trump administration, he had sought to assure Goldman employees about the election results.On Wednesday, Mr. Blankfein left a voice mail with employees globally, seeking to reassure the firm in the aftermath of Donald Trump’s presidential victory, which he said “surprised many of us, similar to what we saw earlier this year in the U.K. Brexit vote.”AdvertisementHe told employees he couldn’t predict whether the outcome of Mr. Trump’s election would be “good or bad in the long run” but that Goldman Sachs would need to “contingency plan for all scenarios,” according to a transcript of the voice mail reviewed by The New York Times.In his voice mail, Mr. Blankfein also addressed Mr. Trump’s caustic words that at times during his campaign had racist, sexist and xenophobic undertones.— MICHAEL CORKERY and ALEXANDRA STEVENSONAs the boards of CBS and Viacom weigh re-merging, the scion of the family that controls both companies believes that, in the media business, bigger is better.Shari Redstone, whose family’s corporate vehicle controls the voting power at both CBS and Viacom, argued that now more than ever, the companies that produce content need to get larger to negotiate against distributors like Comcast and AT&T.The matter is becoming more acute after huge acquisitions by some of the biggest television providers in the country, including AT&T’s $85 billion bid for Time Warner. (Ms. Redstone said on stage that she believed the deal made sense.)Ms. Redstone and her father have pushed both CBS and Viacom to weigh a reunion, putting together businesses that have been apart for a decade. Since then, CBS has thrived while Viacom — home to Paramount, MTV and Comedy Central — has struggled.“Scale matters because it is going to give us leverage,” Ms. Redstone said, “and we are going to need leverage with some partners.”At the moment, special committees at both CBS and Viacom are weighing the merger option. Though media investors and analysts believe that the two companies will go forward, DealBook’s Andrew Ross Sorkin asked Ms. Redstone if it was possible that the two could stay independent and thrive.Advertisement“They are two strong companies, and they both will survive,” Ms. Redstone said. Referring to the presidential election, she added, “Everything is possible — we just saw that this week.”— MICHAEL J. de la MERCED and EMILY STEELThe day after Donald J. Trump was elected, traffic to HealthCare.gov surged.More than 100,000 people signed up for coverage on Wednesday, often with federally funded subsidies, through the health care law that Mr. Trump and his party have vowed to repeal, according to Sylvia Mathews Burwell, the secretary of health and human services.Ms. Burwell stuck to a sunny set of talking points on Thursday, emphasizing the changes the law has brought about — such as guaranteed coverage for those with pre-existing health problems — and how unpopular undoing some of them would be.“When the conversation comes to the point of reality, I think it’s going to be a very different conversation,” Ms. Burwell said.Still, Mr. Trump’s election has cast a shadow over the health care marketplace’s open enrollment period, which began Nov. 1 and ends Jan. 31.“I’m already starting to get the calls where people are fearful about what is going to happen,” said Bernard J. Tyson, the chief executive of Kaiser Permanente. “The questions are now coming: Should I renew? What does this mean? Am I going to get kicked out of Kaiser Permanente after Jan. 20?”(The answer is no. Any 2017 marketplace health insurance plan that a customer signs up for during open enrollment will remain in force for the year.)AdvertisementBut both Ms. Burwell and Mr. Tyson see opportunities for reform where, they hope, bipartisan forces can align, especially around shifting the health care industry’s business model away from high-volume, fee-for-service transactions and toward paying for higher-quality outcomes.Kaiser Permanente is succeeding in its initiatives to move more care out of expensive settings like hospitals and into places like patients’ homes, Mr. Tyson said. Half of its 100 million physician visits last year were done virtually, through tools like videoconferencing and smartphones.“We’re going to end up, in the 21st century, with the home operating as a medical center,” he said. Wearing a Jawbone fitness tracker, he also predicted that wearables would increasingly become medical devices — a technological change that could usher in significant advances in preventive care.— STACY COWLEY“I got a picture this morning of a swastika,” said Howard Schultz, the chief executive of Starbucks, Thursday morning.Mr. Schultz, an outspoken supporter of Hillary Clinton, said he had seen some disturbing things happening in America recently. “It’s hard to understand,” he said.Mr. Schultz said that he felt that much of the country and the world were in a state of shock and disbelief about the outcome of the election, but added that Donald J. Trump’s win was likely the result of years and years of many people in America feeling that no one was listening to them.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In September, after Mr. Schultz endorsed Mrs. Clinton, Trump supporters called for a boycott of Starbucks. On Thursday, at a conference held by The New York Times, Andrew Ross Sorkin reminded Mr. Schultz that Mr. Trump had once said that one of the most successful Starbucks cafes was located in Trump Tower.“Not true,” he shot back.Starbucks has been involved in political activism for years. In September 2013, the company asked customers to leave firearms behind when they were in its stores or using its outdoor seating — a policy change that was made days after a shooting spree at the Washington Navy Yard that left 13 people, including the gunman, dead.And over the summer, Starbucks garnered media attention as customers ordered drinks under “Black Lives Matter,” rather than their names, so that baristas would shout out the phrase when a drink order was ready.AdvertisementAt the conference on Thursday, Mr. Schultz defended Starbucks’s role in activism.“Should we hide behind and not take advantage of the platform we have?” he asked.But when asked whether he would run for political office, Mr. Schultz refused to say yes or no.“I don’t think today’s the day to answer that question,” he said.And, upon being asked whether he would accept a position in the Trump administration (on the off-chance that it were offered to him), Mr. Schultz replied, “I don’t think that’s for me.”— DANIELLE IVORYRichard Plepler, the chief executive of HBO, may not have predicted the outcome of the presidential election correctly, he admitted on Thursday — but he remains convinced that combining his parent company, Time Warner, with AT&T remains the right move.One of the main reasons the $85 billion combination makes sense, he contended, was that it would yield even better data on viewers, which HBO could then use to do a better job of figuring out what those subscribers want to watch. Nearly half of HBO subscribers watch only movies available on the service, and if AT&T is better able to figure out what those people like to watch, HBO can then do better at serving up the content that would keep them watching.What the data won’t be used for, he said, is to dictate the kinds of shows that will be made.“The more we get, the more we learn, the more we can micro-target,” Mr. Plepler said. “No one is telling a writer, ‘Write this based on the data.’”His counterpart on stage and the chief executive of the cable operator Charter Communications, Thomas M. Rutledge, was more circumspect about the deal. Charter — which struck its own megadeal by buying Time Warner Cable — spends about $10 billion a year on content already, which Mr. Rutledge says accounts for much of the expense of cable packages.So putting Time Warner under the aegis of AT&T and potentially charging even more for HBO, CNN and other Time Warner properties remains a concern.Advertisement“I’m not opposed to the transaction,” Mr. Rutledge said. “I want to see more facts.” — MICHAEL J. de la MERCED“Is there a box of tissues here?” Indra Nooyi said with a smile.Ms. Nooyi, the chief executive of PepsiCo and a Hillary Clinton supporter, had just been asked how she was feeling after the election.She offered her congratulations to President-elect Donald J. Trump — but then professed a deep sadness and sense of disappointment about the outcome.“I had to answer a lot of questions, from my daughters, from my employees — they were all in mourning,” she said. “Our employees are all crying and the question that they are asking, especially those that are not white: ‘Are we safe?’ Women are asking, ‘Are we safe?’ L.G.B.T. people are asking, ‘Are we safe?’ I never thought I’d have had to answer those questions.”Asked about the coarseness of the language used during the election as well as the domestic violence issues confronting the National Football League, which Pepsi sponsors, she said: “Forget the Pepsi brand — how dare we talk about women that way? Why do we talk that way about a whole group of citizens?”She said she did not think there was a place for a type of language that has sometimes been dismissed as “locker room talk.” “Not in locker rooms, not in football players’ homes, not in any place.”“If we don’t nip it in the bud,” Ms. Nooyi added, “this is going to be a lethal force that takes over society.”“It has got to stop,” she said — at which point the auditorium, packed with business leaders, academics and others, erupted into applause.AdvertisementMs. Nooyi emphasized the need to offer reassurances, as a nation, to women, racial minorities and members of the lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender community.“The first thing we have to do is assure everyone that they are safe,” she said. — DANIELLE IVORYWhen Aetna ran through post-election expectations, the idea that Donald J. Trump would win the presidency and that Republicans would control both chambers of Congress seemed so implausible that it was not even in play.“We started with a fresh piece of paper yesterday — we had no idea how to approach it,” Mark T. Bertolini, the company’s chairman and chief executive, said Thursday morning at the DealBook conference. “What we would have spent months doing if we thought it was even remotely possible, we had to do in a day.”So what happens now? Mr. Bertolini said he assumed that the Affordable Care Act, the landmark bill that reshaped the health care market, would be repealed but perhaps some parts would survive.In particular, he named three changes mandated by the law that he thinks will endure: allowing young adults to remain on their parents’ insurance policies until they turn 26, the expansion of Medicaid to cover many low-income people and “guaranteed issue,” the rule that requires insurers to offer policies to all applicants, regardless of their health conditions.“I think those are all very important positions that we need to continue,” Mr. Bertolini said.But other provisions are very likely dead, Mr. Bertolini forecast, including the “Cadillac tax” on high-cost plans that was scheduled to take effect in 2020. What happens to premiums in 2018 and beyond is also an open question, he said.Aetna dealt the health care law a major blow this year when it sharply reduced its participation in the public marketplaces, pulling out of two-thirds of the counties in which it sold individual insurance. Without a larger number of healthy people buying insurance through the exchanges, the cost of caring for sick customers had grown too large, Mr. Bertolini said at the time.AdvertisementPremiums for midlevel marketplace plans are set to rise an average of 25 percent next year. They will rise even more in 2018 without significant changes to the law, Mr. Bertolini said Thursday.Still, he thinks a wipeout of the Affordable Care Act is unlikely. Twenty million people gained health care coverage through the law, and “you can’t put them out on the street without insurance,” Mr. Bertolini said. — STACY COWLEYThe National Football League is considering ways to shorten games, including cutting some advertising from broadcasts, to keep the action moving, says Roger Goodell, the league’s commissioner.Responding to shifts in the way fans watch games, the league is looking at whether games should be shorter, including reducing the amount of time spent not playing and speeding up instant replay reviews, to “keep our games exciting.”Fans often complain about the games being too long and frequently express annoyance at the number of commercial breaks and referee video reviews.The league has been plagued with declining ratings this season as fans find nontraditional ways to view games, including online. At Thursday’s DealBook conference, Mr. Goodell said ratings wax and wane in cycles, but he acknowledged that there had been fundamental shifts in the way people use media. The league’s response is to make sure fans are engaged no matter how they see the games.He said the league was also looking at how best to use technology to improve officiating without slowing down the game. “I was at Giants Stadium in the parking lot last weekend, and I got a lot of feedback from fans,” he said. — LIZ MOYERMost public figures should assume that information about them will be leaked. At least, that’s what Eric Schmidt, the executive chairman of Google’s parent company, Alphabet, thinks.AdvertisementMr. Schmidt, whose emails with members of Hillary Clinton’s presidential campaign were stolen and recently published online by WikiLeaks, spoke at length about the importance of tightening digital security at a conference held by The New York Times on Thursday, and said that President-elect Donald J. Trump should create a division within the federal government that spends its time auditing the security of its systems.“We live online now,” he said. “If you grab someone’s smartphone, it’s equal or worse than grabbing their wallet.”He said Julian Assange, the founder of WikiLeaks, once told him that, because “governments are capable of systemic evil, which requires planning,” leaking any form of activity at that level would prevent government from getting “too far into that evil.” Mr. Schmidt punctuated that story, however, by saying, “The problem, of course, with this argument, is that he appoints himself the judge of that.”Mr. Schmidt added that the United States government had not yet figured out how to deter digital attacks from other countries.”China has been responsible for the vast majority of commercial attacks, and yet we maintain good relations with China over all,” he said. — DANIELLE IVORYA version of this article appears in print on November 15, 2016, on Page F2 of the New York edition with the headline: A Post-Election World.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »