AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael CorkeryThe unwinding of Dodd-Frank. The firing up of shuttered coal plants. The rollback of rules that increase overtime pay for low-wage workers.Hours after Donald J. Trump won the race for the White House, scores of regulations that have reshaped corporate America in the last eight years suddenly seemed vulnerable.While many questions remain about how Mr. Trump will govern, a consensus emerged Wednesday in many circles in Washington and on Wall Street about at least one aspect of his impending presidency: Mr. Trump is likely to seek vast cuts in regulations across the banking, health care and energy industries.“This is going to be a president who will be the biggest regulatory reformer since Ronald Reagan,” Stephen Moore, one of Mr. Trump’s economic advisers said in an interview on Wednesday. “There are just so many regulations that could be eased.”Although Mr. Trump is a maverick politician, his anti-regulation stance is that of an old-school Republican. It is driven by a belief that the economy will grow faster if businesses are freed from the long arm of the federal government.Or at least that is what some analysts and economists say they think is Mr. Trump’s rationale. Even after a long campaign of endless rallies and debates, Mr. Trump and his closest advisers have disclosed relatively few specific economic policy proposals.And some of what he has proposed seems contradictory. For example, he has said he would roll back the Dodd-Frank financial overhaul, while his party platform calls for breaking up the big banks.Mr. Trump will probably find common ground with many Republicans in Congress, including Speaker Paul D. Ryan, on cutting regulation. They clashed during the campaign over Mr. Trump’s past conduct toward women and inflammatory statements about ethnic groups, and many Republicans do not see eye to eye with Mr. Trump on immigration and trade.“But Ryan and Trump are like-minded on regulation in a way they are not on trade and immigration,” said Ted Gayer, director of the economic studies program at the Brookings Institution and a former Treasury official under President George W. Bush. “That is red meat for both of them.”Here is a rundown on how Mr. Trump’s presidency could gut regulations from Wall Street to Silicon Valley:A clean Republican sweep of the White House and Congress would normally be greeted by loud cheers across Wall Street.But Mr. Trump’s victory is not a clear boon for bankers and financiers in the way that past Republican wins have been.On paper, many of his campaign proposals appear to favor banks and investors, including a promise to undo Dodd-Frank, which was passed after the 2008 financial crisis.Yet repealing the law and its many rules seems unlikely to gain much traction in Congress. And even many banks admit they have spent so much time and money complying with the law, they would rather keep it.Several Obama administration officials said on Wednesday that they did not expect Congress to completely repeal Dodd-Frank. Instead of undertaking such a costly and controversial effort, one likely possibility is that the Trump administration and Congress would take aim at a handful of specific rules that most irritate the banks, including what is known as the Volcker Rule, a centerpiece of Dodd-Frank that prohibits banks from placing risky bets with their own money.Otherwise, many of the expected changes would benefit small and midsize banks rather than Wall Street banks. Regulators, for example, could raise the size at which a bank is subject to Dodd-Frank’s enhanced oversight.Other pieces of Dodd-Frank could be picked off, like reining in the authority of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, a hallmark of the Obama administration.Mr. Trump could prune other low-hanging financial regulations, including a newly enacted Department of Labor rule that holds investment advisers liable for certain advice to their clients.He also promised on the campaign trail to close the so-called carried interest tax loophole that increases the wealth of private equity executives.And Mr. Trump’s campaign took aim at the honey pot of global banking revenue: free trade. For decades, banks have benefited from facilitating deals and lending to companies worldwide.“Probably more so than any president in modern history it will be difficult to predict what issues he latches onto,” said Aaron Klein, a former Treasury official in the Obama administration, who is now a fellow at the Brookings Institution.MICHAEL CORKERY, BEN PROTESS and LESLIE PICKERIn the energy industry, one of Mr. Trump’s first targets, according to Mr. Moore, an economic adviser, is President Obama’s effort to limit carbon emissions at coal-fired utilities.Mr. Trump’s supporters say the rule drove coal companies into bankruptcy, even though the industry says that its problems are mostly caused by waning demand.It is unclear whether the election of Mr. Trump can help struggling coal miners get back their jobs, but it will almost certainly upend the world’s efforts to curb the impact of global warming.While some legal and procedural roadblocks would impede a complete dismemberment of Mr. Obama’s climate change regulations, a Trump administration could significantly weaken or slow them.Mr. Trump has said that he would do everything in his power to undo Mr. Obama’s ambitious domestic and international climate change policies.He has vowed to “cancel” the Paris Agreement. Nearly every country put forth plans to reduce emissions of carbon dioxide in that 2015 deal. But it is not possible for a world leader to unilaterally block or undo the accord, nor would it be possible for the United States to legally withdraw from it for at least the first term of a Trump administration.Under the accord, Mr. Obama promised that the United States would cut emissions up to 28 percent from 2005 levels by 2025, largely through the Environmental Protection Agency regulations on coal-fired power plants.Mr. Trump could not immediately block the E.P.A. rules, but over the course of his administration he could ensure that they are weakened or rolled back. The rules are facing a legal challenge by 28 states and dozens of companies, and the case is expected to go before the Supreme Court as soon as next year. By appointing an industry-friendly Supreme Court justice and not arguing for the rules, Mr. Trump could weigh the court against them. He could also direct the E.P.A. to rewrite the regulations to be far more lax.A Trump administration could weaken, or even repeal, the rules governing fuel economy and greenhouse gas standards for new cars and trucks.Oil and natural gas executives are hopeful that Mr. Trump will deliver for them, too. They want a loosening of methane emission standards for existing oil wells and the opening of the long-delayed Keystone XL pipeline.“I think he’s going to make a big difference,” said Darlene S. Wallace, president of Columbus Oil, an Oklahoma company.CORAL DAVENPORT, CLIFFORD KRAUSS and HIROKO TABUCHIAs income inequality and stagnant wages became a major preoccupation among voters, the Obama administration brought regulations and enforcement actions intended to increase the leverage of workers. Most of these efforts are now endangered by the prospect of a Republican president and Republican Congress.One achievement in this area has been a regulation raising the salary threshold below which workers automatically become eligible for time-and-a-half overtime pay, to $47,476 from $23,660.In theory, the regulation could be undone by the Trump administration through a rule-making process similar to the one that produced it. But this could take months, if not years. Instead, some lobbyists expect Congress to pass a legislative compromise that would rein in the overtime rule, by phasing it in over a number of years, and by limiting or undoing the automatic upward adjustment in the salary threshold every three years.Mr. Obama enacted a number of other policies through executive order rather than a more involved rule-making process, and these could be undone by a President Trump almost immediately, with the stroke of a pen. These include rules that increased the minimum wage and granted paid sick days to workers hired by federal contractors.More broadly, the Obama administration has made a priority of aggressively enforcing laws protecting workers. To do so, some of its appointees have issued “interpretations” on such questions as which workers should be protected by minimum wage and overtime laws, documents that don’t carry the force of law but can lower the bar for pursuing employers.Trump administration appointees could quickly reject such interpretations and enforce the law differently, said Marc Freedman of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce.The president also makes important appointments to the National Labor Relations Board, which protects workers’ rights to organize and adjudicates questions of labor law. During the president’s second term, the board overturned decades of precedent and made it far more likely that a company would be held responsible for trampling on the labor rights of employees hired by contractors or franchisees that it does business with.Mr. Trump’s appointees to the N.L.R.B. could easily reverse such rulings.NOAM SCHEIBERThe idea of a Trump presidency triggered a sense of dread among many people in the liberal-leaning technology business.Mr. Trump is seen as less favorably disposed toward the concentration of power among the handful of large companies that dominate the internet, including Facebook, Google and Amazon, said Glenn Kelman, chief executive of Redfin, an online real estate firm“I think Donald Trump may be facile with Twitter but mostly feels hostility towards these companies and their size,” Mr. Kelman said.During the campaign, Mr. Trump told an audience in May that “we’re going get Apple to start building their damn computers and things in this country, instead of in other countries.”Many technology executives have called that idea far-fetched since most of Apple’s supply chain, including many of its parts makers, are in Asia.Mr. Trump also blasted Jeffrey P. Bezos, the chief executive of Amazon, saying that he was using the political influence of The Washington Post, which Mr. Bezos owns, to discourage government action against Amazon on tax and antitrust issues.And Mr. Trump has called for the rejection of AT&T’s bid for Time Warner.Still, analysts expect that he will appoint antitrust regulators at the Federal Trade Commission and Justice Department who will largely follow traditional Republican approaches to the free market.Craig Berman, a spokesman for Amazon, declined to comment.Mr. Trump will be under pressure by major telecom and cable firms to roll back aspects of net neutrality. The rule inhibits how broadband providers manage traffic on their networks to ensure any website is equally accessible to consumers.Telecom and cable firms continue to challenge the rules in court and Mr. Trump, with the encouragement of Republicans in Congress, may seek to abandon the regulation.NICK WINGFIELD, VINDU GOEL and CECILIA KANGShares of drug makers rallied on Wednesday on apparent relief that Hillary Clinton, who had vowed to enact a series of drug-pricing controls, had lost the election. But several in the industry said that the broader debate over high drug prices would probably continue and that it was unclear what positions Mr. Trump might take.“The truth is, who knows?” said Ron Cohen, chief executive of Acorda Therapeutics and the chairman of the Biotechnology Innovation Organization, an industry trade group. “We still have to deal with the basic issues that are confronting us as an industry, and those have not changed just because of an election.”Outrage over the rising cost of prescription drugs has spiked in recent years as Americans struggle to pay for their medicines. Egregious examples of price increases, like those on Mylan’s EpiPen and older drugs sold by Valeant Pharmaceuticals, prompted congressional hearings and investigations.At the same time, the drug industry has gone to war with insurers and employers who pay for their workers’ health coverage. Those dynamics, several people said, have not changed, and outrage over high drug prices is seen as a bipartisan issue.Nonetheless, Mr. Trump placed less emphasis on the issue than Mrs. Clinton did during the campaign.He has said he would be in favor of allowing the federal government to negotiate for the price of prescription drugs in Medicare’s Part D program and to allow for the importation of drugs from countries like Canada, both positions that are opposed by the industry and have historically been associated with Democrats.KATIE THOMASAdvertisement