AdvertisementSupported byBy Sydney EmberVice Media, whose brashness has made it one of the hottest media companies, is getting its own cable channel. On Tuesday, Vice and A&E Networks said they had put the final touches on a long-awaited deal for Vice to take over H2, an A&E Networks channel.Vice will fill the cable channel, which will be called Viceland, with lifestyle and entertainment programming, including shows about music, sports, food and travel. The channel will start in late February, according to a person briefed on the deal.Spike Jonze, a longtime Vice collaborator, is expected to be its creative director.The cable channel represents another step in Vice’s transformation into a mainstream media company. Founded in Montreal in 1994 as a free punk magazine, Vice has spun its rebel image into gold, attracting investments worth hundreds of millions of dollars from media giants that see value in its core audience of young men. Most recently, Disney invested $200 million in Vice, according to another person with knowledge of the matter, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because the terms of the deal were private. Vice has coveted a cable channel as another outlet for its original shows and as a way to lure more advertising dollars. A&E and Vice said they would work together to sell ads on Viceland, which is to be distributed initially to roughly 70 million homes in the United States.Both companies had expected to announce the cable channel deal in the spring, but it was held up because not all of A&E’s distribution partners could agree on the terms.For A&E, the move is part of a bigger strategic shift, said Nancy Dubuc, president and chief executive of A&E Networks. The television group has been pushing to diversify its portfolio of channels, which, along with H2, includes the History channel, Lifetime and A&E. Handing Vice the H2 channel, a History channel spinoff with history-focused shows, will give the weaker-performing channel markedly different programming, which could help A&E attract young male viewers, Ms. Dubuc added.H2 had 354,000 prime-time viewers on average this year through mid-October, according to Nielsen, compared with 389,000 last year.But it was not clear whether Vice would be able to draw viewers to a cable channel, particularly in an age when millennials are increasingly dropping their cable subscriptions and turning to streaming services like Netflix and Hulu. Indeed, Shane Smith, chief executive of Vice, has for years criticized traditional TV for being slow and unable to attract young viewers. Ms. Dubuc acknowledged the risks, saying she did not expect the channel to blossom overnight. “I think it’s going to take some time,” she said. “We’re in this for the long game.” As part of the new deal, A&E will increase its ownership stake in Vice to more than 15 percent from roughly 10 percent, and Vice will own nearly 50 percent of H2, according to one of the people briefed on the negotiations, who spoke on the condition of anonymity.Last year, A&E Networks and Technology Crossover Ventures, a venture capital firm, invested a total of $500 million in Vice. In 2013, 21st Century Fox took a 5 percent stake for $70 million.This year, Vice signed a multiyear deal with HBO to broadcast a daily half-hour newscast, which is expected to begin next year. It already has a weekly documentary series on the cable network. Vice is now valued in a range of $4.2 billion to $4.5 billion, according to people briefed on the recent deals. Brooks Barnes contributed reporting.Advertisement