By REUTERSNOV. 10, 2016
Walt Disney Company shares jumped in after-hours trading on Thursday as executives promised improving growth next year and beyond, despite earlier concerns over lower advertising sales and subscriber losses at the ESPN sports network.Executives said that they expected modest growth in earnings per share in fiscal 2017 and “more robust growth” in fiscal 2018 and beyond. The stock rose 2.7 percent.Disney and media rivals face challenges from “cord cutters” who are dropping TV subscriptions for cheaper and more convenient online services, and the issue is especially crucial for ESPN, one of Disney’s most important brands.Excluding items, the company earned $1.10 a share in the latest quarter, missing the $1.16 consensus forecast of analysts polled by Thomson Reuters I/B/E/S.AdvertisementShares dropped immediately after the report, but revived after the executives’ comments on growth in a call to analysts.AdvertisementRevenue in Disney’s cable networks business, which includes ESPN, fell 6.8 percent, to $3.96 billion, in the fiscal fourth quarter. Analysts had been expecting $4.13 billion, according to FactSet StreetAccount.Nielsen data estimated that ESPN lost 621,000 subscribers in November — a figure Disney has sharply disputed.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.To fight cord-cutting, Disney said in August that it would start an ESPN subscription streaming service by the end of 2016. The service won’t include content that appears on ESPN’s TV networks.Disney’s movie business generated revenue of $1.81 billion in the quarter, up 1.57 percent, missing the average FactSet estimate of $1.84 billion.Revenue from Disney’s theme parks, resorts and cruise line business rose 0.6 percent to $4.39 billion. The company opened its Shanghai theme park in June. Attendance declined at Disney’s parks in Paris, Hong Kong and California, the company said.Net income attributable to the company, which also owns the ABC television network, rose to $1.77 billion, or $1.10 a share, in the fiscal fourth quarter ended Oct. 1, from $1.61 billion, or 95 cents a share, a year earlier.Disney’s revenue fell to $13.14 billion from $13.51 billion.A version of this article appears in print on November 11, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Disney Vows New Growth, and Its Shares Shoot Up.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.