AdvertisementSupported byBy Amie TsangThe United States president-elect didn’t write a book called “The Art of the Deal” for nothing.It now looks like mergers and acquisitions could be on the rise, providing Donald J. Trump’s administration can govern with stability.Deal making could be encouraged (or, indeed, reduced) by changes to taxes, as well as shifts on the Dodd-Frank Act or the Affordable Care Act.There are huge changes coming that could markedly alter how the economy functions — for better or worse. Either way, companies will be angling to reposition themselves, which is likely to keep driving deal-making momentum.His pro-business tendencies (let’s not forget that he is a real estate developer) may also be a boon for investors.Mr. Trump’s promise to make a push on infrastructure spending has bolstered stocks in construction companies.The prospect of deregulation could also rally shares in banks, pharmaceuticals and energy. It seems that now that the initial uncertainty of the election result is over with, there could be gains ahead for stocks.Executives and other leaders grappled onstage with the results of the election. Here’s what they had to say.“We are going to get a lot done.”— William A. Ackman, the hedge fund manager, on feeling bullish about a Trump presidency and liking the idea that the president-elect would run the country like a business. He also admitted that he might have been better not going public with his call on Herbalife, which he accused of being a pyramid scheme.“He would be a great Treasury secretary.”— Lloyd Blankfein, the chief executive of Goldman Sachs, on reports indicating that Mr. Trump was considering JPMorgan’s chief executive, Jamie Dimon, for the role.“Scale matters because it is going to give us leverage and we are going to need leverage with some partners.”— Shari Redstone, whose family controls CBS and Viacom, making the case for merging the two companies.“I got a picture this morning of a swastika.”— Howard Schultz, the chief executive of Starbucks, on disturbing images he had seen in the aftermath of the election. Mr. Schultz was an outspoken supporter of Hillary Clinton.“No one is telling a writer, ‘Write this based on the data.’ ”— Richard Plepler, the chief executive of HBO, on why the viewer data collected by HBO (and eventually used by AT&T if a deal with Time Warner were completed) would not be used to dictate the kinds of shows being made.“Forget the Pepsi brand — how dare we talk about women that way? Why do we talk that way about a whole group of citizens?”— Indra Nooyi, the chief executive of PepsiCo, on the coarse language used during the election and the domestic violence issues confronting the National Football League, which is sponsored by Pepsi.“When the conversation comes to the point of reality, I think it’s going to be a very different conversation.”— Sylvia Mathews Burwell, the United States secretary of health and human services, on the prospect of changes to the health care law.“You can’t put them out on the street without insurance.”— Mark T. Bertolini, the chief executive of Aetna, on the 20 million people who gained health care coverage through the Affordable Care Act, and why he thinks parts of the law will endure.“China has been responsible for the vast majority of commercial attacks, and yet we maintain good relations with China over all.”— Eric Schmidt, the executive chairman of Alphabet, said that the United States government had not yet figured out how to deter digital attacks from other countries.• Stanley Fischer, the vice chairman of the Federal Reserve, speaks about United States monetary policy and the global economy at the 20th annual conference of the central bank of Chile.• Alibaba’s shopping holiday, Singles Day, draws to a close. With growth in users, new stores and the value of goods sold on its platform slowing, it looks like the very dynamics that helped Alibaba engineer the holiday have turned against it.Follow Amie Tsang on Twitter @amietsang.Advertisement