By ELIZABETH OLSONNOV. 14, 2016
Martin Lipton, a founding partner of the New York law firm Wachtell Lipton Rosen & Katz, specializes in advising major corporations on mergers and acquisitions. Mr. Lipton, 85, has been instrumental in shaping corporate deal making for decades; he is particularly well known for his efforts to bolster management defenses against hostile takeovers. Mr. Lipton, who set up the firm in 1965 with fellow graduates of New York University School of Law, continues to practice law and speak out against what he sees as the damage that the short-term drive for earnings has done to the economy.  In an interview, he discusses the current merger landscape as well as his work to promote alternatives to what he calls “short-termism.”What trends are you seeing among your clients, in terms of what they are seeking in a transaction?Companies are seeking mergers that do not dilute earnings, as well as mergers that will be viewed as natural extensions of product or of geographic markets — and, in addition, mergers to maintain position in consolidating industries.Advertisement With the mergers and acquisitions market having a turbulent and uncertain year so far, what are the dynamics that you’ve observed?AdvertisementThe significant influences have been mergers to accommodate and adjust to the impact of new technologies — such as the Oracle acquisition of NetSuite — mergers to achieve top-line growth that is otherwise not obtainable in a slow and low-growth economy — such as Sherwin Williams’s acquisition of Valspar — and mergers to obtain cost synergies and mergers in response to activist pressures, such as the Dupont merger with Dow Chemical. The primary cause of agreed big mergers falling through has been failing to pass the federal antitrust barriers.Has “Brexit” had any effect on the merger market that you’ve noticed?I have not witnessed any substantial current impact. There has been, however, considerable speculation as to the future impact. But it’s really too early to know.What is your wish list for the coming administration on the legal and regulatory fronts?I strongly support — and advise — the Aspen Institute’s American Prosperity Project, which is a nonpartisan framework for long-term investment. Key objectives are tax reform, restoring the country’s infrastructure, discouraging short-termism, encouraging company investment in research and development, long-term capital projects, employee training and pricing carbon to simplify regulation, stimulate investment and raise revenue. In addition, it calls for affordable higher education, making job training available to all and fixing the defects in the Affordable Care Act.In boardrooms, academia and on Wall Street, there is a lot of debate over short-term versus long-term stock prices and what constitutes “fiduciary responsibility” for board members. Is it simply a matter of rewarding investors, who may have a different time frame and focus in mind, compared with the broader societal and political demands that companies and executives consider employees, customers and others in their decisions? Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The vast majority of funds invested in equities reflect the direct or indirect savings of employees for retirement and the funds of foundations, endowments and families looking for long-term appreciation and future growth in dividends. Institutional investors, asset managers and the companies in which they invest should all recognize a fiduciary duty to manage and invest to achieve sustainable long-term growth in value. There is a raging debate today over the duty of the corporate board of directors. I believe it is to encourage long-term investment for the benefit of the economy, not just the shareholders.You have prepared a road map for the World Economic Forum’s International Business Council called “The New Paradigm,” in which you talk about the pitfalls of short-termism on societal prosperity. Was there a particular legal case or situation that galvanized your involvement?Short-termism and inadequate public and private investment are major factors in creating the inequality that is plaguing the United States and much of the world today. Knowing of my efforts to fight short-term thinking and strategies and fight attacks by activist hedge funds, the International Business Council invited me to talk about these issues at its August 2015 meeting. Following that, I was asked to help create a paradigm for corporate governance that could be considered at this year’s meeting. I did, and the road map was approved by the council last August.What are the key points for boardrooms, chief executives, investors and governments?A key point is having long-term strategies that are developed by a company with the participation, understanding and approval of the board of directors and are communicated to investors and the public. Other important points are engagement between companies and investors, transparency with respect to companies’ strategies and financial statements; mutual company and investor support for environmental, social and governance issues; and corporate social responsibility. Also, another key point is commitment to long-term investment by companies and commitment to encouraging and protecting those investments by investors.AdvertisementThe paper points to the importance of long-term sustainability of corporations and suggests that focus has been lost. Why did that happen, and how important is it that it be restored?It is of the utmost importance. Interest in it waned because of short-term thinking and efforts by activist hedge funds to force short-term actions on companies, both those that are targeted as well as others. Companies began to adopt short-term strategies defensively in an attempt to avoid being targeted by such efforts. That needs to be changed.At your firm, what are you doing to address the issues of gender equality, pay gaps and minority hiring? Are there lessons you have learned that can be applied more broadly?My firm has lock-step compensation for all attorneys, male or female, so that all, from the same year of joining the firm, have the exact same compensation. We think that it is a major factor in the success of our firm. So, too, is our liberal bonus program for all employees. In addition, we have very active minority recruitment and hiring efforts. We offer summer internships for minority law school students and some high school students to encourage those who are interested in becoming attorneys.A version of this article appears in print on , on Page F17 of the New York edition with the headline: The Long Term.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »