AdvertisementSupported byThe Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.The New York cash market was closed on Friday in observance of Veterans Day, but at its close on Thursday the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.48 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.59 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.29 percent.The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week:  Florida Board of Education, $140.4 million of general obligation unlimited tax refinancing bonds. Competitive.Florida Department of Transportation, $137.3 million of turnpike revenue bonds. Competitive.Charles County, Md., $79.3 million of general obligation limited tax refinancing bonds. Competitive.Massachusetts, $200 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.University of Alabama Board of Trustees, $93.7 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.New Orleans, $70 million of general obligation unlimited tax taxable bonds. Competitive.Clark County, Nev., School District, $405.2 million of Series D general obligation limited tax refinancing bonds. Competitive.Clark County, Nev., School District, $57.7 million of Series E general obligation limited tax refinancing bonds. Competitive.Everett, Wash., $70.4 million of water and sewer revenue refinancing bonds. Competitive.Forest Lake Independent School District No. 831, Minn., $64.6 million of general obligation unlimited tax bonds. Competitive.New Hampshire, $62.1 million of general obligation unlimited tax bonds. Competitive.New Hampshire, $51.4 million of general obligation unlimited tax refinancing bonds. Competitive.Alabama Federal Aid Highway Finance Authority, $369 million of special obligation revenue and special obligation revenue refinancing bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Anchorage, $83.9 million of general obligation and general obligation refinancing bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Apple Valley, Minn., $53.7 million of senior living bonds. Piper Jaffray.Ballston Quarter Community Development Authority of Arlington County, Va., $57 million of revenue bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Bexar County, Tex., $107.6 million of combination tax and revenue certificates of obligation. Morgan Stanley.California Statewide Communities Development Authority, $129.8 million of insured revenue bonds. Cain Brothers.Cincinnati, $192.9 million of water system revenue and revenue refinancing bonds. Morgan Stanley.Columbia, S.C., $62.7 million of waterworks and sewer system revenue bonds. PNC Capital Markets.Columbia, S.C., $162.8 million of waterworks and sewer system revenue refinancing bonds. Raymond James.Denver and Denver County, Colo., $250 million of airport system revenue bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Hartford County, Conn., Metropolitan District, $173.5 million of general obligation bonds. Morgan Stanley.Katy, Tex., Independent School District, $225 million of limited and unlimited tax refinancing bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.King County, Wash., Public Hospital District No. 1, $186.7 million of limited tax general obligation bonds. Morgan Stanley.Lammersville Joint Unified School District, Calif., $111.5 million of general obligation bonds. Stifel, Nicolaus & Company.Los Angeles County, Calif., Metropolitan Transportation Authority, $515 million of debt securities. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Los Angeles Department of Airports, $661.9 million of Los Angeles International Airport subordinate revenue and senior revenue refinancing bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Marin Community College District, Calif., $60 million of general obligation bonds. Piper Jaffray.Maryland Health and Higher Educational Facilities Authority, $63.8 million of Doctor’s Community Hospital revenue bonds. Ziegler.Massachusetts Development Finance Agency, $223 million of Emerson College taxable bonds. Barclays Capital.Mississippi, $223.6 million of general obligation bonds. Morgan Stanley.Missouri Housing Development Commission, $65 million of single-family mortgage revenue and special homeownership loan program bonds. George K. Baum & Company.Montgomery County, Tex., $141.4 million of unlimited tax road bonds and limited tax refinancing bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Morgantown, W.Va., $64 million of combined utility system revenue bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.New Jersey Educational Facilities Authority, $137 million of Higher Education Capital Improvement Fund revenue bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.New York, N.Y., TSASC, $1 billion of tobacco settlement bonds. Jefferies.New York State Mortgage Agency, $97.6 million of homeowner mortgage revenue bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Philadelphia, $283.1 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Richmond, Va., $450 million of public utility refinancing bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Sacramento Area Flood Control Agency, Calif., $220 million of Consolidated Capital Assessment District No. 2 assessment revenue bonds. Stifel, Nicolaus & Company.Salt River Project Agricultural Improvement and Power District, Ariz., $719.8 million of electric system revenue refinancing bonds. Morgan Stanley.Scotts Bluff County, Neb., Hospital Authority No. 1, $65.4 million of hospital revenue refinancing and improvement bonds. Ziegler.Shreveport, La., $110.2 million of water and sewer revenue bonds. Siebert Cisneros Shank & Company.Sonoma County, Calif., Junior College District, $100 million of general obligation bonds. Piper Jaffray.Sweetwater County, Wyo., $90 million of FMC Corporation Project solid waste disposal revenue refinancing bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Torrance Unified School District of Los Angeles County, Calif., $61.3 million of general obligation bonds. Raymond James.Unified Government of Wyandotte County and Kansas City, Kan., $54 million of public utilities system improvement revenue bonds. Piper Jaffray.University of North Carolina Board of Governors, $93 million of University of North Carolina Hospitals at Chapel Hill revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.Vermont Educational and Health Buildings Finance Agency, $73 million of revenue bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.West Virginia Water Development Authority, $68.6 million of infrastructure revenue refinancing bonds. Piper Jaffray.Yonkers, N.Y., $77.5 million of general obligation refinancing and school refinancing bonds. M&T Securities.Advertisement