
Breakingviews By                     
KEVIN ALLISON

NOV. 14, 2016
Samsung is riding a stallion instead of a unicorn into the driverless revolution. Despite no stated cost savings, the 28 percent premium the Korean electronics group agreed to pay for Harman International, a connected-car supplier, is reasonable. Companies like Google are investing heavily to invent the automotive future as General Motors and others bet on risky start-ups. This deal suggests there are safer ways to play a mega-trend in the making.The $8 billion price looks opportunistic and fair for a company that will jump-start Samsung’s presence in what it expects to be a $100 billion market by 2025. Harman’s shares hit a three-year low in June, reflecting concerns that car suppliers face tougher times as the long post-crisis boom in American auto sales fades. General Motors last week underscored the worries by announcing a reduction of 2,000 jobs at factories in the United States, after news of similar cuts by Ford Motor.Despite the turn, Harman has been trying to position itself for the longer term. While it is best known for its JBL speakers, features like navigation, infotainment, communications and car safety accounted for nearly half of Harman’s sales in the last year. They are likely to grow in importance as computers take over from humans at the wheel.A lack of advertised cost cuts probably means that Samsung, which plans to run Harman as an independent subsidiary, will have to rely on revenue gains to recoup its investment. It would only take slashing costs equivalent to 4 percent of next year’s sales to cover the premium, but it is also reasonable to think that combining Samsung’s products with Harman’s brands and customers could result in faster growth than either company could manage separately.That makes Harman a more sensible way to gain exposure to the next generation of cars than building technology from scratch the way Google, Apple and Uber are doing. Similarly, investments such as the $500 million GM made in Lyft, the ride-sharing company, and its $1 billion-plus acquisition of Cruise Automation, the software venture, offer huge upside, but with accompanying risk. Harman should be a good ride down the middle of the road.Kevin Allison is a columnist at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »