By JOHN KOBLINNOV. 15, 2016
AMC Networks, the owner of the IFC cable channel, which broadcasts comedies like “Documentary Now!” and “Portlandia,” has invested in Funny or Die, the companies announced Tuesday.AMC’s minority stake will, in theory, allow IFC to closely collaborate with Funny or Die, the digital comedy hub founded by Will Ferrell and Adam McKay. Though few specifics were announced, AMC and IFC said that the investment could mean there would be an allocated Funny or Die programming block on the cable network. Jennifer Caserta, the president of IFC, professed a “deep admiration and respect for what they do there.”Funny or Die has previously taken investments from media companies like HBO in 2008 and Turner Broadcasting in 2012. Terms of the AMC deal were not disclosed, but Mike Farah, Funny or Die’s chief executive, did emphasize that the company would remain independent. Mr. Farah also said that the agreement with AMC was more expansive than the Turner investment, which was more focused on ad sales. That ad sales relationship has ended, but Turner still owns part of Funny or Die.“This is a much more strategic and kind of comprehensive relationship that we’re doing with IFC,” he said.AdvertisementFunny or Die is already in the business of producing television shows including truTV’s “Billy on the Street,” Comedy Central’s “@midnight,” the Triumph the Insult Comic Dog election specials on Hulu and the coming IFC show “Brockmire,” starring Hank Azaria and Amanda Peet. Funny or Die is also the creator of the popular online series “Between Two Ferns,” with Zach Galifianakis.Both companies said that the experience of working on “Brockmire” made them confident they would be good partners.Advertisement“We’re looking at this as a very long-term relationship,” Mr. Farah said.Mr. Ferrell and Mr. McKay said in a statement, “We met on Tinder, things moved fast and now we’re getting married.”A version of this article appears in print on November 16, 2016, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: AMC Networks Takes Minority Stake in Funny or Die.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.