By AMIE TSANGNOV. 15, 2016
Sell government bonds and pile into stocks that will benefit from a free-spending Trump presidency. That’s the verdict from global investors at the moment.The financial crisis led to a wave of activism from global central banks to make money available. Investors followed their lead, loading up on long-term government bonds while growth was stagnant and political risk abounded. These investors now seem to be on board with Donald J. Trump’s promise to stimulate the economy.They are also betting on the price of commodities important to the building business like copper, in anticipation of a pickup in government spending. Bank stocks have been bolstered by the belief that the industry will face less regulatory pressure. Higher interest rates would also help their lending margins.This is not without its risks. If bond yields — which move up as prices go down — shoot up too sharply, investors in the stock market could get jittery and turn tail, leaving chaos in their wake. A sharp increase in bond market rates will also put pressure on emerging markets if investors are drawn by higher interest rates and a stronger American dollar.AdvertisementThe Washington exodus has begun. Mary Jo White, the chairwoman of the Securities and Exchange Commission, announced her plans to leave the agency after more than two decades in the federal government.AdvertisementMr. Trump’s election will be a game changer for all financial agencies. Ms. White was expected to leave no matter the outcome of the election, but the agency is almost certain to be pushed to the right now.Our columnist Andrew Ross Sorkin and his Times colleagues help you make sense of major business and policy headlines — and the power-brokers who shape them.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Michael S. Piwowar, a Republican commissioner at the agency, could be considered a contender to succeed her. Paul S. Atkins, a Republican and a former commissioner at the agency who has advocated deregulatory policies, is leading Mr. Trump’s efforts to select a new chair. He could also be a candidate. Mr. Trump is also being advised by Anthony Scaramucci, a hedge fund manager who supported his candidacy and who said the S.E.C. needed to “end the demonization of Wall Street.”Mr. Trump has yet to appoint a Treasury Secretary, but the department might rein in the Financial Stability Oversight Council.The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau is stepping up its investigation into seller-financed home sales that target lower-income home buyers unable to get traditional mortgages. The agency recently ordered two major companies that offer high-interest installment contracts to comply with a civil investigative demand for documents. It has been examining whether these transactions violate federal truth-in-lending laws.These contracts — called contracts for deed — have become more prominent since the financial crisis because of a lack of smaller mortgages in urban and rural communities. The seller retains ownership to a home until a contract is paid off, but critics say these transactions were built to fail and harmed customers.These contracts have been particularly popular in Michigan and Ohio, two states that helped propel Mr. Trump to victory.“It would be horrible politics and optics to get rid of an agency that was established to protect the little guy.”— Ian Katz, a research analyst at Capital Alpha Partners in Washington, who says that the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau is unlikely to be eliminated completely. The agency has been a favorite target for critics in Congress and Wall Street. Executives are now pondering what kind of change Mr. Trump will bring and what his legacy will be, as Andrew Ross Sorkin writes.• Ms. White testifies before the House Financial Services Committee.Follow Amie Tsang on Twitter @amietsang.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.