
Breakingviews By                     
ANTONY CURRIE

NOV. 16, 2016
Evercore’s two chairmen are an enviable problem. Wooing former Goldman Sachs partner John Weinberg is a coup for the $2.9 billion advisory firm. Making him executive chairman, though, muddies governance and creates top-heavy management.Mr. Weinberg will take on the title that was held by Roger Altman, who is staying on in the newly created role of senior chairman. Mr. Altman, Evercore’s founder, will also continue to advise clients. Ralph Schlosstein remains chief executive, meaning Evercore will have three top managers responsible for dealing with clients and company strategy.Mr. Weinberg will also become chairman of the board, where his task of representing shareholders may conflict with his day-to-day job of bringing in deals to the investment bank. Though separation of the chairman and chief executive roles is a plus, Mr. Weinberg’s arrival means there will be three insiders on what will become a 10-person board.These ought to be manageable issues. After all, advising on mergers and acquisitions is as much about personalities as finance; turmoil at the top of an advisory firm is simply bad for business. Mr. Altman, Mr. Schlosstein and Mr. Weinberg will not want to risk the firm’s current performance. Evercore’s stock is the best performing of its peers, up 19 percent this year. Advisory revenue grew by one-third in the first nine months of 2016, outpacing the competition. Goldman’s mergers and acquisitions income fell almost 14 percent over the same period.The hope is that Mr. Weinberg, who spent three decades at Goldman before retiring last year, will help propel Evercore even further. Top American companies including General Electric, Ford and Visa have turned to him for advice over the years. And his family lineage is second to none.His grandfather, Sidney Weinberg, ran Goldman for almost 40 years until 1969 and was nicknamed “Mr. Wall Street.” His father and uncle both occupied senior positions at the firm, as did his cousin Peter, who a decade ago set up the Perella Weinberg boutique. Rivals can only wish they had to deal with the dilemma of squeezing John Weinberg into the corporate hierarchy.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »