AdvertisementSupported byDeal ProfessorBy Steven Davidoff SolomonA Delaware court decision to require the sale of TransPerfect, the big, profitable language translation company, has employees howling. They fear their employer will be pushed into the hands of a private equity buyer who would cut jobs. But the real fault lies with the owners who seem to be acting like spoiled children, wreaking havoc on the company they founded.Elizabeth Elting and Philip R. Shawe founded TransPerfect in their dorm room when they lived together while attending New York University’s business school more than two decades ago. The company is owned 50 percent by Ms. Elting and 49 percent by Mr. Shawe. One percent of the company is held by Mr. Shawe’s mother to qualify the business as a majority female-owned business.Since 1992 the company has blossomed and is now probably worth more than $1 billion. TransPerfect has more than 3,500 full-time employees, and annual revenue has reached nearly $500 million. The company, which is based in New York, has become a leading provider of translation services.While TransPerfect has flourished, the relationship between Ms. Elting and Mr. Shawe has worsened, as is detailed in the Delaware court’s decision. They were briefly engaged in 1996, but Ms. Elting broke it off the next year. According to Ms. Elting, Mr. Shawe showed a pattern of terrorizing behavior toward the man she eventually married, the court said.But Ms. Elting and Mr. Shawe stayed with the company as co-chief executives and co-owners.Here is where it got complicated. They never did the most basic thing entrepreneurs do when they form a company — draft an agreement that details how decisions would be made and what would happen if there was no agreement. In the latter case, there is typically a buy-sell, a mechanism that allows either party to exit by offering to sell his or her shares to the other at a set price.Ms. Elting and Mr. Shawe’s failure to do this most basic thing would haunt them through this day and lead to litigation in multiple states. Without an agreement on how to run the company, the two were deadlocked. Mr. Shawe’s mother voted with him, not surprisingly.And the Sartre mantra that “hell is other people” clearly applies to TransPerfect. The two tried to arrange a working peace by governing separate divisions, but as the court opinion describes, there were “temper tantrums” and “mutual hostaging” by Ms. Elting and Mr. Shawe, where each would hold things up that the other wanted unless he or she got certain things.For example, when Ms. Elting questioned plans to open an office in Montpellier, France, Mr. Shawe sent a number of emails threatening to dismantle the company. “FOR YOU TO MAKE ME GO NUCLEAR OVER A $20k office decision is not one you should take lightly.”You get the idea.In 2012 things got worse. According to the opinion by Chancellor Andre G. Bouchard of the Court of Chancery, Ms. Elting and Mr. Shawe would make decisions for the business but the other would then refuse to allow the decision to proceed unless he or she got something else.Ms. Elting hired lawyers to advise her, and Mr. Shawe secretly hacked her emails to read them. The court has sanctioned him for it. The bickering escalated. In 2014, after an argument in the office. Mr. Shawe filed a complaint with the police against Ms. Elting accusing her of battery and describing her as his former fiancée, something that would ensure an arrest. The charges were dropped, but Mr. Shawe filed a tort case that continues, according to the court.The court said employees made a “mass exodus” because of the “crazy arbitrary stuff” occurring.With all the disputes, litigation was inevitable. The strategy of each party appears to be to buy out the other. But in Delaware, where TransPerfect is incorporated, there is a special provision of the law to appoint a custodian of the business if there is deadlock.The Chancellor Bouchard found that the deadlock in the case met that standard. But he also found that the “complete and utter dysfunction” should not justify keeping the parties in place with the business run by a custodian. This would require Ms. Elting, the most likely seller, to sell her shares at a discount since he said, “What rational person would want to step into Elting’s shoes to partner with someone willing to ‘cause constant pain’ and ‘go the distance’ to get his way?” Moreover, appointing a tiebreaker director would be inappropriate because both parties were relatively young.Accordingly, Chancellor Bouchard ordered the company sold and the proceeds split among the partners.The reaction has been heated. Mr. Shawe has appealed. A group of TransPerfect employees that says it represents both the Shawe and Elting forces also has started a campaign to get the decision overturned.The employees have formed “Citizens for Pro-Business Delaware” arguing that the decision is unprecedented because TransPerfect is a very profitable and successful business and that a sale would cause turmoil. Chris Coffey, the leader of the group, predicted that half the employees would be fired if a private equity firm took over. But change is difficult, and the business may or may not prosper under a new owner.The group has also submitted op-eds to newspapers and proposed an amendment to Delaware law. One employee has sued Chancellor Bouchard in New York federal court claiming the decision silenced his right to speak against the sale.The Citizens for Pro-Business Delaware is trying to frame this as an issue of a court interfering with a business, and has even persuaded Rudolph W. Giuliani to side with it. The group has clearly gotten under the skin of the Delaware judges. Vice Chancellor Travis Laster, also of the Delaware Chancery Court, wrote, it is “an utter fabrication and ridiculous claim.” He added, “what you have here is someone attempting, outside the judicial process, to influence what’s supposed to be a disinterested court proceeding.”But let’s be real. The founders decided to incorporate in Delaware, and judge here is applying the law. Given the childish behavior of both sides, he is on good grounds. It seems highly unlikely that the higher court will overturn this. The legal fees would be much better spent counseling traumatized employees or going to charity.The founders chose to not settle their arrangements upfront and then bullied each other and employees in a vicious power struggle. I like to say in my classroom that a business is like a marriage where you pre-order your arrangements through a prenuptial agreement. This is one that has become an ugly divorce where it’s not about me winning but you losing.The aggrieved employees of TransPerfect should not blame the judge but instead the founders who seem to have succeeded despite themselves. It is really their fault and a problem they can easily fix by behaving.There is a lesson here for others, too. Remember that like a marriage, get your affairs in order when you start a business, or you might pay.Steven Davidoff Solomon is a professor of law at the University of California, Berkeley. His columns can be found at nytimes.com/dealbook. Follow @stevendavidoff on Twitter.Advertisement