AdvertisementSupported byBy Amie TsangThere is an end in sight to the drought in major initial public offerings.Snapchat, the messaging service, has filed to go public in one of the most eagerly anticipated market debuts of 2017, according to people briefed on the matter. While a few companies here and there have filed for I.P.O.s this year, offerings are down significantly from a year ago and have not involved many big names.Snapchat could break that trend. It is aiming for a valuation of more than $30 billion, which would make it the third-most-valuable technology company at the time of listing, after Alibaba and Facebook. The filing was earlier reported by Reuters.Snap, the parent company, aims to have shares trading as soon as March. The company, known for its disappearing messages and its photo filters, does not face the same web of regulations that companies like Uber or Airbnb regularly contend with, which could make listing more simple. But it does have a different class of stock for its top executives so that they can maintain control after the initial public offering.“Snapchat will certainly be an indicator of whether there is a big pile of investor cash ready to go into the market,” said Doug Bontemps, the managing director of corporate finance at Silicon Valley Bank. “But Snapchat is unique. It’s growing quickly, is doing some interesting things with glasses and has gotten a lot of attention. There aren’t a lot of that ilk.”The hedge fund manager William A. Ackman likes to beat the competition. This year he is set to post a bigger number than his peers — but this time it won’t be anything to brag about.Mr. Ackman is set to record a hefty double-digit loss for investors in his firm, Pershing Square Capital Management, for the second year in a row. It’s a rare tough streak for Mr. Ackman at a time when investors have been growing impatient with disappointing returns from hedge funds. But it helps that Pershing is structured so that investors have to wait as long as two years to take out their money.Mr. Ackman is apparently not one to let this get him down. He maintained that his firm had a “good batting average” and that the companies he made big bets on remained “fantastic” and “terrific.”He told an audience at the DealBook conference that he had an enormous stomach for volatility. The question now is whether his investors have one too.John S. Weinberg who, until last year, was a top corporate adviser at Goldman Sachs, is joining Evercore Partners as executive chairman and chairman of its board.Roger C. Altman, a co-founder of the firm and its current executive chairman, will take the new role of senior chairman, while Ralph L. Schlosstein will remain chief executive.The Weinberg name has long been associated with Goldman. Mr. Weinberg spent 32 years there, advising the likes of Ford, General Electric and Visa.Now he moves to Evercore, which ranks 10th among merger advisers so far this year and has been one of the best-performing independent investment banks, with its stock up 19 percent this year.“Remember that like a marriage, get your affairs in order when you start a business, or you might pay.”— The Deal Professor examines the case of TransPerfect, a translation company deadlocked because the two founders failed to do the most basic thing when they formed the company: They failed to draft an agreement that detailed how decisions would be made and what would happen if there was no agreement.Follow Amie Tsang on Twitter @amietsang.Advertisement