By DANIEL POLITINOV. 15, 2016
BUENOS AIRES — Viacom has a deal to purchase Argentina’s largest broadcast network, Televisión Federal, for $345 million from Telefónica of Spain.The all-cash purchase of Telefe, as it is commonly known, gives the American media giant a strong presence in Latin America. Telefe reaches 95 percent of Argentina’s households through a network of channels and is also a production powerhouse, spreading content throughout the region.“Telefe is an outstanding broadcast and production business, and this acquisition will accelerate our growth strategy in Argentina, one of the most advanced and valuable media markets in Latin America,” Robert M. Bakish, acting president and chief executive of Viacom, which owns Nickelodeon and MTV among other channels, said in a statement.Mr. Bakish recently moved to acting C.E.O. from his previous role leading Viacom’s international business.AdvertisementViacom would become the first American firm to operate a free-to-air channel in Argentina in almost 50 years. President Mauricio Macri, who took office in December, is trying to woo international investment through a series of market-friendly policies.AdvertisementIn addition to the main broadcast network Telefe, which serves the capital and its suburbs, the deal also includes eight networks in Argentina’s provinces, an international pay-TV channel and online platforms.Perhaps most important is Telefe’s production capacity, including 12 studios that produce more than 3,000 hours of Spanish-language content yearly. It also has a library of more than 33,000 hours of content that could help Viacom’s ambitions of expanding into Latin America as it looks internationally to try to make up for a slowing domestic market.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“If it is true that they want to create a production center for all of Latin America, this would be a good place to do that,” said Martín Becerra, a local media expert. “Telefe has a very significant archive of content, but what Viacom is really buying is the production capacity.”The content produced in Argentina could also help feed the growing market for Spanish-language content in the United States.The deal had been rumored for weeks; local media had reported that Time Warner was the front-runner. Telefónica had long been looking for a buyer for Telefe, the only free-to-air channel it owned, as it continues to sell assets to pay down debt.Two other American media companies — Turner, which is a division of Time Warner, and Fox, a News Corporation unit — seem poised to take over the broadcast of Argentine soccer matches as Mr. Macri’s government undoes a state-run system adopted by the previous administration.Wooing international companies to invest in Argentina is part of Mr. Macri’s effort to jump-start the economy after his administration ended a long conflict with holdout hedge funds that had refused to restructure the country’s defaulted debt and had kept Argentina locked out of international capital markets for more than a decade.An earlier version of this article erroneously included one channel among those that Viacom owns. It does not own Cartoon Network.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.