By SEI CHONGNOV. 17, 2016
JPMorgan Chase’s long Chinese family drama is coming to a close.As early as Thursday, the United States authorities are expected to announce that, after more than three years of investigations, they have determined that the bank hired the children of Chinese leaders with the specific intent of winning business from Chinese state-run companies, in violation of the United States foreign bribery law.As a result, the bank and its Hong Kong subsidiary will pay about $264 million to settle the bribery case, according to people briefed on the matter who spoke on the condition of anonymity. The amount of the settlement was smaller than once expected because JPMorgan showed a high degree of cooperation with investigators.The bank had argued that the hires fell into a gray area, but the United States government found that several JPMorgan bankers made it clear that the jobs were arranged to secure deals with Chinese state-run companies, people briefed on the matter said.When The New York Times first revealed in 2013 the authorities’ investigation into the bank’s hiring practices in China, it was one of a number of regulatory problems the bank was facing at the time, like the $6 billion loss arising from the London Whale trading scandal.AdvertisementSince then, the bank has resolved those cases by paying huge penalties but avoiding criminal prosecution.AdvertisementThis latest settlement also allows JPMorgan to avoid criminal charges, people briefed on the matter said. Instead, the bank negotiated a rare nonprosecution agreement.Since becoming president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis in January, Neel Kashkari has repeatedly sounded the warning about American banks, saying that they were still too big to fail even after the passage of the 2010 Dodd-Frank Act.On Wednesday, he came out with his most provocative proposal yet, called the Minneapolis Plan, to reduce the risks that these banks pose.In a speech at the Economic Club of New York on Wednesday, he said his plan would require banks with $250 billion or more in assets to issue common equity of 23.5 percent, up from 13 percent required under current rules.Long-term debt would not be allowed to be counted as part of that cushion because history showed it was not a foolproof buffer to losses, Mr. Kashkari said.The plan would be likely to prompt banks to break apart because of the high cost of holding so much capital.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Many in the banking industry say that the plan will go nowhere. However, these days few people can say with any certainty what policies President-elect Donald J. Trump will ultimately adopt.As part of Goldman Sachs’s push into consumer lending, the bank wants Americans to know that debt happens.AdvertisementThat message is central to its first ad campaign that is aimed at individuals — even those who may barely qualify for credit.The 15- and 30-second video ads, which will appear on Facebook, Hulu, Pandora and YouTube, depict debt as an unavoidable nuisance of modern life, not something shameful. “Debt happens. It’s how you get out that counts,” the ads say.Dustin Cohn, who oversees brand management for Goldman’s new consumer lending arm, Marcus by Goldman Sachs, said the bank’s aim was to “destigmatize debt and help consumers explore new ways of managing their debt.”• Janet L. Yellen, the Federal Reserve chairwoman, appears before the Joint Economic Committee in Washington. Observers will be listening closely to what she says about the possibility of raising the Fed’s benchmark interest rate in December, especially now with the election of Mr. Trump.• William C. Dudley, president of the New York Fed, and Lael Brainard, a Fed governor, speak at a forum in New York about the evolution of work in New York.• Shareholders of Tesla Motors and SolarCity vote on whether to approve a merger of the two companies in a $2.6 billion deal.• Mike Corbat, Citigroup’s chief executive, speaks about the future of banking at the Harvard Business School Club of New York.• Wal-Mart Stores and Salesforce.com report quarterly earnings.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.