By DAVID GELLESNOV. 16, 2016
In the 1950s, women in the advertising industry often struggled to advance, much less get their work noticed.And then there was Ruth Baron Ziff.A sociologist with a knack for market research, Ms. Ziff, who died on Nov. 11 at 92 in Jupiter, Fla., spent nearly four decades working her way up the ranks at big ad agencies.Her work contributed to one of the most famous campaigns of the 20th century, the “Please don’t squeeze the Charmin” toilet paper commercials of the 1960s featuring the fictional supermarket manager Mr. Whipple.Ms. Ziff, then a vice president at Benton & Bowles, conducted research suggesting that consumers were more likely to buy toilet paper if they could touch it. Using her insights, her colleague John Chervokas developed the Mr. Whipple campaign.Advertisement“It was her research that got it to that place,” Ms. Ziff’s daughter, Ellen Resnick, said.Ruth Baron was born in New York City on May 26, 1924, to Herman Baron and the former Lena Medoff. Her father, who was in the haberdashery business, died when she was 6; her mother sewed hats. She married Solomon Ziff, a paint salesman and carpenter, when she was 17.Ms. Ziff graduated Phi Beta Kappa from Hunter College in 1944, then took a job at the Psychological Corporation, a testing and assessment company. While working there, she earned a master’s degree from Columbia University in 1948. “It was a very unusual marriage,” Ms. Resnick said. “She was the breadwinner.”Ms. Ziff joined Benton & Bowles in 1950 as a manager in the research division. She quickly stood out.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“She was always someone younger woman looked up to,” said Betty Lev, who worked with Ms. Ziff at Benton & Bowles. “She had none of that hard edge you might expect from women who succeeded in that era; she never played any games or politics.”She was eventually named vice president, making her the rare female executive on Madison Avenue. “Talk about breaking the glass ceiling,” Ms. Lev said. “It was an old boys’ network at that time.”Ms. Ziff earned a Ph.D. in sociology from the City University of New York, while continuing to work at Benton & Bowles.AdvertisementShe was named advertising woman of the year by the American Advertising Federation in 1973.In 1975, Ms. Ziff moved to Doyle Dane Bernbach, one of the most influential firms at the time, where she was named executive vice president of research and marketing services. In that role, she was a pioneer of work that brought together psychological research and sales tactics.Ms. Ziff wanted to join the board of an advertising agency, but was never given the opportunity. “That was the glass ceiling,” Ms. Resnick said. “That was where she hit it.”Besides Ms. Resnick, Ms. Ziff’s survivors include many grandchildren and great-grandchildren. Her son, Charles, died in 1992; Mr. Ziff died in 2000, and her second husband, Lawrence McManus, died in 2014.A version of this article appears in print on November 19, 2016, on Page D5 of the New York edition with the headline: Ruth Baron Ziff, 92; Brought Insight to Ads.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.