AdvertisementSupported byBy Randall SmithGoldman Sachs, long the banker to the rich and powerful, has a message for ordinary folks — debt happens.On Thursday, Goldman will introduce its first advertising campaign ever aimed at getting individuals — even those who may barely qualify for credit above the subprime range — out of their higher-cost credit card debt by replacing it with a fixed-rate, lower-cost personal loan.The campaign’s 15- and 30-second video ads, which will appear on Facebook, Hulu, Pandora and YouTube, depict debt as an unavoidable nuisance of modern life, not shameful overspending on unaffordable luxuries. A car gets a cracked windshield while parked at a Little League game. A couch gets chewed up by a new puppy. A child gets new braces. Or a water heater springs a leak.“Debt happens. It’s how you get out that counts,” the ads say.Dustin Cohn, the head of brand management for Goldman’s new consumer lending arm, Marcus by Goldman Sachs, said the bank’s aim was to “destigmatize debt and help consumers explore new ways of managing their debt.”The ads were created by the digital agency Elephant, whose clients include Twitter and Apple. Marcus is pitching consumers on paying off their credit cards with loans of $3,500 to $30,000 for terms up to six years at average rates of 12 to 13 percent, a few percentage points below typical card rates. Two-thirds of the borrowers are not aware that personal loans “can be a better option,” Mr. Cohn said, citing Goldman research.Mr. Cohn himself is a consumer marketing veteran who, before joining Goldman last year, worked at the underwear brand Jockey International as well as PepsiCo and Pizza Hut.Through the ad campaign, Goldman is peddling itself to the masses in a way it has avoided through much of its 147-year history, during which it primarily focused on advising blue-chip corporations, professional money managers and wealthy individuals.Goldman has sold mutual funds through investment advisers since 1989, and last year it introduced a group of exchange-traded funds available to consumers. And it ran corporate-image ads after its initial public offering of stock in 1999, and again starting in 2010 to repair its “vampire squid” reputation.But these days, Goldman is entering new consumer markets as the business environment shifts and new regulations make consumer-oriented businesses potentially more lucrative. Regulators have cracked down on some of Goldman’s longtime strongholds, such as trading, and have forced big banks to maintain bigger capital cushions for some assets.“The real driver” of the new Marcus lending push is “the way the capital rules are,” Goldman’s chief executive, Lloyd C. Blankfein, said last week at a New York Times DealBook conference. “We are dissuaded from growing into certain activities that are capital-intensive, and it’s easier to grow into other areas that are more favored by the regulators and capital rules,” Mr. Blankfein added.The last major Wall Street company to try something like this was Morgan Stanley, which merged with the down-market retail brokerage and credit card firm Dean Witter, Discover in 1997. The merger aimed to reduce the market-driven volatility of Morgan Stanley’s earnings by balancing it with Dean Witter’s steadier fee-driven revenues.Although the Dean Witter merger set off a culture clash between top executives and bankers, it also prepared Morgan Stanley to pick up the Smith Barney retail brokerage firm from Citigroup a decade later. The result: Morgan Stanley now ranks near the top in retail brokerage business, and the former head of those operations has been its chief executive since 2010.Marcus grew out of a companywide review of initiatives begun in 2014 under Stephen M. Scherr, Goldman’s head of strategy and chief executive of Goldman Sachs Bank USA. “We were looking for something different, something new” that wouldn’t compete with Goldman’s existing businesses in investment banking, securities trading, money management and merchant banking, Mr. Scherr said.Goldman’s growth has slowed since its heyday before the financial crisis; its stock has trailed both the broader market and bank stocks since mid-2009. “They’ve gone from great to merely good,” said Mike Mayo, a banking analyst at CLSA. One reason for the slowdown: All big Wall Street companies have slashed their borrowing levels to cut risk.Goldman’s push into retail markets also includes getting consumer deposits online, a business that received a lift in April when Goldman bought a $16 billion consumer deposit portfolio from General Electric.It is easier for Goldman to grow in this sphere because, unlike other Wall Street giants like JPMorgan Chase, Bank of America and Citigroup, it does not have a big credit card operation against which Marcus would compete. And it does not have to build an expansive network of branches. “Digital delivery of financial products presented a different opportunity,” Mr. Scherr said.Lending to consumers always comes with some risk, said Karen L. Webster, chief executive of Market Platform Dynamics, a payments research consulting firm in Boston. “The thing to worry about, when you’re refinancing people who want to consolidate, is that they may not be your cream-of-the-crop borrower, elevating the risk even further for the lender,” she said.The small-scale start-up consumer business could prepare Goldman to expand in the future.“I think what Goldman wants to do here is experiment with this, get in-house expertise and see if they can figure out how it works,” said Chris Kotowski, a bank analyst at Oppenheimer & Company. “Then three years from now, if some consumer banking business becomes available, they can approach it with a base infrastructure that can be expanded.”Advertisement