AdvertisementSupported byBy Zach WichterTheodore F. Twardzik, who used his mother’s pierogi recipe as the foundation of a successful frozen food business, died on Nov. 10 in Pottsville, Pa. He was 89.His son Tom, the president of Mrs. T’s Pierogies, confirmed the death.Mrs. T’s Pierogies traces its roots to the church fairs of Mr. Twardzik’s childhood, when his mother would sell homemade pierogies — dumplinglike pockets of dough containing various fillings — to long lines of people. By the time he was in his mid-20s and working for the accounting firm Arthur Andersen & Company in New York, Mr. Twardzik (pronounced TWORD-zik) could see that the lines meant high demand.He soon left the firm and, in 1952, founded the company, giving it his mother’s name and using her recipe.Mrs. T’s essentially began in his mother’s kitchen: Five women were hired to make pierogies there, to be sold to local stores. But it quickly outgrew that arrangement and went on to become the largest employer in Shenandoah, Pa. It has about 240 people on the payroll today.Mrs. T’s Pierogies was the first frozen pierogi brand available in American supermarkets, and its founder invented new machines to produce his product.“Dad never lost sight of his roots and who he was,” Tom Twardzik said. “He was a guy from Shenandoah like all of his friends and most of the people who worked with him.” The factory even shut down a few times to allow workers to attend one another’s weddings.Theodore Frank Twardzik was born on Sept. 7, 1927, to Frank Twardzik and the former Mary Binek. He was the youngest of six siblings.After graduating from Mahanoy Township High School in 1945, he attended the University of Notre Dame, though he left for a time to serve in the Army. He graduated with honors in 1951 with a business degree and soon joined Arthur Andersen as a staff accountant. That career was brief, however, when he saw his future in pierogies.In 2000, Mr. Twardzik co-founded Lee’s Oriental Gourmet Foods, which is also based in Shenandoah.Besides his son Tom, he is survived by his wife of 60 years, the former Jean Roberts; two other sons, Ted Jr. and Tim; and five grandsons.Advertisement