AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael CorkeryWall Street banks are still too big to fail, and the hundreds of thousands of pages of regulations created in the eight years since the crisis are not adequate protection against another financial shock, says Neel Kashkari of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.Mr. Kashkari, a Republican who has run the Minneapolis Fed for about a year, delivered an unusually blunt and sweeping indictment of financial regulation in a speech before the Economic Club of New York on Wednesday.Comparing banking to the nuclear power industry, Mr. Kashkari said regulators needed to take even more drastic steps to bolster capital levels at the big banks because the risk of another financial calamity outweighed the costs of increased regulation.If it had come even a few weeks ago, Mr. Kashkari’s proposal might have been seen as a provocative but ultimately fruitless idea — the stuff that makes for a lively discussion of financial regulation over coffee and scrambled eggs in a wood-paneled, Upper East Side club, but one that goes nowhere in the real world.But Mr. Kashkari is introducing his idea in a political abyss of postelection Washington, where even the most hard-wired banking lobbyists admit they have little idea what policies President-elect Donald J. Trump will ultimately adopt.Mr. Trump has vowed to dismantle the 2010 Dodd-Frank overhaul of banking regulation but has provided few details on what regulations would replace it.“Everyone is waiting and watching to see what he meant,” said Tim Pawlenty, chief executive of the Financial Services Roundtable, in an interview on Wednesday.Republicans blame the law — which created the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, among other measures — for restricting lending and for hampering economic growth.But at the same time, the Republican Party platform calls for breaking up the large banks by restoring the New Deal-era Glass-Steagall Act, which required a separation of investment from commercial banking.Mr. Kashkari’s proposal — called the Minneapolis Plan — would most likely pressure banks to break apart because the high cost of holding so much capital would mean it would no longer make sense to stay so large.Such a breakup has not happened naturally since the financial crisis. While some big banks have gotten smaller, a great deal of lending and market-making activity is still concentrated in hands of a few Wall Street banks. And with that continued concentration comes risk of another bailout, he said.By Mr. Kashkari’s calculation, the financial regulation since 2008 has reduced the chances of another government banking bailout to only 67 percent from 84 percent before the crisis.His proposal would reduce that risk to 9 percent, he said, by requiring banks to hold much more capital than the current levels.“I don’t want people to have a false sense of security that we have solved too-big-to-fail,” Mr. Kashkari said during the breakfast discussion on Wednesday.In reaching his conclusion about the chances of future banking collapses, Mr. Kashkari analyzed data from the International Monetary Fund on previous banking crises, bailouts and capitalization levels of different banking systems. He acknowledged that this was an “imperfect science.”Many in the banking industry dismissed the plan as a nonstarter.“For those looking to accelerate economic growth and job creation, tripling bank capital levels — already double from pre-crisis levels — will make it much harder to meet those goals,” Laena Fallon, a spokeswoman for the Financial Services Forum, a trade group, said in a statement about Mr. Kashkari’s proposal.Later on Wednesday in Washington, Representative Jeb Hensarling, Republican from Texas who is chairman of the House Financial Services Committee, said he had been in “fairly constant dialogue” with the team handing the president-elect transition about his plan to overhaul Dodd-Frank.Mr. Hensarling’s so-called Choice Act would revamp the oversight of the consumer protection agency and impose harder penalties on bankers who break the law.Republicans say the bill would free lending from onerous and arbitrary rules and would spur economic growth — something that appears to be an overarching goal for the president-elect.On the surface, then, Mr. Kashkari’s plan would seem to be a tough sell to the coming Trump administration. He calculates that requiring banks to boost their capital to truly safe levels would carry steep economic costs.“The added safety isn’t free,” Mr. Kashkari said.The total cost of Mr. Kashkari’s plan would equal 41 percent of gross domestic product — though much lower than the economic costs of a financial crisis.At the very least, Mr. Kashkari said his plan was a straightforward attempt at measuring whether the financial legislation has made the banking system safer. And his conclusion is simple: It is not quite safe enough, despite assurances from the industry and its regulators that the banking system has never been better capitalized.Specifically, he said the plan would require mega banks with $250 billion or more in assets to issue common equity of 23.5 percent, up from 13 percent required under current rules. He would also not allow them to count long-term debt as part of that cushion because he said history showed it was not a foolproof buffer to losses.A former Goldman Sachs banker who ran for governor in California in 2014, Mr. Kashkari said he had not been contacted by the Trump transition team about his plan.Mr. Kashkari is known for grabbing the spotlight with unusual ideas — he spent time on the streets of Fresno posing as a homeless person during his run for governor.He said that Congress and the Obama administration were not willing to truly end “too big to fail” because they feared that the economy was too unstable in the immediate aftermath of the crisis.During the mortgage crisis, banks like Citigroup and Bank of America needed billions of dollars of rescue money from taxpayers because they did not have enough capital to cover enormous losses. At the time, Mr. Kashkari was working in the Treasury Department and was an architect of that bailout, helping to develop the Troubled Asset Relief Program, or TARP.Mr. Kashkari said he traced some of the nation’s current political anger and polarization to how the government responded to the financial crisis — which allowed large banks to survive while thousands of Americans struggled to keep their homes and find new jobs.“The bailouts violated a core belief that has been handed down from generation to generation in our society that if you take a risk you bear the rewards and consequences of that risk,” he said. “We had to tear that up during the crisis because the biggest banks were going to fail and bring down the U.S. economy. And when you violate the core beliefs of society it does lead to anger and a feeling that this wasn’t fair.”Victoria Finkle contributed reporting.Advertisement