By SEI CHONGNOV. 18, 2016
As questions about Valeant Pharmaceuticals International’s business practices have mounted over the past year, its relationship with the mail-order pharmacy Philidor Rx Services has come under the most scrutiny.On Thursday, the Justice Department said that Andrew Davenport, the chief executive of Philidor, and Gary Tanner, a former executive at Valeant, were at the heart of this relationship, accusing the two men of secretly agreeing to promote the pharmacy’s interests inside Valeant, including persuading Valeant to buy an option to acquire Philidor.The Justice Department charged both men with multiple counts of fraud and conspiracy. The arrests are the first charges in multiple state and federal investigations into Valeant’s business practices.According to the complaint, filed Wednesday in Federal District Court for the Southern District of New York, Mr. Davenport, who pocketed about $40 million after the purchase option agreement went through, used a series of shell companies to transfer a $10 million kickback payment to Mr. Tanner.AdvertisementThe government said that Mr. Tanner used an email account under the name “Brian Wilson” to secretly communicate with Mr. Davenport. In one celebratory email to that account, Mr. Davenport wrote that he could picture the two of them on a “Butch and Sundance ride into the sunset.” (Of course, the two outlaws met a nasty end.)AdvertisementMr. Tanner was forced out of Valeant in 2015. Mr. Davenport remained at Philidor until the company shut down in January. Both men said through their lawyers that they intended to defend themselves.Preet Bharara, the United States attorney for the Southern District of New York, said at a news conference on Thursday that the investigation was continuing. He would not say whether his office was looking into Valeant’s accounting practices.In a statement, Valeant noted that the company and its top executives had not been charged in the case, and said it was cooperating with the investigation.Federal prosecutors announced on Thursday that JPMorgan Chase and its Hong Kong subsidiary would pay about $264 million to settle bribery charges connected to its practice of hiring children of Chinese leaders, confirming an earlier report in DealBook.The authorities’ investigation revealed that as JPMorgan was competing with other big banks for business in China, some bankers concluded that they needed to bring on the children of well-connected parents, known as princelings.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We lost a deal to DB today because they got chairman’s daughter work for them this summer,” one JPMorgan investment banking executive told colleagues, referring to Deutsche Bank.Many of the job candidates were unqualified, the authorities said, but JPMorgan hired them anyway. For example:• The son of a powerful executive who had a Wharton degree was described as having a “not very impressive, poor G.P.A.” and had both an “attitude issue” and a “napping problem.”• The son of a Chinese official who did “very, very poorly” in his interviews still secured a position in New York only to be transferred again. A JPMorgan banker later said that the hire “sent out an e-mail (which he inadvertently copied to an H.R. person), where he made some inappropriate sexual remarks.” His peers said he was “immature, irresponsible and unreliable,” but he kept his job.AdvertisementShareholders of Tesla and SolarCity showed their support for Elon Musk by approving the merger of the two companies on Thursday.Tesla said more than 85 percent of its independent shareholders voted for the deal.Under the terms of the transaction, SolarCity shareholders will receive 0.11 of a Tesla share for each share of SolarCity that they own. At Thursday’s closing prices, that offer is worth about $20.75 a share, or just shy of where SolarCity shares closed.Critics have argued that the deal would weigh down Tesla financially. Shares of Tesla have fallen about 14 percent since the company first disclosed its intentions.In after-hours trading on Thursday, shares of Tesla were little changed. Shares of SolarCity rose nearly 2 percent in after-hours trading.Several Federal Reserve officials are scheduled to speak today: William C. Dudley, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, will talk about the consumer expectations survey; Esther L. George, president of the Kansas City Fed, and Robert S. Kaplan, president of the Dallas Fed, will attend a conference in Houston on oil and the economy; and Charles L. Evans, president of the Chicago Fed, will give the opening remarks at a symposium on community banking.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.