AdvertisementSupported byStreet SceneBy William D. CohanWhat should we make of the outspoken defense offered by William A. Ackman of his hedge fund’s awful performance in the last two years? Has he, as he claimed at last week’s DealBook conference, learned the hard lesson of his disastrous 2015 investment in Valeant Pharmaceuticals International, which has cost his investors billions of dollars?Pershing Square Capital Management, the activist hedge fund Mr. Ackman has run for more than 12 years, has had a difficult two years. Its publicly traded entity lost 20.7 percent so far this year, after losing 20.5 percent in 2015, while its private portfolios are down less. Mr. Ackman’s assets under management, once nearly $20 billion, are now down to $11.6 billion. In the first nine months of 2016, his limited partners have redeemed about $1 billion from his fund. His publicly traded investment company, Pershing Square Holdings, is down nearly 50 percent from its 2014 initial public stock offering price.He still claims to have made his investors a compounded annualized return of 15.2 percent since the fund’s inception, compared with a 7.6 percent return for the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index. Should investors give Mr. Ackman another chance, or is it time for him to give up his oft-stated dream of becoming his generation’s Warren E. Buffett?There is no simple answer. On the one hand, Mr. Ackman’s entire Valeant journey stands as an immediate disqualification. It began in February 2014 when Mr. Ackman met J. Michael Pearson, then Valeant’s chief executive. Mr. Pearson developed a cultlike following on Wall Street for his aggressive acquisition strategy and his penchant for  raising the prices  of unique lifesaving drugs. Under Mr. Pearson’s leadership, Valeant’s stock price increased to more than $250 a share in summer 2015, after having languished for years around $16 a share at the time he took the helm of the company in 2008.When the hedge fund manager and the executive met in 2014, Mr. Pearson had his eye on acquiring the drug company Allergan, the maker of Botox, and he enlisted Mr. Ackman’s help to make a bid for the company. The team added a certain luster to the Valeant brand. Armed with information about Valeant’s coming bid for Allergan that other investors did not have, Mr. Ackman spent $3.2 billion buying up Allergan’s shares.To make a long story short, Valeant lost Allergan to Activis, a pharmaceutical company based in Dublin. But Mr. Ackman came out of the battle a huge winner. He made a $2.6 billion profit, $400 million of which went to Valeant, according to the terms of their deal. Mr. Ackman and his investors kept the balance of $2.2 billion. Instead of pocketing his winnings and hunting his next big target, Mr. Ackman made a tactical mistake.He had become enamored with Mr. Pearson and the Valeant story. He invested his Allergan profit and then some — more than $3.2 billion — into Valeant at around $190 a share. Mr. Ackman once again looked brilliant, as the Valeant shares flew past $200 a share, and then past $250 a share. Pershing is Valeant’s largest shareholder, with a 9 percent stake.But by October 2015, the narrative began to change. Mr. Pearson had won the bidding to buy Salix Pharmaceuticals after significantly increasing Valeant’s offer. Valeant’s strategy of raising drug prices attracted congressional scrutiny. And then there was the revelation of Valeant’s hidden relationship with Philidor Rx Service, a specialty pharmacy company that accounted for 1 percent of Valeant’s revenue in the fourth quarter of 2014 but quickly became 7 percent of its revenue.Valeant was exposed for the house of cards it has largely turned out to be. Mr. Pearson left the company in May, as Mr. Ackman took a board seat. As the company has struggled with accounting errors and multiple investigations, Valeant’s stock has fallen back to around $18 a share, and there seems to be little hope that Pershing Square’s investors will recover their losses in Valeant. On Thursday, federal prosecutors announced fraud charges against a lower-level Valeant employee, as well as the chief executive of Philidor.“This will be one for the business school case studies,” Mr. Ackman said last week. He is right about that.Mr. Ackman also said he had learned his lesson. “The mistake we made is, we paid a full price for the existing assets and bet on management’s track record to continue, and we relied on others to be our eyes and ears in the boardroom,” he said. “I think that was our mistake.”Maybe. But another big mistake Mr. Ackman made was becoming too enamored of his own fabulousness. Instead of considering that the profit he made from the Allergan deal may have come from valuable information that others did not have, he concluded that it came from his own investing prowess. He decided to roll the dice again on Mr. Pearson. (Pershing and Valeant face a  lawsuit  brought by investors in California about whether he engaged in insider trading when he bought the Allergan shares.)The hedge fund billionaire’s latest nearly $1 billion gamble is on Chipotle Mexican Grill, the nationwide burrito chain. In the last year — before Mr. Ackman’s investment — the company’s stock had fallen 40 percent because of concerns about the quality of its food. Now, he is said to be vying for a seat on its board. He said the Chipotle investment is in Pershing Square’s sweet spot. “We wait for an otherwise great company with a great brand to make a mistake and for people to lose confidence in the company and the management and the board,” he said. “And that’s when we can be most effective.”He noted that Pershing Square had doubled its money investing in McDonald’s and more than tripled its money investing in Burger King. Mr. Ackman, who prides himself on his physical fitness, said he liked fast food. “I eat on a regular basis at Chipotle,” he said. “I eat on a less regular basis at the other fast-food companies we’ve invested in. So I like the food. I think it’s healthy. I think it’s good for America.”But is it good for his investors? Mr. Ackman started buying Chipotle’s options and stock in July and continued until early September, taking on a 9.9 percent stake. As usual, it is virtually impossible to figure out his basis in the stock from public filings, which reveal an array of puts, calls and stock purchases. But with Chipotle’s stock trading around $411 a share, he has not made much money in Chipotle, if any.He remains as confident as ever. “You can buy Pershing Square today and we’re really cheap,” he told Andrew Ross Sorkin of The New York Times at the conference last week. “And then you get the benefit of the same management team with that much more humility, that much more insight and experience.”Joked Mr. Sorkin, “The humble Bill Ackman, everybody!”Advertisement