
Corner Office By                     
 ADAM BRYANT
 
NOV. 18, 2016
This interview with Jodi Goldstein, managing director of the Harvard Innovation Labs, was conducted and condensed by Adam Bryant. Q. Tell me about your early years.A. I grew up in Mount Snow, a very small ski town in Vermont. My childhood was unconventional. My parents owned a hotel and restaurant. They worked all the time, and so I had a lot of independence at a young age.But my parents were incredibly supportive, and they were amazing role models because of their work ethic. They had an unbelievable ability to challenge convention and follow their passion. They started from nothing and built a successful business.I was quite a tomboy. There were all these things I wanted to do that I wasn’t allowed to do. I remember my mom going to the school board and saying, “My daughter wants to take shop. She doesn’t want to take home ec. Make that happen.” The shop teacher hated me, and I didn’t care. I had a blast. So just because someone tells you no, that doesn’t mean no. Let’s figure out a way.AdvertisementHow did your family end up in a ski town?Before we moved to Vermont, my dad was in the corporate world. When I was very young, we got transferred to rural Georgia. About three weeks after we moved there, there was this big bonfire in our yard. It was the Ku Klux Klan demonstrating. We were the only Jews in a very Southern place.My dad had just gotten this new promotion, but my parents said, “We’re out of here.” They literally sold and mortgaged everything they had and moved to Vermont with two very small children. That taught me to take risks, to trust your gut.Did you have an idea of what you wanted to do for your career when you went to college?I majored in international business, because I wanted to study abroad. I had no idea what I wanted to do, but I did want to learn as much as I could in the shortest amount of time. After working for G.E. for three years, this thought kept going through my head around entrepreneurship, but I didn’t really know what that meant.I didn’t have an idea to start a company, but the opportunity came along to work in the venture capital industry. I thought, “What a perfect way to learn about entrepreneurship, but from the other side.” I got to meet founders and C.E.O.s and talk to them about their businesses and their ideas and help them.I realized I’d be better suited on the other side of the fence with the entrepreneurs. I spent almost 20 years in various early-stage start-ups. For a while I thought I had attention problems because I couldn’t stay at any one job too long. Then I realized I really like early-stage companies, with up to about 20 employees. That’s my sweet spot.AdvertisementWhat have been some key leadership lessons for you?I’m not the best manager in the world, because I’d rather do things myself. I’ve always been a better individual contributor than a manager of lots of people.But I’ve grown to be a fairly decent leader because I can articulate the mission and rally the troops, and give them an amazing amount of autonomy on how to get there. If people have too much autonomy without the vision, then they’re just off doing whatever they want. If you try to dictate exactly what they should do step by step, then you miss out on lots of opportunity. I’ve also learned that failure is O.K., and that if you don’t take risks you might not reach your goal, or get there as quickly and effectively.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The other thing I’ve learned over time is that humility is an incredibly overlooked but important character trait. When I’m hiring, it’s the one thing I’m looking for. Confidence is great, but arrogance is really deadly, and there’s a fine line there.I love people who are confident enough to say, “I didn’t understand that” or “I was wrong.” The sooner you can do that, the sooner we can pivot and go on the right track. There are some people who pretend they know what they’re doing and they think they need to fake it. It’s such a waste of energy and productivity.It’s especially true of some first-time entrepreneurs. They have to pretend everything’s O.K. It takes a certain amount of confidence and sense of yourself to say, “You know what? This didn’t work. Help me out.”It seems like so many people want to be entrepreneurs these days.Authentic entrepreneurs are often what I call accidental entrepreneurs. It’s not their aspiration to be on the cover of a magazine. They see a problem in the world and they want to solve it, and entrepreneurship is just a way to get there.The ones who show up and say, “I want to be an entrepreneur. What do I do first? Give me the to-do list,” that’s not authentic entrepreneurship.I do think entrepreneurship can be taught, but there is no playbook. The people who are doing it to get rich and be famous are there for the wrong reasons. There’s no harder way to get rich than to be an entrepreneur.What else do you look for when you hire?Earlier in my career, I gravitated toward people who I thought were amazing, and then when things become difficult, things changed. So you want to know what someone’s going to be like when things get rough.So I’ll ask questions like, “What’s something that went wrong, and how did you deal with it?” How they answer that will help you determine their real character. You really need people who are willing to try new things but will own up to it quickly if things aren’t going right.AdvertisementWhat career and life advice do you give to new college grads?Be open to opportunity, be a good listener, and meet as many people as you can. You will learn something from everyone you meet, and you don’t have to listen to all the different advice. You’ll get conflicting advice, but there’s always something that’s going to help you along your journey.Each week, Adam Bryant talks with top executives about leadership. Follow him on Twitter: @nytcorneroffice. This interview has been edited for space and clarity.A version of this article appears in print on November 20, 2016, on Page BU2 of the New York edition with the headline: Humility Is the Mother of Invention.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »