NOV. 19, 2016
“Can Trump Save Their Jobs?” by Nelson D. Schwartz (Nov. 13), looked at workers at a Carrier plant in Indianapolis that will soon close, with production moving to Mexico. Some of the workers interviewed spoke of their support for Donald J. Trump.The article attracted 1,964 comments. The following have been edited and condensed.Mr. Trump can’t save their jobs. Nafta and other free trade agreements have kept the economy growing while the underlying dynamics were changing. The underlying dynamics are (a) we’ve gotten better at automation and (b) the big era of American growth is over.Doug, BoulderIt’s heartbreaking to read about these people, people who are victims of change, victims of the technological revolution, victims of a global economy, victims of an economy where people want to pay the least amount of money possible for goods and where the companies who produce those products want to make the most profit possible. Trump conned them, every single one of them. Their jobs aren’t coming back, not ever.Claudia Piepenburg, Vista, Calif.Mr. Trump can save the Carrier workers’ jobs if they’re willing to work for the same wages the company would pay Mexican workers.AdvertisementScott, New YorkThese workers will be sadly disappointed twice: When Carrier moves, and when Mr. Trump does nothing about it. I anticipate confusion, grief and buyer’s remorse from this work force.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Susan, MichiganWhy doesn’t Mr. Trump set a good example for other C.E.O.s and order his companies to start making his products in the U.S.? Right now. Lead by example, Mr. Trump.AdvertisementRita, CaliforniaSo many defeatists here. If Germany can make manufacturing a priority, why can’t we?Steve, MinneapolisAs a Bernie Sanders voter who held my nose and voted for Hillary Clinton, I always wanted to hear from factory workers who could explain their situations and their feelings without the hate displayed by a few Trump supporters. This reporter found those people and recorded their stories respectfully.Annie Dooley, GeorgiaLetters for Sunday Business may be sent to sunbiz@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on November 20, 2016, on Page BU6 of the New York edition with the headline: Comments.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.