AdvertisementSupported byWhite Collar WatchBy Peter J. HenningValeant Pharmaceuticals International is a onetime Wall Street darling that has become a punching bag for how pharmaceutical firms drove up drug prices and engaged in questionable sales practices, in the process losing 90 percent of its market value. The first case to emerge from multiple federal and state investigations of its conduct, however, portrays it as a victim, not a perpetrator.The Justice Department charged a former Valeant executive, Gary Tanner, with taking about $9.7 million in kickbacks from Andrew Davenport, the chief executive of Philidor Rx Services, a specialty mail-order pharmacy, while hiding his true intentions from corporate management. Valeant had a relationship with Philidor and in December 2014 paid $100 million on an option to buy it, but it dropped the association last year. Philidor shut down in January.The criminal complaint depicts surreptitious payments and a cavalier attitude, highlighted by an email from Mr. Davenport to Mr. Tanner evoking how the two men would be like Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid and “ride into the sunset (or off the cliff as in the flick).”The case appears to be a straightforward tale of avarice, but there may be more to proving the charges than meets the eye, perhaps portending a more difficult prosecution for the Justice Department. Was Valeant really the victim, or was it a willing participant that wanted to build up Philidor so it could increase sales of its products?Mr. Tanner’s lawyer issued a statement asserting that his client did his job “exceptionally well, greatly benefiting Valeant’s shareholders, and regularly communicated to his superiors what he was doing.” Mr. Davenport’s lawyer took a similar approach, claiming that “Philidor also benefited Valeant, which is why Valeant and its highly sophisticated and active management team sought to buy it.”Mr. Tanner’s job was to develop what was called the alternative fulfillment program, in which Valeant sought to have prescriptions filled with the company’s drugs through specialty pharmacies like Philidor rather than with cheaper generics. In that regard, Mr. Tanner was successful, and Philidor helped the company increase its sales.But Valeant’s executives also wanted to develop other outlets for its products, which Mr. Tanner is accused of resisting. The criminal complaint portrays Mr. Tanner as a classic unfaithful servant who made Philidor a key outlet for Valeant’s drugs while working out a secret agreement with Mr. Davenport to get a cut of his profits. He is accused of pushing Valeant to enter into an option agreement to acquire the mail order pharmacy while denying to his superiors that he had any financial interest in Philidor.Mr. Tanner received about $9.7 million of Valeant’s payments to Mr. Davenport, money funneled through corporate bank accounts to a shell company controlled by Mr. Tanner. If they were trying to hide those transfers, the two defendants certainly did a poor job by using an account over which Mr. Tanner had signature authority, which would be easy to trace, and keeping the money in the United States rather than shifting it to an offshore account.According to the federal complaint, an ex-Valeant executive was secretly paid millions of dollars to promote Philidor’s interests inside Valeant.At one time, the Justice Department could bring a case against an employee for breaching a fiduciary duty to the employer as mail or wire fraud for violating the right of honest services statute. But the Supreme Court’s decision in Skilling v. United States  in 2010 restricted this type of fraud to cases involving payment of a bribe or kickback to the defendant, not just unethical conduct that deceived an employer.Figuring out whether the $9.7 million constituted a kickback to Mr. Tanner is the prerequisite to proving that he committed honest services fraud. A federal statute cited in the Skilling case defines a kickback as a benefit given “to improperly obtain or reward favorable treatment in connection with” a transaction.Whether the dealings with Philidor were “improper” will be the crux of the government’s case against the defendants. The criminal complaint goes to great lengths to describe how Mr. Tanner kept senior Valeant executives in the dark about his role at Philidor and the benefits he would receive. He also made sure that Philidor played a crucial role in the company’s alternative fulfillment program by never pursuing relationships with other potential pharmacy partners.Buying Philidor turned out to be problematic for Valeant when the company had to issue an accounting restatement after finding that it had incorrectly recorded $58 million in sales to the pharmacy. And after questions were raised about whether it properly disclosed the relationship with Philidor in its filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Valeant shut down the unit.But that does not necessarily mean that the Philidor relationship was improper, or that the $9.7 million Mr. Tanner received constituted an illegal kickback. Valeant was aware of how the mail order pharmacy operated, and the role it played in growing pharmaceutical sales, a key to Wall Street’s embrace of the company that took the stock to more than $260 per share in 2015. The New York Times described an analyst’s view that “Valeant benefited significantly from its ties to the pharmacy, allowing it to increase sales of ailing products and obscure more significant problems with the business.”Unlike the typical kickback scheme in which a supplier pays an official to award a contract that should not have been given, the defendants can argue that the development of Philidor was a benefit to Valeant, and the option to buy it was arranged by experienced executives who paid no more than what they thought the mail order pharmacy was worth at the time.A decision in April 2016 by the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit in Chicago in United States v. Weimert  may offer a path for Mr. Tanner to argue that not revealing his interest in the Philidor deal does not constitute fraud. In that case, the conviction of a bank officer who negotiated a sale of the bank’s interest in a development while secretly taking an ownership interest in the property was overturned. The appeals court found “that negotiating parties, and certainly the sophisticated businessmen in this case, do not expect complete candor about negotiating positions, as distinct from facts and promises of future behavior.”Mr. Tanner’s stake in the Philidor deal may not have tainted the transaction even if he breached a fiduciary duty to Valeant by not disclosing any arrangement he had with Mr. Davenport. Unlike the typical kickback, he can argue that his share of the deal was a means to bring both sides together in a mutually beneficial arrangement. Thus, Valeant was not so much a victim of a bad deal as a willing participant that received the benefit that it sought by gaining control of an important conduit to sell its drugs and avoid losing sales to lower-cost generics.That argument would not put a seal of approval on what Mr. Tanner did, and arranging to make almost $10 million off a deal without first disclosing it to your employer is likely to be considered a breach of duty if Valeant sued him. But whether the federal fraud statutes should be used to police a dispute about a private employment relationship is a different question, especially when the defendants face a potential sentence of up to 20 years in prison if convicted of the fraud charge.Advertisement