
NOV. 4, 2015

From Wall Street to Washington and in the towers of academia, people are buzzing about what some say is the pernicious focus in corporate America on short-term profits. To understand the debate, it helps to understand the various forces that contribute to the pressures on companies to focus on short-term financial results. Those pressures are not just a product of one bad actor. It turns out that nearly everyone in the investment world plays a role in creating the challenges companies face in setting their sights on the far horizon.
Related Article
Means of influenceSalary or incentive paymentThe big banks employ most stock analysts.InformationProxy voting or other pressureStock tradingTHE BIG INVESTMENT BANKSStock analysts feed their reports to journalists.Benefit when investors trade more frequently.STOCK ANALYSTSPay most attention to quarterly results and rarely focus on long-term projections.JOURNALISTSFrequent trading makes money for the big investment banks.Are most interested in breaking stories, so they tend to focus on companies’ short-term results or mistakes. Analysts report short-term results.Journalists write about companies’ short-term performance.Executives recommend their short-term plans to stock analysts.POSSIBLE FIXActivist investors promote their strategies to journalists, hoping to win broader support.Companies in their presentations can focus more on long-term metrics, so that analysts have to. Executives trumpet their own short-term successes back to journalists.INDIVIDUAL INVESTORSTend to focus on the most recent results and media hype — and buy or sell stocks based on short-term results.INSTITUTIONSIndividuals tend to invest through:INSTITUTIONAL INVESTORSACTIVIST INVESTORSSuch as managers of pension funds and endowments, face scrutiny from legislators and institutions if their investments lag benchmarks.  Looking for a short-term win, may push for payouts that help shareholders at the expense of a company’s long-term goals.LEGISLATORSMUTUAL FUND MANAGERSAre often paid based on their short-term rather than long-term results, and see investors flee when short-term results lag.Activist investors can use their proxy votes and clout to push corporate boards to take specific actions.Instututional investors put some of their money in activist investor firms.POSSIBLE FIXThe compensation of mutual fund managers could be tied more closely to long-term returns.POSSIBLE FIXVarious proposals would make it harder for activist investors to influence votes on corporate policy.Investors of all kinds may use their proxy votes to influence short-term company policies.Executives reward investors with stock dividends or buybacks.Investors provide feedback to boards and executives by buying and selling stocks. As investors have focused more on the short term, they have bought and sold stocks more frequently.POSSIBLE FIXTaxes on capital gains could be changed to encourage investors to hold investments longer. CORPORATE BOARDSHire, fire and determine the compensation of top executives. Boards have moved toward more incentive-based compensation, which can encourage executives to hit short-term rather than long-term targets. POSSIBLE FIXBoards could structure compensation so that executives only get paid if they hit long-term targets. Boards reward executives’ short-term thinking with incentive-based pay.EXECUTIVESGenerally respond to the incentives created by their boards and to the feedback they are getting from investors via the stock market. Both of these may encourage short-term thinking. Means of influenceSalary or incentive paymentInformationProxy voting or other pressureStock tradingTHE BIG INVESTMENT BANKSThe big banks employ most stock analysts.Benefit when investors trade more frequently.POSSIBLE FIXSTOCK ANALYSTSCompanies in their presentations can focus more on long-term metrics, so that analysts have to. Executives recommend their short-term plans to stock analysts.Pay most attention to quarterly results and rarely focus on long-term projections.Stock analysts feed their reports to journalists.INSTITUTIONSJOURNALISTSLEGISLATORSAre most interested in breaking stories, so they tend to focus on companies’ short-term results or mistakes. Analysts report short-term results.Journalists write about companies’ short-term performance.Activist investors promote their strategies to journalists, hoping to win broader support.INDIVIDUAL INVESTORSTend to focus on the most recent results and media hype — and buy or sell stocks based on short-term results.Individuals tend to invest through:INSTITUTIONAL INVESTORSACTIVIST INVESTORSSuch as managers of pension funds and endowments, face scrutiny from legislators and institutions if their investments lag benchmarks.  Looking for a short-term win, may push for payouts that help shareholders at the expense of a company’s long-term goals.MUTUAL FUND MANAGERSAre often paid based on their short-term rather than long-term results, and see investors flee when short-term results lag.POSSIBLE FIXThe compensation of mutual fund managers could be tied more closely to long-term returns.Instututional investors put some of their money in activist investor firms.Investors of all kinds may use their proxy votes to influence company policies.Activist investors can use their proxy votes and clout to push corporate boards to take specific actions.Investors provide feedback to boards and executives by buying and selling stocks. As investors have focused more on the short term, they have bought and sold stocks more frequently.POSSIBLE FIXVarious proposals would make it harder for activist investors to influence votes on corporate policy.POSSIBLE FIXTaxes on capital gains could be changed to encourage investors to hold investments longer. Frequent trading makes money for the big investment banks.CORPORATE BOARDSHire, fire and determine the compensation of top executives. Boards have moved toward more incentive-based compensation, which can encourage executives to hit short-term rather than long-term targets. POSSIBLE FIXExecutives reward investors with stock dividends or buybacks.Boards reward executives’ short-term thinking with incentive-based pay.Boards could structure compensation so that executives only get paid if they hit long-term targets. EXECUTIVESGenerally respond to the incentives created by their boards and to the feedback they are getting from investors via the stock market. Both of these may encourage short-term thinking. Executives trumpet their own short-term successes back to journalists.How short-term thinking may affect variousplayers in the financial worldINVESTORSIndividual investors tend to focus on the most recent results and media hype — and buy or sell stocks based on short-term results.Mutual fund managers are often paid based on their short-term rather than long-term results, and see investors flee when short-term results lag.Activist investors, looking for a short-term win, may push for payouts that help shareholders at the expense of a company’s long-term goals.Institutional investors, such as managers of pension funds and endowments, face scrutiny from legislators and institutions if their investments lag benchmarks.  COMPANIESCorporate boards have moved toward more incentive-based compensation, which can encourage executives to hit short-term rather than long-term targets. Executives generally respond to the incentives created by their boards and to the feedback they are getting from investors via the stock market. Both of these may encourage short-term thinking. OTHERSThe big investment banks who employ most stock analysts benefit when investors trade more frequently.Stock analysts pay most attention to quarterly results and rarely focus on long-term projections.Journalists are most interested in breaking stories, so they tend to focus on companies’ short-term results or mistakes. By The New York TimesTech start-ups are making deals to stretch their private valuations to $1 billion. But those trade-offs may end up hurting employees and early investors.AdvertisementTech start-ups are making deals to stretch their private valuations to $1 billion. But those trade-offs may end up hurting employees and early investors.