AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressUnited States markets closed higher on Monday, setting new highs for the major indexes, as energy companies climbed with the price of oil. Investors were hoping that OPEC countries would soon be able to complete a deal that would cut oil production and help support prices. Shares of the meat producer Tyson Foods tumbled after the company reported weak fourth-quarter results.KEEPING SCORE The Dow Jones industrial average closed 0.5 percent higher, to to 18,956.69 points. The Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index gained 0.8 percent, to 2,198.18 points. And the Nasdaq composite index gained 0.9 percent, to 5,368.86 points.OIL GUSHER The price of oil jumped nearly 3 percent early Monday as traders hoped OPEC would complete a deal to curb production. Benchmark United States crude was up $1.65, to $47.34 a barrel, while Brent crude, the international standard, rose $1.73, to $48.59.That led to gains for energy companies. Marathon Oil stock added 5.5 percent and Exxon Mobil stock added 1.4 percent. Chevron stock gained 0.9 percent.OPEC nations will meet in Vienna on Nov. 30. They have agreed to preliminary terms of a deal that will reduce the production of oil slightly, but the details remain to be determined.TYSON FALLS Shares of the meat producer Tyson Foods tumbled 14.5 percent. The company’s fourth-quarter profit and sales fell far short of Wall Street’s forecasts as Tyson’s chicken business struggled. The company also said Donnie Smith, the chief executive, would step down at the end of this year, and the company president, Tom Hayes, would replace him.Shares of a competitor, Hormel Foods, lost 1.8 percent.LOCKED UP Shares of the identity theft and fraud protection company LifeLock jumped 14.8 percent after the security software maker Symantec agreed to buy the company for $2.3 billion. The deal valued LifeLock at $24 a share. Symantec picked up 3.2 percent.WATERS RISING The building products company Headwaters agreed to be bought by Boral Ltd. of Australia in a deal the companies valued at $2.6 billion, or $24.25 per share. Its stock climbed 17.1 percent.OIL DEAL Sunoco Logistics agreed to buy Energy Transfer Partners in an all-stock deal. The two companies are involved in the Dakota Access Pipeline project. A portion of that pipeline would pump oil under Lake Oahe, a Missouri River reservoir in North Dakota, and the local Standing Rock Sioux tribe and others are protesting the pipeline, saying they fear a leak could contaminate the drinking water on its reservation. They also say it could disturb sacred sites.Both companies traded lower, however. Energy Transfer Partners stock lost 7.3 percent and Sunoco Logistics stock skidded 6.6 percent. Energy Transfer Equity, the general partner of Energy Transfer Partners, picked up 3.6 percent.ORACLE SEES A DEAL Business software maker Oracle said it would buy Dyn, a company that helps route internet traffic to its destination. A month ago Dyn was at the center of a huge cyberattack that temporarily stopped some American and European internet users from gaining access to popular websites like Netflix, Twitter and PayPal. The company said its server infrastructure was hit by distributed denial-of-service, or DDoS, attacks. Oracle’s stock gained slightly, up 0.1 percent.LOGGING ON Technology stocks also made substantial gains. They have lagged the market since the election after very strong performance over the summer. Facebook stock rose 4.1 percent while shares of the online payments company PayPal advanced 1.4 percent and shares of Alphabet, the corporate parent of Google, picked up 1.1 percent.CURRENCIES The dollar, which is at a 13-year high, gave up some of its recent gains against some other currencies. The euro was slightly higher, at $1.0592. The dollar rose to 111.24 yen from 110.63 yen.BONDS Bond prices rose. The yield on the 10-year Treasury note slipped to 2.33 percent from 2.35 percent. Utilities traded higher. Those stocks tend to do better when bond yields are down.EUROPEAN MARKETS In Germany, the DAX rose 0.2 percent, and in France, the CAC 40 gained 0.6 percent. The FTSE 100 was slightly higher in Britain.ASIA’S DAY The Nikkei 225 closed up 0.8 percent in Japan, while in Hong Kong, the Hang Seng gained 0.1 percent. The Shanghai composite index added 0.8 percent in China. The Kospi was down 0.4 percent in South Korea. In Australia, the S.&P./ASX 200 lost 0.2 percent, while the Sensex in India was off 1.5 percent. Benchmarks in Taiwan rose but those in Singapore, Indonesia and the Philippines sagged.Advertisement