AdvertisementSupported byBy Amie TsangWhat does a Trump administration mean for you?That’s the question everybody is grappling with at the moment.For Rusty Cloutier, the president of MidSouth Bank in Lafayette, La., the answer is simple: “Main Street won.”He says he expects to see a reordering of priorities, away from the interests of the big cities and toward the rural and blue-collar communities where he operates.Shares in banks of all sizes are benefiting from the prospect of fewer regulations and higher interest rates, but community bankers feel as if they are in a sweet spot: Mr. Trump could limit regulations on them while still being tough on the Wall Street banks that anger the general public.The exuberance over reduced regulation combined with tax cuts has bolstered markets, which hit record highs on Monday as money poured into United States stocks in anticipation of a turnaround in the economy.“Investors are experiencing what I call FOMO — fear of missing out,” said Sam Stovall, chief investment strategist at the research firm CFRA.While they look forward to this, the business credentials that Donald J. Trump promoted during his campaign are raising questions even before he has taken office.The Emoluments Clause, a provision of the Constitution that refers to the word for compensation for labor or services says that “no person holding any office of profit or trust” shall “accept of any present, emolument, office or title, of any kind whatever, from any king, prince or foreign state” unless Congress consents.Mr. Trump’s companies, however, do business with entities controlled by foreign governments and people with ties to them.It would be tough to challenge him in court. The way to address violations of the clause would be through impeachment, not a lawsuit, according to Richard W. Painter, who was the chief White House ethics lawyer for President George W. Bush. Alternately, Congress could pass a resolution directed at the president-elect before going that far.More specific concerns have also cropped up relating to Mr. Trump’s Scottish golf courses. When he met with the British politician Nigel Farage, Mr. Trump encouraged Mr. Farage and his entourage to oppose the kind of offshore wind farms that he believed would mar views from his courses.The meeting has raised questions about how far Mr. Trump would be willing to use the power of the presidency to advance his business interests.Reports of Mr. Trump mixing business with his official duties as president-elect have prompted ethics experts to say that his actions threatened to compromise the integrity of the office.Norman Eisen, who served as the “ethics czar” in the White House under President Obama, said that Mr. Trump’s discussions of wind farms was “an extraordinary transgression of the core idea of public service.”Amid all the uncertainty, at least one question received a solid answer this week.Mr. Trump’s charitable foundation will not be paying any of the $25 million settlement to resolve a series of lawsuits concerning Trump University, which drew complaints about price gouging.Trump Foundation money has been used to settle lawsuits arising from Mr. Trump’s business and personal activities before."We demanded written assurance that the Trump University settlement would not be paid for by any charitable entity,” said Amy Spitalnick, a spokeswoman for the New York state attorney general.Being made partner at a big law firm used to be seen as a brass ring of prestige, wealth and security.But it turns out that is not so secure after all.There is more supply than demand for legal services so some big law firms are demoting partners — taking away their share in annual profits.Some are setting retirement dates or reducing them to salaried status and cutting them out of the yearly profit distribution.According to James D. Cotterman, a principal at Altman Weil, a legal consulting firm, “with law firms having to add 5 percent to 15 percent in new business each year just to stay even” all law firms are going to have to slim down “in some form.”“I came in with pretty low expectations, but the vending machine is pretty cool.”— Joey Pennacchio, the creative director for a video game start-up in Los Angeles, who managed to get his hands on two pairs of Snapchat Spectacles. Snap is preparing to go public next year, and it is betting that it can increase the number of disappearing videos on its platform. The glasses could help them achieve that.Follow Amie Tsang on Twitter @amietsang.Advertisement