By ALEXANDRA STEVENSONNOV. 22, 2016
The billionaire investor Cliff Asness is a staunch libertarian who has railed against government intervention in health care and finance.Yet his AQR Capital Management is set to receive $35 million in financial aid as part of a broader move by the Connecticut government to persuade companies not to leave the state.The aid package, which was approved by the State Bond Commission this month, includes loans and grants tied to conditions for jobs to be created, and follows a similar $22 million offer made this year to Bridgewater Associates, the world’s biggest hedge fund.But the assistance for Bridgewater Associates, which manages $150 billion, and AQR, which has $172 billion in assets under management, has been questioned by some, including the state comptroller, over whether the initiative actually benefits jobs in the state.AdvertisementSeveral months after Bridgewater received approval for its aid package, the firm told clients it was going through a “renovation” that would entail job cuts, in part because there were parts of the firm with more than 1,500 employees that were “bloated, inefficient and bureaucratic.”AdvertisementThe state comptroller, Kevin Lembo, has argued that financial aid would be better spent on companies that could create more stable jobs for the middle class rather than financial firms that often employ only graduates from top-tier universities.“When it comes down to direct assistance to companies, we need to look to the highest value,” said Mr. Lembo, who voted against the financial aid package for Bridgewater in May and for AQR this month. State financial assistance would be put to better use on companies that provide manufacturing jobs, he said, adding, “those are the kinds of jobs that raise up and help maintain a middle class that is struggling to hold on.”A spokesman for AQR said, “This is a win-win job incentive program for both AQR and Connecticut that builds on our strong record of job growth in the state.” A spokesman from Bridgewater declined to comment.Financial firms have been assisted in Connecticut in the past. Before the financial crisis, cities like Stamford, Conn., thrived as the banking industry, lured by tax credits and other government incentives, set up operations there. But firms like UBS of Switzerland and the Royal Bank of Scotland retreated sharply after the crisis, and the number of employees in Connecticut plunged. In Stamford, UBS was said to have the largest trading floor in the world before the crisis. Now, the floor is largely empty and parts of the city feel abandoned.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Connecticut is fighting to keep businesses from leaving after a tax increase last year. The loans to Bridgewater and AQR are part of an initiative by Gov. Dannel P. Malloy to encourage big companies to move their headquarters to Connecticut and to provide incentives to expand for companies already there. In January, General Electric announced it would move its headquarters to Boston from Fairfield, Conn., after four decades in the state.“Let me put it this way — usually companies don’t call up and say ‘We’re going to leave if you don’t pay us,’” Catherine Smith, the commissioner of the Connecticut Department of Economic and Community Development, said in an interview.“Between the lines, we understand that these companies are looking elsewhere. In this case, it was not overt but we wanted to provide something that would be competitive,” Ms. Smith said of the AQR deal. “There is competition out there for these companies — other states approach them or they approach other states, and in a number of cases we have had to play defense.” Bridgewater, she said, was looking at a site in New York when Connecticut began talks with the investment firm.The financial aid effort has been roundly criticized by organized labor.Lori J. Pelletier, president of the Connecticut A.F.L.-C.I.O., remarked on the financial package for AQR in a statement, saying: “While the state continues to cut vital public services to the state’s most vulnerable and lay off critical service providers, the governor leads the way to line the pockets of hedge fund managers.”AdvertisementAs part of the AQR deal, the company will be eligible for $28 million in loans that will be forgiven if the company keeps 540 jobs within Connecticut and creates up to 600 new jobs over the next 10 years.AQR will also receive $7 million in grants, disbursed in phases, to help pay for an expansion. The company moved its operations to Connecticut in 2004 and is based in Greenwich.Mr. Asness co-founded AQR as a hedge fund in 1998. Today the investment firm also offers mutual fund products.A version of this article appears in print on November 23, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: A State Pays Millions to Keep Hedge Funds.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.