By LIZ ALDERMANNOV. 4, 2015
PARIS — During the height of the Greek crisis last summer, five men gathered in a war room at the Finance Ministry in Athens and began poring over the outlines of a surreptitious project. Greece was at a dangerous impasse with its creditors over a bailout, and the group needed to find a way to keep the country functioning if it were to be forced out of the euro.The group, led by Yanis Varoufakis, the finance minister at the time, came up with what he later called a “plan B” for Greece. It called for the creation of a parallel banking system as well as the use of i.o.u.s or even a new drachma to replace the euro if Greece’s creditors cut funding to banks.There was one catch: If Greece dropped out of the currency zone, the entire European project risked succumbing to new chaos.In the end, European leaders struck a deal to salvage Athens with a new 86 billion euro bailout, and the secret plan was not used. But the episode — a stark reminder of the weaknesses of the euro and the challenges of membership in the eurozone — has created a rift among policy makers about how to strengthen European unity to deal with future crises.Advertisement“It’s positive that the eurozone didn’t break up,” said Simon Tilford, a director at the Center for European Reform in London. “But there are still major fault lines that have not been fully addressed. Europe is by no means out of the woods.”AdvertisementOne reason is that European leaders still have not repaired what many economists say is the euro’s chief flaw: the absence of a central fiscal authority. The region lacks a single agency — something akin to the United States Treasury — that can help manage debt liabilities among countries and make it easier to transfer financial aid to those in periods of difficulty.Efforts to strengthen Europe’s banking system by centralizing oversight are incomplete. Plans to allow money from one country to be used to rescue troubled banks in another are similarly in flux.The economic situation only adds to the uncertainty. After six years of back-to-back crises, the region’s economic recovery continues to move at two speeds, with southern countries faring worse than countries in the north, like Germany. Meanwhile, a tide of migrants from Africa and the Middle East has presented new economic and political challenges for leaders.Europe is hardly falling apart. Although it angered many European politicians, the Greek showdown also crystallized their thinking about the euro as an irreversible, historic project anchoring the European Union. Since summer, Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany and President François Hollande of France have repeatedly insisted that the euro must not only remain together but expand through further integration.But the Greek debacle also showed that leaders were still grappling with the question of how far they were willing to go to keep the currency union together.After Greece clinched the deal in August with its European creditors for the new bailout, the economy ministers of Germany and France called for a radical shift in the way the single currency was run. They proposed a eurozone treasury, to be overseen by a eurozone finance chief. That official would have a single budget, the power to harmonize and raise taxes, as well as the ability to share liabilities between countries for public finances and debts.“Strengthening the euro is not only about the eurozone,” Emmanuel Macron, France’s reformist economy minister, and Sigmar Gabriel, his German counterpart, wrote in an open letter published in European newspapers.Advertisement“It cannot be isolated from a broader rethinking of the E.U.,” they wrote. “A stronger eurozone should be the core of a deepened E.U.”Mario Draghi, the president of the European Central Bank, was more blunt. “Europe can only be strong if it acts in unity on the basis of solidarity and cooperation,” he said to the economic committee of European Parliament recently.But the proposal has divided political opinion in Germany, France and other countries for the same reason that no one wanted to carry it out before. Under its prescriptions, countries using the euro might have to give up some national sovereignty to make the eurozone work better.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.European Union leaders have postponed a discussion of the future of the eurozone until December because of conflicting views about how to go forward. Germany and France both want a stronger eurozone. But Germany favors better enforcement of existing rules governing fiscal responsibility among euro countries. France, on the other hand, is focused on whether there should be a common budget — using taxpayer money from member countries — for the entire euro bloc.Adding to the pressure, countries that were hardest hit during the euro crisis remain strained. While a slow turnaround is taking hold in Spain and Portugal, and the economy is improving with greater speed in Ireland, growth remains below precrisis levels. The fallout has damaged national balance sheets and fueled high unemployment among millions of citizens, especially young people.“There is a risk that the eurozone recovery could stall as the rate of growth in the global economy slows,” Mr. Tilford said. “If that happens, nothing that has so far been agreed to in terms of governance reforms for the eurozone is going to help.”Such prospects have not helped burnish the appeal of the 19-member euro club for prospective joiners. Although most of the European Union’s 28 member states are obliged to adopt the euro, no new countries are expected to sign on for several years, especially after the fresh chaos in Greece.Poland, whose relatively robust economy would provide a lift to the currency bloc, is disinclined to get on board anytime soon. Voter interest in adopting the euro has been tepid, and Polish leaders are in no hurry to sign up. For officials in the Czech Republic, the Greek drama reinforced concerns that the eurozone was not stable. In April, the finance minister, Andrej Babis, ruled out any plans for the country to adopt the euro before 2018, citing worries about what could happen “if Greece collapses.”Beyond the eurozone’s borders, the crisis has cast uncertainty over the future of the European Union itself.AdvertisementIn Britain, where the government has no intention of adopting the euro, Prime Minister David Cameron has repeatedly pointed to the euro crisis and the haphazard response of eurozone leaders as proof of a flawed project. Conservatives in his party argue that membership in the European Union is more trouble than it’s worth. The surge of migrants has only reinforced such perceptions.After a majority conservative government was elected last summer, lawmakers quickly renewed the call for a referendum in 2017 or earlier on whether Britain should stay in the European Union, raising the specter of the departure of one of the bloc’s biggest members.Faced with the chaos of a possible decision to withdraw, Mr. Cameron has responded with a campaign to create what he called “real change in Europe.” He recently visited with Ms. Merkel and toured European capitals to drum up support for streamlining European institutions and simplifying the tangle of rules, which critics say are too bureaucratic and often undemocratic.Similar concerns have also elevated right-wing parties in Europe that have rallied against further integration. In France especially, the far-right National Front party, led by Marine Le Pen, has gained ground heading into the 2017 elections partly by tapping discontent over France’s sluggish performance within the euro as well as concerns that the region’s open-door policy might lead to a bigger wave of migrants.“If Le Pen gets elected, we’re going to have a very different discussion going on about Europe,” said Guntram B. Wolff, the director of Bruegel, a political and economic policy think tank based in Brussels.Still, analysts say, the broader political will to strengthen the European Union as well as the currency bloc remains strong and is increasingly likely to prevail. The danger is that policy makers could drag their feet and fail to muster the support to fix problems quickly, before the next crisis.“My overall reading is still that the majority of people are thinking in terms of the continued, gradual integration of Europe,” Mr. Wolff said. “But we can still have accidents.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »