NOV. 24, 2016
The unofficial start of the holiday shopping season began this week, when many national retailers opened their doors and offered major sales.We’re capturing the experience with reporters and photographers around the country, showing what it looks and feels like at American shopping malls, retailers and discount stores. You’ll also find:■ Stories of shoppers and what brought them out to the stores.■ Shopping deals from The Wirecutter, a product review and recommendation site owned by The New York Times Company.■ Shopping by the numbers: history and facts about Black Friday, as the day after Thanksgiving is often called.After working the overnight shift at Old Navy on 34th Street in Manhattan, Walter Reinoso hit the Foot Locker store at Union Square to get a pair of Air Jordan 3S True Blues he had been waiting for. His approach mixed the modern (ordering online) with the past (showing up in a store to get them).Advertisement“They originally came out in 1988 and are really hard to find. I had to reserve them on the app. I haven’t bought a pair of Jordans in a very long time. This silhouette is iconic,” Mr. Reinoso said while proudly holding up the size 9½ midtops. “I like that these are the original colors: white, red and blue. I got them for $249. They are usually much more.”AdvertisementDescribing himself as a shoe enthusiast rather than a guy with a shoe fetish, Mr. Reinoso, 19, of East New York, Brooklyn, along with his friend, Cindy Ortiz, 18, of Bushwick, Brooklyn, were heading to the store Dover Market to check out more footwear, preferably pairs of Vans and Converse. Mr. Reinoso had some more cash to spend — $300 in his pocket — but said he would rather not spend it all. “I don’t want to,” he said, “but may be tempted.”— RUTH BASHINSKYLAS VEGAS — For some, Black Friday deals hold a more aesthetic appeal. At Tatt Life Studios, a tattoo parlor a few short miles from the Las Vegas Strip, customers have called weeks in advance to book appointments to add to their body art.“Tattoos can be pricey,” Justin Smith, Tatt Life Studios owner, who is known as Smitty, said. “This gives our customers a great chance to get some really spectacular work done for a mind-blowing price.”He has held a successful Black Friday deal since 2013 to capitalize on the holiday spending habits of consumers.“It’s been a great way to continue business during our slow months,” said Mr. Smith, who has worked as a tattoo artist for nearly a decade. “We have a lot of loyal customers who wait for this deal.”The process, and subsequent bonding experience, of getting a tattoo can create a lasting impression on customers.“Black Friday, for us, is more than an exciting retail day, it’s more of a way of giving back to our clients,” Mr. Smith said. “The unique thing about getting a tattoo, when you share that with someone as an artist, is that they are with you forever.”AdvertisementMr. Smith’s first appointment of the day, Ryan Wills, has his Black Friday mapped out. After scouring electronics stores for audio car-system deals and crashing a few big-box stores for door buster sales, Mr. Wills plans to spend a few Black Friday hours in the black padded chair at Tatt Life to finish his extensive “Deadpool”-inspired canvas.“I follow Tatt Life Studios on Facebook and couldn’t resist the chance to get my leg piece finished,” Mr. Wills, a 27-year-old mechanic, said. “I have several Marvel tattoos on my body including an Iron Man piece as well as a ‘Guardians of the Galaxy’ collage, both done by Smitty.”— KIMBERLEY MCGEESierra Sproul, a 24-year-old kindergarten teacher in Austin, Tex., had a special incentive to take advantage of Black Friday discounts at her local boot retailer: her coming Western-themed wedding on April 8.“I’m very excited,” she said, beaming as she and her mother wrapped up a purchase of brown floral Corral-brand boots (which came to $199 after a 20 percent discount).In all, the pair spent more than $500 at Cavender’s Boot City in north Austin after adding a $180 hat and $159 boots for her fiancé, Shane McPherson, whom Ms. Sproul lovingly described as “very country.”She and her mother said they had purposely waited for Black Friday to offset wedding costs with hefty discounts.“If we can get boots for a percentage off, that’s good because they don’t go on sale very often,” Ms. Sproul said.Many of the other customers in the store were looking at western items as likely Christmas gifts, according to Robert Garcia, the store’s manager.AdvertisementThe business sent out “doorbuster” coupons valid for shoppers arriving between 7 a.m. and 11 a.m., targeting previous customers and those who lived nearby.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.— DAVID MONTGOMERYConsumers will spend $27 billion this Friday, accounting for 4.7 percent of all holiday shopping, according to the research firm Customer Growth Partners. That may sound like a lot, but Black Friday’s importance has shrunken over the years: A decade ago, the day accounted for 6 percent of sales.FREEHOLD, N.J. — Families packed the Walmart here Thursday evening, fliers in hand and a mission in mind. For many, the targets were similar: Samsung Smart TVs, PlayStation 4 and one of this year’s must-have toys, the furry and interactive Hatchimal.“I was here at 3:30 and I’m just mad because I didn’t get my Hatchimal,” said Amalia Teixeira, 52, a retired police officer from Manalapan. “Now my daughter will have to wait till January.”Sunny Singh, 30, an assistant manager, confirmed that the store sold out of the eight or so Hatchimals in stock early in the day. The toy is a robotic bird that hatches out of an egg. The price starts at about $60.Still, Ms. Teixeira said the crowds this year seemed lighter and less frenzied. While foot traffic was fairly heavy, it was also orderly.“Last year, we walked out with about $2,000 worth of stuff — this year it’s only about $700,” Ms. Teixiera said.Several other shoppers also noticed a slower pace than they had predicted.“It’s less intense than I was expecting, and this is the busy Walmart in the area,” said Martine Similien, 31, of Freehold, which is about 30 miles east of Trenton.“I expected the mob scenes from the commercials,” said Patricia Davis, 34, of Freehold.— LAUREN HERSTIKNAME: Barb MulkeyAGE: 59LOCATION: Seminole Towne Center, Sanford, Fla.BACK STORY: “It’s my first Black Friday shopping ever,” Ms. Mulkey said as she strolled through Macy’s, her arms laden with loot. “My neighbor talked me into it.” In previous years, reports of “crazy people” storming through retail establishments had dissuaded her from participating, she said. As it turned out, she got to see some craziness herself this time. In another store, Ms. Mulkey, a middle-school math teacher, and her neighbor, Kathy Van Singel, an orthodontist’s assistant, had been loading poinsettias into a shopping cart when, their attention diverted, someone made off with the cart, flowers and all. There were no more on the shelf. “And then I became one of those nuts,” Ms. Mulkey said. “We ended up finding some more somewhere else, so we got our poinsettias. But some woman asked me to reach a box for her, and I said, ‘You’re on your own, lady.’”Advertisement— NICK MADIGANAs Brian X. Chen reminds us, the overwhelming majority of Black Friday deals are duds. But there are still some diamonds in the haystack. The Wirecutter is sorting out the good deals from the bad, and highlighting them in a running Twitter feed.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.