By BINYAMIN APPELBAUMNOV. 23, 2016
WASHINGTON — When Federal Reserve officials convened just before the presidential election, they talked like people who were ready to raise interest rates, although they decided to wait a little longer.They fretted about the growing risks of keeping borrowing costs at a historically low level, according to an account of the meeting that the Fed published on Wednesday. They also expressed confidence, albeit with some reservations, that the economy was ready for higher rates.The exuberant reaction of financial markets to Donald J. Trump’s victory has strengthened the case for higher rates, and solidified expectations that the Fed will act at its next meeting in December.The early November meeting was something of a placeholder. The Fed was seen as unlikely to move on the eve of the election. Officials had decided they were not quite ready to raise rates at their previous meeting, in September, and the account noted that they did not have much new data to consider.AdvertisementBut the latest meeting’s account portrays a sense of growing urgency among the 17 members of the Federal Open Market Committee, the Fed committee that sets the course of monetary policy.Advertisement“Many judged that risks to economic and financial stability could increase over time if the labor market overheated appreciably, or expressed concern that an extended period of low-interest rates risked intensifying incentives for investors to reach for yield, potentially leading to a mispricing of risk and misallocation of capital,” it said. The account was published after a standard three-week delay.The Fed said that the case for a rate increase had “strengthened” after the November meeting. Janet L. Yellen, the Fed’s chairwoman, went a little further last week, telling a congressional committee that an increase in the Fed’s benchmark interest rate “could well become appropriate relatively soon.”The meeting account is in the same key. Two officials voted to raise rates in November, and the minutes said others were already convinced that the Fed should move in December, given its stated objectives. Moreover, the account said, “Most participants expressed a view that it could well become appropriate to raise the target range for the federal funds rate relatively soon, so long as incoming data provided some further evidence of continued progress toward the committee’s objectives.”“Inflation had increased somewhat since earlier this year but was still below the committee's 2 percent longer-run objective, partly reflecting earlier declines in energy prices and in prices of non-energy imports.”Markets have received the message. Some analysts warned before the election that Mr. Trump’s victory could upset financial markets and lead the Fed to push back a rate increase. So far, the opposite has happened. Markets have rallied and expectations of a December rate increase have solidified. The probability derived from asset prices stood at 94 percent on Wednesday.Investors are responding in part to Mr. Trump’s economic plans. He has promised to collaborate with congressional Republicans on a large tax cut and other measures intended to stimulate economic growth. Fed officials have all but begged for fiscal authorities to take a stronger hand, in part because they are eager to dial back their own efforts, and push rates up toward more normal levels.Yet the markets’ reaction to Mr. Trump’s victory also creates some new problems.“The timing and scope of these actions is still highly uncertain,” said James Marple, senior economist at TD Bank. “In the meantime, interest- and exchange-rate sensitive sectors of the economy like housing and trade will take a hit, suggesting some downside risk to economic growth.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Fed has kept its benchmark rate between 0.25 and 0.5 percent since last December. The policy is intended to bolster economic activity by encouraging borrowing and risk-taking, but it has raised concerns that the Fed is encouraging too much borrowing and risk-taking.In addition, Fed officials have concluded that labor market conditions are unlikely to further improve, although the share of adults with jobs is significantly below the prerecession level.AdvertisementThe account takes pains to emphasize that the Fed is planning a slow retreat. And it sounded a cautionary note about the strength of growth in the third quarter. The economy expanded at an annual rate of 2.9 percent, but Fed officials pointed to a number of unusual factors, including a boom in soybean exports.“Excluding these factors, underlying economic growth had been relatively modest,” the account said. “Growth of consumer spending had slowed from its brisk pace earlier in the year, residential investment had fallen again, and business fixed investment had remained soft.”Inflation has increased a little faster than the Fed expected in recent months, although it remains below the 2 percent annual pace that the Fed regards as healthy. Some officials advocating a rate increase argue that inflation will begin to rise more quickly as labor markets tighten. That, in turn, could force the Fed to raise rates more quickly, potentially disrupting economic activity.But the Fed’s concerns about inflation remain relatively subdued. Ms. Yellen told Congress last week that she saw little chance of a sharp rise in inflation. The weakness of the global economy continues to weigh on domestic inflation, in part by pushing up the value of the dollar.Mr. Trump’s election also has pushed the dollar sharply higher.A version of this article appears in print on November 24, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Latest Fed Discussion Reflects Increasing Confidence in Raising Rates.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.