AdvertisementSupported byBy Noam Scheiber and Barry MeierPresident-elect Donald J. Trump promised to undo many of the Obama administration’s most ambitious regulations. But even before he takes office, federal courts in Texas are doing some of the work for him.A federal judge’s injunction this week halted a Labor Department rule that would have made millions more Americans eligible for overtime pay.Over the last two years, Federal District Court judges in the state have chipped away at Mr. Obama’s legacy by striking down or suspending no fewer than five regulations, executive orders or actions, and guidelines, including an action that would have allowed illegal immigrants who are parents of United States citizens to remain in the country, and guidance that would have expanded restroom access for transgender students.The injunction in the overtime case, issued on Tuesday by a judge nominated by Mr. Obama, has many advocates and legal experts concerned.“It’s a troubling trend because it’s essentially delegating policy oversight to a set of handpicked judges in the South, who can pick and choose which regulations move forward and which do not,” said Matthew Wessler, a principal at the firm Gupta Wessler who has argued multiple cases involving workers before the Supreme Court.The case over the overtime rule, which would have made an estimated 4.2 million people newly eligible for time-and-a-half overtime pay, provides some insight into why opponents of regulation conclude that descending on Texas increases their odds of success.In an interview, the Nevada attorney general, Adam Paul Laxalt, whose state was the lead plaintiff in the case against the overtime rule, said that the coalition of states it led had elected to file in the Eastern District of Texas because the district had a reputation for handing down rulings quickly.“That was what is known as a fast docket,” Mr. Laxalt said. “The decision was made based on a bunch of variables, but we thought we may be able to get the quickest answer.” Citing the Dec. 1 effective date for the new regulation, he said, “We were really fighting the clock.”Mr. Laxalt added that Nevada had been part of multistate litigation that was filed in other states, including a case over a rule regulating waterways, which was filed in North Dakota.Texas has a rich culture of antigovernment litigation. In 2013, Greg Abbott, now the state’s governor and then its attorney general, jokingly described a typical workday as, “I go into the office, I sue the federal government and I go home.” He bragged that he had sued the Obama administration 25 times in the previous four years.While federal judges in Texas are officially appointed by the president, not state officials, Senate custom gives the state’s two United States senators considerable influence over the nominations.“The judges that do manage to get nominated have to somehow pass through the gauntlet of Ted Cruz and John Cornyn,” said Richard Levy, the secretary-treasurer of the state A.F.L.-C.I.O. who served as its legal director for more than 20 years. “It has skewed the bench here in a way I don’t think is probably likely in other places.”Even though the federal judge who ruled on the overtime regulation, Amos L. Mazzant III, was formally nominated by Mr. Obama in 2014, the influence of Mr. Cruz and Mr. Cornyn made it unlikely that he would be overly sympathetic to federal regulations, Mr. Levy said.Still, the sweep of Judge Mazzant’s decision appears to have surprised even skeptics of the regulation.The Obama regulation raised the annual salary limit below which workers are automatically eligible for overtime pay — something that previous administrations, including George W. Bush’s, had done several times since 1938 — to $47,476, from $23,660.In his ruling, however, Judge Mazzant suggested not simply that the administration lacked the authority to raise the salary limit so high, but that no administration had the authority to establish and raise a salary limit of any kind.Nothing in the law, he wrote, “indicates that Congress intended the department to define and delimit with respect to a minimum salary level.”(Judge Mazzant retreated from the implications of this statement in a footnote asserting that he was determining the legality only of the Obama regulation.)Asked if he agreed with the judge that the Labor Department lacked the authority to create a salary limit of any kind, not just the new level developed by the administration, Mr. Laxalt, the Nevada attorney general, said, “We do think the judge got it right when he said it’s unclear whether or not they can do an arbitrary salary test,” but confessed that he wouldn’t necessarily follow the ruling to its logical conclusion.“I’m not prepared to say categorically we’re opposed to the 23,000,” the limit established by George W. Bush, he said.For his part, Thomas E. Perez, the labor secretary, argued in an interview that it simply was not possible to single out the Obama salary limit as extreme or arbitrary while accepting the previous increases, since the new limit was in line with some of them.“If we had simply indexed the 1975 threshold to inflation, that number would be well in excess of what our current threshold is,” he said — about $57,000 annually.The administration is widely expected to appeal the ruling, given the extensive history of such increases, and many management-side lawyers believed that Judge Mazzant was out on a limb.“The Labor Department has been setting these minimums since 1940,” said Allan Bloom of the law firm Proskauer Rose. “This is the first time that a district court judge is essentially saying you don’t have the authority to do that.”Considered alongside the recent pattern of decisions by Texas judges, however, the ruling might have been foreseen.Last month, Judge Marcia A. Crone of the Eastern District of Texas ruled against most of an Obama administration directive that required companies to disclose labor violations before they could receive a federal contract worth more than $500,000, a policy that had inflamed the business community.Last week, Judge Sam R. Cummings of the Northern District of Texas, permanently blocked an administration rule that would have required employers to disclose relationships with consultants they hire to dissuade workers from unionizing.In perhaps the biggest judicial setback to the president’s executive actions and regulations before the overtime decision, a split Supreme Court decision in June left in place a 2015 ruling by Judge Andrew S. Hanen of the Southern District of Texas that shut down the administration program intended to grant leniency to immigrants in the country illegally with children who are citizens or lawful permanent residents.President Obama had pointed to the program, which was meant to protect millions of undocumented immigrants from deportation, as one of his major achievements.Mr. Wessler, the Supreme Court lawyer, marveled at how unprecedented the recent developments have been.“Using nationwide injunctions coupled with the kind of blatant forum shopping here is not something that we’ve really seen before in the modern age,” he said.Advertisement