
White Collar Watch By                     
PETER J. HENNING

NOV. 4, 2015
The law of insider trading has not changed much since important Supreme Court rulings in the 1980s established a high bar for convictions.It was not enough that someone used confidential information for personal gain, the court said then; prosecutors had to prove that the person had committed a breach of duty — in other words, had violated a legal responsibility — in benefiting from that information.And in September — in one of the largest insider cases so far — the court held fast to that requirement by refusing to hear an appeal of a lower-court ruling that overturned the conviction of two prominent hedge fund portfolio managers in New York. They were charged with trading stocks based on nonpublic information that reaped profits of more than $72 million for their firms.The result outraged Preet Bharara, the United States attorney in Manhattan whose office prosecuted the case known as United States v. Newman. He called the decision “a potential bonanza for friends and family of rich people who have access to material nonpublic information.”AdvertisementBut the court’s recent decision did more than that. It also led to speculation in the legal world that the case would become its own kind of “tipping point” — a critical moment that would inspire the Justice Department and the Securities and Exchange Commission to seek legislative action to toughen and expand the laws on insider trading. The speculation is fueled by the belief that the problem could get worse in the years ahead as information exchange becomes increasingly rapid, complex and exclusive to a technologically savvy few.AdvertisementAny attempt to change the ground rules for insider trading prosecutions will inevitably raise complex questions about what types of information and trading practices should be targeted.Traditional insider trading cases revolve around corporate developments, from an impending merger to more mundane information about quarterly earnings. Most charges involve relatively small amounts of money, ranging from a few thousand to perhaps a million dollars, although there are occasional situations like the prosecution of Mathew Martoma, a former portfolio manager at SAC Capital Advisors, that involved more than $250 million.There is no question that these types of cases will remain illegal, even without any change in the law. Mr. Bharara conceded that the Newman decision would not affect 90 percent of the insider trading convictions his office obtained in the last few years.So if the definition of insider trading should be expanded, it is worth taking into account how the markets have changed since the Supreme Court established the contours of the prohibition to figure out what might come within a new law.Two developments are worthy of consideration: the rise of exchange-traded index funds and the growth of high-frequency trading algorithms, which execute transactions in the blink of an eye and account for an increasing share of the market.The value of E.T.F.s and their various offshoots has grown exponentially in the last decade, to more than $2 trillion today from about $250 billion. And they are becoming more exotic by the day, with funds based on physical commodities, triple-leveraged offerings that multiply investor gains and losses, and even funds that track the volatility of different markets rather than any particular securities.These funds are not immune to trading on confidential information, and indeed they may be even more vulnerable to manipulative conduct when they reflect just a sliver of the market. The temptation to tinker with an index is quite powerful, especially given the constant pressure on Wall Street to produce profits.AdvertisementWe have seen global banks plead guilty and pay billions of dollars in penalties the last few years when traders have misreported interest rates to affect the London Interbank Offered Rate, or Libor. As more specialized E.T.F.s proliferate, there may be efforts to put out information and adopt trading strategies designed to change the valuation of securities and investments underpinning an index, creating an opening to profit.Could information that affects a market index represent a new vehicle for insider trading? If so, then limiting insider trading to those who breach a fiduciary duty, as the law currently requires, may not be broad enough to counter misconduct in E.T.F. transactions.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Traditional investors, like Warren Buffett, look at the fundamentals of a company to find stocks trading at a discount to their true value in the hope that they know more than the rest of the market. The notion that in-depth analysis can be permissible was endorsed by the Supreme Court, which pointed out that it “is necessary to the preservation of a healthy market.”But corporate fundamentals are almost passé as more of the market is driven by high-frequency trading firms looking for a sliver of profits from a heavy volume of transactions, rarely holding a position for more than a day or two. These firms engage in different forms of what is known as “arbitrage,” which is buying and selling securities and other assets across different markets to take advantage of small price differences that crop up.Insider trading is all about getting a leg up on the market by cashing in on information before other investors learn about it. The S.E.C. and the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, the first line of defense for investors, need to determine how new sources of information will shape the markets, and their potential for abuse by traders seeking unfair advantages. The challenge is to determine the extent to which informational advantages gained by high-frequency traders should be tolerated.Questions have been raised about whether these firms gain an unfair advantage from having access to information about the flow of orders and potential price changes just a few seconds before others do. Indeed, some exchanges sell an early peek at their trading data before it is available to the general public, which is quite unlike the information used in a typical insider trading case.The type of information that can move markets is changing because of sophisticated trading algorithms that can execute trades in milliseconds. The number of orders, the prices being offered or sought, and the type of order entered on an exchange can give important clues about the direction of prices — along with the temptation to create false impressions by submitting bids and quickly canceling them. That practice known as “spoofing,” which can fool algorithms by enticing them to trade in order to drive prices up or down, was outlawed by the Dodd-Frank Act.Yet, orders are canceled all the time, often for legitimate reasons. If an algorithm causes a high volume of cancellations, then proof of a violation without more evidence would depend on somehow divining the computer programmer’s intent, which seems problematic if not utterly futile.Michael Lewis’s book “Flash Boys” claimed that high-frequency trading based on small informational advantages has “rigged” the stock market. Yet, the S.E.C. relies on some of that very rigging to help ensure that the markets operate properly.AdvertisementIn a recent request for comments on the regulation of exchange-traded products like E.T.F.s and other index-based securities, the agency pointed out that an important means to ensuring fair pricing is through arbitrage trading, which keeps prices from falling too far out of line with the underlying value of the assets. In effect, the S.E.C. wants high-frequency trading that takes advantage of the pricing gaps in the markets to keep prices in balance.So while the law prohibits trading on confidential information obtained improperly, it says little about the types of information used by high-frequency traders to engage in arbitrage, such as whether installing their computers closer to an exchange or paying for access to information about the flow of orders might be improper. There is nothing inevitably nefarious about trading on this type of information; but it does mean that the investors may pay a bit more to buy or receive a lower price when selling, effectively taxing them in the name of greater market liquidity.Any change to insider trading law should confront the question of whether a line can be drawn around the types of information that these traders can use properly, and what practices cause too much harm to the markets and investors. Simply taking a hands-off approach to high-frequency trading fuels the perception that the markets are the rigged game that Mr. Lewis portrayed, producing profits from trading on information unavailable to ordinary investors — the very rationale for outlawing insider trading.A simplistic approach would be to limit or even eliminate many high-frequency trading practices, but that could involve substantial consequences as the market depends more and more on the liquidity these traders provide. Moreover, imposing restrictions on how high-frequency trading firms operate, or taxing them to reduce their volume, may not be any more realistic than mandating the use of rotary phones and handwritten orders, the way the market operated in the 1960s. Turning back the clock is not a viable strategy, and could affect the long-term health of the financial markets by curbing innovation that helps drive the financial sector.Informational advantages that help generate profits can be the reward for hard work and creative thinking. The challenge is figuring out when it is no longer effort but fraud that is generating the gains.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »