AdvertisementSupported byBy Rachel AbramsRIVERDALE, N.J. — With a baby strapped to her front, a knapsack on her back and a Donald Duck coffee mug in one hand, Christi Mulder arrived at the Target here, about 30 miles northwest of Manhattan, early Friday morning. She and her sister, Erica Renaud, who brought her 7-week-old son, were on the hunt for holiday gifts for the 11 children they have between them.The New York Times followed Ms. Mulder, 36, and her sister for a closer look at how Black Friday, as the day after Thanksgiving is often called, plays out for families on the ground. The retail business, upended by online shopping, is still struggling to figure out just to lure shoppers off their couches and into stores. But even as people grow increasingly used to shopping a seemingly endless stream of bargains online, millions of Americans still rely on Black Friday discounts in stores, braving the cold and the crowds to find them.Each sister works part time — Ms. Renaud is a blogger and Ms. Mulder is a lacrosse coach — and was on a budget. Ms. Renaud, 30, wanted to spend no more than $200 on gifts for her children, plus maybe a little extra for stocking stuffers. Normally, she spends closer to $300. But this year, alarmed by growing discussions about credit card debt, student debt and national debt, Ms. Renaud — who does not use credit cards — decided she would try to cut back.Other factors contributed to that decision. Ms. Renaud and her sister grew up in an observant Christian family, and both say that religion plays a big role in their lives. Their husbands work at local churches — Ms. Renaud’s is a prayer leader, Ms. Mulder’s is a pastor — and Ms. Renaud wanted to focus less on gifts and more on the holiday itself. Instead of tablets or video games, her children will receive homemade “tickets” to family activities, like movies or other outings.The budget outlined by Ms. Mulder was larger, about $600 for her six children. But she, too, was hunting for deals.Neither woman was looking for gifts for herself, although Ms. Mulder’s husband was keen to get a television. Electronics prices had fallen so much so quickly, Ms. Mulder said. The TV they bought for $800 two years ago was already selling for $200.“It used to be like, ‘Oh, my whole bonus check is going to my TV,’” Ms. Mulder said.Ultimately, they decided to spend their money on the children.“When you have a family with a lot of kids, or anybody with a budget, you’re constantly balancing needs and wants,” she said.To get the best deals they could, both women regularly pulled out their smartphones to look up the prices of what they were finding in the store. Ms. Renaud had even come prepared with a virtual cart full of products on Amazon.“In the back of my mind, I’m comparing to what’s in my cart,” she said. Doing that ahead of time, she said, made it easier to stick to a budget. “On Amazon, I’m watching my total change.”And sure, things were often cheaper online. Ms. Mulder even has a subscription to Amazon Prime, the site’s service that comes with free two-day shipping. But there were advantages to coming to the store, not all of them having to do with shopping. The outing was a chance for the sisters to spend a couple of hours catching up, away from their other children and family. Ms. Mulder lives in nearby North Haledon, N.J., while Ms. Renaud lives in Saratoga Springs, N.Y., more than 150 miles away.Coming to the store also allowed them to examine products that could be deceiving online.“You can’t look at all of the Legos altogether at once,” Ms. Mulder said, eyeing an aisle full of Star Wars-branded Lego sets. “This little Lego box could look way better online, and then you get it and you’re like, ‘Oh, that’s tiny, it’s supposed to be a big gift.’”At Target, Ms. Mulder found a set of hardcover Harry Potter books. The set was $5 cheaper on Amazon. She thought about it, and put the books back. “That five or 10 dollars adds up,” she said.But the sisters did not just compare Target’s products to what was available online. When they arrived in the doll aisle, Ms. Mulder took an American Girl catalog from her knapsack. American Girl dolls can retail for more than $100, and Ms. Mulder wanted to compare the items her daughter wanted — an American Girl brand brush, wheelchair and bathrobe — with Target’s Our Generation collection, where dolls cost $22.“The wheelchair for American Girl dolls is like 80 bucks,” Ms. Mulder said. “I can kind of look and see if I can find something similar.” Alas, they did not find a wheelchair at Target.Even though they had come with a mental list of Amazon’s prices, both sisters said they normally would have done even more homework before hitting the stores on Black Friday. But like many people, they were distracted this year by the election, reading news articles instead of scouring retailers’ circulars.“I don’t remember an election trickling all the way into Thanksgiving,” Ms. Renaud said as she eyed a pair of shoes.“I definitely feel more behind than I would usually be,” her sister said. “Usually, by now, I’ll have like a good list for each kid. I’ll have all the fliers for Black Friday. I didn’t have any of that this year.”By about 11 a.m., the sisters were almost finished. One of the babies was getting fidgety, and the sisters had seen most of the store. Much to their surprise, Target was not nearly as crowded as they had expected.But while shopping had gone fairly smoothly, there were a couple of stumbles at checkout. A book was not marked down as much as they had thought. One of the Lego sets did not ring up as being on sale.In the end, Ms. Mulder spent $78.18 on an assortment of dolls and other gifts. Ms. Renaud spent $92.13 — nearly half her budget. But she also left without half of the toys on her list.“I’m definitely going to be meticulous, online shopping,” Ms. Renaud said of how she would buy the rest of her gifts. And if better deals for what she had bought popped up on Amazon, she would not hesitate to return items.“I’m definitely going to keep my receipt,” she said.Advertisement