AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Jennifer SabaTime Inc. owners may yet send a note of thanks to Edgar Bronfman Jr. Mr. Bronfman, the Seagram heir, teamed up with the Warner Music owner Len Blavatnik to make a bid for the $1.4 billion magazine company — an offer that was rejected, according to The New York Post.The 30 percent premium offered sounds decent for an indebted publisher with falling sales.Time, the publisher of People, Fortune and Sports Illustrated, faces big challenges as advertisers flee print-based media. Time Warner’s chief executive, Jeffrey L. Bewkes, punted the division into a separately traded company in June 2014 in an effort to focus on the faster-paced cable networks, movie studio and HBO businesses he still runs.Since then, Time Inc.’s shares have slipped 40 percent as of Friday’s close. Despite an effort by the newly installed C.E.O., Rich Battista, to transform Time into a newfangled digital concern, revenue in 2017 is expected to fall 2 percent year over year to $3 billion — after past declines. The company carries about $1.2 billion in total debt.Rejecting an opening offer may just mean Time’s board is doing the standard mergers-and-acquisitions dance. But the company’s bosses might justifiably be wary of Mr. Bronfman as an investor. He sold his family’s empire to the French conglomerate Vivendi in an ill-fated all-stock deal. And when he ran Warner Music, also once an appendage of Time Warner, Mr. Bronfman sold it to Mr. Blavatnik in 2011 for less than half of the price at which it had gone public.Time Inc. shareholders, though, do not need to worry about Mr. Bronfman’s poor record – and many might be glad to get out of their fading investment at a premium.Time Inc. has been the subject of takeover talk for years. Before Mr. Bronfman, one candidate was the magazine publisher Meredith, which owns TV stations as well as magazines and was thwarted this year in its attempt to buy Media General for $2.4 billion.Whether or not Mr. Bronfman turns out to be the buyer, the latest twist in the story ramps up the chances of a sale of Time Inc. — and puts Time’s bosses on notice to find a deal that works.Advertisement