By JULIE WEEDNOV. 28, 2016
American tourists are numerous, relatively affluent and culturally distinct enough that tour guides in other lands often receive special training to know how best to accommodate them.But the guide trainers say there are some basic ways that Americans can be better guests when taking tours abroad. Generally, that means being open to new experiences and asking more questions about the culture you’re visiting rather than talking about your own. There are specific steps, too.Learn a few of the most common words or phrases. “Hello,” “excuse me,” “thank you” and “goodbye” are common courtesies that you should learn and use in the local language. Even if you mispronounce the words, it’s the gesture that counts.Watch your body language. Customs vary widely, but how and whether you point or beckon can potentially offend, and in the Muslim world the left hand is reserved for bathroom hygiene. Some societies keep eyes downcast as a sign of respect, especially with elders, making an American’s direct gaze feel awkward to tour guides. Do your homework ahead of time about such things before visiting a country or culturally distinct region for the first time.AdvertisementDress appropriately for the society or site you are visiting. If you are unsure, do a little research beforehand, taking cues from the way the locals dress. In many places, women would do well to carry a large scarf to cover the head or shoulders, if necessary — particularly in sites of religious significance.Be a considerate photographer. Don’t monopolize the best vantage points, or cause the tour to fall behind schedule as you play Ansel Adams. And limit use of selfie sticks, which can be particularly annoying.AdvertisementLeave a “little something.” Even in countries where tipping is not part of the culture, it is widely known that Americans do tip. To not do so could be perceived as a specific slight. And many workers, especially in tourist-heavy areas, count on it.A version of this article appears in print on November 29, 2016, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: 5 Tips to Becoming a Better Tourist.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »