AdvertisementSupported byAnother ViewBy Jeff GrammJeff Gramm is the author of the forthcoming book “Dear Chairman: Boardroom Battles and the Rise of Shareholder Activism” (HarperBusiness), which has a chapter about the Great Salad Oil Swindle. He is a hedge fund manager who teaches value investing at Columbia Business School.“The typhoon will pass, and I think history will show that the ship has continued to make real progress.” So wrote a then-little-known fund manager named Warren E. Buffett in 1964, in a letter to Howard L. Clark, chief executive of American Express.The prediction turned out to be right. Though American Express had been brought to its knees by the so-called salad oil swindle, the scandal ultimately strengthened the company and its management team. As for Mr. Buffett, his investment in American Express stock was a huge winner and a major turning point in his career.William A. Ackman is hoping for similar magic from Valeant Pharmaceuticals International. At the end of his three-and-a-half-hour conference call last Friday defending his decision to pile 20 percent of his fund into Valeant stock, Mr. Ackman invoked the salad oil swindle. His presentation read: “The dislocation in the stock price due to the scandal provided a great buying opportunity. With the passage of time, the strength of AmEx’s business proved resilient.”Mr. Ackman closed his presentation by quoting Mr. Buffett, “Be fearful when others are greedy, and be greedy when others are fearful.”Valeant has quickly become the most interesting story on Wall Street today. In this era of increasing shareholder activism, here is a pharmaceutical company shaped into the image of a hedge fund by a prominent activist investor. In 2009, that investor, ValueAct Capital, put together a creative pay package that required Valeant’s chief executive, J. Michael Pearson, to invest a substantial amount of money into the company, but promised rich equity-based compensation should the stock price appreciate. In other words, like any good hedge fund manager, Mr. Pearson put his own wealth at risk while getting exposure to tremendous upside should he create value for his investors.Since Mr. Pearson took the helm, Valeant has focused more on allocating its capital than researching and developing new drugs. It acquired dozens of companies, slashed overhead and research and development and raised prices to maximize profits. At the same time, Valeant borrowed heavily, and actively repurchased its own shares. This strategy ruffled a lot of feathers in the pharmaceutical industry, but Valeant shareholders rejoiced. According to FactSet, the stock was the second only to Apple among widely held hedge fund investments at the end of June.Valeant stock has since tumbled. The hedge fund darling has become the target of several prominent short-sellers, one of whom called Valeant the next Enron. At the center of the claims is a specialty pharmacy called Philidor Rx Services, which reportedly used improper sales tactics — including changing doctors’ prescription orders — to secure payment for Valeant products from health insurers. Although Valeant employees are said to have worked at Philidor’s offices since the company’s early years, and even though Valeant paid $100 million for an option to purchase Philidor for $0, the company insists it does not control the pharmacy and is not liable for its misdeeds. Last Friday, after a week of scrutiny from regulators, journalists and short-sellers, Valeant announced it would sever ties with Philidor, forcing the pharmacy to cease operations.When Philidor is banished to the ranks of extinct businesses, it will join a company called the American Express Field Warehousing Corporation. The warehousing subsidiary of American Express collapsed after it unwittingly guaranteed the soybean oil inventory of Anthony De Angelis, whose background was so shady that his business could not even open a regular bank account. The scandal blew up in spectacular fashion in 1963, when Mr. De Angelis used warehouse receipts stamped with the American Express guarantee to open margin-trading accounts in a reckless attempt to corner the market in soybean oil. When Mr. DeAngelis’s trade turned against him, it sank a brokerage firm with 20,000 customers holding half a billion dollars of stocks, and shut down the Produce Exchange for an entire day.American Express was far from blameless in the scandal. An anonymous tipster explained Mr. De Angelis’s swindle to the company in 1960, including his method for filling tanks with seawater except for a narrow chamber of oil positioned under the measuring hatch. The accusations were largely ignored, and the fraud grew tenfold over the following three years, until American Express had guaranteed more soybean oil than actually existed in the entire country.After Mr. De Angelis’s empire collapsed, American Express was left with scores of angry creditors demanding payment. Because the field warehousing business was housed in a bankruptcy-remote subsidiary, Mr. Clark, the American Express chief executive, could have let the unit fail and ignore the liabilities. In a decision that activist shareholders would later sue the company over, Mr. Clark announced that American Express felt morally bound to honor the liabilities. The company settled with soybean oil claimants, the stock recovered and resumed its upward climb, and Mr. Clark credited the scandal with injecting new life into his employees.The difference between American Express after the salad oil swindle and Valeant Pharmaceuticals is bigger than Mr. Pearson’s refusal to assume financial responsibility for Philidor’s actions. Whereas American Express’s field warehousing business had nothing to do with the company’s rapidly growing credit card and its dominant traveler’s checks franchise, Philidor and other specialty pharmacy partners play an important role in protecting profit margins on Valeant products.American Express proved to be a bonanza for its shareholders because its valuable brand survived a crisis at an obscure subsidiary operating in a different line of business. Valeant’s Philidor scandal, by contrast, raises real questions about the company’s growth prospects and the long-term viability of its aggressive business model. For Valeant investors, this is an altogether different proposition, and one with a vastly different risk profile, than the one Mr. Buffett faced with American Express.It can be dangerous to compare current investment opportunities to home runs from the annals of business history. A possible warning sign may be seen in a quiet insurrection at the Sequoia Fund, a Valeant shareholder that is one of the country’s most respected mutual funds.When Mr. Buffett shut down his investment partnership in 1969, he recommended that his partners invest with his longtime friend William J. Ruane, who co-founded Sequoia the following year. The fund has since compiled a long history of market-beating returns. A big part of Sequoia’s success was a huge position in Mr. Buffett’s holding company, Berkshire Hathaway, which accounted for 35 percent of the portfolio by the end of 2004, shortly before Mr. Ruane’s death.His successors drastically reduced the fund’s dependence on Berkshire Hathaway. Sequoia used the proceeds to buy stock in Valeant, which many shareholders, including Mr. Ackman, have compared to a young Berkshire Hathaway. At the end of June, Sequoia held a stunning 29 percent of its portfolio in Valeant stock.Since then, two directors have left the Sequoia Fund board, reportedly because of concerns over the size of the Valeant position. It is exceedingly rare for directors to quit a mutual fund board because of disagreements over portfolio management.Valeant Pharmaceuticals may prove to be another in a line of gut-wrenching winners for Mr. Ackman. But when investors look at Valeant and see American Express in 1964 or Berkshire Hathaway in 1970, rather than an envelope-pushing pharmaceuticals vehicle run by a former McKinsey consultant wielding low-cost leverage and a scalpel, there’s more than just fear in the air. There’s clearly some greed as well.Advertisement