
Deal Professor By                     
STEVEN DAVIDOFF SOLOMON

NOV. 29, 2016
Chris Cernich held a powerful perch for six years as head of mergers and contested elections research at Institutional Shareholder Services, spearheading its recommendations for how investors should vote on more than 1,000 deals and 250 proxy contests involving corporate heavyweights like Dell, Target, DuPont and Canadian Pacific, among others.The blunt-talking Mr. Cernich, a former furniture maker with a Ph.D. in American literature, even drew critics who claimed that the advisory firm was too powerful and swayed too many shareholders. Institutional shareholders either heeded Mr. Cernich’s call or, in some prominent cases, ignored his recommendations.Earlier this year Mr. Cernich left I.S.S. for a new opportunity. On Tuesday, that new venture was announced. Together with Sard Verbinnen & Company, the big public relations firm, Mr. Cernich has opened Strategic Governance Advisors. There are two other founders, Mark Harnett, from MacKenzie Partners, a proxy solicitation firm, and Amy Bilbija, who worked at Evercore.The firm’s pretty banal sounding name belies the hot market it is entering — advising companies on how to engage with their shareholders, particularly big institutional investors and mutual funds. To date, the only adviser doing this has been the San Francisco-based CamberView, which rocketed to prominence and recently sold a piece of itself to Corsair Capital.AdvertisementTo get a sense of his new company, I asked Mr. Cernich for his views on how activism had changed over the years.AdvertisementIn earlier days, corporate governance and shareholder engagement had been a “back office” phenomenon, he said, but a 1988 Department of Labor directive to pension funds that they had a fiduciary duty to vote their shares brought it into the mainstream. Now, big fund managers like BlackRock, with $4 trillion under management, argue that shareholders should be more prominent and have an active role in shaping companies directly.For one thing, he said, shareholders would no longer be tolerant of enormous pay packages for corporate chiefs. “It’s hard to see shareholders allowing Dick Grasso’s $139.5 million pay package today,” he said, referring to the former head of the New York Stock Exchange who ultimately won a five-year battle with Eliot Spitzer, the former New York attorney general, to keep the pay.Billionaire shareholders like Carl C. Icahn are still in the headlines, Mr. Cernich said, but the trend had shifted to more ordinary fund managers who do not want to wage war on public companies but do want a closer dialogue with them.For Mr. Cernich, this heightened engagement means that companies need to be prepared year-round. As he put it, “If you are focused on crisis management acting only when the activist shows up, you are taking a too limited a view of corporate governance.” The focus on corporate governance has made controversies like Mr. Grasso’s pay package a thing of the past. But it also means every public company these days needs to know its shareholders better.The growth of index funds has been phenomenal, but Mr. Cernich expects that actively managed mutual funds will try to distinguish themselves and their returns by taking more proactive stances with public companies. He has seen at least two such investment funds run proxy contests in the last year: Harvest Capital Strategies in California, which targeted Green Dot, and Neuberger Berman in New York, which aimed at Ultratech. This could be the way actively managed mutual funds convince the public that passive index funds are too passive.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.As active fund managers become more engaged, corporate governance is “expanding, not evolving,” he said. “Increasingly shareholder activism is about the health of balance sheet and income statement.” Shareholders are more confident in giving direction to public companies on their business.To be sure, shareholders are not always successful. He cited the four successive proxy contests at Cracker Barrel. The company resisted the onslaught from the activist investor Sardar Biglari and brought in a new executive team, but it took years for the stock to rebound and the value of the company to rise three to four times. In this situation, patience was crucial. Mr. Cernich supported Cracker Barrel’s board’s fight with Mr. Biglari, “but you had to put your faith in the evidence of their preparation, not a trendline of irrefutable results.”Proxy contests are to be avoided. After the battle over DuPont — in which eventually seemed to accede to everything the activists wanted — there is just not the appetite to fight the shareholders.AdvertisementInstead, companies will settle, but increasingly, the mutual funds want to make sure that the settlement does not favor one party. As Mr. Cernich put it: The days when an activist could swoop in with a plan to leverage a company and pay a dividend to shareholders were over. Few of those activists funds survived, he noted.Mr. Cernich noted that hedge funds these days have become too “evangelical” in their attempts to convince everyone that their conviction is the right one, with the presentations growing into “hundreds of densely detailed pages.”Despite their bigger role, institutional shareholders are wondering how to express their newfound power. As Mr. Cernich put it, ”Vanguard is struggling to figure out what role they should take going forward,” referring to Vanguard’s suggestion that boards create shareholder liaison committees. And “State Street wants to put out a framework for settlement of proxy contests” to ensure that shareholders are treated equally.This is where Mr. Cernich’s firm will come in, competing with CamberView and others trying to mediate the new dialogue between a company and its shareholders. That dialogue, by the way, has been substantially facilitated by “say on pay” votes on executive compensation, which force a company to engage in back and forth with shareholders. That’s remarkable because the votes are nonbinding, and yet they seem to have spurred a major reworking of the relationship between shareholders and companies.This is the future. Big institutional shareholders are working to define their relationships with public companies, and those companies are being forced to engage directly without intermediaries like I.S.S. In the midst of this, shareholders are still figuring out what they really want and whether they can change companies for good. Mr. Cernich is likely to be in the middle of it all for a while longer.Steven Davidoff Solomon is a professor of law at the University of California, Berkeley. His columns can be found at nytimes.com/dealbook. Follow @stevendavidoff on Twitter.A version of this article appears in print on November 30, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Engagement Has Become New Strategy for Shareholder Activism.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »