By THE NEW YORK TIMESNOV. 27, 2016
Here’s a look at what’s coming up this week:RETAIL INDUSTRYRetailers have geared up for Cyber Monday, the last day of deals in what has become a four-day shopping weekend. After Black Friday, Small Business Saturday and Super Sunday, retailers will offer online deals on Monday on everything from televisions to Tupperware, with a focus on electronics. Rachel AbramsTECHNOLOGYUber will head to Europe’s highest court on Tuesday to determine how its popular ride-booking service can operate across the European Union. The company has faced vocal opposition from traditional taxi services and labor unions, and the hearing at the European Court of Justice will decide whether Uber must comply with the region’s onerous transportation rules or can operate mostly unhindered. A decision in the case is expected by March. Mark ScottECONOMICSOn Tuesday, at 8:30 a.m., the Commerce Department will release its updated estimate of economic growth in the third quarter. The revision is expected to show a slight increase, with the estimate rising to 3 percent from an initial figure of 2.9 percent. In addition, the government will provide an estimate of corporate profits in the quarter, which could show an increase, lifted by a recovery in energy prices and continued tech and retail spending. Nelson D. SchwartzOIL INDUSTRYOn Wednesday, all eyes in the oil market will be on Vienna, where ministers of the 14-member OPEC cartel will try to reach an agreement on curbs in output aimed at reducing an oil glut. OPEC came to a general understanding on production cuts in Algiers in September, but has since struggled with assigning targets to each member. Analysts say that a credible deal would probably bolster prices, now close to $50 a barrel, in the short term. Another failure to reach consensus, however, similar to what occurred in Doha, Qatar, in April, may send prices tumbling. Stanley ReedAUTO INDUSTRYThe judge overseeing class-action lawsuits against Volkswagen for its emissions cheating scandal will hold a hearing on Wednesday to get an update on progress toward a settlement involving 80,000 vehicles with 3-liter diesel motors. The vehicles are mostly Audis but also include some Porsche and Volkswagen sport utility vehicles. During the status hearing before Judge Charles R. Breyer in Federal District Court in San Francisco, Volkswagen could face questions about new indications that emissions cheating was even more extensive than the company has already disclosed. Jack EwingAdvertisementECONOMYThe Bank of England is expected on Wednesday to provide its semiannual outlook on the stability of the British financial system, as well as the results of its latest stress test of the ability of the nation’s biggest banks to survive a future financial crisis. Chad BrayPlease verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Official data coming out on Thursday is expected to show that eurozone unemployment fell below 10 percent in October for the first time since 2011. Analysts expect the jobless rate to slip to 9.9 percent, compared with 10 percent in September, continuing the agonizingly slow recovery from an economic crisis that began almost a decade ago. Many countries, including Spain, France and Italy, continue to post jobless numbers well above 10 percent. Jack EwingAdvertisementAUTO INDUSTRYAutomakers report their November sales in the United States on Thursday. Overall sales have been slower this year than last, but automakers hope that a holiday season rush, helped by incentives they offered for Black Friday, will buttress those numbers. Zach WichterECONOMYOn Friday, at 8:30 a.m., the Labor Department will release the latest data on hiring and unemployment in November. Economists expect the report to show that the economy added 175,000 jobs and that the unemployment rate remained unchanged from October’s level of 4.9 percent. Average hourly earnings are thought to have risen by 0.2 percentage point, bringing the yearly increase to 2.8 percent.This is the last jobs report before policy makers at the Federal Reserve meet in December to decide whether to raise interest rates. Most economists expect the Fed to tighten monetary policy, although a very weak jobs number could make that slightly less certain. Nelson D. SchwartzA version of this article appears in print on November 28, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Stores Push Cyber Sales  as U.S. Awaits Jobs Data.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.