By AMIE TSANGNOV. 29, 2016
Call it the Trump Effect. Donald J. Trump’s election is getting credit and blame for all sorts of events, no matter how tangential.And this has led to a mixed reaction among markets as leaders and business executives try to figure out how a Trump administration may rewrite the rules.One glaring concern that could be dealt with early on is the potential for conflicts of interest.Andrew Ross Sorkin suggests hiring a “corporate monitor,” an independent overseer who would provide regular reports to the public about any possible instances of conflicts. It is a role that crops up usually under regulatory and legal duress, but Mr. Trump could voluntarily pay for it.Mr. Sorkin even has a volunteer: Kenneth R. Feinberg, the lawyer who oversaw the September 11th Victim Compensation Fund, managed executive compensation for companies bailed out during the financial crisis, and served as a government administrator of the BP Deepwater Horizon disaster victim compensation fund.AdvertisementPeter J. Henning suggests that Congress should have a more significant role in handling possible conflicts. For example, it could approve foreign benefits for Mr. Trump’s company, something allowed under the now-famous Emoluments Clause of the Constitution. That would amount to disclosure of those benefits, he said, which “would go a long way toward removing any taint, in much the same way that corporate directors can acquiesce to a conflicted transaction.”Our columnist Andrew Ross Sorkin and his Times colleagues help you make sense of major business and policy headlines — and the power-brokers who shape them.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Edgar Bronfman Jr. and Access Industries, the conglomerate to which Mr. Bronfman sold Warner Music, have been trying to woo Time Inc., which publishes People and Sports Illustrated. But so far, Time isn’t interested.AdvertisementMr. Bronfman and Access made a bid that valued Time Inc. at about $1.8 billion, according to a person briefed on the matter. Mr. Bronfman had already made an offer in the spring, but it is unclear whether he will continue to pursue Time Inc.The 30 percent premium offered sounds decent for an indebted publisher with falling sales, Breakingviews writes. And even if Mr. Bronfman does not end up buying Time Inc., at least the bosses there are now on notice to find a deal that works.It’s disappointing news for big firm lawyers hoping for bigger year-end bonuses. The prominent Wall Street law firm Cravath, Swaine & Moore, a trendsetter when it comes to pay, disclosed in an internal memo that bonuses would stay in the same range as 2015.Two other major law firms matched their bonus scale shortly after.Cravath may have raised basic salaries for its junior lawyers for the first time in a decade, but its financial fortunes may have been affected by merger and acquisition work, which has been down of late.• The Commerce Department will release its updated estimate of third-quarter growth, which is expected to show a slightly higher rate. Estimates of corporate profits are also expected to have been bolstered by a recovery in energy prices and continued spending.Follow Amie Tsang on Twitter @amietsang.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.