AdvertisementSupported byDealBookBy Andrew Ross SorkinAre activist investors short-term traders or in it for the long term? It is the question of the moment as nearly $200 billion has poured into the coffers of activists with names like Icahn, Ackman and Peltz, among others. Last year, as a group they put some 200 companies in their cross hairs and replaced 19 chief executives, according to the law firm Sidley Austin, putting pressure on virtually every board in the country to pay attention to this vocal class of shareholders.If you listen to C.E.O.s and politicians on the stump these days, you would get the sense that most activists are dangerous quick-buck artists.Carl C. Icahn, who has agitated for stock buybacks and dividends at companies including Apple, Motorola and Dell, has been described as a “financial parasite,” a “greenmailer” and a “corporate raider.”“The bulk of activism just wants a quick hit. They want the stock to go up next week,” Warren E. Buffett said last month at a Fortune magazine conference.Hillary Rodham Clinton has derided what she describes as “quarterly capitalism,” driven, in large part, by activists. “We need a new generation of committed, long-term investors to provide a counterweight to the hit-and-run activists,” she said in a July speech at New York University.It’s a clean, simple and popular narrative. And it feeds directly into the debate about whether companies are focused too much on the daily fluctuations of their stock prices and not investing enough in their long-term futures.Yet the data about how long activists like Mr. Icahn actually hold shares in companies, makes the narrative fuzzier — or at least more complicated. In many instances, activists may be holding shares longer than many institutional or retail investors.Mr. Icahn’s average holding period for an individual stock is not a month or two, — or even a year. It’s more than three years, according to 13D Monitor, a data service that tracks activist investors. And it can be even longer, given that the calculation doesn’t include several stocks in his portfolio that he’s owned for 20 years, and in at least one case more than 30 years.“The real money I’ve made over the years is holding companies for seven, eight or nine years,” Mr. Icahn said on Tuesday at a New York Times DealBook conference. “You got to buy them when nobody wants them, that’s the real secret.”Trian, Nelson Peltz’s company, which has agitated for change at companies like Heinz and DuPont and recently made a $2.5 billion bet on General Electric, also holds its investments, on average, for about three years. When he takes board seats as a way to bring about change, the holding time is even longer, because selling stock as a board member is more difficult because of insider trading issues.Holding a stock for three or four years doesn’t make them Mr. Buffett, who owns stakes in companies for decades. But set against the average investor, activist investors may look like Rip Van Winkle.According to data compiled by the global investment manager MFS after it sifted through New York Stock Exchange records, the average equity in 2014 was bought and sold in just 1.92 years. Mutual fund managers turn over their portfolios every 1.45 years, according to MFS. “Stocks are being held for record-short periods of time,” MFS wrote in a report.“Until the 1970s,” the report said, “the investment landscape was largely dominated by wealthy individuals and families; this has since changed markedly, with professional investors now accounting for the largest share of investment activity, though it should be noted that these professionals manage significant mutual fund asset pools that are driven by retail investors.”Mutual fund managers may be focused on the short term because most consumers of investment products are no more oriented toward the longer term than activists. The average mutual fund is held for only 3.3 years, according to Dalbar’s 2015 Quantitative Analysis of Investor Behavior.From Wall Street to Washington and in the towers of academia, people are buzzing about what some say is the pernicious focus in corporate America on short-term profits.None of this is meant to excuse activist shareholders’ seemingly short-term financial engineering efforts, like buybacks, dividends, spinoffs and sales, which can quickly send shares spiking while potentially leaving the company more vulnerable later, especially when a company uses borrowed money to buy its own shares.“The S.&P. 100 companies are paying out 108 percent of earnings through dividends and stock repurchases. That can’t last,” said Laurence D. Fink, chairman and chief executive of BlackRock, the asset manager. He blamed activists, in part, for why companies pursue such steps.Mr. Icahn, of course, has another view: He suggests that he is pushing for measures to help flailing companies improve their long-term prospects.“You have people that run companies that aren’t bad people but shouldn’t be running the companies. They’re over their head or they have different agendas,” Mr. Icahn said. “The reason I made so much money over the years is you hold these people accountable.”Whether value is being created or destroyed is still a subject of debate, but there has been little attention paid to the actual holding periods of activists.William A. Ackman of Pershing Square Capital Management, the activist investor who took on Herbalife, owns shares for about a year and a half. His longest current investment, in the Howard Hughes Corporation, a real estate company, was bought in 2010, according to 13D Monitor.Starboard Value, which has taken big stakes in Office Depot and Darden Restaurants, also holds its stakes, on average, for about a year and a half. ValueAct Capital, which recently took a stake in American Express, sticks around, on average, for two years, according to 13D Monitor.For advocates of long-term investing, the goal perhaps should be as much about pressing activists to think long term as persuading the rest of us to do the same.Advertisement