AdvertisementSupported byBy Sydney Ember and Michael J. de la MercedTime Inc., the publisher of People and Sports Illustrated, has rebuffed preliminary takeover proposals from Edgar Bronfman Jr. and the owner of Warner Music, a person briefed on the matter said on Monday.Mr. Bronfman and Access Industries, the conglomerate to whom he sold Warner Music in 2011, had bid at least $18 a share within the last several weeks, this person said. That would have valued Time Inc., which has been trying to navigate a rocky transition into the digital age, at about $1.8 billion.An offer at $18 a share represented an approximately 30 percent premium to the publisher’s closing price on Friday.Time Inc. had rejected a similar overture by Mr. Bronfman in the spring, this person added.It is unclear whether Mr. Bronfman’s group, which also includes the Israeli media executive Ynon Kreiz, will continue to press a takeover approach for the publisher.On Monday, shares of Time Inc. surged more than 17 percent after The New York Post reported the approach by Mr. Bronfman, closing at $16 each. The stock has fallen nearly 26 percent since the company began life as an independent company, spun off in June 2014 from the entertainment conglomerate Time Warner.The takeover interest from the consortium comes as Time Inc. is undertaking a profound shift in strategy as it looks to become a more digital organization. In the last several months, it has shaken up its executive ranks and reorganized its advertising sales and brand development teams.Time Inc. has made other moves to diversify its sources of revenue, including through conferences sponsored by Fortune magazine and through native advertising, or ads that look like editorial content. And it has rolled out a video streaming service from People and Entertainment Weekly.The company reported a $112 million loss in the quarter ended Sept. 30, down significantly from the $913 million loss it reported the same time a year ago. Revenue for the quarter fell slightly from the period a year ago, to $750 million.Mr. Bronfman, now a managing partner at the investment firm Accretive, is no stranger to the media business. He was a scion of the Seagram fortune, having sold that company — home to Universal Studios — to Vivendi of France in 2000 for about $34 billion in stock. He stepped down as an executive at the combined company in 2001.He later led an investor group that bought Warner Music in 2004, which he sold seven years later to Access, a conglomerate founded by the billionaire Len Blavatnik.Advertisement