By ELIZABETH OLSONNOV. 28, 2016
The prominent Wall Street law firm Cravath, Swaine & Moore has splashed some cold water on those still hoping for higher year-end bonuses.The firm — a trendsetter when it comes to pay for big law firms — disclosed on Monday in an internal firm memo that bonuses for its associates would be $15,000 to $100,000 — the same range as in 2015.Shortly after Cravath’s bonus scale became public, two major law firms matched the amounts. They are Milbank Tweed Hadley & McCloy and Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton & Garrison.Hopes had been kindled for a larger increase after the elite firm last June raised the basic salaries for its junior lawyers — for the first time in nearly a decade — to $180,000. That led dozens of law firms to follow suit, raising the pay for associates.AdvertisementNo reason was given in the memo, a copy of which was reviewed by The New York Times, for this year’s bonus scale. But like other law firms in its rarefied tier, Cravath’s annual financial fortunes are shaped by merger and acquisition work and other transactions, which have been down of late.AdvertisementThe firm, with 472 lawyers, is ranked seventh among deal legal advisers, representing clients on more than $200 billion worth of transactions this year, according to Thomson Reuters.Among its major deals this year are Time Warner’s $84.5 billion proposed acquisition by AT&T; British American Tobacco’s deal for Reynolds American, and AB InBev’s $107 billion acquisition of SABMiller.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Founded in 1819, Cravath is a profitable firm that prides itself on “lock step compensation” — where payment is based on seniority and not on the amount of business a lawyer drums up for the firm.And Cravath has long dominated the annual bonus ritual. It discloses the amounts first, which leaves associates at other firms waiting to see if their bosses will be as generous. It is rare for another firm to outspend Cravath on that score, but it does happen.Cravath’s Christmas pay packets, which will be distributed on Dec. 16, will give newly hired associates, many of whom would have started in September, an additional $15,000 in addition to their $180,000, with both sums prorated.The scale continues with $15,000 for second-year employees all the way up, in $10,000 increments, to $100,000 for eighth and ninth year associates.Few associates are expected to be disgruntled as their salaries are comfortably in the six figures at a time when corporate merger activity dropped 22 percent over the same period last year, according to Thomson Reuters.Still, that also means the year-end bonuses could be slimmer for partners, who divide the annual profits as opposed to associates and other categories of nonpartners who receive salaries.A version of this article appears in print on November 29, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Bonuses Are Not Rising at Influential Law Firm.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.