AdvertisementSupported byBy Amie TsangDonald J. Trump has shown that he is willing to take on big business. He plans to announce a deal for Carrier to keep about 1,000 jobs in the United States.He also made no bones about attacking the financial industry during his presidential campaign. One ad portrayed the chief executive of Goldman Sachs as the personification of a global elite that had “robbed our working class.”So his selection for Treasury secretary is an uneasy fit.Mr. Trump is expected to name Steven Mnuchin, a financier with deep roots on Wall Street who began his career at Goldman Sachs, as Treasury secretary.At the same time, Mr. Trump’s choice for transportation secretary, Elaine L. Chao, has prompted criticism from progressive groups who said she was emblematic of the very corporate-driven political establishment Mr. Trump had promised to dismantle.Mr. Mnuchin is described as both an insider and outsider. His deepest relationships are with hedge fund managers, investors and big names in Hollywood, rather than the chief executives of the biggest banks and multinational companies. He does not have much experience with international trade.It remains to be seen what policies Mr. Mnuchin will seek to enact, beyond those espoused by Mr. Trump. He is likely to be welcomed as “one of the adults” in the administration, and friends say he is not ideological beyond simple ambition, Andrew Ross Sorkin writes.Half of the places at American law schools may go to women, but which half?Research indicates that female law students are clustered in lower-ranked schools. There are fewer women at the schools that send a high proportion of students into the profession, meaning that women start their careers at a disadvantage.Women coming from less prestigious schools may have fewer opportunities to get their first full-fledged legal job, which could harm the rest of their careers. And that is before accounting for the fact that women hold less than a fifth of partnerships at law firms and are underrepresented in the higher echelons of law.“If you are focused on crisis management acting only when the activist shows up, you are taking a too limited a view of corporate governance.”— Chris Cernich, a founding partner at Strategic Governance Advisors, which helps companies engage with their shareholders. Mr. Cernich argued that more engagement with shareholders meant companies needed to be prepared year-round.The world’s biggest hedge fund, Bridgewater Associates, may promote “radical transparency,” but the resolution of an action by the National Labor Relations Board regarding the rights of employees will remain a mystery outside of the firm.The final details are being kept confidential at the request of Bridgewater. The labor board had challenged some of the confidentiality provisions in the contracts that Bridgewater requires its employees to sign.The complaint against Bridgewater was filed this summer after a sexual harassment complaint by a former employee. The board had accused Bridgewater of “interfering with, restraining and coercing” employees from exercising their rights.• OPEC members will try to reach an agreement on curbs in output aimed at reducing an oil gut. A credible deal could bolster prices, but a failure to reach a consensus could send prices tumbling.• The judge overseeing class-action lawsuits against Volkswagen for its emissions cheating scandal will hold a hearing on progress toward a settlement. The company could face questions about new indications that emissions cheating was even more extensive than already disclosed.Follow Amie Tsang on Twitter @amietsang.Advertisement