AdvertisementSupported byAnother ViewBy Michael W. PeregrineWhere were you on Dec. 2, 2001?It is not a cocktail party icebreaker question, but rather a test of perspective and experience. Because 15 years ago on that day, the energy giant Enron filed for bankruptcy protection, prompting a chain of seminal legislative, regulatory and public policy developments that influence corporate governance practices to this day. A new generation of leaders has entered boardrooms since then, and it is fair to question what they know, or remember, about the fiduciary failures that not only doomed Enron but also permanently recast the board’s role.Fifteen years is a long time, especially in the life of a company and the tenure of its board members. It is also a long time in terms of accepted business practices, principles and standards. When Enron collapsed, George W. Bush had yet to serve a full year as president. The Dow Jones industrial average was trading under 10,000. The iPhone had not been invented.Yet the Enron bankruptcy remains vitally relevant to today’s corporate board members — not because it was the largest American bankruptcy at the time, but because it gave birth to the fiduciary guidelines and best practices that form the contours of modern corporate governance.It is, in essence, where it all began in terms of corporate responsibility. The board policies, procedures and codes of ethics to which today’s corporate directors are subject are the direct descendants of the lessons learned from the staggering oversight failures of the Enron board. These failures were chronicled by the board’s special investigative committee, led by William C. Powers Jr., then the dean of the University of Texas Law School.The failures included inadequate and poorly applied internal controls, insufficient vigilance of corporate affairs, the suspension of the code of ethics to allow certain transactions to proceed, not responding properly to warning signs, cursory attention by the audit and compliance committees to critical matters placed on their agendas, the lack of an abundant flow of information and, perhaps most important, not recognizing the significance of some of the information about problematic transactions raised to the board’s attention. That is some list.And neither the collective prominence of the board nor the diverse experience of its members provided any guarantee of corporate compliance. In addition to Mr. Powers, the Enron board included a former federal regulator; a member of the British House of Lords and former British cabinet member; current and former board chairmen and several senior executives of large corporations; the head of a private investment firm; and current and former leaders of a major medical center. The audit committee was led by a former accounting professor. This was not the junior varsity in terms of experience and credibility. Yet the business collapsed on their watch.Fifteen years later, it still matters. Current business controversies suggest that Enron-style oversight failures could be occurring in some of today’s corporate boardrooms. So, on this auspicious anniversary, it is time to take the board on a stroll down governance memory lane. The leading fiduciary principles of the day recommend robust director orientation and continuing education programming. Let that education include a history lesson of sorts, a conversation about the Enron board’s critical — and self-admitted — failures, together with some hypotheticals on how those failures might arise again, in different circumstances and in different boardrooms.And it might also include an even more sobering Enron lesson — the fate of the once-venerable accounting firm Arthur Andersen.The Department of Justice indicted Andersen, which was Enron’s outside auditor, in May 2002 on charges of obstruction of justice in connection with the Security and Exchange Commission’s Enron investigation. Andersen was found guilty by jury trial and was required by federal regulation to surrender its accountant license, essentially terminating its accounting business. A unanimous 2005 decision by the Supreme Court overturned the verdict, but by then it was too late.Not even the Supreme Court could reconstruct Andersen’s business or heal the devastating trauma suffered by its partners and employees. Andersen’s fate represents the ultimate example of collateral damage. We forget so easily.Dec. 2, 2001, was a low point for corporate governance. But that lesson can be put to good use if it promotes boardroom conversation about good faith commitment to effective governance and corporate responsibility. And, judging by recent headlines, that is a conversation more than a few boards ought to be having.Michael W. Peregrine is a partner at the law firm McDermott Will & Emery. His views do not necessarily reflect the views of the firm or its clients.Advertisement