
Deal Professor By                     
STEVEN DAVIDOFF SOLOMON

NOV. 4, 2015
In today’s world of public companies, there are the haves and have-nots of corporate governance. How long can this last?The haves are armed with dual-class structures that give voting control to their founding shareholders or the private equity firm that bought them. These are companies like CBS, Ford Motor, Facebook, Google, News Corporation and Viacom, where the shareholders often have one vote or none per share and the founders 10 votes (The New York Times Company also has dual-class voting). These companies are largely free from challenge by any of their other shareholders, and control is centered with the founders, who have largely unfettered authority to hire and fire the board and the executives.The have-nots lack this dual class structure and instead have no controlling shareholder. Instead, these companies have one vote for each share. In these companies, institutional investors like mutual funds and pension funds wield great control and the ability to influence, if not outright direct, the company’s actions.The difference is stark — the haves can function largely free of worry from challenge. The have-nots are on the run, living in fear of activist hedge funds. And it’s not just the hedge funds. These companies are also buffeted by increasingly vocal institutional investors that pressure the companies to adopt good corporate governance. The problem is that even the shareholders cannot agree on what exactly is good corporate governance, and one result is that companies can be pushed in one direction or another based on the flavor of the month.AdvertisementDebated off and on since the 1980s, this situation exists because of a quirk in the legal rules. Back in the 1980s, the Securities and Exchange Commission adopted a rule that prevented companies from having anything other than one vote per share of stock. The S.E.C. was responding to a challenge led by General Motors, which wanted to have dual-class stock for a subsidiary, Electronic Data Systems, that it was about to take public.The S.E.C. acted in the name of shareholder democracy. It wanted to prevent a situation in which a powerful shareholder could control the votes in a company without having much economic stake. That might encourage the shareholder to press the company’s directors to cater to that shareholder’s needs rather than do what was best for the company as a whole.For example, in the last three years CBS and Viacom have each paid more than $10 million a year to the 92-year-old chairman of both companies, Sumner Redstone, who owns only 10 percent of each company but controls the votes. Did he get this pay because he earned it or because he had control?AdvertisementMany defend dual-class stock because it may insulate a company from pressure to take short-term actions at the behest of shareholders. It also allows the founders to take a long-term approach and invest in the company in a way that may not produce immediate results. And finally, defenders point out that institutional investors are often conflicted in their desires, and that dual-class stock allows more deliberate consideration of shareholder issues.The S.E.C. rule would have given all companies the same voting structure. But it was struck down by the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia, which held that the S.E.C. did not have the power to require all companies to have the same voting rights. In the decision’s wake, both the New York Stock Exchange and Nasdaq adopted rules that prohibited companies that were already listed from adopting dual-class shares, but that permitted a company to adopt dual-class stock in an initial public offering. The idea was that all shareholders would agree to this structure by buying their shares at the conception of the public company.A great divide thus sprang up: existing companies with one share, one vote and at the mercy of the markets versus companies with dual-class stock.Still, many thought an I.P.O. of a company with dual-class stock would be harder for shareholders to swallow. Few companies adopted the structure. That changed when Google chose to adopt the mechanism, giving control to its founders, Larry Page and Sergey Brin. Today, dual-class stock is all the rage, and the majority of initial public offerings have it. It’s not just technology companies like Facebook and Zillow. Shake Shack and Fairway, both decidedly nontech firms, also have a dual-class mechanism.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.More than 13.5 percent of the 133 companies listing shares on United States exchanges in 2015 have set up a dual-class structure, according to the data provider Dealogic. That compares with 12 percent last year and just 1 percent in 2005.About half the companies choosing the structure were in the technology industry.Some big institutional investors have come out against this trend. Calpers, the California pension fund, has taken the position that it will not invest in I.P.O.s with dual-class stock. And yet, this seems like a finger in the dike. Dual-class initial offerings keep coming as other shareholders keep buying. It’s an odd state of affairs. The same shareholders who repeatedly assert that they care about corporate governance and are for a shareholder voice do not seem to care about that voice at the initial offering stage.Perhaps this says a lot about how much shareholders value their vote, and it may be very little. Certainly institutional investors talk a good game and are increasingly taking steps to influence companies. But when push comes to shove, they seem ready to drop the vote for a good I.P.O. deal.Perhaps the time has come to decide whether dual-class stock makes continued sense and for either all companies or no companies to be able to adopt it. Or perhaps the conversation should include other possible mechanisms that are more accommodating to shareholders.For example, France has adopted a tenure voting structure for its public companies under the so-called Florange law. In companies with tenure voting, shareholders accumulate more votes the longer they hold shares. In France it is two votes after a year, but the number of votes over a period can really be any number. France adopted the law to cement the power of the French state against activists, but tenure voting is an intriguing idea. If votes really do matter, why not reward shareholders for holding shares? And this would result in others besides the founders having a say.AdvertisementAlternatively, why not require a sunset provision on dual-class shares? It might make sense for a founder to have control at the beginning, but years later the founder may not have the same interests or desires at stake.And finally, it may be that certain types of shareholders like index funds should have no vote at all. After all, they have no choice in their ownership. They also hold shares forever.All of this is to say that perhaps it is time that some hard thinking be given to the shareholder vote, how shareholders value that vote and whether empowering founders over shareholders is a good or bad idea. What is best for companies over the long term, and can one-size voting mechanisms fit all?It is better to do it now, thoughtfully, before the have-nots say enough is enough and push for change that may not be as thoughtful. After all, even 3-year olds know that if one sibling has candy, the other must get it, too.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »