AdvertisementSupported byBy Amie TsangA new economic leadership is on its way — and its ranks are heavy with the superwealthy elite.The men tapped so far by President-elect Donald J. Trump include Steven Mnuchin, the Goldman trader turned hedge fund manager; Wilbur L. Ross Jr., an investor in distressed assets; and Todd Ricketts, the owner of the Chicago Cubs.Mr. Mnuchin is Mr. Trump’s pick for Treasury secretary, while Mr. Ross has been chosen to run the Commerce Department. Mr. Ricketts has been selected as deputy commerce secretary.Gary D. Cohn, the No. 2 executive at Goldman Sachs has also met with Mr. Trump to talk about the possibility of a job with the new administration. Mr. Cohn is said to be open to leaving Goldman if he is offered a position, according to two people briefed on his thinking.It is a powerful signal that Mr. Trump is planning policies that will benefit Wall Street.You might wonder whether this goes against Mr. Trump’s populist campaign message. Democrats like Senator Bernie Sanders and Senator Elizabeth Warren certainly think so. Anthony Scaramucci, the hedge fund executive who is also on the transition team, insisted that it did not and that the working class needed to become the “aspirational working class.”Mr. Mnuchin and Mr. Ross have already made big promises — and contradicted some of Mr. Trump’s campaign pledges. But they may find it harder to follow through on all their promises. The biggest limitation on their ability? Economic math, Neil Irwin says.Still, some consider at least Mr. Mnuchin as a pragmatist rather than an ideologue, and that could help him balance competing views in the job. And he does not seek the limelight, which could appeal to lawmakers eager to take credit for policy victories, according to Breakingviews.It is still unclear how Mr. Trump plans to deal with the assets that make him wealthy. Although the Office of Government Ethics has praised Mr. Trump for committing to divesting his assets, he has not actually done so. He has, instead, promised a “major news conference” with his children in two weeks to reveal his plans for his company.“I’ll give Trump his due, but I hope he and the American people and Congress don’t forget about all these other jobs going to Mexico.”— Chuck Jones, the president of Local 1999 of the United Steelworkers in Indianapolis, which represents workers at Carrier. Mr. Trump prevented 1,000 jobs at Carrier’s Indianapolis plant from moving to Mexico, but layoffs and shutdowns are widespread across the Rust Belt. The Upshot took a look how Mr. Trump’s administration could benefit working-class families in other ways.There is “significant concern” among regulators that millions of Americans are falling behind on their car loans as the auto lending sector continues its boom. And this is happening even with low unemployment.This suggests that lenders are loosening their standards and letting borrowers take on more debt than they can afford.The subprime delinquency rate may be lower than it was immediately after the financial crisis, but many more have subprime auto loans than in 2009. The one consolation is that it is not financial crisis redux. The auto loan market is huge, but the defaults are not likely to affect the banking system in the way that home foreclosures did.It has been a long time coming, but the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries has finally reached an agreement on production cuts, and oil prices have soared.The cartel could not agree how to spread the cuts among the countries, and negotiations were further complicated by the uneasy relationship between Saudi Arabia and Iran. But they decided to cut production next year by about 4.5 percent, or 1.2 million barrels a day.The euphoria may not last though. It is a six-month deal, contingent on the cooperation of non-OPEC countries, most notably Russia. The cut is also trivial in a 96-million-barrel-a-day marketplace that is oversupplied.Automakers publish their sales in the United States for November. Sales have been slower this year than last, but they will be hoping that the holiday season rush and Black Friday will have given the numbers a push.Follow Amie Tsang on Twitter @amietsang.Advertisement