AdvertisementSupported byBy Nathaniel PopperThe list of candidates to take over the top job at Goldman Sachs has shrunk notably in recent weeks.In the last month, both of the firm’s vice chairmen have announced plans to retire from the Wall Street firm. Then, this week, the No. 2 executive at the company, Gary D. Cohn, met with President-elect Donald J. Trump to talk about the possibility of a job with the new administration. Mr. Cohn is said to be open to leaving Goldman if he is offered a position by Mr. Trump, according to two people briefed on his thinking.If Mr. Cohn were to go to work for Mr. Trump, he would be the third Goldman alumnus to join the top ranks of the new administration, along with Steven Mnuchin, a former Goldman partner who was tapped to become Treasury secretary, and Stephen K. Bannon, who worked at Goldman early in his career and is now Mr. Trump’s top political strategist.The concentration of former Goldman employees in the new administration is a rather unexpected outcome from an election in which the firm was a regular punching bag, held up as a prime example of Wall Street greed. The president-elect’s turn toward Goldman is also surprising because the bank, like other Wall Street firms, has not been eager to work with Mr. Trump as a client.For Goldman, Mr. Cohn’s meeting with Mr. Trump on Monday has lowered the once-high odds that the burly former trader would take over the top spot at Goldman from his longtime colleague Lloyd C. Blankfein, the chairman and chief executive.It has been no secret on Wall Street that Mr. Cohn has coveted the top position at Goldman and has grown impatient as Mr. Blankfein has remained in the job.The possibility of his leaving for Washington could put pressure on Goldman’s board to hasten Mr. Blankfein’s retirement in order to elevate Mr. Cohn. But there are no signs that the board is taking any unusual steps at the moment to try to keep Mr. Cohn.For his part, Mr. Blankfein has shown no signs of wanting to leave the post he has occupied since 2006. Last year, he underwent chemotherapy for lymphoma, and the company was forced to consider what would happen if he could not continue as chief executive. But since the treatment, Mr. Blankfein has said he is cancer-free and hopes to stay in the job for some time.Mike Mayo, a bank analyst at CLSA, said that talk of Mr. Cohn leaving “is a sign that Mr. Blankfein is still calling the shots and is likely to do so far a while.”It would appear that Mr. Blankfein’s job is going to get easier with Mr. Trump in the White House. The president-elect has talked about weakening the Dodd-Frank financial reform legislation, which came down particularly hard on Goldman and its Wall Street-centric business model.Since the election, Goldman’s stock has risen 23 percent, much more than the broader market. In the year before the election, its stock fell about 10 percent. On Wednesday, after Mr. Cohn’s meeting with Mr. Trump became public, the bank’s shares rose 3.6 percent.Mr. Blankfein led Goldman through the financial crisis and has had to guide it through the raft of new regulations introduced since then, which have limited the firm’s ability to make big profits from trading.Over the last year, Mr. Blankfein has put more of an emphasis on the company’s technology prowess and has built up a new division to offer financial services to ordinary Americans, including Marcus, an online lending service. That work, though, has been slow going, and it may become less necessary if Mr. Trump’s administration eases the restrictions on Wall Street firms.If Mr. Cohn does leave Goldman, the next candidates in line for the top job would be David M. Solomon, the head of the bank’s advisory division, and Harvey M. Schwartz, the current chief financial officer, who grew up in the firm as a trader alongside Mr. Cohn and Mr. Blankfein.If Mr. Blankfein stays in the job for several years, leadership could pass to a next generation of executives, such as Stephen M. Scherr, who has been overseeing the new consumer banking operation, or R. Martin Chavez, the firm’s chief technology officer.“There are many generals to back the commander in chief, many colonels for every general, and many majors for each colonel,” said Chris Kotowski, a bank analyst at Oppenheimer & Company.Mr. Cohn’s conversations with the Trump administration represent an unexpected twist in the career of a man who was once widely viewed as the natural next leader of Goldman. Mr. Cohn joined a trading division of Goldman in 1990 and rose along with Mr. Blankfein. In recent years, he has donated to both Democrats and Republicans, but he was historically registered as a Democrat.While he has all the trappings of a New York insider, including an apartment on Park Avenue, Mr. Cohn has long positioned himself as an outsider in the elite precincts of Wall Street. Raised in Ohio, the son of an electrician, Mr. Cohn has frequently spoken about his struggles with dyslexia and the brash talk he used to secure his first job as a trader.On Wall Street, Mr. Cohn is known for his brusque style, though that has softened as he has taken on more leadership responsibility at the firm. Since becoming Goldman’s president, he has spent quite a bit of time in Washington, building contacts there, and has also become a fixture on the New York scene, where he has developed a relationship with Jared Kushner, Mr. Trump’s son-in-law.Mr. Trump is said to be considering Mr. Cohn for director of the Office of Management and Budget, Politico reported on Wednesday.Any job Mr. Cohn would be offered in Washington would rank him below Mr. Mnuchin as Treasury secretary. The two men became partners at Goldman in 1994, but before Mr. Mnuchin left the firm in 2002, they were not known to be particularly close.Michael J. de la Merced and Susanne Craig contributed reporting.Advertisement