AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Robert CyranChief executives do not deserve bonuses just for going shopping. Bobby Kotick of Activision Blizzard, however, will now receive an extra payout if he makes a “transformative” transaction. Sensible mergers and acquisitions should be part of what chief executives are already paid for.Activision, which produces interactive games, has done well under Mr. Kotick. The company is valued at $26 billion and its stock has nearly tripled over the last five years as franchises like Call of Duty, World of Warcraft and Skylanders have delivered solid growth. Mr. Kotick has prospered, too, receiving nearly $25 million in total compensation over the last three years.It is odd to offer more for the pursuit of acquisitions. Chief executives often enjoy the hunt, and making a company larger tends to enhance paychecks and prestige. And if deals work out well, a chief executive should benefit on other metrics, like share price and profit margins.If anything, acquisitive chief executives should be given incentives to be skeptical. Purchases usually require the payment of premiums, so they often do not add value. Deals can also cause trouble if cultures clash or integration is not done right.Mr. Kotick doesn’t need a push, either. Activision closed a $5.9 billion purchase of King Digital Entertainment, maker of Candy Crush Saga, this year. The premium was a reasonable 20 percent, but online gaming is faddish. That raises questions about the structure of Mr. Kotick’s new bonus. He earns it only if a deal raises existing stockholders’ investment value by 15 percent or more for at least six months. But that may be too short a period to gauge success.At least Mr. Kotick has to consummate deals. The health insurer Aetna justified bonuses paid to its chief executive and finance chief partly on the company’s 2015 agreement to buy its rival Humana for $37 billion. The government is challenging the merger, and if it fails, Aetna could owe a hefty $1 billion breakup fee. In that circumstance, investors will surely wonder what the bonuses were for.In another example, the American lender BB&T handed top executives $2.5 million for closing the purchase of Susquehanna Bancshares in 2015. Post-crisis bank deals have been tough, but that is a known issue, and doing worthwhile transactions of all kinds is in the job descriptions of all top company managers. There is no need to reward them twice — or to encourage risky acquisitions.Advertisement