AdvertisementSupported byFair GameBy Gretchen MorgensonSteven Mnuchin, President-elect Donald J. Trump’s nominee to run the Treasury Department, electrified Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac shareholders on Wednesday when he signaled that the mortgage finance giants would finally be allowed to get out from under Washington’s thumb.“We got to get Fannie and Freddie out of government ownership,” he told Fox Business. “It makes no sense that these are owned by the government and have been controlled by the government for as long as they have.”Mr. Mnuchin is right. It has been more than eight years since the federal government took over Fannie and Freddie in the mortgage crisis; as such, they are the last big piece of unfinished business from that era.When the government changed the terms of their bailouts in the summer of 2012 and began expropriating all of Fannie’s and Freddie’s profits every quarter, it seemed as if that unsatisfactory setup would go on forever. After all, it is hard for the government to give up a honey pot that has returned over $60 billion more to the Treasury than the companies received from taxpayers during their troubles.Granted, Mr. Mnuchin said little about how the administration thinks the nation’s biggest “government-sponsored enterprises” should be structured. That is not surprising, given the complexity of the $6 trillion mortgage market.So why did Mr. Mnuchin’s comments jazz the markets? Because they revealed a seismic shift in the way these companies are viewed by the new administration. In place of the strident, anti-G.S.E. ideology that has dominated the conversation on both the left and the right since the bailout, it looks as if a more pragmatic and positive approach to the companies and their role in the mortgage market is on the way.What that means, in my view, is that the enterprises may be allowed to live a new day rather than continue to be diminished and drained of their profits.This is good news indeed for small lenders who rely so heavily on Fannie and Freddie to buy the mortgages they underwrite, freeing them to repeat the process rather than hold the loans on their balance sheets. And when small lenders benefit, borrowers do, too, by having more choices.As executive director of the Community Mortgage Lenders of America, Glen S. Corso represents many of the small entities that depend on the liquidity provided by Fannie and Freddie to make their loans. He said in an interview that he and his Main Street constituents were extremely encouraged by the comments from Mr. Mnuchin.“Since 2012, we’ve been advocating for the G.S.E.s to be reformed, recapitalized and then released from conservatorship,” Mr. Corso said. “We’re hopeful that is the direction the Trump administration will head in.”That would be an almost total turnabout from the proposals pushed in recent years by housing officials under President Obama and some influential lawmakers. Railing against recapitalizing the companies and releasing them from conservatorship, they have put forward an array of complicated and impractical proposals that would have reconfigured the mortgage market and, in some cases, handed over a big chunk of it to the nation’s largest banks.Although there was not much talk of Fannie and Freddie on the campaign trail, it was widely assumed that a Clinton administration would embrace some of those Obama housing officials as well as their ideas.That those officials now have little sway is one reason shares in Fannie and Freddie soared in value just after the election and even before Mr. Mnuchin spoke about the companies.As a former head of the mortgage-backed securities desk at Goldman Sachs, Mr. Mnuchin well understands the mechanics of this enormous market. He also recognizes the significant role a well-capitalized Fannie and Freddie could play in ensuring that borrowers have access to mortgage money in good economies as well as bad.So what might happen now? In his comments, Mr. Mnuchin nodded to a crucial issue regarding Fannie and Freddie: safety and soundness. “We’ll make sure that when they’re restructured, they’re absolutely safe and they don’t get taken over again,” he said, “But we got to get them out of government control.”A first step in ensuring that Fannie and Freddie are safe would be to let them rebuild their capital. Since the government began taking all their profits in 2012, it has directed the companies to operate on a small and shrinking sliver of capital. Under the current arrangement, the companies will have zero capital at the end of 2018.This is clearly untenable and unsafe for taxpayers, who would again be on the hook if Fannie and Freddie began losing money.An easy way to let them rebuild capital would be to end the quarterly transfer of all their profits to the Treasury. This would not require legislation; it could be done administratively with incoming Treasury officials advising the Federal Housing Finance Agency, which regulates Fannie and Freddie, to change the terms of the government’s agreement with the companies. This was supposed to happen anyway while the companies were operating under the conservatorship.What of the fears that if they are allowed to recapitalize, the companies will return to their swaggering, prebailout ways and grow powerful and reckless as they did in the 1990s?Mr. Corso and others say safeguards are in place to protect taxpayers from such an outcome.“We would be the first to acknowledge that there were serious deficiencies in the way the G.S.E.s operated, pre-2008,” he said. “But a lot have been addressed in the conservatorship.”Simply recapitalizing the companies will also be cleaner, preventing potential self-dealing and the giveaways of the companies’ assets that existed in some of the privatization proposals.There is another intriguing aspect to the Trump administration’s shift, and it has to do with the lawsuits that have been filed against the government. One such suit was brought by Fairholme Funds, a mutual fund company that owns Fannie and Freddie shares. It contends that the 2012 profit sweep was an improper taking of private property without just compensation.For years, Justice Department lawyers have been stonewalling document requests from the plaintiffs. The government has requested confidential treatment for thousands of pages of materials and has asserted presidential privilege in 45 documents.Margaret Sweeney, the judge hearing the matter in the Court of Federal Claims, recently opened the door a crack, letting some documents see the light of day. Some of the materials cast doubt on arguments made by the government’s lawyers that the profit sweep came about because Fannie and Freddie were in dire condition and the taxpayers needed protection from future losses.If Judge Sweeney were to order the release of more documents, the current administration would probably appeal. It is not as clear that a Trump administration would do so, however. This opens the possibility that all those materials that the Obama administration has fought so hard to keep secret might just emerge.That would be a huge service for anyone interested in holding government officials accountable for their actions.Twitter: @gmorgensonAdvertisement