AdvertisementSupported byCorner OfficeBy Adam BryantThis interview with Abe Ankumah, chief executive of Nyansa, a network analytics software company, was conducted and condensed by Adam Bryant. Q. What were your early years like?A. I was born and raised in Ghana. I’m the youngest of five children. My parents were in the travel and tourism business — they started the first travel agency in Ghana about 45 years ago. I was fortunate to have traveled quite a bit with them when I was growing up. They would bring me along to international conferences.When I was 15, I moved about three hours away to go to an all boys’ boarding school.What was that like?It was really rigorous. If you wanted to stay ahead, you had to wake up in the middle of the night to study. I ended up with a passion for math and science. I took a national exam at the end of high school and was ranked No. 2 in the country.Tell me more about your parents. How have they influenced your leadership style?My father had this quiet confidence about him, but he was also very humble. That’s something that has stayed with me. Regardless of how well you’ve done at any point in your career, there’s no point in making a big deal of it.My mom was very strong on values, particularly about treating people the way you would expect them to treat you. If you wanted to get mad at someone, she would say, “Put yourself in their shoes.” It was kind of a mind-set.When did you come to the United States?I was planning to go to the top university in Ghana, but when I graduated from high school, the primary universities were on strike. So I applied to universities outside the country. I ended up going to Caltech.I gravitated quickly toward computer science and electrical engineering, which was a little crazy because the first time I used a computer in my life was at Caltech. There were other students in the class who had been using computers since they were 5 years old. I had to work three or four times harder. I would stay up studying through the night, but I had some experience doing that from high school.You seem to enjoy taking the harder path.I’ve always tried not to do typical things. I don’t know whether that’s deliberate or it’s because of the thrill and the journey that comes with it. I also like pushing myself, because otherwise you don’t know what your limits are. It’s always been my mind-set: Don’t get too comfortable in any way.What were some early leadership lessons for you?One of the things I learned very quickly was that when you work with a team, you make sure that it doesn’t really matter who gets the credit. I’ve always been very hesitant to take credit for myself, especially within that context.It’s more about giving others credit, because I learned very quickly that it made them want to work and contribute even harder.How have you tried to build the culture of your current company?I think start-ups kind of take on the value system of their founders. There are three of us who started the company, and we’re all first-time entrepreneurs. We tend to be very “first principle” thinkers. What I mean by that is when you’re trying to solve a problem, you start by trying to understand the essence of the problem, rather than starting with what the answer should be and then working your way to justifying it.So it’s all about making sure that everyone understands the problem we’re trying to solve. And to do that, you have to maintain a broader perspective and listen very carefully to people.I have one-on-ones with every single person on the team and then connect the dots. So I ask a lot of questions and build a mental model of the outline of what we need to do. Then when something seems inconsistent in that mental model, you get people together and say, “Wait a second, how do we resolve this?”The other thing that’s important is to have people on the team who want to take personal ownership of a problem. You get 10 times better results when somebody feels personally invested in solving a problem rather than somebody just saying, “Hey, I’m doing it just to check the boxes.”So how do you interview people to make sure they have that quality?The way you assess that is to talk to them about a couple of things. When they talk about things they’ve done in the past and how well they’ve done it, do they light up? That tells you that they were all in when they were working on that problem.The other thing I look for are those first-principle thinkers I mentioned earlier. So I’ll ask a lot of questions about things they’ve done, just to generally learn. Some people can explain something in a way that just shows they really understood it. They just knew what mattered, and they broke down the problem to its essence.And we really look for first-principle thinkers because, as a tech company, we’re charting a course in a new market segment, and a lot of what we’re doing has not been done before. And so it’s all about asking why, and does this make sense or not?Finally, we really look for people who are adaptable, and that comes from asking them about what they’ve done in the past and how they’ve handled adversity. And adversity doesn’t necessarily mean some terrible personal tragedy. Maybe you changed majors, which can be a little bit of a shock to the system.What career and life advice do you give to new college grads?Be a lifelong student. That doesn’t mean go enroll in a bunch of classes all the time. It’s a mind-set. It means continuing to push yourself to learn rather than saying, “I’ve got this degree in this, and that’s what I’m going to do.”The other thing is not to become too comfortable in a role. Chances are that if you’re comfortable, you’re not learning, you’re not pushing the envelope and you’re probably going to get stagnated.Each week, Adam Bryant talks with top executives about leadership. Follow him on Twitter: @nytcorneroffice. This interview has been edited for space and clarity.Advertisement