By AMIE TSANGDEC. 2, 2016
Donald J. Trump has managed to keep about half of the 2,000 jobs at Carrier that Indiana stood to lose, and there is more to come, he said. While touring the factory floor at the heating and cooling company on Thursday, Mr. Trump indicated that he intended to follow through on pledges to impose stiff tariffs on imports from companies that move production overseas and ship their products back to the United States.The approach he took to the Carrier deal, however, was akin to intercepting a driver on his way to his car in a parking garage and trying to persuade him to stay parked longer, Justin Wolfers writes.But there is a reason parking businesses don’t do that. There are many more potential customers outside the garage, and they can attract them by offering a more convenient experience.A parking garage stays full and an economy stays healthy only if they are constantly refreshed, Mr. Wolfers says. It remains to be seen how Mr. Trump might focus resources on the potential entrepreneurs who could open businesses and refresh the economy.AdvertisementMr. Trump’s embrace of the Wall Street elite has already been noted and, indeed, Goldman Sachs executives do have a tradition of taking leading roles in public service, but another theme in his cabinet is a lack of directly relevant policy experience. There are exceptions, but Mr. Trump seems to be betting that nuts-and-bolts experience running government agencies just doesn’t matter, Neil Irwin writes.AdvertisementIt seems that the swamp being drained is the one inhabited by wonkish technocrats who have devoted their careers to the details of policy making.Our columnist Andrew Ross Sorkin and his Times colleagues help you make sense of major business and policy headlines — and the power-brokers who shape them.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In Mexico, the uncertainty that has rattled the country’s economy since Mr. Trump’s election has increased after the governor of the central bank, Agustín Carstens, said he would leave next July. Mr. Carstens will leave the Bank of Mexico, where he has been governor for seven years, to lead the Bank for International Settlements, which acts as a bank of central banks.“It’s unbelievable to us in Italy that we’d be comparing Berlusconi to an American president.”— Oreste Pollicino, a professor of constitutional law at Bocconi University in Milan. Silvio Berlusconi, who served nine years as Italy’s prime minister, faced calls to divest his business empire, just as Mr. Trump does now. But he retained majority ownership and installed his offspring in oversight positions.Howard Schultz, who some might consider the Steve Jobs of coffee, will step down as chief executive of Starbucks next year.He will hand over the reins at the word’s largest coffee business to Kevin Johnson, the company president and a longtime board member.The move is likely to renew speculation about whether Mr. Schultz plans to enter politics. He is an outspoken Democrat and has made his company a vocal part of the national conversation on issues like gun violence, gay rights and race relations.The company had already been signaling its intent to carry out a succession plan. Mr. Johnson was given oversight of day-to-day operations in the summer and he has been on a listening tour with employees over the last year.The Labor Department will publish data on hiring and unemployment for November. The report is expected to show 175,000 jobs added and an unchanged unemployment rate of 4.9 percent. A very weak number could affect the Federal Reserve’s decision on interest rates in December.Follow Amie Tsang on Twitter @amietsang.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.