
Standard Deduction By                     
VICTOR FLEISCHER

NOV. 4, 2015
Every religion has a creation myth.Pay-for-performance is the fundamental tenet of the American approach to executive compensation. While groups in Britain and Switzerland have proposed capping executive pay, investors and regulators in the United States are mainly concerned when there’s a mismatch of pay versus performance. As long as a company is doing well, the sky’s the limit.Congress has embraced pay-for-performance. As mandated by the financial reform law known as the Dodd-Frank Act, the Securities and Exchange Commission proposed rules earlier this year to make it easier to compare actual pay with actual performance. The rules will require public companies to provide a table comparing the amount of compensation paid to top executives with the total shareholder return of the company. Total shareholder return measures the change in the company’s stock price, plus any dividends paid out to shareholders.Critics worry that the “pay for performance” rule encourages short-term thinking. The National Association of Corporate Directors, for example, wrote in a comment on the proposed rule that an isolated emphasis on total shareholder return “can result in excessive focus on quarterly financial numbers.”Pay-for-performance is even embedded in the tax code, which encourages corporations to pay executives with stock options, performance share plans or other forms of compensation linked to the company’s stock price. Section 162(m) of the tax code limits corporate deductions for compensation paid to top executives to $1 million unless the pay is “performance based.”AdvertisementIt’s a strange incentive that reflects an old way of thinking about executives as risk-averse individuals, prodded to action only by high-reward financial incentives.AdvertisementAsk a business school or law school professor about pay-for-performance, and chances are you’ll hear a fable: Once upon a time, chief executives had job security. Companies were loyal. Executives took home modest cash salaries (by today’s standards) but enjoyed perks like private dining rooms and country club memberships. With a comfortable life in hand, C.E.O.s prioritized stability over growth.Then, in the 1980s, came leveraged buyouts, takeover battles and a robust market for corporate control. These villains — or heroes, depending on who tells the story — disrupted the quiet life. The future of the public corporation was questioned, most prominently by Prof. Michael Jensen’s 1989 Harvard Business Review article, “The Eclipse of the Public Corporation.”Corporate boards adopted poison pills to push the barbarians back from the gates, but the culture war was already lost. The only way to save the empire was to align the executives’ fortunes with those of the shareholders. The measure of a chief executive was the price of a company’s common stock, then and forever more.
                From Wall Street to Washington and in the towers of academia, people are buzzing about what some say is the pernicious focus in corporate America on short-term profits.            Thus began the pay-for-performance revolution in executive compensation. In the name of aligning C.E.O. incentives with shareholders, compensation was linked to the stock price. Shareholders expected growth. Chiefs who could deliver would be compensated accordingly. The quiet life was no longer an option.Hostile takeover artists have been replaced by younger understudies like the wolf packs of activist investors who prey on the weakest in the herd and the private equity vultures who circle the wounded. The only way to fend them off is to provide executives with powerful financial incentives tied to the performance of company stock.The moral of the story, as it’s usually told, is that the executive pay packages we observe today are the inevitable consequence of modern capital markets.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The concept of pay-for-performance has attained a sense of inevitability, woven into the fabric of American capitalism. But in practice, pay-for-performance has some known drawbacks. Compensation plans tend to focus on short-term metrics. Some executives myopically focus on quarterly earnings. Tying pay to short-term accounting targets encourages earnings management and other shady practices.In my view, the obsession with pay-for-performance is overkill. A risk-averse executive seeking the quiet life — if indeed such a person ever existed — would not climb the corporate ladder today. The labor market for executives already rewards those who act over those who stand on the sidelines. A risk-averse executive will soon find himself out of a job and unable to find a new one.AdvertisementYet the tax code operates as if we need a special incentive to encourage risk-taking. Section 162(m) was enacted in 1993. Instead of reining in executive pay, the tax code sprinkles holy water on high-risk, high-reward compensation plans. To qualify for the deduction, companies must use instruments like stock options and performance share plans with asymmetric payout structures — lots of upside, no downside — that encourage excessive risk-taking.There’s a strong case for simply repealing Section 162(m). We don’t need the tax code to encourage chief executives to give up the quiet life.Congress might even consider flipping Section 162(m) upside down for investment banks and other large financial institutions where excessive risk-taking creates large social costs.Would Wall Street executives suddenly become timid and risk-averse, regressing to the fabled quiet life? I doubt it. The forces of the labor market will continue to produce executives who take risks, and boards will probably continue to structure pay that rewards them generously.Victor Fleischer is a professor of law at the University of San Diego, where he teaches and writes in the areas of tax policy, entrepreneurship, inequality and higher education.A version of this article appears in print on November 5, 2015, on Page F14 of the New York edition with the headline: The Executive Paycheck Myth.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »