AdvertisementSupported byCommon SenseBy James B. StewartDonald Trump has said a wealthy real estate developer like him has never been elected president, so there’s no precedent for handling the many potential conflicts of interest that come with his dual roles.But there is at least one prominent example of a country’s top elected official continuing to own a major business empire while in office. And even if the parallel is not exact, it’s hardly encouraging: Silvio Berlusconi, who served nine years as Italy’s prime minister.The two men share many qualities apart from their mutual admiration for President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia and attractive women. Like Mr. Trump, Mr. Berlusconi is a billionaire. He initially made his fortune as a real estate developer, then diversified into banking, advertising, publishing, news and entertainment media and ownership of the European soccer club A.C. Milan.Like Mr. Trump, Mr. Berlusconi was elected prime minister as a change agent, called the novus homo of a populist uprising. As in the United States, (and unlike most European countries) no conflict-of-interest laws in Italy prevent the prime minister from owning a business. Like Mr. Trump, Mr. Berlusconi faced calls to divest his sprawling business empire.Mr. Berlusconi resigned all his executive positions and directorships and pledged to have no day-to-day involvement in running the businesses. But he did not divest — he retained majority ownership and installed his adult offspring in oversight positions, much as Mr. Trump has suggested he will do.A result was an unending series of scandals, even as Mr. Berlusconi’s businesses profited and the size of his personal fortune soared, reaching $12 billion by 2005, according to an estimate by Forbes magazine, considered the most reliable guide to the world’s wealthiest people. (Berlusconi’s wealth has declined significantly since he left office. Forbes estimates his current net worth at $5.6 billion.)“There were so many scandals with Berlusconi that it’s hard to know where to begin,” said Alexander Stille, a professor at the Columbia Journalism School and author of “The Sack of Rome,” a critical look at Mr. Berlusconi’s entangled business and political fortunes. Mr. Stille pointed to a communications law that allowed the prime minister to maintain a virtual monopoly over private television in Italy.“That kind of thing happened all the time,” he said. “All sorts of provisions appeared to be tailor-made to fit the contours of his business empire.”Apart from blatant conflicts of interest, there were also pervasive efforts by others to curry favor with Mr. Berlusconi by steering business to his companies, according to Oreste Pollicino, a professor of constitutional law at Bocconi University in Milan. Professor Pollicino pointed to a study by the National Bureau of Economic Research, which found that between 1994 and 2009, businesses seeking influence with Mr. Berlusconi shifted more than 1 billion euros in advertising to his television channels. The pattern was especially pronounced for companies operating in more regulated sectors.“It’s unbelievable to us in Italy,” Mr. Pollicino said, “that we’d be comparing Berlusconi to an American president.”Norman Eisen, a lawyer and conflicts-of-interest specialist who advised the Obama administration and is now at the Brookings Institution, agreed. “It’s shocking that we’re even having a conversation comparing Trump to Berlusconi and his antecedent strongmen of Italy, a long line that runs all the way back to Caesar,” Mr. Eisen said. “I guess we’ll all be relieved if he turns out to be Berlusconi and not Mussolini.”Mr. Eisen said that anything is possible, though. “We’ll know when we see his actual plan to address the business conflicts,” he added. “That will tell us whether he’ll abuse and make a mockery of the office or do what every other modern president has done and put his assets in a blind trust or the equivalent.”Via Twitter, Mr. Trump said this week that “legal documents are being crafted which take me completely out of business operations. The Presidency is a far more important task!” He said he would provide details in two weeks at a news conference with his adult offspring; previously he said he would turn running the company over to them.A spokeswoman said Mr. Trump declined to comment for this column.Such an arrangement seemed to impose few restraints on Mr. Berlusconi. “Berlusconi said he had nothing to do with operating his business empire,” Mr. Stille said. “But then he’d meet with business figures like Rupert Murdoch and discuss business. There was very little separation.”Mr. Berlusconi’s conflicts were even more blatant than Mr. Trump’s potential conflicts, because he owned so much of the Italian media. Many of Mr. Berlusconi’s conflicts involved efforts to control coverage of him as a candidate and as prime minister. (Like Mr. Trump, he had prominent feuds with journalists who crossed him.) Despite Mr. Trump’s threats to toughen libel laws to make it easier to sue journalists, the First Amendment makes it unlikely that he can do much to control the news media.And in his career Mr. Trump has shown more respect for the law than Mr. Berlusconi did. “Trump has pushed the legal envelope,” Mr. Eisen said. “Berlusconi broke right through it.”While Mr. Trump may have avoided paying federal income taxes for years, he has never been accused of doing so illegally. By contrast, Mr. Berlusconi was convicted of tax evasion in 2012 and sentenced to four years in prison. (Instead, he did four hours of community service a week for a year, under a law he had supported that bestowed leniency on anyone over 70 years old.) He was also convicted of bribery and having sex with an underage prostitute, a verdict he has appealed.But many more of Mr. Berlusconi’s businesses are domestic than Mr. Trump’s, with relatively few interests that might be influenced by foreign governments. “Trump’s business interests are primarily international,” Mr. Eisen said. “In that sense Trump is more dangerous than Berlusconi.”He cited what he called a “small but telling example,” the Trump International Hotel in Washington, where foreign delegations are rushing to book rooms in what seems a blatant effort to curry favor. “The founders’ wigs would have flipped off their heads if they’d seen what’s happening at the Trump hotel just a few blocks from the White House,” Mr. Eisen said.But Mr. Berlusconi had his own foreign entanglements and faced harsh criticism over his dealings with Mr. Putin. The Italian Parliament blocked a giant pipeline deal between Eni, the large Italian energy company, and Russia’s Gazprom after allegations surfaced that Mr. Berlusconi had personal interests in the agreement. Recent diplomatic cables released by WikiLeaks have detailed suspicions in the State Department that “Berlusconi and his cronies are profiting personally and handsomely from many of the energy deals between Italy and Russia.”To the dismay of many, the Italian electorate showed scant interest in any of Mr. Berlusconi’s blatant conflicts. He was elected three times despite the constant drumbeat of scandal. “None of these issues seemed to register with the Italian public,” Mr. Stille said. “It was incredibly depressing to those of us writing about it. Most Italians with limited experience outside Italy assumed this was somehow not exceptional. It was just the way the world worked.”Indeed, Mr. Pollicino said, Mr. Berlusconi’s resignation, in 2011, had “nothing to do with any of the scandals — it was because of Italy’s severe economic distress and investors’ loss of confidence in the Italian markets.”Like Mr. Berlusconi, Mr. Trump has said that voters were fully aware of his business activities and potential conflicts when they cast ballots for him, and that “only the crooked media makes this a big deal.”But the fact that Mr. Berlusconi largely got away with it does not mean Mr. Trump should look to him as a role model. “Berlusconi,” Mr. Eisen said, “was widely viewed internationally as the second-greatest Italian clown since Roberto Benigni,” the comic actor. “But Italy plays a vastly smaller role in the world order than the United States does. We can’t afford to have that here, and I don’t think the American public would stand for it.”Advertisement