By ELISABETH MALKINDEC. 1, 2016
MEXICO CITY — The governor of Mexico’s central bank, Agustín Carstens, said on Thursday that he would leave his position next July, adding to the uncertainty that has rattled the country’s economy since the election of Donald J. Trump.Mr. Carstens, 58, a well-regarded economist, will leave the Bank of Mexico, where he has been governor for seven years, to lead the Bank for International Settlements, a financial institution based in Basel, Switzerland, that acts as a bank for central banks.It is a complex time for Mexico, as worry mounts that Mr. Trump as the United States president will make good on his campaign promises to renegotiate the North American Free Trade Agreement and deport Mexican migrants, anxiety that has pushed the value of the peso down to record levels.As news of Mr. Carstens’s departure broke on Thursday morning, the peso slipped further, but he sought to provide some reassurance.Advertisement“I am still going to be here for seven more months and I hope the storm doesn’t last that long,” he told a news conference. His departure raises the question of who President Enrique Peña Nieto will nominate as his successor to finish out the term, which ends in 2021. The president’s choice requires Senate ratification.AdvertisementMr. Carstens has called Mr. Trump “a hurricane” for the Mexican economy. The central bank raised interest rates two weeks ago and cut its growth forecast. The central bank governor said then that understanding the policies of the incoming administration in Washington was “like trying to put a jigsaw puzzle together without having all the pieces.”Mexico is particularly vulnerable to Mr. Trump’s antitrade message because its dynamic export sector is the economy’s main driver. Mexico sends some 80 percent of its exports to the United States and investors fear that any disruption to North American trade would hit Mexico disproportionately.“The timing of the decision is far from ideal,” wrote Daniel Kerner and Carlos Petersen at the Eurasia Group, a risk analysis and consulting group. “Investors and politicians saw Carstens as a bulwark of macroeconomic responsibility and independence who could help navigate these troubled waters, at a time when the U.S. Federal Reserve is expected to begin raising rates and Trump’s policies could begin to further harm Mexico’s economy.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Although Mr. Carstens tried to play down the effect of his departure, arguing that he was just one member of the central bank’s board, he did acknowledge that “if there is one thing that characterizes the moment we’re living through, it is uncertainty.”Despite a long career at the central bank and Mexico’s finance ministry, Mr. Carstens was known to be considering an international position. In 2011, he unsuccessfully sought the position as managing director of the International Monetary Fund.Although there was speculation that he had a difficult relationship with the finance team of President Peña Nieto, “the decision seems to have been driven mostly by Carstens’s own professional interests rather than political pressures or disagreements over monetary policy,” the Eurasia Group analysts wrote.Finance Minister José Antonio Meade described Mr. Carstens’s selection at the Bank for International Settlements, which promotes international monetary and financial cooperation, as an honor for Mexico.“There is an additional element that gives us a lot of calm today,” Mr. Meade said. “The decision is being announced today but it won’t be implemented until near the end of next year.”Mr. Carstens’s departure presents a dilemma for the president. “Now President Peña Nieto faces a momentous decision to propose a solid candidate with credibility, even more so when there is no natural successor,” wrote analysts at Citibanamex.A version of this article appears in print on December 2, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Mexico’s Central Bank Chief to Lead Bank for International Settlements.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.