
Revalued By                     
 DAVID GELLES
 
DEC. 3, 2016
On a recent Sunday, football fans viewing the showdown between the Los Angeles Rams and the New York Jets saw an unusual ad among the spots for pickup trucks and light beer. Against a backdrop of pastel colors and an up-tempo beat, a diverse cast of athletes testified:“I meditate to crush it.”“I meditate to not freak out.”“I meditate to have the edge.”The ad was for Headspace, a guided meditation app developed by two Britons — a former monk and an advertising executive. By targeting the vast audience of football fans, the Headspace team was making clear its belief that meditation is something with mass commercial appeal.Their pitch has new resonance on the heels of a bitter election. In the week after Donald J. Trump’s victory in the presidential race, Headspace said it had experienced a 44 percent jump in its app’s “SOS” meditation, a sort of panic button for the frazzled. Yet even without an anxious electorate, Headspace was finding an audience.A standout among a group of websites, apps and consulting firms that are seeking to capitalize on the current craze for all things mindful, the Headspace app has been downloaded more than 11 million times.With its coffers full from a recent funding round befitting a Silicon Valley social media darling, Headspace is now aiming to convert millions more people with advertisements on network television and posters plastered on New York City bus stops and subway stations.AdvertisementYet even as Headspace finds its groove, questions linger about just how broad its appeal can be, and whether the app’s creators can back up their aspirational claims with real science.“The cheerleading phase is over,” said James Gimian, publisher of Mindful magazine. “People know mindfulness can be a good thing. Now people need to do research into what the benefits are in specific applications.”Headspace was founded by Rich Pierson and his buddy Andy Puddicombe in 2010. At the time, Mr. Pierson was a stressed-out ad executive in London, and Mr. Puddicombe — who had studied as a Buddhist monk and dabbled as a circus performer — was teaching meditation to anxious Britons.The two men agreed to barter: Mr. Puddicombe would teach Mr. Pierson how to meditate in exchange for help in developing something with mass market potential.By 2012, they had their first app. Mr. Puddicombe, with his chummy British accent, honed and narrated the teachings, which were delivered through a mix of cartoons, videos of Mr. Puddicombe and podcasts. And the app gained decent traction, for a meditation app at least.AdvertisementBut in 2013, the pair moved the company from London to Los Angeles. England, Mr. Pierson said, is “one of the most cynical markets in the world,” and the co-founders were optimists. Also, they wanted to surf.In 2014 they updated the app. Before that relaunch, they had fewer than one million downloads. Since then, growth has taken off. Last year Headspace raised $30 million in a financing round led by the Chernin Group and rounded out by celebrities including Jared Leto and Jessica Alba.Today, Headspace claims to employ 160 people at offices in Los Angeles, London and San Francisco. The company doesn’t disclose revenue.What Headspace is selling is deceptively simple. By instructing people to focus on their breathing and let go of thoughts and emotions, Mr. Puddicombe gently coaxes users back to fuller engagement with the present moment. In modern parlance, it is mindfulness — a quick, secularized adaptation of Buddhist teachings that have been distilled for a modern, Western audience. A 10-day course on the app is free. Annual subscriptions cost about $100.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.For this price, the goal is not so much enlightenment as it is stress relief and self-care.“It’s great if people think it can help them with sleep and productivity and the rest, but really what we’re trying to do is get them to be more compassionate,” Mr. Pierson said. “And wouldn’t that be an amazing skill for the world to learn at the moment?”Of course, compassion wasn’t what Headspace was pitching in the commercials that aired during the football game. And therein lies one of the inherent tensions with a for-profit meditation company: In the rush to expand a business, it’s easy to misrepresent, oversell or exaggerate the benefits of a product, especially something as mercurial as mindfulness.In particular, some claim that Headspace has gone too far in trying to appeal to those in fragile emotional states by offering meditation courses devised to treat depression.“The problem I have with Headspace is the way they’ve expanded their content to target vulnerable populations,” said Zindel Segal, a professor of psychology at the University of Toronto, and the co-developer of Mindfulness Based Cognitive Therapy, a meditation-based treatment for depression.“They have no research that validates the claims they are making in this area,” Professor Segal said, “yet their business model requires that they constantly grow their user base.”AdvertisementHeadspace says it is sensitive to these concerns.“Science is one of those things we take really seriously,” Mr. Pierson said. Headspace has dozens of studies going on, employs many scientists who are building on the already voluminous body of research documenting meditation’s potential benefits, and says it will publish more research soon.Mr. Pierson also noted that Headspace tells users to seek professional help if they have severe depression and said, “This isn’t meant to replace medication.”Yet in the end, Mr. Pierson was somewhat defiant.“We are just trying to put stuff out there that will help people,” he said. If meditation and mindfulness can cheer someone up, is a peer-reviewed study really necessary?What’s more, he said, “I don’t think Western science has a monopoly on the human condition.”When it comes to another growing market opportunity — the business of selling meditation offerings to corporations — Headspace has exhibited restraint. There is no special version of the app for enterprise customers, and Headspace says less than half of a percent of all subscriptions are paid for by companies as a benefit to employees.“I worry about people getting it from H.R.,” Mr. Pierson said. “If companies are going to promote it, I want them to do it not just because of productivity, but because they want their teams to be healthier and happier.”Headspace has an early lead, but the field is becoming more crowded. Thrive Global, a venture from Arianna Huffington, will be introduced soon. Audible, the audiobooks company owned by Amazon.com, is expanding its mindfulness offerings. And rival apps including Calm, Insight Timer and 10% Happier are all vying for mind share.In the meantime, Headspace will hope to capitalize on the nation’s lingering unease.“Meditation helps you be more comfortable with the uncomfortable,” Mr. Pierson said. “We’ve definitely seen a bump in usage postelection.”A version of this article appears in print on December 4, 2016, on Page BU3 of the New York edition with the headline: Selling Inner Peace in the Palm of Your Hand.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »