By THE NEW YORK TIMESDEC. 4, 2016
Here’s a look at what’s coming up the week.OIL INDUSTRYIn a highly anticipated opening to foreign oil companies, Mexico is holding its first auction of deepwater oil and gas blocks on Monday. Investors will be watching the results closely as a measure of the energy overhaul’s success. The deep waters off Mexico’s Gulf Coast are believed to hold important reserves of oil and gas, but Mexico’s longtime national oil company Petróleos Mexicanos, or Pemex, does not have the capital or expertise to develop them.Four blocks are being offered in an area just south of American waters and another six blocks are in the southern Gulf of Mexico. An additional block is licensed to Pemex, and companies will also be bidding for the opportunity to develop it in partnership with Pemex. Elisabeth Malkin__________INSURANCE INDUSTRYThe second of two proposed health insurance mega-mergers goes to trial in United States District Court for the District of Columbia on Monday. The $37 billion combination of Aetna and Humana, two of the nation’s largest insurers, is being challenged by the Justice Department as being bad for consumers.The trial over the $48.3 billion merger of Anthem and Cigna is still going on, but a different judge will be looking at distinct issues. One major question is whether the proposed Aetna-Humana deal will leave consumers with too few options in Medicare, where both companies offer private plans in some of the same places. Reed AbelsonAdvertisement__________ECONOMYFinance ministers from the 19 eurozone countries hold their monthly meeting on Monday. The ministers could conclude a review of reforms in Greece and discuss ways of making its giant debt more manageable. Some ministers could push to ease austerity policies that have aroused populist discontent across the European Union.AdvertisementBut the formal agenda is most likely to be overshadowed by the referendum in Italy, after voters on Sunday rejected Prime Minister Matteo Renzi’s plan to streamline the government. The “no” vote could open the way to opponents of euro currency membership, which could deepen the crisis in the country’s banking system and possibly start another period of financial turmoil in the region.On Tuesday, the finance ministers from the nine European Union member states that don’t use the euro join the meeting in Brussels. They are scheduled to discuss steps to curb corporate tax avoidance and ways to strengthen a European Union investment plan. James KanterPlease verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The European Central Bank’s Governing Council will meet on Thursday and is expected to say that it will continue buying government bonds and other assets until September 2017, six months longer than previously planned. The extension of the asset purchases would be an attempt to keep market interest rates in the eurozone from rising along with rates in the United States and interfering with European growth. Mario Draghi, the president of the central bank, is to explain the decision at a news conference after the meeting. Jack EwingOn Monday, the private Institute for Supply Management will report the latest reading of its nonmanufacturing index. Analysts expect a slight increase in the I.S.M. Index to 55.5 percent from 54.8 percent in October, as the service sector continues to expand. Patricia CohenOn Tuesday, the Commerce Department will report data on the trade balance in October. Most analysts are expecting the trade deficit to widen to roughly $42 billion from its $36.4 billion level in September. Growth in exports was partly responsible for the healthy growth in the third quarter, but there was an unusual bump in soybean exports that is unlikely to be repeated. American producers saw exports climb as they rushed to fill the gap left by poor soybean harvests in South America. Patricia Cohen__________TELECOMMUNICATIONSThe top executives for AT&T and Time Warner will defend their proposed $85 billion merger before members of the Senate Judiciary Committee on Wednesday. The hearing is expected to reveal the temperature in Washington on big mergers under a Trump administration. Witnesses include AT&T’s chief executive, Randall L. Stephenson, and Time Warner’s chief executive, Jeffrey L. Bewkes.They will be asked to explain how the union of a video distribution and wireless powerhouse with a company that produces premium channels like HBO and CNN can be a good deal for consumers and not stymie competition in the telecom and media industries.The companies will argue that by combining, they will be able to provide an affordable streaming video service for wireless customers. The hearing’s celebrity witness is the internet entrepreneur and Dallas Mavericks owner Mark Cuban, who has voiced his support of the merger. Mr. Cuban has said that the combined company would be a good counterweight to powerful internet firms like Facebook and Google. Cecilia KangA version of this article appears in print on December 5, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Mexico to Sell Oil Blocks as Aetna Defends Merger.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.