By MATTHEW GOLDSTEIN and ALEXANDRA STEVENSONDEC. 2, 2016
A powerful federal consumer agency that could be muzzled under President-elect Donald J. Trump is showing no inclination of backing down yet.The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau filed a lawsuit on Tuesday in federal court in Michigan to require an investment firm that is a major player in the market for high-interest installment contracts for buying homes — called contracts for deed — to comply with an earlier demand for documents.The agency, which some Republicans in Congress have talked about reining in since Mr. Trump’s victory, filed the suit after the investment firm, Harbour Portfolio Advisors of Dallas, refused a request for documents as part of a civil investigation.In early November, the bureau confirmed it was investigating Harbour Portfolio after it made a public an order in which it rejected the investment firm’s formal objection to the agency’s document request, known as a civil investigative demand.AdvertisementEarly this year, The New York Times, in a front-page article, wrote about Harbour Portfolio and potential abuses in the contract for deed market.AdvertisementHarbour Portfolio bought more than 6,700 single-family homes after the financial crisis of 2008, most of them from Fannie Mae, a government-controlled mortgage finance firm, in bulk sales. Harbour paid $10,000 or less for most of the homes, which were foreclosed on during the financial crisis, and has sold them “as is” to consumers through long-term, high-interest installment contracts.The consumer bureau, according to the lawsuit, is trying to determine whether Harbour Portfolio’s business practices violated the Truth in Lending Act and other federal laws the agency is empowered to enforce.The documents in the suit detail the timeline of the investigation, which began in May, a few months after the article appeared in The Times.In June, investigators from the bureau interviewed Charles A. Vose III, the founder of Harbour Portfolio, at an investigational hearing, according to the agency’s suit. He testified about the contracts the firm uses and its practices and procedures.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But since then, Mr. Vose and his lawyers have appeared to stymie the bureau.In September, Harbour Portfolio said it would not comply with a formal bureau request for documents because “the bureau lacked authority over its activities” and argued the document request “imposed an undue burden.”Around that time, National Asset Advisors and a related firm, National Asset Mortgage, similarly notified the bureau that they, too, would not comply with the document request. Both are based in Columbia, S.C., and work closely with Harbour in collecting payments on contracts for deed and marketing its homes.The two firms also said some of the terms in the consumer bureau’s document request were unclear. The bureau is seeking to require those firms to also turnover documents.On Nov. 1, Richard Cordray, the bureau’s director, ordered Harbour, N.A.A. and N.A.M. to comply with a document request within 10 days. After it became clear that none would do so, the bureau went to federal court.AdvertisementA spokesman for the bureau declined to comment on the lawsuit.Lawyers for Harbour and N.A.A. declined to comment.The consumer bureau is proceeding with its investigation as it is dealing with fallout from an appellate court ruling in favor of PHH Corporation, a mortgage lender. That ruling found the bureau’s leadership structure was unconstitutional because it gave too much authority to Mr. Cordray. The appellate court temporarily vacated a unilateral decision by Mr. Cordray to subsequently increase a fine imposed against PHH by $103 million.The agency is asking for the entire U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit to review the ruling from a three-judge panel.A version of this article appears in print on December 3, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Consumer Agency Sues for Installment Contract Files.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »