DEC. 5, 2016
The anti-establishment sentiment that has roiled Britain and the United States has now thrown Italy into turmoil.Italian voters have firmly rejected constitutional changes championed by Prime Minister Matteo Renzi. Mr. Renzi, who had staked his political career on the outcome, said that he would resign.In a narrow sense, the vote was about changes to the Constitution that would have streamlined the government.But to the rest of the world, it was seen as a referendum on Mr. Renzi’s centrist government and as a barometer of populist sentiment in Europe, especially after Donald J. Trump’s victory in the United States presidential election.AdvertisementAnalysts have warned that instability caused by Mr. Renzi’s premature departure could result in yet another financial crisis in Italy. On Monday, the euro fell in Asian trading but recovered much of its losses in early European trading, while the yield on Italian government bonds rose.AdvertisementThe primary beneficiary of Mr. Renzi’s defeat is Italy’s anti-establishment Five Star Movement, a party that advocates a referendum on whether Italy should give up the euro.The vote may also affect the rescue of Monte dei Paschi di Siena, which was planning to raise 5 billion euros, or $5.3 billion, from investors, and influence policy-making at the European Central Bank.Those fearing the advance of populist forces could claim some respite, though.In Austria, voters rejected the far-right candidate for the largely ceremonial position of president.For Mr. Trump’s children, family and business have always been intertwined.Throwing politics in the mix, however, has raised significant doubts about whether Mr. Trump could successfully avoid conflicts of interest as president of the United States.The Trump Organization said that it was preparing an “immediate transfer of management” to Mr. Trump’s three eldest children — Donald Jr., 38; Ivanka, 35; and Eric, 32 — along with a team of executives.But the professional histories of the three children, who also serve on the presidential transition team, show how deeply the Trump family, Trump business and Trump politics are interwoven.Our columnist Andrew Ross Sorkin and his Times colleagues help you make sense of major business and policy headlines — and the power-brokers who shape them.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Take, for example, the Trump International Hotel in Washington.• The children each hold a stake in the lease that allows the organization to operate the hotel from the federal government’s Old Post Office Building in Washington.Advertisement• Mr. Trump, as president, will appoint the head of the General Services Administration, the government agency that manages the property, while his children oversee the hotel.“Giving to the Trump family would be seen by many foreign leaders as the way to get in with the Trump administration,” said Meredith McGehee, an adviser to the Campaign Legal Center, a nonprofit group. Ms. McGehee worried that companies might be tempted to direct business to the Trump children to curry favor with their father.With two big acquisitions, Masayoshi Son, the founder of SoftBank, has a clear goal: to prepare for the day when millions of everyday objects run on chips and tiny computers that talk to one another.After a brief retirement, Mr. Son:• Bought the British microchip designer ARM Holdings, whose products are at the core of most of the world’s smartphones, for $32 billion.• Formed a partnership with Saudi Arabia’s ruling family to create what could become the world’s largest technology investment fund.Whether he can achieve his grand vision is unclear, however.Mr. Son scored a big victory in his early investment in the Chinese e-commerce giant Alibaba Group, but his acquisition of the mobile phone carrier Sprint has so far resulted mostly in losses.“Son acts on instinct,” said Satoshi Shima, a former senior lieutenant to Mr. Son who is now a professor at Tama University. “It’s a genius instinct, but it’s not logic.”• Three Federal Reserve officials will speak later on Monday: William C. Dudley, president of the Federal Reserve of New York; Charles Evans, president of the Chicago Fed; and James Bullard, president of the St. Louis Fed.Advertisement• Mexico is holding its first auction of deepwater oil and gas blocks. Investors will be watching the results closely to see whether the country's efforts to overhaul its energy sector are a success.• The second of two proposed health insurance mega-mergers goes to trial in United States District Court for the District of Columbia. The $37 billion combination of Aetna and Humana, two of the nation’s largest insurers, is being challenged by the Justice Department as being bad for consumers.• The private Institute for Supply Management will report the latest reading of its nonmanufacturing index. Analysts expect a slight increase in the index to 55.5 percent, from 54.8 percent in October, as the service sector continues to expand.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.