AdvertisementSupported by'Bootstrapping'By Michael J. de la MercedSAN FRANCISCO — To fashion cognoscenti, Everlane is perhaps best known for its almost monastically plain button-down shirts and pants, stripped of excess.The same could be said of the online retailer’s financial structure, which is largely devoid of the big investment firms that loom large over many prominent start-ups. That is largely by design.Even as many start-ups have raced to raise billions of dollars in free-flowing venture capital — American companies collected $19 billion in the third quarter, up 68 percent from the period last year, according to Dow Jones VentureSource — some have decided to take a different tack.Instead of collecting as much money as possible, these businesses have exchanged huge war chests early on in their lives for more control over their destinies. Some have waited a long time to raise money: Atlassian, a maker of collaboration software, waited eight years before taking on its first venture capital investment, while Qualtrics, a data analytics provider, took a decade to bring in venture capital.Everlane has held just two seed money rounds and what the co-founder Michael Preysman described as one modest fund-raising round, all of which he tallied at under $20 million. (Among the investors are institutions like Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers, Betaworks and SV Angel, although the majority of the outside investors are individuals.) As a consequence, he and Everlane’s employees still own a majority of the company, though a representative for the retailer declined to elaborate.Running largely on money raised outside venture capital has long been known as “bootstrapping,” and as Anand Sanwal, a founder of the research firm CB Insights — itself financed by sales — points out, is the way most companies are created and financed.But in the hyper-buoyant world that is Silicon Valley, where it has been extraordinarily easy to attract multimillion-dollar checks, choosing to go it largely alone is a conscious — and often more difficult — road. The rewards can be enormous, though. When Mojang, the Swedish video game developer behind the hit Minecraft, sold itself to Microsoft for $2.5 billion last year, the company had never taken any outside money. Indeed, it had repeatedly rebuffed entreaties from determined suitors, including the former Facebook president Sean Parker, and instead financed itself on revenue from its games.That meant Microsoft’s hefty paycheck did not have to be divided among scores of investors. Markus Persson, the creator of Minecraft, instantly became a billionaire when the sale closed — and used some of his newfound wealth to buy a Beverly Hills mansion for some $70 million.From Wall Street to Washington and in the towers of academia, people are buzzing about what some say is the pernicious focus in corporate America on short-term profits.Independence is a huge selling point in shunning outside capital for as long as possible.“We can take decisions by going into a room and in 15 minutes we’re done,” Carl Manneh, one of Mojang’s founders, told Reuters in 2013.For Mr. Preysman, signs of what not to do abounded. Watching other retailers like the Gilt Groupe, which according to Crunchbase has raised $286 million, labor frantically to build their customer bases and sales at all costs to justify their fund-raising was instructive, he said.Perhaps the most prominent failure of such a strategy is Fab.com, a once-heralded online retailer whose valuation rose to $1 billion after it raised more than $325 million. It then struggled to make its own sales projections. The company’s board, including representatives from several major investment firms, voted in early 2013 to speed up sales through a shift in strategy — and soon burned through much of the start-up’s cash, according to Business Insider.Fab.com was forced to cut staff, and this last spring finally sold itself for a paltry $15 million.“They’re raising money to raise customers,” Mr. Preysman said of those companies. “They’re still not profitable, and some of them are starting to go under.”Or as Bill Gurley, the outspoken partner at Benchmark Capital, wrote in a blog post this year, “Companies are taking on huge burn rates to justify spending the capital they are raising in these enormous financings, putting their long-term viability in jeopardy.”Shunning outside capital meant that Everlane could pursue a strategy outside the standard venture-backed playbook. In particular, that meant spending far less on customer acquisition — principally marketing — than other retailers. Instead, Everlane decided to focus on word-of-mouth, playing off the company’s emphasis on so-called transparent pricing that details how much it costs to make its wares. Marketing events were often smaller, quirkier and almost defiantly not based on directly measurable metrics.“We do a lot of little things, a lot of small events, a lot of word-of-mouth,” Mr. Preysman said. “It’s had a much bigger impact.”Among those who admire bootstrapping entrepreneurs are the investors who find themselves pressing their noses against the window, trying to get in. Mike Abbott, a partner at Kleiner Perkins, said the bootstrappers had demonstrated an ability to “grind it out” with a resilience and discipline that being showered with cash could sometimes wash away.“The dirty secret is that a lot of the best companies don’t need much capital,” Asheem Chandna, a partner at the investment firm Greylock Partners, said. “We don’t see enough of that nowadays.”Advertisement