AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael J. de la MercedYears ago, Kevin J. Arquit and Steven A. Newborn worked side by side as top practitioners of antitrust law.Now the two men are reuniting — at Mr. Newborn’s current law firm, Weil, Gotshal & Manges.Weil is expected to announce late Tuesday that it has hired Mr. Arquit, currently employed by Simpson Thacher & Bartlett, to serve as co-head of Weil’s antitrust practice alongside Mr. Newborn.“We believe we’ll have the No. 1 destination antitrust practice in the U.S.,” Barry M. Wolf, Weil’s executive partner, said in a telephone interview.Mr. Arquit, who has led Simpson Thacher’s antitrust practice, is among the notable business competition lawyers in the country. He worked at the Federal Trade Commission from 1986 to 1992, serving as general counsel and then director of the antitrust regulator’s bureau of competition.The transactions he worked at Simpson Thacher include DirecTV’s $48.5 billion sale to AT&T, Lorillard’s $27 billion sale to Reynolds American and Sirius’s merger with XM Radio.“Kevin is one of the leading lights in antitrust,” said Robert A. Kindler, the global head of mergers and acquisitions at Morgan Stanley. “He has a unique combination of business judgment and technical skills. He is a great addition to Weil’s already strong antitrust franchise.”At the F.T.C., Mr. Arquit overlapped with Mr. Newborn, who served as a director of litigation. It was Mr. Arquit who persuaded Mr. Newborn to leave the government agency and join him at what was then a law firm called Rogers & Wells, where the two led an antitrust team that also included Jim Egan Jr., Carrie C. Mahan, Laura A. Wilkinson and John M. Sipple Jr. All of those lawyers now work at Weil.Rogers & Wells merged with the British law firm Clifford Chance in 2000. Two years later, Mr. Arquit decamped to Simpson Thacher, and, in 2003, Mr. Newborn left for Weil.Weil’s antitrust practice itself has a long history, dating back to its senior partner Ira M. Millstein, one of Wall Street’s top legal advisers. Under Mr. Newborn, the firm has worked on antitrust matters including Biomet’s sale to Zimmer Holdings and Allergan’s $40 billion sale of its generic drug business to Teva Pharmaceuticals.Mr. Arquit and Mr. Newborn stayed friends and kept in contact over the years. But a few months ago, discussions between the two about bringing Mr. Arquit on board at Weil became more serious, and Mr. Newborn brought up the idea with Mr. Wolf.Weil’s partners signed on, believing that the new hire would go hand in hand with their corporate practice overseen by Michael J. Aiello. Last year, the firm ranked ninth in advising on global announced deals by volume, with $538 billion worth of transactions, according to data from Bloomberg.“Our M&A practice under Mike Aiello’s leadership is off the charts,” Mr. Wolf said.Mr. Arquit is expected to start at Weil next month.Advertisement