By ZACH WICHTERDEC. 4, 2016
Robert Bennett, who guided the transformation of a Boston television station into an uncommon font of original programming and went on to run the nation’s largest broadcast station group, died on Tuesday in Newport Beach, Calif. He was 89.His death was confirmed by Paul Rich, a longtime friend and business partner.In 1971, Mr. Bennett was overseeing WNEW-TV, a successful local station in New York City, but, as he later recalled, he was getting bored. “I was very anxious to do more live television,” he told The New York Times in a 1981 interview. And a new opportunity arose.A group in Boston was trying to gain control of the license for Channel 5, which was then WHDH, and promised to create 50 hours of original programming each week. Mr. Bennett joined the group, Boston Broadcasters Inc., after securing a guarantee of creative control and an ownership stake in the station should it be granted the license.Boston Broadcasters acquired the station in 1972, WHDH became WCVB, and Mr. Bennett began work to make good on the group’s promise of original programming.AdvertisementWhile other local stations were making big profits carrying reruns, he turned to homegrown content. Although it was an ABC affiliate, the station far surpassed its promise on original programming, broadcasting as much as 62 hours each week — about 30 percent of its content — at a time when most local stations devoted less than 10 percent of their airtime to shows produced in-house.WCVB’s projects included “Summer Solstice,” a made-for-television movie starring Henry Fonda, and “Miller’s Court,” a weekly talk show hosted by the Harvard law professor Arthur R. Miller.In many cases the station was able to produce shows for less than the cost of licensing reruns. WCVB made episodes of “Park Street Under” — a situation comedy about a Boston bar that was said to have inspired the NBC hit “Cheers” — for $10,000 each. The going rate for “Laverne & Shirley” reruns at that time was $30,000 each.Many WCVB shows went into syndication, and Boston Broadcasters eventually opened a division dedicated to selling the station’s content worldwide.During Mr. Bennett’s tenure at the station, the influential television producer Norman Lear, who worked with him on syndicating the WCVB show “The Baxters,” told The Times, “Bob has to be the best local broadcaster in the nation.” By 1981, the station’s profitability was said to be competitive with that of most major television stations.AdvertisementLater that year, WCVB was sold to Metromedia, then the nation’s largest broadcast station group, for $220 million, a record sum for the sale of a local TV station at the time.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.After the sale, Mr. Bennett became president of Metromedia Broadcasting and a partner in Metromedia Inc. From 1983 to 1985, he ran the company’s station group.Robert Martin Bennett was born on April 17, 1927, in Pittsburgh. After graduating from Staunton Military Academy in 1946, he served in the Army and subsequently took courses at the University of California, Los Angeles, and the University of Southern California, although he did not receive a degree from either.He began his broadcast career in 1948 as a page at CBS Radio in Hollywood. In 1952, he joined KTTV in Los Angeles as a salesman, eventually rising to vice president and director of sales, a position he held from 1958 to 1966. The station was acquired by Metromedia during his tenure.Mr. Bennett went on to become vice president and general manager of Metromedia’s Washington station, WTTG. He moved to WNEW, another Metromedia property, in 1969.His association with WCVB and Metromedia ended in 1985, when Rupert Murdoch acquired Metromedia’s properties, which would eventually be the foundation of the Fox network.Mr. Bennett then became the head of television station acquisitions for New World Entertainment. He went on to hold positions in a variety of media and real estate ventures, including chairman of Bennett Productions, run by his son, Casey.His son survives him, as do his wife of 66 years, the former Marjie Albright; a daughter, Kelly Bennett; and a grandson. He lived in Newport Beach.Describing the impact of WCVB in its formative years, Mr. Lear, in 1981, praised Mr. Bennett for producing programming that helped viewers understand the world around them. “It’s a lot easier for station executives to push a button than develop new material,” he said. “If WCVB is winning in the numbers, then they’re proof that caring pays off.”A version of this article appears in print on December 5, 2016, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Robert Bennett, 89, Creator  of Original TV Fare, Is Dead.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.