AdvertisementSupported byBy Alexandra StevensonFor decades, corporate America rejected activist investors, accusing them of being corporate raiders out to make a quick buck. But these days, some of America’s biggest companies are trying to think more like them.When United Technologies weighed the possibility of selling or spinning off its Sikorsky Aircraft helicopter business this year, its chief executive went on television to explain why.“As I told both our board and our shareholders, I want to be the activist within,” Gregory J. Hayes, the chief executive, told CNBC, adding that he would prefer this to “worrying about somebody coming from outside.” Several months later, United Technologies sold Sikorsky to Lockheed Martin for $9 billion.In making that move, Mr. Hayes was taking a page out of the activist investor’s playbook: Examine the various businesses of a company to determine whether it is more valuable as a whole or as parts.Activist hedge funds that buy stakes in companies with the intention of agitating for change are not going away. And as they swell in numbers and size — with more than $129 billion in assets today, according to research from HFR — corporations have found a new way to deal with them by adopting some of their methods.“We have a number of corporate clients where we have a discussion with management and sometimes at the board level about how to think like an activist,” said Bruce H. Goldfarb, the chief executive of Okapi Partners, a proxy solicitation firm that advises corporations and shareholders, including activist investors, on voting matters and proxy fights.Wall Street’s biggest banks have also begun to coach companies on how to deal with activists. In some cases, lawyers for activist investors have been hired away to work for the other side. This summer, David Rosewater, a prominent lawyer at Schulte Roth & Zabel, left to join a division of Morgan Stanley as a managing director specializing in corporate defense. And even activist investors themselves have been hired as consultants to help coach companies through simulations of an activist attack.“You basically have investment banks and legal advisers that defend companies going in and asking: If an activist looked at this company, what would they do?” said Steve Wolosky, a partner at Olshan Frome Wolosky. “Then they make game theory calculations.”An entire cottage industry has emerged in response to the growing prevalence and popularity of activism. Last year, the number of companies that were targeted by activists reached a high of 459, according to a report by Schulte Roth & Zabel and Activist Insight.Activists are investors who buy large numbers of a public company’s shares — sometimes also obtaining seats on its board — with the hope of making significant changes that will enhance the company’s value and benefit them in turn. In the past, targets have included companies that were being mismanaged, had outsize expenses or might have fared better as private entities rather than public ones. More recently, activists have also aimed at bigger companies that are not mismanaged but could improve operations in one way or another.From Wall Street to Washington and in the towers of academia, people are buzzing about what some say is the pernicious focus in corporate America on short-term profits.Typically, activist investors will announce their intentions in a filing to the Securities and Exchange Commission after they have bought 5 percent or more of a company’s stock. Increasingly, activists have used other tactics like talking to the news media and creating websites where they can publish “white papers” or letters to management.The activist strategy has become so popular that the uninitiated have started activist funds. Nearly half of the activists that have begun campaigns this year are doing so for the first time, according to research by Olshan Frome Wolosky.“I think the success of seasoned activists has encouraged both traditional hedge funds and newly formed activist investors that a public campaign can be successful,” Mr. Wolosky added.As the prevalence of activist investors in publicly listed companies has increased in recent years, a number of battles have also become less contentious. The amount of time it takes for a company to settle with an activist investor that is seeking a seat on the company’s board has decreased to 56 days on average, from 74 days just three years ago, according to the report by Schulte Roth & Zabel.Activist investors have worked to soften their images. Daniel S. Loeb, for example, was once famous for his poison-tip penned letters that disparaged many chief executives. In 2013, Mr. Loeb called Sotheby’s “an old master painting in desperate need of restoration,” and criticized it for a “lack of leadership and strategic vision at its highest levels.”These days, Mr. Loeb has focused on striking a more cordial note. In his most recent activist campaign in Baxter International, the medical products maker, Mr. Loeb said he was “most impressed” with the company’s willingness to consider putting new directors on the board as it searched for a successor to Robert L. Parkinson Jr., Baxter’s longtime chief executive.Others have changed their tone, too. “I think it’s a reflection that activists that go after midcapitalization and large-capitalization companies need the support of institutional investors, and they don’t like those ad hominem attacks,” said Marc Weingarten, a partner at Schulte Roth & Zabel. “That’s why they cleaned up their act.”Speaking at a hedge fund conference in Manhattan this year, the activist investor Nelson Peltz sought to dispel the notion that activists were self-serving. “And what really troubles me is all the mudslinging that goes on to activists. They want to say that we’re greenmailers,” Mr. Peltz said, referring to the practice of investors pressuring management to buy them out of the stock. “They want to say that we’re the raiders of the ’80s. It’s not true.”Fresh from a bitter public battle with the board at DuPont, Mr. Peltz’s hedge fund Trian Fund Management announced in October that it had a $2.5 billion stake in General Electric. In its letter, Trian emphasized its intentions for a “constructive” dialogue and sought to highlight that Mr. Peltz, the founder of Trian, and Jeffrey R. Immelt, the chief executive of G.E., had a good relationship.In May, Trian lost a proxy battle with DuPont, the chemical maker, failing to win enough votes from shareholders to take four seats on the company’s board. It was a stinging defeat after a protracted fight in which each side tried to discredit the other.But on the same day that Trian announced its new stake in G.E., it won a small victory in its DuPont campaign. Ellen J. Kullman, DuPont’s chief executive, announced that she would step down.Advertisement