
Another View By                     
MICHAEL HASENSTAB

DEC. 6, 2016
The United States should not turn away from Latin America as many populist contingents, both Republican and Democratic, have suggested. Instead, we would be well served to model our economic policy off the experiences of an unlikely economic role model: Argentina.For the last decade, the populist policies of the Kirchner regimes in Argentina led to inflation of over 40 percent, a painful recession, high unemployment and social unrest.Worryingly, the four main economic policies that defined Argentina’s lost decade of populism have been adopted or are actively being considered in some form or other in Washington: protectionist trade policies, aggressively loose central bank policy, oppressive government regulations and a government spending spree.First, protectionist policies in Argentina destroyed the very agricultural and manufacturing heartland they were intended to help. The aim was to become self-reliant on domestic production and penalize those who exported or imported goods. Soy export tariffs, for example, eventually reached 50 percent, terminally crippling the crown jewel of Argentina’s once thriving agricultural sector.AdvertisementBy the same token, import restrictions started small-scale trade wars, and by 2015 trade conflicts erupted with more than 40 different countries. This left the domestic agricultural and manufacturing sectors in disarray. As recently as 2002, Argentina had a trade surplus of 16 percent of gross domestic product, but after more than a decade of protectionism, the entire surplus was erased, and 2015 ended in a deficit.AdvertisementSecond, looking for easy sources of growth and debt financing, the government turned to the central bank. Destroying its supposed independence, the government influenced it to aggressively loosen policy. The result: Inflation exceeded 40 percent, hurting growth instead of helping it.Third, oppressive regulations strangled the private sector. The government began controlling things like the price of gas, the value of the exchange rate and nationalization of the private pension system. Artificially distorted prices at first led industry to stop new investment and, later, to stop production altogether. Huge shortages developed. For example, although Argentina has significant natural energy resources, government regulation created huge energy deficits because artificially set prices and burdensome regulation made private investment completely infeasible.An adversarial position toward the financial services industry caused problems like prolonged disputes with creditors and the nationalization of private companies — all of which shut Argentina off from international capital markets.Finally, with the private sector economy in shambles, the government embarked on a spending spree in an attempt to bolster growth. In 2003, when its populist fiscal policies first came into force, the government spent 93 billion pesos annually. By 2015, this soared to about 2.4 trillion pesos annually, mostly in the form of income transfers.While this initially bought popular support, the government eventually ran out of money with little to show for its largess, as average annual G.D.P. growth was a meager 0.3 percent between 2011 and 2015.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.With economic activity at a standstill, unemployment surging and inflation spiraling out of control, the populist regime finally lost the support it had mortgaged the future to maintain. In 2015, the country endorsed the end of populism, electing President Mauricio Macri to put into effect orthodox economic policy and bring the lost decade to a close.Export tariffs and price controls have begun to be lifted, and the adversarial approach to private sector investors has been reversed. Exports can now bring in much-needed foreign currency, help stabilize the value of the peso over the long term and lower food prices.Once ostracized, Argentina just this year has attracted over $20 billion in foreign investment into the government bond market alone. Investments in the private sector are also underway.AdvertisementA highly credible central bank governor and board have been put in place and allowed to exercise independent monetary policy. Raising the central bank reference rate to 38 percent demonstrates technical understanding of what is required to fight inflation, and highlights the central bank’s newfound ability to pursue policies that may be politically unpopular but are wholly necessary to ensure long-term macro stability. The government has also adopted prudently tight fiscal policies; an overhaul package recently passed the lower house with a two-thirds majority.Credible fiscal and monetary policy has, for the first time, begun to anchor and bring down inflation expectations, thus lowering domestic interest rates. This has allowed the domestic financial market to re-emerge and begin to both raise and deploy capital to an economy starved of investment.While Argentina’s future looks bright, arriving at this new regime required a long, painful economic and social crisis.The United States can choose to follow the path of Argentina’s failed populist experiment to varying degrees. Or, we can use the experience of Argentina as a crystal ball and avoid the damaging consequences of populist economic policies.We can choose instead to adopt the remedies Argentina found necessary to begin to create jobs and raise living standards: Eliminate heavy-handed government intervention, ensure we have an outward-looking trade policy, follow fiscally and monetarily prudent policies and promote, rather than stymie, private sector investment.Dr. Michael Hasenstab is executive vice president, portfolio manager and chief investment officer of Templeton Global Macro.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »