By RACHEL ABRAMSNOV. 4, 2015
The discount flooring retailer Lumber Liquidators selected a new chief executive on Wednesday as the company struggled to recover from a major safety scandal that has badly damaged its stock price and sales.The board selected one of its longtime directors, John M. Presley, to lead the company beginning Nov. 16. He will succeed Lumber Liquidators’ founder, Thomas D. Sullivan, who has served as the acting chief since May 21. Mr. Sullivan will work as a special adviser to Mr. Presley, who will remain on the board, according to a news release.Mr. Sullivan replaced Robert M. Lynch, who stepped down unexpectedly  in May after accusations that the company had sold laminate flooring with potentially dangerous levels of formaldehyde.Shares of Lumber Liquidators have plummeted more than 70 percent this year as the retailer has battled a public relations crisis.AdvertisementIn March, the CBS program “60 Minutes” accused the company of selling Chinese-made laminate flooring that exceeded California’s emission standards for formaldehyde. The Consumer Product Safety Commission soon opened an investigation. The retailer also faces a number of lawsuits from consumers.AdvertisementLast month, Lumber Liquidators announced that it would plead guilty to criminal charges from the Justice Department that it had sold illegally harvested timber and pay $10 million in fines.“We’re encouraged that they’re starting to make progress on that list of issues, but there are still a number of other items that this company needs to work through,” said Bradley B. Thomas, an analyst with KeyBanc Capital Markets. “They’ll need to work on P.R. and marketing to reassure the customers that they have a product that is trustworthy.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.On Wednesday, the company also announced that net sales fell more than 11 percent in the third quarter, to $236.1 million. It also announced a net loss of $8.5 million, or 31 cents a share, in contrast to net income of $15.7 million, or 58 cents a share, in the same period last year.The company has also been the target of short-sellers, investors who bet against a company’s stock. Out of about 27 million outstanding shares, nearly 11 million were short, Mr. Thomas said.Shares of Lumber Liquidators rose more than 10 percent on Wednesday.“Over the years I have come to see just how committed our employees are — and I know that together, we have the drive and the vision to succeed and enter the next chapter of our company’s exciting future as we execute our turnaround,” Mr. Presley said in the statement about his appointment. The company declined to make him available for an interview.Mr. Presley has been a director for Lumber Liquidators since April 2006, and he was appointed chairman in May. Before that, he had served as the chief executive at First Capital Bancorp since 2008. He has also held top positions at financial services companies, including Marshall & Ilsley, National Commerce Financial Corporation and First Market Bank, according to the statement.Nancy M. Taylor, a member of the board since April 2014, will succeed Mr. Presley as independent chairwoman of the board.A version of this article appears in print on November 5, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Lumber Liquidators Names a Longtime Director as Chief .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.