By KEITH BRADSHERDEC. 6, 2016
SHANGHAI — One of China’s best-known financiers, sometimes called his country’s equivalent to Carl C. Icahn, has pleaded guilty to insider trading and stock price manipulation, in a case that forms part of a broader nationwide push against financial improprieties.The guilty plea, announced by a Chinese court on Tuesday, comes in a prosecution that began with a memorable arrest. On Nov. 1 last year, Chinese police officers sealed off the 22-mile Hangzhou Bay Bridge, one of the world’s longest, for half an hour before finding and detaining the financier, Xu Xiang, who was driving home from his grandmother’s 100th birthday party.The plea follows a series of signals from China’s leaders that they are stepping up investigations of financial improprieties. Allegations of such activities are central to three big campaigns underway in China.They include an anticorruption drive that has already led to the arrest of more than 100,000 officials; a push to clean up financial markets after last year’s stock market crash that has produced a series of investigations of traders, executives and regulators; and an effort to slow or halt large outflows of money from China through illegal or semi-legal channels.AdvertisementSteve Vickers, a political risk consultant in Hong Kong, predicted that Mr. Xu’s court case would prove a harbinger of other financial prosecutions. “I would think you’ll see a whole series of cases,” he said.AdvertisementMr. Xu, sometimes nicknamed Big Xu, was the reclusive owner of Zexi Investment, a Shanghai-based firm with financial results that far outperformed its rivals during the years up to and even after China’s stock market bubble burst in the summer of 2015. He has been likened to Mr. Icahn for his vigorous assertion of minority shareholder rights.The Hurun Report, a monthly magazine based in Shanghai that tracks the wealth of China’s richest people, estimated last year that Mr. Xu and his relatives were worth $2.2 billion. Mr. Xu was a celebrity investor when share prices were more than doubling from late 2014 through mid-June of last year, drawing in millions of novice investors who then lost their savings in the ensuing crash.Share prices eventually stabilized at a little more than half their peak, but only after the Chinese government poured tens of billions of dollars into buying large blocks of shares in many of the country’s biggest and most liquid stocks. The market intervention partly undid the government’s efforts in previous years to privatize part of its huge holdings of large Chinese enterprises.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The debacle drew angry calls on social media for the authorities to investigate prominent traders, especially those like Mr. Xu who seemed to have avoided losses.Zexi Investment has largely ceased to function. The Chinese State Administration for Industry and Commerce says on its website that the firm has been in a state of “abnormal management” since Nov. 5 last year, four days after Mr. Xu’s arrest. While Zexi still has a website, it shows a phone number that has been disconnected.The Intermediate People’s Court in the coastal city of Qingdao, in eastern China, which has handled Mr. Xu’s case, said it had not decided whether to accept the plea, the next step in the legal process. State-controlled news media have said that Mr. Xu could receive up to a decade in prison if the guilty plea is endorsed.The court’s statement said that it had heard evidence that Mr. Xu had helped set up and secretly control about 100 securities accounts. They were mostly registered in the names of friends, employees and relatives, and Mr. Xu received a portion of the profit from the coordinated trading of the accounts, the court said.Mr. Xu also profited from conspiring with top executives at 13 companies to control the timing and content of favorable corporate announcements, the court said. Two co-defendants with Mr. Xu also pleaded guilty.According to Chinese news media, Mr. Xu’s legal representative in the case was Qian Lieyang, one of China’s most famous lawyers for prominent and politically connected defendants. Mr. Qian said that he would not comment before the court decided whether to accept the plea.A version of this article appears in print on December 7, 2016, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Star Investor in China Pleads Guilty to Misdeeds.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.