AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben SisarioFor the last two years, one of the most arresting stories in the concert business has been the decline of SFX Entertainment, which tried to build a global network of dance-music festivals but collapsed and went bankrupt.SFX emerged from bankruptcy protection last week, with its debt load reduced by about $400 million, and this week it announced a new name and leadership. The new company, LiveStyle, will be led by Randy Phillips, the former chief executive of the concert company AEG Live, and there will be a commitment to something akin to its original mission of being “the world’s largest electronic music event producer,” according to the announcement, though it offered few other details.Armed with “a recapitalized financial structure and an incredibly supportive board, we will build LiveStyle into an essential company in the live entertainment sector,” Mr. Phillips said in a statement on Tuesday.According to its statement, LiveStyle will be based in Los Angeles and retain control of some of SFX’s flagship properties, including the Tomorrowland and Electric Zoo festivals, as well as the online music store Beatport and the ticketing service Paylogic.SFX, founded in 2012 by the media mogul Robert F.X. Sillerman, had an ambitious plan to capitalize on the craze for electronic dance music, with Mr. Sillerman pledging to spend $1 billion to create a new festival empire to challenge the two dominant concert conglomerates, AEG Live and Live Nation Entertainment. A crucial part of Mr. Sillerman’s plan was to use the festival audience to attract sales of advertising and corporate sponsorship.SFX went public in 2013 at a valuation of just over $1 billion. But problems quickly began to emerge, with many in the industry complaining that the company had overpaid for a portfolio of festivals that did not fit well together. The company’s growth slowed, and Mr. Sillerman’s eccentric personal style — at one point a video of him making rude gestures became public — rattled Wall Street analysts.Mr. Sillerman submitted a takeover offer in early 2015, but the company’s stock plunged as investors doubted his ability to make good on the deal. The company sold some assets, including management and marketing firms, but it still has the largest portfolio of electronic festivals. It declared bankruptcy in February.The new leadership of LiveStyle includes Charles Ciongoli as executive vice president and chief financial officer, and Andrew Axelrod of Axar Capital Management, one of the company’s leading investors, as chairman of the board.Mr. Sillerman resigned as chief executive of the company in March, but he remains the target of lawsuits by former investors over his failed takeover bid.Advertisement