AdvertisementSupported byBy Binyamin AppelbaumWASHINGTON — The Federal Reserve could raise its benchmark interest rate in December as long as economic growth continues, two senior Fed officials said on Wednesday, hammering that message in repeated public remarks.The economy is “performing well,” Janet L. Yellen, the Fed chairwoman, told the House Financial Services Committee Wednesday morning, adding that “it could be appropriate” to raise rates at the Fed’s final policy meeting of the year in mid-December. No decision has been made, she stressed.The Fed’s messaging campaign made an impression on investors who have been slow to accept that the Fed may finally be ready to raise rates. Yields on two-year Treasury securities, closely tied to expectations about Fed policy, climbed to 0.84 percent, the highest level since the spring of 2011.In effect, that means the Fed is already starting to tighten financial conditions even as officials wrestle over how soon to end a stretch of nearly seven years of near-zero short-term rates.The Fed’s stimulus campaign has encouraged borrowing and risk-taking, which officials say have contributed to economic recovery and job growth. Those benefits will diminish as rates rise.Ms. Yellen emphasized that the Fed’s timing would rest on the next few rounds of economic data, beginning on Friday with the government’s October employment report.“At this point, I see the U.S. economy as performing well,” she said, noting the strength of domestic spending. Volatility in global financial markets has also diminished, and the recent deal to raise the federal debt ceiling averted a fiscal showdown, removing two threats to continued growth. If the good news continues, she said, “December would be a live possibility.”Her remarks were echoed a few hours later by William C. Dudley, the president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. “I fully agree with the chair,” he told reporters at a news conference in New York. “It is a live possibility, but let’s see what the data shows.”Officials said the economy was strong enough to keep growing with a little less help from the central bank. They said rates would rise slowly, but borrowing costs already have started to climb.While the timing of an increase has captivated markets, Ms. Yellen also emphasized that the path of rate increases over the next several years would be more economically significant. The Fed has said it plans to raise rates more slowly than during previous periods of economic growth because the pace of expansion has been unusually weak.“I know there’s a great deal of focus on the initial move,” Ms. Yellen said. “But markets and the public should be thinking about the entire path of policy rates over time.”The Fed faces mounting political pressure as the decision approaches. Republicans charge that the Fed has waited too long to raise rates, overstimulating financial markets. Some economists and business leaders argue that the economy would benefit from a rate increase.Donald J. Trump, the Republican presidential candidate, charged on Tuesday that Ms. Yellen was doing the bidding of the Obama administration by keeping rates low, to delay the onset of “a lot of bad things.”Democrats say that low rates are still helping create jobs and that the Fed should continue its campaign until it sees evidence of inflationary pressures.Representative Brad Sherman, a California Democrat, went beyond that standard argument on Wednesday, telling Ms. Yellen that God also did not want the Fed to raise rates until next spring, because that was the proper time of year for things to rise from the ground.“If you want to be good with the Almighty, you might want to delay until May,” Mr. Sherman joked with Ms. Yellen, drawing snickers and disbelieving looks from other committee members.To make sure he was not being taken too seriously, he posted on Twitter, “Don’t actually think God has an opinion on monetary policy, but if She did, She would agree that the FOMC shouldn’t increase rates in winter.”Ms. Yellen’s primary concern at the moment, however, is neither God nor President Obama, but wresting a consensus from the members of her own committee, some of whom argue there is no harm in waiting until next year, while others insist the Fed should have moved already.More than seven years ago the Federal Reserve put its benchmark interest rate close to zero, as a way to bolster the economy. But that policy is about to change, perhaps this week.She has staked a middle ground, arguing that the Fed should start moving soon because monetary policy acts gradually and inflation will begin to rise as growth continues.Ms. Yellen and other Fed officials have grown convinced that the tepid pace of growth is not likely to improve much. The Fed has repeatedly reduced its estimates of the postcrisis capacity of the economy, and the latest round of reductions, published last month, has pushed that ceiling almost all the way down to the level of current growth.Fed officials make their own economic forecasts, separate from that staff forecast, but Ms. Yellen’s comments on Wednesday suggested that she broadly agreed. “I see underutilization of labor resources as having diminished significantly since earlier in the year,” she said.Inflation generally increases as unemployment falls. Fed officials have been surprised by the weakness of inflation, but they continue to expect that pattern, known as the Phillips Curve, to reassert itself.“It’ll be back,” Stanley Fischer, the Fed’s vice chairman, said at a separate public appearance Wednesday evening. “I believe we’ll see it. The Phillips Curve will come back.”However, in a nod to Fed officials who note the absence of inflationary pressure, Ms. Yellen said that the pace of subsequent rate increases would depend on the reality of future inflation.Ms. Yellen was speaking at a hearing about financial regulation, and most of the questions focused on that. Congress in 2010 created the position of vice chairman for regulation at the Fed and required that person to report regularly. But the Obama administration has not filled the position; Ms. Yellen testified instead.In her prepared remarks, Ms. Yellen said new regulations after the 2008 financial crisis had made the system, and the largest companies, healthier and stronger.“I hope you will take away from my testimony just how much has changed,” she said.Republicans questioned Ms. Yellen both on the details of individual regulations and on what they said had become, in aggregate, an unnecessarily large and intrusive burden.“It seems like there are many new regulations, and they’re all driving at the same thing,” said Representative Randy Neugebauer, Republican of Texas. He and other representatives pressed Ms. Yellen to conduct an analysis of the aggregate costs and benefits of recent regulatory changes.videoAdvertisement