By CHAD BRAYDEC. 7, 2016
LONDON — Linde of Germany said on Wednesday that it would resume talks over a potential merger with Praxair, an American rival, after ending discussions in September over a deal to bring together two of the world’s largest suppliers of industrial-gas products.Combining the companies would create a giant in the industry with more than $30 billion in annual revenue and a market capitalization of more than $60 billion.Linde’s executive board, after a consultation with its supervisory board, “has decided to resume talks over the essential terms of a potential merger of equals between the two companies,” the company said in a news release. “All members of the supervisory board support resuming the talks.”Praxair, which is based in Danbury, Conn., confirmed last week that it had approached Linde about resuming discussions.AdvertisementOn Wednesday, Linde also said that Aldo Belloni would replace Wolfgang Büchele as chief executive. Mr. Belloni served on the company’s executive board from 2000 to 2014.AdvertisementThe day after the merger talks collapsed, Linde said that its chief financial officer would step down immediately and Mr. Büchele would leave next year in a management shake-up at the company.“With the resumption of the talks, a successful merger is now drawing near,” Mr. Büchele said in a statement. “With a succession plan in place, the necessary continuity is assured without interruption for the demanding tasks of the coming months.”News of the renewed talks sent Linde’s shares up about 2 percent in afternoon trading in Frankfurt on Wednesday. Praxair shares were up about 1 percent in early trading in New York.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In August, Linde, which is based in Munich, confirmed that it was in preliminary talks with Praxair, but it said at the time that the discussions had not “resulted in any concrete results or agreement yet” and that it was not “foreseeable whether there will be any kind of transaction.”Linde called off the talks in September, saying that shareholder representatives on its supervisory board, along with its chief executive, had recommended that the company terminate the discussions.The merger discussions came after Air Liquide, a French industrial-gas producer, completed its acquisition in May of Airgas for more than $10 billion.Praxair’s main products include oxygen, carbon dioxide and helium. It also manufactures equipment to produce industrial gases. The company generated $10.8 billion in sales in 2015 and has about 26,000 employees in more than 50 countries.Linde has three divisions focused on industrial gases, engineering and supply chain services. Its gas division concentrates on industrial and medical gases, including oxygen, nitrogen and argon.The company generated 17.9 billion euros, or about $19.2 billion, in revenue in 2015 and has about 64,000 employees in more than 100 countries.Follow Chad Bray on Twitter @Chadbray.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.