AdvertisementSupported byBy Landon Thomas Jr.Bearded and tanned, Peter S. Kraus, the chief executive of AllianceBernstein, strode with assurance into a Midtown Manhattan conference room full of financial advisers from a large investment bank.He was there to pitch them on Alliance mutual funds and promote the expertise of his stock and bond experts who manage these investment pools.But the financial advisers had been doing a nice little business ignoring these types of actively managed funds and steering their clients into cheaper, index-tracking exchange-traded funds, thank you very much.So Mr. Kraus had a gloomy message for those dazzled by the ascent of E.T.F.s.“Let me bring it down to reality,” Mr. Kraus said. “You guys woke up one morning in August and the Dow was down 1,090 points. And on that day a $40 billion E.T.F. traded at a 30 percent discount.Mr. Kraus, who is 63 and spent 22 years at Goldman Sachs, wore a dark blue suit and a pink shirt that he matched with a similarly colored tie and a pink polka dotted Swatch. He addressed his audience in a cocksure manner that is often seen in Goldman executives who, failing to rise to the top there, move on to firms with a lesser pedigree.“That should never happen, and if your client traded on that day, you will never get that back. Never. These funds may have low fees but they are not safe, and your clients need to understand that.”Mr. Kraus, as an active investor losing market share to E.T.F.s, has an open bias in this debate — as he freely admits.It is also true that he has not been the only person issuing such warnings.As the E.T.F. industry has grown (with close to $3 trillion under management globally, there is as much money is invested in E.T.F.s as there is in hedge funds), so have concerns that too much money has been lured into hard-to-trade areas of the market and into risky investment strategies.Critics have included Stanley Fischer, vice chairman at the Federal Reserve, and investors like Carl C. Icahn and Howard Marks. And their complaint has been consistent: What happens if a wave of selling hits these funds, and investors can’t get their money back?The concern stems from the view that a rush of money into funds that promise instant liquidity is favoring those with a short-term, trading-driven market outlook as opposed to the patient, longer-term perspective espoused by buy-and-hold investors.The stock market swings in recent weeks have heightened these fears.For example, large E.T.F.s promise immediate liquidity in illiquid areas — such as emerging-market bonds, leveraged loans and credit-default swaps.Also on offer are funds that borrow three times the amount of their assets to bet on various markets going up or down in value.AllianceBernstein, or AB as the firm has recently rebranded itself, represents the opposite of this trend: It is an old-school money manager that offers, for a fee, a range of stock and bond funds that promise to beat benchmark stock or bond indexes.The problem is that since 2010 many of the so-called active funds offered by AB and its peers have trailed their benchmarks, not least offerings that invest in large American companies in the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index.As a result, assets have steadily flowed from fund companies with an active orientation like Fidelity, T. Rowe Price and Franklin Templeton to larger firms like BlackRock and Vanguard that specialize in passive investment styles.For example, the firm’s assets under management remain broadly where they were when Mr. Kraus was hired to revive the firm’s fortunes in December 2008 — $463 billion. In a business that prizes asset growth above all else, that is not necessarily a track record to brag about.Of course, actively managed mutual funds still make up two-thirds of the mutual fund market. But it’s the increasing size and growth of the passive fund market that Mr. Kraus sees as a threat.From Wall Street to Washington and in the towers of academia, people are buzzing about what some say is the pernicious focus in corporate America on short-term profits.“If you absorb too much liquidity, there is just not enough grease to make the wheel work,” Mr. Kraus said to the brokers. “We have seen much higher volatility and much faster price reactions over the past few years, and the main reason is this shift from active to passive investing.”While finance chiefs often criticize their peers behind closed doors, it is rare for a chief executive to raise pointed questions about a rival’s business model openly.When Mr. Kraus says that the dominance of Vanguard and BlackRock, whose passively managed funds amount to more than $4 trillion, is a risk for investors, people — and the firms — take notice.Vanguard a threat to the market?Joel M. Dickson, a senior executive within the indexing giant’s strategy unit, has been on the receiving end of many complaints and criticisms from beaten-down active managers, but he said this broke new ground.“E.T.F.s reflect the market environment; they do not dictate it,” Mr. Dickson said in an interview at a Morningstar conference for E.T.F.s last month. “We are just agents for our 20 million investors who are making their own investment decisions.”And Laurence D. Fink, the chief executive of BlackRock, by far the largest E.T.F. provider, rejects Mr. Kraus’s contention that E.T.F.s will experience more sharp price drops as they did in August.“We didn’t have the problem — this was a market structure problem,” Mr. Fink said. “Aug. 24 was a big event, but 90 minutes later everything was fine.”Some of BlackRock’s largest E.T.F.s plummeted from 25 to 35 percent on that day — large moves for funds containing more than $60 billion in investor assets.BlackRock has issued a research paper that concludes that the sharp price drops were the result of panic selling by investors and a lack of trading information, which prevented market makers from coming in as buyers to support prices.For all the eyebrows that Mr. Kraus is raising for his anti-E.T.F. crusade, he may be better known for his lucrative job-hopping spree in 2008.In March of that year, Mr. Kraus retired from his post as co-head of Goldman’s asset management division, not long after some of the firm’s largest hedge funds experienced sharp falls in 2007.In September, Mr. Kraus joined Merrill Lynch at the behest of his good friend from Goldman, John A. Thain, then chief executive. Mr. Thain sold Merrill to Bank of America a few days later.The more conservative executives at Bank of America did not appreciate Mr. Kraus’s colorful ways — he favored a green BlackBerry and displayed expensive art in his office — and by December of that year he had moved on to the top job at AB.During the worst financial crisis in a generation, Mr. Kraus was paid close to $30 million by Merrill and on joining AB three months later, received an upfront bonus of $6 million and restricted stock worth $50 million at the time. Under the terms of his contract, he gets no bonus and does not receive the stock until 2018.AB was a troubled firm when he joined it. Assets under management were half their $800 billion peak in 2007, and in the early years of his tenure many of the company’s funds continued to lose investors because of shoddy performance.In recent years, however, performance has improved, and most AB funds invested in the United States stock market are now beating their indexes, according to the asset management tracking firm eVestment.Nonetheless, inflows have been muted as investor cash keeps pouring into Vanguard and BlackRock E.T.F.s.And Mr. Kraus’s advice to investors now is to move opposite of the herd: “People are just not assessing the risks right — these funds are free riders and they are not safe. You should be short them.”Advertisement