AdvertisementSupported byBy Sei ChongSince it was revealed that Wells Fargo employees created unauthorized accounts for thousands of customers, the bank has tried to quell the subsequent outrage by promising to do what it could to restore trust.Its approach to consumer lawsuits, however, is likely to generate even more ill will.The lender is seeking to move these cases to arbitration, a secretive process that often favors companies, as a New York Times investigation showed last year.Arbitration clauses prevent consumers from filing class-action lawsuits, and judicial rules to limit conflict of interest do not apply to arbitration. Decisions are nearly impossible to overturn.Jennifer Zeleny, who is suing Wells Fargo in federal court in Utah, along with about 80 other customers, is arguing that the bank shouldn’t be able to use arbitration over an account she never wanted.The lender, however, contends that the legitimate contracts that customers signed should also cover disputes over the false accounts.So far, Wells Fargo has found success with this argument.A federal judge dismissed one large case seeking class-action status in California last year, ruling that it was not “wholly groundless” that customers could be forced to arbitrate over accounts they had never agreed to. That case is now being settled.Senator Sherrod Brown, an Ohio Democrat, introduced a bill last week that would prevent the bank from forcing arbitration in the sham account cases. “Wells Fargo’s customers never intended to sign away their right to fight back against fraud and deceit,” he said.In a victory for prosecutors, the Supreme Court unanimously ruled on Tuesday that gifts of confidential information provided from business executives to relatives violate securities laws.The case, Salman v. United States, concerned trading by Bassam Salman based on information from his future brother-in-law, then a member of Citigroup’s health care investment banking group.Prosecutors said that the brother-in-law, Maher Kara, passed information to his brother, Mounir Kara, who then passed the information to Mr. Salman.The Supreme Court had to decide whether prosecutors had to prove that Maher Kara disclosed the information in exchange for a personal benefit. Justice Samuel A. Alito said it was clear that a personal benefit did indeed exist.Mr. Salman’s appeal had relied on a 2014 decision from the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, in Manhattan, United States v. Newman, that made it harder to prosecute insider trading cases. (More on key insider trading cases can be found here.)But Justice Alito said that Mr. Salman’s case differed from that of the hedge fund managers in the Newman case, because the defendants in that case were “several steps removed” from the source of the insider information.Serious questions have been raised about President-elect Donald J. Trump’s vast business empire and the potential conflicts of interest.On Tuesday, a spokesman looked to address those concerns by saying that Mr. Trump had sold all of his stock holdings in June. They make up a small part of his assets, however.In a Deal Professor column, Steven Davidoff Solomon and Michael J. de la Merced write that one solution (albeit an unlikely one) would be to sell the Trump Organization entirely.In imagining how such a sale might proceed, they look at each asset and determine how difficult it would be to sell.Their conclusion? It would be complex and time consuming, but it could be done.• The top executives for AT&T and Time Warner will defend their proposed $85 billion merger before members of the Senate Judiciary Committee. The hearing is expected to reveal the temperature in Washington on big mergers under a Trump administration.• Starbucks holds its annual Investor Day, the last one that Howard Schultz will preside over. Mr. Schultz said he would step down as chief executive next year.Advertisement