By MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDDEC. 8, 2016
The ranks of Wall Street’s regulators in Washington are continuing to turn over, as the Securities and Exchange Commission’s top enforcer announced plans to leave.Andrew J. Ceresney, the director of the S.E.C.’s enforcement division, said on Thursday that he planned to depart the regulator by year-end after three years at the commission.His move follows that of his boss, the S.E.C.’s chairwoman, Mary Jo White, who last month announced her plans to leave, as Wall Street overseers under the Obama administration wind down their tenures.Mr. Ceresney, a former federal prosecutor who joined the commission three years ago as co-head of the enforcement division and assumed sole leadership of the unit in 2014, said in an interview that he had not decided where he would go next. The enforcement division will be led by his deputy, Stephanie Avakian, until a permanent replacement is found.AdvertisementUnder Ms. White and Mr. Ceresney, the S.E.C. proved aggressive in pursuing cases instead of allowing companies to settle without admitting or denying wrongdoing. The commission brought more than 2,850 enforcement actions under Mr. Ceresney, with a record 548 in its last fiscal year. It tried 83 matters in both federal court and administrative proceedings. “I think in many ways, we have taken an already strong enforcement program and made it stronger,” Mr. Ceresney said. “I feel that we’ve solidified our reputation as an aggressive, tough but fair regulator, and I think that’s what we want.”AdvertisementAmong the most prominent were insider trading cases like those involving Leon G. Cooperman, a billionaire hedge fund manager, and William T. Walters, a hugely successful sports bettor.Mr. Ceresney also cited the commission’s settlement with Och-Ziff Capital Management, a big hedge fund that was accused of using middlemen to pay bribes to Libya and several African countries in exchange for investments and mining rights.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Before joining the S.E.C. in 2013, Mr. Ceresney was a partner at the law firm Debevoise & Plimpton and, earlier in his career, a federal prosecutor in Manhattan — and at both places he worked alongside Ms. White.In the interview, Mr. Ceresney said Ms. White would be the only S.E.C. leader he would work under.He added that he was pleased by a Supreme Court ruling this week that sided with prosecutors in an insider trading case. The court found that confidential information passed on by business executives to relatives violated securities laws. The move came after an appeals court in New York limited the ability of the government to prosecute insider trading under different circumstances.“I think that was a good victory for us,” Mr. Ceresney said. “From our perspective, we had been operating as if that was the law. I think we will continue to be aggressive.”The departures of Mr. Ceresney and Ms. White come as President-elect Donald J. Trump prepares to fill out his incoming administration — one that is expected to ease many of the regulations that emerged during President Obama’s time in office. Mr. Trump has vowed to roll back the Dodd-Frank regulatory overhaul that tightened supervision of the financial system, for instance.That would be at odds with how the S.E.C. has approached enforcement under Ms. White and Mr. Ceresney. The commission boasts that it has proposed or adopted more than 50 packages of rules, including ones governing money market funds, credit ratings agencies and so-called crowdfunding initiatives that raise money for businesses from ordinary individuals.Asked whether he was worried about any rollback of his enforcement legacy, Mr. Ceresney was circumspect. “I’m not going to predict what the future will hold, but I will say that strong enforcement is important to the markets,” he said. “I think it’s a bipartisan issue.”A version of this article appears in print on December 9, 2016, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: S.E.C.’s Top Enforcer to Depart, as Obama Administration Winds Down.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.