AdvertisementSupported byBy Peter EavisThe United States stock market is thought to have played a heroic role in the country’s history. Over the decades, thousands of public companies have raised many billions of dollars in the markets — money that has propelled economic growth, innovation and employment. Without the public markets, corporate America would not have had a vast, cheap and powerful pool of capital.But work by John Asker, a professor of economics at the University of California, Los Angeles; Joan Farre-Mensa, an assistant professor at Harvard Business School; and Alexander Ljungqvist, a professor of finance at the New York University Stern School of Business indicates that corporate executives may have started to believe that being public is a hindrance, and opt to keep their companies private.In an interview on the N.Y.U. campus, Mr. Ljungqvist answered some questions about their innovative, and perhaps unsettling, work. The interview has been edited and condensed.Q. What prompted you and your colleagues to start this research?A. One of the big trends in the United States is that firms are turning their backs on the stock market. That has a number of causes, but one of which I think is important is this notion of short-termism. This is the idea that managers feel pressured to change the way they run their firms when they go public.The name of the game becomes not falling short of shareholders’ expectations, because when firms do, their share prices slump. One widely tracked summary measure of shareholders’ expectations is consensus earnings, which is based on Wall Street analysts’ quarterly earnings forecasts. A popular version of the short-termism story, then, is that managers fixate on meeting quarterly earnings targets rather than investing for the long term.Another problem firms encounter once they have gone public concerns communications. Managers feel that it’s difficult to communicate with their shareholders, especially when there is a need to change the business model or do something drastic, such as cut a dividend to fund a promising investment opportunity. All the market observes is the dividend’s been cut. That’s going to be interpreted as bad news, and managers find it hard to convince the market that it’s not bad news.But doesn’t the large information flow from public companies — the financial disclosures and the analyst reports — lead to better investment decisions over all?Stock market regulation in the U.S. is built on the principle that sunlight is the best disinfectant. But it doesn’t follow that there are no problems with being a stock-market-listed firm. On the one hand, you get relatively cheap capital in exchange for having a very high level of disclosure compared to most other countries around the world. But on the other hand, it comes with certain obligations that are onerous to companies, one of which is to live up constantly to shareholders’ expectations.What about the current debate over buybacks? If you ask corporate executives, “Why are you spending money on repurchasing shares when you could be using it for investing?” They might respond, “We’d love to invest but don’t see the opportunity, and we don’t want to invest just for the sake of investing.”So if it’s truly the case that public firms do not find anything worthwhile investing in, how come the private firms do? What’s different about the private firms? Are they just better at spotting investment opportunities, or can they go after them in a way that’s less subject to frictions?Has the extra investing by private companies increased their profitability?I’d like to think that’s exactly what’s happening, but the data tie our hands. The nature of investing is that it is long term. You are taking a hit to profitability in the short term to fund the investment. And we just don’t have enough data to follow these companies after they make the investments to see whether or not their profitability does increase.So, private equity firms, of course, take companies private. But you generally don’t think of large amounts of investment going on at a company in the years after it is taken private? Or is that, in fact, happening?There is a lot of research that suggests that, actually, companies are more long-termist after they are taken private. But I know public perception is a different one.The decline in public companies sounds as though it could be a positive thing for the country in some ways, no?We have to be careful not to say that the public markets are for everybody and the private markets are for everybody. But what I think is very interesting is the trend — away from the stock market. There is something that’s prompting companies to opt out of the public limelight, and I think reforms should try and tackle that.Are there a couple of things that you’d especially like to see?So, some policy makers and politicians are thinking about how they can tackle short-termism. Fine. Good luck. But there are other reasons why companies aren’t going public. That includes the ever-increasing regulatory burden.Anything else?There is a trend on the stock market toward a one-size model fits all. What we’ve lost over the last couple of decades is that exchanges experiment with rules for different-size companies.But stock markets have experimented with that.There was a world when there was more experimentation. But that’s not the world we live in now.What about the Jobs Act? Has that eased the way for companies wanting to go public?It’s made it easier for companies to dip a toe in the water, to see if there’s demand for their shares before they file publicly with the Securities and Exchange Commission. But it’s also made it vastly easier to stay private. It used to be that companies had a filing obligation as soon as they had 500 shareholders, and the Jobs Act raised that limit to 2,000 shareholders.Have people outside academia been interested in your work?I was invited by a very large asset manager to speak specifically about this. It happens fairly frequently that the investment side is interested in this. The corporate side, I don’t think I’ve had many conversations with.Advertisement