AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Jennifer Saba and Fiona Maharg-BravoThe Murdochs are having another shot at Sky. On Friday, 21st Century Fox offered to buy the 61 percent of Sky, the European pay-TV group, that it does not own. The proposal notionally values Sky at 18.5 billion pounds ($23 billion), though only about £11.3 billion would change hands. Circumstances look a lot more auspicious than the last time Rupert Murdoch and his family tried to consolidate the business, in 2010.Back then, a phone-hacking scandal at publications owned by News Corporation, which then held the Sky stake, helped doom the attempt, and it was abandoned the next summer. Questions regarding plans for Sky have swirled since. Fox sold its stakes in Sky Italia and Sky Deutschland back to Sky in 2014. Then James Murdoch, Fox’s chief executive, returned as chairman of Sky.By July this year, as Breakingviews noted, signs were emerging that another tilt at Sky might be coming. For one thing, its shares had steadily declined since the start of the year, making it look increasingly cheap. By Thursday, they were down nearly 30 percent.The £10.75-per-share bid values the Sky enterprise at a bit under 12 times estimated 2017 earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, or Ebitda. The offer is still below where the shares started the year. But investors were not buying Sky’s growth story, despite a recent day of presentations and the launch of new mobile services in Britain. And a 40 percent premium to the undisturbed price is hardly stingy.For Fox, fully owning Sky would simplify its operating model, a big initiative under James Murdoch. It also gives the media and entertainment conglomerate direct access to consumers, helping Fox compete as more people sign up for video-streaming rivals like Netflix.Much has changed since 2010. Fox has spun off its newspapers, distancing itself from the hacking scandal. Media firms and content distributors are rapidly consolidating around the world, as shown by AT&T’s plan to buy Time Warner after already having acquired DirecTV. Though there could still be concerns about the Murdochs’ excessive influence, the political environment in Britain is less hostile. Politicians may be distracted by “Brexit” preparations, too. The terms of the deal still have to be completed, but Fox’s latest reach for Sky looks well timed.Advertisement