AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressCoca-Cola’s chief executive, Muhtar Kent, will step down from that role next year and be succeeded by the company’s No. 2 executive, James Quincey, at a time when people are drinking less sugary soda, including Coke, the company’s flagship drink.Mr. Quincey, who, as Coca-Cola’s chief operating officer, has long been expected to become the next chief executive, will take over leadership of the world’s largest beverage maker on May 1, the company said Friday. Mr. Kent, 64, will remain as chairman of the board.Mr. Quincey, 51, has led Coca-Cola’s drive to cut the amount of sugar in its drinks and said on Friday that he would continue to do so in his new role. He also said he would keep pushing to add more low-calorie beverages and to offer soft drinks in smaller cans and bottles.He also said he wanted to stay relevant with customers by continuing to “digitize” the business, selling Coca-Cola drinks online through food-delivery companies and whatever other methods customers use to make such purchases in the future.The company has been diversifying its drinks to try to adapt to the changing tastes of consumers. Sales volume for regular Coke in the United States is down 14 percent over the past decade, according to the industry tracker Beverage Digest; sales volume for Diet Coke is down 29 percent.Last year, Coca-Cola introduced a milk drink called Fairlife that it said had more protein and less sugar than regular milk. It also makes Sprite, Fanta and Dasani water, and has invested in options like bottled teas that it believes have greater potential for growth.The company is in the midst of selling its bottling businesses to independent companies that will handle the bottling of Coca-Cola sodas and other drinks. Unloading those units will mean less revenue, but fewer costs, for the company as it focuses on selling syrups and concentrates to the bottlers, as well as on expanding its brands.Analysts at Stifel said “job one” for Mr. Quincey is to improve revenue growth. Shares of Coca-Cola rose 2.5 percent, to $42, on Friday.Advertisement