By SEI CHONGDEC. 9, 2016
Time Inc. may have turned down a takeover proposal by Edgar Bronfman Jr. and the owner of Warner Music last month, but it’s keeping the door open to interested bidders, The Wall Street Journal reports.The company has hired Morgan Stanley and Bank of America as advisers, people familiar with the matter told the newspaper. It is uncertain whether any deal will be struck.Shares in Time Inc. rose nearly 8 percent on Thursday to $17.75 after The Wall Street Journal report.The New York Times reported in late November that Mr. Bronfman and Access Industries, the conglomerate to whom he sold Warner Music in 2011, had bid at least $18 a share, which would have valued Time Inc. at about $1.8 billion.AdvertisementA person familiar with the matter told The Wall Street Journal that Mr. Bronfman and his partners in the bid for Time Inc. are still interested.AdvertisementAnother potential bidder, according to bankers and investors, is Meredith Corporation, a company based in Iowa that owns 17 TV stations and magazine titles including Shape, Family Circle and Better Homes and Gardens.The European Central Bank extended its bond-buying campaign, as analysts had expected, but in cutting the size of its purchases, it brought to mind a loaded word in financial circles: taper.The European Central Bank on Thursday extended the time frame for asset purchases to the end of 2017 (it had been due to run through the end of March). Investors, however, focused on plans to reduce the asset purchases beginning in April to 60 billion euros, or about $64 billion, from €80 billion.Our columnist Andrew Ross Sorkin and his Times colleagues help you make sense of major business and policy headlines — and the power-brokers who shape them.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Markets were on edge, recalling the so-called taper tantrum in the United States in 2013, after Ben S. Bernanke, then the chairman of the Federal Reserve, suggested that the American central bank would begin reducing its asset purchases.Financial markets were roiled as investors sold Treasury bonds in anticipation of higher interest rates.Markets on Thursday settled down after Mario Draghi, the president of the European Central Bank, said that he defined tapering as “a process where purchases would go to zero.”“There is no tapering in sight,” he said. “The E.C.B. is going to stay in the markets.”Carsten Brzeski, chief German economist at ING-DiBa in Frankfurt, said in a note to clients that though the central bank’s decision “looked, walked and quacked like tapering,” Mr. Draghi did his best to make it clear that was not the case.Advertisement“We tend to believe him,” Mr. Brzeski wrote.The exodus of Wall Street regulators continues with the departure of Andrew J. Ceresney, the director of the Securities and Exchange Commission’s enforcement division.Mr. Ceresney said on Thursday that he planned to depart by year-end after three years at the commission.His move follows that of his boss, the S.E.C.’s chairwoman, Mary Jo White, who last month announced her plans to leave.Mr. Ceresney said in an interview that he had not decided where he would go next. The enforcement division will be led by his deputy, Stephanie Avakian, until a permanent replacement is found.The S.E.C. brought more than 2,850 enforcement actions under Mr. Ceresney, with a record 548 in its last fiscal year. It tried 83 matters in both federal court and administrative proceedings.• The University of Michigan’s consumer survey index will be released at 10 a.m.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.