AdvertisementSupported byBy The New York TimesIn 1849, Robert B. Ward founded a small bakery on Broome Street in Lower Manhattan. His family would go on to create a baking empire that sold a cream-filled yellow spongecake around the world. Below is a look at key moments in the history of Hostess.Continental Baking, owned by Mr. Ward’s grandson, acquired Taggart Baking of Indianapolis, the maker of Wonder bread, and took its products nationwide. The company’s Wonder brand sold breads and its Hostess brand sold cakes.RelatedBaking Co. Enters Merger (Dec. 28, 1924)In 1912, Otto Rohwedder, an inventor in Missouri, began working on a machine to slice whole loaves of bread. Eighteen years later, Continental Baking used his invention to produce Wonder bread nationwide. (During World War II, the United States temporarily banned sliced bread, in part to conserve wax paper.)RelatedSliced Bread Put Back on Sale; Housewives’ Thumbs Safe Again (March 9, 1943)Who Made That Sliced Bread? (March 1, 2013)James A. Dewar, a manager of the Continental Baking plant in Illinois, concocted the Twinkie by filling a shortcake with a sugar and cream mixture. He came up with the name based on an advertisement for “Twinkle Toe Shoes.”Following the end of World War II’s flour and sugar rationing, Hostess introduced Sno Balls – an upside-down cupcake covered in coconut flakes and marshmallow. The company also marketed its cakes to youngsters on television commercials.Hostess expanded its product line with the hockey-puck shaped Ding Dongs and the Swiss-roll Ho Hos snack cakes.In a match of two unlikely partners, the giant International Telephone and Telegraph Corporation acquired Continental Banking, which had become the nation’s leading bread maker.RelatedI.T.T. Set to Buy Top U.S. Bakery (May 20, 1968)I.T.T. Will Give Up Large Holdings (Aug. 1, 1971)The Federal Trade Commission accused the baker of making false nutritional claims. Wonder bread, the F.T.C. said, was just a standardized enriched bread, sugar was the primary ingredient in Hostess snack cakes and weight-loss claims for Profile Bread were false.RelatedF.T.C. Says Continental Baking Makes False Claims for Bread (March 17, 1971)Dan White was convicted of shooting to death Mayor George Moscone of San Francisco and fellow supervisor Harvey Milk. Mr. White’s lawyer argued that his client had a “diminished capacity,” in part because he had an addiction to sugary junk food. The jury convicted Mr. White of voluntary manslaughter rather than murder.Ex-Official Guilty of Manslaughter in Slayings on Coast (May 22, 1979)I.T.T. agreed to sell Continental Baking to Ralston Purina, the conglomerate that counted pet food among its better-known products, after the F.T.C. cleared I.T.T. of trying to monopolize the baking industry, a charge brought against it in 1974. RelatedITT to Sell Baking Unit to Ralston (Aug. 31, 1984)Charges were dismissed against a 71-year-old City Council candidate in Minneapolis who was accused of handing out $31 worth of Twinkies, Ho Hos and coffee to elderly voters. RelatedMinneapolis Candidate Freed of Twinkie Charge (June 5, 1986)Ralston Purina agreed to sell the maker of Hostess Twinkies to the Interstate Bakeries Corporation. The acquisition made Interstate the largest bakery company in the United States and got Ralston out of the food business.RelatedRalston Selling Continental Baking to Interstate (Jan. 7, 1995)People were still eating Twinkies and Wonder bread, but the problem for Interstate Bakeries was that people were eating less of them. The cakes survived the Great Depression, but Interstate succumbed to the low-carb Atkins and South Beach Diets, filing for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection.RelatedMaker of Twinkies and Wonder Bread Files for Chapter 11 (Sept. 23, 2004)More than four years later, Interstate Bakeries emerged from bankruptcy protection and renamed itself Hostess Brands.RelatedThe Maker of Twinkies Is Fresh From Bankruptcy (Feb. 6, 2009)The company went from cream filling to bankruptcy filing, just three years after emerging from an earlier restructuring. The company filed for Chapter 11 reorganization in January 2012. But later that year, workers went on strike after the company asked for yet another round of painful concessions from its unions. In November, the company decided to liquidate, laying off 18,500 workers and closing the plants.RelatedHostess, Maker of Twinkies, Files for Bankruptcy (Jan. 11, 2012)Goodbye to My Twinkie Days (Nov. 17, 2012)Hostess Brands agreed to sell Twinkies and Ding Dongs — along with Ho Hos, Sno Balls and Zingers — to two investment firms with a history of corporate turnarounds. The new owners are Apollo Global Management and Metropoulos & Company, which owns Pabst Blue Ribbon beer and Vlasic pickles.RelatedHostess Sells Twinkies Brand to Investment Firms (March 13, 2013)Under new leadership, the Twinkie recipe is tweaked to last longer. Hostess now employs only 1,200 people, a fraction of the roughly 8,000 workers in the snack-cake division who lost their jobs during the 2012 bankruptcy.The owners of Hostess Brands agreed to sell a majority stake in the company to a publicly traded affiliate of the Gores Group, a private equity firm. It started trading last month on the Nasdaq exchange. Its ticker symbol is TWNK.RelatedHostess Brands, Maker of Twinkies, Selling Majority Stake for $725 Million (July 6, 2016)Advertisement