AdvertisementSupported byBy Patricia Cohen and Landon Thomas Jr.Consumers say they are more confident. Business leaders, once wary, are now expressing excitement that one of their own is headed toward the White House. And Wall Street is bordering on the ecstatic.A month after Donald J. Trump’s election, a series of pro-business cabinet nominations, along with promises to cut taxes, roll back regulations, invest in infrastructure and negotiate better trade deals, have conjured up the possibility, some executives say, of a “Field of Dreams” economy.The Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index is up 5.6 percent since the election map turned more red than blue; all the major stock indexes hit records yet again on Friday. Consumer confidence levels released on Friday showed they had jumped to a two-year high.Much of the swelling confidence, to be sure, is markedly one-sided. A new national survey by the Pew Research Center found that the leap in Republicans’ optimism about the economy’s direction has far outpaced Democrats’ sagging outlook.The recent heart-pumping stock rally, Jamie Dimon, the chief executive of JP Morgan Chase, said at an investment conference this week, is “based upon the hope, which I hope is accurate, that the Trump administration will be very good for unleashed business per se,” and may improve overall growth.Mr. Dimon and a raft of other Wall Street stalwarts have either joined the new administration or taken on advisory roles, damping down their worries that the bankers-as-boogeymen campaign language would be transformed into action.But many of the anticipated economic policy changes will generate both winners and losers. New research, for example, has shown that in recent decades the fortunes of Americans at the top of the income ladder have grow much fuller, while those who occupy its lower rungs have been largely left by the wayside. Corporate power has increased at the expense of labor’s.The economic field that Mr. Trump and Republican leaders are building could have widely different effects on bankers, business owners and workers, depending on their skill level, industry and location. Possibly even their race or ethnicity, considering the president-elect’s attacks on immigrants and Muslims.Samuel J. Wilkof, chief executive of Stark Industrial, a small machine products manufacturer in North Canton, Ohio, said he was acutely aware how differently some policies would affect businesses. Among his customers are environmental controls companies; he wonders what the impact of picking Scott Pruitt, a climate change skeptic, to head the Environmental Protection Agency will have on them.The months between the election and the inauguration of any new president, particularly one from the opposing party, are always swollen with anticipation. While Trump critics and skeptics brace for their worst, supporters can happily indulge their hopes for the best.The bitter political divide continues, but its impact on the economic outlook is not as sharp.With Republicans about to take control of both the White House and Congress, business expects an end to the Washington stalemate and a shift in policies in its direction.“Uncertainty about the regulatory environment and tax policy is what can cause paralysis,” said Dan Houston, chief executive of Principal Financial Group, a financial management company headquartered in Des Moines. “Just understanding what the ground rules are going to be can make a difference. There seems to be a feeling that there’s going to be more clarity in the first half of 2017.”Central Iowa has already been booming with one of the lowest unemployment rates and highest growth rates in the country. But employers have been further buoyed since the election by the belief that imminent tax cuts and fewer regulations will further rev up the economy, Mr. Houston said.Meanwhile, although the attention to potential Supreme Court nominees has focused on bitterly fought social issues like abortion rights and gay marriage, a more conservative court is also likely to be more pro-business as well, said Larry Sabato, director of the University of Virginia Center for Politics.“If you are a Republican, this is the beginning of a golden age,” Mr. Sabato said.With unemployment falling and wage gains picking up in the last couple of years, Democrats were growing much more upbeat about the economy. Some are now more pessimistic, with Pew showing those who think the economy will get better next year declining to 15 percent from 35 percent. But that drop was not enough to offset the Republican surge.“Is it just two ships passing in the night?” Mr. Sabato asked about the sudden enthusiasm about the economy.Maybe. Historically, Americans have swung behind any newly elected president, with partisan divisions and more realistic expectations resuming after a honeymoon period. In 2008, after President Obama’s election, for example, optimism about the economy was even stronger despite the financial collapse of the time.But Wall Street and business are particularly pumped by the prospect of an end to Washington gridlock. Stephen A. Schwarzman, the chief executive of the private equity giant Blackstone and chairman of Mr. Trump’s panel of business experts, said at an investor conference that change was coming.“I anticipate with a pretty high level of confidence that this stuff is going to happen,” he said. “And this is as big a change happening all at once — I’ve been in finance for, I don’t know, 45 years? This would be the biggest.”Certainly, Mr. Schwarzman is not unbiased, especially in light of his recent advisory appointment. The private equity pioneer is also known for his tendency toward hyperbolic statements, although the fact that his stock price is up 22 percent since the election doesn’t hurt.But it is also true that Blackstone, with its giant portfolio of real estate assets and operating companies that span the world, is closely attuned to the American economy’s potential to grow.The industrial sector is also enthusiastic. Listen to Jay Timmons, president and chief executive of the National Association of Manufacturers: “We’ve been waiting for a builder and leader like President-elect Trump to take a proactive, hands-on and personal approach to supporting manufacturers in America.”In any case, celebration or despair over next year’s economy is not only premature, it is also not easily controlled. In fact, most of the seeds for its performance in the near future have already been sown.“Whatever happened in the economy in the last few weeks or months,” Mr. Wilkof of Stark Industrial in Ohio said, “didn’t just happen in the last few weeks or months.”“There’s been a steady decline in jobless claims, and the unemployment rolls continue to diminish,” he added. “I think the economy is not in a bad position now. My hope is that it is going to grow and be strong.”Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.Advertisement