AdvertisementSupported byBy Emily SteelMedia giants have fallen back into a ring of fire.The stock prices of companies across the industry tumbled on Wednesday after Time Warner cut its profit expectations for 2016, leading its shares to plunge more than 6.5 percent by the end of the day.The company, which owns Turner networks, HBO and Warner Bros. film studios, reduced its outlook for next year, citing the effects of foreign exchange rates as well as the company’s increased spending in content and technology. Although the investments are intended to improve the TV viewing experience, the costs could run into the hundreds of millions of dollars. Time Warner has now cut its forecast for its adjusted earnings per share for 2016 to $5.25 from its previous forecast of $6 a share. Executives said that the company continued to work through its budget process, so other factors could influence the outlook.Time Warner’s move set off another round of panic across an industry already plagued by fears about the role of traditional media in a digital world. Worries about cord-cutting, ratings declines and a weak advertising market continue to stoke broad concerns.The decline led to a chain reaction; shares of Walt Disney, Comcast, Viacom and Discovery all dropped by midday. The shares of 21st Century Fox, which reported a steep drop in revenue on Wednesday, were down more than 5 percent. Disney is scheduled to report earnings on Thursday after the markets close.In August, a crash of eight major media stocks wiped out a combined $37 billion in market value on one day. That was prompted by Disney’s reducing growth expectations for its large cable network division.“We’re back to Dante’s inferno,” said David Bank, an analyst with RBC Capital Markets. “Today, there seems to be more concern that while the top line may have stabilized, the ecosystem will need more investment.”Jeff Bewkes, chief executive of Time Warner, emphasized that the company was preparing itself for long-term growth rather than short-term profitability.“Now is the time for us to press our advantages, and I’m confident these investments in content, capabilities and the consumer experience will position us for continued strong growth in the years to come,” he said in a conference call.Mr. Bewkes outlined the company’s plans to invest aggressively in brands that will resonate with viewers on new platforms, citing HBO’s recent string of deals with Jon Stewart, Bill Simmons and “Sesame Street,” as well as its expanded relationship with the media company Vice.Mr. Bewkes added that investing solely in content was no longer sufficient. He said the company planned to devote more resources to technology initiatives, such as the HBO Now stand-alone streaming service, which does not require users to have a traditional cable subscription. He also outlined how the company would expand its data and analytics capabilities, which would help create new advertising products as well as assist the company’s marketing and content development.“While we are living in the golden age of television programming, for many consumers, the television viewing experience is stuck in the Bronze Age,” Mr. Bewkes said.Mr. Bank, the RBC analyst, called Mr. Bewkes a Jerry Maguire, referring to the movie about the sports agent who loses nearly all of his clients after expressing a moral epiphany.“He is getting up and saying what I think takes real guts to say: You really need to reinvest in the consumer experience and in technology and in content,” Mr. Bank said. “In my view, that is the absolute right thing to say, but it will cost you some profitability in the near term, and it is coming at a time when foreign currency headwinds are extreme.”Total revenue at Time Warner increased 5 percent to $6.6 billion, helped by growth at the company’s Warner Bros. studios and Home Box Office premium cable network. Dragging down revenue was a 2 percent decline in sales at Turner, which reported lower subscription video-on-demand revenue because of foreign exchange rates, as well as a decline in domestic subscribers. Turner also reported a 1 percent decline in advertising revenue.Warner Bros. reported a 15 percent increase in revenue to $3.2 billion, driven by higher video game licensing fees because of the releases of titles like Lego Dimensions and Mad Max. Television licensing revenue benefited from the distribution of “2 Broke Girls” and “Person of Interest.”At HBO, revenue increased 5 percent to $1.4 billion, because of an increase in subscription revenue and higher domestic licensing fees. Executives said HBO’s stand-alone streaming service, HBO Now, contributed some revenue during the quarter and was expected to deliver “attractive financial results” over the long term.Richard Plepler, chief executive of HBO, said the service was still in its early days and declined to reveal statistics about its use or audience.Separately Wednesday morning, 21st Century Fox reported that its total revenue tumbled 6 percent to $6.1 billion for the quarter that ended in September, as a lackluster film slate offset growth in the entertainment conglomerate’s cable network group.Like Time Warner, executives at Fox emphasized their focus on the future. John P. Nallen, chief financial officer of Fox, said that starting in fiscal 2017, the company would change its approach to providing financial guidance by eliminating specific dollar earnings targets. It will instead provide “quantitative and qualitative information” on the company and business trends.“We are very confident in our ability to execute against the opportunities we have ahead to sustain long-term growth, but we don’t want to chase the short-term targets through changes in our operating plan,” Mr. Nallen said. “It’s not good for our management team and it’s not good for our shareholders.”Revenue for Fox’s filmed entertainment group fell nearly 28 percent during the quarter. The company was hurt by the box-office flop of “Fantastic Four” as well as a tough comparison with the previous year, which included the theatrical release of “Dawn of the Planet of the Apes.”Net income was $675 million, or 34 cents a share, down 35 percent from $1 billion, or 47 cents a share, in the same period last year. Excluding certain items, earnings were 38 cents a share.Fox also said that it was holding to the financial guidance expectations for this fiscal year that it made three months ago.Fox highlighted the potential of its films coming in the final months of the year, including “The Peanuts Movie,” opening this weekend, and the holiday release of “Joy,” starring Jennifer Lawrence.Fox’s cable network group — which includes Fox News, FX Networks and FS1 in the United States — reported a 7.2 percent increase in revenue to nearly $3.5 billion, driven by increases in affiliate fees and advertising revenue.Revenue in the company’s television group was about flat at $1 billion, as growth in retransmission revenue — or fees that cable and satellite providers pay to carry its channels — offset a 5 percent decline in advertising revenue. The dip in advertising was, in part, the result of one week fewer of National Football League broadcasts as well as lower revenue from political-ad spending and lower ratings at the broadcast network.Advertisement