By NICOLA CLARKNOV. 4, 2015
PARIS — Axel Springer, the German publishing and digital media group, on Wednesday raised its forecast for 2015 revenue as increasing sales of digital classified advertising offset continued declines in print circulation and other revenue.The group, which in September acquired a controlling stake in the American online news website Business Insider, reported a 32 percent jump in operating profit for the third quarter to 129 million euros, or $141 million. Revenue for the three months to Sept. 30 rose by 7.3 percent to €795.4 million, bolstered by the group’s rapidly expanding portfolio of digital businesses, which it said represented nearly 70 percent of profit.“Our priority this year is growth,” Mathias Döpfner, Axel Springer’s chief executive, said in a statement.Though still best known as the owner of the German daily newspaper Die Welt and the mass circulation tabloid Bild, Axel Springer has been among the most aggressive of Europe’s traditional publishing houses in seeking to transform its print business for the digital world. But faced with declining advertising revenue and uneven growth in digital subscriptions for its core content sites, Axel Springer has moved aggressively to bolster its classified advertising business.AdvertisementMore recently, it has also moved into new online businesses, including price-comparison portals, social media, video and gaming content.AdvertisementMr. Döpfner said Axel Springer, based in Berlin, continued to see “great potential” in digital classifieds and its news and information brands “in Europe and also, increasingly, in the English-speaking world.”Axel Springer’s digital push has involved a series of investments in established digital companies and start-ups, particularly in the United States. In addition to acquiring a majority interest in Business Insider for $343 million, it has bought small stakes in digital start-ups such as Thrillist, a men’s lifestyle portal; Mic.com, a news platform; Jaunt, a specialist in virtual-reality technologies; and even the housing rental website Airbnb.Axel Springer said it now expected that revenue for the year to Dec. 31 would rise in the “midsingle-digit” percentage range from the €3 billion reported in 2014. The group had previously forecast flat to modest revenue growth for the year.The group’s recent focus on investing in smaller American media properties follows a string of setbacks, including a failed bid for The Financial Times, which was sold in July to the Japanese media company Nikkei for $1.3 billion. Axel Springer also lost out in an attempt in 2014 to buy Forbes Media, the publisher of Forbes magazine. A bid a decade ago for the publisher of the British newspaper The Daily Telegraph was also unsuccessful.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Nonetheless, Axel Springer has ambitions to become a major global player in digital, English-language media. The group has said that the addition of Business Insider was expected to increase the size of its worldwide digital audience, as measured by unique monthly visitors, to roughly 200 million users, which would make it the world’s sixth-largest digital publisher — larger than better-known digital brands such as BuzzFeed, NBCUniversal and Vice Media.With revenue from print circulation steadily declining as more readers move to digital — it fell by nearly 3 percent in the first nine months of this year to €542 million — Axel Springer is working to increase earnings from paid digital subscriptions to its newspapers. That effort appeared to have paid off in the third quarter: Operating profit at its digital “paid models” business segment rose by 25 percent from a year earlier to €47 million, on slightly lower revenue of €367 million.For the year to Sept. 30, however, earnings from paid digital content were still 19 percent below 2014 levels, at €138 million, because of restructuring costs linked to new business acquisitions, the company said. Revenue fell by 3 percent to €1.1 billion.In Europe, Axel Springer has also invested in creating new digital media content. In April, the group teamed up with Politico, the Washington-based political news site, to form Politico Europe, which specializes in real-time coverage of the European Union. Politico Europe, which produces a mix of free online content and paid newsletters, claims an audience of more than a million unique visitors a month.AdvertisementWith a growing share of its content appearing online and on mobile devices, Axel Springer is looking for ways to retain more of the advertising revenue generated on its digital platforms for itself. The group said 81 percent of its total advertising revenue was generated by digital activities in the first nine months of the year.Such efforts, however, have also brought the group in direct conflict with companies like Google, and, most recently, with producers of free ad-blocking software.Recently, Axel Springer and other German publishers have lost court cases seeking a ban on ad-blockers, saying that they unfairly deprived content providers of revenue. Last month, Axel Springer began banning access to its largest newspaper website, Bild.de, for users who have installed an ad-blocker.Paid digital subscriptions to Bild and Die Welt — the group’s only German media brands with digital paywalls — rose by 25 percent in the third quarter to more than 362,000, Axel Springer said. The group said it did not publish digital subscription figures for its international brands.A version of this article appears in print on November 5, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Publisher in Germany Posts Profit as Ads Rise.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.