
Breakingviews By                     
ANTONY CURRIE

DEC. 14, 2016
The new Hertz Global chief executive, Kathryn Marinello, faces a tough drive out of the ditch. She has a great résumé. The problem is that she is the $2 billion rental car outfit’s third boss in two years — and the activist investor Carl C. Icahn is in the back seat, fidgeting with a 35 percent stake. Moreover, the company’s engine is sputtering, despite her predecessor’s attempts to get it firing more smoothly.The outgoing boss, John Tague, took over in late 2014 with Mr. Icahn’s backing. The former United Airlines executive’s overhaul included spinning off the equipment rental division this year.His latest, and last, set of quarterly earnings was a wreck, though. Last month, the company missed estimates for the third quarter by a mile and cut full-year guidance by one-third as it admitted it bought too many compact cars and had not achieved cost-cutting goals. In an ominous message for his successor, Mr. Tague told investors he had “underestimated the depth and the breadth and the complexity of the transformation” he had undertaken.Ms. Marinello can draw upon an early career in banking, a decade running various General Electric businesses including auto-related financial units, and experience as a chief executive. She also has a view into other parts of the car business as a board member of both General Motors and the truck maker AB Volvo.AdvertisementThat should afford her some insight into the effects of new technology on the Hertz business, like driverless cars, ride-hailing or other developments. G.M., after all, has a stake in and a car rental agreement with the ride-hailing upstart Lyft.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In an effort to get on the bandwagon, Mr. Tague struck agreements with both Lyft and the market leader Uber over the summer. But Hertz’s problems show how app-driven rides and the sharing economy in general are undermining its traditional rental model.The disruption has left Ms. Marinello with financial matters to deal with. Hertz’s debt ratio has increased to 4.8 times the pruned estimates for this year’s earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, or Ebitda, according to Morgan Stanley. Its rival Avis, by contrast, has a relatively safe 3.4 multiple.AdvertisementMr. Icahn expressed his support for the new chief’s appointment. He liked Mr. Tague, too, however. Ms. Marinello’s journey could be a stressful one.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »