AdvertisementSupported byBy Amie TsangThe competition is heating up at Goldman Sachs.Donald J. Trump officially asked Gary D. Cohn, the firm’s president, to be his top economic policy adviser. That will open up opportunities at the bank for the next generation of Goldman leaders.Mr. Cohn was among a handful of senior executives to have held sway at Goldman since before the financial crisis and is among the last to leave.The bank is expected to announce a new slate of deputies to Lloyd C. Blankfein, the chief executive and chairman. Among the most likely candidates: David M. Solomon, the head of Goldman’s advisory division, and Harvey M. Schwartz, the chief financial officer.Viewed through a political lens, Mr. Trump’s appointments of finance industry insiders have already agitated Senator Elizabeth Warren — so much so that she took to Facebook to attack a “hedge fund billionaire” who is “thrilled by Donald Trump’s economic team of Wall Street insiders.”Unfortunately that hedge fund manager, Whitney Tilson, publicly fought Mr. Trump’s election, supported Hillary Clinton, donated to Ms. Warren and actively sought new regulations for the industry. Oh, and he is also not a billionaire.Mr. Tilson continues to support Ms. Warren, albeit with less enthusiasm and the feeling that “she’s getting down into the gutter with Trump.”“I still support her because I share her belief that banking should be boring,” he said.Beyond the finance sector, Mr. Trump has also done little to assuage concerns about his coming presidency.Those concerned about conflicts of interest between his elected position and his real estate empire are still awaiting a news conference and details about how he will deal with his business interests.He has said only that he would leave the businesses to his sons and no new deals would be done while he was in office.Mr. Trump has also dismissed concerns over Rex W. Tillerson, the Exxon Mobil chief executive, and in particular Mr. Tillerson’s relationship with Russia’s president, Vladimir V. Putin. Mr. Trump planned to announce his selection of Mr. Tillerson as his secretary of state on Tuesday morning, risking what could be a bruising confirmation fight in the Senate.The hearings will also draw attention to Exxon Mobil’s business dealings in Moscow — the company has billions of dollars in contracts that can go forward only if the United States lifts sanctions against Russia.The scandal over sales at Wells Fargo continues to spread, and it is extending beyond the bank itself.Prudential said it was suspending sales of its life insurance policies through Wells Fargo until it completed an investigation into the lender’s sales tactics.Last week three former Prudential employees filed a lawsuit asserting that the company tried to hush up evidence that Wells Fargo bankers opened sham accounts in customers’ names and had premiums withdrawn from their accounts without their consent or knowledge.The employees said they had been fired for trying to prod their bosses to act more aggressively on the findings. Prudential said its decision to suspend sales through Wells Fargo, just days after they made their claims, was coincidental.Prudential is not the only insurer affected. Wells Fargo said it had temporarily cut off its sales of renters’ insurance from Assurant, although both declined to comment on whether they had uncovered any problems.Pilsner Urquell will be joining Peroni and Grolsch under the Asahi roof.The Japanese beer giant Asahi said it would pay $7.8 billion to buy a group of central and eastern European beer brands from Anheuser-Busch InBev.Anheuser-Busch InBev, based in Belgium, is selling the brands to allay regulatory concerns over its mega-merger with SABMiller.At the same time, Asahi is looking overseas for growth as its home market ages and shrinks. It had already bought Peroni, Grolsch and other European SABMiller operations for $2.9 billion in another deal driven by regulatory concerns.• Monsanto shareholders will vote on a $56 billion acquisition by Bayer, which has attracted criticism in Washington as consolidation has put pressure on farmers struggling to sell an abundance of crops.• Shareholders of Smith & Wesson Holding Corporation, which makes firearms, are expected to vote on whether to change the company’s name to American Outdoor Brands Corporation. Executives want to emphasize “shooting, hunting and rugged outdoor” products.Follow Amie Tsang on Twitter @amietsang.Advertisement