
Street Scene By                     
WILLIAM D. COHAN

DEC. 14, 2016
There are many dewy-eyed reasons a wealthy and powerful business executive would choose to give up a throne in the private sector and move to Washington for an important government job. There is the chance to give something back to your country through public service, the belief that you have some serious expertise to offer the incoming president and his administration, and a feeling that the country has been on the wrong course and that every American could benefit from some new thinking. Plus, when you get asked to serve the president of the United States, well, you do it.There is another reason that rarely gets discussed: It is the tax benefit of a lifetime.Incoming cabinet officers and senior members of the White House staff have to rid themselves of any potential conflicts of interest before starting their new jobs, and often that means selling investments.That is not as punitive as it sounds. To help a nominee avoid the sometimes negative consequences of quickly unloading stocks or bonds, the tax code contains a provision that allows the securities to be sold and the capital gains tax on such sales deferred if the full proceeds are used to buy Treasuries and certain money-market funds. The tax continues to be deferred until the Treasuries or money-market funds are sold.And if for some reason the individual is really rich and never needs or wants to sell the Treasuries or money-market funds, then the tax owed can be deferred for a very long time, maybe even forever.AdvertisementThis is the type of sweet deal that would rarely be available to the numerous multimillionaires and billionaires that Donald J. Trump has invited into his cabinet and into his White House, explaining, “I want people who made a fortune!”AdvertisementThe idea is to encourage the best and the brightest to serve in government by not penalizing them for having to sell their securities in a hurry or before they otherwise would choose to do so. Seems fair enough. I mean, who wouldn’t want to defer the tax on any gain related to the sale of stock, especially if the cost basis in the stock is low and the potential tax hit is large? Wouldn’t you jump at the chance to get an extremely valuable present-value tax deferral and to have secretary of state added to your résumé at the same time?Here’s how it works. Rex Tillerson, the chairman and chief executive of Exxon Mobil whom Mr. Trump has chosen to be secretary of state, owned 1.8 million shares in the oil giant as of the last proxy, currently worth about $167 million. Mr. Tillerson might have to sell his Exxon Mobil stock before joining the cabinet to avoid the appearance of anything remotely like a conflict of interest involving the global company, where he has worked for 41 years since graduating from the University of Texas.At the current long-term capital gains tax rate of 20 percent (for the wealthiest Americans, a category we can stipulate describes Mr. Tillerson), he might have to pay as much as $33 million in taxes, assuming the shares were worth zero when he got them, if the special tax benefit did not exist. With the benefit, he can defer that $33 million tax bill so long as he converts the proceeds of the sale of his Exxon Mobil stock into Treasury securities or money-market funds — the safest investments out there.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.True, the yield on these investments is low — the 30-year Treasury yields around 3.09 percent at the moment — but that is still $1 million a year that Mr. Tillerson could earn from the $33 million he would not pay in taxes right away. Plus he might never have to pay the capital gains tax on the sale of his Exxon Mobil stock if he never sells the Treasury securities he bought with the proceeds of the sale of his stock.If the Senate confirms him, Mr. Tillerson could have plenty of company in the Trump administration in getting this windfall. Gary Cohn, the president of Goldman Sachs, is being offered the White House job of director of the National Economic Council. His ownership of Goldman Sachs stock is worth about $245 million. The capital gains tax he would avoid by leaving Goldman and moving to the White House — at a moment when Goldman’s stock is approaching a record high (it is up more than 30 percent since Mr. Trump’s election) — could be as much as $50 million.Wait, there is more. Mr. Trump’s choices to head the Treasury and Commerce Departments — Steve Mnuchin and Wilbur L. Ross Jr. — are billionaires. Mr. Mnuchin runs a hedge fund; Mr. Ross runs a private equity fund. Divesting themselves of their ownership stakes in the companies or the securities their companies control might be more complicated than simply selling Exxon Mobil or Goldman Sachs stock, but their tax deferral benefit on the sales would be legendary.Among his other holdings, Mr. Mnuchin owns $101 million in stock in CIT, a big financial services company. Selling that stake tax-deferred would allow him to avoid as much as $20 million in taxes. Mr. Ross, 79 years old, is worth $2.5 billion, according to Forbes. His private equity firm invests in energy, financial services, transportation, metals and mining and real estate interests. In addition to choosing him to be commerce secretary, Mr. Trump has offered Mr. Ross the chance to sell whatever securities or equity stakes he still owns on a tax-deferred basis for what probably would be the rest of his life. Thank you, Mr. President-elect!Mr. Trump’s pick for education secretary, Betsy DeVos, is the daughter-in-law of the billionaire founder of the private Amway Corporation, said to be worth more than $5 billion. However she and her husband choose to divest themselves of their Amway stock, if they are required to do so, means they, too, would get the tax benefit. Todd Ricketts, the son of the billionaire founder of TD Ameritrade who is Mr. Trump’s choice for deputy commerce secretary, would also benefit. Andrew Puzder, the labor secretary pick, owns stock in his fast-food company, worth unknown millions after leading two private equity buyouts of the business. Even Ben Carson, Mr. Trump’s pick for housing and urban development secretary, is said to be worth $26 million and might benefit from the tax provision.This benefit is not something new for the friends of Mr. Trump. In 2006, Henry M. Paulson Jr., then Goldman’s C.E.O., was tapped to serve as Treasury secretary under President George W. Bush and was able to sell his approximately $500 million of Goldman stock on a tax-deferred basis. Mr. Paulson’s timing was propitious. Goldman’s stock hit the skids during the financial crisis two years later.An earlier version of this article misstated Mr. Tillerson’s tenure at Exxon Mobil. He has worked there for 41 years, not 31.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »