By AMIE TSANGDEC. 14, 2016
Wells Fargo is, once again, in a sticky spot with regulators.For the second time this year, the bank failed a key regulatory test that was created after the 2008 financial crisis to reduce the threats posed by large banks to the economy.It was required to submit a plan, in case it collapsed, to unwind itself in a way that would safeguard the economy. The submissions by Wells Fargo and four other banks were rejected in April.This time around, Wells Fargo was the only bank whose so-called living will did not pass muster. As a result, it will be prohibited from establishing new international units or acquiring a subsidiary that is not a bank.It has until March 31 to fix its plan. If it fails a third time, regulators could place more limits on the bank.AdvertisementWells is also one of a handful of lenders, along with Credit Suisse and Deutsche Bank, trying to block a dozen lawsuits that arose from the financial crisis. They argue that regulators took too long to file the claims and want the Supreme Court to weigh in.AdvertisementAt stake are damages related to some $37.5 billion in securities as well as billions of dollars in disputed prejudgment interest.Fair housing advocates have filed a lawsuit in California accusing Fannie Mae of systematically failing to care for houses in foreclosure in minority neighborhoods.They contend that houses in working- and middle-class white communities were well tended and ready for sale, while issues like unsecured doors and boarded-up windows were significantly more common in minority neighborhoods.They cited evidence from a yearslong investigation in which housing advocates visited Fannie-owned properties in 38 metropolitan areas.Fannie Mae said in a statement that it strongly disagrees with the accusations and that its maintenance standards “are designed to ensure that all properties are tended to and treated equally.”Our columnist Andrew Ross Sorkin and his Times colleagues help you make sense of major business and policy headlines — and the power-brokers who shape them.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mark Zuckerberg wanted to give away nearly all his stake in Facebook, but he wasn’t willing to relinquish control. So he created a new class of shares — a solution that is now common in Silicon Valley.It does show disregard for shareholders though, and some have sued in a Delaware Court. The plaintiffs’ lawyers in the Facebook case may have hit pay dirt, the Deal Professor writes.AdvertisementThe lawyers obtained text messages between Marc Andreessen and Mr. Zuckerberg that appear to show Mr. Andreessen was leaking information and helping Mr. Zuckerberg while an independent committee, of which Mr. Andreessen was a member, was considering the creation of these shares.Even so, that may not change the ultimate outcome — Silicon Valley founders will keep control of their companies no matter what.“The chances that he will view Russia with Exxon Mobil DNA are close to 100 percent.”— Robert Weissman, the president of Public Citizen, a public interest group based in Washington, on Rex W. Tillerson, the chief executive of Exxon Mobil and President-elect Donald J. Trump’s choice for secretary of state. Mr. Tillerson’s stake in Russia’s energy industry could create a conflict between his interests as an oilman and his role as America’s leading diplomat.• Mr. Tillerson is viewed as a flexible pragmatist and people in the oil business have said that he learned to get along with the president of Russia strictly for business reasons.• He has arguably left an American footprint on more countries than any nominee before him, with an agenda that does not always mesh with that of the United States government.• Mr. Trump is trying to enlist the Republican party’s high priests of foreign policy to help him win the confirmation.• If he does become secretary of state, Mr. Tillerson could leave behind a weakened oil empire, facing falling reserves and weak prices.• The Federal Open Market Committee wraps up its two days of meetings. It has all but announced that it will raise its benchmark interest rate, but the 2017 forecast, which will also be published, is expected to give some indication about the direction of monetary policy next year. These forecasts are complicated, as The Upshot explains with the help of a Rube Goldberg Machine.• Mr. Trump will meet with members of the Silicon Valley elite, including Elon Musk of Tesla, Larry Page and Eric E. Schmidt of Alphabet, Timothy D. Cook of Apple, and Sheryl Sandberg of Facebook. Top of the agenda: jobs, jobs, jobs.Advertisement• The Commerce Department publishes retail sales data for November, one of the busiest shopping months of the year.Follow Amie Tsang on Twitter @amietsang.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.