AdvertisementSupported byBy Clifford KraussHOUSTON — Exxon Mobil wasted no time in announcing on Wednesday that Darren W. Woods, the company president, would succeed Rex W. Tillerson as chairman and chief executive now that Mr. Tillerson has been nominated to head the State Department.Mr. Woods, who is already something of a globe-trotting good-will ambassador for Exxon Mobil, has long been considered the heir apparent and is unlikely to shift the company in a radically new direction.The board promoted him to president last December as the company prepared for Mr. Tillerson’s scheduled retirement next March. The timetable was accelerated this week when President-elect Donald J. Trump tapped Mr. Tillerson to become secretary of state.Mr. Woods formally takes over on Jan. 1. As head of the biggest United States oil company, he can be expected to be a major spokesman for the industry as the Trump administration considers an overhaul of energy and environmental policy.And at age 51, Mr. Woods will be in a position to lead the company for many years, given Exxon Mobil’s mandatory retirement age of 65 for the top job.Mr. Woods is known for his congenial manner. The company sends him far and wide to cut ribbons on new projects and otherwise pave the way for deal making.Like Mr. Tillerson, Mr. Woods is a trained engineer. But he comes from the company’s chemical and refining businesses — unlike past Exxon Mobil heads who worked their way up the exploration and production side of the company. His ascension is in part a recognition by Exxon Mobil’s board that chemicals and refining have become particularly important profit centers at a time when oil and gas prices have been slumping.Mr. Woods is also known as a quick study who has delved into the drilling side of the business, which continues to dominate Exxon Mobil even though the company has had trouble in recent years finding additional reserves to replace depleting oil and gas fields.As Exxon struggles to find new growth, Mr. Woods may be forced to find companies and already-productive assets to buy.“I expect Darren will have to make a massive acquisition over the next few years,” said Fadel Gheit, a senior oil analyst at Oppenheimer & Company. “You need an asset that will generate earnings and cash flow.”Mr. Woods takes over the company at a difficult time. Standard & Poor’s recently stripped Exxon Mobil of its top credit rating for the first time since the Great Depression. It has suffered, like the rest of the industry, from the collapse of oil and gas prices over the last two years.Under Mr. Tillerson, Exxon Mobil has forged close ties with Russia in oil and gas exploration and development — relationships certain to draw scrutiny during the nominee’s confirmation hearings. Although much of the company’s projected future production is in Russia, Exxon Mobil’s activities there have been frozen since 2014 under United States sanctions against the Kremlin for its intervention in Ukraine.But trouble looms elsewhere, too.In October, Exxon Mobil conceded that 3.6 billion barrels of it Canadian oil sands reserves and 1 billion barrels of other North American reserves may have to be written down because they are currently not profitable to produce.In the meantime, several state attorneys general are investigating whether the company deceived the public about climate change for decades. The federal Securities and Exchange Commission is also investigating Exxon Mobil’s bookkeeping on reserves; many climate and energy experts say that fossil fuel companies will be required to leave much of their reserves in the ground because of climate change.Mr. Woods can be expected to forcefully argue that the company has done nothing wrong and has accepted the science of climate change.A native of Wichita, Kan., Mr. Woods earned a bachelor’s degree in electrical engineering from Texas A&M and a master’s in business administration from Northwestern University. He joined Exxon Mobil in 1992 and has served both domestically and abroad.He was president of the Exxon Mobil Refining and Supply Company for two years before being named senior vice president for the corporation and a member of its management committee in 2014.“This change in leadership is consistent with the board of directors’ succession plan developed years in advance,” the company said in a statement on Wednesday, “and demonstrates the strength of the management development system.”Advertisement