By PETER EAVISNOV. 5, 2015
A prominent Wall Street regulator on Thursday continued to press senior bankers to clean up the culture of their firms so that they can avoid the sort of recent scandals that have undermined the reputations of big banks.William C. Dudley, the president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, told bankers who had gathered for a conference on ethical culture at the New York Fed, “I think your focus should be less on the search for bad apples and more on how to improve the apple barrels.”Mr. Dudley started his push to improve banks’ culture two years ago with a speech that called the banks’ ethical lapses a “critical problem.” Skeptics have wondered whether the New York Fed has the authority or desire to do what it takes to change behavior on Wall Street. The New York Fed failed to address dangerous weaknesses in big banks before the 2008 financial crisis. And episodes since the crisis, like the so-called London Whale trading scandal at JPMorgan Chase, have raised questions about the effectiveness of its regulation.Still, when it comes to culture Mr. Dudley appears to have made some progress. He has helped assemble an international effort to clean up the banks, under the Group of 30, and on Thursday he had the support of Christine Lagarde, the managing director of the International Monetary Fund, and Stanley Fischer, the vice chairman of the Federal Reserve, both of whom were at the conference.AdvertisementAlthough Mr. Dudley and Ms. Lagarde talked about the public interest, much of the conference was conducted in private. As a result, the public could not follow what the bankers — including Michael L. Corbat, the chief of Citigroup, and James P. Gorman, the chief of Morgan Stanley — said about their efforts to overhaul their companies’ culture. In the coming days, the Fed will release a broad summary of what was discussed during the conference.AdvertisementBanks have been involved in many forms of misconduct in recent years, from selling shoddy mortgages to evading sanctions to rigging interest rates and foreign exchange trades. On Thursday, for instance, a jury in Manhattan found two former traders from a Dutch bank guilty of manipulating interest rates.Such wrongdoing has left the financial industry diminished in the eyes of the public. Ms. Lagarde described a personal example of this, recounting that her son told her he might not talk to her again if she joined a large investment bank. Ms. Lagarde, whose current term at the fund ends next year, in her speech on culture also cited ancient Greek thought and the work of Immanuel Kant.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“The goal of the financial sector must be not only to maximize the wealth of its shareholders,” she said, “but to enrich society by supporting economic activity and creating value and jobs — to ultimately improve the well-being of people.”For his part, Mr. Fischer warned that regulators should not be tempted to think that Wall Street would one day be clean. “This is not a battle that can be won,” he said, “Even in the best barrels, there will always be bad apples, so we must keep up that fight.”In some ways, Mr. Dudley is stepping into new territory. Law enforcement agencies and banking regulators are already supposed to address wrongdoing when they see it. But often it is hard for such agencies to spot misconduct. As a result, Mr. Dudley’s apparent goal is to press bankers to do more to prevent wrongdoing and find better ways to spot it in its early stages.By often taking to the bully pulpit, Mr. Dudley may be able to stir up greater vigilance within the banks.But it is now clear how the bankers have responded. Mr. Dudley said that the conference would give banks and regulators a chance to describe what is working and what is not. The attendees of the conference were chiefly bankers and regulators, as well as members of bank lobbying groups and lawyers from firms that represent banks. There appeared to be a dearth of consumer advocates.“What is essential for any serious discussion of culture and the entire range of industry and regulatory issues is a diversity of viewpoints, opinions and experiences,” said Dennis M. Kelleher, president and chief executive of Better Markets, a group that has called for tougher financial regulation. “Balance is the key or, as we all know, garbage in, garbage out.”An earlier version of this article referred incorrectly to an organization involved in an effort to improve banking culture. The Group of 30 is a a nonprofit organization set up to study economic and financial issues, not a group of nations.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.