By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSDEC. 14, 2016
A United States citizen living in Moscow was arrested on Wednesday after he flew to New York to face charges that he stole contact information for more than 100 million customers of American financial institutions, brokerage firms and financial news publishers, the authorities said.The man, Joshua Samuel Aaron, 32, was arrested at Kennedy Airport. He pleaded not guilty to a federal indictment charging him with conspiracy, computer hacking, securities fraud and wire fraud, among other charges.Mr. Aaron’s lawyer, Benjamin Brafman, said that his client had waived extradition and asylum in Russia and had voluntarily returned to the United States “to responsibly address the charges.”The prosecution was announced last year by Preet Bharara, the United States attorney for the Southern District of New York, who said that two men had been arrested in Israel after conspiring with Mr. Aaron to carry out “the single largest theft of customer data from a U.S. financial institution ever.”AdvertisementMr. Bharara said the thieves took data related to more than 83 million JPMorgan Chase customers in 2014. The prosecutor said that Mr. Aaron was charged with working to break into the networks of dozens of American companies. In a news release issued on Wednesday, Mr. Bharara said the men had engaged in “what we have called ‘hacking as a business model.’”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.JPMorgan Chase is the nation’s largest bank by assets.A federal court indictment said that identifying information for millions of customers from companies other than JPMorgan Chase had been stolen from 2012 to last summer as well.Mr. Aaron’s co-defendants — Gery Shalon and Ziv Orenstein — were arrested by the Israeli authorities in July 2015 and were extradited from Israel in June. They have also pleaded not guilty.AdvertisementIf convicted of the charges, the defendants could face decades in prison.Mr. Aaron pleaded not guilty to the charges during a brief appearance before a magistrate judge. With the consent of his lawyer, he was scheduled to be held overnight pending another court appearance on Thursday before a Federal District Court judge.A version of this article appears in print on December 15, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Suspect in Vast Data Breach Returns to Face U.S. Charges.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.