By AMIE TSANGDEC. 15, 2016
When a company is the target of two of the largest-known data breaches ever, you have to ask questions.Just months after revealing the hacking of 500 million accounts in 2014, Yahoo disclosed that more than one billion accounts were compromised the year before. Government employees are among the victims of the hack, Bloomberg reported, citing a database provided to an online security researcher.Critics have already pointed out how slow the company was to adopt aggressive security measures, even after a breach in 2013 and a series of spam attacks.The most concerning issue for some is the fact that the company discovered the attack only after analyzing files provided by law enforcement.AdvertisementWhat does it mean for Yahoo’s sale to Verizon?Verizon has already said it might seek to renegotiate the terms of its $4.8 billion deal because of the disclosure of the 2014 hack, and it repeated its position after the latest disclosure.Advertisement“We will review the impact of this new development before reaching any final conclusions,” said Bob Varettoni, a Verizon spokesman.As a generation of executives moves to the Trump administration, another rises to lead the corporations they leave behind.With Gary D. Cohn, the No. 2 executive at Goldman Sachs, leaving to lead the National Economic Council, the bank has elevated a new generation of leaders.Our columnist Andrew Ross Sorkin and his Times colleagues help you make sense of major business and policy headlines — and the power-brokers who shape them.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.David M. Solomon, one of three co-heads of the investment bank, and Harvey M. Schwartz, Goldman’s chief financial officer, will replace Mr. Cohn. The pair will share the jobs of president and chief operating officer. R. Martin Chavez, the chief information officer, will succeed Mr. Schwartz as C.F.O.Exxon Mobil, meanwhile, quickly tapped Darren W. Woods, the company president, to succeed Rex W. Tillerson (The president-elect’s pick for secretary of state) as chairman and chief executive.Mr. Woods has long been considered the heir apparent and is unlikely to take Exxon in a radically new direction.“We’re operating under a cloud of uncertainty at the moment.”— Janet L. Yellen, the chairwoman of the Federal Reserve, who declined to comment on the merits of Donald J. Trump’s plans or their consequences for the economy. The Fed raised its benchmark interest rate, saying that the economy was performing well. Now, the question is whether Mr. Trump’s presidency will lead to more rate rises. Not necessarily, Neil Irwin writes.AdvertisementIn spite of an incoming presidential administration in the United States that is hostile to addressing climate change, the clamor for corporations to be more forthcoming about the risks posed by environmental changes is getting louder.A task force commissioned by the Group of 20 richest nations has issued guidelines for how companies should measure and disclose the predicted effects of extreme weather and rising seas.The guidelines are voluntary, but companies may find themselves under more pressure from investors, who have taken to including environmental, social and corporate governance issues, or E.S.G., in their stock picks. Younger investors, in particular, like the approach.And performance does not have to suffer. Funds like the Vanguard social index fund and the Parnassus Core Equity Investor fund, which pick stocks using E.S.G. and fundamental analysis, have been beating the market.• The Bank of England will announce its latest monetary policy decision and is expected to stand pat on interest rates. It cut its benchmark interest rate in August over fears that Britain’s vote to leave the European Union could hamper growth, but the economy has beaten expectations since the referendum.Follow Amie Tsang on Twitter @amietsang.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.