AdvertisementSupported byCorner OfficeBy Adam BryantThis interview with Yuchun Lee, C.E.O. and co-founder of Allego, a Boston-area start-up focused on sales education, has been edited for space and clarity.Q. What were your early years like?A. I was born and raised in Taiwan. My father was a captain on oil tankers, so he was never home. My mother was a stay-at-home mom. I have two sisters.I’ve been an entrepreneur since kindergarten. My first gig started because my father would travel back from Japan and bring me these really fancy stickers that changed pictures based on your perspective. I would sell them at school. Later on, I sold silkworms in elementary school.You eventually moved to the United States.My father got sick of traveling all the time, and he connected with a businessman who was starting a shipping company in the states, so my whole family immigrated here. After we landed, the guy who sponsored us went bankrupt.So there we were, our whole family, and no job. Our standing in society just dropped all the way down to survival mode for about a year. Then we moved to Houston when my father got a job. My mother opened a Chinese restaurant, and I would help out. Then I started my first software company in my junior year of high school.How did that happen?I was basically a complete nerd, and I was really good in math. A friend of mine and I decided to compete to see who could finish our math course sooner. So the teacher gave us all the homework for the whole year, and we just crammed. In three weeks, both of us finished the entire course. The teacher gave us the exam, and we passed everything.So we had nothing to do for almost a year, but we had to go to class. After a few days, the teacher told us we should go hang out in the new computer room. I was also interested in art, so I wrote a program that allowed a professional draftsman to use a personal computer to design anything. This was before all the Mac programs came out to do that.Then when I went to M.I.T., I started a company in my junior year — a friend and I imported PC components, assembled them in our dorm and sold them. We did that for a year and a half until the campus police got involved because the scale of the business got a little too big for a dorm operation. At one point, the U.P.S. truck that came by every day was filled entirely with our stuff.Early management lessons for you?There were so many. Nobody taught me that managing people is something you’ve got to love to do, and that it’s a real burden, a real responsibility. I started out with a blue-collar-ish mental model of manager, where you would just tell people what they needed to do. But then you very soon realize that human beings have free will and you’ve got to persuade them.Over time, I’ve learned that finding people who inherently love what they do just makes the manager’s job much easier.Other lessons you’ve learned over time?I’ve developed a few core philosophies about how to run a company.The first is the ability of the company to know what is true, what is not true, and what’s real and what’s not real. That grounds everything. You can have a group of supersmart people, but if they have the wrong view of the world, they can waste a lot of energy going down the wrong track. So I tell every employee, if something’s fishy, question it. The foundation is all about truth.The second is how you behave as a team to solve problems. A lot of energy can be wasted, because in an unchecked environment, 80 percent of what’s being said is posturing, and it’s got nothing to do with the problem. Everybody’s trying to figure out how to look smart in front of the C.E.O. or they’re solving a problem that’s completely different than what’s on the table.So we set some ground rules about problem solving, including that it’s actually O.K. if you sit there. If you’ve got nothing to say, don’t say it.The third is about mistakes. We tell people you’ve got to love your mistake. If you go through a whole day without making a mistake, you just wasted a whole day because you probably haven’t pushed yourself.So we try to train and tell every employee that if you can truly embrace your mistake, and not feel this visceral defensive reaction when someone tells you that you did something wrong, you’re going to go so much further than anybody else. You need to see mistakes as opportunities to improve.How do you hire? First, have as many people interview a candidate as possible. And second, always do “blind” reference checks by finding people who have worked with the person in the past, because in a one-hour interview, a lot of people can fake it.And I look for people who are not set in their ways, and who are interested in learning and growing. You can tell that just by whether their eyes sparkle when they talk about the most rewarding experience in their life.What career and life advice do you give to new college grads? My philosophy is that there’s a continuum. At one end, you’ve got people saying you should find a job that will make you a good living — a pragmatic view of the world. At the other end, you’ve got the Steve Jobs view — find what you love.The right answer is somewhere in the middle. I think most people can actually be pretty happy and passionate and love what they do over a much wider variety of things than they think.So I would say there’s a basket of things that you’ll probably love doing. So set your bar really low at first, by looking for things you don’t hate, and that’s your pool of possibilities. Then you’ll discover you’re good at certain things, and that you love doing them, and then you can start to narrow the choices down to a smaller set.Each week, Adam Bryant talks with top executives about leadership. Follow him on Twitter: @nytcorneroffice. This interview has been edited for space and clarity.Advertisement