DEC. 18, 2016
Here’s a look at what’s coming up this week.AUSTRALIAAustralia’s treasurer, Scott Morrison, will release his country’s midyear budget update on Monday on the heels of its worst quarter for economic growth since the start of the financial crisis. After close elections in July, Standard & Poor’s put the government on notice that Australia could lose its AAA credit rating. The ratings agency has not changed its negative outlook, and Mr. Morrison’s announcement is largely seen as a deciding factor in any possible changes before the new year. Zach Wichter__________EARNINGSNike Inc. will release its second-quarter earnings on Tuesday. Earnings per share are expected to be down from the same time last year. The company faces competition from companies including Adidas and Under Armour. Its stock is down 18 percent this year.The FedEx Corporation will also announce its second-quarter earnings on Tuesday. The company recovered in the first quarter after fourth-quarter losses in the 2016 fiscal year. In May, it acquired the Dutch courier TNT Express for $42.8 billion. FedEx stock has risen more than 30 percent this year. The company is benefiting from strong demand for holiday deliveries. Zach WichterThe Rite Aid Corporation will report its earnings Thursday. Walgreens Boots Alliance is still waiting on government approval of a $9.4 billion deal to take over the company but expects the transaction to be completed in early 2017. Walgreens included Rite Aid’s profits in its full-year forecast, signaling its confidence in obtaining federal approval. Zach WichterAdvertisement__________BRITISH EXITTheresa May, the prime minister of Britain, is scheduled to face questions on Tuesday from senior lawmakers over her government’s preparations for the country’s departure from the European Union. Mrs. May, who has said she wants to begin the exit negotiations by the end of March, is due to give evidence to the House of Commons Liaison Committee, which generally questions the prime minister on public policy three times a year. Stephen CastleAdvertisement__________ECONOMYA series of data releases on Thursday will provide fresh indications from the federal government about the economy’s trajectory.The Commerce Department will release its final revision of estimated economic growth in the third quarter. Experts anticipate only a slight change in the number, with new data likely to increase the estimate to 3.3 percent annually from 3.2 percent.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The third quarter — spanning July, August and September — turned out to be fairly robust, and economists expect growth to slow to just below 2 percent annually in the current fourth quarter.In a separate release, the Commerce Department will announce figures for durable goods orders in November. Economists expect the headline figure to show a 4.7 percent decline in orders, as aircraft deliveries fell. Excluding the volatile transport category, durable goods demand is thought to have risen by 0.2 percent.Finally, the Commerce Department will release data for personal income and spending in November. Experts expect to see a 0.3 percentage point rise in income and a 0.4 percentage point jump in spending. Consumer prices are estimated to have risen by 0.2 percentage point last month.In the wake of last week’s interest rate increase by the Federal Reserve, Wall Street will be watching Thursday’s data to gauge the economy’s underlying strength and whether the Fed will need to move again soon. Nelson SchwartzOn Friday, the University of Michigan will release its final estimate of consumer sentiment in December. With the election in the past and the stock market on the upswing, consumer sentiment is expected to come in at 98.1, an improvement from the outlook in October and November. Nelson SchwartzA version of this article appears in print on December 19, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: U.S. Estimates Growth; Nike to Release Earnings.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.