AdvertisementSupported byWhite Collar WatchBy Peter J. HenningThe Bible says that “no one can serve two masters.” In federal law, this admonition is embodied in statutes that prohibit government officials from receiving any outside compensation for their work and bar them from acting in ways that favor their own financial interests.These laws present challenges for the corporate executives Rex W. Tillerson from Exxon Mobil and Gary D. Cohn of Goldman Sachs, along with the investment billionaires Wilbur L. Ross and Steven Mnuchin, who have been named by President-elect Donald J. Trump to senior positions in his administration. Their nominations will raise additional questions beyond those facing Mr. Trump about how they will set aside their business ties when entering public service.Mr. Trump told The New York Times that “the president can’t have a conflict of interest.” He is right that the major conflict laws do not apply to him, but they certainly do apply to everyone else he brings into the administration. And the law may not be the only challenge the president-elect faces, as he is already dealing with a conflict arising from a provision in a lease his company has with the federal government to run a hotel in Washington. The lease may be breached once he takes office unless he divests himself of his financial interests in the hotel.A federal statute, 18 U.S.C. § 209, prohibits a federal worker from receiving any salary or compensation, except as paid by the government “for his services as an officer or employee of the executive branch.” The law traces back to 1917, when Congress enacted it out of concern that executives at companies and private foundations who volunteered to work for the government to help support the war effort as “dollar-a-year men” while still receiving their private-sector salaries would favor the interests of their employers.The law permits some outside payments to someone who isworking for the federal government so long as they were earned before he or she left employment. For example, a pension or profit-sharing program that may be paid out over a number of years is permissible because it is not tied to the person’s current work as a federal official.But that is not the only benefit corporate executives may receive when leaving the private sector to work for the government. One way companies avoid violating the law while still giving a departing employee a generous “golden handshake” as they walk out the door is to pay any extra bonus or accelerate the vesting of restricted stock awards before the person officially takes office.In Crandon v. United States, the Supreme Court rejected the Justice Department’s argument that lump sum severance payments to executives of Boeing who were leaving the company to join the Reagan administration violated Section 209. Although the payments were essentially a gift to mitigate the loss that would come with joining the government and the resultant lower pay, the opinion, by Justice John Paul Stevens, took a literal approach to the statute. He concluded that the use of the present tense “serves” in Section 209 meant that it covers only current federal employees, not those about to take a position.Mr. Tillerson, nominated as Mr. Trump’s secretary of state, may well be in that situation if Exxon decides to accelerate the vesting of his stock awards of about 1.9 million shares, worth over $170 million at the current stock price. If he held on to the shares, there could be significant issues because he would continue to hold a stake in a global company that will be affected by many decisions made by the secretary of state, and that could arguably violate another conflict-of-interest statute, 18 U.S.C. § 208, which prohibits favoring personal financial interests.According to Exxon’s most recent proxy statement, its “sound governance practices” prohibit accelerating the payment of unvested stock awards and delayed bonuses. But an executive who served at the company since graduating from college 41 years ago and led it as chairman and chief executive for over 10 years is likely to get the benefit of additional compensation to reward him for joining the government.Goldman Sachs, where Mr. Cohn was president and a director, takes a much more favorable view about granting benefits to executives departing for Washington, a seemingly routine practice that has earned the firm the nickname “Government Sachs.”A shareholder proposal this year to prohibit accelerated vesting of stock awards for executives leaving for a government position received less than 5 percent of the vote. The company argued against it in its proxy statement, stating that “as a broader policy matter, we do not think it is appropriate to penalize employees who choose to enter into a career of public service.” Mr. Cohn was picked to be the  director of the National Economic Council.Why would a company bestow a benefit on a departing executive? It can certainly be viewed as a reward for loyal service, and not an effort to buy any future favor. Executives like Mr. Tillerson and Mr. Cohn are unlikely to view the companies to which they devoted their careers any less favorably if they forfeit restricted shares and other compensation.Regardless of the expressed reason, there is the perception that the company is cementing its relationship with a high-level official by handing out an expensive parting gift. A board of directors is well within its authority to confer the benefit under the “business judgment rule” by which courts refuse to review most compensation decisions, so any shareholder challenge would be doomed to failure. As long as the company stays within the letter of the law established by the Crandon decision, there is no danger that handing out a benefit to a departing executive will be deemed improper.The challenge for Mr. Ross, who is the chairman of the private equity firm WL Ross & Company and Mr. Trump’s nominee for commerce secretary, and Mr. Mnuchin, a hedge fund manager and yet another Goldman Sachs alumnus, who was picked for Treasury secretary, may be harder to deal with.Unlike an executive at a public company, their firms have continuing investments in a range of companies, and they have no convenient means to quickly sell their ownership stakes. Serving in the Commerce and Treasury Departments means that any continuing stake in their firms is sure to be affected by their decisions, perhaps violating Section 208.Nor can they continue to receive compensation, even if the payout was deferred, while serving in the cabinet as if they were still working at their firms. The problem is not insoluble, but Section 209’s limitation on compensation for government workers does present a new challenge as Mr. Trump brings in men from a part of Wall Street that has not before been a source of leaders for government departments.In addition to the exemption the law provides to the president from Section 208, Mr. Trump is free from the restriction on receiving compensation related to government service. The Times reported that he would be credited as an executive producer of “The New Celebrity Apprentice,” to be hosted by Arnold Schwarzenegger, receiving some income from the program while serving as president.Could Mr. Trump make an appearance on the program as a special guest, which would be expected to drive ratings — and profits — higher? There would not be a violation of Section 209, but it is an altogether different question whether the American public would accept his profiting from using his office in this way.Mr. Trump’s cabinet selections, and his own continuing involvement in outside business ventures, raise the question about how much business and government should mix when corporate executives and investors join the government. The challenge will be figuring out which master is being served.Advertisement