AdvertisementSupported byBy Amie TsangIt’s that time of year again.The holidays are approaching and the annual ritual of Wall Street gurus making their forecasts for the year ahead has begun.This year, as with many other years, most declare themselves to be bullish. And as with many other years, they could be wrong.But does it matter? In a word, yes.These forecasts are not just lacking in value, they’re destroying value by issuing spurious numbers, according to Salil Mehta, an independent statistician who was formerly the director of research and analytics for the United States Treasury’s Troubled Asset Relief Program and for the federal Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation.“They are much worse than random chance alone would predict,” Mr. Mehta said.Markets are notoriously difficult to time accurately and consistently, even for those whose forecasts might be worth pondering.Seth J. Masters, chief investment officer of Bernstein Private Wealth Management, predicted in 2012 (in a period of deep gloom) that the Dow Jones industrial average would reach 20,000 within the decade, and given where it is headed, he may soon be right.But even he won’t issue stock market targets.“The world is too complex for that,” Mr. Masters said. “We can analyze trends, we can give some probabilities — we can’t really predict the future.”Finland is about to embark on a social welfare experiment that will test not just economic policy, but also human nature.Jobless people in the country cannot earn additional income while collecting unemployment benefits. So for some laid-off workers, a guaranteed unemployment check is a better financial proposition than taking a leap with a new job or business.The government wants to see if it can change that.It is giving 2,000 unemployed people a universal basic income — automatic benefits, minus the bureaucratic hassle and penalties for amassing extra income.Will these people set themselves up on new career paths once they are liberated from the time-sucking unemployment system? Or will they squander their money on vodka?We will see as the trial progresses over the next two years.Many will be keeping an eye on the results. The search for a way to lessen the vulnerabilities of working people who may have been affected by globalization and automation is gaining a sense of urgency as reactionary populism sweeps the globe.“The organizational complexity of companies is now so high that it makes it difficult for external parties to detect misconduct.”Jaron H. Wilde, an assistant professor of accounting at the University of Iowa’s Tippie College of Business, whose study highlighted that insiders are often best positioned to monitor companies’ financial reporting.Women are no longer the minority at law schools in the United States.They now make up more than 50 percent of students at accredited law schools for the first time, according to the American Bar Association.Law schools have been trying to broaden their base of applicants, while grappling with tighter requirements for bar passage rates and declining enrollment. Some have found that reaching more women has yielded more qualified applicants.Still, some data show that even with the number of female students rising, a portion of women end up in lower-ranked schools. They may have the edge in enrollment numbers, but that does not always lead to an advantage in the profession.• The verdict in the trial of Christine Lagarde, the managing director of the International Monetary Fund, is expected.Follow Amie Tsang on Twitter @amietsang.Advertisement