AdvertisementSupported byBy William GrimesGeorge Barris, one of the pioneer car customizers immortalized in Tom Wolfe’s essay “The Kandy-Kolored Tangerine-Flake Streamline Baby” and the designer of the Batmobile, the Munster Koach and other specialty cars for television and film, died on Thursday at his home in Encino, Calif. He was 89.Edward Lozzi, a spokesman for Barris Kustom Industries, confirmed his death.Mr. Barris, a veteran of the body shops of Sacramento and Los Angeles, was a towering figure in the Southern California subculture of customizers and hot-rodders, known both for the sophistication of his design work and his flair for self-promotion.He and his older brother, Sam, treated standard-issue Mercurys, Buicks and Fords as mere starting points for reinterpretation. They stripped away trim, reshaped body parts, and pirated grilles, headlights and taillights from other car models. George created his own line of outré paints, called Kandy Colors, to impart luster and depth to vehicles that became, in effect, rolling works of street art.In his baroque phase, Mr. Barris designed a slew of special-order cars for television, most famously transforming a 1955 Lincoln Futura concept car, in three weeks, into the finned Batmobile for the 1960s television series “Batman.”In an entirely different vein he spliced a 1921 Oldsmobile and a flatbed pickup for the sitcom “The Beverly Hillbillies,” and he incorporated a coffin in creating a car called Drag-u-La for another sitcom, “The Munsters.” (He also created the family car, the Munster Koach, for the same show.)“He made a look — the Southern California customized car look — that was very distinctive,” said John DeWitt, the author of “Cool Cars, High Art: The Rise of Kustom Kulture.” “But his great contribution was putting customizing on the map. He was a phenomenal publicist and showman. L.A. was the perfect place for him.”George Salapatas was born on Nov. 20, 1925, in Chicago. His mother died when he was 3, and his father sent his two sons to be raised by relatives in Roseville, Calif., a suburb of Sacramento. The Barris name was fashioned from Salapatas and another family name, Badacardes.Both George and Sam were car-crazy. When the brothers were in their early teens, they customized a 1925 Buick sedan that their father had given them, applying orange and blue stripes and fitting it with hubcaps and metal trim fashioned from Woolworth pots and pans.While in high school, George worked part time at local body shops, putting in time under Harry Westergard, a legendary car customizer, and completing his first full custom job, on his own 1936 Ford roadster.In 1942, Sam enlisted in the merchant marine and George moved to Los Angeles, intending to follow suit, but a promised assignment never came. Instead, he found work with Jones’s Body, Fender and Paint Shop, where he became foreman. He opened his own shop, in Bell, a suburb of Los Angeles, in 1944.“It was like Tiepolo emerging from the studios of Venice, where the rounded Grecian haunches of the murals on the Palladian domes hung in the atmosphere like clouds,” Mr. Wolfe wrote in a famous passage. “Except that Barris emerged from the auto-body shops of Los Angeles.”The brothers reunited after the war and moved the shop, now called Barris Kustom, to Los Angeles. In 1948, George’s customized 1941 Buick took the top prize at the first Hot Rod Exposition at the Los Angeles Armory. It was the first in a long series of prizewinning custom jobs marked by a modernist feel for streamlining and understatement.“Detroit cars are usually very well designed — so well, in fact, that we seldom change the basic lines,” Mr. Barris told Motor Trend magazine in 1953. “Instead, we accentuate them, develop them beyond the limits imposed by mass production, and try to refine them into a car which has design plus more lasting quality.”Mr. Barris’s creations reached a national audience through car shows, new magazines like Hot Rod, Car Craft and Rod and Custom, and model kits sold by companies like Revell, Aurora and AMT. One car in particular sealed the brothers’ reputation: the Hirohata Merc, a 1951 Mercury Club Coupe that Sam and George transformed into a sleek, elongated teardrop.The car, named after its owner, Bob Hirohata, expressed the Barris aesthetic in its classic period. The brothers extended the front and rear fenders, removed the chrome trim, lowered the roof, dropped the chassis to within a few inches of the ground and painted the car an arresting sea-foam green with dark green panels. Two 1953 Lincoln taillights were “Frenched,” or smoothed into the contours of the fender, and a new grille was fashioned from three 1951 Ford grilles.The Hirohata Merc was the hit of the 1952 Motorama show in Los Angeles and a superstar after it appeared on the cover of Motor Trend. Rod and Custom documented Mr. Hirohata’s journey as he drove the car on Route 66 to the Indianapolis Custom Show, where it took first prize.“The Barris brothers didn’t merely improve the looks of the original or ‘individualize’ it with bolt-on accessories as is done today,” Mr. DeWitt wrote in an essay on the Hirohata Merc for The American Poetry Review in 2009. “They reimagined it, redesigned it and rebuilt it so that it embodied a culture, a California car culture’s idea of what it meant to be completely cool.”Ala Kart, a customized 1929 Ford pickup, won the America’s Most Beautiful Roadster trophy at the Oakland Roadster Show (now the Grand National Roadster Show) two years running, in 1958 and 1959. “It gives you a feeling that you’ve done something to make a better world,” Mr. Barris told Rod and Custom in 1962.Detroit took note. In the early 1960s, Ford hired Mr. Barris to customize production cars for two traveling exhibitions, Ford’s Custom Car Caravan and Lincoln/Mercury’s Caravan of Stars. Before long, the innovations of customizers like Mr. Barris began finding their way into the new breed of muscle cars, a development that spelled the end of the golden age of customizing.In 1958, a year after Sam moved back to Sacramento for a quieter life with his young family, Mr. Barris married Shirley Ann Nahas, who helped manage his business until she died in 2001. His survivors include a son, Brett, a daughter, Joji Barris-Paster, and a grandson.Mr. Barris’s cars gained cachet with film actors and other notables. He did his first celebrity job for Lionel Hampton, the jazz musician — a Jaguar — and a slew of commissions followed. He created a 1954 Cadillac Eldorado for Liberace with sterling-silver grand-piano hood ornaments that played “I’ll Be Seeing You” when opened.His celebrity projects also included Elvis Presley’s 1960 Cadillac Fleetwood (with a gold-plated record player, drinks cabinet and shoe buffer inside), a gold Rolls-Royce for Zsa Zsa Gabor, and a caricature golf cart, with ski-jump nose, for Bob Hope.Inevitably, the movies came calling. After the Hirohata Merc made an appearance in the 1955 film “Running Wild,” with Mamie Van Doren, Mr. Barris built two duplicate chopped and channeled 1948 Chevy stunt cars for the drag-racing scene in “High School Confidential” (one doomed to be crashed), and the chopped Mercury that James Dean drove in “Rebel Without a Cause.”Mr. Barris did some of his most memorable work for television. In addition to the Batmobile, the Munster Koach and the “Beverly Hillbillies” jalopy, he designed the fictional 1928 Porter driven by Jerry Van Dyke in “My Mother the Car.”Over the decades, the price of gasoline skyrocketed and the cars got smaller, but Mr. Barris managed to keep his hand in, producing custom versions of the Toyota Prius (at the request of The New York Times Magazine) and the 2010 Chevy Camaro. In 2013, the Batmobile, which he had owned through the years, sold for $4.62 million at the annual Barrett-Jackson auto auction in Scottsdale, Ariz.“Look, I’m just a crazy car guy, and I’m proud of it,” Mr. Barris told USA Today in 2005. “My love for this nutty stuff keeps me coming in the office every day, 8 o’clock sharp.”Advertisement