AdvertisementSupported byBy Amie TsangAs Bono puts it, they are “a lot of bad deals done by good people.”The musician and activist was commenting on the pitfalls of social impact investing — certainly fashionable, but with mixed results. The social impact can be negligible or nonexistent.But a group of prominent executives and investors have nonetheless put together Rise, a $2 billion fund, Andrew Ross Sorkin writes.It is being developed by William E. McGlashan Jr., a partner at the private equity firm TPG, and has an all-star cast of board members: along with Bono, they include Jeff Skoll, the first employee of eBay, who now runs Participant Media; Laurene Powell Jobs, the philanthropist investor; and Mo Ibrahim, perhaps the most influential investor in Africa.They want to be clear: it is not a charity. There are strict metrics by which to measure social impact, and an outside auditor is involved. Two large pension funds and one sovereign wealth fund have committed nine-figure sums, according to people briefed on the investments.“We have to be a bit modest about where we are with Rise and be actually a bit tough on ourselves,” Bono said. “I’d be more comfortable speaking about this in a year’s time or two year’s time as we go along.”Steven T. Mnuchin was a longtime member of the financial elite, but he was not a household name. At least, not until Donald J. Trump chose Mr. Mnuchin to be his campaign fund-raiser.Now, he is on course to become the first hedge fund manager to lead the Treasury.At his Senate confirmation hearing, his penchant for secrecy and willingness to take risks are likely to come under scrutiny.For example, he owns a company in Delaware called Steven T. Mnuchin Inc., which was set up months before Goldman went public in May 1999. It had a Goldman mailing address and at least one Goldman director. It stayed that way years after he left Goldman to start his hedge fund career.Corporate filings call the entity an “investment in partnerships.”Barney Keller, a representative for Mr. Mnuchin said the company held legacy Goldman investments and had not made any new investments since 2002.Matthew Goldstein and Alexandra Stevenson took a look at other business dealings that may attract attention.Mr. Mnuchin could be joined in the administration by yet another billionaire. Mr. Trump plans to nominate Vincent Viola, the founder of a high-frequency trading company, as secretary of the Army.Mr. Viola, a retired Army major and graduate of West Point, is the owner of the National Hockey League’s Florida Panthers, former chairman of the New York Mercantile Exchange and founder of Virtu Financial.Peter J. Henning points out that these nominations raise even more questions, beyond those facing Mr. Trump, about how they will set aside their business ties when they enter public service.“She was a breath of fresh air, someone representing true change from the past. Now she is just another tainted European leader.”— Peter Doyle, a former economist at the International Monetary Fund (and now an outspoken critic). The fund threw its support behind Christine Lagarde, its managing director, in spite of her being convicted on charges of misusing public funds.The double-digit returns at Platinum, a little-known hedge fund in New York, were just too good to be true.Mark Nordlicht, a founder and the chief investment officer, was arrested, along with six others, on charges related to a $1 billion fraud.Prosecutors likened it to a Ponzi scheme, saying that executives misrepresented the firm’s investments and performance. They also took in new money in order to pay longtime investors, eventually resorting to high-interest rate loans.It seemed the firm sensed the government investigation closing in on it, too.“Don’t forget the books,” one unnamed partner wrote in an email exchange. “Assume we are not coming back to ny.”Follow Amie Tsang on Twitter @amietsang.Advertisement