By CHAD BRAYDEC. 21, 2016
LONDON — Investors are increasingly sounding the alarms over Monte dei Paschi di Siena, the beleaguered Italian lender, as concerns mounted on Wednesday about its ability to raise new capital and avoid a government bailout.The troubled Italian banking system, stuffed with dubious loans, has broadly put global policy makers and investors on alert for signs of a potential shock. And Monte dei Paschi, the country’s oldest bank, is in the weakest spot.The bank, which was the worst performer in the European stress tests this year, was given until the end of the month to raise 5 billion euros, or about $5.2 billion. But investors do not seem convinced that the bank can find the funds, sending shares plunging on Wednesday.Thursday is the deadline for investors to agree to purchase new shares in the lender as part of its recapitalization plan, but news reports have indicated that Monte dei Paschi has struggled in its efforts to sell shares.AdvertisementThe Italian government is preparing for the worst. Italy’s Parliament on Wednesday signed off on a €20 billion plan to potentially bail out the country’s weakest banks.AdvertisementAnd Monte dei Paschi’s financial picture is quickly deteriorating. The bank, in a  document posted on its website on Wednesday, said that its €11 billion in liquidity would last about four months. The lender had originally said that it expected that capital to last 11 months.Trading in shares of Monte dei Paschi were suspended for part of the day on Wednesday, with the stock declining as much as 18 percent. Shares ended the day in Milan down 12 percent.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.With large losses and continuing capital concerns, shares in Monte dei Paschi, Italy’s third-largest bank by assets behind UniCredit and Banca Intesa Sanpaolo, have been under significant pressure.The bank is now worth about €1 billion. Its value has drastically eroded, despite raising about €8 billion in recent years.The bank’s chairman and chief executive left in September after their plans for raising capital received little support in the markets. Marco Morelli, a former Monte dei Paschi executive, rejoined the bank in September as chief executive and has been trying to win over investors.In October, Mr. Morelli unveiled a turnaround effort. As part of the plan, the bank said that it would cut 2,600 jobs by 2019 and close 500 of its 2,000 branches as part of its reorganization. It also said it would seek to sell some businesses.A recapitalization plan was central. The bank is selling new shares to the public and seeking to convince existing bondholders to swap their bonds for shares. The deadline for bondholders to agree to the swap was Wednesday afternoon.Follow Chad Bray on Twitter @Chadbray.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.