By RAVI SOMAIYANOV. 5, 2015
When News Corporation, Time Inc. and Tribune Publishing were spun out of their respective corporate parents in recent years, it was said to be as much for the sake of the media companies themselves as for the bottom lines of the more lucrative businesses they left behind.The picture revealed on Thursday in the companies’ quarterly earnings, a year or two into life alone for all three, more closely reflected the harsh, shifting realities of a challenged industry.News Corporation  reported revenue of about $2 billion, down 4 percent from $2.1 billion a year ago. Net income of $189 million was up significantly from $88 million a year ago, in part because of the addition of the online real estate company Move, acquired for $950 million last year.But the news and information segment of the business, which includes The Wall Street Journal and The New York Post, declined 11 percent, or $161 million, though the company attributed two-thirds of that decline to fluctuations in foreign currencies.AdvertisementIn a call with investors late Thursday, the company’s chief executive, Robert J. Thomson, described “understandable” difficulties, but said that the company remained “confident in our overall plans.”AdvertisementRevenue at Time Inc. was down 6 percent, to $773 million from $821 million, driven by declines in what are the pillars of most publishing companies — advertising, circulation and newsstand sales. Digital advertising, up 22 percent, could not make up for declines in print. The company, too, cited currency fluctuations as a factor in some declines.It recorded a net loss of $899 million, after a $952 million good will impairment charge.In his call with investors, Time Inc.’s chief executive, Joseph A. Ripp, pointed out the success of certain brands like Southern Living, including an expansion of the brand into interior design, among other new businesses, as proof the company’s growth plan can be extended across its portfolio of more than 90 publications, including Time and People magazines.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But the declines are expected to continue in the fourth quarter, the company said, and it is not clear precisely how much time Mr. Ripp will be given by investors to deliver on his plan. The company’s stock was down nearly 4 percent at the close of trading Thursday.At Tribune Publishing, revenue remained virtually flat at just over $400 million, but the company reported a net loss of $3.4 million. Advertising revenue declined, most notably in national advertising, which is integral to the company’s plan to sell across its portfolio of newspapers, which include The Chicago Tribune and The Baltimore Sun.The company is recovering from a recent scandal in which it dismissed the popular publisher of The Los Angeles Times, prompting questions about the company’s plans to increase revenue.All three companies are trying to cut costs — by $110 million at Time Inc. and $70 million at Tribune Publishing this year. But a clear path to consistent growth and profitability remains unclear.On his call with investors, Mr. Thomson of News Corporation was asked whether he had considered spinning the news and information business out again, on its own. He said no. When the advertising market, going through its own turmoil, settles, he said, News Corporation will be well positioned to take advantage of it.A version of this article appears in print on November 6, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: News Corp., Time Inc. and Tribune All Report Flat or Falling Quarterly Revenue.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.