By CHAD BRAYDEC. 21, 2016
LONDON — A former fund manager at BlackRock was sentenced to one year in prison on Wednesday after he pleaded guilty to insider trading charges in November.The fund manager, Mark Lyttleton, 45, oversaw the BlackRock UK Dynamic and BlackRock UK Absolute Alpha portfolios before he left the firm in March 2013. He pleaded guilty last month to two counts of insider dealing, the equivalent of insider trading in Britain.At a hearing in London on Wednesday, Judge Andrew Goymer sentenced Mr. Lyttleton to 18 months in prison, but reduced the sentence to a year in prison as credit for Mr. Lyttleton’s pleading guilty in the matter, according to the Financial Conduct Authority, which brought the criminal case.Insider dealing convictions carry a maximum penalty of seven years in prison.“Lyttleton’s insider dealing involved a gross abuse of the trust placed in him as a senior fund manager,” Mark Steward, the regulator’s executive director of enforcement and market oversight, said in a news release.Advertisement“He tried to hide his misconduct through the use of unregistered mobile phones and setting up a company in his wife’s maiden name in an overseas jurisdiction,” Mr. Steward added. “None of this meant he could avoid detection.”AdvertisementThe trading in question occurred in 2011 through a Panama-registered company that Mr. Lyttleton bought in November 2010 and placed in his wife’s maiden name.Regulators said Mr. Lyttleton made trades on that company’s behalf using inside information gleaned while working at BlackRock.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The trades included the purchase of 175,000 shares of EnCore Oil in October 2011 ahead of an announcement of a proposed takeover and options in Cairn Energy in November 2011 ahead of an announcement of drilling results from one of its wells in Greenland, the Financial Conduct Authority said.Mr. Lyttleton realized more than $54,000 in profits from the EnCore trading, the regulator said.Both securities were on BlackRock’s restricted trading list at the time, and Mr. Lyttleton failed to disclose to BlackRock the existence of his trading account or seek clearance for his trades in EnCore or Cairn, the Financial Conduct Authority said.Mr. Lyttleton was arrested in April 2013, but his identity was not publicly released at the time and he was not immediately charged.During the course of its inquiry, the British regulator said that it recovered two mobile phones — one of which was unregistered and the other registered to a false name and address. Those phones had one contact number, which was registered to the Swiss asset manager through which he executed his trades, the Financial Conduct Authority said.Mr. Lyttleton was charged with insider dealing in September.BlackRock, which manages about $5 trillion in assets, previously said that it had been informed by the Financial Conduct Authority of charges against a former employee related “to alleged actions carried out in 2011 for his personal gain, while off our premises, and that neither BlackRock, nor any employee, was under investigation.”Follow Chad Bray on Twitter @Chadbray.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.