By AMIE TSANGDEC. 21, 2016
Is it finally time to stop beating up on Yahoo?It’s easy to pile on with the criticism after another hacking, but according to the Deal Professor, Steven Davidoff Solomon, the business is stabilizing.Consider:• Yahoo still has more than one billion monthly active users, which makes it seem like a bargain at $4.8 billion. By comparison, Snap has 150 million users, but it could go public at a $25 billion valuation.• If Verizon wanted to walk away, it might have difficulties doing so legally. A Delaware court would look at whether the breaches had a material adverse effect, something it has never found to exist before. The cost of intrusions at other companies have cost little relative to the billions of dollars they make in annual revenue.Of course, that does not mean Verizon cannot get a discount.It is likely to request as much information as possible to make Yahoo nervous. According to the mergers and acquisitions playbook, it could eventually claim that Yahoo is not complying with the information requests. This alone could shave a billion or two off the deal price, a rounding error in comparison to Yahoo’s market capitalization of $36.9 billion, and be done with it.AdvertisementBut the Deal Professor is rooting for Yahoo to stand firm.“If Yahoo stands firm right now and no new bad facts come out,” he writes, “Verizon will have to close or be forced by a court to do so.”AdvertisementThe political corruption investigation into Petrobras, which has roiled Brazil, has moved past the country’s borders.Our columnist Andrew Ross Sorkin and his Times colleagues help you make sense of major business and policy headlines — and the power-brokers who shape them.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The United States and international authorities are expected to announce one of the largest corruption fines ever in a case involving two Brazilian companies, according to people briefed on the matter.Odebrech, the construction company that built Miami International Airport, and Braskem S.A., an affiliated petrochemical firm, are expected to settle bribery charges for $3 billion.In the United States, the settlement would be the largest penalty in a case involving a violation of the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act of 1977.Prices for government and corporate bonds in China have tumbled, spooking investors and prompting the government to temporarily restrain some trading and make emergency loans to struggling financial institutions.A healthy bond market is crucial to China’s restructuring plans: The country has been relying on it to bring market discipline to the economy. Chinese companies need the money to cope with a slowdown in growth, but the price drops and rising yields have pushed borrowing costs higher.And there could be more to come.“The adjustment has not yet finished,” said Miao Zuoxing, a partner at the FXM Brothers Fund, in Shanghai. “It will continue and normalize until money is put where the government can see it.”“You are basically drawing a line in the sand.”— John P. Boyd, a lawyer in Columbia, S.C., explaining the rules of a state program providing protections against pollution-related liabilities. The rules aim to prevent a polluter from evading liability by using another company to stand in its place. They also mean that when Donald J. Trump, the president-elect, bailed his eldest son out of a business deal gone bad, he may have ended up with a costly environmental cleanup in return.Follow Amie Tsang on Twitter @amietsang.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.