AdvertisementSupported byBy Brooks BarnesWither ESPN? Not this time.After recalibrating the growth expectations for ESPN three months ago, a disclosure that sent the media sector reeling, the Walt Disney Company on Thursday reported significant quarterly gains for its sports media business.For the most recent quarter, which included one more week than the same period last year, operating income soared 27 percent, to $1.82 billion, in Disney’s Media Networks division, which houses ESPN. Disney said the increase was primarily due to higher ESPN affiliate and ad revenues, partly offset by higher programming costs, including rights for the United States Open tennis tournament and Major League Baseball games. “The brand is stronger than ever,” Thomas O. Staggs, Disney’s chief operating officer, said on a conference call with analysts, before reciting a list of viewer statistics showing the dominance of ESPN. Ad sales are pacing up “significantly” so far in the current quarter, added Christine M. McCarthy, Disney’s chief financial officer.Even so, ESPN in recent weeks laid off 300 of its 8,000 workers as it scrambled to maintain the growth that investors have come to demand. Disney ended its fiscal year with $8.38 billion in profit, a 12 percent increase from 2014, as hit films, strong domestic theme park attendance and a surging consumer products business combined to make up for softer television results. Robert A. Iger, Disney’s chief executive, noted on the conference call that it was the company’s fifth consecutive year of record results.For its fourth quarter, Disney reported a profit of $1.61 billion, or 95 cents a share, up from $1.5 billion, or 86 cents a share, a year earlier. Excluding one-time items — specifically $399 million in deferred taxes related to the recapitalization of Disneyland Paris — Disney had a per-share profit in the quarter of $1.20, a 35 percent increase from the year-earlier period. Revenue totaled $13.51 billion in the quarter, a 9 percent increase. Analysts had expected profit of $1.14 a share and revenue of $13.52 billion.Disney’s results come during a week of shaky results for the broader media industry. Shares in major media companies declined sharply this week after Time Warner reduced its profit expectations for the coming year, in part because of the need to invest more in technology to keep pace with digital TV viewing. Time Warner executives also said that they planned to cut back the licensing of their programs to streaming services.Meanwhile, 21st Century Fox missed expectations for quarterly revenues. Combined, the developments stoked fears on how the cable television industry is adapting to the new digital landscape, as cord-cutting, ratings declines and a soft advertising market make the future uncertain for what has long been Big Media’s most stable business. In August, Disney’s reduced guidance on its cable division, which it attributed to subscriber declines, set off an earlier wave of panic about the prospects for the television industry.“This is not a one-time program, some piece of software that needs to be built (then you’re ‘done’), or some batch of programming investment to fill some hole,” Todd Juenger, an analyst at Sanford C. Bernstein, wrote in a research note on Thursday. “It’s a permanent, fundamental change to the way the business is approached.”Operating income at Walt Disney Studios more than doubled in the quarter, to $530 million, as the Pixar-produced film “Inside Out” and “Ant-Man” both hit blockbuster status. The studio also recorded higher revenue from streaming services. Lower costs and merchandise sales related to the film “Frozen” also contributed to the improved results.Mr. Iger used the conference call to highlight the introduction of DisneyLife, a new streaming service in Britain that will offer certain Disney movies and television shows for a monthly fee. Calling the service “interactive and intuitive,” he said it “definitely speaks to where we’re going as a company.” He added that Disney hoped to expand the service to other markets, although he did not specify which ones.Disney’s theme park division had mixed results. Increased spending on tickets, concessions and hotel rooms at Walt Disney World in Florida and Disneyland in California delivered a 7 percent rise in operating income in the quarter, to $738 million. In a rare bright spot for the troubled Disneyland Paris resort, it reported higher attendance and hotel bookings.But those results were dragged down by higher pre-opening expenses at Shanghai Disney Resort and a decline in attendance and hotel bookings at Hong Kong Disneyland.Disney Interactive, a division that includes Disney.com and the company’s video game efforts, had operating income of $31 million, a 72 percent increase from the same period a year ago. Disney cited sales of Infinity, a family-focused game, for the increase. In the future, Disney will no longer break out financial results for the Disney Interactive, which is by far the company’s smallest unit. Disney investors will now turn their attention to the high-stakes restart of the “Star Wars” movie series and the opening of Shanghai Disney.“Star Wars: The Force Awakens” arrives in December, ending a 10-year absence for the space franchise in theaters. Following months of hype, expectations are immense; some analysts think “The Force Awakens” could take in $2 billion or more at the global box office, making it one of the biggest movies of all time.Shanghai Disney, built in partnership with state-owned companies in China for $5.5 billion, is scheduled to open in the spring. The resort will most likely not turn an immediate profit, but will receive intense scrutiny. As they gear up for the opening, Chinese authorities said they would begin a campaign to crack down on counterfeit Disney products.Emily Steel contributed reporting.Advertisement