AdvertisementSupported byBy Amie TsangPresident-elect Donald J. Trump wants to shake up both relations with China and regulatory issues, and he’s not doing it by halves.Mr. Trump has named:• Peter Navarro, a strident critic of China, to lead a new White House office overseeing American trade and industrial policy.• Carl Icahn, the investor, to serve as a special adviser on regulatory issues.Mr. Navarro, a professor at the University of California, Irvine, is the only credentialed economist in Mr. Trump’s inner circle. He has argued that China is effectively waging economic war by subsidizing exports to the United States and impeding imports from it. He has also made a documentary called “Death by China,” in which an animation of a Chinese knife stabs a map of the United States.Some economists actually say that automation is a bigger threat to people’s jobs than globalization.The appointment highlights a division among Mr. Trump’s economic advisers.Like Mr. Navarro, Wilbur Ross, the president-elect’s choice for commerce secretary, favors increased trade restrictions. But Mr. Trump’s broader circle of advisers is dominated by proponents of free trade.Mr. Icahn, who made his fortune as a “corporate raider,” will play a role in the selection of a new leader for the Securities and Exchange Commission. That is the regulator that serves as the referee for his battles with corporations.His appointment has renewed concerns about conflicts of interest in the administration. It comes just as the Trump Organization has resolved labor disputes that could have posed other conflicts for the president-elect.One of those labor agreements provides a union contract to workers at the Trump International Hotel Las Vegas (the hotel had previously refused to bargain with the union). The second agreement eases a hurdle to unionization at a recently opened Trump hotel in Washington.Eric Trump also said that he had decided to stop directly soliciting contributions for his charitable foundation because he recognized that his status as the president-elect’s son means that donors could try to use him to gain access to his father.It looked to be another prominent insider trading case brought by Preet Bharara, the United States attorney for the Southern District of New York.But it could be undone because a federal agent leaked confidential information to reporters.William T. Walters, the Las Vegas sports bettor, was charged with using illegal stock tips, but the judge in the case essentially instructed Mr. Walters’s lawyers to file a motion to dismiss the case.The case has been marred by revelations that a special agent for the Federal Bureau of Investigation leaked details of the inquiry to reporters at The Wall Street Journal and The New York Times two years before Mr. Walters was indicted.If the charges are dismissed, it would be another stunning legal victory for Mr. Walters. He has faced charges before, mostly arising from his gambling business, but has not been convicted.“Odebrecht and Braskem used a hidden but fully functioning Odebrecht business unit — a ‘Department of Bribery,’ so to speak — that systematically paid hundreds of millions of dollars to corrupt government officials in countries on three continents.”— Sung-Hee Suh, the deputy assistant attorney general of the criminal division of the Justice Department. The companies pleaded guilty in Federal District Court in Brooklyn to charges that they paid hundreds of millions of dollars in bribes.California’s state public pension system, Calpers, voted to lower expectations for its investment returns in a move that would increase pressure on town and city budgets across the state.With $300 billion in assets and the investments of more than 1.7 million current and future retirees under management, it is the biggest public fund outside the federal government. Other pension systems may well follow suit.Calpers is also changing its business plan so that it covers less of the cost of pensions. Local governments and public workers will have to chip in more.The shift by Calpers to 7 percent, from 7.5 percent, will do little to satisfy critics of its methodology who argue that the expected returns should be based on safe investments like Treasury securities, which are nearer the 2.5 percent mark.• The Commerce Department publishes data that will give an idea of the economy’s underlying strength and some indication as to whether the Federal Reserve will move again soon on interest rates.Follow Amie Tsang on Twitter @amietsang.Advertisement