AdvertisementSupported byThe WorkologistBy Rob WalkerI just completed my first year at a large company, or rather, at an affiliate that operates in a different market. I am relatively autonomous. My immediate supervisor has an understanding of my work, but the head of the overall business unit, by his own admission, has almost no idea what I actually do. In my midyear review, this higher-up made passing references to my “excellent” work but then focused on my adjustment to “company culture,” which he said needed improvement.This criticism seemed largely based on a single email, which allegedly had an “aggressive” tone in responding to a particular request. I was told that my email placed the requested task in a queue behind other projects. I still think that the email seems reasonable, as described. (It wasn’t actually shared with me, and since I send thousands of emails, I don’t recall it specifically.)Now my annual review is approaching, and I am not certain how to prepare. Should I try to contrive some improvement in my adjustment to “company culture”? Or simply move forward and focus on my work? I suspect that the head of the business unit just wants to keep me under his thumb, and so as long as I maintain a smile and a deferential attitude in his presence, this too shall pass. Still, I’m hoping to shape the assessment discussion. LEE, WASHINGTONUnder any circumstances that I can think of, you should absolutely address criticism that came up in an earlier review. To do otherwise is to suggest that you weren’t listening, or don’t care.You don’t have to dwell on it at length. Bring it up quickly and dispense with it matter-of-factly: Indicate that you’ve been more mindful of “company culture,” have adjusted and believe this issue is behind you. (You don’t even need to admit you did anything wrong, per se, only that you took the critique seriously. Just avoid re-litigating the matter or adding any gratuitous caveats to the effect that you never agreed with the criticism in the first place. Even if that’s the case, saying so six months later isn’t going to get you anywhere.)Admittedly, the feedback you got six months ago really does sound annoying. It would have been far more useful to discuss what, precisely, was “aggressive” about that email. That’s in the past now, but it’s worth thinking about how you may handle a similar critique today. Even though providing concrete feedback is the reviewer’s responsibility, it can still make sense for the person being reviewed to press the matter — strategically.If something like this happens again, seek more specifics, but position it as a means of properly addressing the issue, not a challenge. There’s a big difference between “Well, what’s wrong with that?” and “Can you help me understand the better way to handle that here?”That said, you may be right that all this boss is looking for is “a smile and a deferential attitude,” so the best way to shape the discussion is to get previous critiques out of the way quickly. Think ahead about what issues you want to see addressed, and how. Then start the conversation by demonstrating that you’re acting in good faith on his earlier feedback, and when that’s accomplished, move on to your own agenda.I work in a small but growing office, and I wear many hats. During my first annual review, I asked for a $10,000 raise and got it! But now I’m worried that this year, the company may offer me a lowball raise, or nothing at all.  Management holds all information close to the vest, so the only feedback employees get is when there is a problem. I’m confident that my work is above average, but because the nature of my job is to minimize and solve problems for management, I get the sense that they don’t appreciate my efforts or realize what I truly contribute. How do I counter an offer that undervalues my work? JANE, CHICAGOOne underlying problem may be something that, unfortunately, is beyond your control. Many companies are so opaque about their thinking regarding compensation that employees can do little but speculate — often, as you are here, with the assumption that they are undervalued.Last year, The Harvard Business Review published the results of a study by PayScale, a compensation software company, based on a survey of 71,000 workers. It found that among those being paid the market rate for their position, a whopping 64 percent believed they were receiving a below-market salary. However, the researchers argued, clear communication about why a given pay scale (whether high or low) works the way it does was actually more important to worker satisfaction than any raw dollar amounts.It sounds as if your company is on the secretive side of the spectrum. Still, it may be helpful to try to get a clearer sense of what goes into its thinking, when it comes to you at least. If you got a big raise last year, maybe that’s because you exceeded expectations. Maybe this year you simply lived up to new expectations set by your earlier performance. Or at least maybe that’s how your bosses see it.The more you can gain an understanding of how management thinks about your performance benchmarks, the better positioned you are to work in a way that meets those benchmarks, and to make sure the bosses know it. But perhaps more important, you’re establishing some clear parameters that should help both sides understand each other, and give you something specific to point to in salary negotiations, this year and beyond.Send your workplace conundrums to workologist@nytimes.com, including your name and contact information (even if you want it withheld for publication). The Workologist is a guy with well-intentioned opinions, not a professional career adviser. Letters may be edited.Advertisement