
Corner Office By                     
 ADAM BRYANT
 
DEC. 23, 2016
This interview with Katherine Power, chief executive of Clique Media Group, a media and marketing agency, has been edited for space and clarity.Q. What were your early years like?A. I’m originally from Orange County, Calif. My parents were in the horse business, and we had racehorses growing up. But I was much more of a city kid, and not that much into horses. From a young age, I was a very serious dancer, doing ballet and jazz and everything else.I was much more of my grandmother’s child. She grew up in Los Angeles, her parents were in the film industry and she ran a retail store. When I was young, I would stay with her and work at her store. I loved the cash register, dressing the mannequins, and I remember learning how to sell when I was about 9. I would act nonchalant and just express my opinion, and people believed me. I was very entrepreneurial from a young age.I also didn’t have a traditional education. Because of dance, I was doing independent study by eighth grade. And I initially thought I wanted to be a film producer. So my plan was to go to Santa Monica College and then transfer to U.S.C. for film school.AdvertisementI had started an internship the summer before at Touchstone Pictures. But on the first day at S.M.C., I showed up early to find parking. I drove around and around and around and couldn’t find a spot. And so I decided, this is not for me.I called Touchstone and said, “I’m available Monday through Friday, 9 to 5, if you’ll have me.” I worked for this producer every single day for free, and soon after she hired me as her assistant. I have just been working ever since.Who were your biggest influences early on?My choreographer was Marguerite Derricks, and she basically taught us what it was like to work in the real world. She treated us like adults and taught us how to be professional and respectful. We would constantly have directors or producers coming to watch us to hire us for various events or movies, like “Austin Powers.”It was about always doing your best and putting your best foot forward. You never know where an opportunity can come from. She helped shape who I am today, particularly being thick-skinned, because you go to auditions and you get rejected.But I don’t even think of it as rejection, because of her. I just think of it as a change in course. I’m weirdly missing the gene that tells you to be afraid of putting yourself out there.AdvertisementDid you always want to be a chief executive?We started the company in 2006, and at first we did everything in the beginning and really built up the business. Then we hired a C.O.O. to run the business side, and I was the creative director.When we grew to a certain scale, we debated whether to bring in a C.E.O. In order to be a C.E.O., you have to be both an operator and a visionary, and I think it’s really hard to find kind of that combination. One of our board members said to me, “Katherine, I really think you should do it.” So my career was sort of born again in 2014.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.At that point, we had hired dozens of employees, and because I had done pretty much every job at the company, I was able to really understand what we should spend money on, what we shouldn’t, how long something should take and what the right talent was to put in a specific position.As an entrepreneur and as a C.E.O., you have to be very creative. You have to understand how to get from Point A to Point B with X amount of resources, and see if there are alternative ways to get there.How do you hire?I look for very entrepreneurial people. I look for people who can quantify their value, who can really think like an entrepreneur and put a value around their skill set and growth.So if you look at a resume of someone who was a lifestyle writer for XYZ publication, I like to see that they wrote 16 pieces of content per week resulting in X percent growth in page views over three months.I also always ask people, when you go home at night and think before bed that today was a great day, what made it a great day? That gives me a lot of insight into exactly what they care about.And I look for people who have created their own experience. So maybe you worked for a fashion brand but on the side you created your own blog dedicated to home décor, or you learned about a specific industry, or you took on an additional job or internship just to learn about a new field.And what kinds of answers are you listening for to the question about what makes it a good day?It depends on the job, but it’s typically when there has been some sort of accomplishment or efficiency created, like, “I saved X amount of money by doing something this way.”AdvertisementOr if I’m interviewing for my assistant position, I want to hear someone talk about making every meeting run on schedule and being able to fit everyone in. Again, it depends on the position, but I want to hear that they get excited about the things I care about.What career advice do you give to new college grads?Find something you love to do and then figure out a way to get paid for it. That’s what I’ve always done. And if you don’t have experience, create your own.But there are some people who don’t know yet what they love to do.I would tell them to identify either companies that they’re passionate about or individuals that they’re passionate about, then do a lot of research. If it’s a company, what are the different roles you can have there? Or if you’re following a certain person’s career, how did they get there, what is their role like? With the internet now, it’s almost like you can have a virtual mentor.Each week, Adam Bryant talks with top executives about leadership. Follow him on Twitter: @nytcorneroffice. This interview has been edited for space and clarity.A version of this article appears in print on December 25, 2016, on Page BU2 of the New York edition with the headline: Do You Think Like an Entrepreneur?.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »