AdvertisementSupported byAnother ViewBy Holly A. BellSince the election, stock prices have risen sharply on hopes that a wave of pro-growth policies under Donald J. Trump will drive up equity prices even further.But Mr. Trump’s administration will soon face a trend that threatens to move the long-term benefits found in stock markets away from investors and toward exchanges.Specifically, since the approval in June of the IEX Group to become a public exchange, a wave of new exchange proposals has emerged that may lead to an equity market geared to exchange revenue and not investor returns.Because IEX planned to delay incoming and outgoing information to the broader market by 350 microseconds each way, the Securities and Exchange Commission was forced to reinterpret a key provision of Reg NMS to approve IEX’s application. In particular, the agency declared any inbound or outbound delay less than one millisecond (1,000 microseconds) to be “de minimis” — or irrelevant and not harmful to investors.Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, a professor at the University of California, Los Angeles, and I predicted this decision would create a cascading effect that would enable other exchanges to add order types and intentional delays to benefit themselves and sophisticated traders at the expense of ordinary investors. With multiple exchanges adopting a wide variety of delays, it will be difficult to locate the best price within the marketplace. That means you’ll pay more and your investments will earn less.Unfortunately, this trend is emerging. The New York Stock Exchange introduced a so-called discretionary pegged order type to compete with IEX. The Nasdaq stock market has also proposed a new extended-life order.Yet the plan that should cause the most concern for investors is a new speed bump proposed by the Chicago Stock Exchange.First, it’s discriminatory. The Chicago exchange delay would be felt only by those buying a stock posted by market makers. The time advantage for market makers provides them a “last look” that allows them to withdraw their offer if the price is moving in an unfavorable direction based on information obtained outside the Chicago exchange. Moreover, the capacity of market makers to actively update their quotes during the delay means the price for those trying to buy the stock may no longer exist.Second, this ability for market makers to back away from their offer at any time would most likely increase downward price pressure when markets are under stress. As additional exchanges adopt similar quotes to compete, the effects of so-called disappearing quotes on price pressure would intensify.A study of speed bumps that favor low-latency liquidity providers on the TSX Alpha Exchange in Canada found that disappearing offers rose to 60 percent from 14 percent after the speed bump was introduced.The Chicago Stock Exchange argues that fast traders are driving market makers away from its exchange. Yet, the same study on the TSX Alpha Exchange found the speed bumps “increase profits for liquidity providers on TSX Alpha but negatively impact aggregate liquidity.”In total, this proposal will lead to more revenue for market makers and the Chicago Stock Exchange at the expense of investors.After all, if a delay of less than a millisecond is truly “de minimis,” any 350-microsecond delay, no matter how it’s applied, should not harm markets or their participants.Yet, IEX’s delay structure gives an advantage to hidden pegged orders, while the Chicago exchange’s proposal creates advantages for market makers. That different venues can use the same delay to manipulate markets in favor of their own order types underlies my original concerns about the IEX precedent and the millisecond rule.The Securities and Exchange Commission has two options. It could decide to treat IEX as a pilot of the millisecond rule and issue a moratorium on any new delays until the commission can assess the impacts. Or, the agency could issue additional clarifying guidelines for the use of delays to minimize potential abuse.Otherwise, I fear the millisecond rule might be the tool that actually rigs markets in favor of individual exchanges while undermining the broader market and increasing costs and lowering returns for investors.If a Trump stock market boom keeps going, a Trump S.E.C. should ensure that investors benefit.Holly A. Bell is an associate professor at the University of Alaska in Anchorage and a consulting scholar on financial market structure and regulation. She is also the author of the thriller “Trading Salvos.”Advertisement