By AMIE TSANGDEC. 23, 2016
Deutsche Bank has reached a tentative deal to resolve a federal investigation into its sale of toxic mortgage securities, which will cost it $7.2 billion.The civil settlement includes a $3.1 billion penalty and $4.1 billion of relief to American customers, which it said would be “primarily in the form of loan modifications and other assistance to homeowners.”The sum falls short of the $14 billion that the government was reported to have demanded from the bank when negotiations got underway, but the lender’s business model and prospects still came under significant scrutiny.Deutsche Bank has cautioned that the deal is not final, saying that “there can be no assurance that the U.S. Department of Justice and the bank will agree on the final documentation.”AdvertisementThe payment would settle claims that the bank sold investors mortgage securities that contributed to the crisis. The industry as a whole has paid tens of billions of dollars to resolve claims over the sale of these securities.AdvertisementCredit Suisse also agreed on Friday to resolve accusations about the bundling together of unsuitable mortgages into securities, by paying $5.3 billion. Of that amount, $2.48 billion is a civil penalty and $2.8 billion will go toward consumer relief.Credit Suisse said it would take a pretax charge in the fourth quarter of about $2 billion, in addition to its existing reserves for the mortgage inquiry, to fund the settlement.On the same day that Deutsche announced its deal, the Justice Department sued Barclays over similar accusations. In that case, the negotiations had broken down, prompting the government to file a lawsuit.The Justice Department claims that Barclays — which has significant investment banking operations in New York — repeatedly misled investors about the quality of mortgages underlying 36 mortgage-backed securities from 2005 to 2007.Vendors that the bank hired to perform due diligence on the loans described some of them as “craptacular,” others as the “scariest collateral” and others as having the “distinct aroma of default,” according to the complaint.Our columnist Andrew Ross Sorkin and his Times colleagues help you make sense of major business and policy headlines — and the power-brokers who shape them.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Barclays said the claims were “disconnected from the facts.”Goldman Sachs may find its profile improving under the Trump administration, but the firm is also coming under heavy scrutiny related to an investigation into a sprawling international money laundering and embezzlement scheme.Prosecutors have said that billions of dollars that Goldman raised for the government investment fund 1Malaysia Development Berhad, or 1MDB, were channeled into personal bank accounts and ultimately used to buy paintings, luxury real estate and investment stakes in movies like “The Wolf of Wall Street.”AdvertisementThe question investigators are asking now is, how much did Goldman know?Goldman said it believed the money was being used to buy legitimate assets for the investment fund.Jack Blum, a lawyer who led corruption investigations for several Senate committees, said that Goldman should have done a thorough investigation of what 1MDB was doing with the money.“It is a very serious problem when a company is making a hell of a lot of money out of something and everybody in the place says, ‘I don’t know about it,’ ” Mr. Blum said.“They need to step on the gas and get it done.”Richard Painter, a law professor at the University of Minnesota and former chief ethics counsel to President George W. Bush. Some of President-elect Donald J. Trump’s most prominent cabinet employees, with millions in assets and complex business arrangements, are moving unusually slowly through the government’s arduous financial disclosure examinations.When do 1.5 and 16 add up to 72?That’s the riddle confronting investors in Pershing Square Holdings Ltd., the closed-end fund run by Bill Ackman.The fund has gained 20.5 percent during the four years since it began. After deductions — a 1.5 percent management fee and Pershing Square Holdings taking 16 percent of any gains — investors were up just 5.7 percent. Pershing Square kept about 72 percent of the fund’s gains for itself.How does that work? Many hedge funds reap far higher percentages of their gains than that stated in their fee structure because when they experience substantial losses, as Pershing Square did, they don’t have to give anything back.And investors are catching on to the fact that most hedge fund managers share generously in the good times, but are exposed to none of the losses in the bad.The DealBook Morning Agenda newsletter will be taking a break over the holidays. We’ll be back on Jan. 3. Follow Amie Tsang on Twitter @amietsang.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.