By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSDEC. 22, 2016
WASHINGTON — The United States economy grew at an annual rate of 3.5 percent in the third quarter, its fastest pace in two years and more than the government had previously estimated. The growth spurt, however, is not expected to last, as consumers and businesses pull back.The gain in gross domestic product — the economy’s total output of goods and services — came from added strength in consumer spending, business investment and the government sector, the Commerce Department said on Thursday. The government had previously estimated the quarter’s annual growth rate at 3.2 percent.
            Annual rate of change in the gross domestic product, based on quarterly figures adjusted for inflation and seasonal fluctuations.        +3.5%3rd quarter revisedChange at annual rate ToFrom +3.2+6%+4+20–2’13’14’15DEC. 22, 2016
The G.D.P. report “paints a picture of a healthy consumer, likely fueled by ongoing gains in employment, modest increases in wages, and solid balance sheets,” said Michael Gapen of Barclays.The faster growth in the third quarter was a sharp pickup from the tepid annual growth rates of 0.8 percent in the first quarter and 1.4 percent in the second.AdvertisementStill, growth is expected to slow to an annual rate of roughly 1.5 percent in the fourth quarter, a reflection, in part, of reduced consumer spending and business stockpiling.AdvertisementGrowth for all of 2016, economists say, is likely to be around 1.5 percent. That would be a decline from 2015 and would be the weakest performance since the economy shrank 2.8 percent in 2009 at the depths of the severe economic downturn. In the current recovery, which began in mid-2009, growth has averaged just over 2 percent, the weakest expansion in the post-World War II period.During the presidential campaign, President-elect Donald J. Trump criticized the sluggish pace of growth, saying that his economic policies would accelerate annual growth to 4 percent or more. To do that, Mr. Trump said, he would eliminate many government regulations, increase spending on the nation’s aging infrastructure and slash taxes.Most economists do not believe that 4 percent growth is realistic, given a chronic slowdown in productivity and a work force that is growing slowly.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Most forecasters expect growth of around 2.5 percent next year, though they say those estimates could rise if Mr. Trump wins congressional support for much of his economic program. Stock markets have surged since Mr. Trump’s victory, partly because of optimism that his proposals would help growth and corporate profits.The report on Thursday was the government’s third and final estimate of G.D.P. growth for the third quarter. The upward revision mainly reflected stronger consumer spending, which grew at a 3 percent annual rate, more than the 2.8 percent pace estimated a month ago. Consumer spending is closely watched because it accounts for about 70 percent of economic activity.The Federal Reserve last week increased a key interest rate by a quarter-point, just the second increase in the past decade. Fed officials said that they could gradually raise interest rates as they near their goals for full employment, and inflation increases by about 2 percent a year.In public comments last week, the Fed chairwoman, Janet L. Yellen, made no predictions about Mr. Trump’s economic program. But Fed officials forecast that they would raise rates three times in 2017, up from their previous forecast of two.In a separate report, the Commerce Department said on Thursday that orders from businesses for industrial machinery, steel and other big-ticket items rose 0.9 percent in November, after a 0.2 percent increase in October. Those gains follow a 1.5 percent drop in September.Orders for all big-ticket factory goods fell 4.6 percent, mostly because demand for commercial aircraft, a volatile category, dropped. Excluding transportation-related goods, orders rose 0.5 percent.A version of this list appears in print on December 23, 2016, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Growth Rate Last Quarter  Was Fastest in Two Years.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.