By ANDREW E. KRAMERDEC. 24, 2016
MOSCOW — Russian aviation authorities have grounded the country’s fleet of its newest model of civilian airliner, the Sukhoi Superjet 100. Metal fatigue, a problem usually associated with older airplanes, was discovered in the tail section of a new Sukhoi plane, the Russian regulator Rosaviatsia said Friday.The grounding was the latest setback for the jet, which has already had a rough introduction.The plane model is important as a test of whether Russia’s military aerospace prowess can translate into a successful civilian product. The manufacturer, Sukhoi, is best known as the maker of military jets now flying over Syria.Most other Russian-made civilian jets, once a workhorse fleet of wide- and narrow-body planes, are flown only by regional airlines, and the aging planes are plagued by safety problems.After the latest announcement, the Russian national airline Aeroflot, a major Sukhoi customer, on Saturday canceled 21 domestic flights.AdvertisementRosaviatsia ordered the planes grounded pending inspections after a regional carrier, IrAero, reported finding metal fatigue in a component in the tail wings of one plane, according to Regnum, a nongovernmental news agency.AdvertisementThe agency grounded the fleet to determine whether similar problems were appearing in other planes, most of which have been flying for only a few years.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Sukhoi said in a statement that it was inspecting the entire fleet “to support airworthiness of the civilian Sukhoi planes.” The defect “of one element of the tail portion” could not cause a crash, but “all the same, airlines must check this model of aircraft,” the company said.Aeroflot said in a statement that flights on Sukhoi jets had been canceled for “technical reasons.”Safety concerns with the Superjet, Russia’s first post-Soviet passenger plane, emerged soon after its introduction in 2008. Dozens of employees at the Siberia plant were found to have faked their university engineering diplomas.In 2012, a Superjet crashed into a mountain in Indonesia during a sales demonstration flight carrying 37 aviation executives and journalists, and eight crew members, killing all aboard. An investigation cited pilot error.Aeroflot says the plane is now safe. While the grounding was a setback for the model, it also indicated vigilance by Russian aviation regulators.A version of this article appears in print on December 25, 2016, on Page A8 of the New York edition with the headline: Russia Grounds Newest Airliner After Metal Raised Safety Fears.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.