By LESLIE PICKERNOV. 5, 2015
In an effort to appease young investment bankers over the last few years, Goldman Sachs increased their salaries and gave them Saturdays off.Now, to retain them longer, the company is making a number of organizational changes so that analysts will view Goldman Sachs as an entree for their careers, rather than just an hors d’oeuvre.Goldman Sachs announced on Thursday a three-part initiative to reduce analysts’ temptation — which has become increasingly common across all investment banking over the last decade — to leave the bank after two years for private equity, hedge funds or the corporate world.First, Goldman Sachs wants to do away with much of the mundane busy work that engulfs the banking world. The company is building out more technology to speed and simplify some of the steps in financial deal-making that have historically been assigned to Ivy League graduates new to Goldman.AdvertisementIt is also initiating a 12-month rotation program after analysts complete their first two years, so they can receive exposure to other parts of the business.AdvertisementAnd the bank is accelerating analysts’ promotions to associate after their second year, with an increase in compensation.“The goal of all of it is to make sure we hire the best people available to the firm and that we retain those people,” said David Solomon, co-head of investment banking at the company, who helped create the new policies.“It all speaks to what I say at the highest level for a continued need for us to be very thoughtful about how we manage human capital, train them, provide learning experience and how we’re transparent about their career trajectories and opportunities they have.”Goldman Sachs is investing in a deeper management structure to make these changes and provide more attention to younger bankers.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The new policies come after other recent changes the company made to recruit and retain talent. Goldman Sachs said that starting this year it would increase salaries for first-year analysts in the United States by about 20 percent, to $85,000 from $70,000, not including bonuses.Two years ago, Goldman Sachs developed a “junior banker task force.” One of its first moves was to prohibit analysts and associates from working from 9 p.m. on Friday to 9 a.m. on Sunday. In June, Goldman said that interns should leave the office before midnight each day, doing away with the all-night working that the position had been known for.Since Goldman Sachs started focusing more on keeping younger bankers happy, there have been “tangible results” in retaining people, said Mr. Solomon, who declined to say publicly what the company’s future retention goal is.The investment banking industry has come under criticism recently for its notoriously grueling pace; it is known for attracting hyper-ambitious people who will push their limits to complete the tasks asked of them. The pressures these 22- and 23-year-olds face, though, have led many to defect to other careers, either within finance or outside it.AdvertisementSeveral highly publicized suicides have occurred among junior investment bankers. Although not explicitly attributed to their jobs, the deaths tended to come after stressful periods including all-nighters, sometimes mixed with drugs and alcohol.For Goldman Sachs, though, the investment banking business is only as good as the people working there, Mr. Solomon said. That is why it has made such a concerted effort to be more competitive in hiring and retaining talent, he said.“We’re in the fifth or sixth inning,” he said. “We’re more heavily invested in how we manage our people.” A version of this article appears in print on November 6, 2015, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: New Tactics at Goldman to Retain Junior Bankers.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.