AdvertisementSupported byMediatorBy Jim RutenbergStarting a weekly column about the nexus between media, technology, culture and politics in the middle of the 2016 presidential campaign was like parachuting into a hail of machine-gun crossfire.Dense smoke was everywhere as the candidates and their supporters unloaded on one another and, frequently, the news media, which more than occasionally was drawn into the fighting.The territory that was at stake was the realm of the true, and how all sides would define it in the hyperpartisan debate to come under a new president.With the campaign behind us and a new administration quickly taking shape, that territory remains very much in dispute.So the ammunition keeps flying, especially at the national news media, which emerges from the election invigorated in its mission to report on plate-shifting news while rooting out the truth. And yet it has never been more besieged or, if the Gallup Organization had it right, distrusted.Sitting at my desk as I write this sentence on a Thursday night, our offices littered with empty champagne cups and cake crumbs on paper plates — the detritus of too many sayonara toasts to sage colleagues leaving with buyout packages — I’m trying to think my way to the big takeaway from the year American journalism just lived through that can help it in the downsized year ahead.This much is obvious, but it bears repeating before the year turns: If the news media is going to do its part in maintaining a fact-based national debate, it’s going to have to learn important lessons from 2016. But the lessons need to be drawn not only from what it did wrong but also from what it did right.What the mainstream media did wrong is by now well established. It generally failed to appreciate the power of the anger that ultimately decided the presidency. And that was in large part because it was overly hooked on polling that indicated a Hillary Clinton glide path, overly reliant on longtime sources who believed the rules of politics were immutable and too disconnected from too many workaday Americans. It repeatedly underestimated Donald Trump, not to mention Bernie Sanders. And there could have been a lot more reporting on both candidates’ policy plans, or lack thereof.What it did right has been less appreciated than it deserves. Faced with a precedent-shattering candidate who made false assertions at a rate none had seen before — one considerably higher than that of his opponent — reporters became more assertive in directly calling out falsehoods.They reported on the apparent affinity between Mr. Trump and President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia and the paid speaking appearance his national security adviser, Lt. Gen. Michael T. Flynn, made for Mr. Putin’s state-run television network Russia Today.They dug into the interests of the Clinton Foundation’s foreign donors. They reported out Mrs. Clinton’s connections to Goldman Sachs and her paid speaking tour through corporate America despite her refusal to release transcripts from those speeches.They exposed the questionable practices of Mr. Trump’s charitable organization and reported on his taxes even as he refused to release them — a break with decades of tradition. And, no, they did not “ignore” the news that Mrs. Clinton used a personal email account for State Department business, which this newspaper was the first to report (more on that in a minute).Of course, what the mainstream news media did right and what it did wrong were inexorably joined.So when Mr. Trump would, say, insult Senator John McCain for being captured while fighting for his country in Vietnam, or declare that he could grab women by their genitals uninvited, reporters covered those moments for what they were: jarring exhibitions of decidedly unpresidential behavior as it has been defined through history.Then they would look at polls and the political prognostication sites showing Mrs. Clinton as the overwhelming favorite, and see affirmation that the old rules were holding.But, as the New York Post columnist Michael Goodwin told me on Thursday afternoon, “People don’t all see things in the same way.”Too often, Mr. Goodwin said, he found that mainstream press coverage treated Mr. Trump’s more outlandish actions as if they were disqualifying when in the end they clearly weren’t — at least for the voters in the states that decided the Electoral College outcome and thus the presidency.“The 63 million people who voted for Donald Trump clearly didn’t see things the same way as the reporters for The New York Times and The Washington Post and other similar news organizations did,” he said.Mr. Goodwin is a Trump supporter who identifies himself as a conservative Democrat. He has been highly critical of news coverage of Mr. Trump, especially that of this newspaper — and of a column by yours truly in August about journalism’s role in the Trump era — which he viewed as woefully unfair. We agreed to disagree on that score. But he’s in plentiful company among Mr. Trump’s voters, who, along with Mr. Trump, have promoted the election result as a castigation of all the mainstream news coverage of the campaign.Of course, where one stands on press bias so often depends on where one sits politically. Talk with a Clinton aide and you’ll inevitably hear that unfair news coverage was a big reason for her loss.“Her coverage was out of context and disproportionately negative,” Jennifer Palmieri, the senior Clinton strategist, told me. “The email coverage was the original sin,” she said, arguing that the reporting on the fact that she used a private email server was so “completely out of proportion” that it unfairly became something nefarious in the minds of voters who initially didn’t see it as a big deal.In her view, the news media should have made it clear that Mr. Trump’s failings were different — and in her view far worse — from any of Mrs. Clinton’s, which presumably would have contributed to a different outcome.As I wrote in my very first Mediator column in March, it is not the mainstream, non-opinion news media’s job to determine outcomes. That’s up to the voters. Nor should the news media measure itself against any one campaign’s definition of fairness. It is political journalism’s job to be true to the facts in a way that helps voters envision what the candidates will be like in the nation’s highest office.And judging by the past couple of weeks, the coverage seems to have succeeded in that regard.If you read or viewed reports about Mr. Trump’s ties to Russia and his compliments of Mr. Putin, then his choice of Rex Tillerson for secretary of state — a man whom Mr. Putin considers a friend of Russia — should not have been a surprise. If you read the coverage questioning whether Mr. Trump would upend the United States’ approach to nuclear weapons, his suggestions last week that he might reverse decades of United States nuclear weapons policy did not come out of left field. I could go on.When you get down to it, the takeaway from the year is pretty basic.It struck me as I was speaking with Ms. Palmieri, who harked back to how President Obama’s nominee to lead the Health and Human Services Department eight years ago, Tom Daschle, withdrew his name after news broke that he had failed to pay taxes on his use of a chauffeur and car service. “Imagine a Trump nominee dropping out because they didn’t pay taxes on their car and driver,” she said.If there’s anything that Mr. Trump proved this past year, it’s that something that led to a certain eventuality yesterday won’t necessarily do so tomorrow. Maybe a piece of scandalous news will sink a Trump nominee; maybe it won’t.That means that even as the news media reports the heck out of the story — as it must — it needs to avoid getting ahead of it; let the facts lead, and let them do it at their own pace, not that of Twitter. Every incorrect leap only helps those who are so aggressively seeking to undermine journalism for their own political ends. It’s also just bad journalism.So, 2017, here we come. Until then, peace.Advertisement