AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben SisarioPandora Media and the publisher Sony/ATV have often been bitter opponents in the music industry’s streaming wars. But on Thursday they announced a direct licensing deal that gives both sides benefits while the music world braces for possible changes in government regulation of songwriting rights.In a joint announcement, Pandora and Sony/ATV, the world’s biggest music publisher with control of the songwriting rights for the Beatles, Taylor Swift and thousands of others, called it a multiyear agreement. Martin N. Bandier, the chief executive of Sony/ATV, said that his company’s songwriters “will begin to enjoy the benefit of better rates.”Songwriters and music publishers have long complained about low payouts from Internet radio and fought fiercely with companies like Pandora for better rates. Two years ago, Sony/ATV made a temporary deal with Pandora that gave the publisher rates 25 percent higher than those it received through standard agreements with Ascap and BMI, the industry’s biggest licensing clearinghouses. In a court case against Ascap, however, Pandora accused Sony/ATV of getting that raise by holding a metaphorical gun to its head. The deal between Pandora and Sony/ATV bypasses the longstanding system of licensing through Ascap and BMI, which offer so-called blanket licenses to radio stations, online streaming services and other companies that use music. But Ascap and BMI — supported by many publishers and prominent songwriters — have complained that outdated regulation by the federal government has prevented them from obtaining fair rates from digital outlets like Pandora.The Justice Department has been reviewing these regulatory agreements for over a year. But big publishers like Sony/ATV have said they may withdraw their catalogs from Ascap and BMI if regulatory changes are not made to their satisfaction.In the announcement on Thursday, Pandora noted that its agreement with Sony/ATV would allow it to “benefit from greater rate certainty” in coming years. Pandora also noted that the deal would let it “add new flexibility to the company’s product offering over time.”A number of other music publishers, big and small, have been approached by Pandora with offers for similar licensing deals, according to publishing executives who spoke on the condition of anonymity. Pandora declined to comment on whether it was holding talks with other publishers.Pandora has announced a flurry of deals recently, including its $450 million acquisition of the ticketing company Ticketfly, a $90 million settlement with the major record companies over the licensing of old recordings and a deal to stream the hit podcast “Serial.”Shares in Pandora, which last month dropped by 35 percent the day after it released its latest quarterly financial reports, were up 5.7 percent, to $12.45, on Thursday in response to the announcement with Sony/ATV.Advertisement