
White Collar Watch By                     
PETER J. HENNING

DEC. 27, 2016
The Scottish poet Robert Burns once wrote “there is no such uncertainty as a sure thing.” There seemed to be any number of sure things this past year, from the outcome of the presidential election to how the Supreme Court would cut back on insider trading.They turned out to be anything but what many had hoped.Among the coming changes will be a new administration in Washington that portends a shift in the types of cases investigated and the crimes prosecuted. New leadership at the Securities and Exchange Commission and the Commodity Futures Trading Commission means that the markets will have to adjust to a different view of what constitutes a violation — and perhaps a reduced emphasis on enforcement as a primary tool to regulate trading and corporate misconduct.Another sure sign that change is coming is the seeming rush by the Justice Department to clean up the legacy of toxic mortgage-backed securities that cost investors billions of dollars. Settlements were reached last week with Deutsche Bank and Credit Suisse that require the banks to pay the usual penalties and consumer relief. But the banks paid less than what the government originally sought as part of an effort to close the books before new and potentially more sympathetic leaders move into office in the next few months.A test of whether Donald J. Trump’s appointees will take as hard a line with the banks is the Justice Department’s lawsuit against Barclays Bank and two of its executives. They are accused of fraud in the issuance of over $31 billion of securities that resulted in “catastrophic losses” after the financial crisis. By refusing to lower the demand for a hefty penalty, prosecutors left it to their successors to show how tough they will be with claims of corporate misconduct. Barclays said it would “vigorously defend” itself, which may be a gamble to see if it can convince the incoming leadership to drop the case or at least agree to a smaller penalty.AdvertisementAlthough there were a number of multibillion-dollar settlements in cases arising from the financial crisis, this past year also showed that fighting the government can result in a much better resolution.AdvertisementIn August, Daniel H. Mudd, the former chief executive of Fannie Mae, settled fraud charges, which were filed by the S.E.C. in 2011 amid great fanfare, without any acknowledgment of a violation. His settlement included a token payment to the Treasury Department made on his behalf by the company. Bank of America won its appeal in May to overturn a fraud verdict when a federal appeals court found that it did not violate the terms of a contract by selling faulty mortgages.As we look ahead to 2017, here are a few areas in the uncertain world of white-collar crime that will be of interest:What Will Donald DoMr. Trump was elected on a populist appeal that he would “drain the swamp” by not relying on the usual Washington power structure to govern. Whether that turns out to be the case is an open question in an administration that will include several alumni of Goldman Sachs, the firm he singled out during the campaign as part of the global elite.Mr. Trump also said that Wall Street “got away with murder” and that he would not let companies off the hook, which may foretell a tough stance on business crimes. No president wants to be seen as defending corporate power, so if a scandal develops like the one that enveloped Wells Fargo over abusing its customers by opening unauthorized accounts, we could expect tweets from the White House railing against abuses.An important issue that will confront the leadership picked by Senator Jeff Sessions of Alabama, the choice to serve as attorney general, will be whether prosecutors continue demanding that corporations turn over evidence of individual misconduct if they want to receive any credit for cooperating in an investigation. Deputy Attorney General Sally Q. Yates announced the policy in a 2015 memorandum, known as “the Yates Memo,” that was widely seen as addressing a shortcoming from the financial crisis in which the big banks paid out billions of dollars in penalties but no individuals were prosecuted.The new leadership is almost certain to tinker with the memo, if only to get the name of the next deputy attorney general on it to show that the legacies of former attorneys general Eric H. Holder Jr. and Loretta E. Lynch have been purged.What those changes will look like is anyone’s guess, but there has been a push to reduce the requirement of identifying individuals as the price of admission to a settlement with a lighter penalty and perhaps even a pass on charges being filed.But that alternative might be taken as a softening of the government’s stance against corporate crime, which is not a label an attorney general wants.AdvertisementA World of ConflictsThe election of a man with a global business built around selling his name as a brand will raise questions about any number of decisions that could affect his company because of potential conflicts of interest. Mr. Trump bluntly told The New York Times  that “the president can’t have a conflict of interest,” but in fact that issue continues to roil the president-elect and his family as critics call for him to completely divest his holdings in The Trump Organization.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The main conflict-of-interest statutes exempt the president from their prohibitions, but there are other laws that apply to Mr. Trump. One is known as the Stock Act, short for Stop Trading on Congressional Knowledge, that was adopted in 2012 and bans any member of the executive or legislative branch from using nonpublic government information for private profit. A memorandum  issued by the Office of Government Ethics states that this rule applies to the president, something that could present problems if Mr. Trump retains any ownership interest in his company.It is not just Mr. Trump’s potential conflicts that are likely to raise questions. He has appointed a number of billionaires to his cabinet and to advisory positions whose work is expected to have an impact on their extensive business interests. The likelihood that some decision, meeting, or policy will lead to questions about a possible violation of the conflict-of-interest laws is high, if for no other reason that there is a keen awareness that these wealthy individuals, including Carl C. Icahn, Steven Mnuchin and Wilbur L. Ross, have the president’s ear.So do not be surprised to hear the phrase “special prosecutor,” as the Independent Counsel Act is often called, bandied about in this context — even though that law, which bedeviled Bill Clinton, has long since expired.Is Insider Trading Teetering?Insider trading has been the subject of headline-grabbing cases along with a raging debate about when trading on confidential information is — and should be — a violation of the securities laws.When the Supreme Court granted review in the Salman v. United States case last January, there was much anticipation that the justices would start cutting back on the scope of the broad and amorphous prohibition on trading with confidential information. There was speculation that it might endorse the narrow approach taken in by a federal appeals court in Manhattan in United States v. Newman. That 2014 decision required proof of a tangible benefit given to the insider in exchange for information for a violation. A few months later, some saw the Supreme Court’s frank rejection of the government’s broad view of the federal anti-corruption laws in McDonnell v. United States as a sign that the justices would take a similarly strict approach to insider trading to avoid finding it unconstitutionally vague.Alas, the Salman opinion issued in early December turned out to be something of a dud. The court concluded that the requirements for proving an illegal tip had not changed since the 1983 decision in Dirks v. Securities and Exchange Commission, which said a gift of inside information to family or friends could be enough to prove a benefit to a tipper.But two current insider trading cases may present significant problems for the government as well as show how winning these cases remains a challenge even after Salman.The prosecution of the well-known gambler William T. Walters ran into significant turbulence when prosecutors revealed that a Federal Bureau of Investigation agent leaked information about the investigation to the press in 2014. That led Judge P. Kevin Castel, who is presiding over the case in Federal District Court in Manhattan, to encourage the defense to file a motion to dismiss the charges. If Judge Castel grants the request, it would be an embarrassing blow to the Justice Department and could raise questions about whether there have been leaks in other cases.AdvertisementThe S.E.C. filed charges in September against the hedge fund manager Leon G. Cooperman, accusing him of profiting from nonpublic information given to him by an executive of a company in which he held a large investment. Regulators said that he sold shares despite having promised the executive he would not trade on the information, but the complaint is vague about when the agreement was made. Mr. Cooperman has filed a motion to dismiss the charges, arguing that any promise came after receiving the information, so there was no breach of a duty — a key requirement for proving a violation.Mr. Cooperman goes a step further by claiming the S.E.C. deliberately used vague language in the complaint to obscure when he purportedly agreed not to trade, contrary to what he was told before it filed the case. If the court finds that the agency has tried to sandbag about what it claims is a violation, then there is a reasonable possibility that the charges will be dismissed.The Salman decision gave the government a boost, but the charges against Mr. Walters and Mr. Cooperman involve claims that it was the government that might have been involved in rigging the cases, putting them in danger of dismissal.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »