AdvertisementSupported byThe Week AheadBy The New York TimesEurozone finance ministers are set to discuss how soon Greece receives its next disbursement of funds from the country’s latest international bailout at their monthly gathering on Monday in Luxembourg. No major decisions are expected at the meeting, the first of its kind since Greek voters returned Alexis Tsipras to power as prime minister last month. But it will be an opportunity for Greece’s finance minister, Euclid Tsakalotos, to reassure ministers that his country is carrying out the reforms required to continue tapping the bailout, worth up to 86 billion euros, or about $96.5 billion. On Tuesday, the ministers, joined by their counterparts from European Union countries outside the single-currency zone, will try to reach a political deal on a law forcing the bloc’s 28 member states to exchange information about preferential tax agreements like those granted by Luxembourg to Amazon, and by the Netherlands to Starbucks. -James KanterGreece is to unveil its draft budget for 2016 on Monday, offering its forecast for the country’s austerity-battered economy and setting out tax increases and spending cuts promised to the country’s international creditors. The blueprint is expected to be scrutinized in Luxembourg on the same day by eurozone finance ministers. Later on Monday, Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras is to present his policy program in Greece’s Parliament. The Parliament has scheduled for Wednesday a vote of confidence in Mr. Tsipras’s new government, which he is expected to secure. -Niki Kitsantonis On Tuesday, the United States government will report the latest data on the nation’s trade balance in August. Wall Street is looking for the trade deficit to widen to $44 billion from $41.9 billion in July. The stronger dollar this year and slowing growth overseas are hurting exports, while making imported goods cheaper for domestic consumers. Some experts are looking for an even bigger gap in August than the consensus calls for. If they are right, it will cut further into estimates of economic growth for the second half of 2015.  -Nelson D. Schwartz A second criminal trial is expected to begin in London on Tuesday in an inquiry by British prosecutors into the manipulation of a global benchmark interest rate known as the London interbank offered rate, or Libor. Tom Hayes, a former trader at Citigroup and UBS, was convicted at a trial in August of conspiring to manipulate Libor and sentenced to 14 years in prison. -Chad BrayMicrosoft, known as one of the world’s biggest software makers, now makes so many hardware products that it is staging an event on Tuesday to show them all off. The event in New York City will serve as a showcase for all the Microsoft-made devices that will go on sale later this year and run Windows 10, a just-released operating system that it designed to run virtually any gadget. New Microsoft smartphones and Surface tablets are sure to be among the devices on display. The company may also share more details about HoloLens, above, an augmented reality headset that it previously promised to release around the time Windows 10 went on sale. -Nick Wingfield The European Court of Justice, Europe’s highest court, will rule on Tuesday on whether companies like Google and Facebook can continue to transfer data about their European users to the United States. The decision could have significant implications on how these companies can operate in the 28-member bloc and what services, like cloud computing, can be offered to their European customers. -Mark Scott Covestro, the polymer business spun off this year from the German drug maker Bayer, is expected to list its shares in an initial public offering in Frankfurt on Tuesday. The company was forced to lower the expected price range for its offering last week amid a turbulent period in global stock markets and is expected to raise 1 billion euros, or about $1.12 billion — less than originally expected in the I.P.O. -Chad BrayVolkswagen has promised to unveil a “technical solution” on Wednesday for the 11 million vehicles, including about 500,000 in the United States, that have illegal software aimed at cheating on emissions tests. The diesel cars may emit far more pollution than allowed under regular driving conditions. But experts are skeptical that Volkswagen can devise a fix that will comply with emission standards without hurting performance and fuel economy. Most of the affected vehicles are in Europe, and include Audi, Skoda, SEAT and some light commercial vehicles with so-called EA 189 1.6 liter or 2 liter diesel motors. -Jack Ewing The Federal Reserve, which decided at its most recent meeting in September that it was not quite ready to start raising interest rates, will publish an account of that meeting on Thursday. Some Fed officials have said since the meeting that the decision to wait was a close call. The meeting minutes may illuminate what it would take for the Fed to move forward later this year. The policy-making committee next meets on Oct. 27 and 28, and again in mid-December. -Binyamin Appelbaum Advertisement