AdvertisementSupported byCommon SenseBy James B. StewartWhen the founding fathers enshrined a right to an impartial trial by jury in the Sixth Amendment, it’s hard to imagine they were anticipating the jury in the Dewey & LeBoeuf criminal case.In the wake of the financial crisis and a wave of partner defections, Dewey, the once-prominent law firm, collapsed in 2012 in one of the nation’s largest law firm failures. Last month, after hearing four and a half months of often mind-numbing evidence, and after 21 days of deliberations, a jury acquitted the firm’s former leaders of dozens of charges but it said it was deadlocked on 93 counts, including some of the most serious.The verdict was satisfying to no one. The Manhattan district attorney, Cyrus R. Vance Jr., failed to get a conviction in one of his most prominent white-collar criminal prosecutions, and now he and his team of prosecutors have to decide whether to retry the complicated, expensive case. The defendants — Steven H. Davis, the firm’s former chairman; Stephen DiCarmine, its former executive director; and Joel Sanders, its former chief financial officer — escaped conviction, but they remain under the shadow of an indictment and face the prospect of another long courtroom ordeal.And the jurors — seven women and five men — also got little sense of closure. “I feel like it still isn’t over,” Skylar Schur, a high school English teacher who served on the jury, told me this week. “It was very frustrating to spend all that time and still not reach a verdict on so many counts.”I’ve followed the Dewey & LeBoeuf trial and observed the jurors in the courtroom, where they seemed attentive, with several taking copious notes. After the judge declared a mistrial, I wondered why the Dewey jury could not reach a decision. Its struggles speak to the challenges of prosecuting complex business cases, and may contribute to a continuing debate about whether unanimous verdicts should be required in criminal trials, especially white collar ones.Interviews with several jurors make clear that they were floundering during their deliberations and could not agree on even the most basic definitions. The jurors sent a note to the judge asking for an explanation of what it means to deliberate. There was confusion over the concept of burden of proof, even though they were repeatedly told it was the government’s obligation to prove guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. They had to wrestle with arcane rules related to accounting adjustments and how they applied to the dozens of charges against each defendant. They also debated irrelevant tangents, such as why Mr. Sanders and Mr. DiCarmine had such deep suntans.In the course of deliberations, some jurors refused to budge or explain their positions, while others seemed to change their minds constantly, sometimes on what seemed little more than a whim. Some jurors closed their eyes and refused to listen when other jurors spoke.“There was a great deal of hostility,” Ms. Schur said, “both overt and passive.”So it’s hard to say where the jury might ultimately have ended up had it ever reached a unanimous decision. But when the mistrial was declared, four jurors seemed convinced that the three defendants were innocent on all remaining counts. A fifth leaned toward acquittals on most counts.Several jurors said that the evidence was least persuasive for Mr. Davis, that it was somewhat more so for Mr. DiCarmine, and that the strongest case was against Mr. Sanders, the chief financial officer, who had direct dealings with the cooperating witnesses who had already pleaded guilty. This was borne out in preliminary votes on the most serious charges — scheme to defraud, conspiracy and grand larceny. The vote was 11 to 1 not guilty for Mr. Davis, 10 to 2 not guilty for Mr. DiCarmine, and 7 to 5 guilty for Mr. Sanders.All this suggests the prosecution has its work cut out for it on any retrial. Joan Vollero, a spokeswoman for the Manhattan district attorney, declined to comment.To help assess the Dewey & LeBoeuf outcome, I shared my notes of juror interviews with Dennis J. Devine, associate professor of psychology at Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis, and author of the book “Jury Decision Making.”“They deserve congratulations for sticking it out as long as they did,” he said of the jurors. Twenty-one days of deliberations “is light years beyond the norm,” which he said is two to four hours, usually in cases involving a single defendant with just a few counts. That they had to contend with over 150 counts with three defendants “must have been mind-boggling,” he said.He noted that prosecutors tend to like multiple counts, apparently on the theory that if they lodge enough charges, something will stick. But in this instance, “they seem to have done themselves a disservice.”That a group of four jurors favored acquittal makes it unlikely the prosecution would ever have gotten a unanimous guilty verdict. “Extensive research suggests that two-thirds is a critical mass in getting to a verdict,” he said. In other words, nine or more jurors can often get the holdouts to join the majority. But with four or more jurors, they receive enough reinforcement from fellow jurors to stand their ground.“They were right on the line here,” Professor Devine said. “That’s where you tend to get hung juries.”The United States, Canada and a few jurisdictions in Australia are the last places to require unanimous juries in criminal cases, even among Commonwealth countries that inherited the British tradition. Both Oregon and Louisiana require votes of 10 to 2. In Oregon, capital cases require a vote of 11 to 1. For civil cases, many states have abandoned the requirement.English law abandoned the requirement for a unanimous jury more than 40 years ago, and now 10 votes on a jury of 12 are enough for a conviction.Edward P. Schwartz, a jury consultant for DecisionQuest in Boston and a former Harvard professor who has co-written several articles on the unanimity requirement, said he strongly favored dropping it in favor of some degree of majority vote.“It’s an artifact of the earliest days of the jury system,” he said, when jurors were deprived of food, water and drink until they reached a unanimous decision. “The rule has no logical foundation. Requiring unanimity is peculiar, ineffective and a blunt instrument.”But Judge Jed S. Rakoff, who sits on the Federal District Court in Manhattan, defended the practice. He debriefs jurors after every trial.“With the rarest of exceptions, it has increased my confidence in the jury system,” he said of his interviews. In his 20 years on the bench and after hundreds of trials, he has encountered just two hung juries.His advice to both prosecutors and defense lawyers: “Keep it simple. A jury that understands the basics can reason through to a verdict. A jury that’s confused is a recipe for bizarre results. If the charge is simple and the presentation is straightforward, then the issues become relatively clear-cut.”It helps, he said, that jurors in federal court can take into the jury room a written copy of the judge’s instructions, which helps them stay focused and avoid superfluous issues. But that is not allowed in New York state courts unless both sides agree, which they did not in the Dewey & LeBoeuf case.Professor Devine agreed on the virtues of simplicity. He pointed to one Dewey & LeBoeuf juror, who said, “I just wanted the prosecution to give it to me in one sentence.”“They’re hungering for a story to tie together all these disparate facts,” Professor Devine said. “That’s very consistent with how scholars think about juries and jury trials. Trials are like movies. There’s a plot, and if the plot doesn’t make sense, jurors get confused.”Advertisement