AdvertisementSupported byDeal ProfessorBy Steven Davidoff SolomonIt’s time to call an end to 2016 and hand out grades for good and bad deal-making. In a fitful and contentious year, it is perhaps no surprise that this year there were more bad grades than good.LOST IN THE VALLEY Whether it was the Tesla Motors acquisition of SolarCity, Facebook’s attempt to cement Mark Zuckerberg’s control of the company or the continuing implosion of Theranos, Silicon Valley seemed to gloss over substantive points of governance in the pursuit of founders’ dreams and control.Corporate governance is often rightly criticized for emphasizing meaningless metrics and the peculiar social whims of stockholders, but in these cases, the Valley glossed over big issues about who controlled the corporation — the founder or the owners? — earning an F.The super-lawyer David Boies gets a special mention for representing Theranos while serving on its board. As I predicted, the relationship has foundered and his law firm, Boies, Schiller & Flexner, is no longer Theranos’s counsel, while Mr. Boies is still inexplicably a Theranos board member.JUST SAY NO Time Warner turned down an offer from 21st Century Fox, waiting two more years for a higher bid of $85.4 billion from AT&T. NCR, meanwhile, held out against pressure from activist investors to take an $820 million investment from the Blackstone Group. NCR’s share price has rocketed up more than 60 percent this year.To further underscore the benefits of holding out, look at a deal from 2015, when Allergan was sold to Actavis for $220 a share, after Allergan resisted a bid from Valeant Pharmaceuticals International for $185 a share. Now, consider the kind of year Valeant has had, with its stock plummeting and criminal charges being brought against some former executives. While saying no to deal offers can be risky, in these cases, it turned into success. A’s.VIACOM VANITIES If I could give a grade below F, it would go to all the parties in the Viacom mess. Everyone saw this coming for years as Sumner Redstone’s succession strategy was a proclamation that he was “not going to die,” a succession strategy that never ends well.As chief executive of Viacom, Philippe Dauman presided over a declining empire, racking up a track record that would have had him fired in Mr. Redstone’s better years. When Shari Redstone, Mr. Redstone’s daughter, asserted control and tried to oust Mr. Dauman, chaos ensued, needlessly costing tens of millions of dollars in legal fees. When the Redstones won, they put Viacom and CBS through a process to merger that was aborted, with yet more money going to lawyers and bankers. An F all around.DECISIVE DELAWARE The Delaware courts receive an A for cracking down on merger litigation. In years past, a deal announcement would seemingly trigger a lawsuit automatically. Litigation rates rose to as high as 96 percent of all deals. This remarkable statistic had long been the subject of criticism, and Delaware has acted to try to reduce the volume of these suits, following up on a late 2015 decision in Trulia that refused to award attorneys’ fees for many of these cases. Such litigation will be impossible to stamp out, but Delaware deserves an A for effort as well as for capably handling many other corporate disputes over the year. Chief among these was Energy Transfer Equity’s Houdini-like escape from the merger with the Williams Companies, which came down to the nuances of when a tax opinion can and cannot be given.PAPER TIGERS Gannett made a blockbuster hostile bid, seeking to acquire the company that owns The Chicago Tribune and The Los Angeles Times. Who knew there was still life in the moribund newspaper business? It quickly escalated into a battle of wills as the chairman of Tribune Publishing, Michael Ferro, ramped up a heated defense, changing the company’s name to Tronc to emphasize its emerging internet business. This type of name change didn’t work during the dot-com bubble, and there is no reason to think it will work now.Tronc found a white squire, Patrick Soon-Shiong, who was willing to invest $70 million to become the second-largest shareholder of the company, after Mr. Ferro. Gannett equivocated on whether it still wanted to make a deal but ended up setting aside a blockbuster offer of $18.50 a share. Tronc finally agreed to the offer. In the 11th hour, however, Gannett’s lenders balked at doing a highly leveraged deal while the newspaper business was deteriorating. At least this showed that this gatekeeper stuff actually has bite sometimes. Still, the deal died, earning everyone an F.THE MAC IS BACK Litigation alleging a material adverse change, or a MAC, to justify walking away from a deal, returned to the fore this year. Abbott Laboratories sought to escape its $5.8 billion acquisition of the medical test maker Alere with a lawsuit in Delaware Chancery Court. And Verizon Communications is reconsidering its acquisition of Yahoo, after cyberattacks affected more than 1.5 billion Yahoo accounts.A MAC is a contractual claim that the business has suffered a material adverse affect. Abbott is citing a government investigation into possible bribery at Alere’s foreign operations. Verizon would presumably base a case on the hacks. Alere is in court fighting Abbott’s claims, while Yahoo waits to find out whether it can simply recut its deal and avoid litigation ending its long national nightmare. It all shows that the conventional wisdom that a MAC claim is a loser may not always be true. An incomplete.CHINA’S BUYING SPREE Chinese buyers hit the United States in full force this year, pushing hard-to-move cash abroad and spreading their wings. The national security concerns stopped some deals, including Philips’s $2.9 billion sale of a controlling stake in its LED light business to GO Scale Capital, and Fujian Grand Chip Investment Fund’s acquisition of the chip equipment manufacturer Aixtron.But the biggest barrier for some Chinese buyers has been inexperience and opaqueness, amply illustrated by the Anbang Insurance Group’s $14 billion offer for Starwood Hotels and Resorts. No one had heard of the insurer, yet it challenged Marriott International in a surprising bidding war. And then, even more mysteriously, Anbang quietly walked away, possibly because Chinese regulators balked. An F.RUBE GOLDBERG CORPORATIONS The collapse of Sun Edison in the middle of its acquisition of Vivint left everyone with whiplash. Sun Edison was a financial beast with two publicly traded subsidiaries whose sole purpose was to buy Sun Edison assets, and a business model built on debt. This very Wall Street construction was unstable, and with the sharp decline in oil it fell apart, sending the company into bankruptcy. An F.SHAREHOLDER ACTIVISM 2.0 Bill Gates’s family office and foundation jumped headfirst into shareholder activism, challenging a controlling family’s attempt to sell its stake in the Swiss chemical maker Sika. Mr. Gates’s funds pressed the media- and the minority-friendly provisions of Swiss law to stand up for the governance rights of minority shareholders and the right to share in any sale premium. Now, if only we saw more of that among American shareholders, rather than fights over meaningless issues. An A.THE EDGES OF ANTITRUST ENFORCEMENT Antitrust enforcers blocked a number of enormous deals, including those between Halliburton and Baker Hughes and between Office Depot and Staples. The surge in enforcement reflected in large part a move by companies to consolidate more aggressively. A number of large deals will be taken up by the Trump administration at a time of increasing unsettledness about the degree of concentration. As a candidate, Donald J. Trump spoke out against the Time Warner-AT&T merger, which would be a vertical merger, raising fewer issues. Yet it is unclear what his administration will do. A third incomplete.A happy new year to all as we look forward to what 2017 will bring for deal-making, presidential and otherwise.Steven Davidoff Solomon is a professor of law at the University of California, Berkeley. His columns can be found at nytimes.com/dealbook. Follow @stevendavidoff on Twitter.Advertisement