By JACK EWINGDEC. 28, 2016
FRANKFURT — Hans Tietmeyer, the central banker who led Germany’s transition from the deutsche mark to the euro despite reservations about a single European currency, died on Tuesday. He was 85.The Bundesbank, Germany’s central bank, announced his death but did not give the cause or say where he died.As president of the Bundesbank from 1993 until 1999, Mr. Tietmeyer was the most powerful central banker in Europe and a leading advocate of policies that prized price stability above all else. But in contrast to some of his more dogmatic predecessors, he was also known as a politically savvy pragmatist capable of compromise.In the years leading up to the creation of the euro in 1999, the Bundesbank under Mr. Tietmeyer set the tone for other central banks in Europe because of Germany’s status as Europe’s largest economy and the stability of Germany’s currency. When the Bundesbank raised or lowered its benchmark interest rates, the central banks of France, Italy and other European countries had little choice but to follow suit.AdvertisementMr. Tietmeyer played a leading role in the years of negotiations that preceded the euro. He was among those insisting that countries joining the new currency union should be held to strict spending limits, and that the European Central Bank’s top priority should be to contain inflation.AdvertisementAfter the Bundesbank and other central banks in the eurozone ceded power over monetary policy to the European Central Bank in 1999, Mr. Tietmeyer remained a visible and influential speaker and commentator. In a 2004 book, “Herausforderung Euro” (“The Euro Challenge”), he lamented that many countries — including Germany — had violated the spending limits he had worked so hard to establish.Mr. Tietmeyer expressed doubts about whether the euro could be sustained without a strong European central government to enforce fiscal discipline. “One must not underestimate the risk to the euro of faulty budget discipline,” he told the German magazine WirtschaftsWoche in 2007.His views seemed to be vindicated in 2010, when the government of Greece was discovered to have systematically concealed its runaway public debt, provoking a crisis that nearly destroyed the euro and remains a source of tension.Mr. Tietmeyer was born on Aug. 18, 1931, in Metelen, a village northwest of Münster close to Germany’s border with the Netherlands. He was one of 11 children of Helene and Bernhard Tietmeyer, a financial inspector for the local government. There was no immediate word on his survivors.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.When he completed secondary school in 1952, Mr. Tietmeyer initially studied Roman Catholic theology. But after three semesters he switched to economics and went on to earn a doctorate from the University of Cologne in 1960. At the same time, he became expert at table tennis, winning medals at national championships.In 1962, Mr. Tietmeyer took a post at the West German Ministry of Economics, beginning a long career in Civil Service, often in jobs that involved coordinating economic policy with other European countries.As European leaders were beginning to discuss the idea of a common currency, Mr. Tietmeyer, in 1982, became a state secretary in the Finance Ministry, a position just below the minister. The job included responsibility for issues related to what was then known as the European Community. In that role, he became a close adviser to Chancellor Helmut Kohl, preparing for West German participation in international summits.Mr. Tietmeyer was powerful enough to become a target of terrorists. In 1988, members of the far-left Red Army Faction fired at his Mercedes-Benz outside Bonn, striking the car numerous times but leaving Mr. Tietmeyer and his driver uninjured.AdvertisementMr. Kohl’s government nominated Mr. Tietmeyer to the Bundesbank’s board in 1990, and he became president three years later.After his retirement from the Bundesbank, he remained something of a spiritual godfather to German economists and policy makers who have insisted — to much international criticism — that fiscal austerity is the cure for countries, like Greece, with too much government debt.“Monetary stability is not everything,” Mr. Tietmeyer said in a 2008 speech, “but without it there is nothing.”A version of this article appears in print on December 30, 2016, on Page A17 of the New York edition with the headline: Hans Tietmeyer, 85; Led Germany’s Transition to the Euro.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.