AdvertisementSupported byBy Randall SmithA jury in Manhattan on Thursday found two former London traders guilty in the first convictions in the United States stemming from the global investigation into the rigging of an interest rate benchmark known as Libor.The verdict against the two, Anthony Allen and Anthony Conti, after less than a day and a half of deliberation, was a surprisingly quick victory for the Justice Department as it makes a renewed effort to prosecute individuals for financial crimes.As the jury foreman began reading out the verdicts on the 19 counts of fraud and conspiracy against Mr. Allen and the nine for Mr. Conti, Mr. Allen slumped low in his chair, his chin resting on his left fist. As the guilty verdicts slowly tallied all 28 counts, he stared off to his right, away from the jury seated to his left.The journey for the two men, both British citizens, to Federal District Court in Lower Manhattan was the product of a long-running push by regulators and law enforcement in a number of countries to investigate the manipulation of Libor, or the London interbank offered rate. Libor is a benchmark used by banks to set interest rates on mortgages, credit cards and other kinds of loans.More than a half-dozen banks, including the Dutch bank the two men worked for, Rabobank, have paid more than $10 billion to settle charges with regulators and law enforcement agencies that they conspired to rig Libor.Abuse of interest rates and the failure to address the problem is one of the most expensive scandals to hit Wall Street since the financial crisis.Trying the two former Rabobank traders before a jury presented a challenge for prosecutors, resting in part as it did on the arcane technicalities of how Libor is calculated. Submissions for Libor benchmarks are made at a certain time in London in different currencies and for numerous different short-term maturities in the hundredths of a percentage point.Yet after the verdict, a juror, Howard Wasserfall, said that “it was pretty obvious to us something was going on that was interfering with the way the Libor rate was supposed to be” calculated.A retired mail carrier, Mr. Wasserfall pointed to the emails and text messages among the traders that the prosecutors presented and especially to the testimony from three other former Rabobank traders who had earlier pleaded guilty to participating in the scheme.“I think this shows that the government can obtain convictions even in complicated cases, and this was not the simplest case,” said John Coffee, a law professor at Columbia University.Leslie R. Caldwell, the assistant attorney general for the criminal division of the Justice Department, said: “Today’s verdicts illustrate the department’s successful efforts to hold accountable bank executives responsible for this global fraud scheme.”The Justice Department has sought to counter the sharp criticism from many quarters — including from the judge presiding over the Rabobank trial, Jed S. Rakoff — that it has been reluctant to bring cases against Wall Street executives, even for the abuses that led to the financial crisis of 2008.The convictions on Thursday may embolden prosecutors as they weigh whether to bring cases against individuals in the currency manipulation scandal.“The Libor cases have been a symbol of the department’s commitment to taking on the major banks,” said Brandon L. Garrett, a professor at the University of Virginia law school. “I think it was very important for the government to show that both individuals and the corporations will be held criminally accountable.”Michael Schachter, the lawyer for Mr. Allen, who is 44, said, “This is Round 1. Of course, we are disappointed with the verdict, but we look forward to exploring all available legal options.”Tor Ekeland, a lawyer for Mr. Conti, 46, said, “He respects and accepts the jury’s verdict and fully plans on appealing.”The defendants could face a decade or more in prison. Although each count is punishable by up to 30 years in prison, the actual sentences aren’t likely to be that severe, one legal expert said. Sentencing has been scheduled for March 10.In addition to Mr. Allen and Mr. Conti, the Justice Department has criminally charged 11 individuals in the Libor investigation. Four, including the three former Rabobank traders, have pleaded guilty.Another trader who has been charged is Tom Hayes, formerly of UBS and Citigroup, who was convicted this summer in London on British charges of conspiring with others to manipulate Libor. It was the first criminal conviction in the Libor investigation. Mr. Hayes is appealing. Six former brokers who were accused of assisting Mr. Hayes are currently on trial in a London court.The trial of Mr. Allen and Mr. Conti began on Oct. 14. Prosecutors said the defendants had conspired to submit bogus rates to be used in calculating Libor, which is based on submissions from 16 banks, to help other Rabobank traders make more money on trades in which they stood to gain from a higher or lower interest rate.Mr. Allen, the global head of liquidity and finance, supervised Mr. Conti, a senior money markets trader who made daily Libor submissions.Despite the complexity, the jurors appeared to take a lively interest in the specifics of the case, with more than a half-dozen taking notes regularly during the trial. For the jurors, Mr. Wasserfall said, the “hardest part” was determining “the degree to which they participated in the scheme.” He said he was struck by Mr. Allen’s trading desk nickname, “Ghosty,” which reminded him of the way he tried to portray himself as “an innocent bystander.”Another juror, who declined to give her name, said she thought Mr. Allen was “smart enough to know what was going on.”  Prosecutor Brian R. Young said the defendants had “left a paper trail a mile long,” and had been “active and enthusiastic participants” in a scheme with other Rabobank traders.Defense lawyers argued that their clients’ submissions were made honestly in good faith, and that what appeared to have been their agreement in emails and texts to make high or low submissions were often sent merely out of politeness.Mr. Schachter said that out of 12 documented requests his client Mr. Allen had received between 2005 and 2008, he had ignored seven and “blown off” or “pushed back” on others.“It is not a crime to receive a request,” he said. “Saying O.K. is not a crime. Submitting a fraudulent rate is a crime.”Both he and a lawyer for Mr. Conti, Aaron K. Williamson, noted several instances when email requests for particular rates, and in some cases their clients’ apparent agreements, were followed by Libor submissions that matched those of many other banks.Mr. Williamson acknowledged that Mr. Conti, whose email trail was more extensive and who unlike Mr. Allen chose not to testify in his own defense, had at times considered and accommodated traders’ requests for higher or lower Libor submissions — but only within a range he believed warranted by market conditions.Prosecutor Carol L. Sipperly said that such conduct was “exactly what the defendants were charged with.”Mr. Allen, she said, had “turned a blind eye” to what he understood were improper requests by allowing them to continue. He didn’t intervene “because he was in on it.”Advertisement