AdvertisementSupported byStreet SceneBy William D. CohanIt’s rare to get a peek behind the corporate curtain and to catch a glimpse of the real-time deterioration of the relationship between an activist investor and the chief executive he had long supported.But thanks to a recently released report by the Senate Special Committee on Aging, we have been offered a front-row seat to witness how the billionaire hedge fund manager William A. Ackman turned on J. Michael Pearson, the chief executive of Valeant Pharmaceuticals International, and replaced him with Joseph Papa in hopes that Valeant’s miserable fortunes could be turned around. It’s like watching a car crash.It wasn’t that long ago, in February 2014, when Mr. Ackman and Mr. Pearson were besties. Together, they hatched a plan for Valeant to attempt a hostile takeover of Allergan, the maker of Botox. Mr. Ackman secretly spent $3.2 billion to buy a 9.7 percent stake in Allergan. He agreed to vote these Allergan shares for the Valeant deal.Two months later, Valeant announced a hostile $45.6 billion stock-and-cash bid for Allergan. Allergan’s stock surged. In short order, Mr. Ackman had made a profit of $1 billion. But Allergan fought back and found a white knight in Actavis, a Dublin-based pharmaceutical company, which agreed to buy Allergan for $66 billion. Because Mr. Ackman still owned his Allergan shares, his profit on them rose to around $2.6 billion after Actavis bought Allergan.By prior arrangement, Mr. Ackman’s hedge fund, Pershing Square Capital Management, kept $2.2 billion of that profit and forked over $400 million to Valeant as its share of the winnings.So pleased was Mr. Ackman with Mr. Pearson that he decided to plow his Allergan profits, plus another $1 billion, into Valeant itself to help Mr. Pearson continue his acquisition spree, which had long made Valeant a Wall Street darling, and one especially favored by hedge fund managers.Mr. Ackman viewed Valeant’s failure to purchase Allergan as an example of Mr. Pearson’s discipline as a serial acquirer. In building a $3.2 billion stake in Valeant, Mr. Ackman had paid around $190 a share. Soon enough, Mr. Ackman looked like a genius as the Valeant stock moved up smartly on the news of his involvement, reaching a peak of $264 in August 2015. Mr. Ackman’s stake in Valeant was then worth around $4 billion.But the honeymoon between Mr. Ackman and Mr. Pearson ended a few months after the October 2015 revelations that Valeant had a hidden ownership of Philidor Rx Services, a specialty pharmacy company that had been an engine behind Valeant’s growth. Short sellers started circling Valeant.At first, however, as the Senate report now makes clear, Mr. Ackman was ambivalent about what to do about Mr. Pearson. In late October, he tried to be supportive of Mr. Pearson, despite disagreeing with him about the company’s communications strategy in the wake of the Philidor revelations.“I just want you to know that I am totally supportive of you as C.E.O. of Valeant,” Mr. Ackman wrote in an email to him, which was cited in the report. “I just want to make sure you don’t confuse my disagreement with you about a conference call with my confidence in you as C.E.O.”In early November 2015, The Wall Street Journal published a front-page article about Mr. Ackman and Valeant. The night before it appeared, Mr. Ackman wrote Mr. Pearson that he had spoken with the reporter and “done [his] best to make it a good story and for you and the company to look as good as possible. Fingers crossed.”But it didn’t work out as Mr. Ackman had hoped. “It is always a debate as to whether to work with the press or not, but I chose to do so with The Journal,” he wrote Mr. Pearson. “I did my best to get the article to a good place. Clearly, this was not my best work. My apologies.”A few days later, Mr. Ackman again wrote Mr. Pearson a message of support, according to the report. “While I have strong views on Valeant’s communication strategy and would have taken a different approach, you and the board should not interpret this as a negative reflection on my view of you as the C.E.O. of the company,” he wrote. “You are one of the most shareholder-oriented C.E.O.s I know. You have assured me that you and the rest of the board are considering any and all alternatives that would benefit shareholders and other stakeholders. That is very comforting to us.”Later that November, Pershing Square nearly doubled its stake in Valeant to 9.9 percent.For the first two months of 2016, Mr. Pearson was on medical leave from Valeant, apparently suffering from “severe pneumonia” and exhaustion. On Feb. 29, the day after Valeant announced that Mr. Pearson would return to the company, Mr. Ackman met with him to request that his partner, Steve Fraidin, a Wall Street lawyer, be added to the Valeant board of directors. “We greatly appreciate the work you are doing on behalf of us and the other shareholders,” Mr. Ackman wrote Mr. Pearson. “You come across very well and I think will be very comforting for analysts.”Mr. Fraidin joined the Valeant board on March 8. Ten days later, Mr. Ackman requested that he, too, be named a Valeant director. (Pershing Square is Valeant’s largest shareholder.) In that request, according to a deposition that Mr. Pearson gave to the Senate committee, Mr. Ackman said that he “had 100 percent confidence” in Mr. Pearson as chief executive.Not for long.On March 20, Mr. Ackman called Mr. Pearson and told him the board was replacing him as chief executive and that Mr. Ackman was joining the board.Mr. Pearson told the Senate special committee that Mr. Ackman lost confidence in him “sometime between Friday and Sunday of that weekend.” Asked why he believed Mr. Ackman sought his removal, Mr. Pearson told the committee: “I think it had to do primarily with the share-price performance, and that he was probably feeling a lot of heat from his investors and, therefore, if you’re an activist, you make changes. And a change to the C.E.O. is probably the easiest change to make.”For his part, Mr. Ackman told the Senate committee that he would not comment on the board’s discussions over replacing Mr. Pearson with Mr. Papa. Mr. Ackman’s stake in Valeant, once worth $4 billion, is down now to around $400 million. Valeant’s collapse has put a serious dent in Pershing Square’s 2016 performance.Since Mr. Papa took over for Mr. Pearson, Valeant’s stock is down another 50 percent or so — ensuring that 2017 will be a rocky year for him, as long as Mr. Ackman is around.Advertisement