AdvertisementSupported byVocationsAs told to Patricia R. OlsenUlysses Jackson, 35, is a paint formulator at Golden Artist Colors in New Berlin, N.Y.Q. What do you do as a paint formulator?A. I develop paint for artists and for special applications, such as when a conservation scientist at a museum wants to repair an old painting and needs to match the color. I balance certain attributes of the paint, such as performance, shelf stability and ease of manufacturing.So you don’t just mix colors.No, there’s a lot of science involved. I’m a self-taught chemist. Each formulation has 10 to 12 ingredients, like binders and a dispersant that can interact with each other. We need to understand those interactions.How did you teach yourself chemistry?I’ve always been interested in science. When I was a kid, I had a lab in the basement, and in the summers I attended the Children’s School of Science in Woods Hole, Mass. When I started here, I began reading chemistry textbooks one after the other and I haven’t stopped.How did you get this job?I graduated from the University of South Florida in 2002 with a fine arts degree. I’m a painter, but I knew I’d have to work full time. I planned a road trip around the country to figure out where I wanted to live and work. My parents, both painters, use Golden paints, so I included the company founders, Mark and Barbara Golden, with others I contacted to ask about staying with them when I wasn’t camping. I stayed with the Goldens in New Berlin and eventually went to work for them. I’ve been here 13 years.Has this job influenced your art?When I first started here, I was doing soft, quiet landscapes. After doing some intricate experiments with paints at work, my personal art became more textural and now looks more like blackboards in a chemistry lab. Some works look like what you might find in New York City alleys, with torn posters and graffiti and the history of the culture. People ask where I get my collage materials even though it’s all paint.Do you wish you had more time to paint?I don’t feel conflicted at all. I have an analytical or scientific side that’s satisfied by working with paint during the day. I also have a creative or artistic side that I indulge in after work in my studio practice. One side of my personality informs the other.Vocations asks people about their jobs. Interview conducted and condensed by Patricia R. Olsen.Advertisement