By LESLIE PICKERNOV. 5, 2015
A year ago, when Forbes Media agreed to sell a majority stake to a consortium of Asian investors, Steve Forbes, the chairman and editor in chief, said he got nearly everything he wanted out of the deal.“We were looking for a very particular kind of buyer,” he told The New York Times then. “We are pleased to say the long process was worthwhile.”Now he is taking that buyer to court over allegations of default and corporate abuse.The Forbes family is suing Integrated Whale Media Investment, a group comprising the investors Yam Tak Cheung and Wong Siu Wa. The complaint, filed with the Delaware Court of Chancery, said that Integrated Whale had borrowed from the Forbes family to finance part of the September 2014 transaction and missed an interest payment and eventually defaulted under the terms of their agreement.The situation underscores the chances that merger and acquisition transactions — saluted at the time they are signed — will sour quickly. The risk, though, can be even higher when the seller finances part of the buyer’s purchase, as was the case with Forbes and Integrated Whale.Advertisement“This will force people to rethink seller financing altogether,” said Minor Myers, a professor at Brooklyn Law School. “To the extent that a seller is willing to finance a transaction, it will cause people to do a lot more due diligence, not just on the entity that’s on the hook but also who they are.”While most of the financial details were redacted in the copy of the complaint, a person close to the deal, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said last year that the transaction valued Forbes at $475 million.Integrated Whale acquired an 80 percent stake with cash, another person briefed on the matter recently said. Then, the Asian group borrowed about $71 million from the Forbes family to buy an additional 15 percent, said the person, who spoke on condition of anonymity. The Forbes family holds the remaining 5 percent, the person said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The complaint said Integrated Whale did not make its first interest payment, due on Oct. 1, 2014. Based on the terms of the agreement, the missed payment ultimately required Integrated Whale to repay the entire amount of the loan, which it did not do, the complaint said.At the time of the transaction, Integrated Whale and Forbes deposited cash into an escrow account. On Sept. 12, the money was to be given to Forbes unless Integrated Whale had a specified reason for it not to. But that money has not been released, the complaint said.As a response to Forbes’s request for the funds, Integrated Whale used its control over the company’s board to “embark on a retaliatory, multifront campaign of oppression through the abuse of the corporate machinery to penalize and dissuade the Forbes plaintiffs from enforcing their basic contractual rights,” the complaint said.AdvertisementIntegrated Whale’s management “rejects the allegations contained in the complaint as completely without merit,” the group said in an emailed statement. It is “currently reviewing all legal options regarding the complaint and reserves its rights.”The parties entered into litigation in the British Virgin Islands, where Integrated Whale is domiciled. Integrated Whale gave testimony there that said Mr. Forbes had agreed orally to forgive the Asian investors’ default, according to the complaint. But the complaint said there was never such a conversation between Mr. Forbes and Integrated Whale.If the Asian investors do not and cannot pay back the Forbes family, Integrated Whale could be liquidated. If that is the case, a majority stake in Forbes Media may — once again — be up for sale.A version of this article appears in print on November 6, 2015, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Forbes Sues the Consortium That Bought It, Over a Default.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.