By LIZ MOYERNOV. 5, 2015
Boeing has agreed to pay $57 million to settle a lawsuit that accused it of charging excessive fees and choosing higher-cost investment offerings for the workers and retirees who participate in its 401(k) retirement plan.The amount of the settlement, tentatively reached in August on the eve of a trial, was disclosed on Thursday, and the two sides have asked a federal judge in Illinois for approval.With the settlement, nine large American companies have paid a combined $271.5 million over class-action lawsuits brought on behalf of workers by a St. Louis lawyer who has pushed major corporations for more accountability in the retirement plans they offer. Other companies that have settled include Ameriprise Financial, Cigna and Kraft Foods.“This settlement, the culmination of over nine years of litigation, signifies our commitment to improving the 401(k) savings plans that Americans rely on for a secure retirement,” said Jerome J. Schlichter of the St. Louis firm Schlichter, Bogard & Denton, who represented the Boeing workers and retirees in the case.AdvertisementBoeing has the second-largest retirement plan among American companies, with $44 billion in worker and retiree savings, behind I.B.M. with $48 billion of assets. The defense contractor Lockheed Martin has paid the biggest single settlement to date in a similar case, $62 million.AdvertisementBoeing has denied the claims in the suit but has made a number of changes to its 401(k) plan, known as a voluntary investment plan, including replacing mutual funds with lower-cost investment options. An independent consultant will review its plan.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“This settlement is a reasonable approach to avoid the additional expense of continued litigation,” Tony Parasida, Boeing’s senior vice president of human resources, said in a note to employees on Thursday morning. “It’s not an admission of wrongdoing, and Boeing maintains that it has prudently managed and overseen the V.I.P. at all times.”The settlement applies to those who participated in the Boeing plan from 2000 and 2006, after deducting attorney fees and expenses.Regulators and lawmakers in Washington have increased their scrutiny of the retirement products industry in the last few years, focusing on the fiduciary duties firms have to employees and investors.In May, the Supreme Court handed Mr. Schlichter a partial victory in another one of his 401(k) lawsuits. In that ruling, the court said retirement plan administrators must continue to monitor the investments in their plans and remove imprudent ones over time, a standard that legal experts say could reverberate throughout the retirement-savings industry.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.