
The Haggler By                     
 DAVID SEGAL
 
DEC. 30, 2016
Being a largehearted fellow with a deep and abiding faith in humanity, the Haggler likes to take the days between Christmas and New Year’s Day and look back at the warmth and good cheer he encountered in this column over the past 12 months.So he did that.It took four seconds.Because when he browsed through the episodes of 2016, he found many tales of companies behaving badly. In some cases, very badly. The year was like every other in the Haggler’s career of interventions on behalf of consumers. Moments of reconciliation were rare. Moments of enlightenment even rarer.Which is to say that if you’re in the mood for uplift, dear readers, try a forklift. What follows is an update to some of the standout examples of shouting and agita as we once again look back at a year in haggling.Remember Carl Swenson, the father of the Medal of Honor winner William Swenson? He kept finding fake Facebook accounts in the name of his son. It turned out that the accounts were used for something known as “romance fraud,” in which scammers wheedle money from women who have contacted them on dating sites. The fake accounts bolster the fraudster’s identity.AdvertisementThe real William Swenson, who does not have a Facebook account, seemed somewhat amused by the misuse of his image and biography. His father, less so. After the Haggler helped get the attention of Facebook, the company took down a particularly stubborn “William Swenson” account. But Swenson the elder said that for months afterward, he was battling with Facebook over other William Swenson-inspired accounts, some of which used a photograph of his son receiving the Medal of Honor from President Obama. He spent three weeks, for instance, needling Facebook to take down a Devoe Swenson William page.Advertisement“I have 72 pages reported and removed so far,” he wrote to the Haggler in October. “There are several other clearly bogus pages, without photos, but I know I have to live with that.”Onward. The Haggler has written a few columns about John Fox, the man who bilked millions from customers of Premier Cru, a wine store he helped found in Berkeley, Calif. Mr. Fox told thousands of hopeful buyers that he was taking pre-orders for rare vintages of Bordeaux. In fact, he was just pocketing the money and occasionally mollifying his more irate victims by sending them cases he had bought from other wine stores.Having previously plead guilty to wire fraud, Mr. Fox was sentenced in mid-December to six and a half years of prison. In his plea agreement, he told the Justice Department that he would make whole the 9,000 customers whom he had cheated of some $45 million. This would seem a tall order, given that Mr. Fox has filed for personal bankruptcy after spending his ill-gotten gains on Corvettes, Ferraris and other luxury cars, as well as nearly $900,000 on a woman he met online who was blackmailing him — at a cost of $10,000 a month — after a tryst.Mr. Fox’s many victims may wonder how, exactly, he will ever earn $45 million. Good question. According to reports, he said in court that he wanted to take computer classes in prison, and start a new business when he is released, then use profits from that venture to make restitution.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Haggler doesn’t see what could possibly go wrong with this plan.In November, the Haggler wrote about a company called IDC Servco, which for over two years had charged a nonprofit in Manhattan some $28,000 for printer toner it had never ordered, at roughly 10 times the going price. The strangest part: IDC Servco was supposed to have been shut down in late June, soon after the district attorney’s office in Orange County, Calif., indicted 23 of its employees.But the nonprofit had dealt with IDC Servco in September, or at least it had dealt with a man named Jim Snodgrass, who said he was with IDC Servco. What was really going on here? In a brief phone call with the Haggler, Mr. Snodgrass said that the company’s lawyer would explain. That never happened, and the mystery endures.But the Haggler learned a few days ago that he wasn’t the only one scratching his head. On Dec. 19, an agent of the Secret Service, which was involved in the IDC Servco indictments, contacted the Haggler in search of contact information for the nonprofit that was overcharged by the company. This was the first time law enforcement had sought out the Haggler’s help. It made the Haggler feel useful, in a novel way.If this leads to more news, the Haggler will share.Finally, the Haggler departed from his usual complaint-then-aid format in July by writing about streaming music services, with an appraisal of Apple Music. The service looks great, and it is terrific at finding new music. But the version it released for Android last year behaved like a pothead — dropping songs from playlists, duplicating others, forgetting “I don’t like this suggestion” buttons that were pressed time and again.AdvertisementAround that time, the company was unveiling an update to its Android version of Apple Music. For the next three months, the Haggler tried it out. On one level, he is pleased to report, it was an improvement. There were no more dropped or duplicated songs, for instance.But it was still buggy. By month No. 3, it was nearly always necessary to restart the Haggler’s smartphone to launch Apple Music. Which gets old.In short, the streaming service may no longer be stoned. But like a lot of recovering drug users, Apple Music is not exactly reliable.Since November, the Haggler has been happily using Spotify. When you write with complaints in 2017 — and by all means, please do — it will be playing in the background.Email: haggler@nytimes.com or tweet to @TheHagglerNYT. Keep it family-friendly and under 250 words, include your hometown and go easy on the caps-lock key. Letters may be edited for clarity and length.A version of this article appears in print on January 1, 2017, on Page BU3 of the New York edition with the headline: Looking for Holiday Cheer? Look Elsewhere.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »