AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Jennifer SabaWalt Disney may be looking for a bit of two-for-one magic. The $160 billion entertainment conglomerate is on the hunt for technology to connect consumers directly with its movies and television shows. It is also in need of a successor to its chief executive, Bob Iger. A Netflix acquisition including its founder, Reed Hastings, might just answer both dreams — though it would be pricey.The Magic Kingdom lost some of its zip in 2015, when Mr. Iger indicated that fewer people were paying for ESPN, its cable sports network and profit engine. Shares of Disney are off about 20 percent since then.All the same, the company has been one of the forward thinkers in its business when it comes to bypassing traditional cable boxes. ESPN is part of new packages like Dish Network’s Sling TV. Mr. Iger splashed out $1 billion for a one-third stake in Major League Baseball’s streaming technology, with the option to buy it out.Disney could, however, think much bigger. Netflix could provide more streaming know-how and 87 million subscribers worldwide. Mr. Hastings has defied the odds in developing his 20-year-old creation from mail-in DVDs to an online leader and content producer. He could be a candidate to replace Mr. Iger, who is slated to step down in 2018.Netflix would be expensive, though. It trades at well over 100 times next year’s estimated earnings, compared with Disney’s 16 times multiple. Assuming a standard 30 percent premium, the purchase would cost $65 billion. To match the $15 billion uplift from the market price in present-value terms, Mr. Iger would need to find over $2 billion in annual cost savings. That is a big chunk, but Disney could plausibly substitute a third of the content that Mr. Hastings plans to spend more than $6 billion a year on to make and buy.Netflix would still offer Disney an inadequate financial return. Sometimes, though, there is more at stake, like leapfrogging into the latest technology and securing the right leader. The House of Mouse paid nearly 50 times earnings for Pixar in 2006, but the purchase solved strategic problems and reinvigorated its animation studio.Asked recently about acquisitions including Netflix, Mr. Iger did not get specific but did not rule anything out, either. Lots could go awry with a big, bold purchase, from shareholder backlash to culture battles. Still, the storyboard is something Disney might want to sketch out.Advertisement