By PETER EAVISDEC. 31, 2015
The hedge fund of William A. Ackman said on Thursday that it had sold some of its shares in Valeant Pharmaceuticals, the embattled drug company that Mr. Ackman earlier this year went to considerable lengths to defend.The hedge fund, Pershing Square Capital Management, said in a regulatory filing that its stake in Valeant was now equivalent to 8.5 percent of the company’s shares. In November, Pershing said that it had bought shares that increased its stake in Valeant to 9.9 percent of the company, from 5.7 percent. In the sale announced on Thursday, Pershing Square disposed of roughly five million shares.The hedge fund said in the filing that it sold the shares to “generate a tax loss for their investors.” In other words, Pershing’s losses on the Valeant shares can be used to offset taxes that might be owed on the fund’s other positions. Even so, by selling the shares, Pershing loses the opportunity to book any future gains on them. This suggests that Mr. Ackman may not expect the shares to reach the price at which he purchased them any time soon. The sale sounds a downbeat note for Mr. Ackman and Pershing Square, whose main public portfolio was down 19.5 percent on Dec. 22.Valeant’s shares have fallen 61 percent from the high they reached in the summer, though they have climbed considerably from the lows they hit in November.Valeant’s business model has come under fire on several fronts in recent months. It drew criticism for sharply raising the prices of some old drugs after acquiring them. And Valeant has faced scrutiny over its relationship with Philidor Rx Services, a mail-order pharmacy that dispensed some of Valeant’s expensive dermatology drugs. Valeant cut its ties to Philidor in October after questions were raised about the practices.Earlier this week, Valeant said that J. Michael Pearson, its chairman and chief executive, was on medical leave and that a team of executives would run the company while he was away. Valeant earlier said Mr. Pearson had been hospitalized and was being treated for a severe case of pneumonia.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.