AdvertisementSupported byBy ReutersA drop in United States exports last month pushed the country’s trade deficit in goods higher, while the number of Americans filing for unemployment benefits fell last week in a positive sign for the labor market.The two reports were released on Thursday and suggested that when Donald J. Trump becomes president next month, the labor market will probably be at roughly full strength and international trade could weigh on the economy.In an initial estimate that did not include trade in services, the Commerce Department said the United States exported $1.2 billion less in November than in October. Imports rose by $2.2 billion during the month. The full trade report for November is due on Jan. 6.Michael Gapen, an economist at Barclays in New York, said it appeared that “net trade will again be a drag” on fourth-quarter economic growth.The report also showed an increase in retail and wholesale inventories in November, which could temporarily bolster economic growth.Mr. Trump campaigned on promises to reduce America’s trade deficit and bring back jobs that had moved abroad to countries with lower manufacturing costs. Working against him could be a stronger United States dollar weighing on American exporters. The trade deficit for goods widened by $3.4 billion in November to $65.3 billion.The dollar has surged about 5 percent since Mr. Trump won the Nov. 8 presidential election, as investors bet that wider budget deficits under his presidency could cause higher inflation and more interest-rate increases by the Federal Reserve. On Thursday, the dollar eased.Separately, initial claims for state unemployment benefits dropped 10,000 to a seasonally adjusted 265,000 for the week ended Dec. 24, the Labor Department said. It was the 95th straight week claims were below 300,000, a threshold associated with a healthy labor market. That is the longest stretch since 1970, when the labor market was much smaller.The department said in a statement that there were no special factors affecting claims last week, although estimating the data can be more difficult around holidays.The claims report also showed that the number of people still receiving benefits after an initial week of aid rose 63,000 to 2.10 million in the week ended Dec. 17, the highest since September.Advertisement