By ROBERT D. HERSHEY Jr.DEC. 31, 2016
F. Ross Johnson, who as chief executive of RJR Nabisco instigated an era-defining takeover struggle that was chronicled in film and a best-selling book and made him a symbol of corporate greed, died on Thursday at his home in Jupiter, Fla. He was 85.The cause was pneumonia, a spokesman for his family said.Known for lavish expense accounts and for surrounding himself with sports stars and other celebrities, Mr. Johnson cut the biggest profile among a breed of executives who with little company loyalty waged war on the traditional business order in the financial world’s roaring 1980s.“He did the biggest deals, had the biggest mouth and enjoyed the biggest perks,” Bryan Burrough and John Helyar wrote in “Barbarians at the Gate: The Fall of RJR Nabisco,” a detailed 1990 examination of Mr. Johnson’s signature gamble.The auction of RJR Nabisco, a white-hot, debt-fueled competition that Mr. Johnson’s management group lost in October and November 1988, became the biggest corporate takeover to that point. It began as the most ambitious leveraged buyout ever attempted and resulted in a $25 billion victory by Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Company.AdvertisementBut the deal, which cost Mr. Johnson his company and much of his career and reputation, left him with few regrets in his retirement in Florida and even some satisfaction at having been the leading figure in an epic American business story, one that is still taught in business schools.Advertisement“The whole deal had an impact on millions of readers, in terms of their knowledge of business,” he told the “Barbarians at the Gate” authors in an epilogue to their book. “Between the book and the movie, everyone knows who the hell you are. I mean, it’s been 20 years! But people, they think you’re a star.”James Garner played Mr. Johnson in the 1993 HBO film about the deal.Frederick Ross Johnson was born on Dec. 13, 1931, in Winnipeg, Manitoba, the only child of a hardware salesman and a bookkeeper. He was entrepreneurial as a child — he rented his comic book collection to friends and at 7 won a bicycle for selling magazine subscriptions — but was indifferent as a student. Still, he managed to graduate from the University of Manitoba with a degree in commerce.His career started slowly, first with a job as an accountant for General Electric in Montreal and then with a sales position in Toronto, where he took friends to what he called “the good parties” while deploying expense budgets to entertain customers extravagantly.But he had made little corporate headway by age 32, and when he failed to get a transfer to the United States, he left G.E. for T. Eaton, a venerable Canadian department store chain. From there, he landed the No. 2 job at General Steel Works, a maker of small appliances.His breakthrough came when he was presented with the chance to lead the Montreal-based Canadian subsidiary of Standard Brands, a stodgy operation that included Chase & Sanborn coffee. He fired 21 of the top 23 executives in his first year and led a revival that won him a promotion to lead the company’s international operations in New York.The board made him president before long and then, in a 1976 coup, chief executive.Mr. Johnson promptly transformed Standard Brands management, lavishing on his executives industry-topping salaries, country-club memberships, apartments and a private box at Madison Square Garden. The team was a raucous, profane, fraternity-like group that would go out after business hours to dine and drink, repairing afterward to a new company-owned apartment.“When most other Fortune 500 executives were long asleep,” Mr. Burrough and Mr. Helyar wrote, “Johnson’s band would change into rumpled sweatsuits and settle back for a long night of drinking, talking business and kicking around ideas. By the wee hours, those still conscious would collapse into the twin beds in the two bedrooms or onto the living-room couch.”AdvertisementNever one to cut costs, Mr. Johnson saw profits suddenly plummet by nearly 50 percent because of a price collapse in the Standard Brands corn-sweetener business. The crisis prompted the onetime accountant to engage in some financial sleight-of-hand and to introduce products, including the Reggie! Bar, a candy named for his baseball-playing pal Reggie Jackson of the Yankees, and a wine called French Kiss. Both proved ill-fated.In 1981, a restive Mr. Johnson negotiated a $1.9 billion stock swap with the packaged-food juggernaut Nabisco, maker of Oreo cookies and Ritz crackers. Fortune magazine likened the combination to the Hell’s Angels merging with the Rotary Club, but its harmonious success and the early retirement of the chief executive lifted Mr. Johnson to the top job in 1984.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The following spring, Mr. Johnson got a call from J. Tylee Wilson, head of R. J. Reynolds Industries, whose brands included Winston and Salem cigarettes, Smirnoff vodka and Hawaiian Punch. Mr. Wilson proposed a friendly $4.9 billion takeover, which resulted in RJR Nabisco.Within months, Mr. Johnson asked the board to choose between him and Mr. Wilson. For the second time in five years, he saw his company bought out by a larger one only to emerge once again as the boss.“Ross is a locomotive,” one company executive told Business Week, “and Wilson just got out of his way.”Mr. Johnson, shaggy-haired and fond of gold necklaces and open-collar shirts, promptly slashed the corporate staff by two-thirds and, to vitriolic backlash, moved the headquarters to Atlanta, from Winston-Salem, N.C., where it had been rooted for more than a century.He also oversaw construction of what Mr. Burrough and Mr. Helyar described as the Taj Mahal of hangars, for RJR’s expanded “air force” of 10 planes, and a separate building from which the company’s 36 corporate pilots ferried celebrity friends like Jack Nicklaus and Frank Gifford. Mr. Gifford, as a sportscaster, would hitch rides home from football games.Mr. Johnson relished his lush job, but he soon grew restless again. Unhappy with RJR’s languishing stock price, which was depressed by mounting public concern about the health hazards of tobacco, he assembled a group of eight company managers and told a shocked board that they wanted to buy the food and tobacco conglomerate themselves.Although their offer of $75 a share was about $20 above the market value at the time, it was shown to be a lowball figure when Kohlberg Kravis Roberts joined the fray four days later with an offer of $90 a share.Advertisement“It made K.K.R. look like saviors,” a person involved in the process told The New York Times when the dust had settled. “It started to create a feeling of ‘what’s going on here with the management?’”A public relations bombshell went off when The Times disclosed a financial arrangement under which Mr. Johnson and a small number of his executives could each reap profits topping $100 million. When he responded that it was not unusual for a buyout group to be rewarded with 20 percent of the company, the criticism intensified.The deal was “a startling example of the conflict of interest a chief executive faces when he participates in a buyout on both the buy side, trying to get the best terms for himself, and the sell side, representing the shareholders,” Business Week wrote.The bidding escalated in an increasingly tense six weeks: to $92 a share, then $94, $101, $106, $108 and $112. The board finally awarded the deal to K.K.R. at $109 a share, or $24.88 billion.Mr. Johnson conceded that his rival’s bid was better than his group’s $112, and he resigned as chief executive three months later with a severance package worth around $50 million. RJR Nabisco was subsequently dismembered.He is survived by his wife, Susan; two sons, Neil and Bruce; and two granddaughters.Eli Rosenberg contributed reporting. Elisa Cho contributed research.A version of this article appears in print on January 2, 2017, on Page D7 of the New York edition with the headline: F. Ross Johnson, 85, Symbol of 1980s Corporate Excess.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.