AdvertisementSupported byNews AnalysisBy Noam ScheiberWASHINGTON — Is the party over for America’s super-rich?For 20 years beginning in the early 1990s, the effective tax rates for those at the very top of the income ladder generally dropped. Then, in 2013, after a pair of unusual tax increases negotiated by the Obama White House went into effect, taxes went up on this group.According to data released on Wednesday by the Internal Revenue Service, the average rate for federal income taxes paid by the country’s top 400 income earners rose from 16.7 percent in 2012 to 22.9 percent in 2013, almost exactly where they stood in the early 2000s, though well below the level of the early 1990s. By any measure, that’s a victory for the cause of tax justice, analysts said.But the recent rate increases, many experts also noted, still do little to overcome the broader issue of a separate, more comfortable tax system for the ultrawealthy.“The 2013 increase in the capital gains rate was a significant move towards greater tax fairness,” said Jared Bernstein, who was the top economic adviser to Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. during President Obama’s first term. “But when you consider the breadth of the tax avoidance industry, much of which is about sheltering income from exposure to any tax liability at all, it’s just a drop in the bucket.”Even with the higher tax rates in 2013, the top 400 highest-earning taxpayers, who took home an average of about $265 million that year, paid a significantly lower share of their reported income in taxes than those just below them. For example, the top 1 percent of earners — whose average income was $1.24 million — paid roughly 27 percent of their income in taxes.Moreover, when payroll taxes are taken into account, many people with much lower incomes, in the range of $150,000 to $200,000, pay effective tax rates that are similar to those imposed on the rich.Essentially, the rich have benefited from two crucial developments over the last few decades: The first was a declining tax rate on investment income, which fell in the late 1990s under pressure from a Republican Congress after President Bill Clinton raised income tax rates in 1993. It fell even further under President George W. Bush in the early 2000s, who cut both ordinary income rates and investment rates.(Both went back up with the 2013 tax increase, though the rate on investment income remains lower than in the early 1990s.)Supporters of keeping tax rates on capital gains and dividends lower than ordinary income tax rates say there are good reasons for doing this. They note that the policy helps limit double taxation of corporate income and argue that it fosters innovation by encouraging greater investment and risk-taking.But because the ultrawealthy derive an outsize portion of their income from investments, these tax cuts disproportionately benefited them.The tax cuts on investment income then had a second important effect: They brought back from an earlier era the incentive for the ultrawealthy, working in tandem with highly sophisticated tax advisers, to game the tax system by transforming ordinary income into investment income, which is now taxed at about half the top rate.To take one recent example: Private equity fund managers have historically received part of their income in management fees, on which they pay the relatively high standard income tax rate, and part of their income as a share of their funds’ profits, on which they pay the relatively low tax rate on investment income.In recent years, however, it has become common for private equity fund managers to “waive” a substantial portion of their management-fee income and instead receive an even greater portion of their income as a share of profits from their funds, which are taxed at a lower rate. (The I.R.S. has recently proposed rules that would limit this practice.)Historical experience has shown that partly as a result of this gaming, the ultrawealthy tend to whittle down the rates they actually pay over time for any given level of official tax rates. By contrast, the average rates for most other taxpayers tend to remain relatively stable when tax laws do not change.Between 2004 and 2012, official income tax rates on regular income and investment income did not budge for affluent or wealthy taxpayers.But during that time, thanks in part to techniques like fee waivers, the top 400 income earners went from paying an average rate of 18.2 percent to an average rate of 16.7 percent. For the top 1 percent of earners, excluding the wealthiest top one-tenth of 1 percent, rates rose ever so slightly, to 24.1 percent from 23.9 percent.This historical evidence suggests that the ultrawealthy will soon find ways to limit the impact of the recent rate increases under President Obama. For example, many wealthy taxpayers already exploit tax strategies, like keeping income in offshore entities, that allow them to defer taxes on investment income for years, allowing the money to compound on a tax-free basis.“The goal of the tax avoidance industry is to shelter income from exposure to any tax liability at all,” Mr. Bernstein said. “I guarantee you they’re figuring out a workaround to this higher gains rate as we speak.”Indeed, many ultrawealthy taxpayers can be expected to explore additional strategies for deferring investment income in response to the higher tax rates, according to Victor Fleischer, an expert on tax law at the University of San Diego. (He noted that the tax avoidance caused by deferrals wouldn’t show up in I.R.S. data because the income isn’t recorded until it is taxed years after the fact.)While some of these strategies may be of dubious legality, the ability of the I.R.S. to weed them out has been eroded. Adjusting for inflation, the agency’s budget dropped by nearly 20 percent from 2010 to 2015, falling to $10.9 billion from $13.4 billion, according to calculations done by the liberal Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, relying on government data. This has led to significant cuts in enforcement officials tasked with clawing back tax revenue from the wealthy.The Republican leadership in Congress, which has influence over the I.R.S. budget, has given little indication that it is open to reversing this trend.In the end, the ultimate arbiter of the fate of the Obama tax increases is likely to be his successor. Every leading Republican presidential candidate has proposed reducing some or all of the rates Congress agreed to raise on the wealthy in 2012, which were part of a deal to avoid even more extensive tax increases. Under any of those proposals, taxes on the rich would probably fall below even their recent lows.By contrast, the leading Democratic candidates have called for preserving or increasing those rates. If they were to raise taxes further on investment income, it could have the dual effect of both raising rates on the wealthy and making certain tax avoidance strategies less lucrative.Advertisement