AdvertisementSupported byBy Richard SandomirRobert L. Hulseman, a corporate executive who developed the sturdy red Solo cup that became indispensable at picnics, tailgate parties and barbecues and inspired a song by the country singer Toby Keith, died on Dec. 21 at his home in Northfield, Ill. He was 84.His son Paul said the cause was complications of several strokes.Mr. Hulseman spent nearly all of his career at the Solo Cup Company in Lake Forest, Ill., a maker of disposable cups, plates and bowls. One of his other legacies was helping to create a coffee cup lid that may now be as prevalent as the Solo cup.The company’s products might have been seen as unremarkable party essentials in a throwaway age if not for the creation of the Solo cup in the mid-1970s. It became a mainstay at beer keggers, where its size, typically 16 ounces, durability and opacity were prized attributes.Mr. Hulseman preferred that his cups be used at family outings, not at rowdy, boozy blowouts.“The cup’s design was for strength,” Paul Hulseman said in an interview. “Not for a shot, a wine and a beer.”Mr. Keith seized on the cup’s popularity in 2011 when he recorded “Red Solo Cup.” The song is a silly celebration of the cup’s critical place at a kegger, of the sort seen in the song’s video featuring some of his well-known friends, including Sammy Hagar, Ted Nugent, Larry Bird and Roger Clemens.“It’s the stupidest song I’ve ever heard, but it’s so stupid it’s good,” Mr. Keith told The Boot, a country music website, in 2014.His song could have served as an advertisement.“Now I’ve seen you in blue and I’ve seen you in yellow,” Mr. Keith sings, a red Solo cup in his hand throughout the video. “But only you, red, will do for this fellow. ‘Cause you are the Abbott to my Costello. And you are the fruit to my loom.”Although Solo cups come in a dozen colors, red is the most popular. For the record, Mr. Hulseman’s favorite cup color was blue.Mr. Keith acknowledged Mr. Hulseman’s death, writing on Twitter, “Raise one for this good man today.”Robert Leo Hulseman was born on April 5, 1932, in Chicago. His father, Leo, founded Solo Cup in 1936; his mother, the former Dorothy Hall, was a singer who went by the name Dora Hall. As a teenager, he contracted polio, which affected the left side of his body and caused one leg to be shorter than the other, a deformity that was corrected by surgery.He attended Marquette University and served briefly in the Army.Mr. Hulseman started working in a Solo factory at age 18 and held various jobs, including purchasing. He later worked on developing the company’s plastics business, and he became company president in 1980. Later, he became its chief executive and chairman.“He knew plastics manufacturing like nobody,” said Paul Hulseman, who worked at the company with some of his siblings. “He built plants and machines and tooling.”Robert Hulseman resigned as chairman in 2006, two years after Solo acquired the holding company of Sweetheart Cup, another maker of disposable food packaging. The family had lost control of Solo to the private equity firm that helped finance the Sweetheart deal. At the time, Solo had sales of $2.5 billion and a net loss of $373 million. In 2012, Dart Container acquired Solo.Besides his son Paul, Mr. Hulseman is survived by two daughters, Margaret Kovach and Patricia Hulseman; six other sons, Richard, Robert, Joseph, Thomas, Lawrence and William; 29 grandchildren; and a brother, John. His wife, the former Sheila Murphy, died last year, and his daughter Jean Kloos died this year.Mr. Hulseman and Jack Clements, a Solo employee, designed the Traveler Lid for coffee cups in 1986. (Mr. Clements is credited with the patent.) The extra height of the lid accommodates whipped cream or cappuccino foam, and its inner ring reduces “dribble at the rim,” the company’s website says. In 2004, the Museum of Modern Art included it among 122 “Humble Masterpieces” of design.Writing in The New York Times in 2010, Steven Heller, co-chairman of the design department at the School of Visual Arts in Manhattan, praised the Traveler Lid as a “substitute for a mother’s breast” and likened its spout, for sipping, to a nipple.“Ergo,” Mr. Heller wrote, “the lid is a nurturing apparatus.”Advertisement