By LIZ MOYERNOV. 5, 2015
Two senators sent a letter to the chief executive of the prepaid debit card company RushCard on Thursday, seeking information on the technical issues that prevented thousands of RushCard customers from accessing their money for days at a time last month and about the company’s efforts to remedy the problems.The letter was sent by Senator Sherrod Brown of Ohio, the ranking Democrat on the Senate Committee on Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs, and Senator Robert Menendez, Democrat of New Jersey. It asks for details on the number of customers who were affected, a reimbursement fund RushCard that has established to cover late fees and other charges customers had to pay during the issues, the nature of the malfunction and how arbitration clauses will affect customers who may seek settlements.The letter also asks about monthly and other fees and whether RushCard will waive fees outside of a “fee holiday” it has declared from Nov. 1 to the end of February.A spokesman for the company said, “RushCard spoke with Senator Brown’s office last week and provided information about the problems associated with the processor conversion. We welcome the senators’ interest and will respond to the questions in their letter.”AdvertisementThe senators have asked for answers by the end of the month.The problem, which occurred during RushCard’s processing technology conversion over Columbus Day weekend in October, “is a clear indication that more oversight and consumer protection is needed in the prepaid card market,” according to a copy of the letter that was reviewed by The New York Times.AdvertisementRushCard has said it is working to correct the problems. In an emailed statement on Wednesday, it said a “small fraction” of its customers were experiencing difficulties, but that a majority of them were not related to system problems. Instead, the lingering customer inquiries were about direct payroll deposits that were previously halted by employers or questions on how to reset customer accounts.“We have tripled our call center capabilities and continue to respond directly to customer inquiries we receive over the phone and through social media,” said the statement from RushCard’s co-founder, Russell Simmons.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The statement was issued before the letter from the senators was sent.Last week, RushCard’s chief executive, Rick Savard, said that the company was establishing a fund of $2 million to $3 million to reimburse customers for late fees, charges and inconvenience. The size of that fund may change, and the details of how the fund will be run are being completed.RushCard’s prepaid debit cards are popular with people who either do not have a traditional banking account or who do but still rely on more expensive services like check-cashing stores and payday loans. The company has said it has hundreds of thousands of customers, and thousands were affected, some as long as nine days, after problems arose during the systems conversion that spread to other technology used by the firm to manage customer accounts and customer service support.Some customers said they could not access their money for days, or see their account balances, and others had payroll checks and government benefit checks returned.The episode has attracted the attention of regulators as well, including the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, which said last month it was taking action to address the issues at RushCard.The agency recently proposed rules to regulate prepaid cards. In their letter, the senators said, “As the C.F.P.B. moves forward in finalizing rules on the prepaid card market, it is important to understand how the market operates and ensure that customer accounts and information are handled responsibly.”A version of this article appears in print on November 6, 2015, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: 2 Senators Seek Details in Failures at RushCard.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.