By CHAD BRAYNOV. 5, 2015
LONDON — Britain’s takeover regulator on Thursday publicly censured Credit Suisse and two law firms, Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer and Holman Fenwick Willan, over their roles as advisers in the creation of an Indonesian coal mining company formerly known as Bumi.The regulator, the Panel on Takeovers and Mergers, also said that it had found the conduct of JPMorgan Chase, which acted as an adviser in the transaction, “disappointing,” but not serious enough to require a public censure. There was no fine associated with the ruling.Bumi was created in 2011 through a $3 billion merger between an investment company formed by the British financier Nathaniel Rothschild, an heir to one of Europe’s prominent banking families, and mining operations owned by the Bakrie family, which controls one of Indonesia’s oldest and largest conglomerates.Mr. Rothschild – a descendant of Nathan Mayer Rothschild, who helped finance the British victory over Napoleon at Waterloo – and the Bakrie family engaged in a public feud for control of Bumi. That included a nasty spat on Twitter last year after the Bakrie family agreed to split from Bumi.AdvertisementNeither Mr. Rothschild nor the Bakrie family remains an investor in the company, which was renamed Asia Resource Minerals and was taken private this year.AdvertisementThe public scolding on Thursday was a rarity by the takeover panel, which oversees merger activity in Britain. (Kraft was censured by the panel in 2010 for failing to keep promises regarding a plant closure during its takeover of Cadbury.)The reprimand centered on information that was given to the panel about the relationship between the Bakrie family and the investor Rosan Roeslani.As part of the deal, the Bakrie family and Mr. Roeslani would acquire a stake of more than 30 percent of the combined company, a threshold that would require them, if they were cooperating, to make a general offer to buy out the stock of other investors under British takeover rules.The takeover panel determined in 2012 that the Bakrie family and Mr. Roeslani had been “acting in concert” and forced a sell-down of shares.In its ruling on Thursday, the regulator said that “the conduct of the advisers gave rise to a number of separate breaches of important provisions” of Britain’s takeover code.Credit Suisse and Holman Fenwick Willan advised the Bakrie family on the transaction, while JPMorgan and Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer advised Mr. Rothchild’s company.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The takeover panel faulted Credit Suisse and Holman Fenwick Willan for failing to seek the panel’s view on whether the Bakrie family and Mr. Roeslani were “acting in concert.” The regulator said that JPMorgan should have “pursued the matter further” and consulted with the panel on the issue.The regulator said that Freshfields “could have done more regarding the concert party issue but makes no finding of breach.”AdvertisementThe panel also faulted Credit Suisse and the law firms for failing to provide information about certain agreements, known as forward-sale agreements, between companies owned by the Bakrie family and Mr. Roeslani. The regulator said those details were “relevant to the possibility” they were acting in concert.The actions of Credit Suisse and the law firms were “sufficiently serious” to merit censure, the panel said.“Credit Suisse takes its regulatory responsibilities very seriously and has fully cooperated with the U.K. Takeover Panel during its investigation,” the bank said.“Credit Suisse regrets its conduct in 2010 and 2011, has accepted the panel’s findings and has taken appropriate action to ensure that its high standards of conduct are upheld at all times in relation to the U.K. Takeover Code and to prevent repetition,” the bank added.Freshfields said that it cooperated in the inquiry and accepted findings by the panel that the advisers “failed to provide the Takeover Panel with some information that was relevant in considering the submission, but accepted that there was no intention on the part of any of the advisers to mislead the panel.”Holman Fenwick Willan said the panel’s public statement “was issued with the consent of all parties involved” and said it would make no further comment.The conduct of JPMorgan Chase was “disappointing, but not sufficiently serious to merit public criticism” through a censure, the regulator said.JPMorgan declined to comment.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.