AdvertisementSupported byCorner OfficeBy Adam BryantThis interview with Ann Cairns, president of international markets at MasterCard, was conducted and condensed by Adam Bryant.Q. What were some early influences for you?A. I grew up in the northeast of England, in a small mining village near Newcastle. My dad was a shoemaker who originally made shoes for miners. I grew up in a period when Margaret Thatcher was closing down mines across Britain, so there was very high unemployment in my town.That had quite a big influence on people living in the area because, as kids at school, you would be thinking, “What can I do to make the best of life?” You realize that education’s important and that you need to spread your wings. So that was a big influence.I won a scholarship at the age of 11 to go to a British grammar school. The headmistress, a nun, had a chemistry degree from Oxford. She was very pro girls doing science. It was an all-girls school, and there were a lot of scientists in the school. It seemed pretty natural to me to go to university to do math.Tell me about your mother.She’s still alive. She’s 85, and she’s a very confident woman. She worked as a pharmacist’s assistant. She was quite scientific. And she’s also a very good singer, a soprano. My dad was a club comedian, too, so they were both performers. They would often do cabaret in the area at night.When you went to university, did you have an idea of what you wanted to do?None whatsoever. It was a time when, if you were well educated, you were in a position to get a good job, because only about 10 percent of the population went to university back then. I didn’t study math from a vocational point of view. I studied it because I loved the subject. I majored in pure math, actually, and then went on to do a master’s degree in statistics.While I was doing my master’s, British Gas rang up the university and asked if anybody was doing statistics who could come into the research area and design experiments for physicists, chemists and engineers. The university sent me along for the job interview, and I got the job.I became much more interested in the engineering side and offshore exploration. But first I had to pass a weeklong offshore survival course. The guy running it was an ex-Royal Marine. I was the only woman in the course, and he kept making me do everything first.After about the third day, I went up to him and said, “You know, I’m really fed up with this. What’s this all about?” I told him it felt like discrimination. He said, “No. You’re such a little girl that if you jump off the platform, all those 47 guys behind you who are terrified are going to say to themselves, ‘Look, she’s just done it.’ ”And were you O.K. with that?I was, because I understood there was a reason he was doing it, and it was a positive one, not a negative one. He was not trying to show me up. He was trying to help make other people more confident about it. So that was O.K.You started early in management roles.I was managing about 50 engineers in my late 20s. It was comfortable for me, though. The thing about engineers is that they are people who are very expert at what they do, so you don’t have to know everything that they know. You just have to be somebody who can help build a team and put things together. And I was always pretty interested in understanding everybody’s specialization and how it all worked.You then shifted into banking and moved up the ranks quickly. What are some leadership lessons you learned along the way?In my mid-30s, they started doing 360-degree reviews, and I was getting pretty good reviews from my boss, and I was getting great reviews from my people, but I wasn’t getting such good marks from my peer group.It’s easy to be competitive with your peer group as you’re climbing up the ladder. But over time you realize that in order to make your group effective, you have to think in terms of being one team, and how can you make those relationships the best they can ever be. You’re not trying to compete now. You’re trying to really make this work.You see companies where people at that level are competing against each other, and then you see other companies where they’re not, and it makes quite a difference. Any more thoughts on building a team?You think about what each person will bring to the team, but you also have to think about them as individuals, and where they’re going from and to, because they’ve all got their own paths and things they want to achieve.I’ve had people work for me who are very creative or can be very disruptive, and sometimes they’re the same person. I’ve seen other people take them off teams because it’s just too hard to manage people in that situation. But my view is that if you can get the best out of people, then it’s worthwhile putting them on a team and making sure that everyone else on the team actually knows this person’s characteristics.And then you constantly reinforce what the good is, and you build mutual respect so that you don’t create a team of mediocre people who are all happy with each other and don’t challenge each other. You want people who can challenge each other without creating this peer problem of, “I don’t like you because you said such-and-such in the last meeting.” If you’re the boss of the team, you can stop that from happening without stopping the conversation flow.The other thing that’s really important about building a team is that your team has got to respect you and they’ve got to feel safe. So you create that safe environment, and they’ve got to feel that you’re always acting in their interests.Each week, Adam Bryant talks with top executives about leadership. Follow him on Twitter: @nytcorneroffice. This interview has been edited for space and clarity.Advertisement