AdvertisementSupported byThe Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Thursday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.17 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.49 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.14 percent.The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week: MONDAYFlorida Department of Transportation, $173.3 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.WEDNESDAYMassachusetts School Building Authority, $150 million of revenue bonds. Competitive. THURSDAYCouncil Rock, Pa., School District, $60 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Grand Prairie, Tex., Independent School District, $98.2 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.ONE DAY DURING THE WEEKChippewa Valley, Mich., $65 million of refinancing bonds. Stifel Nicolaus.Collin County, Tex., $159 million of Allen independent school district building bonds. William Blair.Escambia County, Fla., $51.8 million of sales tax revenue bonds. Raymond James.Kansas University Development Corporation, $333.2 million of debt securities. J. P. Morgan Securities. Louisiana Public Facilities Authority, $66 million of hospital revenue refinancing bonds. Bank of America.New Jersey Health Care Facilities Authority, $200 million of health care system debt securities. Wells Fargo Securities.Orange County, Calif., $334.3 million of taxable pension obligation bonds. Stifel Nicolaus.South Carolina Public Service Authority, $382 million of tax-exempt revenue refinancing bonds. Bank of America.Tallahassee, Fla., $150 million of health facilities revenue bonds. Bank of America.Texas University, $200 million of revenue refinancing bonds. Bank of America.Texas University, $250 million of revenue financing bonds. Bank of America.Volusia County, Fla., $75.5 million of refinancing certificates of participation. Raymond James.Ysleta, Tex., Independent School District, $235 million of unlimited tax school building bonds. Piper Jaffray.Advertisement