By BROOKS BARNES and JOHN KOBLINJAN. 3, 2016
LOS ANGELES —  Hollywood loves a comeback story. And right now, there is perhaps none better than Rich Ross and Discovery.Concerned that its shows lacked diversity, thwarted by streaming services like Netflix and embarrassed by ratings stunts (watch a man get eaten alive by an anaconda), Discovery Communications in 2014 installed new management at its flagship network. Out: Eileen O’Neill, a Discovery lifer. In: Mr. Ross, a former Disney executive with something to prove.The debonair Mr. Ross, 54, is perhaps the last person one might expect to find associated with “Alaskan Bush People,” one of Discovery’s hits. But running the channel offered a new start. Disney had ousted him as movie chairman in 2012. A subsequent job at Shine America, a television production company, ended with a corporate restructuring.In the span of a year at Discovery, Mr. Ross has delivered noticeable results. The casts of Discovery shows like “Gold Rush” and “Men Women Wild” are more diverse. The quality of documentary films has improved under a new lieutenant who hews closer to historical facts. Promising new series are arriving, in particular “Killing Fields,” a true-crime serial that is set to debut on Tuesday.AdvertisementAnd ratings are up. The channel delivered a 12 percent year-on-year gain in total viewers, according to Nielsen data, along with a 3 percent increase in adults 18 to 49, a bracket that advertisers often pay a premium to reach. For the first time in its 34-year history, Discovery just ended a year as the No. 1 nonsports cable network among men age 25 to 54, a target demographic.Discovery’s strength comes as other cable networks have faltered. Viewership plummeted in 2015 for stalwarts like History, A&E, USA, MTV and Comedy Central. Reasons include poor programming choices, the loss of popular stars, competition from streaming services and a glut of similarly themed reality shows.“People told me when I took this job, ‘You came to the party, and the punch bowl is empty,’ ” Mr. Ross said in an interview at his Los Angeles office last month. “Not true. We can get ratings by doing things the right way, by inspiring people, by influencing people, by activating people.”AdvertisementHe added, after pausing to straighten the lace on one of his high-top leather sneakers, “It’s about not confusing what the audience wants with your taste.”Mr. Ross offered “Moonshiners,” an Appalachian docudrama that he inherited, as an example.“People here looked at me and said, ‘Well, that’s not a show for you. It’s not aspirational,’ ” he recalled. “And I said, ‘In what universe are you living? Craft alcohol is changing people’s lives, changing the way people think about organic versus corporate.’ ”“Killing Fields” brings a new test.One of the first new shows created under Mr. Ross, it follows a colorful detective, Rodie Sanchez, who comes out of retirement to try to solve a 1997 murder case — possibly tied to a serial killer — that has never stopped haunting him. With its artistic pacing and lush, foreboding images of Louisiana topography, “Killing Fields” resembles the celebrated first season of HBO’s “True Detective,” except that the Discovery version is true.The stylized show has a strong pedigree, especially for Discovery. Its executive producers are Tom Fontana, whose credits include “Homicide: Life on the Street” and HBO’s “Oz,” and Barry Levinson, the Oscar-winning director of “Rain Man,” neither of whom had worked in unscripted television before.“I came into this with a bit of a snobby attitude — reality TV? — and I have been completely won over,” Mr. Fontana said. “It’s a character piece. The murder is obviously important, but what’s really compelling to me are the men and women we meet along the way.”Mr. Levinson added, “When you think of reality television, this feels like a step forward, something that has not been done over and over already.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The so-called true-crime genre is hot. Recent successes include “The Jinx” on HBO, “Making a Murderer” on Netflix and the “Serial” podcast. But “Killing Fields” represents a risk nonetheless. Crime has not been part of Discovery’s programming mix for years. “Killing Fields” is also an attempt to attract more female viewers; crime shows tend to draw large numbers of women.Mr. Ross has other efforts on the way. He is making a move toward scripted shows; an early project — a drama about the history of the motorcycle maker Harley-Davidson — will start to film in March. Mr. Ross is also focusing on what he calls brand-defining event documentaries that can cut through the clutter, like the environmental-activism film “Racing Extinction,” which became a ratings success last month.“The challenge now, for Discovery and other cable networks, is to broaden their audience without alienating core viewers,” said Andy Donchin, chief domestic investment officer for Amplifi, a division of Dentsu Aegis Network, an ad agency that counts General Motors and Home Depot as clients. “That has to be done very carefully.”AdvertisementLike other cable channels — notably ESPN — Discovery is losing subscribers in the United States. Analysts estimate that Discovery has lost roughly four million subscribers since 2011. Consumers, less willing to pay for expensive cable packages that include channels they do not watch, are cutting off service or not signing up in the first place.To grow, Discovery must work harder to maintain its stronghold on its core audience of men while becoming more inviting to other audiences, notably women.Mr. Ross has considerable television experience, helping to build Nickelodeon in the late 1980s and running Disney Channels Worldwide during its “High School Musical”-fueled 2000s. It was when he was promoted in 2009 to run Walt Disney Studios that he encountered difficulties, gaining a reputation for imperiousness as he carried out a fast-paced overhaul and overseeing bombs like “John Carter.”But those days now seem firmly behind him.“He’s working on the weekends, he’s working late at night, and he’s driven,” David Zaslav, the chief executive of Discovery Communications, said of Mr. Ross last month at a UBS global media and communications conference. Mr. Zaslav, who recently gave Mr. Ross control of two additional networks, Animal Planet and Science Channel, added that Discovery had been steered back toward quality.“He wrote off a lot of content that was off brand,” Mr. Zaslav said. (Ms. O’Neill, who left behind numerous hits, including the Alaskan fishing series “Deadliest Catch,” declined to comment about the turn Discovery took late in her tenure.)Not on Mr. Ross’s agenda are programming stunts.“I don’t believe you’ll be seeing a person eaten by a snake during my time,” he dryly told a gathering of television critics last year. “Eaten Alive,” which ran in 2014, was seen as tarnishing the Discovery brand. (To make matters worse, the anaconda only half finished the task, prompting an outcry of its own.)“In challenging times, people need a spiral up, not a spiral down,” Mr. Ross said from his office. “We have an enormous opportunity to make a difference that way.”Without question, Discovery’s surge has been aided by plummeting ratings at its rival History Channel, which is co-owned by Disney and Hearst. History experienced a 26 percent drop among 18- to 49-year-olds in 2015. But Mr. Ross — crediting lessons he learned early in his career — says he has pushed his team to pay less attention to the competition.“When I came here, there was a lot of history of focusing on History,” he said. “I kept hearing, ‘The pitch for this show is competitive with History.’ I said, ‘Stop talking about that. I really don’t care.’ If we think of ourselves only in the scheme of beating History, that’s small ball. We have to think about what Discovery can be.”A version of this article appears in print on January 4, 2016, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Under New Leader, Discovery Shows Promise .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.