By AMISHA PADNANIJAN. 3, 2016
Operating on the mantra that the news never sleeps, about 200 employees of The Boston Globe stayed up all night to help deliver newspapers to subscribers who were angry about widespread delivery problems last week.“I’m extremely proud of my colleagues,” said Beth Healy, a business reporter who delivered 155 newspapers in Wellesley, a suburb west of Boston, until 8:30 a.m. on Sunday. “It was a long, difficult night.”A plea for volunteers was made after The Globe switched to a new delivery service, ACI Media Group, on Dec. 28. ACI Media Group, based in Long Beach, Calif., works for The Miami Herald, The Los Angeles Times and several other newspapers. ACI could not immediately be reached for comment.Globe officials said that by midweek last week, ACI had delivered 95 percent of the papers — The Globe has 115,000 home subscribers on weekdays and 205,000 on Sundays — but they still wanted to address subscriber complaints.Advertisement“We are in crisis mode,” said a letter from Scott Steeves, a representative from the newspaper’s union.AdvertisementMs. Healy said she sent a mass email to her colleagues and was amazed by the responses that flooded her inbox. “I’m in. I’m in. Where should I be? What time?” Ms. Healy said, summing up several responses.Editors, reporters, web producers and employees in marketing and advertising were directed to arrive at the newspaper’s three distribution centers at midnight. “Make sure you have a flashlight and a GPS,” said the letter from Mr. Steeves.They then assembled and bagged thousands of newspapers and stacked them in their cars.“It was definitely a bonding experience for the newsroom,” said Nicole Dungca, a transportation reporter. “It was pretty incredible that so many people were willing to give up their sleep because we care so much about our readers.”The novice deliverers pored over information about where the subscribers preferred their newspapers to be placed.“You’re following instructions about whether people want it directly on their porch or hidden somewhere, so you have to walk up to the house and drop it where they wanted it,” Ms. Dungca said.
            This is the Sunday editor of The Boston Globe delivering the Sunday Globe. (I'm his wingman.) #globedelivery pic.twitter.com/VfcANkNEkq Michael Sheehan, The Globe’s chief, said the newspaper switched vendors after learning through a survey that 50 percent of readers who unsubscribed did so because they were unsatisfied with their delivery service.He said ACI ran into two problems: It was not able to hire enough carriers on time and there was a problem with the routing software.Advertisement“I know firsthand because I delivered 376 newspapers today, and I ended up on the same street four times,” Mr. Sheehan said. He said that ACI was recruiting “day and night” and that it was switching to another software next week.
            It's ridiculous to have reporters delivering papers. Hire back the people who need money and know the routes #globedelivery #bostonglobe While no one considered the overnight effort to be a long-term solution, Ms. Healy said it felt good to get involved.“We knew we weren’t going to solve the problem last night,” she said. “But we didn’t want to just sit around and wonder, ‘What’s going on?’ So it was powerful, and, while exhausting, I hope we send a message.”
            Happy to see @BostonGlobe on my doorstep today. Thanks to all who worked overnight to make #globedelivery work. pic.twitter.com/vfqopMmRIH A version of this article appears in print on January 4, 2016, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Boston Globe Staff Unites to Deliver Sunday Paper.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.