By THE NEW YORK TIMESJAN. 3, 2016
The first Monday of the new year will mark the first day of extended trading hours for China’s currency, the renminbi. The move, announced last Wednesday by China’s central bank, is the most recent in a number of steps taken over the last few years by Beijing to make the renminbi more international.The new hours, which extend trading to 11:30 p.m. local time, will allow the currency to trade into the United States business day, catering to growing global demand for the currency, according to analysts. Still, many said they expected demand in late trading sessions to be light initially. —Paul MozurThe threat of a debt downgrade hangs over Brazil as it starts 2016, with $38 billion in payments on local and foreign currency bonds scheduled to be made on the first two business days of the year. President Dilma Rousseff, who is facing impeachment by opponents in Congress, wrote in a local newspaper on Friday that the economy there will be better in 2016 than current predictions. The gross domestic product dropped 3.5 percent in 2015 and expectations were for it to drop another 2 percent this year. —Liz MoyerOn Monday, the Institute for Supply Management will release its index for manufacturing for December. Economists are expecting a slight increase in the I.S.M. index to 49, from 48.6 in November. Any reading below 50 suggests weakness. Factories have been hurt by weak overseas demand and the effects of the strong dollar, although the automotive industry has been a bright spot. —Nelson D. SchwartzAdvertisementAutomakers on Tuesday will report December sales of new vehicles in the United States, and they are expected to close out the best year in history with a bang. Analysts predicted that the industry sold at least 1.6 million vehicles during the month, which would push annual sales for 2015 past the record of 17.4 million vehicles in 2000.AdvertisementThe research firm Edmunds.com predicted that overall sales increased 12 percent in December from the same period a year earlier, with most major carmakers posting big improvements. The gains are partly a result of a flurry of holiday promotions and sales incentives, as well as continued low gas prices. —Bill VlasicPlease verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Federal Reserve did the expected in December, raising its benchmark interest rate above zero for the first time since December 2008. Now the question is how soon the Fed plans to raise rates for a second time, and how quickly it plans to proceed thereafter. The Fed on Wednesday will publish an official account of the December meeting. The details of the internal debate among Fed officials may provide some clues about what comes next. —Binyamin AppelbaumAt the Consumer Electronics Show, the annual technology trade show that will start on Wednesday and run through Saturday, electronics companies will spotlight two major new product categories: virtual reality and so-called 4K high-definition TVs. The convention, held in Las Vegas, will draw in big brands including Facebook’s Oculus, Samsung Electronics, Sony and more. —Brian X. ChenOn Friday, at 8:30 a.m., the Labor Department will report on hiring and unemployment in December. This is the first jobs report since the Federal Reserve raised interest rates last month, and most economists expect the labor market to have shown continued strength. Wall Street estimates that employers hired about 200,000 workers last month, with the unemployment rate remaining unchanged at 5 percent.But some experts, including Michael Gapen of Barclays, are looking for a slightly stronger performance, with the unemployment rate falling to 4.9 percent, closing in on what the Fed considers full employment. Besides the level of hiring, both the Fed and Wall Street will be watching to see if average hourly earnings continued to rise. Economists are looking for a .2 percent monthly increase in December. —Nelson D. SchwartzA version of this article appears in print on January 4, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.