By LESLIE PICKERJAN. 4, 2016
A year after repaying taxpayers for its bailout during the financial crisis, Ally Financial, the onetime auto-lending subsidiary of General Motors, is facing new investor pressure. This time, though, it is from an upstart hedge fund, demanding two board seats and a potential sale of the company.Lion Point Capital, co-founded in 2014 by the former portfolio managers from Elliott Management and Perry Capital, has proposed two director candidates, whose names were not released, to stand for election at the company’s annual meeting on May 3. The hedge fund also sent a letter on Dec. 23, urging Ally to create a strategic alternatives committee, a step that can often result in the sale of a company.Ally, which has objected to the activist investors’ tactics, said it considered Lion Point’s proposals but concluded that selling the company would not be in the best interest of all shareholders. The board will evaluate Lion Point’s nominations and said it would express its views to investors in “due course.” Ally, once known as the General Motors Acceptance Corporation, or GMAC, also noted that the hedge fund held less than a 1 percent stake in the company.“Although we are troubled by Lion Point’s tactics, our fundamental disagreement is with Lion Point’s clear agenda to force a sale of Ally,” Franklin W. Hobbs, the chairman at Ally, said in the statement. “Such a course of action would be contrary to the best interests of stockholders, and our obligations to all stockholders do not permit us to adopt such a course to avoid a proxy contest.”AdvertisementLion Point first informed Ally of its interest in the company on Nov. 12, Ally said in its statement. Then, the firm sent a letter with its demands in late December, requesting a positive response to the demands in less than two weeks. If the deadline was not met, Lion Point said it would nominate directors, according to the statement.AdvertisementSeveral committees and Ally’s board met after Christmas to discuss these proposals and representatives had additional discussions with Lion Point, ultimately opposing the idea of a sale.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Lion Point did not immediately respond for requests for comment on Monday.Ally’s shares have largely been under pressure since it went public, slumping 20 percent over the last year. As GMAC, the financing arm of General Motors, the firm fell into the government’s hands during the financial crisis because of a string of bad home loans. The Treasury Department spent $17.2 billion rescuing the company, whose name was changed to Ally Financial, then generated $19.6 billion through an initial public offering and additional stock sales until December 2014, according to a statement at the time.With less than a 1 percent stake, Lion Point would need to rally support from Ally’s current shareholders to push through its recommendations. Cerberus Capital Management is Ally’s largest investor, with an 8.6 percent stake, according to data compiled by S&P Capital IQ, a financial information provider. Perry Capital is among the biggest of Ally’s so-called activist shareholders, with 4.69 percent of the shares outstanding.The former Perry analyst Jim Freeman is one of the co-founders of Lion Point, along with Didric Cederholm, a former portfolio manager at the activist hedge fund Elliott Management. This is the firm’s first major public move since raising capital from investors.Ally had about $156.1 billion in assets as of Sept. 30, and provides auto financing to both consumers and midsize companies. It also operates Ally Bank, which takes deposits.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.