By MARY WILLIAMS WALSHJAN. 4, 2016
Puerto Rico defaulted on about $174 million of debt payments on Monday, as planned, stripping cash away from its lower-ranked creditors so that higher-ranked creditors could be paid in full.Alejandro García Padilla, Puerto Rico’s governor, defended the default as best he could on Monday in an appearance on CNBC, saying, “It’s very simple. We don’t have money to pay.”The payment default does not change Puerto Rico’s underlying economic troubles, although it could spur efforts in Congress to find ways to help the island.Puerto Rico has been struggling with more than $72 billion of debt, mostly in the form of municipal bonds. Government financial officials have been shuffling cash from one agency to another in recent months, in desperate triage efforts to pay only the most urgent bills while letting others languish.AdvertisementWith big bond payments looming, Mr. García Padilla announced last week that he had ordered a “clawback,” or recovery, of cash that would have normally been used to pay certain bonds. Since Nov. 30, he said, that cash had instead been diverted to help make a $328 million payment to the island’s general obligation bondholders, who are entitled to be paid first, according to the Puerto Rican constitution.AdvertisementBecause of the New Year’s Day holiday, all of the due dates were extended until the close of business on Monday.The clawback allowed the government to amass enough cash to pay the general obligation bonds, which enjoyed a price rally on Monday.But it put the other bonds into default, the governor acknowledged. In some cases, bondholders could still be paid out of prepaid reserves, but drawing on a reserve without replenishing it is also considered a form of default.And in the case of bonds issued by the Puerto Rico Infrastructure Financing Authority and the Public Finance Corporation, there were no reserves. The responsibility to make the payments would then fall to bond insurers.Standard & Poor’s, the ratings agency, said in a statement on Monday that it was going to downgrade the infrastructure authority’s rating from CC to D. The clawback “was not done lightly, as it opens up the commonwealth to litigation,” it said. “However, we also believe it shows Puerto Rico’s reluctance to default on G.O. debt, where bondholders hold a particularly strong legal claim, and could represent a shot across the bow to bondholders in ongoing restructuring talks.”S.&P. did not change ratings on other bonds but added that the lack of current audited financial information created “great uncertainty as to Puerto Rico’s true financial position.”Executives of two bond insurers that had guaranteed some of the affected bonds wrote to Mr. García Padilla and his advisers last week, calling the clawback illegal.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We are gravely concerned by this improper act, which violates numerous statutory and state and federal constitutional provisions,” said Nader Tavakoli, the executive chairman of Ambac Assurance Corporation, and Derek M. Donnelly, senior managing director of the Financial Guaranty Insurance Company.AdvertisementMr. Tavakoli and Mr. Donnelly argued that the clawback violated Puerto Rico’s law for the order of payment priorities, its constitution and several provisions of the United States Constitution.But they said they were even more concerned about another diversion of money, which they said had begun in September, well before the governor invoked the clawback by executive order. They said as much as $94 million in federal excise tax on Puerto Rican rum, sold on the United States mainland, was supposed to have been placed in a trust fund, to pay principal and interest on bonds issued by the Puerto Rico Infrastructure Financing Authority.“No monies were transferred” from September through the end of November, when Mr. García Padilla invoked the clawback, the executives wrote. “The foregoing pattern of activity is unacceptable.”They demanded that the missing money be placed in the trust fund and that further clawbacks be halted, at least with respect to money that was designated to pay bonds that their companies had insured. They said they reserved their rights and remedies to recover the money.Mr. García Padilla said he was expecting lawsuits. He said litigation would add to the government’s pile of bills and possibly increase frictions between have and have-not creditor groups.“It will cost a lot for the commonwealth,” he said. “It will cost a lot for our creditors. And every dollar that I need to use to pay lawsuit lawyers will be a dollar that I will not have available to pay creditors.”A version of this article appears in print on January 5, 2016, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Struggling Puerto Rico Defaults on Its Debt Payments.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.