AdvertisementSupported byGlobal ManagerBy Nazanin LankaraniDaniela Riccardi  is chief executive of Baccarat, a manufacturer and retailer of luxury crystal products based in France and controlled by the American investment firms Starwood Capital Group and Catterton.Q. What as a child prepared you for a career in business? A. Nothing in my family background. My mother took care of the children and my father was an expert in jewelry. As a child, I had no idea what I wanted to be later, but I was very curious and adventurous. I knew I wanted to travel the world and learn about different cultures.Q. You studied classical ballet before obtaining a degree in political science and international studies. How did you end up working in the business world? A. I studied ballet for 12 years at the National Dance Academy in Rome, then I went to university initially interested in a career in diplomacy. I was curious about the world and thought then that diplomacy would help me make a contribution as a global citizen.After college, I obtained a fellowship in marketing at Yale University in the United States. There, I had an eye-opening experience. During a short internship at Pepsi where a business turnaround was underway, I witnessed the energy and leadership of top management, and I knew that was what I wanted to do. When I returned to Italy, I applied to a number of multinational companies. Procter & Gamble was my first job. I stayed for 25 years.Q. Was your career choice typical for an Italian woman in 1985? A. When I accepted the job at P.&G., I wanted first and foremost to experience different cultures. At that time, no one wanted the faraway assignments, even though the opportunities for advancement in Europe were limited for women.During my first assignment in Brussels, I met my husband, a Colombian. When he decided to move back home, I followed him both for personal reasons and to travel the world. I was quite successful in South America with P.&G. and was promoted quickly to general manager for the region, something that may not have happened, had I stayed in Europe. Though my choices were unusual for a woman, they helped me advance.Q. What role did your education play in your evolution as a leader?A. The 25 years at P.&G. were the best school for me. I did not attend business school, and it has made no difference for me. On the job, I learned everything I needed to know, the importance of reliable data, how to analyze the strengths and weaknesses of a business, and what it takes to build an image or a brand. Everything I know, I learned by doing.Q. What did ballet bring to your life?A. Dance has always been a part of my life. I trained at a professional level and could be a dance teacher today. In my spare time, I give dance lessons to young adults and to my employees. I believe it is important to cultivate both the mind and the body.Ballet has taught me the importance of combining passion with discipline. As a dancer, you must go on even when your feet bleed. Pain can be a driving force, but only if there is passion. In the business world, I put my heart into what I do, whether it is opening a new store, planning a strategy or organizing a party. But I also demand that meetings run on time, that data be precise and structures respected.Q. In 2010, you made a radical career change, taking a job with a fashion label. Why?A. I had just turned 50 that year. After 25 years at P.&G., my path going forward seemed predictable, given that I had covered major regions like South America, China and Russia. It was time for a change.I considered returning to ballet, and possibly opening an international dance academy, or running an institution like the New York City Ballet. I felt that I could bring value to a dance company because I understood the technique and the specific challenges faced by dancers, but I also knew how to run a business. In the end, I accepted an offer from Diesel. I found the journey of Renzo Rosso, who had single-handedly created an incredible brand from scratch, very courageous and thought-provoking.Q. In 2013, you became chief executive of Baccarat. Why choose to work in a much smaller company? A. Size was not a decisive factor for me. When the opportunity presented itself, two things mattered most: the brand and the bosses. It was the chance of a lifetime to take on a brand with 250 years of history and help lead it into the future. Baccarat had a strong heritage but needed a new strategy that integrated its savoir-faire into today’s lifestyle. The owners also shared my vision for branding, building a future and adding value. That is why accepted the challenge.Q. What is your experience managing across cultures?A. I am in Paris today as the Italian chief executive of a French brand belonging to an American group, and I do business around the globe including in Korea, Japan, and Russia.Telling our employees around the world that the American bosses expect results will produce nothing. You need to ignite a passion, a sense of pride, not unlike a patriotic sentiment, in your employees. That kind of motivation extends beyond the brand itself. People need to feel good about their work. Leadership is partly about the ability to bring out that feeling.There are few places where I have not lived. If you have not experienced multiculturalism, you cannot be effective in leading globally. I make it a point to understand why people live a certain way, what they eat, and what values they hold. Understanding cultures helps you draw out passion.Q. What’s the best advice you have ever received?A. The same advice I give as a mentor, particularly to women, is be yourself and do things your way. Early on in my career, I struggled with questions like how to present myself, how to act under scrutiny, or even whether my ballet background made me suitable for the job. Then one of my bosses at P.&G. told me that I must be true to myself and imitate no one, either man or woman. To succeed, you must be comfortable in your own shoes.Q. What is the difference between a good leader and a great leader?A. Courage. Good leaders compromise often, but great leaders have the courage to stand their ground. I learned to have the courage to stand up for my opinions and justify them. At Baccarat, I am often told, “We have been doing things a certain way for 250 years.” It takes courage to respond: “If we want to continue for another 250 years, we must have the courage to change.”Q. What would you tell your younger self?A. Looking back, I cannot think of what I would have done differently. Younger, I was often told that it was naïve to think that as a woman I could have both a family and a global career in business. But I made things happen with courage and the help of a family that supports me.Advertisement