By KEITH BRADSHERNOV. 5, 2015
HONG KONG —  A pact between Washington and Hanoi to strengthen labor unions in Vietnam could give workers more bargaining power, but the impact will depend on how Vietnam carries out the agreement, longtime Vietnamese government advisers and other specialists said on Thursday.The side agreement to the Trans-Pacific Partnership calls for Vietnam to pass legislation that would legalize independent unions, allow them to strike and let them seek help from foreign labor organizations like the A.F.L.-C.I.O.The overall trade agreement faces a contentious debate in Congress. The Obama administration is aiming to win over Democrats who have expressed concern about the potential for free trade to shift jobs to countries where unions and workers’ rights are weak.Vietnam’s Constitution enshrines the right of workers to strike and engage in organized protests, said Le Dang Doanh, a prominent economist and a former top official at a government research organization in Hanoi. But until now, Vietnam has adopted few laws to codify and protect those rights.AdvertisementConsequently, the labor accord “is a very positive step for Vietnam,” said Mr. Doanh, a longtime advocate of market changes who has advised his country’s top leadership through its gradual relaxation of many government controls over the economy in the last quarter-century.AdvertisementPham Chi Lan, the former secretary general of the Vietnam Chamber of Commerce and Industry and a former senior adviser in the office of the prime minister, also portrayed the agreement as an important concession.“This is a big compromise, for Vietnam to agree to do this,” she said.But Tony Foster, the managing partner of the Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City offices of Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer, a big global law firm, said that the labor provisions of the Trans-Pacific Partnership had been expected, and that it was unclear how much change they would bring to Vietnam.The central question, he said, will be the extent to which the trade agreement increases the influence and independence of labor unions.“The devil is really going to be in the details on a lot of this stuff — I’m sure people are going to be parsing it very carefully to determine what will really be required,” Mr. Foster said in a telephone interview from Hanoi. “It will be a balancing act for the government, and I’m sure they will comply, more or less.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Multinationals have shown much more interest this autumn in investing in Vietnam, and the anticipated labor provisions of the trade accord have caused little concern among companies, he added.For the last decade, factories in Vietnam have faced many wildcat strikes each spring, sometimes involving thousands of workers at a single location. The strikes tend to occur close to the Tet festival and are often the result of workers’ dissatisfaction with the annual bonuses they receive then.Vietnam has administrative regulations for striking with government protection, but they are so bureaucratic that workers seldom follow them. The Vietnamese government has tolerated wildcat strikes to allow workers to let off steam and to demand raises, particularly during the period of high inflation in Vietnam that accompanied and followed the global financial crisis in 2008 and 2009.Unlike some countries that have been under authoritarian rule, like Indonesia before the fall of President Suharto in 1998, Vietnam does not have a large underground labor movement that might quickly benefit from legalization. Vietnam’s tolerance of wildcat strikes may have discouraged the formation of such a movement.AdvertisementLabor-affiliated institutes in Germany and Australia have had offices in Vietnam for many years to work with the government-affiliated union and encourage it to press harder on behalf of workers. American labor groups have been less active in Vietnam until now, partly because of the lingering history of the Vietnam War, which has made American involvement in Vietnamese domestic issues more delicate.Two Vietnamese government officials, reached in Hanoi after the text of the agreement was made public on Thursday, had no immediate comment. But Le Dinh Quang, the deputy head of the labor relationships department at the government-controlled Vietnam General Confederation of Labor, welcomed the accord.“That is a very big challenge for us, but due to national benefit, the integration with the world and also the rights and benefit of labor, we have to find solutions” to apply the agreement, Mr. Quang said in a telephone interview. “We understand that this would be very good for workers in Vietnam.”Chau Doan contributed reporting from Hanoi.A version of this article appears in print on November 6, 2015, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: U.S.-Vietnam Pact Could Aid Workers, Depending on How It’s Executed .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.