AdvertisementSupported byBy Stephanie StromChick-fil-A’s Midtown Manhattan restaurant remained closed on Monday for a fifth business day after an inspection by city health officials found several violations, including the presence of fruit flies and food stored at the wrong temperature.The closing was voluntary, according to an official at the New York Department of Health and Mental Hygiene who declined to be named. The store opened in October with great fanfare, and consumers continued to wait in a line that stretched along 37th Street right up until the company closed it on Dec. 30.Carrie Kurlander, a company spokeswoman, said that Chick-fil-A had decided to close the store to make various changes to operations. “There is a little more work to be done from a facilities, maintenance and retraining standpoint, so we have decided to remain closed today until we believe everything exceeds standards,” Ms. Kurlander said by email.She said she did not know when the restaurant would reopen.Ms. Kurlander said the presence of flies was the biggest concern. But the city health department listed six violations, including: “Cold food item held above 41º F (smoked fish and reduced oxygen packaged foods above 38º F) except during necessary preparation; food not cooled by an approved method whereby the internal product temperature is reduced from 140º F to 70º F or less within 2 hours, and from 70º F to 41º F or less within 4 additional hours.”The report also cited food that was not protected from potential contamination during storage, preparation, transportation, display or service; wiping cloths that were soiled or not stored in sanitizing solution; and “harborage or conditions conducive to attracting vermin to the premises and/or allowing vermin to exist.”In a statement on the New York City store’s website, the company said it was making upgrades to the facilities and equipment and that it had hired an independent consultant to evaluate the changes.The health department conducts inspections of restaurants in the city and awards letter “grades” based on the findings.Under the inspection system, every restaurant has two chances to earn an “A” grade. If a restaurant fails to get an A on initial inspection, it is subject to a second inspection soon after the first one. The health department official said Chick-fil-A would have had to post a C grade or a sign saying “grade pending” after its second inspection, held on Dec. 24.He said that the city closes restaurants only when it finds a public health hazard that cannot be corrected at the time of inspection, something like having no working refrigerators.Another popular restaurant chain, Chipotle Mexican Grill, is struggling to overcome a food safety scare after more than 50 people who ate in its restaurants in nine states were found to be infected with strains of an E. coli bacteria.Separately, more than 100 people who ate in a Chipotle restaurant in Boston were infected with a norovirus.Although Chick-fil-A posted a note saying it would reopen on Monday, Ms. Kurlander said the company had changed its mind out of an abundance of caution.Advertisement