AdvertisementSupported byBy Sydney EmberEver since the billionaire casino mogul Sheldon Adelson acquired The Las Vegas Review-Journal last month, the newspaper’s reporters and editors have agonized over whether their coverage of Mr. Adelson and his business interests would be compromised. On Tuesday, the staff at The Review-Journal met for the second consecutive day with an adviser, who laid out guidelines for how the embattled newspaper should cover its new owner and his family. The staff members made several demands, including that they be allowed to meet a representative of the Adelson family.The gathering came a day after a contentious meeting with the adviser, David J. Butler, executive editor of The Providence Journal in Rhode Island, who told The Review-Journal’s staff to ease up on how it covered Mr. Adelson. In December, Mr. Adelson paid $140 million for the Las Vegas paper, buying it through a shell company. (The Providence Journal is owned by GateHouse Media, which also manages the operations of The Review-Journal.)During the meeting on Tuesday, Mr. Butler provided the Review-Journal staff with a list of requirements related to coverage of the Adelson family. The staff agreed on nine guidelines, said Stephanie Grimes, a features editor, who shared details about the proceedings on Twitter.They included the requirement that a statement about Mr. Adelson’s ownership of The Review-Journal appear in the paper, and that all articles about Mr. Adelson and his business and political interests would also contain sufficient disclosures. Mr. Adelson is a prominent Republican donor.The identity of Mr. Adelson as the buyer of The Review-Journal was kept secret for days after the sale was announced on Dec. 10, sending the paper’s reporters scrambling to identify their new owner and raising questions about the lack of transparency. In the weeks after the sale, executives at the paper reviewed and edited articles about the sale to remove details and quotes that could put the new owners in an unflattering light, according to several Review-Journal reporters and editors. At the end of December, the paper’s editor, Michael Hengel, resigned. The Review-Journal has yet to name an interim editor, and the newsroom has urged management to put a new leader in place. The publisher of The Review-Journal will continue to review articles involving the Adelson family, Mr. Butler said on Tuesday. He denied a request from the staff to guarantee certain portions of stories not be cut. The staff also objected to having an ombudsman for the paper, fearing the person would be used “for nefarious purposes,” Ms. Grimes posted on Twitter.Staff members also said they wanted to know who was behind an order that journalists monitor three local judges, one of whom is overseeing a lawsuit filed in 2010 against Mr. Adelson and his casino company. Shortly before the sale was announced, an article about business courts that was critical of that judge appeared in two Connecticut newspapers owned by Michael E. Schroeder, who had been the manager of News & Media Capital Group, the company through which Mr. Adelson bought The Review-Journal. Mr. Schroeder is no longer involved with the paper or News & Media Capital Group.Advertisement