By ANDREW POLLACKJAN. 5, 2016
An inhaled insulin championed by a billionaire medical entrepreneur suffered a big setback on Tuesday when it was abandoned by the company with the rights to market it.MannKind, the developer of the insulin, announced on Tuesday that Sanofi, the big French drug company with the marketing rights, was terminating the agreement between the two companies.The move by Sanofi was not a surprise since the inhaled insulin, called Afrezza, has had dismal sales since being approved by the Food and Drug Administration in June 2014. Sanofi reported sales of only 5 million euros, or a little more than $5 million, in the first nine months of 2015.MannKind’s shares plummeted 48 percent on Tuesday, closing at 75 cents. When Afrezza was approved, the shares were worth about $10.AdvertisementThe company, based in Valencia, Calif., is expected to face significant money problems without Sanofi’s support, though it vowed to fight on.Advertisement“I speak today with resolve to say that this is not the end of the line for Afrezza, or MannKind, by any means,” Matthew J. Pfeffer, the chief financial officer of MannKind, said in a brief conference call with investors and analysts, during which the company took no questions.MannKind was started by Alfred E. Mann, who made a fortune founding aerospace and medical device companies, including the insulin pump manufacturer MiniMed, which was sold to Medtronic for about $3 billion.But Mr. Mann, now 90, spent much of his accumulated wealth backing MannKind as it suffered many setbacks before finally winning F.D.A. approval of Afrezza.Mr. Mann and other supporters of Afrezza said the product would provide millions of diabetics with a new option that might be more attractive to them than injecting themselves with insulin up to several times a day. This would improve overall public health, they said, because many people with diabetes who could benefit from insulin do not use it, in part because they do not like injections.Pfizer had used the same arguments several years earlier yet suffered a costly failure in trying to market an inhaled insulin called Exubera.MannKind argued it would succeed because its inhaler was much more discreet — the size of a referee’s whistle, while Pfizer’s was the size of a tennis ball can. MannKind also said its insulin had some desirable medical characteristics, though there was debate on that.But insurers have been reluctant to pay for Afrezza, which is more expensive than injectable insulins. There are also concerns over the safety of putting insulin into the lungs. The prescribing information for Afrezza calls for lung function to be tested before patients start on the drug and periodically thereafter.AdvertisementSanofi had hoped that Afrezza, which is taken at mealtimes, would be an adjunct to its big diabetes drug Lantus, which is a basal insulin taken once a day. Sanofi paid $150 million in 2014 to MannKind for the Afrezza rights and another $50 million early in 2015.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Still, Sanofi wasted no time in jettisoning the product, acting on Monday, the first business day it was allowed to give MannKind notice of termination.Sanofi’s entire diabetes business, one of its major assets, is suffering now from price and product competition. That contributed to the ouster of its chief executive, Christopher Viehbacher, in October 2014. The new chief executive, Olivier Brandicourt, said in the fall that Sanofi’s diabetes business was expected to decline from 4 to 8 percent annually from 2015 to 2018.Both Sanofi and MannKind said they would work for a smooth transition so delivery of Afrezza to patients was not interrupted. Sanofi said it would continue to fill orders until July 4.Mr. Pfeffer of MannKind said that the patients who tried Afrezza really liked it and that the drug could succeed if patients and doctors were educated and insurers were persuaded to pay for it.But MannKind, a small company, is expected to face challenges in marketing Afrezza by itself, or in finding a new partner.“With a busted launch by one of the leading diabetes players, it’s hard to see any other company stepping in to take on commercial efforts,” Joshua Schimmer, an analyst at Piper Jaffray, said in a note on Tuesday. He said that because MannKind did not take questions on its conference call, “we didn’t have an opportunity to ask how the company can avoid bankruptcy.”Mr. Pfeffer tried to dispel speculation that MannKind would run out of money. The company has about $60 million in cash, enough to last well into the second half of this year at the current rate of expenditure, he said. He hinted that the company would cut expenses to conserve cash.MannKind had a net loss of $91.4 million in the first nine months of 2015, even with Sanofi paying much of the bill to market Afrezza.AdvertisementAs of Sept. 30, the company had an accumulated deficit of $2.6 billion since its founding, and about $185 million in debt.At the time Afrezza was approved, Mr. Mann had provided about $1 billion to the company in equity and loans. He owned 37.8 percent of the stock as of last March, a stake that has now lost most of its value.Hakan S. Edstrom, who had been chief executive of MannKind, resigned under pressure in November. The new chief executive, who officially took office on Tuesday, is Duane M. DeSisto, a former chief executive of Insulet, a manufacturer of insulin pumps. He did not speak in the company’s conference call.A version of this article appears in print on January 6, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Shares of Inhaled Insulin Maker Plummet 48% as Big Marketing Partner Pulls Out.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.