
Breakingviews By                     
JENNIFER SABA

JAN. 5, 2016
China’s richest man is finally going Hollywood.Wang Jianlin’s Dalian Wanda is set to add Legendary Entertainment, the American movie studio behind “Jurassic World,” to a leisure and lifestyle portfolio that includes a Spanish soccer team and the operator of Ironman races. Buying Legendary should help fill seats in the cinemas that Wanda owns around the world — and perhaps bolster China’s soft power.The Chinese entertainment company wants to buy a majority of Legendary in a deal that values Legendary at about $4 billion. Mr. Wang has flirted before with red-carpet deals. Two years ago, he was in talks to buy a piece of Lions Gate, the studio behind the “Hunger Games” franchise and that counts the media mogul John C. Malone as an investor.A bit like Mr. Malone, Mr. Wang has the ambition to own producers of content, not just its distributors, which is savvy. But as it happens, Wanda also controls the largest theater chain in China in addition to the No. 2 cineplex in the United States, AMC Entertainment, behind the Regal Entertainment Group. Gaining control over a studio may give Wanda greater leverage in ensuring moviegoers go out for a night at the movies instead of taking one in on the couch.Action movies that play well on the silver screen are one way to entice consumers out of their living rooms, particularly in China. Legendary is known for big-budget films that can cost more than $200 million to produce. And movies like “The Dark Knight” and “Godzilla” translate nicely around the world.Box-office ticket sales in China rose 50 percent last year compared with 2014, ringing up almost $7 billion, The Los Angeles Times reported. But Beijing is picky in what it allows theaters to show; the government closely controls the flow of imported movies. Under Wanda’s ownership, Legendary’s films should have a better chance of winding up on screens in China’s booming movie market.Finally, controlling a piece of Tinseltown comes with other, softer benefits: China itself could star in a more favorable light on screen. Perhaps the next time Godzilla ravages his way through Tokyo, a Chinese scientist will be the one to save the day.Jennifer Saba is a columnist for Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »