By AMIE TSANGJAN. 4, 2016
HONG KONG — The fears among investors that sent shares tumbling on the first trading day of the year appeared to have abated, with global markets relatively calm on Tuesday.U.S. stocks closed mostly higher after wavering between small gains and losses one day after a plunge in China’s main index set off a bout of selling in global markets.While Chinese stocks still showed signs of volatility, the selling pressure was muted compared with the sell-off on Monday, which sent the country’s stocks plummeting nearly 7 percent. On Tuesday, Asian stocks closed slightly down, and European shares closed a bit higher.The global markets got a helping hand from the Chinese government. China’s central bank on Tuesday said it had poured about $20 billion into the financial system in an effort to help steady the markets and ease some liquidity concerns.AdvertisementInvestors’ concerns are largely focused on the Chinese economy. A weak manufacturing report stoked fears about a slowdown in China’s economy and global growth.AdvertisementSuch worries have clouded the market for months. But by Tuesday, investors appeared less worried.On Wall Street, the Dow Jones industrial average gained nine points, or 0.1 percent, to 17,158. The Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index edged up four points, or 0.2 percent, to 2,016. The Nasdaq composite fell 11 points, or 0.1 percent, to 4,891.Ford fell 2 percent and General Motors fell 3 percent after the companies reported sales figures that fell short of forecasts.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Gun makers rose after new data pointed to strong sales at the close of 2015. Smith & Wesson jumped 11 percent and Sturm Ruger gained 7 percent.European stocks rose, with the FTSE 100 in London up 0.7 percent for the day. The Euro Stoxx 50 index rose 0.4 percent.While the Shanghai composite index was down almost 4 percent, it recovered to finish 0.3 percent lower. The Shenzhen composite index fell almost 5 percent before crawling back to end the day down 1.9 percent.The Nikkei 225-share index in Japan finished the day 0.4 percent lower. The Hang Seng Index in Hong Kong closed 0.7 percent down.Steven Sun, the head of Hong Kong and China equity research at HSBC, pointed to a stabilization in the Chinese currency and an injection of liquidity as the reasons for a less tumultuous trading day, noting that the implementation of the circuit breaker probably contributed to the sell-offs on Monday.He said he expected the volatility to continue, but not to the extent seen last summer.“You can see that volatility compared to July and August,” Mr. Sun said. “It’s not yet back to normal, but it’s been coming down compared to July and August last year.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.