By LESLIE PICKERJAN. 5, 2016
LVMH, the largest luxury conglomerate in the world, has been an investor in the funds of the American private equity firm Catterton for almost two decades.And when LVMH’s private equity arm, L Capital, which invests in brands in Europe and Asia, considered expanding into the United States, its American counterpart was contemplating the opposite move.Rather than compete, the two have now decided to combine, in a deal rarely seen among private equity firms.They say the new company, to be named L Catterton, will be the largest consumer-focused investment firm in the world, with some $12 billion in assets after several funds are expected to close on raising money this year, according to a statement issued Tuesday. The merger should be completed in several months, pending regulatory and investor approvals.AdvertisementJ. Michael Chu and Scott A. Dahnke, the managing partners at Catterton, will become the global co-chief executives at L Catterton, with headquarters in Greenwich, Conn., and London. L Catterton’s partners will own 60 percent of the new firm, while LVMH and Groupe Arnault will jointly own the rest. The price and structure of the transaction were not disclosed.“The globalization of media and technology, combined with increasingly permeable geographic borders, is driving rapid consumer growth on an unprecedented global scale,” Mr. Dahnke said in the statement. “Together, Catterton and L Capital will create a global consumer investing franchise with unmatched access to resources in the industry.”AdvertisementCapturing each other’s knowledge about their respective regions was the impetus behind the deal. In the luxury segment, especially, a physical presence is imperative. A Deloitte study found that almost half of consumers surveyed said they discovered new brands while shopping.Both L Capital and Catterton wanted to capitalize on new markets to bolster growth in their portfolio companies.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Groupe Arnault is the family holding company of Bernard Arnault, who founded LVMH and still leads the $70 billion luxury conglomerate, with brands such as Christian Dior and Bulgari. L Capital was founded in 2001 with the mandate to invest in “affordable luxury” that was below the prices within LVMH’s brands.L Capital has sold more than a dozen such companies, including its stake in Gant, the clothing provider, through a 2006 initial public offering; and La Gardenia, an Italian fragrance and cosmetic chain, which was acquired by another private equity fund in 2011. According to its website, L Capital still maintains investments in other companies. L Real Estate began four years later to seek out luxury retail properties, including Miami’s Design District.Catterton was founded in 1989 and has grown to $5.5 billion in equity capital to deploy through leveraged buyouts and growth investments. Its brands penetrate the niche exercise market, counting Pure Barre, Peloton, CorePower Yoga, Flywheel and the workout clothing retailer Sweaty Betty among its investments. Catterton had invested in well-known American retailers such as P.F. Chang’s, Restoration Hardware, Baja Fresh, Build-A-Bear Workshop and First Watch, and it holds stakes in Noodles & Company and Chopt, according to its website.“Having been investors in Catterton’s funds since 1998, we have participated in its growth and success, evidenced by its strong track record and its distinctive culture,” Mr. Arnault, the chairman and chief executive of LVMH, said in the statement Tuesday. “L Catterton will provide investors with a unique value creation platform, bringing together our global network and industry expertise with Catterton’s longstanding operational approach to building value in consumer investments.”A version of this article appears in print on January 6, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: LVMH Takes a Partner for Its Private Investing.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.