By LIZ MOYERJAN. 6, 2016
Colm Kelleher, named Wednesday as president of Morgan Stanley and the heir apparent to its current chief executive, James P. Gorman, has spent much of his career at the firm moving up the ranks through its trading and capital markets operations.The Irish-born Mr. Kelleher, 58, has a history degree from Oxford University and is a chartered accountant, a special designation first bestowed by founders of the profession in Britain.After working at Arthur Andersen in London, he moved to Morgan Stanley in 1989 in fixed income sales and eventually became head of global capital markets. From 2007 to 2009 he was chief financial officer and the co-head of strategy. He was named a managing director of the firm in 1996.Before the announcement on Wednesday, he was president of Morgan Stanley’s institutional securities division and the chief executive of Morgan Stanley International.AdvertisementThe securities division has been adjusting to the effects of stricter regulation and volatile markets, particularly in the fixed income trading businesses that have recently downsized after a brief expansion. Analysts who follow the firm say they expect it to announce a $150 million fourth-quarter charge for eliminating 25 percent of the jobs in fixed income sales and trading.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Kelleher’s pay for 2014 included a $2 million supplemental award of stock units and deferred cash “in recognition of his continued contributions and commitment to the Company during 2014, as demonstrated in his successful execution of his global role, management of global regulatory obligations, and regular client interactions across many jurisdictions,” according to the firm’s proxy last year.In all, his total pay for 2014 of $16 million, not including the supplemental award, equaled that of Gregory Fleming, the former head of wealth management, who is leaving the firm. Pay for 2015 will not be disclosed until the proxy filing later this spring.AdvertisementMr. Kelleher has been based in London, though it is unclear whether he will move to the United States in his new role.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.