AdvertisementSupported byNews AnalysisBy Jackie CalmesWASHINGTON — A string of agreements between the White House and Congress, capped by last month’s surprise accord that ended a five-year impasse over the International Monetary Fund, has eased, though not dispelled, concern that America is retreating from global economic leadership.From early 2015, allies had much to fret about, and they did: China was on the rise and the United States was on the sidelines as countries joined Beijing’s new international development bank. Political dysfunction at home threatened President Obama’s power to negotiate trade agreements, including a landmark trans-Pacific accord. The Republican-controlled Congress had closed the nation’s 81-year-old Export-Import Bank and was threatening government shutdowns.And a longstanding stalemate over an overhaul of the I.M.F.’s governance structure imperiled America’s decades-old stewardship of the international lender, which in recent years was crucial to dealing with a global financial contagion.“Our national security and our economic security were very much at stake,” Treasury Secretary Jacob J. Lew said of the showdown over the I.M.F. “And as someone who for the last three years has gone to international meetings” — where he was badgered by ministers frustrated by American inaction — “I can tell you that it was ratcheting to the point where it was doing real damage.”As 2016 begins, much has changed.China’s economy has slowed, while the United States’ growth buoys the world. Congress in July finally granted Mr. Obama enhanced trade negotiating authority, enabling him in October to conclude the largest regional trade pact in history with Japan and 10 other Pacific Rim nations — though it now faces hostility from lawmakers. Congress agreed to revive the Export-Import Bank to assist American exporters, and a bipartisan budget deal prevented a shutdown as well as a crisis over increasing the federal debt limit.And Congress closed 2015 by unexpectedly approving the I.M.F. deal reached in 2010 by the United States and its allies. Republicans — members of a party long skeptical of international institutions, but especially so at a time of Tea Party populism and antipathy toward Mr. Obama — demanded and got the administration’s agreement to restrict the fund’s bailouts of deeply indebted countries.“It’s been critically important to get this done,” Mr. Lew said in an interview. “The I.M.F. is really the first line of defense, the first responder, in global economic and financial crises. And for 70 years the United States has played the driving leadership role in the organization.”That concern spurred the conservative economist John B. Taylor, a senior Treasury official in the George W. Bush administration, to help secure Republicans’ support for the I.M.F. governance change. In an interview, Mr. Taylor, an economics professor at Stanford, called its approval “a good step” toward allaying “a perception and reality” that the United States is shrinking from leadership on the global stage.“The U.S. has an opportunity now to set what its strategy is internationally on the economic side, but also on the strategic side, the security side,” he said, adding that Mr. Lew’s decision to work with Congress on the I.M.F. “shows a kind of principled leadership.”“Too bad it took five years, to be sure,” he said.That damaging delay, and conditions that Congress imposed, left Edwin M. Truman, a senior fellow at the Peterson Institute for International Economics and an assistant secretary of the Treasury for international affairs during the Clinton administration, with a glass “only half full with champagne,” he wrote after the I.M.F. measure’s passage.“Whether you’re talking about trade or aid or finance or whatever, the politics of the country are in the direction of ‘The world is dirty; let’s wall ourselves off from it,’” Mr. Truman said in an interview.That was reflected, he said, in the “stealth” way that Mr. Lew had to work behind the scenes to ensure Republicans’ assent, given the I.M.F.’s unpopularity with conservatives. And it shows, he added, in the language of Republicans seeking their party’s presidential nomination: “We either want to say, ‘Our way or the highway,’ or we say, ‘Build a wall.’”The overhaul of the I.M.F., which now has 188 countries as members, will be the most significant since the organization was formed in 1945 as an international lender of last resort to foster global stability and reduce poverty after decades of world wars and economic depression.The changes, spearheaded in 2010 by the Obama administration, are intended to reset members’ quotas for contributions and their voting shares to better reflect the current world. They would raise the status of emerging nations — in particular China, but also India, Russia and Brazil — at the expense of European and Persian Gulf nations. The United States would retain its veto power.While quotas would be doubled to buttress I.M.F. lending, that would cost the United States and other countries relatively little because emergency funds affluent countries provided in the crisis would be counted toward members’ quotas.Yet after taking the lead in designing the overhaul, the United States was the holdout as the proposal languished in Congress. “My counterparts were saying, ‘We trust you, but we don’t know if we trust the United States to get this done,’” Mr. Lew said.He pressed Republican leaders in Congress and by April had their commitments to help pass the overhaul in 2015. Mr. Lew said he took part in hundreds of calls — including a crucial round with Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the majority leader, and Senator Bob Corker of Tennessee, chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, while he was in Armenia for the centennial of the Armenian massacre. With the phone system there overwhelmed by the throngs in the streets, the Americans kept losing their connections, Mr. Lew recalled.For months, a series of bills were considered and rejected as vehicles for an I.M.F. amendment, out of fear that the I.M.F. bill would endanger its carrier. In December, the overhaul got its ride on the year’s last must-pass bill, which funded government operations through September.Mr. Lew said two factors crystallized the argument that American credibility and leadership were at stake. One was the need to persuade the I.M.F., and the emerging nations among its members, to aid Ukraine. The other was the rise of China’s new Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank, which was poised to fill a vacuum left by the United States.But another argument won over many Republicans. By June, Mr. Taylor was meeting with House Republicans, and Mr. Corker in the Senate, about his proposal that they support the overhaul with conditions. Chiefly that meant repealing the I.M.F.’s so-called systemic risk exemption, a 2010 rule that allowed loans to Greece, Portugal and Ireland despite their unsustainable debt. That rule had been passed to stave off financial contagion from the European debt crisis.While I.M.F. members and its managing director, Christine Lagarde, supported the change, Mr. Truman called it “a horrible precedent” for Congress to impose such conditions. Still, he applauded Mr. Taylor for his role in gathering Republican support.Mr. Taylor, for his part, said: “This is an international organization, and many parts of the country don’t even know what it is. Members had to have a reason to vote for it.”OpinionThe Editorial BoardAdvertisement