AdvertisementSupported byBy Julie CreswellIn the days after the Paris terrorist attacks last November, world leaders denounced the shooting massacres. On Wall Street, the money manager Louis Navellier saw a buying opportunity.Shares of the two leading gun manufacturers, Smith & Wesson and Sturm, Ruger & Company, popped onto Mr. Navellier’s computer screen. Their stock prices were rising as a result of strong sales. He began accumulating positions in both companies.Two months later, those bets have paid off. The stocks of Smith & Wesson and Sturm, Ruger spiked again after the San Bernardino, Calif., shootings last month. They also moved sharply in advance of President Obama’s announcement on Tuesday of measures to curb gun violence.On Tuesday morning, Mr. Navellier appeared on the business television network CNBC and discussed his winning investment in gun makers.“Mr. Obama is the best gun salesman on the planet,” said Mr. Navellier, chairman of the Reno, Nev., investment firm Navellier & Associates, alluding to the notion that the White House’s push for stricter gun laws has driven sharp increases in firearm sales.While the country reels from a series of mass shootings, each one reigniting the debate over the regulation of firearms, the hottest investments in the stock market seem to be shares of gun manufacturers.Since President Obama took office in 2009, shares of Smith & Wesson and Sturm, Ruger have each increased more than 900 percent, far surpassing the return of the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index (up 147 percent) and even outperforming the stock of Apple (up 800 percent).But some investors have missed out on the rally in gun stocks by choice. A number of public pension funds and other money managers have moved to sell their stakes in gun and ammunition companies in recent years, arguing that their profits come at too steep a price.Still, the business climate for gun makers has rarely been better. Firearms enthusiasts, whether they are hunters, target shooters or those concerned with their personal safety, buy more guns after mass shootings and the resulting appeals for stricter gun laws. After the call for sales restrictions after the San Bernardino attacks, more guns were sold in December than almost any other month in nearly two decades, according to federal data released this week.On Monday, Smith & Wesson alerted Wall Street analysts and investors that it believed its full-year sales would be higher than expected, above $650 million for its fiscal year, which ends in April. That is up more than 57 percent from its 2012 sales of $412 million.But even surging sales are not enough to attract those investors that consider the shares of gun manufacturers to be taboo. After the 2012 shootings at Sandy Hook Elementary School in Newtown, Conn., several public pension funds began moving to sell off their financial stakes in gun and ammunition manufacturers.One of the investors’ first targets was the Freedom Group (now called Remington Outdoor), a large gun maker owned by the investment firm Cerberus Capital Management. One of the guns used in the Sandy Hook shootings was a Bushmaster, a Remington Outdoor brand.Cerberus’s investors urged the firm to sell the Freedom Group. It publicly pledged to do so but, after an unsuccessful auction, decided to maintain ownership while allowing investors to sell their stakes. Last spring, Cerberus bought out investors like the California State Teachers’ Retirement System but maintains an ownership stake in the company. The owner of Cerberus, Stephen A. Feinberg, is a passionate hunter and gun aficionado.While several of the country’s large public pensions sold off shares in gun makers, other investment firms flowed in. The London Company, a money manager in Richmond, Va., with $11.2 billion in assets under management, began buying stock in Sturm, Ruger in 2008. In 2013, it doubled its stake. Today, it is the largest shareholder, owning 2.4 million shares, or about 12.7 percent of the company.More guns were sold in December than almost any other month in nearly two decades after President Obama called for new gun-buying restrictions.Likewise, Gotham Asset Management, a firm whose co-investment chief is Joel Greenblatt, a well-known New York money manager, largely sold off its position in Smith & Wesson early last year. But starting last fall, it bought more than a million shares of the company and today is one of the largest shareholders.Neither firm responded to requests for comment.A number of large shareholders in gun manufacturers are the nation’s largest providers of 401(k)’s, including Fidelity Investments, the Vanguard Group and BlackRock. It is unclear whether the stocks are in actively managed funds or in passive index funds, which are intended to mimic the movements of the broader markets.For Mr. Navellier, there was nothing personal driving his decision to invest in Smith & Wesson and Sturm, Ruger. His home in Nevada came with a gun range, but he uses it as a wine cellar. When he inherited some guns from his father-in-law, he gave away the ammunition to his employees and locked the guns away in a safe, he said in a phone interview on Tuesday.Instead, the decision to buy the gun shares had everything to do with profits.“Everybody is so desperate for earnings. The strong dollar is crushing company earnings,” Mr. Navellier said. “As a professional manager, I’m looking for companies with real sales and real earnings.”Mr. Navellier said he had a small number of investors that put restrictions on the types of companies in which he can invest. Some West Coast investors, for instance, do not want the firm to invest in companies involved with genetically modified crops. For some investors on the East Coast, it would not be appropriate to invest in a company with a nonunion work force, he said.“But nobody,” Mr. Navellier said, “has told me not to buy guns.”Advertisement