AdvertisementSupported byBy Nathaniel PopperA shuffle at the top of Morgan Stanley has led to the departure of Gregory J. Fleming, an executive who was once seen as a leading candidate to run the Wall Street firm.Mr. Fleming’s departure was announced on Wednesday. He decided to leave after the firm’s chief executive, James P. Gorman, elevated another top Morgan Stanley executive, Colm Kelleher, to the No. 2 position at the company, according to people briefed on the moves. The change is the biggest shake-up in the top executive ranks at Morgan Stanley during Mr. Gorman’s six-year tenure. The moves are the latest in a flurry of leadership changes that Mr. Gorman has made in recent months, aimed at improving the firm’s profitability. Like many companies on Wall Street, Morgan Stanley has been struggling under the weight of new regulations and changes in the markets, but its most recent quarterly earnings were particularly disappointing. The trading businesses overseen by Mr. Kelleher have taken much of the blame for dragging down Morgan Stanley’s financial results in recent years.The wealth management division overseen by Mr. Fleming, on the other hand, has been viewed as the strongest performing part of the company. That makes Mr. Fleming’s departure — and Mr. Kelleher’s promotion — somewhat surprising. It also makes Mr. Fleming one of the most eligible candidates for top jobs that open up at other financial firms in the near future. Mr. Kelleher’s elevation now makes him the clear immediate successor to Mr. Gorman, though Mr. Kelleher, at 58, is one year older than Mr. Gorman. Mr. Gorman has indicated internally that he is hoping to work with Mr. Kelleher to find a long-term successor among the younger generation of Morgan Stanley executives.Over the last year, Mr. Fleming, 52, had made it clear to other top executives at the firm that he was somewhat impatient to succeed Mr. Gorman himself and would not wait more than a few years to do so, according to people briefed on the matter.Earlier this week, Mr. Gorman let Mr. Fleming know that he was hoping to continue leading Morgan Stanley for at least five more years and that Mr. Kelleher would be the new president of the firm, the people said. Mr. Fleming was given the opportunity to remain in his current position, but he quickly decided to resign. “The new year always brings change and new challenges and, for me, those challenges will be on the horizon beyond Morgan Stanley,” Mr. Fleming said in a memo to employees in the wealth management business. In 2009, Mr. Fleming was recruited by Mr. Gorman soon after taking over leadership Morgan Stanley. At the time, the firm was in the middle of acquiring the enormous Smith Barney wealth management business from Citigroup and Mr. Fleming was given the job of running the huge operation.Mr. Fleming had previously worked with Mr. Gorman at Merrill Lynch and was given credit for helping drive the sale of Merrill that staved off its collapse during the financial crisis.The wealth management unit that Mr. Fleming built up at Morgan Stanley was a prized business because it brought in a reliable stream of fees and did not come with the high regulatory costs of the trading businesses that had been big money makers before the financial crisis.In recent years, Mr. Fleming’s business has been responsible for nearly half of Morgan Stanley’s revenue and was regularly promoted as an important component of the company’s future strategy.There were, however, a few indications over the last year that Mr. Fleming was being marginalized by Mr. Gorman in favor of Mr. Kelleher. Last spring, Mr. Kelleher was given an unusual bonus that brought his annual compensation to $18 million — $2 million more than Mr. Fleming received. A regulatory filing indicated that the bonus was in recognition of Mr. Kelleher’s handling of new regulatory requirements and his “regular client interactions.” Last fall, Mr. Fleming was relieved of responsibility for an investment management unit that he had previously overseen. Part of the reason that Mr. Gorman decided to elevate Mr. Kelleher was his long affiliation with Morgan Stanley, and his understanding of the firm’s culture, people briefed on the move said. Mr. Kelleher came to Morgan Stanley from the accounting firm Arthur Andersen in 1989 and joined the fixed-income sales team. He rose to become head of capital markets and then, from 2007 to 2009, was chief financial officer and the co-head of strategy. “Our clients, colleagues and shareholders all recognize Colm’s experience, leadership and commitment to our culture,” Mr. Gorman wrote in a memo to Morgan Stanley employees on Wednesday. The Irish-born Mr. Kelleher has a history degree from Oxford University and is a chartered accountant, a special designation first bestowed by founders of the profession in Britain.Before his promotion, he was president of Morgan Stanley’s institutional securities division and the chief executive of Morgan Stanley International. The trading businesses that Mr. Kelleher has overseen have had to adjust to stricter regulations and volatile markets, which have come down especially hard on the bond and fixed-income trading desks. Last fall, after the fixed-income units turned in particularly poor results, Mr. Gorman and Mr. Kelleher chose a new leader for the business, Ted Pick, who had been leading Morgan Stanley’s more successful stock trading division.  Since taking over, Mr. Pick has announced internally that he will be eliminating 25 percent of the jobs in fixed-income sales and trading.Mr. Pick, 46, is widely seen as one of the leading contenders to succeed Mr. Gorman if he manages to remain at the firm for several more years. Mr. Kelleher has been based in London, and it is unclear if he will move to New York for his new role.He will now assume responsibility for the wealth management division that Mr. Fleming had overseen. Mr. Fleming will be replaced by two co-heads, Andy Saperstein and Shelley O’Connor. The announcement was made after the stock market closed. Earlier, shares of Morgan Stanley fell 2.5 percent, to $30.50.Liz Moyer contributed reporting.Advertisement