AdvertisementSupported byStreet SceneBy William D. CohanDespite pressure to reform what has been variously described as its misogynist, racist and bullying nature — Yik Yak, the anonymous, localized free messaging app, remains the rage on college campuses across the country.But one lawyer, Debra S. Katz, and others who abhor what Yik Yak permits are hopeful that Ms. Katz’s formal complaint last May to the Department of Education against the University of Mary Washington over a Yik Yak-related episode — and a pending investigation by the department’s Office of Civil Rights — might signal the beginning of the end for the social media upstart that has outraged feminists, racial justice advocates and others in its relatively brief existence.Tyler Droll and Brooks Buffington, two former Furman University fraternity members, founded Yik Yak in 2013, and have raised around $75 million from Silicon Valley venture capitalists, placing a value of nearly $400 million on the company.Perhaps the story of Yik Yak and a group of women at Mary Washington, a public university in Fredericksburg, Va., with about 4,000 undergraduate students, will finally convince Mr. Droll and Mr. Buffington that Yik Yak needs to change, or at least persuade its blue-chip investors at Sequoia Capital and Draper Fisher Jurvetson to pull the plug on the company.“Universities wouldn’t allow students to run around with megaphones and chant racist and sexist and horrible things if it was affecting the environment for other students,” Ms. Katz said in an interview. “Why don’t they do anything when it’s happening via cyberspace? In some respects, it’s more damaging.”Despite a tragedy at Mary Washington — where a young woman who had been threatened by name on Yik Yak was murdered last April — it is not at all clear that Yik Yak really wants to discourage offensive posts. Yik Yak-related episodes have occurred at more than a dozen universities nationwide.Yik Yak’s communications director, Hilary McQuaide, declined to comment on Ms. Katz’s complaint, but she did provide a statement saying that Yik Yak does not condone “misuse” of the site and was working to prevent it. “We work hard to encourage a positive and supportive community environment on Yik Yak, and we support school administrators in their efforts to encourage positive behavior and discourage inappropriate activity – whether on campus or on any social platform,” she said.In an interview with The New York Times last year, Mr. Buffington said Yik Yak had been created as a space for the “disenfranchised.”James Goetz, the Sequoia partner responsible for his firm’s Yik Yak investment, wrote me last year: “Yik Yak has tapped our desire to connect authentically with those around us. Its hyper-local forums provide a sense of community and a place to be our genuine selves, and that’s really resonated with millions of people, myself included.”For those who have not followed every twist in the Yik Yak saga, here’s what happened at U.M.W., as it is known, the details of which are contained in an administrative complaint filed last fall by six U.M.W. students with the Office of Civil Rights at the United States Department of Education:In November 2014, the student senate at U.M.W. voted to endorse the idea of allowing fraternities on campus. At a town hall-style meeting after the vote, Paige McKinsey, the president of Feminists United on Campus, a student organization dedicated to fighting for gender equality at the university, raised questions about recent studies that showed a meaningful correlation between behavior among some fraternity brothers and sexual assaults on college campuses. As Ms. McKinsey was speaking, Yik Yak posts about her appeared nearly immediately, including one calling her “scary” and another that said, “This feminist needs to chill the hell down.” That theme was reprised over and over again in extremely foul and hostile language.A complaint to the Department of Education against the University of Mary Washington over a Yik Yak-related episode contains graphic language.A few days later, Zakaria Kronemer, a U.M.W. senior, texted Ms. McKinsey about a party he had attended at the off-campus home of some Mary Washington rugby players where a bunch of them, and others at the party, sang a song that “advocated violence against women, including rape, murder, and necrophilia,” according to the complaint, and included the phrase, “She was right and dead.”It turned out that only about eight of the 47 members of the rugby team were at the party that night, singing the song in a drunken stupor — the rest were playing in a game in Maryland — and the song itself was not original to U.M.W. but rather was one of those bawdy songs that get passed around from group to group, some of the lyrics of which come from the drinking song “Walking Down Canal Street.”Ms. McKinsey and her colleagues at Feminists United took their concerns about the singing of the song to the university’s president, Richard V. Hurley, who told them he was “disgusted by the chant,” according to the complaint and would take action against the rugby team. On Jan. 29, 2015, Ms. McKinsey wrote an op-ed article in the student newspaper explaining why she no longer felt particularly safe at U.M.W. because it wasn’t a “feminist friendly campus.” For the next few months, the leaders of Feminists United had a number of unsatisfactory interactions with the university’s administration and could not understand why it was taking so long to discipline the rugby club.Finally, on March 18, 2015, Mr. Hurley announced that the rugby club would be suspended for the remainder of the school year, its games canceled. In addition, team members would have to participate in training classes regarding sexual assaults and violence on campus. After Mr. Hurley informed the campus of the decision, Yik Yak lit up again. Among the anonymous postings against Feminists United were suggestions that its members should be tied to a radiator and raped, that two of them were about to be killed and that the person responsible for the complaint should be euthanized.Three leaders of Feminists United — Ms. McKinsey, Kelli Musick and Grace Rebecca Mann were mentioned by name on the Yik Yak texts.On March 25, Julia Michels, another Feminists United leader, wrote to Mr. Hurley and told him that more than 200 offensive Yik Yaks had been directed toward her and her colleagues. “Because of these things, many of us feel immensely unsafe at U.M.W., for even if none of these threats are acted upon, we have still been severely and relentlessly attacked emotionally and psychologically,” she wrote.On March 26, the leaders of Feminists United met with the university administration to again voice their concerns about Yik Yak and the hostile atmosphere posts on it were engendering on campus. They wanted U.M.W. to close down Yik Yak on campus, to ban the service from U.M.W.'s Wi-Fi, to clarify that Feminists United had no role in the rugby club’s demise and to require a campuswide assembly to discuss rape culture on campus, online bullying and other social media concerns.The university’s response was to claim it had “no recourse” for bullying on Yik Yak and urged anyone feeling threatened on Yik Yak to get in touch with Yik Yak directly. The administration said that as a university receiving federal funding, its hands were tied regarding shutting down Yik Yak because of First Amendment issues.On April 17, after attending a “Day of Silence” event at U.M.W. intended to raise awareness of sexual bullying on campus, Ms. Mann, 20, returned to her off-campus home, where she was killed. Steven Vander Briel, a former member of the U.M.W. rugby team who had recently re-enrolled at the university, was charged with first-degree murder and abduction; he pleaded not guilty and a trial has been set for May. The day after the killing, a leader of Feminists United, Kristine Harner, wrote Mr. Hurley expressing outrage over her friend’s death and asking why nothing had been done to address the threats directed toward Ms. Mann and others. “You turned away when the members of F.U.C. showed you 700 bullying and threatening posts,” she said, using the Feminists United acronym. Mr. Hurley never responded to the letter. Mr. Hurley could not be reached for comment. He had previously announced his retirement from the university, and the search to replace him is underway.In May, Ms. Katz, a Washington, D.C., lawyer, filed a complaint against the University of Mary Washington, contending that it violated Title IX, which protects people from discrimination based on gender, and that it “condoned and ratified a sexually hostile environment by permitting ongoing, gender-based cyberstalking and cyberassaults.”In October, Ms. Katz wrote to Mr. Droll and Mr. Buffington urging Yik Yak to “do more” to end bullying. She told me that she has not heard back from them. In November, she wrote the venture capitalists, Mr. Goetz, at Sequoia Capital, and Timothy Draper at Draper Fisher, urging them to do something, too, because Yik Yak’s response to the waves of bullying across college campuses had been “head in the sand, business as usual.” Neither Mr. Draper nor Mr. Goetz responded to Ms. Katz’s letter, she said. (All sides in the dispute are careful to say there does not appear to be any evidence that the Yik Yak posts played any role in Ms. Mann’s death.)There’s not much good news in the sorry saga of Yik Yak at U.M.W. The Office of Civil Rights has agreed to investigate Ms. Katz’s charges against the university. In an interview, Ms. Katz said she was confident that an “enforcement action” would be brought against the university. Let’s hope that is so, and that this is the beginning of the end for Yik Yak.Advertisement