AdvertisementSupported byBy Robert D. McFaddenRobert H. B. Baldwin, a Wall Street maverick who presided over the transformation of Morgan Stanley from a prestigious but staid old investment bank into a modern, competitive financial services corporation in the 1970s and early ’80s, died on Sunday at a nursing home in Skillman, N.J., near Princeton. He was 95.His son Robert Jr. confirmed the death on Wednesday.At the start of Mr. Baldwin’s tenure, Morgan Stanley’s partners and clients wore old-school neckties, lunched at the same clubs and relied on sure things: underwriting bonds, genteel integrity, assured profits. But as Morgan Stanley’s gentlemanly mystique gave way to new regulations and cutthroat competition, Mr. Baldwin liked to remind them that he had worked his way through Princeton, and that his grandfather had been a railway conductor.In short, that he was not really one of them.A tough, brusque, often polarizing leader who struck colleagues as being out of place at Morgan Stanley, he was widely credited with pulling the firm out of its white-shoe rut into an era of enormous growth and painful change, less focused on exclusive services for blue-chip clients and more on the rough-and-tumble of securities trading, mergers and acquisitions and money management.As president from 1973 to 1982 and chairman until he retired at the end of 1983, Mr. Baldwin expanded Morgan Stanley into a full-service financial brokerage and changed a culture that had been entrenched for decades, with executive success often assured by family, social and educational connections.Mr. Baldwin, a protégé of Perry Hall, the managing partner from 1951 to 1961, recognized the flaws in the facade long before he took over. Until incorporating in 1970 and 1971, the firm was run like a 19th-century business, with many partners who strategized collegially but bothered little about long-range planning, modern management techniques or even detailed budgets.Morgan Stanley’s tweedy underwriters dealt almost exclusively with the chief executives of corporate America — American Telephone, General Electric, Exxon, DuPont and other giants — playing golf, taking leisurely lunches, giving advice and managing the sales of bond and stock issues without dickering over commissions or competing in open markets. Those relationships were not abandoned under Mr. Baldwin.But after the Securities and Exchange Commission abolished fixed commissions on stock trades in 1975, changes were inevitable. For Morgan Stanley, which sold blocks of stock for institutions at set fees, the new rule meant a huge loss of easy revenue and a need to compete for commissions. It could no longer monitor markets from a distance, but had to get down on trading floors and skirmish for bids and prices.Mr. Baldwin created a trading operation from scratch, and hired a big staff for it. The firm had long looked down on the trading-floor crowd as coarse. Now it needed traders capable of split-second, high-pressure decisions, people with quick wits, stamina and guts. Other firms were raided for talent. Incentive pay sharpened performances. Collegiality faded, competition raced ahead.Other traditions also fell. To get closer to clients, Morgan Stanley gave up its hallowed headquarters on Wall Street and moved to Midtown Manhattan. It established new offices in Europe, the Middle East and Asia. Instead of taking country club memberships, it rented Madison Square Garden sky boxes to entertain clients at Knicks and Rangers games.To compete for lucrative mergers and acquisitions, long shunned by Morgan Stanley’s etiquette, Mr. Baldwin named dozens of new executives whose expertise was in equities and hostile takeovers, not social relationships. The firm also began taking start-ups as clients, handled initial public offerings of stock and moved into wealth management for private clients.Morgan Stanley weathered a potential storm as the S.E.C.’s Rule 415 took effect in 1982. It allowed corporations, in favorable markets, to sell securities on short notice directly to investors, posing a threat to old-line firms, like Morgan, that had exclusive underwriting deals. But after first refusing to bend its old insistence on being the sole or lead manager of issues (as a result losing IBM as a client) Morgan adapted to the rule by sharing arrangements for managing issues, and by widening its sales.Growing pains nibbled at the fringes of Morgan Stanley’s integrity. In 1980, two former employees were charged with using confidential information to profit in stock trades. And in 1983, the firm, after long refusing to do business with the Teamsters union, began managing its $4.7 billion pension fund, long a target of corruption charges.By the time Mr. Baldwin stepped down, Morgan Stanley had become a full-service financial hub. Its staff had grown tenfold to 2,600 and its capital to more than $300 million from $7.5 million in 1970. It was still one of the most prestigious names on Wall Street. But historians said the cost had been great.“Bob Baldwin probably saved the firm and destroyed its soul,” Ron Chernow wrote in “The House of Morgan: An American Banking Dynasty and the Rise of Modern Finance” (1990). “This new Morgan Stanley was a monument to his force and clear vision, a brilliant adaptation to altered circumstances. Yet he badly politicized a firm long unified by a special esprit de corps.”Robert Hayes Burns Baldwin was born on July 9, 1920, in East Orange, N.J., to John Frank and Anna Burns Baldwin. His grandfather really was a Pennsylvania Railroad conductor. Robert graduated from Phillips Exeter Academy in 1938. At Princeton, he ran a laundry to pay his way. He studied economics, played football, basketball and baseball, and graduated in 1942 with high honors. In World War II, he was a naval officer on two aircraft carriers.In 1949, he married Geraldine Gay Williams. They divorced. In 1981, Mr. Baldwin married Dorothy Tobin Ayres.Besides his son Robert, his survivors include another son, Whitney; three daughters, Janet K. Baldwin, Deborah Baldwin Fall and Elizabeth Baldwin Maushardt; two stepchildren, Mary Ayres Hack and W. Dillaway Ayres Jr.; and 13 grandchildren.Mr. Baldwin joined Morgan Stanley in 1946. He became a general partner in 1958 and a limited partner in 1965. From 1965 to 1967, he took a leave to be President Lyndon B. Johnson’s under secretary of the Navy.As president and chairman of Morgan Stanley for a decade, he was an influential voice on Wall Street, quoted by the press when interest rates changed, inflation worsened or government agencies imposed new regulations affecting the industry.His 1975 prediction that hundreds of brokerage firms would go out of business as a result of the new S.E.C. rule eliminating fixed commissions was quoted often as its accuracy became apparent over the next few years. In 1978, he signaled Wall Street’s cautious approval of a national market system linking the major securities exchanges electronically. And he spoke for many colleagues when he criticized President Jimmy Carter’s tax reforms and enthusiastically endorsed Ronald Reagan in 1980.When he stepped down as chairman at the end of 1983, he joined a board that informally advised Morgan Stanley on policy matters and business ventures. From 1989 to 1992, he was chairman of the Lodestar Group, a New York merchant bank.In later years, as Morgan Stanley became a global financial operation with 1,300 offices and 60,000 employees in 42 countries, Mr. Baldwin was remembered by old colleagues as a man of rough edges and driven energy, awkwardly misplaced among the Ivy Leaguers but the savior of a proud institution.“To the last, Baldwin remained hypercompetitive and bent on having his way,” Mr. Chernow wrote in his history of the House of Morgan. “Yet for all his flaws, the tough, tactless Baldwin had emerged as the most important person in modern Morgan Stanley history, giving the firm the market skills to compete in a world no longer based on old-school ties.”Sam Roberts contributed reporting.Advertisement