By MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDNOV. 6, 2015
For weeks, Valeant Pharmaceuticals has been under pressure from sources raising questions about its drug-pricing tactics and criticizing its ties to a mail-order pharmacy chain that helped increase sales of its expensive treatments.Now its chief executive, J. Michael Pearson, has encountered trouble from an unusual source: an investment bank that has done work for his company in the past.Valeant disclosed on Friday that Goldman Sachs forced Mr. Pearson to sell nearly 1.3 million of his shares in the drug maker to cover a loan that the bank had extended to him.Valeant’s drug pricing has been the subject of Senate committee hearings and it has acknowledged in a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission that it had received subpoenas from the Justice Department and the Federal Trade Commission over its ties to the mail order pharmacy, Philidor, which critics contend allowed the company to charge much higher prices for its drugs.AdvertisementValeant’s shares have tumbled 67 percent over the last three months. Yet they rose nearly 4 percent on Friday after the company’s disclosure, closing at $81.77.AdvertisementGoldman’s move raises fresh questions about how long Mr. Pearson, a former McKinsey consultant who devised the aggressive acquisition strategy that made the drug maker a darling of Wall Street, will remain atop the company he helped build.It was Mr. Pearson who came up with an unusual idea for how a pharmaceutical company should operate: Instead of spending billions on research and development, it could instead buy up competitors in succession, slashing expenses and bolstering its own bottom line.The strategy bolstered Valeant’s stock price — and Mr. Pearson’s own net worth. Forbes recently estimated his wealth at about $1 billion.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Yet that did not stop the executive from using about 20 percent of his shares as collateral for $100 million in loans from Goldman, which the company said he used to finance a variety of expenses, including tax obligations as well as donations to Duke University, his alma mater, and a community swimming pool.The investment bank knows Mr. Pearson well, having advised Valeant on a number of financial transactions, including the $2.3 billion sale of new shares in 2013. It also advised a number of companies that sold to the drug maker, including the eye care products maker Bausch & Lomb.But as the price of Valeant’s shares have tumbled, Goldman decided to call in its loans and forced a sale of Mr. Pearson’s stock in what is known as a margin call. (Last year, the company banned executives from pledging shares to back personal loans.)“Since joining Valeant, I have not sold any shares provided to me as compensation, and it was not my desire that shares be sold now,” Mr. Pearson said in Valeant’s statement. “I have complete confidence in Valeant’s ability to move forward and continue meeting our commitments to patients, doctors and shareholders.”A spokesman for Goldman declined to comment.Questions have also been raised about how long Mr. Pearson would lead the company. Earlier this week, The Wall Street Journal reported that William A. Ackman, the hedge fund manager who is a major investor in Valeant, had considered whether the executive should go.Ultimately, both Mr. Ackman and the board said publicly that they were backing Mr. Pearson as chief executive. Mr. Ackman went so far as to publicly disclose a letter that he had sent to the chief executive, calling him “one of the most shareholder-oriented C.E.O.s I know.”A version of this article appears in print on November 7, 2015, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Valeant’s Chief Forced to Sell Company Shares He Pledged Against Loans.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.