AdvertisementSupported byBy Andrew PollackValeant Pharmaceuticals International said on Wednesday that it had named an interim chief executive as its leader remained in the hospital, where he is being treated for severe pneumonia.The drug maker, which has been under scrutiny for its pricing and distribution policies, said Howard B. Schiller would be its interim chief executive as J. Michael Pearson recovered from his illness. Mr. Schiller, who serves on the company’s board, was Valeant’s chief financial officer for over three years, ending in June.The company said the timing of Mr. Pearson’s return was uncertain and that he would be on medical leave until further notice.Under Mr. Pearson’s leadership, Valeant grew into one of the world’s largest drug companies in less than a decade, but some of its tactics have been criticized — particularly the practice of acquiring old drugs and sharply raising their prices, often by several hundred percent. It also attracted scrutiny for its once-secret relationship with a mail-order pharmacy that bolstered sales of its expensive dermatology drugs. The company’s practices are now being investigated by Congress and federal prosecutors.Valeant announced on Dec. 28 that Mr. Pearson, who also serves as chairman, was on medical leave and said it had created an “office of the chief executive,” which included several executives, to run the company. Valeant also created a board committee, which included Mr. Schiller, to oversee and support the new office of the chief executive.A spokeswoman for Valeant said the office of chief executive was created as an immediate measure, but once it became clear that Mr. Pearson would be on an extended leave, the board decided to name an interim chief executive.Valeant also said on Wednesday that Robert Ingram, its lead independent director, would serve as interim chairman.“We appreciate the expressions of support and concern for Mike’s health that we have received from Valeant’s investors, employees, business partners and other stakeholders,” Mr. Ingram said in a statement. “While Mike’s illness was sudden and unexpected, our strong management team has stepped in to keep our businesses on track and thriving.”The prospect of a prolonged absence for Mr. Pearson has hurt the company’s stock price, which was already being battered by questions about Valeant’s practices and its future. Mr. Pearson has been the architect of Valeant’s business model, which relies on numerous acquisitions of smaller drug companies rather than on its own research and development.However, the appointment of Mr. Schiller, a trusted lieutenant, seemed to calm investors, and shares of Valeant closed 1.5 percent higher.“We think this is the ideal outcome given the less-than-ideal situation,” Neil Maruoka, an analyst at Canaccord Genuity, wrote in a note on Wednesday.Annabel Samimy, an analyst at Stifel, said in a note that it was “a vote of confidence that an integral member of Pearson’s team is being entrusted to execute on the recovery plans.”Still, Irina R. Koffler, an analyst at Mizuho Securities, said in a note issued late Tuesday, before Mr. Schiller’s appointment was announced, that Mr. Pearson’s medical leave had “revealed shortcomings in Valeant’s succession plan, and revealed yet another weakness in the business.” Mr. Pearson, 56, was taken to Morristown Medical Center in New Jersey on Dec. 24. Information provided by the hospital on Dec. 25 indicated that he was transferred elsewhere. His whereabouts and details of his condition have not been disclosed by the company.After a long career in investment banking at Goldman Sachs, Mr. Schiller served as Valeant’s chief financial officer from December 2011 until last June. Mr. Ingram, the interim chairman, is a former GlaxoSmithKline executive and now a general partner at Hatteras Venture Partners in North Carolina.Advertisement