AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael J. de la MercedSAN FRANCISCO — Yahoo, already on its back foot after abandoning one plan to break up the company to pursue another, is closer to facing a new challenge: a potential fight over its own board.A prominent hedge fund that has long criticized Yahoo’s management, Starboard Value, on Wednesday called for changes to the web pioneer’s board and management to go along with a shift in the company’s strategy. Otherwise, the investment firm wrote, it may try to run its own slate of directors.The challenge by Starboard, which has successfully ousted corporate boards in the past, adds yet more pressure on Yahoo as it explores ways to spin off its mainstay Internet businesses. The hedge fund has instead called on the company to sell that division outright.“If the board is unwilling to accept the need for significant change, then an election contest may very well be needed so that shareholders can replace a majority of the board with directors who will represent their best interests and approach the situation with an open mind and a fresh perspective,” Jeffrey C. Smith, Starboard’s managing member and chief executive, said in the letter.In a statement, a representative for Yahoo said that the company was “in the midst of a multiyear transformation” and that it would provide more information on its plans by the time it announces fourth-quarter earnings.Yahoo is once again trying to address its shareholders’ complaints. Last month, Yahoo abandoned a plan to spin off its stake in the Alibaba Group, the Chinese e-commerce giant, into a separate company after the Internal Revenue Service declined to bless the move as tax-free.That could have left the company on the hook for a tax bill of more than $10 billion.Yahoo’s chief executive, Marissa Mayer, instead announced that the company was considering spinning off its core business — search, email and the social media service Tumblr — and leaving the Alibaba stake as a separately traded company. That would be a bet that such a move would keep the tax-free benefits of the original proposed transaction without the risk of a potential challenge by the I.R.S.Yet some activist investors — those who seek to change a company’s strategic direction — have called for various alternatives.As Yahoo’s chief executive, Ms. Mayer acquired more than 20 companies, but ultimately struggled to turn around the web pioneer.The biggest by far is Starboard, which toppled the board of Darden Restaurants, the parent of the Olive Garden restaurant chain, and pushed Staples and Office Depot to merge.Starboard declared again on Wednesday that Yahoo’s best bet was to sell the core business, even if that meant paying a big tax bill. The hedge fund said that several potential buyers — both corporate suitors and private equity financiers — had expressed interest in buying the Internet division.Starboard has argued that Yahoo’s financial performance has continued to slide, which the activist shareholder has attributed to poor management.“We explained over and over again that we did not believe your actions, or lack thereof, would achieve the desired result of stabilizing the business,” Mr. Smith wrote. “Unfortunately, it appears we have been right, and each quarter is worse than the last.”The hedge fund’s threat comes at the beginning of proxy season for corporate America, when shareholder activists can formally begin challenges for board control. According to Yahoo’s shareholder materials, investors can nominate their own director candidates from Feb. 25 to March 26.Yahoo has faced challenges to its board before. Nearly four years ago, the hedge fund magnate Daniel S. Loeb fought for three director seats in a bitter public brawl — and engineered the ouster of Scott Thompson, the company’s chief executive at the time, by highlighting apparent résumé-padding by Mr. Thompson.Mr. Loeb eventually won three seats in a settlement with Yahoo, and later helped bring in Ms. Mayer as chief executive.And in 2008, the veteran financier Carl C. Icahn took a run at the company’s board, dismayed by its reluctance to sell itself to Microsoft. He eventually secured three seats in a compromise with Yahoo.It is unclear how Starboard, which reported owning less than 0.8 percent of Yahoo’s shares as of Sept. 30, would fare. But the hedge fund is counting on widespread investor dissatisfaction with the failure of Ms. Mayer and the company’s board to turn around Yahoo’s fortunes.Still, the reaction of investors on Wednesday was muted, with shares of Yahoo closing slightly down, at $32.16.Advertisement