AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael J. de la MercedWhen the longtime investment banker Paul J. Taubman left Morgan Stanley in late 2012, no one was quite sure what he would do next.Then, over the next two years, he helped spearhead two huge takeover bids — for Verizon and Comcast — climbing the ranks of Wall Street’s deal makers as a virtual one-man mergers advisory business.Now, Mr. Taubman is set to begin the next stage of his career: leading a new publicly traded investment bank formed from the merger of his own budding operations and the 30-year-old advisory arm of the Blackstone Group.The firm, PJT Partners, will begin trading on Thursday, testing whether Mr. Taubman can lead a rapidly assembled team of specialists in mergers, reorganizations and fund-raising for investment funds in the spotlight of the public markets.“This wasn’t on my radar when I left,” Mr. Taubman, 54, said in a telephone interview. “It’s just how the world played out. But I’m excited we’re in this place.”So-called boutique and independent investment banks have gained ground in recent years as longtime deal makers created new firms devoted solely to advising clients on takeovers and other transactions. Unlike the big firms, from which most of those bankers hailed, the new firms do not have huge trading desks or lending arms.Boutiques now make up about 30 percent of the market for merger advisory fees, according to data from Thomson Reuters, having risen fairly steadily from 13 percent in 2000.During that time, a flurry of independent firms — some publicly traded, some not — opened. They include the likes of Evercore Partners, Centerview Partners and Moelis & Company, all formed by Wall Street veterans.PJT is on the smaller side of those firms, with 330 employees and 46 partners. The 167-year-old Lazard, by contrast, has nearly eight times as many people on its staff.But PJT is being led by one of the top-ranked deal makers on Wall Street: Mr. Taubman, a 33-year veteran who presided over multibillion-dollar transactions involving not only the likes of Comcast but also the pharmaceutical giant Pfizer. Perhaps his most important deal, however, was helping to secure an investment for Morgan Stanley from the Mitsubishi UFJ Financial Group of Japan, a crucial lifeline during the financial crisis.The birth of PJT has taken place on an unusually fast timeline. After leaving Morgan Stanley, Mr. Taubman slowly began assembling his own team, including former colleagues like Scott Matlock and Johannes Groeller.But Blackstone’s senior management, including its co-founder Stephen A. Schwarzman, contacted Mr. Taubman late last year asking him to take over the business that became the foundation for what is now a $330 billion investment giant.Mr. Schwarzman, who began his ascent on Wall Street as a mergers banker himself, has spoken fondly of the advisory business. But the division increasingly suffered from conflicts with the firm’s other, much bigger investing operations. Some private equity firms, for example, did not want to hire Blackstone bankers to advise their portfolio companies when their colleagues at the Blackstone-owned GSO hedge fund were taking opposite bets on the debt of those companies.Bringing in Mr. Taubman and spinning off the advisory business would solve that problem.“This is a firm that has been able to achieve leadership positions with arguably one hand tied behind its back,” Mr. Schwarzman said.Soon after Mr. Taubman’s arrival, changes took place even faster at the advisory business, with about half the merger partners departing. In came notables like John Trousdale, a media deal maker from Credit Suisse, and Don Cornwell, a sports banker from Morgan Stanley.In the meantime, the restructuring team, led by Timothy Coleman, and the advisory business’s Park Hill fund-raising group, led by Dan Prendergast, were left alone. But being part of a firm focused entirely on advisory work would bring additional benefits, including regular access to the chief executive for clients.“What you have now is like the beginning of Blackstone,” Mr. Coleman said. “The head of the firm will go on pitches.”In the span of a year, the management team has had to make other decisions big and small, from the name of the firm to new office space in Manhattan and elsewhere around the world.When it begins trading, the question is whether the year of preparation will arm the firm for business, particularly in a still-frothy market for mergers. PJT so far has secured mandates on deals like Altice’s $9.6 billion acquisition of Cablevision and $9.1 billion takeover of the cable provider Suddenlink, as well as the sale of a huge stake in the Economist Group to a wealthy Italian clan.But if the environment for deals cools, the financial restructuring team is meant to provide a useful counterweight, according to PJT executives. And the Park Hill fund-raising business should remain a constant source of revenue.“When we think of this enormous M.&A. market out there, we expect to have real market share gains,” Mr. Taubman said. “Even if it cools a bit, it works to our favor if our other businesses outperform.”Advertisement