OCT. 4, 2015
The Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.00 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.06 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was –0.02 percent.The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week:MONDAYFlorida Department of Transportation, $195.9 million of turnpike revenue bonds. Competitive.Florida, $230.2 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.TUESDAYLouisville/Jefferson County, Ky., $262.5 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.San Francisco Unified School District, $226 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.AdvertisementWashington State, $161.6 million of certificates of participation. Competitive.Yuma Municipal Property Corporation, Ariz., $92.4 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.AdvertisementWEDNESDAYMaui County, Hawaii, $61.3 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Pulaski County Special School District, Ark., $56 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.San Francisco, $128 million of certificates of participation. Competitive.Vermont, $57 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.THURSDAYSan Francisco Unified School District, $72 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.ONE DAY DURING THE WEEKCalifornia Infrastructure Economic Development Bank, $349 million of Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences debt securities. Wells Fargo Securities.California, $445 million of veterans general obligation bonds. Bank of America.Chicago, $1.95 billion of general airport senior lien revenue bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Chicago, $439 million of second lien wastewater transmission revenue refinancing bonds. Ramirez.District of Columbia Water and Sewer Authority, $350 million of subordinate lien revenue bonds. Bank of America.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Grant County Public Utility District No. 2, Wash., $177.9 million of Priest Rapids Hydroelectric Project revenue refinancing bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Illinois Finance Authority, $57.1 million of Plymouth Place revenue bonds. Ziegler.Minnesota Housing Finance Agency, $52.4 million of homeownership finance bonds. RBC Capital Markets.AdvertisementNassau County Interim Finance Authority, N.Y., $118 million of sales tax secured refinancing bonds. Bank of America.Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, $2 billion of revenue bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Orange County Community Facilities District, Calif., $90.9 million of debt securities. Stifel Nicolaus.San Mateo-Foster City School District, Calif., $60 million of general obligation bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Southern Minnesota Municipal Power Agency, $93.3 million of power supply system revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.Spring Branch Independent School District, Tex., $217.8 million of tax refinancing general obligation bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Tarrant County Cultural Education Facilities Finance Corporation, Tex., $50.5 million of retirement facilities revenue bonds. Ziegler.Texas Water Development Board, $790 million of State Water Implementation Revenue Fund bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Wise County Industrial Development Authority, Va., $105 million of Virginia Electric and Power Company solid waste and sewage disposal revenue bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.A version of this article appears in print on October 5, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Treasury Auctions Set for This Week.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.