By MATTHEW GOLDSTEINJAN. 7, 2016
Martin Shkreli, the New York businessman charged by federal prosecutors with defrauding his former hedge fund investors, is worth at least $45 million.Federal prosecutors in Brooklyn disclosed on Thursday in a court filing that a brokerage account containing $45 million had been used to secure a $5 million bond posted by Mr. Shkreli, 32, after his Dec. 17 arrest on securities fraud charges.The brokerage account at E-Trade, the online securities firm, is the first public accounting of just how much money Mr. Shkreli — who last year became the focal point of a national debate over price gouging in the drug industry — has made over his brief career on Wall Street and in the pharmaceutical business.The money and securities in the account should put to rest speculation on how Mr. Shkreli was able to come up with $2 million to buy the only known copy of a recent album by the rap group Wu-Tang Clan.AdvertisementMr. Shkreli, known for raising the price of a decades-old drug by more than 5,000 percent at Turing Pharmaceuticals, a company he used to run, has turned himself into a bit of a media sensation both before and after his arrest.AdvertisementHe has continued to give interviews, post messages on Twitter and stream live videos of himself playing online chess, playing guitar and chatting on YouTube ever since he was arraigned on charges of defrauding investors in two small hedge funds he once ran and later looting Retrophin, another drug company he ran, to pay back those disgruntled investors.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Brash and outspoken, Mr. Shkreli, a Manhattan resident, has portrayed himself as a widely successful stock trader and later a daring corporate executive. But the federal indictment suggests much of his early success was built on lies and misrepresentations.Retrophin eventually ousted Mr. Shkreli, and he has since resigned as chief executive of Turing. In addition, he was ousted from another drug company, KaloBios, that he had recently invested in to try to revive. It has now filed for bankruptcy.The court filing by prosecutors accompanied a restraining order signed by Judge Kiyo A. Matsumoto of Federal District Court in Brooklyn. The order bars any financial institution, including E-Trade, from transferring or conveying any assets in the account.The action by prosecutors settles a lien that authorities had placed on Mr. Shkreli’s account as security for the bond.It is not known whether Mr. Shkreli has assets in other brokerage or bank accounts.One of his lawyers, Baruch Weiss, did not respond to a request for comment.A version of this article appears in print on January 8, 2016, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: Shkreli’s Bond Is Secured by His Brokerage Account.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.