By REUTERSJAN. 7, 2016
WASHINGTON —  The number of Americans filing for jobless benefits fell last week, and layoffs in December were the smallest in more than 15 years, indicating labor market strength even as economic growth appears to have slowed sharply in the fourth quarter.Coming on the heels of a report on Wednesday showing that private payrolls in December recorded their biggest increase in a year, the data on Thursday suggested the economy’s fundamentals remain healthy as it struggles against the headwinds of a strong dollar, bloated inventories and energy sector investment cuts.“You don’t go into a recession with jobless claims and layoffs at these low levels,” said Jacob Oubina, senior economist at RBC Capital Markets in New York.Initial claims for state unemployment benefits dropped by 10,000 to a seasonally adjusted 277,000 for the week ended Jan. 2, the Labor Department said. The decline partly offset the jump the week before, which had lifted claims to their highest level since early July.AdvertisementLast week was the 44th straight week that claims held below the 300,000 mark, which is associated with a healthy labor market. That is the longest run since the early 1970s.AdvertisementThe four-week moving average of claims, considered a better measure of labor market trends as it levels week-to-week volatility, slipped 1,250, to 275,750 last week.
            Weekly number of people who have filed for unemployment benefits for the first time.        400,0004-week moving average300 2001000ASONDJJAN. 7, 2016
The closely watched monthly federal employment report will be released on Friday.Jesse Hurwitz, an economist at Barclays in New York, said the data “continue to indicate that U.S. labor markets are fundamentally healthy.”“We expect a similar read from tomorrow’s December employment report,” he said.Should the December employment report meet expectations, it could calm fears over the United States economy and ease some pressure on global equity markets, which have suffered a sell-off this week on concerns about the impact of slowing growth in China on the world economy.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Weak reports on United States manufacturing, construction spending, auto sales and export growth prompted economists this week to slash their fourth-quarter gross domestic product growth estimates by as much as one percentage point to as low as a 0.5 percent annual pace. The economy grew at a 2 percent annual rate in the third quarter.In a separate report, the global outplacement consulting firm Challenger, Gray & Christmas said employers based in the United States announced plans to cut 23,622 jobs in December, the fewest since June 2000. That was down 24 percent from November and the lowest December job cut total on record.For all of 2015, announced layoffs totaled 598,510, the most since 2011. Job cuts last year were mostly driven by the energy sector, which has been roiled by a collapse in oil prices. Layoffs in the military were also a factor.There were 94,409 announced layoffs in the energy sector last year, nearly seven times the job cuts announced in this industry in 2014. The United States Army announced plans to cut 57,000 troops and civilian personnel from its ranks.“Low job cut announcements, layoff rates and jobless claims point to companies seeking to retain workers in a tighter labor market environment,” said John Ryding, chief economist at RDQ Economics in New York.A version of this list appears in print on January 8, 2016, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: Job Market Remains Strong Even as U.S. Economy Slows.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.