By BILL VLASICNOV. 6, 2015
DETROIT —  The United Automobile Workers union reached a tentative agreement on Friday on a new contract for more than 52,000 workers at Ford Motor Company.Workers at General Motors concluded voting on a proposed four-year deal. With this and a tentative deal in place at Ford, the union is nearing the conclusion of groundbreaking labor talks that began this summer with the Detroit carmakers.The first company to settle with the union was Fiat Chrysler Automobiles. Workers there rejected the initial contract proposal last month, but the U.A.W. leadership resumed bargaining with the company and won better terms for union members.The key component of the revised Fiat Chrysler agreement was a provision that entry-level workers would eventually achieve wage parity with long-term employees. When Fiat Chrysler workers voted to accept, it set a template for G.M. and Ford.AdvertisementOn Friday, the union said it had a tentative agreement with Ford that included “substantial economic gains” and job security for workers.AdvertisementWhile no details were released, the union said the contract would provide both entry-level employees and veteran workers with pay increases that are probably similar to what workers received at Fiat Chrysler and G.M.“This agreement is significant for our members in that it creates a clear path for economic advancement for active members and rewards veteran employees for their sacrifices in recent years,” said Jimmy Settles, head of the union’s Ford department.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The union’s leadership council will meet on Monday in Detroit to consider the deal. If it gains the council’s support, the contract will then be put to a vote of the workers.Ford did not comment on details of the agreement, but an executive said it was beneficial to both the company and its workers.“The agreement, if ratified, will help lead Ford Motor Company, our employees and our communities into the future,” said John Fleming, Ford’s chief of global manufacturing and labor affairs.The 52,000 union members at G.M. had voted all week on their proposed agreement, which calls for all workers to receive raises as well as an $8,000 signing bonus.Like the Fiat Chrysler deal, the G.M. agreement calls for entry-level employees to get a series of raises that, over time, will bring them close to the $29-an-hour wage of veteran workers.The union announced late on Friday that 55 percent of the members at G.M. had approved the contract. However, the deal will not formally be ratified until after union leaders meet with skilled trades workers who voted against the deal.A version of this article appears in print on November 7, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: A Tentative Deal for Ford Autoworkers.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.