AdvertisementSupported byCommon SenseBy James B. StewartAs January goes, so goes the entire market year.That’s probably the best-known aphorism from the Stock Trader’s Almanac, an annual compilation of dates, statistics and advice for investors first published in 1968 by Yale Hirsch. A prolific author of pithy investment advice, Mr. Hirsch also created the strategy often referred to as “Sell in May and go away,” and he identified a year-end seasonal “Santa Claus” rally.His so-called January barometer posits that a decline in the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index in January means that major averages will also end that calendar year with a decline, and vice versa if stocks rise during the month.Given the global plunge in stock market prices this week — United States and European shares dropped sharply on Thursday in the face of market turmoil in China — it may be a grim year for stock investors. With the S.&P. 500 already down more than 5 percent in just the first four days of trading of the year, this is shaping up as one of the worst Januarys ever. (In January 2009, the index declined 8.6 percent.) If the selling keeps up through the end of the month, the almanac suggests investors should sell stocks and wait for the inevitable further decline.If only it were that simple.It’s tempting to dismiss the January barometer as just another statistical coincidence, along with other market predictors that have enjoyed periodic bursts of popularity, such as the Super Bowl indicator (if the winning team is from the old National Football League, now the National Football Conference, stocks will rise); the Chinese zodiac (years of the rabbit and dragon are best for stocks); or the old hemline indicator (skirt lengths shorten during market upswings and fall to the floor during downturns).The impulse when the stock market falls hard for a few days in a row is to do something but it probably doesn’t make much sense to overhaul an investment strategy based on a blip of market activity.But Mr. Hirsch’s son Jeff, who now runs the publishing and investment business his father founded, calculates that the January barometer has been right 87.7 percent of the time since 1950 (ignoring basically flat years) and 75 percent of the time including all years. He said the percentages were roughly the same extending back to 1938. He also examined all other months of the year, and none displayed any predictive capacity. (April was next best, but showed only a modest correlation with subsequent stock movements, he said.)Jeff Hirsch posits that this is not simply coincidence. He said his father’s insight was that new political agendas — the convening of a newly elected Congress, the inauguration of a president, the State of the Union address — emerge in January.Traders react to them immediately, usually with considerable foresight, and then the economic implications unfold throughout the year, confirming the traders’ January instincts. “Traders and analysts react to the political agenda, as well as what the new year looks like based on last year and the state of the world economy,” Mr. Hirsch told me this week. “I think that’s the root of it.”Especially ominous this year is the Almanac’s “First Five Days” indicator, which posits that in presidential election years, the market’s performance during the first five days of trading will determine whether the market ends up or down for the year. Mr. Hirsch said that indicator had been accurate in 14 of the last 16 such years.But such causation in the stock market is impossible to prove or disprove, unlike, say, the link between smoking and lung cancer.China’s economy is faltering, prompting concerns that are now shaking global stock markets.“You can’t possibly prove this is causal or even predictive, which might be a better concept,” said Rebecca Goldin, a mathematics professor at George Mason University and director of research for Stats.org. “That doesn’t mean it isn’t, but you’d need to know much more.”She pointed out that a 75 or 87 percent correlation sounds impressive, but not if the stock market goes up every year, in which case it is meaningless. In fact, the stock market does tend to rise more often than it falls: It has gained in 21 of the last 30 years, or 70 percent of the time. So simply predicting every year that the stock market would go up would have been nearly as accurate as the 75 percent rate achieved by the January barometer when all years were included.Moreover, using January to predict the outcome for the full calendar year incorporates January’s results, which further biases the prediction.Given the vast number of variables that might be used to predict stock prices, it’s possible that even a high degree of accuracy of the January barometer is a purely random outcome.“If you have a truly random variable, and there are, say, 60 million possibilities, it’s impossible not to find some pattern somewhere,” said Nassim Nicholas Taleb, a professor of risk engineering at New York University, author of “The Black Swan” and a former derivatives trader on Wall Street. “You might well find a correlation between changes in your grandmother’s blood pressure and stock prices. But that’s a spurious correlation.”He added, “It’s surprising we don’t have more weird correlations, given the vast number of possible variables and the large number of markets we have.”Professor Goldin said that if you flipped enough coins every year, you would most likely find one that predicted stock prices with 100 percent accuracy. “You could call that a magic coin,” she said. “It has an impressive correlation looking backward. The problem is, it wouldn’t give you any sense of how well it’s going to do going forward.”That seems to have been an issue lately with the January barometer, whose accuracy in recent years has been slipping. Over the last 10 years, it gave false negative indications in 2014, 2010, 2009 and 2005, and a false positive in 2011.That’s a success rate of just 50 percent, which is what you would expect from a coin toss.And the magnitude of a January decline doesn’t seem to be a factor. In 2009, after a dreadful start, the S.&P. 500 gained more than 23 percent for the year. In two of the four years since 1950 when the January decline was greater than 6 percent, the index ended the year with a gain.That has not curbed popular demand for Mr. Hirsch’s insights. He has been deluged with media requests this week and has been making television appearances talking about the almanac and the January barometer. Most likely for evolutionary reasons, the human mind looks for patterns, and it is uncomfortable with randomness.Over the last two and a half years, the oil industry experienced its deepest downturn since at least the 1990s.“There’s a reason people love almanacs,” Professor Taleb said. “They purport to find order in random events, like weather or the seasons. People have an irrational belief in them.”“Our brains are hard-wired to find causality,” Professor Goldin said. “That’s especially true for the stock market. The stock market may not be entirely random, but there’s enough about it that is to make it unpredictable. The desire to find a pattern is really strong because if you’re right, it could make you rich.”(Some, like the mathematician and quantitative hedge fund manager James Simons, do seem to have found such patterns, and Forbes estimates Mr. Simons’s net worth at $14 billion. But as far as is known, his formulas cannot be reduced to a single catchy sentence.)Even Mr. Hirsch does not rely entirely on the January barometer, which he said was just one of many technical and fundamental factors he takes into consideration when making investment decisions. “I try not to be too one-dimensional, and use all the tools available,” he said. Although he’s not nearly as bullish this year as he was last year, “I’m not throwing in the towel yet,” he said.Professor Taleb said that despite this week’s decline in share prices, he would not be buying United States stocks now because of high valuations, rising interest rates and the continuing plunge in commodity prices. And while that decision has nothing to do with a bearish forecast from the January barometer, he doesn’t entirely dismiss such market maxims.“One thing you learn as a trader is, don’t bet against the folk wisdom,” he said. “The odds are this is a purely random outcome, but sometimes there’s a kernel of truth in these sayings.”Advertisement