By ELIZABETH OLSONJAN. 7, 2016
Last year saw a record number of law firm mergers and acquisitions – 91 — and the largest-ever law firm merger, according to a newly released tally from the legal consulting company Altman Weil’s online tracking service.Altman Weil’s MergerLine, which has been compiling the numbers for nine years, found that the combinations in 2015 exceeded the previous record of 88 reported in 2013, as the law firms look to expand their share of the legal market.Such combinations “are a primary strategy to acquire new business in a market where demand is flat or constrained,” said Ward Bower, an Altman Weil principal. “The record number of deals in 2015 is a reflection of the intense competition among law firms for new work, and we expect the market to remain hot in 2016.”Also last year, the multinational law firm Dentons announced a merger of its 2,500 lawyers with a giant Chinese firm, Dacheng, with 3,500 lawyers. But that was only the first of eight combinations last year between Dentons and other legal entities in the United States and other parts of the world. Once the deals are completed, its head count will be around 7,100 lawyers.AdvertisementDentons, which will have 3,000 more lawyers than the next largest firm, Mr. Bower said, “is charting new territory with the degree and speed of their expansion.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Also last year, the firm combined with the Australian firm Gadens, which had 500 lawyers; McKenna Long & Aldridge, with 300 lawyers; Singapore firm, Rodyk, with 200 lawyers; OPF Partners in Luxembourg, with 34 lawyers; and RK Adler in New York City, with six lawyers. Also last month, Dentons announced two acquisitions in Latin America: Cardenas & Cardenas, with 50 lawyers, in Bogota, Colombia, and the 25-lawyer firm Lopez Velarde Heftye & Soria in Mexico City.AdvertisementWith Dentons’s business organization as what is known as a verein, which is an association of independent legal entities, Mr. Bower predicted that “it will be challenging for them to create and maintain a unified vision and mission for their brand.”Such concerns did not hamper other major law firms from combining with law firms operating abroad. For example, DLA Piper, with 4,200 lawyers, added Canadian firm, Davis L.L.P, which has 260 lawyers. And Morgan Lewis & Bockius, a law firm with more than 1,800 lawyers, acquired Stamford Law Corporation, an 80-lawyer firm in Singapore. In the United States, five major firms added to their ranks by acquiring law firms in Chicago, including Nixon Peabody, which acquired Ungaretti & Harris, with 102 lawyers.Over all, 28 percent of all law firms acquired in 2015 had headquarters in the southern United States, with the largest concentration in Florida and Texas. Midwestern firms were next in line, with 23 percent of the acquisitions in the heartland, especially in Illinois. Nineteen percent of acquired firms were in the Middle Atlantic states, with a focus on New York.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.