AdvertisementSupported byBy Tara Siegel BernardEmployees who work for private businesses in New Jersey are one step closer to receiving a relatively low-cost retirement savings plan, which would be run by the state but offered through employers.Though legislation received final passage on Thursday and was supported by several Republicans in both houses of the Legislature, it is still unclear whether Gov. Chris Christie will sign the bill.The New Jersey Legislature’s action, known as the Secure Choice Savings Program, comes just months after the Obama administration issued guidelines to encourage states to create such plans. That was part of a broader initiative to provide more choices for the nearly 68 million workers who do not have access to employer-based retirement plans like 401(k)’s or 403(b)’s.The New Jersey program was closely modeled after a tax-deferred savings plan being constructed in Illinois, covering as many as 1.2 million workers. Under New Jersey’s version, employers with at least 25 workers that have been in business for two years — and that do not already offer a retirement plan — would be required to enroll workers into an individual retirement account run by the state. Workers can, however, opt out.“The voluntary program will be convenient, low-cost and portable, so that employees can take it with them if they change jobs,” Steve M. Sweeney, president of the New Jersey Senate, said in a statement. “It will make use of professional investors but it won’t cost the taxpayers anything because it is self-sustaining.”The bill, approved by the state’s Assembly in December and by the Senate on Thursday, now goes to Governor Christie.Because the bill was adopted at the end of a two-year legislative session, he must sign the bill by Jan. 19 for it to become law. If he does not sign by then, the legislation would die. Employee enrollment must begin within 24 months if it does become law.A spokesman for the governor said he would not comment until he had adequate time to review the bill.Small businesses, which employ nearly half of all private-sector workers, often do not have the time and resources to set up plans for their workers. Though lower-cost options are emerging, small employers often pay far more for plans than larger companies.AARP, a lobbying group for older Americans, which has pressed for state-run savings plans across the country, estimated that 1.7 million workers in New Jersey do not have access to a plan at work.Under the program, employees would be automatically enrolled in an I.R.A., with five investment options to choose from. If workers do not choose their own contribution level, 3 percent of their paycheck will be deducted and they can save up to $5,500 annually, the regular I.R.A. contribution limits, or $6,500 for workers over 50.Employees would pay no more than 0.6 percent of their savings for investment and administrative fees.The goal is to have the fees cover the costs to run the program, but the state may pay administrative costs until the program can sustain itself.Declan J. O’Scanlon Jr., a New Jersey assemblyman who describes himself as a conservative Republican who is generally against government mandates, said he supported the savings program. He said he believed it was consistent with his principles because it would help clear a path for lower- and middle-income workers to begin saving, which will help them become more self-sufficient in retirement.“This would make participation dramatically easier for both employees and employers,” Mr. O’Scanlon said, adding that, as a small-business owner himself, he found the idea appealing. “It is designed so that it doesn’t cost taxpayers anything.”Employers, who are not permitted to provide matching contributions, will handle payroll deductions but will not hold a fiduciary role, nor will they have any other legal, investment or administrative responsibilities, according to the legislation.If employers fail to enroll employees who have not opted out, however, they may be fined. Employers with fewer than 25 employers are not required to participate, but can opt in. Part-time employees can also participate.A seven-member board, which will include the state’s treasurer or an appointee, would set up and run the program.The New Jersey Business & Industry Association, a small-business advocacy group, opposed the legislation. In a letter to members of the New Jersey Senate, the group said it believed the program should be voluntary for employers.The New Jersey Chinese-American Chamber of Commerce, the African American Chamber of Commerce of New Jersey, the Asian-Indian Chamber of Commerce and the New Jersey Main Street Alliance, among others groups, have voiced support for the program.“The only cost the employer might incur is payroll deduction,” said Douglas Johnston, AARP’s interim state director for New Jersey. “Secure Choice is providing a leg up for small businesses because they are providing a retirement benefit at virtually no cost to them.”Advertisement