
Corner Office By                     
 ADAM BRYANT
 
JAN. 9, 2016
This interview with Christopher Cabrera, founder and C.E.O. of Xactly, which provides employee-incentive software, was conducted and condensed by Adam Bryant.Q. What were your early influences?A. I was the fourth of five kids, and I learned that you have to fight for everything, including dinner. Once the food was on the table, if you didn’t dive in, you were going to go hungry.My mom was always a stay-at-home mom and was the ultimate optimist about what we could be, and how smart we were, and how good-looking we were, and how we were always the best. Hearing that drumbeat in your brain for years gives you a certain confidence as you go out into the world.My dad was a serial entrepreneur, and he always bootstrapped his companies. The family finances and the business finances were kind of one. Every single summer as I was growing up, I worked at his companies.AdvertisementSome of the best lessons I’ve learned came from my father, in terms of the way he treated his employees. On the day before Thanksgiving, we’d load up his station wagon with frozen turkeys, and we would deliver them to each one of his employees.How else have your parents influenced your leadership style?What I love about the big family I grew up in was that we could argue and fight around the dinner table, debating everything you could imagine, from the constellations to national politics. We’d have these lively debates and people would get emotional, and then we’d all go back to being normal. So I’m very comfortable with my executive team being super open and communicative, and apolitical as much as possible.What did you do after college?I started a security guard company with my dad during my senior year. It gave me instant managerial experience at a time I probably didn’t deserve it. I was dealing with personnel issues and hiring people and firing people. It was kind of a crazy, fun experience. But I cringe when I think back on some of the things I did, in terms of poor leadership.After a few years, I wanted to do something different, and I joined Silicon Graphics, which was the hot company in Silicon Valley during the ’90s. I spent seven years there, and that’s where I became a manager.I had a seasoned boss who was a wonderful mentor, and he really helped me with hiring and understanding how to create diverse teams. The company was growing quickly, and hiring was a big part of my job.AdvertisementI needed to hire eight people for my team. I was about halfway through, and I had one of my normal sit-downs with my boss, who was African-American, and he said, “I want to go over your last four hires with you. Do you realize that they’re all basically white 23-year-old men? This isn’t a fraternity.”I was so embarrassed because I certainly hadn’t done that on purpose. The lesson was that we often just do what we’re comfortable with. The thing I learned that day, and every day since, was the power of diversity and the power of bringing people together from different cultural backgrounds and experiential backgrounds.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.I distinctly remember him saying to me, “How interesting do you think your team meetings will be when you have 12 guys that are 23, white, with the same background? Do you think that that’s really going to be a challenging and rich environment where you’re learning?”And I just remember thinking, “Yeah, that’s crazy. Why would I want that?” It really stuck with me.Other leadership lessons?Earlier in my career, if somebody would come in all worked up about something with a colleague, I had a tendency to want to jump in and get involved. I realized that I was becoming part of the problem, and almost giving credibility to the drama. In most cases it was usually petty stuff, and the energy we spent on it didn’t help move the ball forward in the business.I learned to stay above the drama and to address the real issue behind the problem. I also think that when people realize you’re not going to go there, it tends to happen less.What else?We talk a lot about reinventing ourselves. I’m constantly in front of the company explaining to them, “The skills that I had to take this company from zero to $20 million are very different than the skills that are going to take this company from $100 million to $200 million. Every six months, I’ve had to reinvent myself, and so what are you doing to reinvent yourself? And we’ll give you the tools you need to help you do that.”We have to just keep reinventing as time goes on, and part of that reinventing is constantly challenging each other about what could we do better, and what could we do differently.What do you look for in job candidates?I’m trying to understand if you would be additive to our culture or just take away from the culture. We’ve had people who come in and say, “Hey, this is great. I love this place.” But then they don’t take part in a lot of the things, they don’t help foster the culture, and that’s the quickest way to kill it.AdvertisementWhat questions do you ask?I’ll ask for some examples of where you’ve failed. I want to get a sense of whether you are a risk taker. You interview people sometimes and they’ll wear it like a badge of honor — “I haven’t failed at anything.” You just know right away that’s not going to work.I also ask what their boss would say about them. I ask them what they think they’re great at. I ask them what they’re most proud of in their career so far.And I ask them what irritates them. I’m pretty even-keeled, and it takes a lot to get me riled up. That gets back to the ability to play above the drama. When you get petty responses, it gives you a sense of that person’s annoyance threshold. I want that threshold to be pretty high.Each week, Adam Bryant talks with top executives about leadership. Follow him on Twitter: @nytcorneroffice. This interview has been edited for space and clarity.A version of this article appears in print on January 10, 2016, on Page BU2 of the New York edition with the headline: Learning to Stay Above the Drama.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »