
Deal Professor By                     
STEVEN DAVIDOFF SOLOMON

NOV. 6, 2015
Walgreens Boots Alliance is in a buying mood, having just agreed to buy Rite Aid for $9.4 billion. The question is whether antitrust authorities in the United States will permit the deal to go forward.It is a concern that was clearly on the minds of the two companies, as they have negotiated certain rights in the merger agreement to deal with the government.Rite Aid obtained agreement to a “hell or high water” provision that requires Walgreens to make certain dispositions of stores and other assets to satisfy regulators.Walgreens, however, negotiated limitations on how far the provision can go to obtain regulatory approval. There are three limits.AdvertisementFirst, Walgreens is not required to dispose of more than 1,000 stores of the combined entity.Second, Walgreens is not required to make any dispositions that are set forth on a schedule attached to the merger agreement. This schedule is not publicly disclosed, and consistent with practice, it was not disclosed by Walgreens or Rite Aid.AdvertisementLet’s stop here. Walgreens is required to make certain dispositions, but we don’t know what they are. This is arguably material information, and the failure to publicly disclose it seems to me to be skirting the line on the securities law requirements.Shares of Rite Aid fell about 8 percent after the disclosure of this agreement, and the failure to disclose this information and the uncertainty it creates may be one reason for that.Another reason may be the third set of limitations. Here, it is worth setting forth the full language from the merger agreement (with the warning that this may make your head hurt). The agreement states that Walgreens will not have to make any dispositions or sales to satisfy regulators, except that:(b) such Divestiture Actions as would not, individually or in the aggregate, result in an impact exceeding $100 million in the aggregate. . . . as a result of (x) the divestiture of non-earnings generating assets, properties or businesses, in each case with such impact calculated as the fair market value of such assets, properties or businesses so divested or (y) the divestiture of earnings generating assets, properties or businesses, or any other adverse impact on the assets, businesses, liabilities or financial condition of Parent, the Company or their respective subsidiaries (including, with respect to Parent, the Surviving Corporation), in each case with such impact calculated by multiplying any reduction of Adjusted EBITDA on an annual basis resulting therefrom by twelve (12) (any or all of the actions set forth in clauses (a) and (b) of this proviso, a “Required Antitrust Action”) . . . .So what this seems to be saying is that Walgreens will not be required to dispose of more than $100 million worth of assets that do not generate revenue.In addition, for assets generating revenue, Walgreens is not required to dispose of the business if it produces 12 times earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, or Ebitda above $100 million. These two categories are lumped together, so the $100 million is in total. Let’s just say that this is not the best drafted provision – the qualification on Ebitda modifies both clauses. But this is the best reading I have.A spokesman for Walgreens declined to comment on the merger agreement.If antitrust clearance is not obtained, Walgreens must pay a termination fee of $325 million.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Here’s where it gets interesting. The agreement provides that Walgreens cannot make any significant acquisitions for the first eight months that the deal is pending regulatory approval. After, Walgreens can make other acquisitions, but if the Rite Aid deal fails for antitrust purposes, then a $650 million fee is payable.The language is a bit unclear again, but it appears that Walgreens is in essence prohibited from any acquisitions of retail pharmacy operations while the deal is pending.Walgreens was already an active buyer, purchasing Duane Reade, USA Drugs and Kerr Drug. It means that Walgreens negotiated this deal despite knowing that the consolidation in its industry was not yet done and that it wanted the latitude to make more acquisitions.AdvertisementInvestors apparently thought that the requirements to make dispositions was favorable to Walgreens, giving it the ability to take a stand against regulators without having to make too many dispositions beyond the 1,000-store requirement (although 1,000 stores does seem a lot given that they have 12,800 combined). The wild card is the nondisclosed matters.The question, of course, is why Rite Aid would agree to this if indeed it is overly favorable to Walgreens. Rite Aid is a smaller player and has not been performing well. It is probably urgently seeking an acquirer and so has less negotiating leverage than it may want. These negotiations, meanwhile, are going on in a politically sensitive industry that will culminate in an election year. Walgreens has negotiated for maximum discretion.And so, that is yet another reason the Rite Aid stock price fell. In the end, this deal will be at the mercy of the antitrust authorities, who will decide the limits on how big these companies can become. And it appears that Walgreens will be holding the cards.Steven Davidoff Solomon is a professor of law at the University of California, Berkeley. His columns can be found at nytimes.com/dealbook. Follow@stevendavidoff on Twitter.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »