By MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDJAN. 11, 2016
Since leaving IMG, the sports and media powerhouse where he was a top executive, George Pyne has kept busy, starting an entertainment investment firm a year ago that has already struck deals with the likes of the National Football League.Now, he is teaming up with some big names in business — including Daniel Gilbert, the owner of the Cleveland Cavaliers, and the advertising giant WPP — to extend his new venture’s reach even further.Mr. Pyne is expected to announce on Monday that his firm, Bruin Sports Capital, has set up Courtside Ventures, a new $35 million venture investment firm to be based in Detroit and New York that is meant to invest in nascent sports and media technology start-ups.“The way people consume their passion points is changing from a media standpoint,” he said in a telephone interview. “If you’re a business and you’re in sports, you want to be in the middle of the change, or the world will pass you by.”AdvertisementIt is his latest effort to broaden Bruin’s reach as he embarks on his latest career turn as an investor. Bruin’s growth has been closely tied to Mr. Pyne’s two-decade career in sports, during which he rose from a sports marketing business to become the chief operating officer of Nascar.AdvertisementYet his most prominent position to date was at IMG, where he was president of the agency’s sports and entertainment practice and helped build up a formidable presence in college athletics. He left in 2014, after IMG was acquired by the Hollywood giant William Morris Endeavor.In less than a year, Mr. Pyne raised $250 million in capital to set up Bruin, a venture aimed at buying and investing in sports, media and lifestyle businesses. Formally unveiled last January, the new company took control of the N.F.L.’s hospitality business along with RedBird Capital Partners and the league’s 32 owners. (The newly independent unit, On Location Experiences, will focus on, among other things, high-end private concerts, a business backed in part by Jon Bon Jovi.)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.And late last year, Bruin bought a sports marketing agency, Engine Shop.Now, Mr. Pyne is setting up what he calls a third platform for Bruin, investing in all manner of early-stage start-ups that can mesh with sports and entertainment. Courtside’s focuses will include virtual reality, data analytics and e-sports ventures, according to Deepen Parikh, a partner at the new venture firm.“Even though these may not initially be in sports, we feel that the entertainment network we’ve put together will allow us to break into sports,” he said.In setting up Courtside, Mr. Pyne has again turned to deep-pocketed, well-connected partners. Mr. Gilbert, who made his billions by founding Quicken Loans, was one of the initial investors in Bruin Sports Capital. And so was WPP, the world’s biggest advertising company.Mr. Pyne credits Mr. Gilbert and Martin Sorrell, chief executive of WPP, with helping to come up with the idea of Courtside. The two men, he said, stressed the importance of staying on top of the changing technology landscape.“Sports remains a fundamental interest for our clients, the media and our people,” Mr. Sorrell said in a statement. “So, we are delighted to participate in Courtside, particularly with Dan Gilbert and George Pyne.”A version of this article appears in print on January 11, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Bruin Sports to Team Up With Others as Investor.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.