By SAM ROBERTSJAN. 10, 2016
Harry F. Mariani, who with his brother made a fortune introducing Americans to Italian wines, first through the chilled, sparkling sweet red Riunite promoted with a ubiquitous  slogan, died on Tuesday in Huntington, N.Y. He was 78.Joe Janish, a spokesman for Banfi Vintners, confirmed the death but did not specify a cause.Banfi was founded in 1919 on Spring Street in Lower Manhattan by Mr. Mariani’s father, John Sr., and three of his brothers, who named it for an aunt, Teodolinda Banfi, an amateur vintner.Harry and his brother, John, imported their first 100 cases of Riunite Lambrusco, produced by an Italian cooperative in the Emilia-Romagna region, in 1967. Banfi, the sole importer, promoted the wine with the slogan “Riunite on ice, that’s nice.” (Since 2012 the slogan is “Just Chill.”). By 1973 it was the nation’s largest-selling imported brand.“Growing up, John and I loved cold drinks — iced tea, orange juice and black-and-white sodas,” Harry Mariani told New York magazine in 1982. “We knew we wanted a light wine that was fruity and effervescent, that started out sweet and finished dry, and that was chillable.”AdvertisementRiunite’s television advertisements appealed largely to young women, a cohort that eroded when the legal drinking age was raised. The brand also faced new competition when wine coolers proliferated. But the company overcame a slump: In 1984, imports of Riunite peaked at 11.2 million cases and accounted for 27 percent of all foreign wines sold in the United States.AdvertisementWith their success as importers, the brothers decided to branch out and buy their own vineyards. They began distributing finer wines, and by the mid-1990s Banfi was the nation’s leading wine importer.“We were distributors, and there were always problems when you’re dealing with a product that you buy and you market — glass problems, filtering problems, shipping problems,” Mr. Mariani told The New York Times in 1995. “The reason John and I started producing wine was that you like to create your own thing, and see it from infancy to final product.”“It was the growth of Riunite Lambrusco from 1967 through the ’70s and early ’80s that got us to the point where we had financial wherewithal to invest in vineyards,” he said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In the late 1970s, the brothers bought 2,000 acres of what became the Castello Banfi estate in Montalcino, Italy, between Siena and Monte Amiata. They also bought a mid-18th-century winery in Piedmont, renaming it Vigne Regali. (Is is now known as Banfi Piemonte.) On Long Island, in Old Brookville, they purchased a 127-acre estate that had belonged to F. W. Lundy, the Brooklyn restaurateur, and transformed into a vineyard.Harry Francis Mariani was born in Manhattan on Jan. 21, 1937, the son of John F. Mariani Sr. and the former Eva Barr. He graduated from Garden City High School on Long Island and received a bachelor of arts degree from Colgate University in Hamilton, N.Y., in 1959.He is survived by his wife, the former Anne Marie Goetz; their daughters, Ginny Kitt and Katy Goodrich; their sons, James and John Mariani; eight grandchildren; his sister, Joan Whiting; and his brother, John, the company’s chairman emeritus.Mr. Mariani and his brother assumed control of the company in 1964. Harry was named president; John, chairman and chief executive officer.At his death, Harry Mariani was president emeritus. His son James and John’s daughter Cristina are the chief executives.Wine, Mr. Mariani recalled, was always a part of his life, even when he was a young boy.“I had wine with meals,” he told The Times in 1995. “It was never taboo. My father would always dilute it with water for me.”AdvertisementAnd typically, at mealtime, Harry Mariani would toast: “A tavola non s’invecchia,” which loosely translated means, “When dining at the table with family and friends, one does not grow old.”A version of this article appears in print on January 11, 2016, on Page A21 of the New York edition with the headline: Harry F. Mariani, Who Introduced Americans to Lambrusco, Dies at 78.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.