By NOAM SCHEIBERJAN. 10, 2016
WASHINGTON —  It has been nearly 18 years since Hillary Clinton used the term “vast right-wing conspiracy” to describe the conservative forces arrayed against her husband’s administration. But the suspicion about right-wing plotting remains as current on the left as, well, Mrs. Clinton.The most recent cause for concern is a case the Supreme Court will hear on Monday, Friedrichs v. California Teachers Association, which could lay the legal groundwork for depriving public sector unions of hundreds of millions of dollars in revenue.“Yet again, right-wing donors and their wealthy, special interest allies have united to attack working families,” David Brock, a founder or board member of several liberal organizations and a supporter of Mrs. Clinton, said by email. “This week they’re waging their fight at the Supreme Court, but these donors have been using their unlimited resources for years to push an agenda across all three branches of our government.”The challenge to nearly 40 years of legal precedent on public sector union fees has shined a particular spotlight on a group of libertarian-minded public interest lawyers known as the Center for Individual Rights, which has organized the case but is little known outside Washington and right-of-center legal circles.AdvertisementThe center is backed financially by a number of prominent conservative foundations, and the case has generated considerable interest on the right. Conservative organizations and politicians, some of whom have received funding from Koch Industries and Charles and David Koch, have submitted more than one dozen amicus briefs in support of the plaintiffs.AdvertisementStill, the question of an organized plot is more complicated than it first appears.According to the center’s president, Terence J. Pell, the inspiration for the case was a 2012 ruling that suggested the Supreme Court might be open to striking down arrangements that force public sector workers to pay fees, known as “agency fees,” if they decline to join the unions that bargain on their behalf.By early 2013, the center, working with lawyers at Jones Day, had generated a list of possible plaintiffs by essentially cold-calling teachers and organizations who appeared to oppose public sector unions. “Within a week or two weeks, we had 15 people who were determined to do this,” Mr. Pell said. The center filed its complaint on behalf of 10 teachers and one of those organizations, the Christian Educators Association International, that April.The Center for Individual Rights traces its history to the late 1980s, after conservative philanthropists and activists had spent years lamenting the ineffectiveness of the right’s public interest law firms.In a report to the conservative Scaife Foundation around 1980, the lawyer Michael J. Horowitz concluded that the existing groups were too timid in their tactics, choosing to write amicus briefs rather than litigate cases; too closely aligned with business; and, in his view, insufficiently principled and ideological.“While the business supporters of the first generation of public interest law thought in terms of discrete cases, Horowitz thought in terms of long-term political conflict,” wrote the Johns Hopkins political scientist Steven M. Teles in his book “The Rise of the Conservative Legal Movement.” Mr. Horowitz “judged cases by whether they weakened the institutional entrenchment of liberalism, and strengthened conservative organizations and causes.”Taking a page from the liberal playbook, Mr. Horowitz and others recommended that conservative donors support groups similar in their ambition and structure to public interest organizations, like the American Civil Liberties Union and the NAACP Legal Defense Fund, that had enjoyed great success in the 1960s and 1970s by actively looking for clients with potentially precedent-setting cases, then pouring resources into litigating them.The Center for Individual Rights became one of the earliest public interest groups to grow out of this reassessment, focusing initially on defending academic free speech amid what it considered to be overweening political correctness. It began to attack affirmative action policies a few years later. It litigated a handful of cases before the Supreme Court.Advertisement“The A.C.L.U. in our view was a great organization for a long time — it defended individual rights across the board without regard to the content of the views expressed,” Mr. Pell said in an interview. “We thought that there was room for a public interest law firm to pick up the original A.C.L.U. mission and amplify it.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In the early 1990s, the group created an “Academic Freedom Defense Fund” that raised money from conservative donors to defend professors and students who clashed with campus liberals, cases that generated enormous publicity. That level of strategic savvy foreshadowed the more recent efforts of conservative political and policy groups.Foremost among them is the political network of the Koch brothers, which includes about 300 conservative donors, many of whom meet at least annually. The network has vowed to spend nearly $900 million dollars during the 2016 election cycle.The Center for Individual Rights is embedded in the world of prominent conservative political donors as well, having received large contributions from the Sarah Scaife Foundation, the John M. Olin Foundation, and the Lynde and Harry Bradley Foundation, according to filings with the Internal Revenue Service.Many of the center’s donors contribute to other groups that have been active in trying to curtail union activity. The Bradley Foundation’s president, Michael Grebe, has been one of the most important supporters for Gov. Scott Walker of Wisconsin. The foundation has given millions to the Wisconsin Policy Research Institute, a think tank closely aligned with Mr. Walker, who helped roll back public unions’ collective bargaining rights after taking office in 2011.Mr. Grebe said his organization has had an interest in challenging public employee unions for about 15 years, supporting groups that do so on the policy level. He said support for legal action in the same area was “a natural extension” of these efforts.Still, unlike the Koch political network and its plans to shape the presidential campaign, it is difficult to find evidence of a single coordinating body that has directed money toward the Center for Individual Rights and its legal campaign to allow public employees to opt out of union fees.While the Bradley Foundation has been a steady donor to the center over the years, the amount it contributed appears to have declined somewhat from 2010 to 2013, even as the union case was getting off the ground.The Philanthropy Roundtable offers another case study. Its board until recently included James Piereson, a board member at the Center for Individual Rights and at Donors Trust, a so-called donor advised fund-provider that directed nearly $800,000 in contributions, typically at the suggestion of unnamed donors, to the center in 2012 and 2013, according to I.R.S. filings. Mr. Piereson was executive director of the Olin Foundation, another onetime Center for Individual Rights backer, from 1985 to 2005.AdvertisementThe round table, an organization that assists donors in making their philanthropy more effective, would appear to be capable of coordinating funds on behalf of an organization like the Center for Individual Rights. Several conservative philanthropists, like Betsy DeVos and James Arthur Pope, serve on its board. Mr. Grebe of the Bradley Foundation was a recent chairman.Mr. Piereson, in an interview, acknowledged that there was both considerable suspicion among conservatives toward public employee unions and frequent communication among donors and employees of organizations on the right about efforts to rein in these unions. But, he said, this did not amount to a conspiracy. He called the coordination “diffuse, decentralized.”And some liberals agree, at least when it comes to the Philanthropy Roundtable.“It’s obviously a conservative institution, but the people run the gamut,” said Gara LaMarche, president of the Democracy Alliance, a confederation of prominent liberal donors, who has spoken before the group in the past.The Philanthropy Roundtable’s annual conferences include everyone from board members of the Bradley Foundation to “people in conservative philanthropy who are focused on scholarship for poor kids,” he said. “I don’t think it’s the epicenter.”Jack Begg contributed research.A version of this article appears in print on January 11, 2016, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline:  Court Case on Union Fees Rouses Political Suspicions.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.