AdvertisementSupported byIn DebtBy Stephen J. LubbenIs Chapter 11 doomed? There are reasons to think that the famous financial reorganization law won’t work much longer in its current form.It has already been widely remarked that the tendency for distressed firms to grant first, second and even third liens on their assets makes reorganization all the more difficult. The bankruptcy code was really not intended for a world where everyone is a secured creditor.For many years, my research has shown that the growth of credit default swaps has made restructuring more complex by making creditors’ true incentives more opaque. Chapter 11, as written in 1978, is based on the assumption that economic interests and legal interests come as a package, but that is no longer true.Then there are the safe harbors that remove derivatives, repurchase agreements and securities trades from the crucial protections of the bankruptcy code. It was only a matter of time before smart lawyers figured out that lots of ordinary supply contracts look a lot like swaps or other derivatives if viewed from the right angle.And there is the trend of putting companies’ real estate assets into REITs, or real estate investment trusts. Caesars Entertainment is proposing to put its real estate into a REIT as part of its Chapter 11 plan. But a host of other companies have already made this move or are considering it. REITs benefit from a tax subsidy, provided that they pass on all of their real estate income to shareholders. Separating a firm’s real estate into a distinct corporate entity allows the company to enjoy this subsidy.From a bankruptcy perspective, this means that if any of these companies ends up in bankruptcy – or in Caesars’ case, if it ends up in bankruptcy again – the operating company will no longer have direct control over the company’s real estate.This continues the trend of slicing and dicing the company, giving priority claims to select creditors before the company ever thinks about filing for bankruptcy, and sometimes even when bankruptcy is already looming. In either case, the results in bankruptcy are significant, leaving the bankruptcy estate with increasingly narrow options if the company is to survive.In the 1980s, law professors would talk about corporations as nothing more than a bundle of contracts, but modern corporate finance is making that a reality. The question is whether Chapter 11 works with such a company, especially if some portion of those contracts are “safe harbored” from the operation of the bankruptcy code.Stephen J. Lubben holds the Harvey Washington Wiley Chair in corporate governance and business ethics at Seton Hall Law School and is an expert on bankruptcy.Advertisement