JAN. 10, 2016
The Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.20 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.45 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.21 percent.The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week:TUESDAYNevada System of Higher Education, $61.3 million in certificates of participation. Competitive.East Carolina University, N.C., $136.6 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Washington County, Utah, Board of Education, $60.3 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.AdvertisementWEDNESDAYRegional Transportation Authority, Ill., $100.2 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.AdvertisementSeattle, $123.2 million of power revenue bonds. Competitive.THURSDAYGreenwich, Conn., $50 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Illinois, $480 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Kansas Development Finance Authority, $93.5 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.ONE DAY DURING THE WEEKAlaska International Airport System, $158.2 million of revenue refinancing bonds. Goldman Sachs.Ball State University, Ind., $55.7 million of housing and dining system revenue bonds. Piper Jaffray.Bowling Green State University, Ohio, $70 million of general receipts bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Build NYC Resource Corporation, $140.6 million of New York Law School project revenue refinancing bonds. Morgan Stanley.California Health Facilities Financing Authority, $500 million of Sutter Health revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.Chicago, $500 million of general obligation bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Conroe Independent School District, Tex., $145.6 million of unlimited tax school building and refinancing bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.AdvertisementDelaware Transportation Authority, $180 million of transportation system revenue bonds. Bank of America.Desert Community College District, Calif., $175 million of general obligation bonds. RBC Capital Markets.El Camino Community College District, Calif., $198 million of general obligation bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Fort Bend County, Tex., $66 million of senior toll road revenue bonds. Raymond James.Georgetown Independent School District, Tex., $96.8 million of unlimited tax general obligation bonds. William Blair.Illinois Housing Development Authority, $88.7 million of homeowner mortgage revenue bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Leander Independent School District, Tex., $79.6 million of unlimited tax general obligation bonds. William Blair.Michigan Finance Authority, $300 million of Beaumont Health Credit Group hospital revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.Minnesota Housing Finance Agency, $97.4 million of homeownership finance bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Missouri Health and Educational Facilities Authority, $58.6 million of senior living facilities revenue bonds. Ziegler.Montgomery County, Tex., $69.2 million of unlimited tax road and refunding general obligation bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.AdvertisementNew Jersey Turnpike Authority, $150 million of turnpike revenue bonds. Goldman Sachs.Philadelphia Authority for Industrial Development, $96.3 million of revenue refinancing bonds. PNC Capital Markets.Placentia-Yorba Linda Unified School District, Calif., $85 million of certificates of participation. Stifel Nicolaus.Round Rock Independent School District, Tex., $105 million of school building general obligation bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Successor Agency to the Redevelopment Agency of the City of San Diego, $176 million of tax allocation refinancing bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.San Jose Unified School District, Calif., $120 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Stifel Nicolaus.San Mateo County, Calif., $100 million of lease revenue refinancing bonds. Raymond James.Santa Barbara Community College District, Calif., $51.9 million of debt securities. Morgan Stanley.South Florida Water Management District, $395 million of certificates of participation. Citigroup Global Markets.Stockton Unified School District, Calif., $128.4 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Morgan Stanley.AdvertisementTampa Bay Water, Fla., $133.4 million of water utility system revenue refunding bonds. Raymond James.Texas Department of Housing and Community Affairs, $95.2 million of single-family mortgage revenue and refinancing bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Trinity Health Credit Group, Mich.; Conn.; Idaho; Montgomery County, Md., $568 million of hospital revenue and refinancing bonds. Bank of America.Wyandotte County/Kansas City, Kan., $116.6 million of public utility system revenue bonds. Piper Jaffray.A version of this article appears in print on January 11, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Treasury Auctions Set for This Week.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.