AdvertisementSupported byBy Landon Thomas Jr.The college seminar was drawing to a close in October and Martin J. Whitman was pondering the hits and misses in his long career at the top of Third Avenue Management, one of Wall Street’s better-known value investment firms.He had had winners with his stock picks, but when it came to bonds, the results were mediocre.“My problems have been in distressed,” he said, referring to the bets he had made on near-bankrupt companies.Those bets may have been bad. But they paled in comparison to the implosion in December of his firm’s junk bond fund, which was loaded with high-risk bonds of distressed companies. Worried about the fund’s viability, panicked investors demanded payouts that far exceeded the fund’s liquid assets. And in a desperate move, the firm froze the fund, halting further redemptions.Since the end of November, investors have withdrawn $1.5 billion from Third Avenue funds, according to Morningstar, the fund research firm. Total assets under management at the firm have fallen to $6.3 billion from about $10 billion half a year ago, according to Third Avenue.It has been a searing series of events for the 91-year-old Mr. Whitman, who, while no longer a money manager at Third Avenue, remains chairman of its five mutual funds. On Monday, reflecting concern about the equally searing effect on some investors, the Securities and Exchange Commission announced that one of its key areas of focus this year would be mutual funds’ accumulating hard-to-price and -sell securities without ensuring that investors can get their money out.In essence, that is what happened to Third Avenue’s fund.Mr. Whitman’s renown in the 1990s and early 2000s was largely due to his success as a value-oriented equity hawk, seeking out companies that traded at discounts to the broader market. But as he made clear to the business school students at Boston College last fall, he got his start as an investor in the 1970s by scooping up the debt securities of highly indebted companies.It is a laborious, time-consuming process that involves buying the bonds of a few bankrupt companies for pennies on the dollar and then working with management to effect a turnaround.In many ways, that approach was reflected in the strategy of the Third Avenue Focused Credit Fund that barred redemptions in December: find a company on death’s door and bet big, paying little concern to investment tenets that encourage diversified portfolios of securities that can be easily sold.“If you don’t know a thing about the company, then you should diversify,” Mr. Whitman growled, using an obscenity to underscore his view that owning a broad basket of securities reflects a lack of confidence and conviction on the part of the investor.Betting big on a few companies and sticking with them may have worked during Mr. Whitman’s heyday. For example, one of his earliest forays into investing was in the waste energy firm Covanta in the 1980s, and even now the company remains a top holding for the flagship Third Avenue Value Fund.But such an approach proved disastrous for Third Avenue’s credit fund, which, more than any of its peers, skewed its portfolio toward high-risk, high-return turnaround situations in which the bonds traded so infrequently that determining a price for them was little more than guesswork.The question looming now is whether this practice of pushing into bonds that have very high yields but are very hard to sell — taken to an extreme by Third Avenue but popular among many junk bond managers these days — will result in any action against the firm by regulators.Third Avenue declined to comment, as did the S.E.C.In 2010, the S.E.C., the main regulator for mutual funds, set up an asset management unit with the aim of increasing surveillance of fund companies. Since then, one of the main areas of focus for this division has been the extent to which fund trustees, who are obligated to look out for the interests of mutual fund investors, are fulfilling their duty to hold fund managers to account.The S.E.C.’s fund unit has recently brought several actions in this regard. One charged that fund trustees were lax in disclosing crucial information to investors, and another said that fund directors did not do enough to prevent investment advisers from inflating the value of hard-to-sell securities in order to keep investors from leaving the fund.At the root of these investigations is the concern that fund trustees are beholden less to the investors they are mandated to protect than to the investment advisers that appoint them to their paid positions.Regulatory experts say that if the S.E.C. does decide to crack down on Third Avenue, it will be related to this pricing issue and whether the portfolio managers at the credit fund set prices too high for the most illiquid bonds. Mispricings of hard-to-trade (and hard-to-value) securities give investors a distorted view of the assets’ worth — which makes the fund all the more vulnerable when investors remove their money en masse.“There is a line that that board could have crossed by not ensuring that the fund had adequate liquidity,” said Mercer E. Bullard, a mutual fund specialist at the University of Mississippi School of Law and a former lawyer at the S.E.C.Just a few months before the Third Avenue fund debacle, the commission published a new set of proposed rules aimed, in effect, at preventing exactly what happened with Third Avenue’s credit fund.The message was clear: Mutual fund boards are responsible for making sure that the investment adviser acts responsibly in pricing securities and ensuring there is enough cash on hand for investors looking to sell.But experts worry that mutual fund boards these days do not have the expertise or the muscle to do this job effectively.“It’s really hard to value these types of corporate bonds,” said Stephen Keen, a securities lawyer at the law firm Perkins Coie in Denver. And few boards, he added, have the technical smarts for such a task.To be sure, there is no indication so far that Mr. Whitman, or any other trustees, will face charges for failing to ensure that securities were valued correctly and that enough cash was on hand for investors who wanted to get out.Still, as the S.E.C. continues to scrutinize the sequence of events leading to the fund’s decision to prevent investors from taking their money out last December, a critical question will be how Mr. Whitman balanced his responsibility as fund chairman to protect investors with his loyalty to the investment firm that he founded.Although Mr. Whitman gave up his direct money management responsibilities in 2012, he and his family remain the largest of the firm’s minority shareholders.In the past, the makeup of Third Avenue fund trustees has tilted toward people closely tied to Mr. Whitman with little to no financial experience. Until 2002, for example, Mr. Whitman’s daughter, Barbara, a Broadway producer, and his sister, Phyllis Beck, a superior court judge in Pennsylvania, served on the board.And even today, three of the board’s independent trustees have personal links to Mr. Whitman. Lucinda Franks, an author and a former journalist, is married to Robert M. Morgenthau, former district attorney of Manhattan and a close friend of Mr. Whitman. Two others, Martin Shubik, a mathematics professor, and Charles Walden, a financial executive, have assisted Mr. Whitman with books he has written.Regulatory filings show that as money poured out of the fund, the board stepped up scrutiny of its hard-to-sell holdings. The board has two committees to review pricing issues. One is a valuation committee, which included Third Avenue’s top lawyer and its chief financial officer. And the other is a fair value committee, composed only of independent directors.According to fund disclosures, the fair value committee met 13 times in the fiscal year ending in October 2014. Third Avenue has not yet disclosed how many times the committee has met since then. But the more its members met, especially in 2015, the more exposed the fund became to its most distressed hard-to-price securities.And by December, with these bonds making up 16 percent of its portfolio — in violation of the S.E.C.’s 15 percent limit — Mr. Whitman and the board decided to shut the fund down.Advertisement