AdvertisementSupported byBy John KoblinBEVERLY HILLS, Calif. — Over the last decade, NBC Universal’s cable chief, Bonnie Hammer, has occasionally visited the Golden Globes under less-than-glamorous conditions: sitting in a production truck for the E! network, dressed in jeans and sneakers, with her hair pulled back. By time the network wrapped up its red carpet show and the show actually began, a limo would be summoned, a pizza ordered and Ms. Hammer’s night would be all but over.It was a very different scene Sunday night when the USA cable network’s first-year hit “Mr. Robot” took home the Golden Globe for best television drama, a first for the network, and Ms. Hammer found herself at the center of a triumphant NBC after-party.“This is the lady that makes it happen,” said Rami Malek, the show’s fresh-faced star, his arm draped around Ms. Hammer.“This is the one brave enough to make this choice,” added his co-star Christian Slater, holding his award for best supporting actor in a TV drama. “She certainly has moved the network in a very unique direction, and I’m grateful she was willing to take this risk.”This was a share-the-wealth year for TV at the Golden Globes; no networks won more than the two awards grabbed by Amazon and USA, a cable unit of NBC Universal. It was a particularly striking achievement for USA, a network that has been known for big ratings, but not for avant-garde or critically acclaimed programming in an era that is rife with them. Awards nights have not been USA nights.But these are different times in the TV industry. There is more programming than ever, ratings are in free fall and award winners can come from producers of any conceivable stripe. That included relatively obscure shows like Amazon’s “Mozart in the Jungle,” which won the best TV comedy award, the second consecutive year the streaming service took that category.66 PhotosView Slide Show ›Monica Almeida/The New York Times“If you’re going to get into the zone of being in the top five shows out of 400? Well, if you talk with everybody you know and everybody thinks your show is a fantastic idea, you’re probably a little behind the curve and should get a different idea,” Roy Price, the head of Amazon Studios, said.That is essentially what USA executives did. “Mr. Robot,” a drama that embraces of-the-moment themes like hacking and the isolating effects of digital life, is darker than the so-called blue skies programming that helped propel USA to the most-viewed cable channel in the last decade.“The show is a weird, subversive, tiny little show,” said Sam Esmail, the creator, holding his Golden Globe. “The best I could think of for its potential was a cult hit. That was the thing I was dreaming about.”Instead it became more than that. The nearly three million viewers who tune in — about half of them in the 18- to 49-year-old demographic important to advertisers — made it one of the top new drama cable series of the year.The first step toward the success of “Mr. Robot” was taken a couple of years ago, when Ms. Hammer and the USA Network’s president, Chris McCumber, noticed that the programming that was once so successful for USA was starting to show signs of wear and tear.“We had a filter where it had to be flawed-but-likable characters, drama with a dollop of humor,” Ms. Hammer said, referring to a longtime strategy that helped fuel shows like “Burn Notice” and “Psych.” “And then we realized that many of those who watched USA for years basically aged out of the demo. The 40-somethings were now 50-somethings. We had to say, ‘O.K., we get it. We have to look at the 30-somethings and the millennials. What are they going to watch?’ ”Ms. Hammer and Mr. McCumber realized what that group wanted was not what USA had on the air.“The world isn’t blue skies, it’s very complicated,” Ms. Hammer said. “The generation that is growing up right now is willing to accept that life is complicated, that decisions aren’t easy. They don’t tune in because it’s fun. Anything that hits an honest authentic nerve, they’ll basically embrace it.”There was also the matter of the show’s connection with real-life events. Even though “Mr. Robot” focuses so much on hacking, the pilot had already been shot when news of the Sony hacking became public. And the season finale was postponed by a week in August after a scene involving a live-on-video suicide was deemed insensitive after the on-air shooting of a television reporter and her cameraman in Virginia.“The show in a really uncanny way, sometimes tragically, mirrored what was going on in the world right now,” Mr. McCumber said.Mr. Esmail said working with a network that was suddenly open to a new creative approach presented a golden opportunity.“If I went with another network that had a certain style and voice to their network they’re going to want to impose this on the show, there might have been more compromise,” Mr. Esmail said. “Here was an opportunity to define what that could be.”The awards for “Mr. Robot” were welcome news for USA, especially because, like many cable channels, its viewership dropped sizably this year. Ratings were down about 15 percent in total viewers and 20 percent in the 18-to-49 demographic. Ms. Hammer said that scrutinizing the ratings was a backward way of thinking now, and that was one of the reasons USA had changed its game plan.“For a long time we wanted to do great business in linear television and we did it,” she said. “We accepted we weren’t going to get a ton of awards. Now we’re in a different business. Now it’s no longer just competing in the linear business, it’s competing for great content.”And if the ratings continue to fall, will advertisers still be around to spend money on that so-called great content?“I sure as hell hope so or I’m going to be fired,” she said.Advertisement