By MARTHA C. WHITEJAN. 11, 2016
Joshua Reeves, the co-founder and chief executive at the payroll and benefits management start-up Gusto, rented a house for a week in 2013 with his roughly 10 colleagues for what he called a “workation.”One part reward for the long hours they worked, one part brainstorming marathon, the retreat allowed the group to cook together, hike and plan the fledgling company’s next steps.“The two main goals we had were to bring the team together, take a step back and have a chance for community time and connection,” Mr. Reeves said. “Physically going somewhere else can actually be a great catalyst for introspection.”Although Gusto now has 300 employees in San Francisco and Denver, retreats are still part of the company culture. Recently, its human resources department took a four-day trip to Los Angeles that included a trip to Disneyland to observe and gather ideas for how to scale up their operations. Staff members from both of the company’s offices attended.Advertisement“We really love the time we’ve spent on retreats,” Mr. Reeves said.Today, companies not generally given to embracing start-up corporate culture are finding retreats to be an effective way to accomplish seemingly conflicting goals: Getting people to relax and to work harder. And hotels have been eager to accommodate companies’ increased willingness to reward hard work with off-site getaways.Advertisement“Over the last 18 months, we’ve been seeing a really encouraging uptick,” said Alison Taylor, senior vice president of global sales at Starwood Hotels & Resorts Worldwide, which has had an approximately 12 percent increase, year-over-year, in reward and incentive travel, including retreats.And by all accounts, that business is growing — especially among younger workers. “We definitely have seen the reinvestment of corporations back into those,” said David Peckinpaugh, president of Maritz Travel Company and Experient. “We saw, in particular, from 2014 to 2015, a significant spike,” he said. Last year, he said, his company had roughly 30 percent more corporate incentive programs.“I think we typically see it as synonymous with a growing economy,” said Andrew Flack, vice president for global marketing at Hilton Worldwide, where requests for corporate retreat bookings have increased by a double-digit percentage. “Also, companies in particular are looking for how to sustain growth, and that’s a lot of what they talk about.”The trend dovetails with a push in human resources management to reward more while paying less. “I’m seeing more off-sites that fall under the category of culture-building and team-building,” said Paul McDonald, senior executive director at the recruiting firm Robert Half.Although Labor Department data show wages slowly creeping up, many companies see an advantage to giving employees bonuses or other rewards because this lets them avoid adding a fixed amount to their bottom line, as pay raises would.Still, even as companies try to hold the line on pay, the labor market has tightened sufficiently, especially in some high-tech and professional services fields, that companies recognize the need to keep employees happy as well as hardworking.“I think the most important thing that corporate America has found is that they need their employees to perform,” said Christine Lawson, senior vice president of sales and catering at Kimpton Hotels & Restaurants. “They understand that engagement is absolutely essential to their productivity.”AdvertisementMs. Lawson said more than half of her brand’s corporate business, which is up roughly 10 percent year-over-year, consisted of retreats.As retreats grow in popularity, traditional incentive programs are incorporating more retreatlike elements even as they expand beyond perks for top sales executives or dealers.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Incentives are being opened up,” Ms. Taylor said. “The incentive business has morphed now to be about community.” Hotel companies welcome the broader scope of the programs because that means more business for them.Another change is the incorporation of brainstorming or high-level strategy sessions among the recreation and bonding activities. “We’re seeing either a half-day or a full-day working session,” said Mark Sergot, senior vice president for global sales at FRHI Hotels & Resorts.Like many other aspects of both corporate culture and business travel, the growth of retreats and the evolution of incentives are being driven by Generation Y, people like Mr. Reeves of Gusto: young and with the mentality of a Silicon Valley start-up.“They really like to feel like they’re part of something, and that’s why we’re seeing the increase,” Mr. McDonald said.“Millennials expect that,” Ms. Taylor said. “They want to have that interaction with the C-level executives, and incentives are a very nice way to do that, to make them feel included.”Ms. Lawson of Kimpton said the brand, which is based in San Francisco, has a long history of catering to the high-tech industry’s casual, quirky meeting style.“Tech has always come into our hotels in jeans and T-shirts and wanted their room to have beanbags and couches,” she said. Only recently, she said, have other industries started following suit — forgoing the suits and boardroom presentations for more intense but more intimate sessions of brainstorming or strategizing.“Generally, we don’t see boardroom-type retreats anymore,” Mr. Sergot said.While this might be new territory for groups in buttoned-up fields like insurance, professional and financial services, even start-ups can take time to get the hang of the laid-back retreat. At Gusto’s first retreat in 2013, Mr. Reeves recalled bringing in the components of workstations: desks, tables, PC monitors. They went unused.Advertisement“As it turned out, everybody spent the whole week on the couches with their legs up,” he said.A version of this article appears in print on January 12, 2016, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: In Retreats, Start-Ups Find a Way to Recharge Workers’ Batteries.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.