By RAVI SOMAIYAJAN. 11, 2016
Chris Hughes, the Facebook co-founder who bought The New Republic in 2012 and prompted a revolt among staff members and contributors  when he tried to remake it, said on Monday that he had decided to put the magazine up for sale.“I bought this company nearly four years ago to ensure its survival and give it the financial runway to experiment with new business models in a time of immense change in media,” he said in a letter to his staff that he also posted on the website Medium. “After investing a great deal of time, energy, and over $20 million, I have come to the conclusion that it is time for new leadership and vision at The New Republic.”When Mr. Hughes bought the magazine in 2012, many were optimistic about his Silicon Valley experience combining with the publication’s reputation. Shortly after he took over, he rehired Franklin Foer, a well-regarded former editor.But by late 2014, because of tension between Mr. Foer and a new chief executive Mr. Hughes brought to the magazine, Mr. Hughes decided to replace Mr. Foer. When word got out, Mr. Foer resigned and was followed by a dozen outraged staff employees and dozens of contributing editors. The walkout forced the magazine to cancel an issue.AdvertisementIn the weeks that followed, and again in his letter to the staff, Mr. Hughes, 32, described the difficulty of maintaining tradition and carrying out his new ideas. “I will be the first to admit that when I took on this challenge nearly four years ago, I underestimated the difficulty of transitioning an old and traditional institution into a digital media company in today’s quickly evolving climate,” he said. Mr. Hughes declined to comment beyond his letter.AdvertisementThe New Republic, it turned out, was far removed from the Silicon Valley mind-set that Mr. Hughes and his chief executive, Guy Vidra, espoused. The magazine was partly conceived in Theodore Roosevelt’s living room and, since its founding in 1914, has featured writers including Virginia Woolf and Philip Roth. It is famed for its intellectual rigor and its left-leaning political views, and has a reputation as an incubator for talented young writers and editors.At a meeting not long after he joined in 2014, Mr. Vidra, using a profanity, told the magazine’s staff that he wanted to break stuff, a phrase common in the tech industry that many present felt was incongruous. Journalism was, to him, content, a view that immediately put him at odds with the literary-minded staff. The magazine’s history, he said later, was a “competitive advantage” to be “leveraged.”Despite many changes in the last year and more than a dozen new hires, the magazine still does not make a profit, according to three people with knowledge of its finances. The atmosphere at its offices in Manhattan’s Union Square on Monday was unsettled, according to former staff members, and an all-hands meeting Monday morning was described as tense.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Gabriel Snyder, the magazine’s top editor, declined to comment. He did post a message on Twitter saying The New Republic’s staff was “focused on what we do every day: trying to make great journalism.”Mr. Hughes, according to two people with knowledge of his plans, has already begun to meet with prospective buyers. When he bought the magazine, those who had been interested included Yahoo and Bloomberg L.P. A person with knowledge of those talks said that the Wall Street executive Steven Rattner had also expressed interest. But the magazine has now perhaps lost some of its luster, and many of its prominent writers, and it is not clear who might follow Mr. Hughes.“The New Republic has been a money-losing proposition for 100 years,” said Jacob Weisberg, who once worked for the magazine, and is now the chairman of the Slate Group. “The idea that anyone is going to turn it into a business now, when it has never been harder, is implausible.”In his letter, Mr. Hughes said that his aim “is to place The New Republic in the hands of the most promising and dedicated potential steward.” That might take many forms, he said. “Perhaps it should be run as part of a larger digital media company, as a center-left institute of ideas, or by another passionate individual willing to invest in its future,” he wrote. “There are many possibilities.”But for many of those who hold The New Republic dear, Monday’s letter was another unfortunate moment in Mr. Hughes’s tenure.“If Chris Hughes had simply sold the magazine a year ago he would be in a much better position financially and in terms of his prestige,” said Jonathan Chait, one of the contributing editors, who asked to be removed from the magazine’s masthead last year and is an outspoken critic of Mr. Hughes’s stewardship. “The talented people who placed their hopes in the vision of a reconstructed magazine are unfortunate victims here, and no one can feel good about this.”AdvertisementMr. Chait said that, to him, The New Republic was fundamentally not a business proposition. “A business is something that is trying to make money,” he said. “If you’re in a town and you’re trying to sell hamburgers, and everyone wants pizza, you’d switch to pizza. But The New Republic believes in hamburgers. We think you need hamburgers, and we will continue to make hamburgers and try and persuade you to eat them.”A version of this article appears in print on January 12, 2016, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Owner of New Republic Puts It Back on Market.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.