AdvertisementSupported byWhite Collar WatchBy Peter J. HenningGeneral Douglas MacArthur said in his retirement speech before Congress that “old soldiers never die; they just fade away.”The government crackdown on insider trading, which the F.B.I. called “Operation Perfect Hedge,” seems to be fading away as well with the settlement announced on Friday between Steven A. Cohen and the Securities and Exchange Commission over an administrative charge of failing to supervise an employee convicted of illegal trading.The case was the last one of any significance from the investigation into how hedge funds traded on inside information. It ends with little of the fanfare that greeted the failure-to-supervise charge, with no monetary penalty and only a two-year bar on Mr. Cohen investing funds for outside investors.The wide-ranging investigation first came to light in October 2009 with the arrest of Raj Rajaratnam, founder of the Galleon Group hedge fund, and five others based on extensive wiretaps showing how inside information was passed along and how that allowed traders to reap millions of dollars of profits. The government paraded defendants in handcuffs in public while they were being transported to court, the so-called perp walk, to show how serious this effort was.Preet Bharara, the United States attorney in Manhattan who presided over the cases, made the cover of Time magazine behind the headline “This Man Is Busting Wall St.” At one point, the government could boast of a perfect record of convictions and guilty pleas for 85 defendants, and sentences of a decade and longer were meted out that far exceeded what had ever been seen in insider trading cases.Perhaps the biggest — and most elusive — focus of the investigation was Mr. Cohen and his highly profitable hedge fund firm, SAC Capital Advisors. The New York Times reported that the government had tapped his telephone for a brief period in 2009, but it apparently never yielded incriminating evidence against him.Mr. Bharara’s office and the S.E.C. pursued charges against a number of SAC’s traders in an effort to build a case against Mr. Cohen, but no one was able — or willing — to point the finger at him for insider trading. Two SAC hedge fund managers who dealt directly with him, Mathew Martoma and Michael S. Steinberg, were convicted and received long prison sentences but would not provide evidence implicating Mr. Cohen in wrongdoing.The government took aim at the firm as a proxy, resulting in payments to the S.E.C. of more than $600 million in March 2013 to settle civil insider trading charges and another $1.2 billion in November 2013 when it was prosecuted by the Justice Department.In hindsight, the biggest blow to the pursuit of Mr. Cohen came when the Federal Appeals Court for the Second Circuit in Manhattan reversed the insider trading convictions of two hedge fund managers in United States v. Newman because the government could not show they knew that the source of inside information had received a benefit in exchange for revealing it.What could have been a tough case against Mr. Cohen, based only on circumstantial evidence of well-timed trades, became almost impossible without the type of wiretap evidence that was used against Mr. Rajaratnam and others showing what they were told before trading. Indeed, Mr. Bharara’s office dismissed its case against Mr. Steinberg because of the appeals court’s decision, a sure sign it was never going to be able to prosecute Mr. Cohen.The S.E.C.’s failure-to-supervise charge was the last remaining case that could link Mr. Cohen to the misuse of confidential corporate information, and at the request of federal prosecutors it was delayed until the criminal cases involving Mr. Martoma and Mr. Steinberg were resolved. The S.E.C. accused Mr. Cohen of ignoring red flags from their trading, and once Mr. Steinberg’s conviction was dismissed that case also became much more difficult to prove.In the end, the settlement with Mr. Cohen lets each side proclaim a victory. Andrew J. Ceresney, the director of the S.E.C.’s enforcement division, pointed to the two-year investment bar and other oversight requirements imposed on Mr. Cohen’s family office, Point72 Asset Management, as achieving “significant and immediate investor protection and deterrence.” This comes on top of SAC’s earlier payments of $1.8 billion in criminal and civil settlements, the largest penalties ever imposed for insider trading.Yet, it seems that the case, much like Operation Perfect Hedge, is just fading away. Although the S.E.C. has demanded an admission of a violation in other cases, Mr. Cohen settled without admitting or denying liability, leaving the impression that the S.E.C.’s evidence was not as strong as it once appeared.The two-year ban on investing outside money is far short of the permanent bar initially sought when the charge was filed, and there is every reason to think that Mr. Cohen will be welcomed back by investors eager to take advantage of his market acumen.The S.E.C.’s order asserts there were red flags Mr. Cohen ignored, but the case breaks no new legal ground on what a hedge fund manager should do beyond being more careful when it turns out a trader hits the mother lode with information from a questionable source.In an interesting twist, there is a reasonable possibility that Mr. Cohen’s firm will become the model for other hedge funds in complying with the law. The S.E.C.’s order requires Point72 to put into effect the procedures suggested by an outside monitor to prevent insider trading if it wants to return as an investment adviser, which can provide a blueprint for the types of compliance measures expected for these types of firms.The only remaining case of any notoriety from the crackdown on insider trading is Mr. Martoma’s appeal of his conviction, which was argued in late October so a decision should come in the next few months. The Justice Department and the S.E.C. have moved on to more fertile ground, pursuing cases involving computer hacking of corporate information and smaller scale trading revealed by market data analytics that show a pattern of suspicious activity. These cases have had little of the impact that the arrests of Mr. Rajaratnam and others over six years ago had on the public perception of how the government is policing the markets.After achieving convictions and settlements with numerous defendants, the push against insider trading on Wall Street has largely run out of steam. Does that mean traders and hedge funds are off the hook for insider trading?The answer, of course, is “no” because perhaps the greatest deterrent comes from the government’s use of wiretaps and consensual recordings by cooperating witnesses to build its cases. Those tactics sow fear among traders that someone could be listening when there is talk about corporate developments.The message to beware when gathering information remains potent, at least for now. But traders live in a high-pressure world in which the latest quarter’s results are paramount.As Operation Perfect Hedge fades away, there is little doubt that the temptation to develop an “edge” by using confidential information will cause some to seek out inside information. The question is whether the government is listening, perhaps even right now.Advertisement