By ANDREW E. KRAMERJAN. 11, 2016
MOSCOW — Russia’s main stock indexes plummeted on Monday, the first day of trading after a lengthy winter holiday here, as the drop in oil prices cast a pall over the country’s energy-dependent economy.The retreat for Russian shares was in line with declines on other exchanges around the world in the first week of the year, when financial markets in Moscow were closed for the Eastern Orthodox Christmas holiday.One broad index of Russian stocks, the Micex, closed 3.75 percent lower on Monday. Another index, the RTS, which prices Russian shares in dollars and therefore reflects changes in the exchange rate as well as in the stock market, fell 4.9 percent.The ruble dropped sharply at the opening of trading to more than 76 to the dollar, from 74.75, before recovering to close at 75.8.AdvertisementOil and other commodities like natural gas and steel, which make up the bulk of Russia’s exports, have fallen sharply on fears of a slowdown in the Chinese economy. A barrel of the benchmark Brent crude was trading at less than $32, down more than 4 percent for the day.AdvertisementIn an interview published on Monday in the German newspaper Bild, President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia conceded that the plunge in oil prices was hurting his country’s economy, but that it would have a positive side in that it would push Russia to improve its financial policies.“Our nonoil and gas deficit had risen to a very dangerous level,” Mr. Putin said. Resisting spending oil funds is difficult, he said, but “it is the reduction of these expenses that improves the economy.”The Russian government taxes oil companies at higher rates when oil prices are higher, and at lower rates during a price slump.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.As a result of that policy, the federal budget, rather than the companies, has borne the brunt of the oil price decline.The average after-tax profit a Russian oil company earned from the sale of a barrel of oil actually rose over the past year — to 1,290 rubles in 2015, from 1,012 rubles in 2014, according to an analysis by Renaissance Capital, a Moscow-based investment bank. Because of the skewed price signals, Russian oil companies have ramped up production, reaching a post-Soviet record of 10.8 million barrels a day in December.The Russian government has budgeted for an average oil price of $50 in 2016, far above where it stands today, with a deficit of 3 percent of gross domestic product.The government could balance its budget at a lower oil price and with that deficit only if the central bank allowed the ruble to decline against the dollar, further whittling away the value of Russians’ wages and pensions.Russia’s central bank has warned that the country’s economy could continue to contract this year, after a 3.8 percent drop last year, if oil prices do not recover.In his interview with Bild, however, Mr. Putin reiterated assurances he offered at a news conference in December that Russia’s economy would turn the corner, despite low oil prices and Western sanctions.Advertisement“We believe we will gradually be looking at the stabilization and rise of the economy,” he said.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.