By CHAD BRAYJAN. 11, 2016
LONDON — The Swedish appliance maker Electrolux said on Monday that its top executive planned to retire, an announcement that comes a month after a deal to buy General Electric’s century-old appliance division for $3.3 billion fell apart.G.E. called off the deal in December after the Justice Department moved to block the transaction. It was the second time in recent years that G.E. had tried to sell the division.In a news release, Electrolux said that Keith McLoughlin, an American, had notified the company’s board of directors that he planned to retire as chief executive, although he would continue as a consultant in North America.“It is now time for me to pass the baton and return to my family” in the United States, Mr. McLoughlin, who turns 60 this year, said in the news release.AdvertisementJonas Samuelson, who leads Electrolux’s major appliances business for Europe, the Middle East and Africa, was set to take the helm as president and chief executive on Feb. 1. Mr. Samuelson joined the company in 2008 and previously served as head of Electrolux’s global operations and as chief financial officer.AdvertisementThe all-cash deal for General Electric’s appliance division would have been the largest transaction ever for Electrolux, one of the world’s biggest manufacturers of home appliances and industrial equipment.It would have combined Electrolux’s Frigidaire, one of the best-known brands of refrigerators, with G.E.’s stable of products, including its Monogram line of luxury appliances.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The purchase would have allowed Electrolux to expand its reach in North America, one of the largest markets for home appliances, and it would have made the company a stronger competitor to Whirlpool Corporation.Electrolux, which was founded in 1910 and expanded into home appliances in the 1920s, posted revenue of about $13 billion last year. G.E.’s appliance and lighting divisions generated $8.4 billion in revenue in that period.Sales of major appliances in North America accounted for about 30 percent of Electrolux’s revenue in 2014, the company said.Electrolux and G.E. had agreed to the transaction in September 2014. The Justice Department sued to stop the sale in July, saying it would lead to less competition and higher prices for buyers of stoves, ovens and other kitchen appliances.In December, Electrolux said that it had made a variety of “reasonable” settlement proposals to the Justice Department that would have addressed competition concerns. “Unfortunately, these proposals were rejected,” Electrolux said at the time.G.E., which is based in Fairfield, Conn., tried to sell the appliance division more than seven years ago, with Electrolux and the Asian appliance manufacturers Samsung and LG among companies taking part in negotiations. But those talks fell apart with the start of the 2008 financial crisis.A version of this article appears in print on January 12, 2016, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: Departing C.E.O.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.