By LESLIE PICKER and CHAD BRAYJAN. 11, 2016
After a courtship of more than six months, Shire won over its fellow drug maker Baxalta on Monday in a deal valued at about $31 billion. The combination would create a giant in the treatment of rare diseases.Baxalta, which was spun off from Baxter International, generates a large portion of its sales from Advate, a drug for hemophilia. It also has a portfolio of plasma therapies and treatments for immune diseases.The company initially rebuffed Shire’s offer last summer, saying that it “significantly undervalued” the company. Shire’s first proposal was an all-stock deal, worth $30 billion when the companies disclosed their talks in August.Under the terms of the deal announced on Monday, Shire will pay $45.57 in cash and stock for each Baxalta share, or a total of $31 billion. That price represents a 37.5 percent premium to Baxalta’s share price before Shire first announced in August that it had made a takeover approach.AdvertisementBased on the 30-trading-day volume-weighted average of Shire’s stock price, however, the deal is valued at $47.50 a share, or about $32 billion.AdvertisementPart of Shire’s ability to pay such a premium for Baxalta is tax savings.Because Shire is based in Dublin, while Baxalta is based in Bannockburn, Ill., outside Chicago, the combined company will be able to achieve a lower tax rate than Baxalta can as a stand-alone. The combined company will have an estimated tax rate of 16 to 17 percent by next year, compared with Baxalta’s current rate of 23 to 24 percent, Shire said.Shire said that it expected to realize more than $500 million in annual cost savings within the first three years after the deal closes.Baxalta has been a stand-alone company for only six months. The drug maker was spun off from Baxter in July to streamline its operations with a focus on specialty drugs. Baxter, a medical supplies giant, still owns more than 19 percent and remains the largest shareholder, so the deal with Shire is incumbent upon its support.“Baxter fully supports the proposed combination of Shire and Baxalta, which will create a major biotechnology company and global leader in rare diseases,” said José E. Almeida, Baxter’s chairman and chief executive.The Baxalta spinoff was structured in a way to avoid creating a tax burden for Baxter shareholders who received shares in the new company.Preserving the “tax-free status” of the Baxalta spinoff was a key component of the takeover discussions, Shire’s chief executive, Flemming Ornskov, told reporters in a conference call on Monday. He said he was “confident” the current structure of the transaction would accomplish that.Tax considerations had helped drive a proposed $54 billion sale of Shire to the American drug maker AbbVie last year. After the Treasury Department announced new rules aimed at curbing inversions — when an American company acquires a foreign one to reincorporate overseas to lower its tax bill — AbbVie and Shire terminated their deal.AdvertisementShares of Baxalta were down more than 2 percent, at $39.06 in midday trading. Shire shares closed down more than 8 percent in London trading.Sign up to receive an email from The New York Times as soon as important news breaks around the world.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“This proposed combination allows us to realize our vision of building the leading biotechnology company focused on rare diseases,” Mr. Ornskov said in a news release. “Together, we will have leadership positions in multiple, high-value franchises and become the clear partner of choice in rare diseases.”The combined company could generate more than $20 billion in sales by 2020, with rare disease treatments accounting for 65 percent of its annual revenue, Shire said in a news release. The companies currently have about $13 billion in combined sales, according to Shire.Shire is best known for its drugs to treat attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, or A.D.H.D, which represent about one-third of its sales. To build up its diverse portfolio, Shire has engaged in a series of acquisitions, more recently focusing on rare diseases, which now make up 40 percent of revenue, according to Morningstar.In November, Shire agreed to acquire Dyax Corporation, which develops treatments for hereditary angioedema, or HAE, a rare genetic condition. A year ago, Shire agreed to acquire NPS Pharmaceuticals for about $5.2 billion.The Baxalta transaction is expected to close by the middle of this year and is subject to shareholder and regulatory approval.Baxalta shareholders would own about 34 percent of the combined company.Wayne T. Hockmeyer, Baxalta’s chairman, is to become deputy chairman of the combined company, and two additional directors from Baxalta are expected to join the combined company’s board.Evercore, Morgan Stanley, Barclays and Deutsche Bank advised Shire, as well as the law firms Ropes & Gray; Cravath, Swaine & Moore; and Slaughter & May. Goldman Sachs and Citigroup, as well as Kirkland & Ellis and Jones Day, are providing advice to Baxalta.A version of this article appears in print on January 12, 2016, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: Merger Will Create a Giant in Drugs for Rare Diseases.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.