By LIZ MOYERJAN. 12, 2016
The giant insurer MetLife said on Tuesday that it was exploring spinning off its retail life and annuity business in the United States because of financial pressures it is facing under regulations put in place in the wake of the financial crisis.The decision was made two years after the Financial Stability Oversight Council, a group created by the 2010 Dodd-Frank regulatory legislation, named MetLife a systemically important nonbank financial institution, or SiFi. That designation carries requirements to set aside more capital as a cushion against a substantial decline in the nation’s financial markets as occurred in 2008, potentially limiting its earnings.MetLife is considering several options, including an initial public offering to create a company that would, presumably, be better able to compete with smaller life insurance and annuity providers who are not subject to the same regulatory restrictions.MetLife is the largest life insurance company in the United States, with $880 billion in assets, including $240 billion of retail assets that would be part of the new company.AdvertisementAmerican International Group, Prudential Financial and General Electric Capital Corporation, the financing arm of General Electric, have also received the designation, which was largely bestowed on companies deemed so large that their failure would damage the American economy.AdvertisementIn a statement on Tuesday, Steven A. Kandarian, MetLife’s chairman, president and chief executive, said the risk of increased capital requirements contributed to the decision to explore breaking up the business, although exact plans have not been completed.“An independent company would benefit from greater focus, more flexibility in products and operations, and a reduced capital and compliance burden,” he said.The announcement, a result of a strategic review, was made weeks before oral arguments in Federal District Court in Washington in MetLife’s year-old case to eliminate the council’s designation.“Even though we are appealing our SiFi designation in court and do not believe any part of MetLife is systemic, this risk of increased capital requirements contributed to our decision,” Mr. Kandarian said.General Electric made a similar calculation last year, when it announced plans to dismantle G.E. Capital, which had grown into one of the biggest lenders in the United States.Last fall G.E. Capital agreed to sell a large part of its commercial leasing business in the United States to Wells Fargo. G.E. had already been selling pieces of its financing arm, spinning off its private-label credit card operation in a $2.9 billion initial public offering in 2014 to create Synchrony Financial.MetLife shareholders greeted the after-markets news favorably, pushing MetLife shares up 6.6 percent Tuesday evening.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The stock had declined 22 percent from January 2015 through Monday.“This is just the first step in the process,” Mr. Kandarian said.AdvertisementJay Gelb, an analyst at Barclays, said the relatively large size of the new company being created made an I.P.O. more likely than a sale to another insurer. He added that the plan put pressure on Prudential and A.I.G. “to take steps to minimize the anticipated impact of Fed regulation by potentially separating their businesses.”A.I.G. is already under pressure by the activist shareholder Carl C. Icahn to split apart, and it plans to present its strategic vision this month.MetLife’s remaining business after the separation would be corporate-oriented, such as its work with large corporate benefits plans. “In the U.S., it would allow us to focus even more intently on our group business, where we have long been the market leader,” Mr. Kandarian said.Remaining with MetLife would be its group, voluntary and work site benefits, corporate benefit funding, and business in Asia, Latin America, Europe, the Middle East and Africa. MetLife would also keep some of the life and annuity business sold through its agents, although it would not write new life or annuity policies after the split, it said.The proposed new company would be run by the MetLife executive vice president Eric Steigerwalt, and would have about a quarter of the current company’s 28,000 employees and 20 percent of its operating earnings.Businesses that would be under it include MetLife Insurance Company USA, General American Life Insurance Company, Metropolitan Tower Life Insurance Company and other subsidiaries.MetLife would move 75 percent of its book of variable annuities with living benefit guarantees to the new company, one of the businesses that would be hardest hit by the higher capital requirements. It would also move 85 percent of its universal life with secondary guarantees business.As a company, the new entity would be smaller than some rival insurance providers, such as Lincoln Financial, that do not have the council’s designation, and presumably would not have the same capital-intensive burdens.Likewise, the remaining MetLife would not have the capital requirements of the variable annuity business it would move off its books. The remaining company would have about $640 billion of assets, making it smaller than Prudential but larger than A.I.G.AdvertisementTo proceed with the plan, Metlife would need approval from its board and would have to file documents with the Securities and Exchange Commission.A version of this article appears in print on January 13, 2016, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: MetLife Is Considering Spinning Off Its Retail Life and Annuity Business.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.