AdvertisementSupported byBy Liz MoyerIf the American International Group’s chief executive, Peter D. Hancock, was planning to essentially maintain the status quo at the insurer, he should probably expect resistance from investors.An online questionnaire from the investment advisory firm Sanford C. Bernstein & Company, answered by about 100 A.I.G. investors, found that 86 percent of them want the insurer to act radically by selling businesses or spinning off divisions — or both — in an effort to better focus its operation, or in the words of the survey, “de-conglomerate.”Josh Stirling, a Bernstein analyst, posed the questions to institutional investors who are clients of Bernstein from Thursday to Monday. About 18 percent said they were among A.I.G.’s 30 largest stockholders. Thirty-nine percent said they were managers of mutual funds; 30 percent identified themselves as representing hedge funds.The results are not necessarily representative of all A.I.G. shareholders, and Bernstein itself has been critical of A.I.G.’s management. But the opinions could give more ammunition to Carl C. Icahn, the activist shareholder who has been pushing for big changes at A.I.G. The company is scheduled to update shareholders on its corporate strategy in two weeks.In response to the report, the company said only: “As previously announced, A.I.G. will provide an update on its strategy and its proactive plan to drive shareholder value on Jan. 26.”In his research note, which was released on Tuesday, Mr. Stirling wrote, “Management’s strategy has practically no support.”Some of the harshest criticism was directed at management. Mr. Stirling’s note included numerous anonymous comments. “Management is a serial disappointment,” read one.“We do not intend on remaining shareholders unless there are significant changes to the current structure/leadership,” read another.Just 4 percent of those who responded said they supported management’s current strategy. Thirteen percent said they supported management but wanted it to move more quickly.Eighty percent of investors said they were unhappy with the pace of progress in fixing A.I.G.’s property and casualty business, and 73 percent said they were unhappy with the decision to combine property and casualty insurance and life insurance businesses under “OneAIG.” In addition, 82 percent said they were unhappy with what they saw as a lack of urgency and intensity among senior management and the board.But if management is able to make enough changes and largely embrace the proposals of activists, it might be able to beat an activist slate of candidates for A.I.G.’s board that campaigned on a plan to break the business into three parts, Mr. Stirling wrote in the note.Advertisement