

      By NEIL IRWIN

UPDATED January 15, 2016

 When 2010 began, the United States economy seemed to be on the mend and leaders of the Federal Reserve discussed how they would unwind their extraordinary interventions from the crisis of the preceding two years. By the time it ended, the Fed was pumping another $75 billion a month into the financial system by buying bonds, aiming to keep the young expansion from falling apart. Newly released transcripts show how the Fed got from Point A to Point B. Released Friday after the customary five-year lag, the eight meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee (plus two unscheduled emergency conference calls) show, in real time, how the Fed under Chairman Ben S. Bernanke came to the conclusion that the economy was in greater peril than it had seemed at the start of the year and how new action would be needed to guard against a new recession or fall into a deflationary trap. The transcripts also show how Fed officials grappled with the crisis in the Eurozone, especially Greece, that nearly spiraled out of control in the spring and again in the fall. But the signature action of the Fed in 2010 was the November decision to launch the program known as “QE2,” a second round of quantitative easing that consisted of the Fed buying $600 billion in Treasury bonds over the course of nine months. It was a hard-fought battle internally, with several of Mr. Bernanke’s colleagues either reluctant supporters or outright opponents of the action. The bond buying also caused considerable political blowback both in the United States and abroad.As The Times reviews the hundreds of pages of transcripts, we are adding notable or revealing exchanges and nuggets here as we find them.Emergency Call As Europe stood on the precipice of a debt crisis, the Fed held an emergency conference call to decide what to do — and the discussion sheds light on how Mr. Bernanke dealt with his overseas counterparts. Jean-Claude Trichet, then the president of the European Central Bank, had told Mr. Bernanke of the E.C.B.’s intention to start a controversial program to intervene in markets by buying bonds, such as Greek government bonds, that private investors were dumping. But the E.C.B. would not announce it until after Europe’s fiscal authorities agreed to concerted action. Still, Fed officials in the United States were briefed about a European policy action long before the public. The same meeting offered a window into the Fed’s interactions with the Obama administration and Congress at a delicate time. The Europeans requested that the Fed open up “liquidity swap lines” to channel dollars to global banks in need. Mr. Bernanke agreed the step was justified on the merits, but did worry that it could create political blowback in Congress at a very delicate moment for the central bank. The Dodd-Frank Act, legislation intended to regulate the financial industry, was in the final stages of passage, and some proposed provisions of the law, in Mr. Bernanke’s view, would have compromised Fed independence. Headlines describing the Fed as bailing out European banks would be distinctly unhelpful in that context. However, Mr. Bernanke said he had assurances from Rahm Emanuel, then White House chief of staff, and Timothy Geithner, then Treasury secretary, that the Fed should do the right thing on the merits and that the Obama administration would have their back politically. F.O.M.C. Meeting Fed officials were worried that inflation was falling far short of the central bank’s 2 percent goal in the summer and fall, a major reason it undertook its quantitative easing program in November. At the September meeting, Janet L. Yellen, the current Fed chairwoman and then the president of the San Francisco Fed, cited some novel evidence that Americans’ inflation expectations were falling: A drop in the number of people doing Google searches for “inflation” and a rise in searches for “deflation.” F.O.M.C. Meeting  Ms. Yellen, the current Fed chairwoman and then the president of the San Francisco Fed, expressed deep concern about the state of the United States economy, even as some of her colleagues were more complacent. She emphasized during this meeting that the challenges of the domestic job market did not seem likely to change anytime soon, and that inflation was likely to remain well below the central bank’s 2 percent target. Fed policy meetings are usually serious — one might even argue breathtakingly boring — affairs, full of discussion of the yield curve and terms like premia and so on. Once in awhile, a moment of levity breaks through. Sometimes it involves Lady Gaga and a meat dress. John F. Moore, a vice president of the San Francisco Fed, represented the bank at this meeting, because Ms. Yellen was the outgoing president at this point, having been named vice chairwoman of the central bank, and her successor as San Francisco Fed president had not taken office. For context, two important things happened in the fall of 2010. The San Francisco Giants won the World Series. And the singer Lady Gaga wore a dress in which her body was draped in raw flank steak to the MTV Video Music Awards. Take it away, John F. Moore. The quantitative easing debate in a nutshell came down to whether the Fed, in buying $600 billion in securities, would create instability disproportionate to its potential to help the economy. Here are how three officials staked out views on that — Dallas Fed president Richard W. Fisher, a skeptic; and Chicago Fed President Charles L. Evans and governor Daniel K. Tarullo, supporters. Mr. Evans discussed a different method of bond-buying known as large-scale asset purchases, or L.S.A.P. Advertisement