AdvertisementSupported byBy Leslie Picker and Mike IsaacThe biggest question on Wall Street on Friday was why Square, the upstart mobile payments company, was so determined to go public now.Square is facing a market that is unenthusiastic about the initial public offerings of tech companies. Those start-ups that have already taken the I.P.O. plunge have faced pickier investors who are focused on profit — which Square does not have — rather than revenue growth, which, for Square, is beginning to slow.And Jack Dorsey, Square’s chief executive, is also the chief executive of Twitter, dividing his time in a way that may be a hard sell to public investors.Square knows that it faces an uphill battle. To account for its challenges, the company on Friday set its price per share in the $11 to $13 range, valuing the company at roughly $3.9 billion. That is well below its most recent private market estimate of $6 billion.For Square, the pricing decision has ramifications beyond the obvious. By going public at a lower-than-expected valuation — a down round — the company has triggered what is known as a ratchet, which requires it to give one class of investors more shares at the expense of others.The I.P.O. price is disappointing for the six-year-old Square, which has faced questions over the years about whether it can grow into — and ultimately beyond — its lofty valuation. More broadly, the company’s pricing is a test both of the appetite for technology offerings and of the disconnect between the boundless optimism of private company valuations and the realities of a scrutinizing public market.“A big name like Square going public at a down round paves the way to wonder what Silicon Valley unicorns will do so now,” said Kaylan Tildsley, a partner at Triton Research, which researches private companies.Still, potential investors are digging into the company’s prospectus and setting up meetings with management during the firm’s road show to market its stock, according to people briefed on the company’s plans. And from Square’s perspective, it may be better to take its chances in the public arena now than to wait until next year, when it could be competing for attention with other unicorns — start-ups valued at $1 billion or more — going through the same issues.“Their thought is, Let’s get out there sooner rather than later,” Ms. Tildsley said.Colleen Murray, a Square spokeswoman, declined to comment.Many tech I.P.O.s this year — including those of the software companies Box and Apigee — have achieved lower valuations than those assessed in the private market. In October, Pure Storage priced its I.P.O. near its private valuation and declined on the first day of trading.And public investors have been so skeptical of tech offerings that a mere 14 percent of initial public offerings in 2015 were from tech companies, according to Dealogic. That is the smallest percentage of tech I.P.O.s since 2008.Square’s I.P.O. is also a case study in ratchets, a type of protection that investors can use if a start-up they back does a subsequent round of funding at a lower valuation. In Square’s case, a ratchet will be triggered for Series E investors if the company goes public at anything less than $18.56 per share. If that happens, those investors will receive an additional number of shares to make up the difference, protecting them from taking a loss on their investment. This happens at the expense of earlier investors, whose shares will be diluted.While promoting Square to investment firms and leading the company through the I.P.O. process, Mr. Dorsey, 38, was named chief executive of Twitter, the nine-year-old social network, and is charged with turning around the company’s flagging user growth and internal morale. That divided attention is part of the reason Square is marketing the deal at a lower valuation, according to people briefed on the matter who spoke on the condition of anonymity.Founded in 2009 by Mr. Dorsey and a small group of friends, Square broke new ground for mom-and-pop stores by offering a compact, square-shaped card reader that works with smartphones and tablets. The product, aimed at merchants that did not previously accept credit cards, took the world of small and medium-size businesses by storm.The company says more than two million merchants use Square to process transactions every month, and over the last year it has processed more than $32.4 billion in payments. Square has also struck deals with major retailers like Starbucks, though it is better known for its long tail of small merchants across the United States, Canada and Japan.Critics have long assailed Square’s revenue structure as problematic: The company takes a small percentage of every credit card transaction it processes, but it must split that amount with banks, credit card networks and other financial intermediaries. That splitting of fees, detractors say, will make Square’s core business difficult to scale to highly profitable heights over time.But Square has persevered where others have long since failed. Last week, Amazon closed its credit card reader program for small and midsize businesses. PayPal offers a similar card reader, but it has devoted less attention to the project in recent years.Over the last few years, Square has expanded its business to move beyond payments processing in an attempt to capture additional revenue from the millions of merchants the company serves. Square now offers Square Capital, a cash advance program for businesses, as well as subscription-based appointments and payroll services.Advertisement