By SYDNEY EMBERJAN. 12, 2016
H.F. Lenfest, the owner of The Philadelphia Inquirer, The Philadelphia Daily News and Philly.com, announced on Tuesday that he had donated the publications to a newly formed nonprofit journalism institute.With the agreement, Mr. Lenfest cedes ownership of Philadelphia Media Network, which controls the three news outlets, to The Institute for Journalism in New Media. The institute was created at Mr. Lenfest’s behest and will operate under the Philadelphia Foundation. The publications will run independently.Daily newspapers are contending with falling circulation and dwindling advertising dollars, and many have sought new business models and new revenue sources to combat the decline.In a statement, Mr. Lenfest, 85, a former cable television magnate, said the agreement would allow the three publications “to continue long term in the new digital age.”Advertisement“My goal is to ensure that the journalism traditionally provided by the printed newspapers is given a new life and prolonged, while new media formats for its distribution are being developed,” Mr. Lenfest said. “Of all of the ventures I have been involved with in my life, nothing is more important than preserving the journalism that has been delivered by these storied news organizations.”AdvertisementPhiladelphia Media Network will remain a for-profit business, with its own independent board and management, and will operate as a taxable subsidiary of the institute. Individuals, corporations and foundations can donate to the institute and will be able to specify that the tax-deductible contributions be used to support journalism projects at the three publications. The institute will be run by a board of managers, whose members include Steve Coll, the dean of the Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism, and David Boardman, the dean of the School of Media and Communication at Temple University.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.At a news conference Tuesday morning, Mr. Lenfest called the new ownership structure “a perfect combination for the future of journalism in Philadelphia.”“This is all designed hopefully to perpetuate journalism,” he added. But he also acknowledged that the move would not eliminate the current challenges confronting the publications.Mr. Lenfest, known as Gerry, has provided $20 million to the institute’s endowment.The publications have been through a public and protracted power struggle. In 2012, a group of local businessmen, including Mr. Lenfest, purchased The Inquirer and the other properties, prompting fear that they sought to promote their own interests. When the editor in chief was fired, two of the men, Mr. Lenfest and Lewis Katz, a former owner of the New Jersey Nets, sued the newspaper and its publisher, arguing that the firing was a breach of contract. Mr. Lenfest and Mr. Katz eventually paid $88 million for the publications in 2014, taking them over from their partners, but Mr. Katz died days later in a plane crash. Mr. Lenfest later purchased Mr. Katz’s stake.Other publications operate under similar ownership structures. The Poynter Institute, a nonprofit journalism organization, owns The Tampa Bay Times. Newspapers like The Washington Post and The Los Angeles Times have received significant grants from The Ford Foundation. Other news organizations, including ProPublica and The Marshall Project, operate as nonprofits.A version of this article appears in print on January 13, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Philadelphia Publications Are Donated to Nonprofit.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.