By ANDREW POLLACKJAN. 13, 2016
SAN FRANCISCO —  It is still uncertain when J. Michael Pearson, the chief executive of the troubled drug maker Valeant Pharmaceuticals International, will return to the company, his temporary replacement told investors on Wednesday.Howard B. Schiller, who was named interim chief executive last week, said the company would not now provide any update on the condition of Mr. Pearson, who the company said was hospitalized with severe pneumonia just before Christmas.Mr. Schiller spoke to a packed room at the J.P. Morgan Healthcare Conference here in his first public appearance since his appointment.Mr. Schiller said Valeant had been informed by Mr. Pearson’s family last week that the timing of his return was uncertain.AdvertisementIt was at that point that the board of directors decided to appoint Mr. Schiller, the company’s former chief financial officer, to run the company in Mr. Pearson’s absence.Advertisement“It truly wasn’t the script or the circumstance under which I would have ever wanted to come back to Valeant,” said Mr. Schiller, who was the financial officer from 2011 until last June and is still a director. But he added: “Given how I felt about Mike, the company, its prospects and people, it was an easy decision.”Valeant would not comment on whether Mr. Pearson was still hospitalized.Valeant’s once high-flying stock has plummeted in the last few months as concerns grew about the sustainability of its business model, which has relied in part on acquiring drugs from others and sharply raising their prices. It has come under the scrutiny of both Congress and federal prosecutors over its pricing and distribution practices.Most recently, the company attracted criticism for what had been its secret relationship with a mail-order pharmacy that helped win reimbursement for its costly dermatology drugs. Valeant severed its ties with that pharmacy, Philidor Rx Services, and signed a new agreement with Walgreens.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Schiller said he was “100 percent committed” to the new job, adding that he and Valeant’s management team were “not caretakers” and were “moving things forward.”He and other executives did not announce any big new initiatives but said the company was continuing on its course.“The bottom line is we remain committed to our strategy,” Mr. Schiller said. He later added, “We are going to regain your trust and confidence.”As the company has said in the past, Mr. Schiller said that Valeant would focus on paying down debt this year rather than doing its usual large number of acquisitions. The company, he said, did not anticipate “excessive” price increases on drugs anymore.He also said that Valeant needed to devote more resources and attention to relations with investors, government and the news media. “We need to change the narrative,” Mr. Schiller said.Shares of Valeant fell nearly 3 percent on Wednesday, closing at $85.54. They were briefly above $260 in early August.A version of this article appears in print on January 14, 2016, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Valeant Official Says Chief’s Return Date Is Uncertain .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.