
Breakingviews By                     
RICHARD BEALES

JAN. 13, 2016
Steven A. Kandarian is hedging his bets.MetLife, the $50 billion American insurer Mr. Kandarian runs, may unload much of its domestic retail business. The carve-out would reduce the potential impact of higher capital requirements if the chief executive loses his fight with regulators over labeling MetLife a systemically important financial institution. Carl C. Icahn’s activism at American International Group suggests reshaping MetLife may pay off with shareholders.The company plans to put most of its variable annuity accounts in the new American retail unit. Included are three-quarters of those with bells and whistles that, in effect, expose MetLife to market risk in what it might have to pay out. Along with other nontraditional products, the variable annuities have been singled out by the International Association of Insurance Supervisors and Daniel K. Tarullo, a Federal Reserve governor and regulation specialist, as particularly deserving of higher capital cushions. Such firms, known by the acronym SIFI, are those whose failure would have a damaging effect on the American economy.The scale of any potential competitive disadvantage is not yet clear because the rules have not been written. But MetLife’s spinoff numbers work out conveniently. The new variable annuity-heavy business would have $240 billion of assets — just over a quarter of the $882 billion the insurer had on Sept. 30. That’s handily less than the $250 billion reported by not-so-dissimilar Lincoln National, which has not been tagged with a SIFI label.The remainder of MetLife, with roughly $640 billion of assets, would fit between Prudential Financial and A.I.G., the two other insurance SIFIs. On that simple yardstick, the spinoff would not render Mr. Kandarian’s battle with watchdogs moot – his company would still be big enough to merit the systemic designation and have to hold extra capital. But most of the products likely to attract big surcharges would be gone.Mr. Icahn’s proposal, made public in October, that A.I.G. should split into three to reduce complexity and escape the SIFI label gives MetLife additional motivation to act. Mr. Kandarian says he will continue his legal battle. But dividing in two makes the outcome less important. And judging by the 5 percent stock-price pop in Wednesday morning trade, it may help keep shareholders happier, too.Richard Beales is assistant editor for Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »