AdvertisementSupported byBy Jonathan Soble and Hiroko TabuchiTOKYO — Customers are quickly rethinking their relationship with Takata, leaving the fate of its big airbag business in doubt.After months of frustration, carmakers in Japan, Takata’s home market, rushed this week to distance themselves from the company, whose products are at the center of the largest automotive safety recall in history.On Friday, Nissan and Toyota dropped Takata as an airbag supplier after a similar move by Honda on Tuesday. Other Japanese automakers, including Mazda, Mitsubishi Motors and Fuji Heavy Industries, the maker of Subaru vehicles, said this week that they were considering phasing out Takata’s main airbag technology.For Takata, those relationships are critical. Airbags are a major part of Takata’s business, generating about 40 percent of its sales. And Toyota, Honda and Nissan are the three largest car manufacturers in Japan, with sales of close to 20 million in 2014.Akio Toyoda, Toyota’s president, said at a news conference Friday that the company was “placing top priority on ensuring the safety and confidence of our customers.”The trouble centers on the ammonium nitrate propellant in Takata’s airbag inflaters. The ammonium nitrate can destabilize, in extreme cases causing the device to explode and send metal fragments into the vehicle. Eight deaths and more than 100 injuries have been linked to the defective inflaters.American safety regulators this week effectively barred Takata from continuing to use ammonium nitrate, its main propellant. A consent order accompanying a $70 million fine imposed by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration requires that the company phase out inflaters containing the compound unless it can prove they are safe.Recalls of tens of millions of vehicles have already taken a toll on Takata’s finances.The company reported a net loss of 29.5 billion yen, or a little more than $240 million, last fiscal year. Its share price dropped 6 percent on Friday, extending its decline to 40 percent since Honda dropped it as a supplier.Takata’s equity ratio, a measure of its ability to absorb financial shocks, was just over 31 percent at the end of the fiscal year in March, down from more than 50 percent in 2008. At the current level, Takata is below average for a company its size, though still not in territory that analysts consider imminently dangerous.Akio Kamimura, an analyst at Japan Credit Rating Agency, said a crucial question for Takata was how quickly it could switch to another propellant. He did not question the company’s ability to survive, saying stable sales of products like seatbelts would provide a financial cushion.Nonetheless, Mr. Kamimura this week cut his rating of Takata’s creditworthiness to just above junk-bond status. “The prospect of lawsuit-related costs is also still a worry, so the outlook is negative,” he said.In its latest earnings report, Takata said it was still impossible to estimate the full financial costs. It faces an array of issues, including servicing the recalls, handling lawsuits related to its airbags, phasing out of its ammonium nitrate propellant and a general loss of business.Takata said that as of the most recent quarter, it had set aside about 68 billion yen, or $558 million, to cover expected costs related to the recalls. And the company anticipates further costs in negotiations with its automaker customers.Takata said it expected to earn a profit this year, albeit a significantly smaller one than it had forecast. It cut its projection for net profit in the fiscal year ending in March to 5 billion yen, or about $41 million, from 20 billion yen, citing the fine by American regulators and increased costs related to the vehicle recalls.Propellant materials vary among airbag makers, but since the early 2000s, Takata has favored ammonium nitrate, even as questions have mounted about whether the compound was vulnerable to changes in moisture and temperature. A small number of its inflater models contain guanidine nitrate, and Takata said on Friday that it planned to expand production of those. But it declined to provide specifics about volumes or timetables.“We will start changing to guanidine nitrate in the U.S. market, beginning with hot and humid regions, then move gradually to other markets,” Akiko Watanabe, a spokeswoman for Takata, said in a telephone interview.Mr. Toyoda said Toyota would not rule out buying inflaters from Takata if it changed the design.“As for other types of inflaters, we’d consider buying from Takata if their safety could be guaranteed,” he said.This week, Honda, Takata’s largest customer, said that this year, about 25 percent of its new vehicles had been fitted with airbags with inflaters made by Takata, and that it expected to complete the switch to other suppliers by March.Toyota makes about 10 million vehicles a year, more than double Honda’s production, but it buys fewer Takata airbags. Toyota declined to indicate how many of its vehicles had Takata airbags or how soon it expected to complete its phaseout.Steve Yaeger, a spokesman for Nissan, said that Japanese automaker would also halt its use of Takata’s inflaters.“In line with the recent announcement from the United States’ National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, we have decided to no longer use inflaters containing ammonium nitrate in airbags for future models,” Mr. Yaeger said. “We will continue to put our customers’ safety first and work to replace the inflaters in vehicles under recall as quickly as possible.”Laura Conrad, a spokeswoman for Mitsubishi Motors North America, said that its airbag supply relationship with Takata was under review. “The safety of our customers is a top priority,” she said by email. “Mitsubishi is reviewing all available information and will take action as warranted that is consistent with its commitment to the safety of its vehicles and our customers.”Rebecca Kiehne, a spokeswoman for BMW of North America, a Takata customer, declined to comment on the issue. Jonathan Soble reported from Tokyo and Hiroko Tabuchi from New York. Hisako Ueno contributed reporting from Tokyo and Bill Vlasic from Detroit.Advertisement