AdvertisementSupported byBy John KoblinPASADENA, Calif. — After the first season of E!’s “I Am Cait,” the reality series about Caitlyn Jenner’s first months as a transgender woman, there was no mistaking that it was a different show from the one she used to star on, “Keeping Up With the Kardashians.”“I Am Cait” explored weighty topics like the high suicide rate among transgender people and the difficulty of transitioning in the public eye.“It was a conscious decision that I wanted this show to be about the issues,” Caitlyn Jenner said at a Television Critics Association press event on Thursday. “We all love good clothes and all that kind of stuff, but I really wanted the people to get to know all of my girls, everybody that’s involved with the show.”She was referring to the transgender friends who became prominent cast members in the first season and will continue to be this season. Ms. Jenner added, referring to her children: “I love my kids, I have a great relationship with all my children, but this is a different show. This is about a serious issue.”E!’s second season of “I Am Cait” will debut March 6. The first season opened with big expectations after Ms. Jenner’s revelation that she was transgender. There was a highly rated Diane Sawyer interview, a prominent Vanity Fair cover, and a well-received speech at ESPN’s annual award show, the ESPYs.Ratings for Ms. Jenner’s series were solid but never came close to the heights of her ABC interview or the ESPN speech, and they slowed down after a strong opening. The show averaged about 2.2 million viewers per episode and 1.3 million viewers in the 18-to-49-year-old demographic, according to Nielsen live plus seven-day delayed data.For E!, those ratings were enough. Jeff Olde, the head of programming at E!, said that having viewers “talk about trans issues and to have the most famous transgender person on the planet be the center point of a show for an entertainment network like E! is a hugely important thing. It’s culturally significant.”He added: “We always love ratings but we do the show for many reasons.”One of the bigger storylines of the second season will include a road trip Ms. Jenner takes with her transgender friends. Also, this season, like the first, will include several of the Kardashians and Kris Jenner, Ms. Jenner’s ex-wife. And Ms. Jenner continues to support points of view that appear to be at odds with the trans movement, notably that she is a proud Republican.“Isn’t it good that they have an ally, somebody on the team, who can go in there and maybe change their minds?” Ms. Jenner said on Thursday, when asked about her political beliefs.Ms. Jenner also spoke about her decision to bring “I Am Cait” to E!, the same network as “Keeping Up With the Kardashians,” and suggested it was about logistics as much as anything else.“It gave me the opportunity that if I wanted to go to Kylie’s birthday, it’s not like they have to hide me in the background because I can’t be on camera,” Ms. Jenner said.And when one media member complimented her on her appearance and asked her how she stays in such good shape, Ms. Jenner paid homage to her past.“Eat your Wheaties!” she said.Advertisement