By HIROKO TABUCHIJAN. 14, 2016
The board of American Apparel, a struggling retailer that filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy in October, has rejected a takeover offer from investors aligned with the company’s ousted founder, Dov Charney, according to a person with knowledge of the situation.This month, the investment funds Hagan Capital Group and Silver Creek Capital Partners offered to buy American Apparel, and bring back Mr. Charney, in a bid valued at $300 million.The retailer’s board fired Mr. Charney in 2014, accusing him of misusing company funds and other misconduct. Mr. Charney has denied those accusations.It was unclear whether Hagan Capital and Silver Creek would raise the offer or seek to persuade a bankruptcy judge to accept their bid over a plan put forward by American Apparel’s senior creditors.AdvertisementAmerican Apparel is set to seek approval of its current reorganization plan, which would cut about $200 million of debt, at a Jan. 20 hearing in Delaware. Under that plan, the retailer would be taken over by lenders, including Monarch Alternative Capital, Coliseum Capital and Goldman Sachs Asset Management.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Calls to Hagan Capital and Silver Creek Capital were not returned Thursday evening. An American Apparel representative declined to comment.The board’s decision to reject the bid was first reported by Bloomberg.Once the epitome of made-in-America cool, American Apparel has more recently struggled under mismanagement and losses in the face of an onslaught of fast-fashion labels like H&M.AdvertisementAmerican Apparel runs just over 200 stores in 19 countries, most of which creditors have promised to keep open.A version of this article appears in print on January 15, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Business Briefing; American Apparel Is Said to Reject Takeover Bid.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.