By NATHANIEL POPPERJAN. 14, 2016
In recent years, meetings between James P. Gorman, Morgan Stanley’s chief executive, and the bank’s investors often came back to the same question: When was Mr. Gorman going to do more to deal with the bank’s most problematic business — its bond and commodity trading desks.“They were saying ‘You should do more,’ and also asking ‘Why aren’t you already?’ ” said an investor who attended a 2013 lunch with Mr. Gorman at the Boston Harbor Hotel. The investor spoke on the condition of anonymity for fear of losing his access to the bank.After long holding off on a big overhaul, Mr. Gorman last month began the sort of cuts investors were pushing for — announcing plans to lay off roughly a quarter of the staff, or hundreds of employees, on its bond and commodity desks, known as the fixed-income division.Last week, the executive who oversees the trading businesses, Colm Kelleher, was elevated to the No. 2 spot in the firm, while Gregory J. Fleming, who headed wealth management, announced that he would leave. And on Thursday, the firm announced a shake-up in the fixed-income division’s management ranks.AdvertisementStill, investors have already begun to ask whether the changes are too little, too late.Since word of the cuts surfaced in December, Morgan Stanley’s stock has fallen more than any of its largest competitors, and several analysts have lowered their projection for the bank’s future stock price.AdvertisementMr. Gorman has been credited with successfully steadying many parts of the company, leading its push into the more stable earnings of wealth management. Yet the stock price is now lower than it was when he took over as chief executive in January 2010.The new strategy will take center stage on Tuesday, when Morgan Stanley announces its 2015 financial results. It is assumed that Mr. Gorman will lay out the full details of the recent changes, and the response could determine his future.“The pressure is on James Gorman to reassure investors that they are on the right path,” said Mike Mayo, a bank analyst with CLSA Americas. “Either you convince the market you are the right person or we need a new person.”The situation facing Mr. Gorman is a symptom of the broader challenges confronting Wall Street, as new regulations have raised the cost of doing what was once the most profitable work in the financial industry: buying, selling and holding bonds, commodities, derivatives and currencies. Wall Street banks have struggled with difficult markets and the added regulatory burden, while some big European banks have gone further, making major retreats in the business.Among American banks, Morgan Stanley is under particular pressure because, since 2010, Mr. Gorman has already been through four leadership teams within his fixed-income division, trying to find the right formula. So far none have worked. The management turnover itself is causing concern for investors and analysts who worry that Morgan Stanley is unlikely to stick with any strategy for long.“Truthfully, over the last few years, Morgan Stanley has flip-flopped” on its fixed income business, said Michael Wong, a bank analyst at Morningstar. “The flip-flopping has increased my uncertainty about that business.”The most basic problem facing Mr. Gorman is that the returns from his company as a whole have remained below the amount Morgan Stanley is presumed to pay its shareholders for their money: 10 percent.AdvertisementThis closely watched measure of profitability is called return on equity. In 2013, Mr. Gorman said that he aimed to get Morgan Stanley above that 10 percent threshold.But he has failed so far, and in the first nine months of 2015 the company’s return on equity was actually lower than it was during the same period in 2014, coming in at 8.8 percent.If it were not for the fixed-income business, Mr. Gorman would already be comfortably above his target. But the bond trading business lowers Morgan Stanley’s return on equity because it increases the level of equity and capital that the bank has to maintain.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Gorman did not move sooner, in part, because he was not anticipating the Federal Reserve’s continuing efforts to increase capital requirements for large banks, according to people briefed on the firm’s thinking.The continuing evolution of Morgan Stanley is taking it further and further away from where it was a decade ago, when it was run by a bond trader, John J. Mack, and was earning big profits from its mortgage trading desks.Mr. Gorman, an Australian with a background in consulting and wealth management, came in after those bond desks took Morgan Stanley to the brink of collapse during the financial crisis. Mr. Gorman had a mandate to shift the firm away from riskier businesses and build up things like the Smith Barney wealth management division that Morgan Stanley acquired from Citi during the crisis.Morgan Stanley has also had recent success in the units that advise companies on mergers and acquisitions, and trade stocks, which do not have the same high regulatory costs as bond trading.The emphasis on these businesses led many investors to believe that Morgan Stanley would no longer be as prone to big swings in the markets. And Mr. Gorman did successfully halve the amount of its resources dedicated to fixed-income trading over the last three years — at least in terms of capital.But he hesitated from pulling back too far, and occasionally appeared to be pushing further into the business, like when he brought in Glenn Hadden, a prominent bond trader from Goldman Sachs. Mr. Hadden had to leave Morgan Stanley after facing questions from regulators about activity during his time at Goldman.AdvertisementBank shareholders and some executives within the bank pushed Morgan Stanley to make stronger moves to get out of the business. In 2013, an internal review of the bank’s resources, conducted by all the top executives, created dissension in the ranks about how reliant the bank still was on bond trading, according to people briefed on the review.Financial results in the last year have served as a reminder of how Morgan Stanley’s financial results are still tied to what happens on its fixed-income desks, even though they now account for less than 10 percent of the firm’s overall revenues.The problem for turning the business around is that even after employees are let go, the bank must still maintain the elevated levels of capital it previously needed to conduct the business. The firm will only be able to get rid of that capital if it can win approval from regulators, which has not been easy for any bank and can take years. Until then, the so-called trapped capital will continue to restrain Morgan Stanley’s return on equity.The man who was given the mandate, last October, to deal with this problem is Ted Pick, an executive who came from Morgan Stanley’s successful equities trading business. His elevation has been questioned by some investors who worry that he does not have any experience in fixed income, a very different marketplace.But Mr. Pick, who is now the company’s global head of trading, quickly began cutting from across the bank’s trading desks over the last month. On Thursday, he announced that one of his old deputies from the equities trading business, Sam Kellie-Smith, would now have responsibility for the fixed-income operations.The investor at that 2013 lunch in Boston says he worries that the results of all this will not be different from what happened after previous shake-ups. But he is willing to see it out.“We can take another run at this,” he said. “This is it. This is the shot.”A version of this article appears in print on January 15, 2016, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Morgan Stanley Heeds Its Investors.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.