AdvertisementSupported byBy Liz MoyerState Street’s banking unit will pay $12 million to settle Securities and Exchange Commission charges that an executive and an outside lobbyist operated a pay-to-play scheme to win the firm contracts from Ohio pension funds.The former executive, Vincent DeBaggis, who was head of State Street’s public funds group, is also settling with the S.E.C. over the matter, agreeing to repay $174,202.81, plus a $100,000 penalty.The public funds group is responsible for handling State Street’s work overseeing public retirement funds. The S.E.C. says the two individuals struck an agreement with the deputy treasurer of Ohio during the time of the scheme in which they would make cash payments and political campaign contributions in exchange for the business.In return, State Street received three sub-custodian contracts for three of the state’s big public pensions.State Street and Mr. DeBaggis consented to the orders without admitting to or denying the findings. State Street disclosed the receipt of a so-called Wells notice last June, warning that the S.E.C. might pursue action. In a statement, the Boston-based company said the activity violated its code of conduct and was done without informing others in management at the bank. State Street fired Mr. DeBaggis and in 2012 eliminated the hiring of consultants to solicit asset servicing business from state retirement plans. “We have cooperated fully with the S.E.C.’s investigation and are pleased to put this matter behind us,” the firm said.The lobbyist, Robert Crowe, is a law firm partner and fund-raiser who worked on behalf of State Street from 1993 to 2011. The S.E.C. filed a lawsuit against him on Thursday in federal court in Ohio, saying he illegally filtered $16,000 through his personal bank account to the treasurer’s campaign funds and continued to make illicit campaign contributions until September 2010 out of fear that the business could be rescinded.The S.E.C. says Mr. Crowe acted as a “conduit” for corrupt payments from State Street to influence decisions about public pension contracts.“Pay-to-play schemes are intolerable, and lobbyists and their clients should understand that the S.E.C. will be aggressive in holding participants accountable,” said David Glockner, the director of the S.E.C.’s Chicago office.Arthur McMahon III, the lawyer for Mr. Crowe, said in a statement: “The S.E.C.’s allegations regarding Mr. Crowe are patently untrue. Moreover, nothing the S.E.C. has alleged would constitute securities fraud, a breach of the S.E.C.’s pay-to-play rules or a violation of any other rule the S.E.C. has authority to enforce.” He added that he believed Mr. Crowe would be vindicated.The S.E.C. said Mr. DeBaggis also arranged a lobbying agreement with Mohammed Noure Alo, an immigration lawyer with no lobbying experience but connections to the Ohio deputy treasurer, Amer Ahmad. Under the agreement, Mr. Alo was to be paid $8,000 a month. That fee would go up to $10,000 a month if State Street got the business of at least two Ohio pensions.From February 2010 to April 2011, State Street paid $160,000 in lobbying fees to Mr. Alo, a substantial portion of which made its way to Mr. Ahmad, the S.E.C. said. Mr. DeBaggis knew Mr. Alo was acting on Mr. Ahmad’s instructions and sharing his fees, the commission said.Mr. Ahmad started demanding more, however, according to the S.E.C.’s lawsuit against Mr. Crowe. Mr. DeBaggis arranged a meeting between Mr. Ahmad, Mr. Crowe and others in March 2010, in which Mr. Crowe would be able to describe how he could raise funds for the treasurer. After that, Mr. Ahmad demanded $20,000 to $25,000 from Mr. DeBaggis within five days, the suit said.In 2014, Mr. Alo was sentenced to four years in prison after pleading guilty in connection with a bribery and money-laundering scheme involving the Ohio treasurer’s office. Mr. Ahmad also pleaded guilty in that other case and fled the United States to Pakistan before sentencing, only to be extradited last year. He was sentenced to 15 years in prison.Mr. DeBaggis and Mr. Crowe also arranged the payment of $60,000 in political contributions to the Ohio treasurer’s election campaign in return for Mr. Ahmad’s awarding State Street the sub-custodian contracts, the S.E.C. said.Mr. Crowe believed that raising funds for the incumbent treasurer’s campaign was critical to retaining State Street as a client, the S.E.C. said.Advertisement