By REUTERSJAN. 14, 2016
WASHINGTON —  The number of Americans filing for unemployment benefits rose unexpectedly last week but remained at levels associated with a healthy labor market, the Labor Department reported on Thursday.Other data on Thursday showed that import prices tumbled in December for a sixth consecutive month as the cost of petroleum and a range of other goods fell further, suggesting that tame inflation could persist in the near term.Initial claims for state unemployment benefits increased 7,000 to a seasonally adjusted 284,000 for the week ended Jan. 9, the Labor Department said. It was the 45th consecutive week that claims remained below the 300,000 mark, which is associated with strong labor market conditions. That is the longest such stretch since the early 1970s.“Claims are still low from a historical perspective, and we see little evidence in this morning’s report to suggest anything other than healthy labor market separations,” said Jesse Hurwitz, an economist at Barclays in New York.AdvertisementEconomists had forecast claims slipping to 275,000 last week. The increase probably reflects volatility rather than a change in labor market conditions, as the data is difficult to adjust during holidays. Claims also tend to increase at the start of each quarter.
            Weekly number of people who have filed for unemployment benefits for the first time.        400,0004-week moving average300 2001000ASONDJJJAN. 14, 2016
The four-week moving average of claims, considered a better measure of labor market trends because it strips out week-to-week volatility, rose 3,000 last week, to 278,750.AdvertisementThe labor market has largely shrugged off weakness in the economy; nonfarm payrolls surged in December. Economic growth has been hurt by a strong dollar, slowing global demand, efforts by businesses to cut excess inventory and spending cuts by energy companies.In another report, the Labor Department said import prices decreased 1.2 percent last month after dropping 0.5 percent in November. Import prices have now declined in 16 of the last 18 months, a sign that they will continue to weigh on consumer goods prices. For all of 2015, import prices fell 8.2 percent, the largest calendar-year decrease since 2008.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The strong dollar and a sharp drop in oil prices are keeping imported inflation subdued, leaving overall inflation well below the Federal Reserve’s 2 percent target. With the dollar continuing to rise against major currencies and oil prices hovering at 12-year lows, inflation will probably remain benign for a while.Economists say modest inflation together with slowing domestic and global growth could make the Fed cautious about increasing interest rates at its March policy meeting, despite tightening labor conditions.“Import prices should continue to exert a drag on domestic inflation in the first half of 2016,” said Sam Bullard, a senior economist at Wells Fargo Securities in Charlotte, N.C. “The incoming data continues to provide uncertainty over the likelihood of a rate hike in March.”The Fed last month raised its benchmark overnight interest rate by a quarter of a percentage point to between 0.25 percent and 0.50 percent, the first rate increase in nearly a decade. In December, imported petroleum prices plunged 10 percent after sliding 3.6 percent in November. Excluding petroleum, import prices slipped 0.4 percent after falling 0.3 percent in November.A version of this list appears in print on January 15, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: New Jobless Claims Rise, and Import Prices Slump.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.