
Breakingviews By                     
ANTONY CURRIE

JAN. 14, 2016
JPMorgan Chase’s fourth-quarter results offer a compelling case for cranking up the industry’s use of financial technology.The bank, run by Jamie Dimon, is one of the industry’s top performers. Yet its annualized return on equity for the three months to December was just 9 percent — and it relied on one-offs to get there. New technology offers a way to increase both revenue and savings.JPMorgan has done a lot to improve its operations in recent months. Core loans grew 5 percent from 2015’s third quarter and 16 percent over the course of the year. The bank cut many capital-intensive assets, including tough-to value ones, noncore deposits and over-the-counter derivatives. That means the capital buffer it is required to maintain as a systemically important financial institution ought to drop from 4.5 percent of total assets in 2014 to 3.5 percent now.Yet JPMorgan and its competitors seem destined to amble along with returns on equity slightly above or below the 10 percent considered enough to cover a big bank’s cost of capital. Mr. Dimon’s outfit, for example, is expected to earn an average of 10.3 percent return on equity for each of the next three years, according to Thomson Reuters.AdvertisementRising interest rates won’t help much. A one percentage point increase would raise return on equity at JPMorgan, Bank of America and Citigroup around one percentage point — handy, but hardly earth shattering.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.All those lenders are cutting costs. JPMorgan is already halfway to its 2017 target of reducing expenses $3.8 billion. Yet financial technology could help it do much more. A central system for checking clients’ basic data for a number of banks could reduce back-office costs by 10 percent, according to the Boston Consulting Group. Smart tech could also slash expenses in lending, invoice payments, telephone banking and other areas.AdvertisementA 15 percent reduction in overall bills would, for example, add three percentage points to JPMorgan’s return on equity. Technology could also create business by making it easier to satisfy customers and find new clients.A deal with the small-business lender OnDeck and a new payments system called ChasePay has already put JPMorgan ahead of many of its peers. All of them, though, could do a lot more.DealBook readers: The Reuters Breakingviews predictions book, “Stairway to Heaven, Highway to Hell,”  offers smart financial ideas for the 2016 playbook. Click here to read the book. (Or download the PDF.)Antony Currie is an associate editor at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »