AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Antony CurrieAmerica’s too-big-to-fail cabal is nursing $130 billion in damages. That’s the amount of market value lost by the nation’s top six banks in the last two weeks. The shares of all but Wells Fargo now trade below book value, suggesting stockholders are bracing for a year or more of pain. Whether they’re right looks like a tossup.Few banks ended 2015 on a high note. JPMorgan Chase, which reported fourth-quarter earnings on Thursday, needed a few one-time boosts to eke out an annualized return on equity of 9 percent – just below the 10 percent considered necessary to cover the cost of capital. Citigroup managed just 6 percent for the three months to December. Wells hit a decent 12.2 percent, but as with rivals, revenue is barely growing. Yet all are doing more business: JPMorgan’s core loans rose 16 percent last year, and credit losses are near record lows.Banks will have very little leeway once debt problems arise. Those seem limited at the moment to the energy sector, with low unemployment and falling oil prices cause for optimism. And if the Federal Reserve raises interest rates again, banks should earn a bit more, though not enough to substantially increase returns.Low or nonexistent growth is nothing new, though. What’s changed is that investors are increasingly concerned that China’s troubles presage global economic problems that could hobble America’s plodding recovery.As a result, Citi and Bank of America are trading at less than two-thirds of book value. Morgan Stanley has fallen to 75 percent of assets minus liabilities, Goldman Sachs to 92 percent and JPMorgan to 94 percent. That means shareholders are assuming either that the banks will earn less than expected or that the value of loans, bonds and other assets on their balance sheets is overstated – or both.Bank of America, Goldman and Morgan Stanley have also dropped below tangible book value, which strips out good will from acquisitions and other amorphous assets. That’s a dubious distinction that in the last year or two was limited to Citi.Investors may be overreacting to China’s stock market ructions. If so, now is a great time for bank executives to buy back stock. If not, Wall Street’s largest firms are in for a bumpy ride.DealBook readers: The Reuters Breakingviews predictions book, “Stairway to Heaven, Highway to Hell,” offers smart financial ideas for the 2016 playbook. Click here to read the book. (Or download the PDF.)Rocky Road Ahead for Big BanksFourth-quarter earnings were mostly a fizzle for the “too big to fail” crowd, and the last two weeks have cut deeply into their market value.Advertisement