By STANLEY REEDNOV. 6, 2015
LONDON — ArcelorMittal, the world’s largest steel maker, on Friday reported a $700 million loss for the third quarter, blaming falling prices and competition from Chinese exports.In a news release, the company said that customers were hesitating to buy its products and that “unsustainably low export prices from China,” which produces far more steel than any other country, had hurt its bottom line.Lakshmi N. Mittal, the company’s chief executive, said in an interview on Friday that steel demand in the company’s main markets, Europe and North America, was healthy, but that low-cost Chinese steel was depressing prices.“The Chinese are dumping in our core markets,” Mr. Mittal said. “The question is how long the Chinese will continue to export below their cost.”AdvertisementThe company’s loss for the period compared with a $22 million profit for last year’s third quarter.AdvertisementArcelorMittal, which is based in Luxembourg, also sharply cut its projection for 2015 earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization — the main measure of a steel company’s finances. The new estimate is $5.2 billion to $5.4 billion, down from the previous projection of $6 billion to $7 billion.On a call with reporters, Aditya Mittal, Mr. Mittal’s son and the company’s chief financial officer, said that a flood of low-price Chinese exports was the biggest challenge for ArcelorMittal in the European and North American markets.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The company estimates that Chinese steel exports this year will reach 110 million metric tons, compared with 94 million tons last year and 63 million tons in 2013. ArcelorMittal produced 93 million metric tons of steel in 2014.ArcelorMittal is one of several companies operating in the United States that have brought complaints against the dumping of Chinese steel. On Tuesday, the United States Commerce Department issued a preliminary ruling in those companies’ favor in one product category, saying it would impose tariffs of up to 236 percent on imports of corrosion-resistant steel from some Chinese companies, on the grounds that their products are subsidized by the government.“That clearly shows there is substance in the trade cases,” Lakshmi Mittal said.The slowing Chinese economy and resulting drop in demand has caused prices of almost all commodities to fall. Steel is no exception. ArcelorMittal said its average selling prices were down nearly 20 percent in North America and Europe in the third quarter, compared with a year earlier, and were continuing to fall.The price decline was a major reason the company’s sales in the quarter fell to $15.6 billion, compared with $20.1 billion in the period last year.ArcelorMittal has invested heavily in mining in recent years, as a hedge against its weakening steel business. But falling prices for iron ore and coal have undermined that strategy. The company said it had recorded a $2 million operating loss in mining in the quarter.To conserve cash, the company said it would not pay a dividend for 2015. It paid 20 cents a share last year. The stock was up more than 2 percent in afternoon trading in Europe on Friday.A version of this article appears in print on November 7, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Business Briefing; Steel Maker ArcelorMittal Reports $700 Million Loss.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.