By DANIEL VICTORJAN. 15, 2016
As Chipotle Mexican Grill tries to recover from a series of contaminations that have caused some customers and investors to flee, it said it would shut all its stores for several hours on Feb. 8 to hold food safety meetings with employees.“We are hosting a national team meeting to thank our employees for their hard work through this difficult time, discuss some of the food safety changes we are implementing, and answer questions from employees,” Chris Arnold, a Chipotle spokesman, said in an email. The stores will open at 3 p.m., later than the usual start time of about 10 a.m. or 11 a.m., skipping the lunch hour rush on a Monday.The restaurant chain, which has more than 2,000 locations and has created an identity based largely on using locally grown, fresh ingredients, has been contending with a series of E. coli outbreaks. Five customers in Seattle became ill with the bacteria in July, and there have been at least six outbreaks in the last six months.Chipotle indicated last week that the federal authorities were pursuing a criminal case. The company said it had received a grand jury subpoena related to a norovirus outbreak that sickened 234 people in Simi Valley, Calif., in August. Chipotle has said that outbreak and another in Boston that affected at least 136 customers in December were caused by sick employees who ignored company policies that prohibited them from working.AdvertisementMore than 500 people are estimated to have become ill after eating in Chipotle restaurants in the second half of 2015.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The company said in December that it may never know what caused an E. coli outbreak in November linked to two restaurants in Kansas and Oklahoma. “If there’s a silver lining in this, it is that by not knowing for sure what the cause is, it’s prompted us to look at every ingredient we use with an eye to improving our practices,” Mr. Arnold said this week.“We did a really comprehensive review of food safety practices from farm to restaurants,” he added. “From that assessment we developed a food safety plan, which we hope will establish Chipotle as a leader in food safety.”AdvertisementChipotle’s same-store sales dropped by 14.6 percent in the last quarter.A version of this article appears in print on January 16, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Chipotle Safety Meeting Is Planned at All Stores .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.