By HIROKO TABUCHIJAN. 15, 2016
Gas is cheap, and while the stock markets are wavering, the job market is strong. Rising wages are putting more money in people’s pockets.Yet retail sales, an important barometer of the economy, fell 0.1 percent in December from the previous month, according to figures released by the Commerce Department on Friday, raising concerns that the economic recovery is not as robust as it may seem.Much of the decline came down to a drop in retail revenue among sellers of gasoline because of the lower gas prices. Growth in car sales also slowed slightly in December, after a bumper year for the auto industry.But even excluding receipts of autos and gas, retail sales were flat in December, after a 0.4 percent rise in November. Economists had forecast that December would mirror the gains recorded in the previous month.AdvertisementThe National Retail Federation, an industry trade group, separately estimated that holiday sales rose just 3 percent from the previous year, far below its projection of 3.7 percent growth.AdvertisementThe tepid showing by consumers adds to worries among investors, already troubled by the market turmoil in China and elsewhere around the globe, that the recovery in the American economy remains fragile. Last week, the International Monetary Fund warned that the global spillover from China’s economic slowdown was much larger than it anticipated and could continue to “spook” world markets.Lackluster retail sales also reflect wider shifts in the habits and fortunes of many American consumers, economists say. Much of the wage gain has come at the top end of the wage distribution, leaving many middle-income Americans feeling less than well-off. And burned by the Great Recession, many households have increased their savings, while paring back borrowing.When they do spend, more shoppers hunt for deals, a shift evident in the recent success of heavy discounters like T.J. Maxx and Marshalls. To compete, major department store chains like Macy’s and Nordstrom have raced to open their own off-price locations.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Brick-and-mortar stores have also struggled to contend with the rise of online retailers, led by the juggernaut Amazon. According to one estimate, Amazon accounted for almost a quarter of all retail sales growth last year.For the rest of the retail industry, business has become a cutthroat battle for market share, involving longer sales seasons and deeper discounts.This holiday’s winners include Lululemon Athletica, the upscale maker of stretchy yoga pants, which raised its earnings outlook as it continued to ride a boom in athletics wear. L Brands, which owns Victoria’s Secret, reported its “best December ever” after the lingerie brand generated holiday buzz with a star-studded fashion show.But heavyweights like Gap and Macy’s reported dismal holiday sales, as warm weather in much of the country hurt sales of winter clothing. And on Thursday, Best Buy said its winter had been disappointing so far, with sales hurt by a lull in demand for smartphones and other consumer electronics despite heavy discounting.One consequence of intense retail competition has been a decline in the price of many consumer goods. In the 12 months to November, the price of men’s and women’s apparel, home furnishings, televisions, pet products, books and jewelry have all declined, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics. But households are spending more on housing and medical care, where costs are rising.While falling prices for crucial items may be good news for consumers in the short term, a prolonged fall can condition consumers to hold off on spending as they wait for better deals. That can suppress consumer spending further, sapping corporate profits.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.