AdvertisementSupported byBy Amie TsangHONG KONG — General Electric said on Friday that it had agreed to sell its appliances business to Qingdao Haier of China for $5.4 billion in cash.The deal includes the stake of 48.4 percent that G.E. Appliances owns in Mabe, a Mexican appliances company.The Chinese appliances company, which had revenue of about $32.6 billion in 2014, snapped up the appliances unit after a G.E. deal with Electrolux of Sweden worth $3.3 billion fell apart last year. General Electric abandoned that deal after the United States Justice Department sued to block it because of antitrust concerns. G.E. has tried to sell the unit twice before as part of its efforts to focus on its core industrial businesses.“G.E. Appliances is performing well, and there was significant interest from potential buyers, helping drive a good deal which will benefit our investors, customers and employees,” Jeffrey R. Immelt, G.E.’s chairman and chief executive, said in a news release. “Haier has a stated focus to grow in the U.S., build their manufacturing presence here, and to invest further in the business,” Mr. Immelt added.Seth Martin, a G.E. spokesman, said on Friday that the company did not foresee any antitrust concerns with the Haier deal because it had a smaller market share than Electrolux.He added that the value of the deal had been bolstered by an increase in the unit’s profitability since the deal with Electrolux was reached.G.E. said the deal valued the appliances unit at 10 times the past 12 months’ earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization. It will generate an after-tax gain of about 20 cents a share. The division had revenue of about $5.9 billion in 2014 and employs 12,000 people.G.E. added that it would offset the gain with a restructuring, details of which it would disclose when it discussed its fourth-quarter earnings this month.The company will continue to use the G.E. Appliances brand, and the unit’s headquarters will remain in Louisville, Ky.“Haier is committed to investing in the U.S. In addition, together Haier and G.E. will explore opportunities for joint collaboration and, in doing so, establish a type of new alliance, with comprehensive strategic cooperation between two world-class enterprises, which reflects our common understanding on opportunities brought by the Internet Era,” the chairman and chief of Haier Group, Zhang Ruimin, said in the news release.The two companies said they had agreed to cooperate in areas like health care and advanced manufacturing.The transaction, first reported by The Wall Street Journal, is expected to close in mid-2016.The two companies noted that the deal would provide an outlet for G.E. products in the Chinese market and allow the company to grow internationally.“Qingdao Haier and G.E. Appliances are highly complementary businesses, particularly in the areas of brand, market, product innovation, and supply chain and quality management,” said Liang Haishan, Qingdao Haier’s chairman.videovideoAdvertisement