By CARLA FRIEDJAN. 15, 2016
Investors chasing high yields have been battling high anxiety.Shareholders tried to withdraw so much money from the Third Avenue Focused Credit mutual fund that it abruptly shut down in December. That troubling event was just the most glaring problem in what has been a rough stretch for high-yield bond portfolios.The average high-yield, or junk, mutual fund lost 4 percent last year. It was the first such decline for an entire calendar year since 2008. But the problems in 2015 were hardly a surprise. Trouble for junk bond funds began in the summer of 2014, when commodity prices began their free fall, pulling many junk bond funds down, too. Since then, the average junk fund has lost more than 7.5 percent. The two largest high-yield bond E.T.F.s, iShares iBoxx High Yield Corporate and SPDR Barclays High Yield, are down 7.8 percent and 11 percent, respectively.Investment-grade funds have done much better. The Vanguard Total bond index fund, which owns only investment-grade issues, was up 2.4 percent over that stretch, and the Pimco Total Return fund, the largest actively managed high-grade portfolio, scratched through with a rise of about 1 percent.Not surprisingly, the pickup in volatility sent plenty of income chasers out of the sector entirely. In the 12 months through last November, investors removed more than $30 billion from high-yield funds and their junky cousins, bank-loan funds. But for the intrepid still fixated on generating more income in a low-rate world, a sharply bifurcated high-yield market now offers an interesting opportunity if you are willing to accept some risk and navigate carefully. The near 6 percent yield for the Vanguard High-Yield Corporate fund, for example, offers more than double the payout for Vanguard’s total bond index fund, though it is much riskier. A more apt use for junk today may be to treat it as an income substitute for dividend-paying stocks, which are typically trading at high valuations at this late stage in the bull market.AdvertisementMany of the woes of the junk-bond sector are a result of the steep dive in commodity prices.The North American shale rush was financed largely with junk bonds. According to MarketAxess, high-yield bonds issued by gas and oil companies grew to more than $250 billion last year from $95 billion in 2012. Yet with the price of oil 65 percent below its 2012 peak, many energy companies now find themselves in a cash-flow pinch. Energy companies that defaulted on debt in 2015 include SandRidge Energy, Halcón Resources, Quicksilver Resources and Walter Energy.AdvertisementPlenty of others are in rough shape. For example, some bonds issued by Chesapeake Energy, a natural gas and oil exploration and production company, fell more than 70 percent in 2015.S&P Dow Jones Indices tracks “distressed” high-yield corporate bonds. By its definition, a bond that yields at least 1,000 basis points (10 percentage points) more than a Treasury issue with a comparable maturity earns a spot in the distressed heap. About 15 percent of the $1.6 trillion high-yield United States bond market is distressed right now. Thirteen commodity-related industries account for nearly 40 percent of the distressed market, according to S&P Dow Jones Indices; the rest is spread among more than 85 industries.Unless a sharp rally in commodity prices provides relief for energy and mining companies, there is likely to be more bloodletting in the high-yield world. Moody’s Investors Service expects the 3.4 percent default rate for domestic junk bonds at the end of last year to rise to 4.1 percent by late this year. The pain is expected to be highly concentrated: The default rate is expected to rise to near 7 percent for metals and mining issuers and more than 5 percent for bonds issued by oil and gas companies.“Energy and mining have been just horrible, but it’s a Jekyll-and-Hyde market,” said Carl Kaufman, lead manager of Osterweis Strategic Income fund, which lost 0.93 percent last year and has a 6 percent annualized gain over the last 10 years. “There’s more to the market than just energy and materials. And the rest of the economy is not falling apart.”Gershon Distenfeld, director of high yield at AllianceBernstein, points out that falling commodity prices are a boon for companies that use them — as well as for consumers, who drive about two-thirds of the domestic economy. Moreover, the broad sell-off in junk bonds over the last 18 months has made the high-yield bond market more compelling.That sell-off was painful, of course. An index of high-yield bonds that yielded 5 percent before commodities collapsed was at 8.75 percent at the end of 2015. If you owned junk during that climb, you felt the pain. That is because bond prices fall when yields rise, and a fund’s total return is the sum of the yield plus the changes in the price of the bond. The negative returns of late reflect the fact that the income payouts were not enough to offset the decline in bond prices.But those past declines may help now. “Odds are that high yield will do better going forward given where yields are now,” Mr. Distenfeld said. He added that a “pretty good guide” for forward annualized returns over a four- or five-year rolling period was the yield at the beginning of the period. That is more than 8 percent now.AdvertisementFred Hoff, manager of Fidelity High Income fund, is also not battening down the hatches. “There are no signs in the next 24 months that we are entering a recession, which is always the big concern in high yield.” Mr. Hoff said the fact that an index of high-yield bonds now traded at less than 90 cents on the dollar made it a “great entry point.”Just do not expect anything resembling a smooth ride. The Fed has signaled its belief that a still-weak economy is at last strong enough to merit lifting interest rates off the zero level in place since the financial crisis. But with that less-than-robust backdrop, every bit of disappointing economic data could set off an outsize investor reaction. And if recession chatter picks up meaningfully, losses in high-yield bonds could be big. Case in point: The average junk fund lost more than 25 percent in 2008.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.One indication that the high-yield market is dicey comes from actively managed high-grade core bond funds, which typically have the freedom to invest 10 to 20 percent or so of their assets in high-yield issues. It makes sense to do so when they surmise they are getting a big enough yield payoff to compensate them for the risk. (Core index funds do not own junk bonds.)But these funds are holding back. According to Morningstar, the average actively managed core bond fund holds less than 10 percent of assets in issues rated below investment grade, and that includes investments in low-rated mortgage- and asset-backed securities. The two largest actively managed core bond funds, Pimco Total Return and Metropolitan West Total Return, have little to no exposure to high-yield corporate bonds.The third-largest active bond fund, DoubleLine Total Return, has never trafficked in high-yield corporate bonds (it does own lower-rated mortgage- and asset-backed issues), and the DoubleLine Core Fixed Income Fund has just 5.3 percent of its assets invested in high-yield corporate bonds and bank loans. “Just because it is cheap doesn’t mean it is a deal,” said Bonnie Baha, head of DoubleLine’s Global Developed Credit Group. “We’re focused on slowing U.S. growth, slow global growth and the fact that the Fed can’t justify raising rates based on fundamentals,” Ms. Baha said.Given the evident risks, now is a time to play it as safe as possible within the junk world.That starts with the quality of the bonds a fund owns. The bond rating scale starts at AAA for the high-quality issues, and then continues to AA, A, BBB, BB, B, all the way to C and unrated. Any bond rated below BBB is considered high yield. Junk bonds rated BB and B are the most solid part of the high-yield market. Once you get into the C range, you’re not trawling just among the riskiest companies, but among bond issues that are the hardest to trade in volatile times.Those trading difficulties are what brought down Third Avenue Focused Credit Fund, a high-yield portfolio that specialized in distressed debt, which it bought with the expectation that it would rebound in value, sooner or later. But nearly 90 percent of the portfolio was in issues rated CCC and lower. When investor redemption requests increased, the fund’s managers decided to shutter it rather than be forced to promptly meet redemptions by selling bonds at fire-sale prices. Dan Gagnier, a spokesman for Third Avenue, said there was no timetable for how long it would take the fund to liquidate and make final payments to shareholders. With a loss of more than 40 percent since the middle of 2014, many shareholders are facing net losses.Sarah Bush, a bond fund analyst at Morningstar, said the emphasis on distressed issues made Third Avenue Focused Credit an extreme outlier, and she did not expect there to be similar implosions among other junk funds. “Most junk funds focus on BB- and B-rated debt,” she said, “but Third Ave. explicitly invested in much lower-quality issues from firms that were known to already be in trouble.”In fact, the average high-yield mutual fund has about 17 percent of its assets in bonds rated CCC or lower. That is about what the SPDR Barclays High Yield Bond E.T.F. holds. The iShares iBoxx High Yield Corporate Bond E.T.F. has about 10 percent invested below B.Anthony Valeri, fixed-income strategist at LPL Financial, said that index funds, which are required to track the market even when it includes very risky constituents, may be at a disadvantage when it comes to junk bonds now. “We recommend investors seek out actively managed high-yield mutual funds, where the manager can avoid the land mines,” he said.AdvertisementThe actively managed Vanguard High-Yield Corporate Fund recently had less than 6 percent invested in issues rated below B. Last year it lost 1.4 percent. That may not seem like anything to boast about, but passively managed competitors did worse: The SPDR E.T.F. lost more than 7 percent, and the iShares E.T.F. lost more than 5.5 percent.A version of this article appears in print on January 17, 2016, on Page BU13 of the New York edition with the headline: A Year Junk Bonds Lived Up to Their Name.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.