By TIM GRAYJAN. 15, 2016
Investing can sometimes seem heartless. If whatever makes money is your mantra, you may find that you have put your cash into enterprises with which you fundamentally disagree.That is where so-called socially responsible — also known as environmental, social and governance, or E.S.G. — mutual funds come in. These funds have been around for years, but these days, more investors are committing money to them and more investment companies are rolling out offerings. EPFR Global in Cambridge, Mass., said funds and exchange-traded funds in the sector had increased assets under management sixfold since the beginning of 2008, though they still represent less than 1 percent of assets invested in stocks in the United States.As the niche has grown, it has become harder for investors to determine in advance what socially minded funds and E.T.F.s will — and won’t — invest in. Fund managers define the mandate differently. They declare different sorts of stocks off limits, and they assess environmental, social and governmental performance in varying ways. Apple, for example, is a typical top holding in the group, but the TIAA-CREF Social Choice equity fund won’t own it because of concerns about its environmental practices and supply-chain standards, said Amy M. O’Brien, head of this branch of investing for TIAA-CREF.Even the index funds in the niche are harder to parse than some conventional competitors inasmuch as they are based on more obscure indexes. Without digging into a fund’s full list of holdings, which can number in the hundreds, investors may have difficulty knowing precisely what they are getting.Advertisement“The sector is not as simple as it used to be,” said David J. Kathman, a senior fund analyst at Morningstar. “Instead of just excluding a few things, the idea is you want to own the best companies judged by positive E.S.G. criteria. So it’s more nuanced, but it’s also tougher to look at a portfolio and tell how socially responsible it is.”AdvertisementEven funds from the same family can define the mandate differently. The Parnassus Fund and Parnassus Endeavor, both managed by Jerome L. Dodson, founder of Parnassus Investments in San Francisco, won’t own companies involved in the production or refining of fossil fuels. But their larger sibling, Parnassus Core Equity, continues to do so. “Our founder and I had a talk about this,” said Todd C. Ahlsten, lead manager of Core Equity. “He felt that his two offerings should be fossil-free. I agree that climate change is very important. But I think the transition to a fossil-free economy is going to take a long time.”All Parnassus funds avoid investments in companies that derive significant revenue from making alcoholic beverages, tobacco products or weapons, from gambling or from business in Sudan. Yet even those strictures require qualification. “With certain things, like Sudan, there’s zero tolerance,” Mr. Ahlsten said. “With others, we have a 10 percent revenue threshold. Say you’re Whole Foods, and you’re just selling wine, not making it. You can still be in the portfolio.”Parnassus also assesses positive performance on dozens of environmental, social and governance measures — “every one of those levers boils down to risk management,” Mr. Ahlsten said. Companies with strong environmental records, for example, should be less likely to run afoul of regulators, he said.When two United Methodist ministers started the Pax World Fund in 1971, their definition of socially responsible investing was simple. They opposed the Vietnam War and didn’t want to invest in weapons makers, said Joseph F. Keefe, president and chief executive of Pax World Management in Portsmouth, N.H. Early on, they also decided to avoid tobacco companies, he said.Their approach created a template for the field: Decide what you disdain and shun it. Over time, the list of common no-nos grew to include things like adult entertainment and genetically modified organisms. Many fund managers — even those at Pax World — came to conclude that approach was too restrictive, thus they increasingly mix screening out a few companies with overweighting others based on financial, environmental, social and governance factors.“We still don’t invest in weapons and tobacco,” Mr. Keefe said. “But for the most part, we’ve shifted to sustainable investing, which we define as fully integrating E.S.G. factors into portfolio construction.”Some funds and E.T.F.s in the sector use quantitative methods for picking stocks. Domini Social Investments in New York, for example, does environmental, social and governance evaluations for its three funds and then hands an approved list of potential picks to Wellington Management, which uses quantitative screens to winnow the holdings, said Adam M. Kanzer, Domini’s director of corporate engagement and public policy.AdvertisementA diversity of approaches brings a wealth of choices for investors but also, potentially, bewilderment.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Consider the opposing ways two social-fund specialists view General Electric. Mr. Alhsten of Parnassus won’t invest because of what he calls “legacy environmental issues.” G.E., for example, only recently said it had completed the dredging of a stretch of the Hudson River that was polluted decades ago by two of its plants.In contrast, John H. Streur, chief executive of Calvert Investments in Bethesda, Md., says his company’s analysts rate G.E. as a buy. “The business focus there is all about sustainability,” he said. “Our research says G.E. is doing a lot of important work on renewable energy and its nuclear exposure isn’t what the public’s impression of it is.”Even as socially minded investors disagree about which companies count as exemplary citizens, their funds, as a group, tend to favor growth-oriented sectors of the market, like technology, over value-oriented ones, like energy and utilities.“You’re getting a different set of exposures to the economy than you would with an S.&P. 500 index fund,” said Dan D. diBartolomeo, president of Northfield Information Services, an investment analytics company in Boston. That is not necessarily bad for investors, Mr. diBartolomeo said. They should just understand that, when the energy sector sizzles, their fund might not keep up.A criticism long leveled against socially minded funds is that they can’t, by their very construction, keep pace with the broader market. This reasoning says that if you limit the sorts of stocks you invest in, you limit your potential return and add to the riskiness of your investment.But Mr. diBartolomeo and a co-author found, in a paper published in 2011, that one of the main indexes in the field — the MSCI KLD 400 — provided an annual average return quite close to that of the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index from 1992 through 2010. The indexes’ performances diverged at times, but over all, “managers using the KLD 400 as an investment universe have had neither headwinds nor tailwinds,” they wrote. The volatility of the two indexes’ returns was also similar.The KLD wasn’t any riskier than the S.&P., Mr. diBartolomeo said. The average annual total return for the MSCI KLD from the end of 1991 to Nov. 30, 2015, was 9.4 percent, compared with 9.1 percent for the S.&P. 500 for the same period.Mr. diBartolomeo reconciles the findings with conventional investment wisdom by pointing out that not all constraints bind. “In real life, if I constrain myself from having five martinis, that’s not going to hurt me,” he said. “And if I go from 500 to 400, that’s still plenty of stocks to invest in.”AdvertisementInvestors who want to invest in all 400 of those stocks can do so via the iShares MSCI KLD 400 social index E.T.F. The fund is the largest of four socially minded indexed E.T.F.s offered by BlackRock. It carries an expense ratio of 0.5 percent and is “heavily skewed toward technology, health care and consumer discretionary stocks,” said Paul C. Lohrey, head of iShares domestic product development and consulting. Another iShares offering, MSCI USA ESG Select, provides a more balanced exposure to the market’s major sectors, he said.An even cheaper way of making an indexed E.S.G. investment is the Vanguard FTSE social index fund. Its basic investor shares carry an expense ratio of 0.27 percent. The fund, based on the FTSE4Good US Select Index, excludes companies involved with weapons, tobacco, gambling, alcohol, adult entertainment and nuclear power.Rodney Comegys, a principal in the investment management group at Vanguard, said a fund that barred so many different sorts of stocks might not work as a core holding for many people. Although managed passively, it is analogous to an active bet because its holdings have different characteristics from broad market indexes like the S.&P. 500, he said. Financial stocks, for example, account for about a quarter of the FTSE index but only 15 percent of the S.&P. (Only about 10 percent of the retirement plans Vanguard administers offer it as an option.)“It’s not going to be perfect for everyone,” he said. “But it’s a compromise because you don’t believe a typical core holding is right for you.”A version of this article appears in print on January 17, 2016, on Page BU18 of the New York edition with the headline: Follow Your Conscience Without Losing Your Shirt.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.