
Fundamentally By                     
PAUL J. LIM

JAN. 15, 2016
While most forms of investing require a leap of faith, betting on emerging-markets stock funds this year — Chinese stocks have already had double-digit declines — may feel like jumping across the Grand Canyon.Not only have shares of companies based in developing economies like China, Brazil and Russia been mired in a prolonged bear market — prices were down about 40 percent from April 2011 through Thursday, compared with a 44 percent gain percent for American stocks — but this once-promising group was also hit with a double whammy of bad news at the end of last year.There was the Federal Reserve’s decision in December to raise short-term interest rates for the first time since 2006. Near-zero rates, intended to encourage risk-taking, induced investors to pump billions of dollars into the developing world in search of higher yields and better returns.Now rates are a bit higher and the mood is very different. “Uncertainty associated with the Fed and guidance on future rate hikes is a big overhanging negative” for emerging-market shares, said Brian D. Singer, head of dynamic allocation strategies at the asset manager William Blair.AdvertisementMoreover, a bear market in commodities became worse as crude oil prices fell to below $35 a barrel, from a fourth-quarter peak of $52 a barrel. The economies of many emerging markets are still tied to natural resources, which explains why exchange-traded funds with bigger-than-average stakes in energy and basic materials stocks have faced headwinds lately. The Schwab Emerging Markets Equity E.T.F., for instance, sank more than 1 percent in the fourth quarter and lost 16 percent in 2015.AdvertisementDespite this bad news, money managers and market strategists say there is a compelling case for long-term investors to have a presence in the developing world.A big reason is valuations.Historically, the price-earnings ratio of emerging-market stocks — based on five years of averaged, or “normalized,” profits — has been roughly 20 percent lower than the price-earnings ratio for stocks in the United States, according to figures compiled by the Leuthold Group. During the global financial crisis in 2008, emerging-market shares actually traded at a 20 percent premium.Today, these stocks are 53 percent cheaper than domestic shares.The last time they were this inexpensive was in 2000, shortly after the Asian currency crisis raised questions about the health of those economies. From mid-1997 through 2000, emerging-market shares declined more than 30 percent.In hindsight, said Jason Hsu, vice chairman of Research Affiliates, the aftermath of the Asian currency crisis was probably among the best times to be invested in these shares.From 2000 through 2007, emerging-market stocks tripled in value while the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index of domestic shares was flat. “The lesson of the Asian currency crisis,” Mr. Hsu said, is that “rebounds can come fast and furious and waiting can sometimes hurt you.”Research Affiliates predicts that over the next decade, emerging-market stock returns will outpace inflation by nearly 8 percentage points a year, owing much to lower valuations. By contrast, the firm predicts that blue-chip domestic stocks will beat inflation by only about 1 percentage point a year.Fed rate increases are likely to hurt companies in the emerging world in a couple of ways: Rising interest rates could slow global growth, which may further reduce demand for commodities, and rising domestic rates could also strengthen the value of the dollar against emerging-market currencies.Advertisement“If the dollar continues to strengthen, companies and countries holding dollar-denominated debt could be hit with solvency issues,” said Arjun Jayaraman, a portfolio manager with Causeway Capital Management. That is because their debt burden based on their local currencies would rise.But Mr. Jayaraman also pointed out that if the Fed increases are more gradual than expected, leading to “a slow and steady increase in the dollar, the emerging markets can weather that better,” he said.Also, market watchers think that if the slowdown in China is not as pronounced as the market fears, that, too, could be good news for emerging-market equities.How then can investors play this volatile group of stocks for the long term while still trying to play it safe? There are several strategies.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Investors could simply “dollar-cost average” into emerging-market stocks, which means putting money to work in the markets in small increments on a regular schedule, which investors already do effortlessly with their 401(k) retirement accounts.“If you think in the long run you’d be comfortable putting 15 percent of your stock portfolio in the emerging markets but don’t know if today is the right time, give yourself a window — say, 15 months — and commit to putting 1 percentage point to work each month come hell or high water,” Mr. Hsu said. “That takes away the anxiety over whether the timing is exactly right.”Lewis J. Altfest, a financial planner in New York City, suggests being selective about the type of emerging-market stocks you own.For instance, he said, “if you’re worried about commodities, you want to be in those countries that are beneficiaries of low commodity prices, not victims.” He pointed to industrial and consumer economies such as India and South Korea that stand to gain with low energy and raw-materials prices.Jeffrey N. Kleintop, chief global investment strategist for Charles Schwab, agreed, suggesting that investors stay away from commodity-based economies such as Brazil, Russia and South Africa, instead focusing on more diverse economies such as Mexico, South Korea and Taiwan.AdvertisementTo be sure, such a strategy does have a drawback. While stock market valuations in commodity-producing emerging markets are dirt cheap — Russian stocks, for instance, trade at a price-earnings ratio of around 6 — commodity importers like South Korea and India are more expensive. The average price-earnings for the MSCI South Korea index, for instance, is about 10 while Indian stocks trade at 19 times their projected earnings.“Yes, the emerging markets are cheap, but it’s not the cheapest ones you necessarily want to own,” Mr. Kleintop said, citing the danger of plunging commodity prices.At the Thornburg Developing World fund, which has beaten 90 percent of its emerging-market peers over the last five years, the co-manager Charles Wilson is going for a “barbell” approach.This calls for seeding a portfolio partly with companies based in economies like India that might not be hurt by lower commodity prices. Among the fund’s top holdings in India is HDFC Bank, a large retail bank. Then the other part can be devoted to “things that are outright cheap,” Mr. Wilson said. “I would put China in that camp. The market is too concerned about the growth outlook for China without noticing the low valuations.”Among the fund’s top holdings in China is China Mobile, the world’s largest wireless phone company.China is also of interest to Rainier Investment Management. “We want to focus on the parts of China that we would characterize as China 2.0,” said Derrick Tzau, international equity analyst at Rainier.For instance, he pointed out that over the next 10 to 20 years, the sheer demographic shifts taking place in China — including the growing middle class and the aging population — may point to favorable conditions for the country’s health care sector.“In the next 10 years, the pharmaceutical market there could be the second largest in the world, outside the U.S.,” he said. Even better, that market is most likely to grow no matter what happens to commodity prices or interest rates.If you are able to take a really long view, emerging markets may not be as scary as they seem.A version of this article appears in print on January 17, 2016, on Page BU20 of the New York edition with the headline: When Emerging Markets Roar, Stand Your Ground.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »