
Off the Shelf By                     
PAUL B. BROWN

JAN. 15, 2016
Mastering the basics required to put together a solid financial plan is not too hard. Getting the most out of every investment dollar is.That is the message of two books aimed at helping you get your financial life in good shape.Let’s start with some basic advice that is not only simple but short. In fact, everything you need to know can fit on a large index card, or at least that’s the view of Helaine Olen, a personal finance writer, and Harold Pollack, a professor at the University of Chicago’s school of social service administration.They have created 10 rules — such as “save 10 to 20 percent of your income,” “never buy individual stocks,” “max out your 401(k) and other tax-advantaged savings accounts” — that do indeed fit on an index card. (The rules are printed on a card included in the book.) These simple rules, they argue, will help to put you on the right financial track and keep you there.The appealing conceit behind their book, “The Index Card: Why Personal Finance Doesn’t Have to Be Complicated,” (Portfolio/Penguin), which began life as a blog post by Mr. Pollack in 2013, raises two big questions: How well do the rules apply to the financial lives most of us have? And if you can capture them on an index card, why do we need a full-length book?AdvertisementTo answer the second question first, the authors contend that “most of us don’t want to follow rules unless we know why they are rules.” Their book, they say, “explains how the rules work and why we chose them. They may be simple, but they aren’t always self-explanatory.”And the rules are good. Saving 10 to 20 percent of your income is difficult to do, but a great idea. And paying off your credit card balance in full every month just makes sense (you can invest all the money you were giving the credit card companies in interest). I particularly love the idea of holding your financial adviser to a fiduciary standard, a requirement that is more difficult to achieve than it ought to be.Today, many financial advisers merely follow what is known as “a suitability standard.” Here is how the Securities and Exchange Commission explains it on its website: Under this standard, your adviser “must have a reasonable basis for believing that the recommendation is suitable for you.”The problem with that, the authors correctly note, is the adviser can recommend something that is O.K. for you, even though there could be better options out there. Why would advisers recommend the O.K. choice? Because they make more money on it.Fiduciaries, on the other hand, have a legal obligation to put your interests before theirs and act in your best interest. The S.E.C. is considering such a standard, and the Labor Department has already proposed it for retirement accounts. But the authors say you don’t have to wait. You can hold advisers to that standard by having them sign a statement promising to do so. The book even provides sample wording.AdvertisementAll this is terrific. But the difficulty with simplifying anything so that it fits on an index card is you have to leave stuff out. Even in their extended discussion, the authors are not great on explaining how asset allocation works.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.And while subtracting your age from 100 to determine what percentage of your investments should be in stocks has long been traditional advice, with people living longer, it might be too conservative today. I’m in favor of subtracting your age from 115.Similarly, the author’s idea of having 15 percent of your stock holdings in international funds is old-fashioned thinking. Today, many financial planners suggest a minimum of 20 percent, and the authors don’t even bother talking much about what bond funds to buy.Still, as a place to begin, the advice is sound.A primary purpose of creating a solid portfolio is to make sure you’ll have enough money to live the way you want once you stop working. That’s the focus of the veteran financial writer Jane Bryant Quinn in “How to Make Your Money Last: The Indispensable Retirement Guide” (Simon & Schuster), which is geared toward those who are already retired or soon will be.
CreditThe New York Times        But the normally reliable Ms. Quinn falls a bit short. She is trying to address just about every financial concern people might have once they have retired, and that is impossible to do in any depth, even in the 350 pages she gives herself.For example, she makes the good point that if you are a homeowner, you may find that you have more house than you need once you retire — and that presents you with options as varied as buying something less expensive, selling and renting a new place, and moving in with “a willing adult child.” They are all potentially good choices. But how should you decide? When you devote only three pages to the topic, it’s hard to provide much insight.And even when she gives a subject substantial space — her discussion of seemingly every type of health insurance takes up more than 10 percent of the book — she goes through the information too quickly for a reader to know exactly what to do.In some very good sections — for example, her discussion of the pros and cons of taking part of your retirement savings and converting it into an immediate annuity — Ms. Quinn provides websites and phone numbers of professionals and financial service companies that can offer detailed advice. I can’t vouch for the people and companies she recommends, but I love the idea of double-checking investing ideas with pros.In fact, I am going to do this as I prepare for my eventual retirement. I intend to use some of the information she provides to generate questions — for example, what is the best way for me to minimize my taxes if I stop working — and I expect to seek professional help for the answers.With any luck, the questions will fit on an index card.A version of this article appears in print on January 17, 2016, on Page BU16 of the New York edition with the headline: Investing Advice That Doubles as a Bookmark.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »