By SYDNEY EMBEROCT. 4, 2015
DUBLIN, N.H. —  The beginning of fall was just two days away and the staff of Yankee magazine had a situation on its hands: The leaves were still green.Most of those gathered at an editorial meeting last month agreed that photographers should already be out taking pictures of leaves changing colors. But the foliage was not cooperating.At Yankee, which has chronicled the sights and charms of New England for the last eight decades, this was more than an inconvenience. Just how important is fall foliage to the magazine?“This is our Mardi Gras,” said Mel Allen, the magazine’s editor.In many ways, Yankee has been as consistent as the seasons since it was first published in September 1935. The family-owned magazine is run out of the same barn-red building in this town of roughly 1,600. The power goes out frequently, especially during lightning and ice storms. Brook Holmberg, the magazine’s publisher, said Yankee only recently started to lock the building’s door during the day because people kept walking in off the street to chat. “They think of us as a neighbor,” he said.And much like a hardy New Englander braving a particularly harsh winter, Yankee has stuck it out, in much the same form, while more renowned print publications have succumbed to the challenges of the digital age. The magazine still depends on print subscriptions, which cost $28 a year, for the bulk of its revenue. Its website does not have a pay wall.AdvertisementThe content has not changed much, either. There are tips on travel to destinations like Narragansett Bay, in Rhode Island, and recipes for Boston cream pie and needhams (an old-fashioned Maine candy made with mashed potatoes). Ads for regional businesses and New England wares still fill the magazine, which now comes out six times a year. The much loved Swopper’s Column — a classifieds page for unusual objects, which first appeared in the magazine’s fourth issue — was not discontinued until 2013.AdvertisementWhen those at Yankee are asked how it has managed to survive this long, they have a ready answer.“We tell good stories, but I think it’s New England that’s responsible for us being around for 80 years,” Mr. Allen, 69, said as he sat in his office at a desk covered with old magazines and cassette tapes. (He kept a bag of food on a side table for his terrier, Rudy.) Indeed, Yankee’s original stated mission was “the expression and perhaps, indirectly, the preservation of that great culture in which every Yank was born and by which every real Yank must live.”Yankee’s most recent issue, which celebrated the magazine’s anniversary, detailed “80 Gifts New England Gave to America.” No. 1 was Robb Sagendorph, the magazine’s founder; the color of fall leaves, surprisingly, ranked just 45th, although the one- or two-hour “foliage road trip” was No. 15 and the day-trip version was No. 17.Yankee has carved out a niche largely untouched by other New England-based publications like Boston magazine. The magazine stays away from topics like sports, and despite New Hampshire’s central role in the presidential campaign, articles about politics rarely make it into the magazine’s pages.“But we cover it from a cultural standpoint,” said Jamie Trowbridge, 55, chief executive of Yankee Publishing, who is also Mr. Sagendorph’s grandson. The magazine focuses instead on important regional issues, like the erosion of Nantucket beaches, along with subjects like the best old-home tours of New England. Over the years, it has published writers as varied as Stephen King, Annie Proulx and the poets Donald Hall and May Sarton.The magazine has also managed to cultivate a loyal following of older readers (average age: 56), who are less likely to stop reading print publications. Two-thirds of its readers live in New England, Mr. Trowbridge said, and many of the rest grew up there.Yankee appears to be doing well. Mr. Trowbridge, who grew up here and attended Dartmouth, said Yankee’s revenue was $7 million last year and that its profit has been growing.But the magazine has not been immune to the steep challenges facing the industry. In the late 1990s and early 2000s, it struggled to break even. There was a point during that period when the family that owns the magazine tried to sell it. In 2007, the magazine, which was then digest-size, underwent a major overhaul that included making its pages bigger, largely in an attempt to attract more advertisers. There was a time, Mr. Trowbridge said, when Yankee had so many requests from advertisers that it had to turn some away because the staples the magazine used could not hold more than 320 pages.AdvertisementEven with adjustments in recent years to appeal to a wider audience — like focusing more on travel and food and no longer publishing poetry and fiction — the publication’s paid circulation has dropped below 300,000, from a peak of one million in the 1980s. (When it started, Yankee had 614 subscribers, the story goes: 14 family members and 600 random names that a fraudulent subscription agency had selected from the Boston telephone book.)Mr. Allen acknowledged that while Yankee’s “focus on storytelling hasn’t changed,” he was increasingly thinking about how to get its content in front of online readers. “For every story we’re doing in Yankee, we’re always thinking about how to reach people on another platform,” he said.Mr. Holmberg said the magazine’s website attracts more than half a million unique visitors a month, an increase of 300 percent in the last three years. Online revenue is still low, but there is hope that a new digital magazine called Yankee Plus — which will come out during the months that the print magazine is not released and will be available to read online and on mobile devices — will help attract advertisers. Yankee Plus will have multimedia components like videos and slide shows, and also new articles and columns, along with features from the magazine’s archives.There are other signs of a digital shift at Yankee. The magazine’s Facebook page has over 80,000 likes; its Instagram account, which is now filling up with photographs of fall leaves and apples, has roughly 12,000 followers. During the recent editorial meeting, held in a small room that contained a four-foot model sailboat, Mr. Allen floated the idea of including readers’ Facebook comments and Instagram photos in the print magazine. Most of the eight other editors and writers responded enthusiastically to the suggestions, in between bites of lobster-flavored crackers.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Little about Yankee, however, suggests that any sweeping changes are on the way.Visitors sometimes mistake Yankee’s offices, with its signs for The Old Farmer’s Almanac (another Yankee Publishing title) for a historical society. Its staff is the definition of stability: The 27 full-time employees have been with the magazine for an average of 13 years. Yankee Publishing’s editor in chief, Judson D. Hale Sr., 82, has been at Yankee for 57 years and still writes a column.But a large part of Yankee’s appeal seems to be that it is an anachronism — a relic from a less complicated time. There are still people who want to escape the frenzy of the digital world and read a magazine filled with photographs of fall leaves and stories about hiking trails, seaside inns and Indian pudding. It also looks nice on their coffee tables.“Yankee is that postcard from home,” Mr. Holmberg said, “six times a year.”About halfway into the recent editorial meeting, there was a brief debate about what to do with the last page of the magazine’s future issues. Most eventually agreed that it should display a memorable photograph. The page would be called Timeless New England.A version of this article appears in print on October 5, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: An Anachronism for All Seasons .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.