AdvertisementSupported byCorner OfficeBy Adam BryantThis interview with Ragy Thomas, founder and chief executive of Sprinklr, a social media software platform, was conducted and condensed by Adam Bryant.Q. Were you doing entrepreneurial things when you were younger?A. No. I did not have a lemonade stand. I had zero business background. It didn’t run in my family. My dad’s a professor. My mom used to work for the government. I was born in India, but we also lived for several years in Africa.I ended up not going to school for three years in Nigeria, because the educational system was not very good. I went to a school for a day, but my parents figured it was better for me to not go through the system.Q. So you were home-schooled?No. I was not schooled. I just did what kids do. When we returned to India, my parents put me in a boarding school for fifth grade. That was a rough learning experience — going from just being a child at home, and not having interacted with a lot of other kids, to being in a boarding school with kids who had grown up there.Because of that checkered schooling, I didn’t grow up learning how to be super normal socially, but it was also the foundation for how I think about the world. I always take on problems my own way, and I know that when I’m lost, I can just reflect and find a way out by myself.The boarding school was in the middle of nowhere on top of a hill. It was a Catholic school, and we woke up every morning and went to the chapel. They taught you about life, and it made me deeply spiritual. Not religious, but very spiritual. It also made me extremely naïve about what life can be.What do you mean by naïve?By the time you get to college and start your life, there’s just a certain phoniness in life. You’re supposed to behave with friends a certain way, work a certain way, and you don’t let people into your trust circle. It’s O.K. to say a lie, and it’s O.K. to be looking out for yourself.Many of those things were lost on me, and that allows me to naïvely trust people. I just believe that there is goodness everywhere, and I still go through life that way. The hardest thing to learn is that even though you try to be helpful and grateful, a lot of people don’t live their lives that way.So do you consider naïveté a strength or a weakness?It is a strength because statistically, when you act that way with 100 people, you might get beaten up 80 times because of it. But then there will be some people who respond because you believed in them, and they start doing things that they didn’t think they were capable of doing. And those people just come through for you in a big way, and allow you to do big things. By embracing this approach and taking a statistical view of it, you always come out ahead.It’s like venture capitalists with their portfolios. You invest in 100 companies. Some of them die. With most of them, you’re lucky if you make your money back, and then you have 10 or 20 that make you a big winner.But don’t some people want to take advantage of you financially? As an entrepreneur, you’re dealing with so many people who want a piece of the pie.You change the equation by changing the order of magnitude of value you’re trying to create. I’m not interested in saving $10,000 or $20,000. A lot of the smaller stuff is a waste of my time.When you desire big things, a lot of stuff seems meaningless. And so you might have a lawyer or a banker who wants to negotiate. I keep those people out of my life. I always get other people to deal with them so I can focus on bigger things. Time is finite for everyone, but so is “mind space.”If you worry about $10,000, you’re not going to make $100,000. If you worry about $100,000, you’re not going to make $1 million. If you worry about $1 million, you don’t have a shot at making $10 million. And so on.Another rule I follow is that you can fool me once, but once I’ve lost my trust in you, I very quickly keep that person out of my inner circle — in fact, out of my circle, period. Over time, I have built enough of a reputation that people know that trying to appeal to my nobler sense will yield way more for them than they can ever negotiate.What was the big inflection point in your life that sparked the entrepreneurial drive?I was a party animal in college. But I was always lucky, because I could pick up a book the night before a test and pass it. I didn’t know what learning was until I was in my mid-20s. After I got married, I became aware that when you have another human being that you’re responsible for, you start thinking about the future.And I started investing in learning. All of a sudden, I made a conscious attempt to learn whatever I wanted to. I figured out how to learn, and that dramatically transformed my life from then on. I also had a crazy fear of failure.Because?There have been distinct moments in my life when I’ve seen my family be embarrassed — not purposely, but in the sense that we were not given our due. I’ve seen people differentiate based on wealth and social stature, and it deeply hurt me to see my family have to go through that. Many of the rich people I had seen earlier in life were so arrogant that it gave me this massive desire to show them that I can be richer than them and still be nice.It just gave me the drive, that hunger. I’ve been fortunate that it’s generally been much easier for me to see opportunities in business that others don’t see. And what I’ve developed over time is this dogged persistence and the insane will and ability to chase it, and the conviction to disregard what everyone says to me.Each week, Adam Bryant talks with top executives about leadership. Follow him on Twitter: @nytcorneroffice. This interview has been edited for space and clarity.Advertisement