AdvertisementSupported byFair GameBy Gretchen MorgensonThe tide has definitely turned against investors in high-yield debt, better known as junk bonds.Market indexes are down approximately 9 percent from their highs of last year. Plummeting prices for oil and other commodities have done most of the damage, but the decision last month by a well-known mutual fund, Third Avenue Focused Credit, to halt redemptions, has also spooked the market.Is the worst over in this $1.5 trillion arena? Not yet. And some strategists say that investors may be focusing too much on the role energy has played in the decline while underestimating other risks.Commodities companies, outsize issuers of junk debt in recent years, have certainly caused the most pain. Fully 27 percent of high-yield debt brought to market in 2014 came from oil companies, many of them riding the shale fracking boom.And this is not just an issue for the high rollers. Much of this debt found its way into widely owned high-yield mutual funds. As of last September, the Franklin High Income fund, for example, had 16 percent of its assets invested in energy-related securities. And at the end of December, 14.5 percent of the assets in Nuveen’s High Income Bond fund were energy-related securities.These two energy holdings have no doubt contributed to the funds’ poor performance of late: The shares of both are down 20 percent from their peaks of 2015. (It didn’t help that one of the largest holdings in the Franklin fund was debt issued by the troubled company Valeant Pharmaceuticals International.)But with oil falling below $30 and no bottom yet in sight, there is probably further pain ahead in the oil sector, according to Matthew Mish, global credit strategist at UBS, who also contends that prices on junk bonds outside of energy have not come down enough either.“In energy, bond valuations are pricing in an uplift in underlying commodities, so there’s more downside risk if prices hold at these levels for a long time or go lower,” Mr. Mish said in an interview. And elsewhere, he added, “we do not see a marginal buyer for lower-quality credit.”As evidence of the disconnect between the free fall in oil prices and energy bond prices, Mr. Mish noted in a report issued on Wednesday that most high-yield issuers’ business models “don’t work with oil in the $20-$40 range.” In this environment, even energy bonds that are trading at distressed levels — 20 cents to 30 cents on the dollar — could be worth “close to zero in reorganization.”Some retail investors have sold high-yield bond fund holdings recently, reducing overall exposure in this market to about $250 billion from $300 billion. Still, that’s a lot of money riding on what may constitute a “hope trade.”David Kotok, chairman and chief executive of Cumberland Advisors, which oversees $2 billion in assets in Sarasota, Fla., said his firm recently exited the high-yield corporate bond market entirely because of risks that he considers real but not yet evident.“For six years, a subset of the investing class — and a large one — chased yield in complex ways, and by doing so they took on currency risk and exposure to commodity prices and emerging-market countries,” Mr. Kotok told me. “Now all three now are unraveling. I don’t need to see the fire — I see the smoke.”Currency risk is a considerable worry to Mr. Kotok. Foreign currencies — even those in developed markets such as Canada — have been crushed under a strong United States dollar. Over the past year, the Canadian loonie has fallen 17 percent against the American currency; the Brazilian real has plummeted 34 percent.Morningstar reports that about one-quarter of global bond funds do not hedge their currency exposures. More than half of these funds focus on sovereign debt, but some invest in corporates.High-yield bond funds’ holdings that were issued by foreign companies in United States dollar denominations are a real problem, Mr. Kotok said. An issuer in a country with a collapsing currency will find it much harder to repay these debt obligations.While rare, redemption halts like the one started by the Third Avenue Focused Credit fund also remain a risk, Mr. Kotok said. “There are a lot of moving pieces in the junk bond market that are unknown until they surface,” he said.Joseph F. Kalish, chief global macro strategist at Ned Davis Research in Venice, Fla., is also negative on high-yield bonds. Particularly worrisome is the fact that damage in the market is spreading beyond commodities.“That’s what has gotten me more concerned this time around, compared to the generalized, risk-off sell-off we had in the middle of last year,” he said. Downward moves in small capitalization stocks and upward action in volatility also point to further pressure in the high-yield market, he added.For investors, another cause for worry is the relatively low levels of cash currently held by high-yield mutual funds to meet redemptions. “In general, over the last three years, there has been a general feeling of bullishness among high-yield managers,” Mr. Kalish said. “As a result we’ve seen a drawdown of cash reserves.”At the moment, high-yield funds have average cash reserves of less than 5 percent, he said. (The Franklin and Nuveen funds have 4.5 percent cash on hand.) While such levels are sufficient to meet normal redemptions, high levels of investor sales could require these managers to sell assets, possibly at depressed prices.“I would like to see us get back to 8 percent,” Mr. Kalish said. “That would suggest managers have become more cautious — they have built up sufficient cash reserves to meet redemptions and they can become buyers again.”Mr. Kalish said that he would become more positive about the high-yield market if he felt confident that commodity prices wouldn’t go much lower.“I just can’t say at this point that we’ve seen the bottom in oil or commodity prices,” he said. “That needs to be clearer for people to understand the risk they are taking and whether they are being compensated for it.”Advertisement