By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSJAN. 17, 2016
PARIS —  A man died in a French hospital on Sunday after taking part in an experimental drug trial for a painkiller, while five other participants remained hospitalized.French prosecutors have begun a manslaughter investigation into the unusual case, which shined a spotlight on the practice of testing drugs on paid, healthy human volunteers. Scores of others were also given the drug.The Portuguese pharmaceutical company testing the drug, Bial, said in a statement that it was working with health authorities to determine what caused “this tragic and unfortunate situation.”The Rennes University Hospital in western France announced the death in a statement, but did not identify the patient, who was among six male volunteers between 28 and 49 hospitalized last week after volunteering to take the drug. French health authorities have said three of the hospitalized volunteers may suffer brain damage.AdvertisementThe Paris prosecutor’s office said the investigation was expanded after the death to include potential manslaughter charges.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The drug trial, which began Jan. 7, involved 90 healthy volunteers who were given the experimental drug in varying doses at different times. The hospital said it had contacted the 84 other volunteers exposed to the new painkiller. Ten of those volunteers underwent medical exams on Saturday, but the hospital said it found no anomalies. It said another five would have medical exams closer to their homes, but did not say whether the others were being monitored or tested.France’s minister of health, Marisol Touraine, said that the drug, in addition to treating pain, was also intended to ease mood and anxiety troubles as well as motor problems linked to neurodegenerative illnesses. Ms. Touraine said the drug was not based on marijuana or cannabis, as some reported.AdvertisementBial said that clinical trials started last June after toxicology tests and that 108 healthy people had already taken part in trials with no moderate or serious reactions.A version of this article appears in print on January 18, 2016, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Man Dies After Experimental Drug Trial.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.