By THE NEW YORK TIMESJAN. 17, 2016
European policy makers and American tech moguls are in Munich for a three-day conference that began on Sunday to debate many of the contentious issues that have caused friction between lawmakers and companies on both sides of the Atlantic, including Europe’s tough competition rules.Margrethe Vestager, Europe’s antitrust chief, and Reed Hastings, Netflix’s chief executive, are among the attendees as Europe gears up for another year of renewed regulation on such issues as continuing competition and tax and privacy complaints involving many of the largest American tech companies. —Mark ScottOn Tuesday, China is expected to report its slowest economic growth in a quarter of a century. Despite continuing questions about the accuracy of Chinese data, the official reading on gross domestic product remains a widely watched indicator of the economy’s health and of potential catalysts for the government to step in with more stimulus measures.Economists expect growth for 2015 to come in at 6.9 percent, the slowest expansion since 1990. Analysts will also try to gauge the depth of the country’s slowdown from other data to be released on Tuesday, including December figures for industrial production, investment and retail sales. —Neil GoughThe Treasury secretary, Jacob J. Lew, will travel to Puerto Rico on Wednesday to meet with its governor, Alejandro García Padilla, and other government, labor and business leaders to discuss the Obama administration’s proposal for addressing the island’s huge debt.AdvertisementA major element of the administration’s proposal is the enactment of a legal framework, like bankruptcy, that would halt creditor lawsuits while Puerto Rico reduces its debts. Mr. Lew says Congress needs to act by the end of March.AdvertisementThe Puerto Rican legislature also faces a looming deadline: Creditors have given it until Friday to approve an out-of-court restructuring of about $9 billion of the island’s $72 billion debt. —Mary Williams Walsh Starting on Wednesday, thousands of political and financial luminaries will gather in the Swiss village of Davos for the 46th meeting of the World Economic Forum. With oil prices plummeting and fears building about China’s ability to maintain its high growth rate, the health of the global economy is expected to be a main topic of discussion.The prime ministers of Britain and Turkey and South Africa’s president are expected to attend. Also going will be Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. and numerous central bankers, finance ministers and chief executives of companies from around the world. —Landon Thomas Jr.The Labor Department, on Wednesday morning, is scheduled to report the latest data on consumer prices in December. The Consumer Price Index is expected to be unchanged, weighed down by a steep drop in gas prices. Excluding more volatile food and energy prices, the index is estimated to have risen by 0.2 percentage point, which suggests inflation remains subdued. —Nelson D. SchwartzRoyal Dutch Shell and BG Group will publish preliminary earnings for the fourth quarter and 2015 on Wednesday in preparation for the completion of Shell’s acquisition of BG in mid-February. Shell’s agreement to buy BG, the oil and gas producer based in Britain, last year in a cash and stock deal now worth around $48 billion has been criticized by some investors as too expensive in the current low oil price environment.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Shell and BG shareholders will vote on the deal next week, and analysts expect that it will be approved. The financial results that Shell and BG release will be an early indication of how hard oil companies’ profits were hit in the fourth quarter of last year by falling prices. Along with other major oil companies, Shell and BG will publish formal results in early February. —Stanley ReedAs the collapse of oil and other commodity prices continues to shake Canada’s economy, many economists expect that the country’s central bank will halve its primary lending rate on Wednesday, bringing it down to 0.25 percent, a record low. While interest rates are expected to rise in the United States this year, Stephen Poloz, governor of the Bank of Canada, said last month that he might even consider moving his bank’s benchmark overnight rate below zero percent to stimulate the economy.The bank’s low interest rate policy has been a major factor in the fall of the Canadian dollar. Mr. Poloz and others think that a low dollar will buoy the economy by effectively lowering the export prices of products and services from Canadian companies. After hovering close to par with American currency, the Canadian dollar is now fluttering around 70 American cents. Any rate cut on Wednesday would further reduce its value. —Ian AustenMario Draghi, the president of the European Central Bank, is expected to hold a news conference on Thursday after a meeting of the bank’s governing council. Analysts do not expect any change in policy, but Mr. Draghi will probably face questions about why inflation in the eurozone remains far below the central bank’s official target despite significant stimulus measures. —Jack EwingBecause of an editing error, the Week Ahead column on Monday misstated the day the president of the European Central Bank, Mario Draghi, plans to hold a news conference. The news conference will take place on Thursday, not Wednesday.A version of this article appears in print on January 18, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.