AdvertisementSupported byPolitical EconomyBy Hugo Dixon | Reuters BreakingviewsAs if the European Union didn’t have enough to worry about. Its latest concern is that the Polish and Greek governments may be flouting the rule of law.The flood of refugees, the risk that Britain may quit the European Union, and the euro crisis are bad enough. But if countries in what is supposedly a club of liberal democracies undermine the rule of law, it contravenes a core value. What’s more, if people can’t rely on the rule of law, it is bad for investment.The Polish situation has garnered the most headlines. Last week, the European Commission started a preliminary assessment of whether Poland’s new right-wing nationalist government was complying with the rule of law.This was partly because the government passed a law in December requiring the country’s constitutional court to secure a two-thirds majority for most of its rulings, rather than a simple majority. Critics said this neutered the court as a check on government power.Then, this month, the government in Warsaw pushed through a law giving it the power to appoint the heads of state-run broadcasters. The next day it parachuted in a former member of Parliament from the governing party to run state television.Poland seems to be following a playbook pioneered by Hungary, whose nationalist government reduced the power of its top court and undermined the independence of its central bank earlier in the decade. Viktor Orban, the Hungarian prime minister, said last week that he would block any proposed European Union sanctions against Poland.The European Union is founded on a series of principles that include democracy and the rule of law. When a country flouts these values, the Union can, as a last resort, remove that government’s right to vote on Union matters.Although the European Commission has only started a preliminary investigation, this has already provoked a war of words. One Polish minister compared European Union “supervision” to the Nazi occupation in World War II.Investors have reacted badly. The zloty fell to a four-year low against the euro on Friday after Standard & Poor’s cut the country’s credit rating, saying the government had weakened the independence of major institutions.Now look at Greece. The chief executive of Piraeus Bank, the country’s largest lender, resigned on Friday after rumors circulated that the government, led by the leftist Syriza party, was putting pressure on him to quit via the head of the Hellenic Financial Stability Fund, the vehicle that receives bailout money and injects it into Greece’s banks. Piraeus’s shares fell 22 percent in two days.When these rumors started circulating, Paulson & Co., a hedge fund that owns more than 9 percent of Piraeus, wrote to the Hellenic Financial Stability Fund to complain. It said it had invested in the bank in last month’s share issue on the understanding that Anthimos Thomopoulos, whom it rated as “highly capable,” would remain as chief executive. John Paulson, the hedge fund’s founder and manager, argued that the stability fund would not have the authority to request the chief executive’s resignation and that, if it had delivered such a request on behalf of the government, it “would clearly have been in violation of the laws governing the HFSF and, in particular, safeguarding its independence from political interference.”The stability fund put out a statement on Thursday denying that it had made any such request. Later that day, the Eurogroup — the group of eurozone finance ministers — made clear that it wanted Greece to depoliticize its banks and public administration. Despite this, Mr. Thomopoulos resigned the following day.Given that the eurozone has lent Athens vast sums of money (some of it to recapitalize Piraeus Bank) and the European Central Bank is now Piraeus Bank’s supervisor, there is a need to get to the bottom of what happened.There are also other worrying signs that the government of Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras may be flouting the rule of law. Last year, it fired the head of the supposedly independent tax authority. It also passed a law giving the government more control over television broadcasting.Kyriakos Mitsotakis, who was elected leader of the opposition this month, said there had been an attempt “to control the justice system, to tamper with independent authorities, to stuff the state with friends and family, and to roll back reforms in education.”When Mr. Tsipras fired the tax boss, Greece’s eurozone creditors barely murmured, despite the fact that tax evasion is one of the country’s biggest problems. The European Commission seemingly didn’t want to be too harsh on the government because it wanted to believe that its latest bailout plan, of 86 billion euros, or $94 billion, was working.But respect for the rule of law is probably even more important for Greece’s economic future than balancing budgets and freeing up markets. It is also important for Poland’s economy.The European Union is in a quandary over how to respond. It doesn’t want to pick more quarrels when it is already fighting battles on multiple fronts. But if it turns a blind eye, bad behavior could spread. Hugo Dixon is chairman of InFacts, a journalistic enterprise arguing that Britain should stay in the European Union. Advertisement