
Global Manager By                     
SONIA KOLESNIKOV-JESSOP

JAN. 17, 2016
Sabrina Tan is founder and chief executive of Skin Inc, a Singapore-based company that sells customized skin-care products.Q. How did you start your career?A. My first job was working for IBM in their marketing team. I was fresh out of school, and the first six months were all about training, learning about presentation skills, the different thinking hats. It was a great place to start. IBM really invests in its human resources, because they want you to grow with the company. I was in charge of a business channel, and I had to quickly develop influence skills to compete with other companies, like HP. How do you convince people to choose your products? It’s the same today for me working with Sephora [to distribute Skin Inc products] — how to get more opportunity to present my products on their shelves.Q. What’s the secret?A. You need to understand your business partner, anticipate what is the person’s motivation, what is their company growth strategy. Listening skills are very important.Q. Your mother had a beauty salon. Did you ask her for advice when you started your own beauty company?AdvertisementA. Never. I didn’t want to be retrained by a beauty-world way of thinking, I wanted to think out of the box. I think she obviously influenced me subconsciously because growing up she would take me to her salon. But she was into service; I wanted to be into products — so two very different worlds.Q. You invested $1 million to set up your own company in 2007. That was quite a decision.A. I’ve always felt money is there to serve me. I don’t want to be a slave to it. My husband is in technology and we both had done rather well financially. I thought if it didn’t work, I had a full 11 years of successful corporate background to fall back onto. So give it two years, because you only live once and you should give it your best shot.Q.  The idea behind Skin Inc is novel: offering customers custom-blended serum based on an in-depth online skin survey, and keeping the active ingredients individually encapsulated so they remain pure and fresh until application. How did you do it? A. I first went to Japan with a girlfriend, a bit for fun, and we hit the drugstores, trying out the various products, reading the labels, trying to find out more about the ingredients.Hyaluronic acid, Q10, PiT2 Polyclonal Antibody — it was all foreign language to us. Looking at the packaging, I saw they put the names of the manufacturers. So I did a second trip with a girlfriend who speaks fluent Japanese and I started to talk to some of these manufacturers. It’s all about connecting the dots.AdvertisementComing from a tech world, I knew I didn’t need to “own” everything. Dell sells storage, which is not manufactured by Dell but by EMC, a storage provider. It’s about forming the right partnership. I don’t have to be the best at everything. In fact, in terms of beauty products, different manufacturers have different specialties.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Doing sun block is not the same as doing a face mask, so why not go to the best in class for each and partner with them, particularly because I wanted specialization — that was the crux of the brand.Meanwhile, some laboratories may have a great formula, but don’t know how to execute it and market it. That’s where I come in.Q. How did those first meetings go?A. I presented my concept to the chemist via a translator, telling them I wanted to throw everything together in one product. They literally frowned and said, “No, not possible.” Why not? “Cannot, chemical blah blah.” I was really disappointed because that was going to be my key differentiator: Save women’s time on their beauty regime by limiting the number of products they need to use and allow them to customize what they wanted to have in their product through a digital program. I was sure every woman would want to use this.I went on a toilet break, and passed in front of a wall filled with jars with capsules. That’s when it hit me. Why not put some of the ingredients inside a capsule, like you would encrypt technology? I took a picture and went back into the room and told them, “What if…”That was the “ah-ha” moment. It was really thanks to my tech background that I could envisage encrypting technology in a capsule. How does an HP server talk to a Sun server and how I can encrypt the information to keep a firewall?Q. With language as a barrier, why go to Japan? Why not look closer to your home base?A. Q.C. [quality control]. Japanese products are well known and loved by Asian girls. Japan is the second-largest skin-care market in the world and in general, the Japanese are not really “exporting” their formula, partly because of the communication issue, not just the language, but the mind-set.Q. Setting up your business, what skill has helped you most?A. My influence skill set. Being able to make people trust me and make them want to be part of this with me. I think I’m pretty agile and adapt to the person who is in front of me.Q. What are the difficulties you’ve faced?A. I think there is still a bit of a glass ceiling for women, particularly in Asia. It’s changing, but when I started eight years ago, I really felt it was a bit of an old boys’ club. Potential business partners would make comments about the fact that I was the mother of two and wondering how committed I would be — questions a father would never be asked. But leadership is not about capacity, but about energy and how you focus that energy.Q. What would you tell your younger self?A. Don’t judge a book by its cover. Take your time to discover what motivates someone and understand where they come from.A version of this article appears in print on January 18, 2016, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »