By ERIC ASIMOVNOV. 7, 2015
When I mentioned to a colleague that I was going to try a few Chinese wines, he looked at me sadly and said, “I’m sorry.”Sorry? The group of five red wines I tried have no reason to apologize. They were all competently made and can stand with pride among the ranks of commercial wines produced and sold all over the world. What they lack is any sense of distinctiveness, or, to use a bit of wine jargon, terroir.Terroir is often thought to be the soil in which wine grapes are grown, but in fact it represents much more than that. It’s also the microclimate, the elevation, the exposure to the sun and the human element. In the Old World, where wine has been made for centuries, this human element is not only the hand of the winemaker but often an expression of the community and culture reflected in the wine. In the New World, where making wine is more often a commercial effort, the human element more tends to reflect an entrepreneurial spirit. These Chinese wines are entrepreneurial in nature. Their reason for being is primarily to win an audience rather than reflecting ages-old traditions.Because Bordeaux is so prized in China, most Chinese wine producers use it as a model. Why not? If you are going to start making wine virtually from scratch, and you are ambitious, it stands to reason that you would base the wine on what you regard as the best.AdvertisementSo it was with these Chinese wines, made primarily of the two leading Bordeaux grapes, cabernet sauvignon and merlot, and a third, cabernet gernischt, which is identical to carménère, an old Bordeaux grape that is now primarily grown in Chile. Like most Bordeaux, these are medium-weight wines with alcohol in the low- to midrange, 12 to 13.5 percent, and, for the most part, very drinkable.AdvertisementThe wines, which are not available in the United States, included two entry-level bottles, the 2013 Val Enchanté Reserve from Silver Heights and the 2013 Gutenland Cuvée from Kanaan Winery, which were appropriately soft, simple and easygoing; one midlevel wine, the 2010 Moser Family from Chateau Changyu Moser XV, which showed a bit of complexity; and two high-end wines, the 2011 Legacy Peak and a magnum of 2011 Emma’s Reserve from Silver Heights. The Emma’s Reserve bore all the hallmarks of ambition: deep, plush flavors and lots of oak, which came from prolonged aging in 100 percent new oak barrels from France. This is typical of many expensive start-up wines: without a singular terroir, they instead reflect the winemaking attributes of luxury wines.I don’t fault any of the wines — no apologies needed. China is a young winemaking country, with a lot of money and resources. Based on these five wines, I have no doubt it will find its way in short order to making a wide range of commercially acceptable wines. Whether it will make the sort of distinctive bottles prized by wine lovers will take longer and require more experimentation to determine.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Silver Heights Val Enchanté Reserve 2013(90 percent cabernet sauvignon, 10 percent cabernet gernischt)Soft, simple and velvety, with straightforward aromas of red and black fruit with the faint echo of breezy mint.108 renminbi; $17Kanaan Winery Gutenland Cuvée 2013(cabernet sauvignon, merlot, cabernet gernischt) Simple, lightly candied aromas of baked fruit, slightly plummy with a suggestion of tannins.160 renminbi; $25Chateau Changyu Moser XV Moser Family Cabernet Sauvignon 2010(100 percent cabernet sauvignon)Aromas of red fruit, cedar and herbs, very dry with flavors of spicy, plummy red fruit; of the five wines only this one conveyed a hint of nuance and complexity.288 renminbi; $45Legacy Peak 2011(70 percent cabernet sauvignon, 30 percent merlot)Aromas of cherry fruit and vanilla oak, brightly fruity on the palate but straightforward; with time in the glass light tannins emerge.680 renminbi; $107Silver Heights Emma’s Reserve 2011(90 percent cabernet sauvignon, 10 percent cabernet gernischt)Aromas of sweet, rich, red fruit and oak, plush texture with flavors of slightly jammy fruit and vanilla and the impression of dry oak tannins.1,280 renminbi; $201A version of this article appears in print on November 8, 2015, on Page BU4 of the New York edition with the headline: A Tasting of Chinese Wines.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.