AdvertisementSupported byReporter’s NotebookBy John KoblinPASADENA, Calif. — Twice a year, executives, show runners and actors convene for the Television Critics Association press tour to preview shows, review bad decisions and examine the industry at large.This year, there was a feud between Netflix and some networks over ratings, and plenty of self-reflection at a time when ratings are substantially down and the number of shows continues to go sharply up.Here are some of the highlights from this year’s gathering:What happens when a show is a critical hit, earns a Golden Globe, and almost no one watches it? Such is the case for CW’s “Crazy Ex-Girlfriend.” It barely draws a million viewers, and its rating in the 18-to-49-year-old demographic is so minuscule that the CW’s president, Mark Pedowitz, conceded at T.C.A.: “I wish I had more optimistic statistics or measurements. I don’t.”“Crazy Ex-Girlfriend,” which debuted in October, presents a unique case study for this television season: Years ago, a show like this would have been canceled after an episode or two. But this is an era in which executives are increasingly reluctant to cancel a show quickly.That’s good news for “Crazy Ex-Girlfriend,” which, despite the low ratings, might actually have promise. It has generated some buzz, and the show’s lead, Rachel Bloom, won the Golden Globe for best actress in a comedy. At this point, CW, which has not picked it up for a second season, is going to sit tight.“We believe in the show,” Mr. Pedowitz said. “We stand by the show.”He added: “We’re going to give it a chance to get seen.”Aline Brosh McKenna, the show’s co-creator, suggested that binge viewing could help it find an audience.“It’s an unusual show,” she said. “Some of my favorite shows are shows that took a little while to catch on, or maybe people discovered a little bit later they had bought the season pass from iTunes.”Glenn Geller, the new president of CBS Entertainment, presented at the event for the first time last week and said that he was going to pick right up at the network where his predecessor, Nina Tassler, left off.Mr. Geller said Ms. Tassler “liked strong and narrative stories just like I do. She loved strong central characters just like I do. I don’t think that will ever change. Our brand works. Our audience loves it, and I love our shows too.”Case in point: As serialized programming becomes more and more popular on television, and procedurals are falling out of favor, CBS won’t be abandoning its bread-and-butter programming, even in the era of bingeing.“The No. 2 show on television is a regular old procedural in ‘NCIS,’ ” Mr. Geller said. “There’s a great interest in shows that are about the good guys putting the bad guys away.”Mr. Geller did make a strong defense for Stephen Colbert, whose “Late Show” has struggled to find a devoted viewership.“I think the show is fantastic, and we want Stephen to be Stephen. And that’s exactly what he’s doing,” he said. “I think he is clearly the pre-eminent interviewer in late night.”At the Golden Globes last week, Amazon became the first programmer in nine years to win the best comedy series award for two consecutive years for two different shows. The streaming service won last year for “Transparent,” and this year for the relatively obscure “Mozart in the Jungle.” (ABC won consecutively in 2005-6 with “Desperate Housewives” and “Ugly Betty.”)“I think that’s the good part about the Globes,” said Joe Lewis, Amazon’s head of comedy, at the company’s post-awards party. “They are able to look at shows that might not get the broadest audience, and that’s what we try to do. We’re not trying to make everyone’s third-favorite show.”The next morning, Roy Price, the head of Amazon Studios, said in an interview that Woody Allen’s much-anticipated show for the streaming service would begin filming in the spring and would debut later this year.There are cord-cutters and cord-nevers, and now Showtime’s president, David Nevins, has added a new term to the television industry lexicon: Cord-cobblers. To recap: A cord-cutter is someone who has cable and cancels; a cord-never is usually a younger person who has no intention of ever subscribing to cable. So what exactly is a cord-cobbler?Mr. Nevins — who said someone else came up with this term — explained that a cord-cobbler is “much more likely to have Hulu, Netflix, Amazon, and so you’re seeing a phenomenon of a lot of people putting things together that they care about.”(Showtime has its own stand-alone app, too.)And Showtime’s shows are now going to be staggered throughout the year, less concerned with, say, making sure “Homeland” is a lead-in for “The Affair.”Mr. Nevins said that David Lynch was more than halfway through his shooting schedule for the much-anticipated revival of “Twin Peaks.” It will debut in the first half of next year, he said. And, he added, the sixth season of “Homeland” will be filming in and around New York City.Fox is jumping on the live-musical bandwagon, with “Grease: Live,” broadcasting this month, and, in March, “The Passion,” a musical about Jesus Christ’s final days. And later this year, it will unveil another musical, “The Rocky Horror Picture Show.”NBC unleashed the live-musical genre in recent years with its productions of “The Sound of Music,” “Peter Pan,” and, most recently, “The Wiz.” But Fox sees the musical business as true to its brand.“Music is so much a part of the Fox DNA,” said Dana Walden, co-chief executive of Fox Television Group. Gary Newman, the other chief executive, pointed to “Glee” and “Empire” as examples that illustrate Fox’s music bona fides.These sort of musicals generally lose money, But in creating live television events in an industry hungry for them, they serve as important promotional platforms for other shows on the network.In the meantime, NBC Entertainment’s chairman, Robert Greenblatt — who announced that “Hairspray” would probably be the network’s next live musical — made reference to the fact that ABC is working on a “Dirty Dancing” musical and took a small victory lap at his Television Critics Association session: “If we spawned a little kind of uprising of musicals,” he said, “that’s great.”Advertisement