By MARY WILLIAMS WALSHJAN. 18, 2016
SAN JUAN, P.R. —  Four months after announcing a grueling five-year plan for reducing the island’s vast debt and reviving economic growth, Puerto Rico’s top economic officials said on Monday that they had been too optimistic and revised the plan for the worse.When the government first released its five-year plan last September, it warned creditors that it would need $14 billion of debt relief over that period, because it did not have enough money to pay them the total amount due, $28 billion.In a briefing for journalists on Monday, officials said they now expected to need a $16 billion break from creditors.The officials said they had run updated forecasts for 10 years as well, and things did not get much better. Over the full 10 years, they said, they would need $24 billion worth of reductions in the total $63 billion in principal and interest that various branches of government owed creditors.AdvertisementAnd that is if the structural reforms that Puerto Rico is planning succeed in fostering renewed economic growth. Without such a recovery, the officials said, Puerto Rico would need $34 billion worth of relief from the $63 billion of scheduled payments.Advertisement“We expect to sit with our creditors shortly and put forth a comprehensive restructuring proposal,” said Melba Acosta Febo, chairwoman of the Government Development Bank, in a statement issued Monday afternoon. She said the proposal would include responsible steps by Puerto Rico to manage its economy, “But it also includes a comprehensive adjustment of its debt, that reflects the commonwealth’s actual capacity to pay its creditors over the long term.”She added that solutions that “burden the economy with unsustainable debt levels, or allocate all of the debt restructuring burden to one class of credits over another will not work and instead will merely prolong this crisis.”The officials who briefed the journalists said they recently realized that they had to revise their economic plan when they saw that tax revenues were running about $500 million lower than forecast. The government has increased certain taxes and stepped up audits and enforcement, but the efforts have yet to yield a payoff. The island’s brutal 10-year recession has prompted some businesses to close and many residents to move to the United States mainland, leaving fewer incomes and transactions for the government here to tax.With inadequate revenue and no ability to borrow, Puerto Rico’s cash has been drying up. The island was able to make a number of large, high-priority debt payments due on Jan. 1 only by taking money away from lower-ranking creditors. The island’s next significant debt payment, of $400 million, is due in May from the Government Development Bank.The development bank is important because it orchestrates most of Puerto Rico’s complex web of debt, and because it has the increasingly difficult job of making sure all branches of government have adequate cash. There are concerns that if it ran into severe problems, they would spread to other parts of the government.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.And on July 1, so many debt payments are due that the officials said that without relief, there would be defaults from the top to the bottom of the hierarchy of creditors. When questioned further, they said it was still too soon to reveal how much relief they would seek from each creditor group.Under the ground rules for the briefing, the officials could not be identified by name or quoted directly.On Wednesday, the United States Treasury secretary, Jacob J. Lew, is scheduled to visit Puerto Rico. He is expected to discuss the island’s debt crisis with Gov. Alejandro García Padilla, senior members of the legislature, and business, labor and community leaders.AdvertisementMr. Lew and other Obama administration officials have been urging Congress to enact measures they say would help it restructure its $72 billion of debt in an orderly manner. In particular, the administration has argued that Puerto Rico needs access to a legal framework, like bankruptcy, that would automatically stay creditor lawsuits and make it possible to force dissident creditors to accept settlements. As currently written, the bankruptcy code bars Puerto Rico’s cities or other bodies of government from using Chapter 9, the provision that insolvent cities and counties on the mainland have been able to use to shed debt.Republicans in Congress have held back from agreeing to amend the bankruptcy code for Puerto Rico, saying they must first have a better understanding of how the island got into so much trouble.The officials who briefed journalists on Monday said that any restructuring would be easier if they could do it under the protective shield of bankruptcy — but that even without bankruptcy they had to press forward. They said debt relief was the only hope for bringing the government’s fiscal affairs into balance over the long term.To underscore the point, they offered new details about the various vendors and programs that were being shortchanged, as the government desperately pulled together enough cash to make its highest-priority debt payments. In the second half of 2015, they said, they removed $400 million from social insurance programs; they delayed $330 million worth of income-tax refunds due to residents since 2014; they allowed nearly $1.8 billion of unpaid bills to vendors to pile up.They said that some vendors were being stretched to the breaking point, and that they feared they would stop delivering essential medical supplies to hospitals, or foodstuffs to prisons, if they were not paid quickly.At the end of 2015 the government also announced that it was exercising a “clawback” provision that allowed it to strip money away from some bondholders in order to pay it to others. They said about $163 million had been clawed back and used to satisfy payments due to general-obligation bondholders, who have the highest priority under the Puerto Rican constitution. The clawbacks prompted two insurers of the affected bonds to sue the government.A version of this article appears in print on January 19, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Puerto Rico Revises Plan to Reduce Debt as Optimism Dwindles.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.