By LIZ ALDERMANJAN. 18, 2016
PARIS —  The declared mission of the World Economic Forum, which begins on Wednesday, is “improving the state of the world.” But the perennial question is whether sequestering a few thousand of the global elite in the Alpine ski resort of Davos, Switzerland, can really achieve that lofty goal.Tensions reminiscent of the Cold War keep flaring with Russia and in the Middle East — not to mention over the Korean Peninsula. Europe is struggling to cope with a refugee crisis that risks fracturing the European Union, even as the bloc tries to counter a rising security threat from the Islamic State. Britain may vote this year on whether to leave the European Union altogether. And China’s growth slowdown could prompt the second global financial crisis within a decade.Given those strains, the official Davos theme this time — “Mastering the Fourth Industrial Revolution” — may sound oddly out of tune, and the various panels on the topic could prove to be little more than sideshows.Klaus Schwab, the World Economic Forum’s founder and one of the best-connected men on the planet, is nonetheless using the forum’s website to urge the cadre of bankers, politicians, tech executives and trend makers to ponder “the fusion of technologies across the physical, digital and biological worlds, which is creating entirely new capabilities and dramatic impacts on political, social and economic systems.”AdvertisementThe big-thought themes of Davos often billow above current events. Last year, the topic was “The New Global Context,” a reference to shifting political, economic and social forces in the world. The year before focused on the “Reshaping of the World.” If such banners are somewhat elusive, so, too, is the gathering’s ability to map solutions to more immediate problems.AdvertisementBut then, problem-solving is not really the point. More than anything, Davos, at about 5,120 feet, is about high-altitude networking.The forum is where hedge fund managers, central bankers, chief executives, social-media magnates, heads of state, self-help gurus, artists, celebrities, fashion models and even archbishops engage in the equivalent of intellectual or corporate speed dating. If all goes well, they may pry open a possible business deal, pad out a contact list or maybe receive enlightenment about affairs outside their professional expertise.Many deal makers retreat to hotel suites for much of the conference, forsaking the official program in favor of a whirl of meetings, emerging only to attend private parties in exclusive chalets on the Davos slopes or invitation-only power dinners.This year’s tech luminaries are to include Jack Ma, the head of China’s online retail giant Alibaba; John T. Chambers, the chief of Cisco Systems, the Internet hardware maker; Eric E. Schmidt, executive chairman of Alphabet, Google’s parent company; and Sheryl K. Sandberg, chief operating officer of Facebook.And then there are the captains of the financial industry, including Jamie Dimon, the head of JPMorgan Chase; Gary D. Cohn, Goldman Sachs’s chief operating officer; and top executives from most of the world’s major banks.Also on hand will be a host of regulators who oversee the big banks, including Jacob J. Lew, the United States Treasury secretary, as well as an influential coterie of central bankers who determine monetary policy, including Mario Draghi, the president of the European Central Bank.Foremost among their concerns this year may be whether problems in China, whose rapidly slowing economy has rattled stock and commodity markets around the world, could cause a relapse into global financial instability just as Europe and the United States are recovering from the last crisis. No clear remedies are likely to emerge from Davos, though, because top leaders from China, as in years past, will not be present.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.And while the agenda at Davos is replete with sessions about some of the timeliest topics, including the refugee crisis in Europe and the rising threat of terrorism after Islamic State-inspired attacks in Paris, California and elsewhere, the discussions are unlikely to sway national policies.AdvertisementChancellor Angela Merkel of Germany and President François Hollande of France are conspicuously avoiding the gathering this year, judging it more effective to grapple with pressing problems back home.President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia, who once gave a keynote speech at Davos, is shunning the forum for a fifth consecutive year, wary of Western criticism of his country’s foreign policy. Instead, he is sending a delegation that is expected to promote Russia’s business shift toward Asia.And then there is the controversy surrounding North Korea. Last fall, the conference organizers took the unusual step of inviting a delegation from Pyongyang. But shortly after North Korea trumpeted a nuclear bomb test on Jan. 5, the Davos organizers disinvited the delegates — prompting North Korean officials to declare the snub “seriously unjust.”And yet, in the honeycomb of private side rooms inside the old nuclear bunker where the main conference takes place, or on the leather couches of the nearby five-star Belvedere Hotel, a favorite place for private dinners and parties, there are always opportunities for key players to make progress on thorny subjects.This year, for instance, Christine Lagarde, the managing director of the International Monetary Fund, is expected to meet on the sidelines with Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras of Greece, who defied the fund and Europe’s political elite for many months last year over the terms of a multibillion-euro bailout, risking his country’s exit from the eurozone. More recently, Mr. Tsipras, having turned from a defender of the poor to a mainstream leader eager to save Greece from further financial turmoil, is expected to try to persuade Ms. Lagarde to send more of the fund’s money to Athens.And even if no big policy breakthroughs are achieved, at least there will be star power. Justin Trudeau, the youthful new Canadian prime minister, will give a keynote address aiming to sell a fresh image of Canada to the world.The stalwarts will continue to show up, including Prime Minister David Cameron of Britain, who may be pressing his case that Britain should stay in the European Union if the bloc is willing to cut his country a new deal. From the United States, Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. is leading a delegation including Secretary of State John Kerry and Ashton Carter, the secretary of defense.For extra celebrity kick, Leonardo DiCaprio, fresh off his Oscar nomination for best actor, has been invited to receive an award for his foundation, which focuses on climate change and saving wildlife. And the musician Will.i.am will be honored for his foundation, I.am.angel, which supports science and technology education.As for the movers and shakers who have not had time to brush up on this year’s official theme — how artificial intelligence and robotics are changing humanity — Mr. Schwab, the forum’s founder, has conveniently published a new book, “The Fourth Industrial Revolution.”AdvertisementA link on the World Economic Forum’s website whisks readers to Amazon, where the 4,300-kilobyte e-book can be purchased for about $8 — a digital value that no billionaire should be able to resist.A version of this special report appears in print on January 19, 2016, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Global Tensions Simmer as Elites Meet in Davos.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »