By LIZ ALDERMANJAN. 18, 2016
PARIS — Declaring the French economy to be in a “state of emergency,” President François Hollande announced on Monday a 2 billion euro plan to subsidize job creation and temporarily move half a million unemployed people off the welfare rolls, as record unemployment threatens his bid for re-election next year.Critics immediately seized on the measure as having more political than economic meaning. And they questioned whether the new steps, a package worth about $2.2 billion, would have any more measurable impact than previous stimulus plans Mr. Hollande has announced in his yearslong effort to revive France. Despite being the second-largest eurozone economy after Germany, it has struggled to bounce back from the slowdown that befell much of Europe after the global financial crisis of 2008.Mr. Hollande has vowed repeatedly not to run for a second presidential term unless there is a downturn in unemployment, which has risen to an 18-year high of 10.6 percent, from around 9.7 percent since he came to power in 2012.The economy recently began to emerge from three years of stagnation, but it has failed to create enough jobs to reduce the pool of 3.5 million people seeking work. Youth unemployment in France, at 25.7 percent, is among the highest in Europe, adding to social precariousness in the marginalized banlieues — suburban enclaves heavily populated by Muslim residents.AdvertisementUnemployment is above 40 percent in some banlieues, where young people face particularly high hurdles in finding permanent work.Advertisement“There is an economic and social emergency,” Mr. Hollande told business and labor leaders in a speech on Monday describing his plans. The language echoed statements he made after the Paris attacks in November, when he put France under a state of emergency and pledged to ramp up military spending and domestic security to prevent new terrorist acts on French soil.With little more than a year to campaign for France’s presidential elections in 2017, the president is facing a growing challenge from rivals. Despite the fact that Mr. Hollande posted improved poll ratings for his handling of the terrorist attacks, Marine Le Pen, the leader of the far-right National Front, has gained ground against him by hammering the twin themes of nationalism and economic weakness.Ms. Le Pen posted a party statement on Twitter on Monday dismissing the plan as “ineffective” and an election ploy, and warned that unemployment would not decline without a “reindustrialization of France.”In his remarks on Monday, Mr. Hollande acknowledged that the economy, now growing at an annual pace of a little more than 1 percent, remained too weak to reduce France’s unemployment rate, which is more than twice Germany’s rate of 4.5 percent.The French economy created only 40,000 private sector jobs last year, although many more jobs were destroyed during the downturn, France’s labor minister, Myriam El Khomri, told French newspapers this month. “That means that although the economy is taking off again, growth is still too timid,” she said.Business investment remains weak despite €40 billion in tax breaks approved by Mr. Hollande in 2014 in an effort to spur corporate profitability. Consumer spending, which has also failed to revive, took an extra hit after Islamic State militants killed 130 people in a coordinated terror spree in November.Mr. Hollande’s newest measures, on top of similar initiatives unveiled in the last two years, aim to bolster employment.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The blueprint provides a new layer of subsidies for small and midsize businesses — this time a bonus of €2,000 for companies that hire and retain a full-time employee for more than six months. Last summer, Mr. Hollande unveiled an aid plan of €4,000 for single-person businesses that hired their first worker on a yearlong contract.AdvertisementMore controversial is a plan to put 500,000 unemployed people into vocational training programs this year, on top of 150,000 announced in October — an action that would, at least temporarily, remove more than half a million people from the unemployment rolls.The government also wants to reduce youth unemployment, in part by putting tens of thousands of young people to work in so-called civic service volunteer programs. In 2015, 60,000 young people were enrolled in civic service programs; this year, the government wants to more than double it to 150,000.Still, political rivals quickly questioned whether the incentives amounted to little more than putting a bandage on a gaping wound. Last week, for example, the manufacturing giant General Electric announced plans to cut up to 6,500 jobs globally, including 765 positions in France.Critics also attacked Mr. Hollande’s plan as a naked grab to salvage his candidacy at a time when even some members of his Socialist party have suggested that he not automatically be their main candidate heading into next year’s elections.“President Hollande is starting the year with a lie to the French,” Éric Woerth, a member of the conservative Republican party, which is led by former President Nicolas Sarkozy, said on Monday. “Even if 500,000 people can get training, you need 500,000 jobs to hire them into,” he said. “Otherwise it’s back to the unemployment line the day after” the program ends.Mr. Hollande was already facing his party’s opposition to more far-reaching, centrist economic proposals that he had announced in the last year. A so-called responsibility pact, in which the government granted tax breaks in exchange for job-creation pledges by businesses, was opposed by unions, which said the pact gave too many concessions to employers.Mr. Hollande has also sought to loosen restrictive labor practices, making it easier for companies to lay off employees in some cases and to cut workers’ pay and hours when times are hard. So far, though, those measures have had a limited impact.On Monday, he gave reassurances that the latest measures were not a “statistic artifice” aimed solely at lowering the numbers of unemployed people.“We can’t correct statistics,” he said. Employment, he added, is “the only issue that goes beyond the need to assure the security” of France.A version of this article appears in print on January 19, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Hollande, Facing Election Pressures, Announces Program to Bolster Jobs.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.