By KATIE BENNERJAN. 19, 2016
SAN FRANCISCO — Practice Fusion, an electronic health records start-up, hired JPMorgan Chase last year to explore an initial public offering in 2017, according to people with knowledge of the matter, though the discussions are now in flux because of market volatility.At the time, JPMorgan estimated that Practice Fusion could get a public market valuation of around $1.5 billion if it went public next year, according to a document prepared by both companies that was reviewed by The New York Times. The valuation was based on estimated revenue of $181 million for 2018.Conversations about a public offering have since become more complicated because of stock market turmoil, said the people with knowledge of the matter, who spoke on condition of anonymity because the details are private.Practice Fusion later created a way to estimate its I.P.O. valuation if revenue came in at $155 million in 2018 instead of $181 million, according to one of the people. Using the lower revenue assumption, the company could command a valuation of $1.1 billion to $1.2 billion if it goes public. It is unclear if the lower revenue estimate was made in response to the market turmoil.Advertisement“An I.P.O. could potentially be an outcome for Practice Fusion, but currently we continue our focus on commercializing our products, growing the business and serving our physician community,” a Practice Fusion spokeswoman wrote in an email, declining to comment further. JPMorgan declined to comment.AdvertisementPractice Fusion’s trajectory with I.P.O. discussions is becoming a familiar one as ripple effects from the stock market gyrations spread. The Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index has fallen 7.9 percent this year, and the Nasdaq 100 has lost 9.7 percent, according to Bloomberg data. Other venture-backed companies that went public last year have been hit hard, with the payments company Square, which went public last November, down 27 percent, and the online storage company Box down about 60 percent after going public last year.“It is fair to say that the I.P.O. window is barely open right now,” said Kathleen Smith, principal at the I.P.O. research firm Renaissance Capital.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Practice Fusion, which is based in San Francisco, was founded in 2005. The company lets physicians store and gain access to electronic medical records free, earning money by showing advertisements to those doctors. It has raised $149 million from investors including Morgenthaler, Founders Fund, Artis Ventures and Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers.As of a funding round in 2013, Practice Fusion was valued at $635 million, according to one of the people with knowledge of the matter.The company encompasses some of the trends that have been most attractive to venture capitalists in health care services, such as storing medical records in the cloud and finding ways to better connect doctors with patient information. Venture money in the sector more than doubled to $720 million in 2015, according to the National Venture Capital Association.Practice Fusion’s revenue was $26.9 million in 2014 and was expected to increase by 71 percent to $46.1 million in 2015, with the company projecting it would pare losses by 40 percent to $25.8 million in 2015, according to the document prepared by bankers and the company.At the time the document was prepared, the company estimated revenue would hit $70 million in 2016.Practice Fusion said this month that revenue had grown by more than 70 percent in 2015 and that about 30,000 medical practices use its tools.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.