By STEPHANIE STROMJAN. 19, 2016
Freshii plans to make lemonade out of Chipotle’s lemons.The Canadian restaurant chain, which offers everything from a juice cleanse to customized wraps and quinoa bowls, will sell the Mexican items on its menu for half price on Feb. 8, the day Chipotle Mexican Grill will close all its stores for a few hours for an employee meeting on food safety.“In a world full of generic promotions, we wanted to do something fun and timely to relieve some of the anxiety around what’s a pretty serious topic,” said Matthew Corrin, Freshii’s founder.Chipotle has been hit with a string of food safety problems that have sickened hundreds of people in several states since last summer. The spate of food-borne illness cases caused a decline in sales, the company said, and has contributed to a drop in Chipotle’s stock price over the last several months. A federal grand jury in California is also looking into an incidence of food-borne illness last summer at one of Chipotle’s restaurants in the state, the company reported.In an effort to recover its damaged reputation and restore customer confidence, the company disclosed last week that it would close its stores at lunchtime on Feb. 8 to brief all of its employees on new safety protocols and practices it has put into place over the last few months.AdvertisementOn Tuesday, Chipotle said in a news release that most of its new food safety program was in place. The new effort includes things like DNA-based testing of some ingredients to ensure quality and safety before they are shipped to its restaurants, and paid sick leave, a rarity in the fast-food business, so that employees stay home when they are sick. (An investigation by health authorities in Boston, where a norovirus sickened some 140 people after they ate in a Chipotle restaurant, identified a sick employee at work.)AdvertisementFreshii offers about a half-dozen Mexican-style meals on its menu that will be discounted, such as the Baja Burrito, stuffed with quinoa, avocado, red and green onions, cilantro, salsa and pico de gallo, and the Ranchero Breakfast Burrito.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Corrin said those items were among Freshii’s most popular. “I think it will end up costing us, but we wanted to do something that would be eye-catching and maybe introduce consumers to healthier versions of burritos and bowls than what they find at Chipotle,” he said.This is not the first time Freshii, which has more than 200 stores, has tried to ride a bigger competitor’s coattails. Last May, Mr. Corrin sent an open letter to Steve Easterbrook, then the new chief executive of McDonald’s, asking him to install a Freshii kiosk in a McDonald’s store. He predicted that store would experience a 30 percent rise in same-store sales over a year and contribute $250,000 in profit.“That was dead serious,” Mr. Corrin said. “There’s an accelerating obesity epidemic around the world, and we were a young company that thinks about health and wellness offering a solution to a big company — because, you know, kale on an Egg McMuffin in one city in California isn’t going to make a difference.”Freshii has tried other unusual efforts to grow its business. Most recently, for instance, Target converted the cafes in nine of its stores in Chicago and Minneapolis to Freshii stores.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.