AdvertisementSupported byBy Matthew GoldsteinMartin Shkreli, the former hedge fund manager turned pharmaceutical executive who was charged with securities fraud, is in the market for a new lawyer.The legal team at Arnold & Porter, the big Washington law firm that was representing Mr. Shkreli, filed a letter in the Federal District Court in Brooklyn, saying that Mr. Shkreli was in the process of retaining new lawyers.Marcus A. Asner, in a letter dated Monday to Judge Kiyo A. Matsumoto, did not offer an explanation for Mr. Shkreli’s decision to hire a new legal team. Mr. Asner did not answer a request for comment.Mr. Shkreli, 32, has continued to take to Twitter, streaming videos and traditional news outlets to proclaim his innocence and act as if not much has changed in his life.In a broadcast interview with Fox 5 News in New York on Sunday, Mr. Shkreli said, “The government’s case is fictitious,” and he took issue with assertions that he was the “most hated man” in the world.Mr. Shkreli, when asked about the change in lawyers, initially said he had “no further comment.”But in an email, Mr. Shkreli said that it was “a dumb theory” that the reason for the change had anything to do with the recent TV interview.Mr. Shkreli wrote his response to an email that was sent to Mr. Asner and was forwarded by the lawyer to Mr. Shkreli.It is not unheard-of for white-collar defendants, especially those with deep pockets, to switch lawyers in the middle of a case. But they will often wait a bit before doing so.On Dec. 17, federal prosecutors in Brooklyn charged Mr. Shkreli with defrauding investors in a former hedge fund and looting a drug company he once ran in an attempt to pay back the investors.But Mr. Shkreli may be best known for raising the price of a decades-old drug by 5,000 percent at another drug company, and later paying $2 million to buy the only known copy of an album by the rap group Wu-Tang Clan.His brash defense of the raising of the drug price earned the wrath of some politicians and many commentators, but it also cast him as something of a Wall Street outlaw. His love of rap music and the casual style in his streaming videos have also gained him some fans, as well as critics.One thing Mr. Shkreli is not lacking is the money to hire new lawyers.This month, federal prosecutors disclosed in a court filing that Mr. Shkreli had used brokerage accounts at E-Trade containing $45 million to post $5 million bail after his arrest and arraignment.In a court filing on Friday detailing information prosecutors had provided to Mr. Shkreli, they further disclosed that he had six accounts at E-Trade, an account at Deutsche Bank, an account at Sterne Agee and accounts at other financial firms.Prosecutors also said they had received records from Twitter for an account using the name “Thug_BioAnalyst.”It is not clear if the account was set up by Mr. Shkreli, who posts under his name @MartinShkreli. The @Thug_BioAnalyst account mainly repeats tweets from others, including Mr. Shkreli. The profile for the anonymous account describes the poster as the: “Chairman of the Twitter Biotech Board - ain’t nobody bringing new drugs to deez streets widout ya boy gettin a taste.”Advertisement