By TARA SIEGEL BERNARDJAN. 19, 2016
As more states explore ways to encourage workers to save for retirement, New Jersey recently decided on its own approach: The state will create a retirement plan marketplace, intended to make it easier for small businesses to select a tax-deferred savings program for employees.This approach was a compromise. On Tuesday, Gov. Chris Christie, a Republican, signed a revised bill that differed significantly from a version that initially passed both houses of the New Jersey Legislature.The original bill, which the governor rejected, would have mandated that businesses with more than 25 employees that did not already provide access to a retirement plan offer a state-run retirement program to its workers.Instead, New Jersey will introduce a more hands-off approach, which leaves it up to employers to decide whether they will participate. Modeled after a program adopted in Washington State, the so-called New Jersey Small Business Marketplace will connect eligible employers and their workers with retirement plan providers that meet certain conditions.Advertisement“It’s not what I intended, but it’s a step forward,” Vincent Prieto, the Democratic speaker of the New Jersey Assembly, said in a statement. “I plan to revisit the issue next session.”AdvertisementRetirement plans in the state’s marketplace, which will be available to companies with 100 or fewer workers, cannot charge more than 1 percent of a participant’s total assets invested, up from the first bill’s 0.6 percent.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The marketplace must offer at least two types of plans: an individual retirement account funded through payroll deductions (and in which the employer does not make matching contributions) and a Simple I.R.A. Each provider must also offer at least two investment options, including a target-date fund and a balanced fund. The platform will also offer the new employer-sponsored savings accounts known as myRA, which are essentially starter after-tax Roth I.R.A.s for people who do not have access to employer-sponsored plans.Governor Christie vetoed the original bill and offered recommendations that the state Senate and Assembly ultimately passed. While he said that he shared the Legislature’s concern about insufficient retirement savings, he said he also believed that mandating participation under the threat of fines was unnecessarily burdensome on small businesses.AARP has lobbied for state-led retirement initiatives, which can take several different forms. Some models, where the retirement plans are largely operated by the state, take most of the responsibility off individual employers’ shoulders, including fiduciary responsibility. Certain employers must participate and workers are automatically enrolled (though they can opt out).By contrast, the model adopted by New Jersey simply preselects retirement plans from the private market and presents them in an online marketplace.“The way the marketplace model is operated is going to be very important to whether this benefits small employers who choose to participate,” said David John, senior strategic policy adviser at the AARP Public Policy Institute. “What New Jersey is doing essentially is making it easier to buy a plan, but they are not providing much in the way of an additional incentive for small employers to participate.”A version of this article appears in print on January 20, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: New Jersey Establishes Savings Plan Marketplace .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.