AdvertisementSupported byCorner OfficeBy Adam BryantThis interview with Carmelyn P. Malalis, chairwoman and commissioner of the New York City Commission on Human Rights, was conducted and condensed by Adam Bryant.Q. Were you in leadership positions when you were younger?A. From a very early age, I was in leadership roles, whether it was choir president in grade school or student council president in high school. My parents are immigrants from the Philippines, and even though they were proud of me, I think they were wary of the independence that was awakening in me. Having their daughter expressing her opinions so publicly and openly was just not something that culturally they were accustomed to.A few years ago, I received an award, and my parents joined me at the luncheon. My parents and I have the type of relationship and experience that I know a lot of my friends who are also second-generation have with their parents. We’re out in the world doing things that are very different from their lives. Often the result is that our parents know very little about what we feel very strongly about.Then there are these moments when it becomes very real for your parents. I vividly remember after the event, we went to get our coats, and my dad said to me: “You know, Carm, when you were young, you were very opinionated, and it was really tough on me and Mom. But I can see it’s done well for you.” I think about that all the time.Do you see strands of your parents in your leadership style today?To the extent that real multitasking exists — because I’m aware of all of the studies saying there’s no such thing as multitasking — I definitely got that from my mother. I grew up thinking she could do everything.And my core belief of wanting to reach out to more marginalized populations and working with vulnerable groups comes from my father, certainly. I remember he would occasionally make trips on his own to the Philippines to visit a sick relative. He would leave with a full suitcase of clothing, and he would come back with really just the clothing on his back. And my mom would say, “What happened?” His answer was always, “Somebody needed it more than me.”Did you have a clear idea in college what you wanted to do for a career?My mom was a doctor, and I started out college thinking I was going to be a doctor too. By the end of my first year in college, I like to say that I joined the support group for other Asian-American non-pre-med students. I veered toward doing a lot more of the small seminar classes that were very much about empowerment, disempowerment, relationships of different communities. That started me thinking that I wanted to do something in law or politics.Do you remember your first management role?After college, I worked for a while at Sullivan & Cromwell as a legal assistant. I would be staffed on these huge cases, with multiple war rooms, and it was the first time I was in charge of up to 40 people sometimes. I was 22, but I was running the show. I was reporting to associates or partners at the law firm, but I was managing all these folks who in many instances were older and had more experience with the law. But my job was to be the person to organize the work. And I think that my mother’s multitasking gene was helpful in those situations.How has your leadership style evolved?I knew very early on that I was not going to be somebody who led with fear or by sheer force because that just wasn’t comfortable to me. That doesn’t make me feel good as a leader, and it didn’t make me inspired to do a good job when I worked with people who did that.That was also when I started thinking about the importance of telling others about the great work the folks on their team are doing. I remember sending out emails to partners and saying this person did a great job. Or if there were openings for jobs, I would tell people that a certain person should be considered for the position.This is something I really believe: People don’t take the opportunity to say nice things about their colleagues to others, or to the people themselves.And something that’s changed as I’ve grown older, frankly, is that I’ve just become much more comfortable in my own skin. I think women struggle with that, and women of color definitely struggle with that. I have these conversations especially with younger lawyers or new lawyers — you have to start getting comfortable being you.It’s the hardest thing to do sometimes because you could also feel completely lost in whatever situation you’re in. But you figure out how you fit in that construct rather than figuring out how you create a construct for yourself that fits in with the surroundings.How do you hire?In every single interview, regardless of the position, the person is asked what their community relationships are. What are your ties to the community, whatever that community may be? That’s a very important part of the agency, but it also tells you a lot about how this person interacts or functions in group settings.The other question we ask is about references. We don’t just want the names of people who have supervised them or were their peers. We ask for names of people they’ve supervised because it’s important for us to know that they can be a good person to report up to.What advice do you give to new grads?I definitely tell them to be who they are, because they can’t be anybody else. And I tell them they should always be adding to or forming their kind of personal board of directors — people from different backgrounds who they trust, and can give them advice on different aspects of their life. You’re always going to need that group for decisions you make in your life.Each week, Adam Bryant talks with top executives about leadership. Follow him on Twitter: @nytcorneroffice. This interview has been edited for space and clarity.Advertisement