
Breakingviews By                     
ROB COX

JAN. 19, 2016
Donald Trump’s presence will be felt at the World Economic Forum this year, even though he isn’t actually expected to attend.The populism driving the real estate developer’s unlikely campaign for the presidency finds its roots in the inequality that the annual gathering in Davos, Switzerland, represents – and which the world business and political leaders in attendance will, again, talk about solving.Mr. Trump is the most imposing of a long line of politicians who, particularly since the great financial crisis that began in 2008, have rallied voter discontent in ways that are upending the establishment.The disruption that Mr. Trump and his ilk represent can, theoretically, be a good thing. A corrupt status quo with entrenched political and corporate interests will, over time, erode faith in democratic institutions. History suggests that can lead to economic instability, even violent revolution. Certain types of populist movements, however, carry their own, equally frightening risks.Advertisement“The history of populism in democracy is not great, and it’s not self-correcting in a lot of cases,” said Kenneth M Jacobs, chairman and chief executive of the international investment bank Lazard during a Breakingviews Predictions panel discussion last week. “You only have to look to Europe between the two wars and to a number of the Latin American countries prewar and postwar to see that.”AdvertisementAll variations of modern populism share a similar root: disaffection with the social contract, and an abiding sense that the benefits of economic progress are not just asymmetrically distributed but potentially no longer available to ordinary citizens.On this front, the charity Oxfam, in its regular party-pooper report ahead of the World Economic Forum, provides some startling evidence that this may indeed be the case today. It’s not just in the United States, which holds a presidential election in November, but across the globe.Just 62 individuals – 53 of them men – control the same amount of wealth as 3.5 billion people, or the poorer half of the human race, according to Oxfam’s findings. Just five years ago, 388 individuals controlled that level of wealth. Moreover, the riches of these 62 people have nearly doubled since 2010, reaching an absolute figure of $542 billion.The billionaires, chief executives and prime ministers convening in Davos from Wednesday to Saturday are acutely aware of the underlying problem of wealth and income inequality, as they have been since the financial crisis.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The program this year is actually dedicated to “Mastering the Fourth Industrial Revolution,” a nod to forces like technology and automation that are intensifying the wealth divides, and peppered with sessions like “Politics of Inequality” and “The Inequality Challenge.”It’s a shame that populism isn’t specifically on the agenda, even if it can be diagnosed as a byproduct of inequality. Not all forms of mass insurrection are bad. Spain’s political system, for example, has reformed since the emergence of the “indignados” movement a few years ago, which gave rise to parties like Podemos and Ciudadanos. This has beneficially challenged a two-party system – not to mention monarchy – long calcified by corruption.Scholars have argued that relatively bloodless reforms, like America’s New Deal nearly a century ago and China’s shift toward a market economy over the last two decades, were at heart populist movements. Both represented huge shifts in the established order and had the effect of lifting millions of people out of poverty and into the middle class.The belief that whatever compact existed as a result of the New Deal and its many more recent derivatives has shattered is a factor leading to the seemingly unstoppable rise of Mr. Trump in the race for the Republican nomination. A similar phenomenon is happening in the Democratic Party, where Senator Bernie Sanders has taken the front-runner Hillary Clinton by surprise.AdvertisementBoth have engaged in the sort of scapegoat tactics that often characterize the bad form of populism. Mr. Sanders rails against the moneyed elite – basically Davos Man. Mr. Trump focuses on Muslims and Mexican immigrants, linking the woes of his base, the underemployed American with authoritarian inclinations, to globalization, which is a precondition for the very existence of the World Economic Forum.The central difference is that Mr. Sanders’s targets are amply endowed to rebut or undermine his assertions. That’s not the case with the voiceless, mostly poor, immigrants that Mr. Trump, and his emerging nemesis in the G.O.P., Senator Ted Cruz of Texas, have sought to vilify. With his targets lacking any ability to push back publicly, Mr. Trump is able to whip up the angry and undereducated in ways that worryingly echo the worst populist movements of the recent past, particularly National Socialism in Germany.“The contract around American capitalism used to be pretty simplistic – it was basically ‘I don’t mind you getting rich as long as I have the chance to get rich,’” said Mr. Jacobs, who will be among this week’s World Economic Forum attendees. “The challenge for us right now is whether that has fundamentally broken down. The sense that I can’t make it next is pervasive.”DealBook readers: The Reuters Breakingviews predictions book, “Stairway to Heaven, Highway to Hell,”  offers smart financial ideas for the 2016 playbook. Click here to read the book. (Or download the PDF.)Rob Cox is editor of Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »