AdvertisementSupported byBy Jack EwingVolkswagen on Tuesday named a former BMW executive to oversee its business in the United States, Canada and Mexico, where sales have been particularly hard hit by an emissions scandal that has placed the company under intense pressure from regulators.The new executive, Hinrich J. Woebcken, 55, will become head of the North America region for Volkswagen brand cars effective April 1, the company said Tuesday. Michael Horn, who has been chief executive of Volkswagen’s United States unit and who is popular with dealers, will remain in that post, the company said.The appointment addresses a leadership vacuum in the region at a time when Volkswagen sorely needs to repair its relations with customers and the authorities. American state attorneys general have complained that the company has not cooperated fully with investigations of who was responsible for installing software designed to mask the true emissions of cars with diesel motors.In addition, Volkswagen has not yet been able to agree with the Environmental Protection Agency and California regulators on a way to fix about 600,000 vehicles that have the illegal software.The decision by Volkswagen to name an outsider may be a response to criticism that the company’s top management remains dominated by longtime insiders too ingrained in the existing corporate culture.Volkswagen created the North American regional position as part of a reorganization in September, days after the E.P.A. accused the carmaker of installing the emissions cheating software.But the person initially named to the job, Winfried Vahland, who had been head of Volkswagen’s Skoda unit based in the Czech Republic, quit the company without ever assuming his new duties. His reasons for resigning were unclear. German news media reported that Mr. Vahland was unhappy that the job did not also include a seat on the parent company’s management board.Volkswagen also needs to find a way to appease angry buyers of its diesel cars in the United States, many of whom say they were misled by company marketing campaigns that described the cars as environmentally friendly.Sales of Volkswagen brand cars in the United States have slumped since the emissions cheating became known. In December, sales fell 9 percent to 31,000 vehicles, the company said, even as the overall car market boomed.Including Canada and Mexico, Volkswagen brand sales in December fell 1 percent, to 53,000 vehicles.Mr. Woebcken was a senior executive at BMW from 2004 to 2014 with responsibilities in purchasing and production. Since 2014, he has been chief executive of the commercial vehicle systems division at Knorr-Bremse, a German brake supplier.His new job does not include responsibility for Volkswagen’s Audi and Porsche brands, which have not had the same sales declines as Volkswagen brand cars.Advertisement