AdvertisementSupported byBy Matthew GoldsteinSteven A. Cohen, the billionaire investor and a renowned art collector, may be in a buying mood.At the end of last year, Morgan Stanley’s private bank arranged a personal loan of an unspecified sum for Mr. Cohen. The loan is secured by “artwork collateral pieces” and related documents, according to a filing with the Connecticut secretary of state’s office.It is not uncommon for wealthy art collectors to take out multiple lines of credit to fund purchases. In the past, Mr. Cohen, 59, has used similar personal loans from Deutsche Bank and other Wall Street banks to finance and defray the cost of some of his big art purchases, which have included works by Jeff Koons, Damien Hirst, Alberto Giacometti and Pablo Picasso. It is estimated that his art collection is worth about $1 billion.Two years ago, Goldman Sachs provided Mr. Cohen with a line of credit after Deutsche Bank decided not to continue a personal loan it made to him in 2009. Officials at Deutsche Bank pulled back on its business and personal ties to Mr. Cohen after his former hedge fund, SAC Capital Advisors, agreed to plead guilty to insider trading charges, pay $1.8 billion in penalties to the federal government and stop managing money for outside investors.Morgan Stanley, however, is providing a line of credit to Mr. Cohen at a time when both his business and personal prospects look far brighter. It could be a shrewd business move for the Wall Street bank, given that Mr. Cohen’s former hedge fund once accounted for 3 percent of the daily trading volume on the New York Stock Exchange.His new firm, Point72 Asset Management, the $11 billion family office which succeeded SAC, has been no slouch, either.The firm, which manages mainly Mr. Cohen’s own personal fortune, has had a second consecutive successful year. In 2015, Point72 was “highly profitable,” said a person briefed on the firm’s performance who spoke on condition of anonymity, even as many big name hedge funds posted double-digit losses. Point72, which employs more than 900 people, had a gross profit of more than $2.5 billion in 2014, its first year as a family office.On Tuesday, the firm announced that it was opening an office in London that could eventually employ up to 70 people. In 2013, SAC shut its London office, laying off dozens, during the height of the insider trading investigation, which led to securities fraud convictions for five former employees of Mr. Cohen.This month, Mr. Cohen reached a civil settlement with the Securities and Exchange Commission in an administrative matter that will allow him and his firm to begin managing money from outside investors in two years. The settlement was a victory for Mr. Cohen as the S.E.C. initially sought a lifetime ban for him for failing to supervise an employee at his former hedge fund who was convicted of insider trading. Mr. Cohen resolved the matter without admitting any wrongdoing or paying a personal fine.For a man who not too long ago was a prime target for federal authorities trying to root out improper trading in the $3 trillion hedge fund industry, Mr. Cohen, arguably one of the more successful stock traders of his generation, is back on top of the world.Morgan Stanley’s private bank arranged a personal loan of an unspecified sum for the billionaire investor. The loan is secured by “artwork collateral pieces,” according to a filing.A Morgan Stanley spokesman declined to comment on the loan. Jonathan Gasthalter, a spokesman for Mr. Cohen, also declined to comment on the new loan.Mr. Cohen’s love of art has been well chronicled, as have some of his big purchases and major sales at auctions.In November, for instance, he sold a portrait of the former Chinese leader Mao Zedong by Andy Warhol for more than $47 million at a Sotheby’s auction. He bought it in 2007 in a private transaction for $17 million.A number of the works he has accumulated have been on display over the years at the Stamford, Conn., headquarters of his firm, at his house in East Hampton, N.Y., and at his 35,000-square-foot Greenwich, Conn., mansion. One of Mr. Koons’s “Balloon Dog” statues has graced the lawn of that estate.In recent years, Mr. Cohen has begun lending some of his collection to museums, including the Metropolitan Museum of Art and the Museum of Modern Art. In 2014, the charitable foundation that he and his wife, Alexandra, manage gave $110,000 to the Bruce Museum in Greenwich. And last summer, the foundation gave $2 million to the Whitney Museum of American Art.Alexandra Stevenson and Chad Bray contributed reporting.Advertisement