AdvertisementSupported byBy Liz MoyerThe American International Group is getting more prodding for radical change from the activist investor Carl C. Icahn just one week before management is scheduled to unveil its vision for the insurer’s future.In a letter to A.I.G.’s board on Tuesday, Mr. Icahn again urged it to sell, spin off or separate operations to tailor A.I.G. as a so-called pure play — or highly focused — property and casualty insurer and get out from under stricter new regulations that affect companies deemed big enough to endanger the stability of the financial system should they fail.“It is abundantly clear to me that there is only one sensible path for A.I.G. to follow,” Mr. Icahn said in the letter, which came just days after another big American insurer, MetLife, announced plans to separate its retail business in the United States to address in part its own designation as a systemically important financial institution.MetLife is not being pursued by shareholders to make big changes, but investors have pushed for radical change at A.I.G. for many months.“It would be a mistake to squander this opportunity to present a bold new strategy,” Mr. Icahn said in his letter to A.I.G.Critics of A.I.G. management have said it does not appear to be acting swiftly enough to put the company on a firmer footing. An analyst at Sanford C. Bernstein & Company, Josh Stirling, recently questioned more than 100 A.I.G. investors and found that 86 percent of them want the insurer to act radically to “de-conglomerate” the company.Management has virtually no support from these shareholders, Mr. Stirling said in a note about his questionnaire’s findings. Mr. Icahn said Tuesday that he was concerned management’s plan would be limited to small changes, like asset sales and cost-cutting. He also said he thought management had been misleading in public statements about the feasibility of a breakup.In a statement Tuesday, A.I.G. said it “continues to take steps to narrow its focus, improve its financial performance, and return capital to shareholders.” It said it has an active dialogue with shareholders, including Mr. Icahn.The Bernstein research may have given more ammunition to Mr. Icahn, who has been campaigning to break up A.I.G., including spinning off its life insurance and mortgage insurance units, to free it from being labeled a systemically important financial institution, a government designation that requires financial companies to set aside more capital as a cushion for losses and adhere to stricter regulations.Mr. Icahn says in the letter that he has spoken with A.I.G.’s chairman, Douglas M. Steenland, and has received assurances that the board will act if management does not.Advertisement