AdvertisementSupported byBy Emily SteelThe Spanish-language media giant Univision Communications announced Tuesday that it had acquired a large stake in The Onion, the comedy and satirical digital media group, as part of the company’s efforts to extend its digital reach and strengthen its portfolio of comedy outlets.Terms of the deal were not disclosed, but the transaction was said to be for a 40 percent stake, valued at less than $200 million, according to one person briefed on the deal.“Comedy is playing an expanding role in our culture as a vehicle for audiences to explore, debate and understand the important ideas of our time,” said Isaac Lee, chief news and digital officer of Univision. “It has also proven to be an incredibly engaging format for millennial audiences and is expected to play a key part in the 2016 presidential election process via our robust content offerings in Spanish and English.”Univision’s digital portfolio is undergoing a flurry of changes, part of an effort to build its footprint and reach as diverse a group of millennials as possible. News emerged last month that Univision was in talks with the Walt Disney Company to take full control of their joint venture Fusion, the English-language digital news service and cable channel. In November, Univision named Mr. Lee to a new position with responsibility for overseeing digital functions, leading multicultural efforts and creating a music strategy. He also is chief executive of Fusion.At the same time, Univision’s plans for a public offering of stock have been delayed after broader fears about the future of the television business sent the share prices for major media companies on a downward spiral.Univision executives saw The Onion as a complement to Fusion and its other properties, with comedy filling a vital role in culture, political discourse and the discussion of current events, according to the person briefed on the deal. They also saw the deal as helping Univision develop new comedy and satirical offerings in Spanish and English and collaborate with up-and-coming talent. The two groups also could create and distribute new TV programs based on The Onion.The deal gives Univision an immediate expansion of its online presence. In December, Univision’s digital sites attracted 19.5 million unique United States visitors, while Onion sites drew 19.3 million unique United States visitors, according to the media measurement firm comScore.The Onion describes its start — with a wink — as rising from “humble beginnings as a print newspaper in 1765” and now attracting a daily readership of 4.3 trillion as “the single most powerful and influential organization in human history.” The company actually began in 1988 as a weekly publication in Madison, Wis. The Onion Inc. portfolio of sites now includes the satire news publication The Onion; the pop-culture site The A.V. Club; the buzzy ClickHole; a gossip site called StarWipe; and Onion Studios, a digital video network.In a memo to employees, Mike McAvoy, the president and chief executive of Onion Inc., said the deal came after the company had searched for a partner during the last year to help the company grow. He said that after acquiring a “good chunk” of Onion Inc., Univision could acquire the remainder of the company in the future.“As an independent media company, we’ve always been forced to run a tight financial ship, which has made us smart and lean, but not always ready to invest in the great new ideas that we come up with,” Mr. McAvoy said in the memo. “I’m excited to see what we can do with Univision behind us.”Ravi Somaiya contributed reportingAdvertisement