By BEN PROTESSJAN. 21, 2016
After a monthslong delay, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo on Thursday named a new top financial regulator for New York State, nominating Maria T. Vullo, a prominent litigator with ties to his administration.Ms. Vullo, a lawyer at the white-shoe law firm Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton & Garrison, previously worked for Mr. Cuomo when he was the New York State attorney general.For Mr. Cuomo, a Democrat who created the Department of Financial Services in 2011 to oversee banks after the crisis, Ms. Vullo is a logical choice. The agency’s previous superintendent, Benjamin M. Lawsky, was also one of Mr. Cuomo’s top aides at the attorney general’s office.Under Mr. Lawsky, the agency shook up the sleepy world of financial regulation in New York, extracting hundreds of millions of dollars in penalties from banks that did business with Iran and manipulated benchmark rates. Mr. Cuomo said he expected Ms. Vullo to be tough on Wall Street, but she might also repair the agency’s relationships with fellow regulators and prosecutors, some of whom bristled at the agency’s headline-grabbing actions.Advertisement“Maria Vullo is a dedicated, tough and fair litigator with the right combination of public and private sector experience needed to lead the Department of Financial Services,” Mr. Cuomo said in a statement. “Maria has shown an immovable commitment to upholding the law and protecting consumers, and I am confident that she would be a strong and tireless advocate for the people of New York as superintendent.”AdvertisementIn the same statement, Ms. Vullo thanked Mr. Cuomo “for this tremendous opportunity,” adding that she was “excited to serve the people of the State of New York once again.”The announcement ends months of speculation over who would replace Mr. Lawsky, who left in June to start his own law and consulting firm, and offers some certainty to an agency that had bounced from one interim leader to another. Anthony J. Albanese, a top aide to Mr. Lawsky, replaced him temporarily but left the agency for the private sector late last year.Ms. Vullo, whose nomination requires confirmation from the State Senate, was among the first rumored to be under consideration for the job. Although some close to the agency speculated that Mr. Cuomo would select an outsider, he is known to prefer prominent candidates he personally knows.It is unclear whether any opposition to her nomination will arise.But Ms. Vullo could face internal pressure to exert independence from the governor’s office, an issue that caused alarm at the agency after Mr. Lawsky’s departure.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Late last year, an aide to Mr. Cuomo sought to intervene in some of the agency’s business, according to people briefed on the matter, who spoke on the condition of anonymity. The aide asked to review and possibly edit requests that the agency sent to financial institutions, the people said.It is unclear whether similar problems will arise under Ms. Vullo, but people who know her describe an independent streak.“She is wise, independent, extremely hard-working and will very much want the agency to continue on a similar path,” Mr. Lawsky, who has known her for more than 15 years, said in an interview.At the attorney general’s office, where she was the executive deputy attorney general for economic justice, Ms. Vullo oversaw some of Mr. Cuomo’s prominent cases stemming from the financial crisis. Among them, she led the case against Ivy Asset Management related to Bernard L. Madoff’s Ponzi scheme and the action against Ernst & Young for its role as the auditor of Lehman Brothers.AdvertisementIn private practice at Paul, Weiss, Ms. Vullo was a well-known white-collar litigator, representing financial institutions facing government investigations. That experience could allay concerns from Wall Street, which took a beating under Mr. Lawsky’s tenure.“Maria is someone with credibility among advocates, based on her work in the attorney general’s office, as well as with the financial industry, thanks to her many years in private practice,” Kathryn Wylde, head of the Partnership for New York City, a pro-business group, said in a statement. “She is a perfect choice.”Ms. Vullo also handled a number of pro bono cases involving women’s rights issues, including women raped by soldiers during the Bosnian War from 1992 to 1995 and abortion providers who faced online threats.“I’ve worked closely with Maria for more than 25 years, the last 20 as law partners,” Brad S. Karp, the chairman of Paul, Weiss, said in an email. “Maria is brilliant, tenacious and evenhanded, with superb judgment. She’ll be a wonderful superintendent.”Jesse McKinley contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on January 22, 2016, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: Cuomo Chooses a Litigator to Be New York’s Top Financial Regulator .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.