By EMILY STEELJAN. 20, 2016
Viacom cut the annual pay for its executive chairman, Sumner M. Redstone, by 85 percent during the 2015 fiscal year, the company disclosed on Wednesday, in the face of growing questions about whether Mr. Redstone, an ailing 92-year-old, should continue in his role at the company.Mr. Redstone, who controls about 80 percent of Viacom’s voting stock, was paid $2 million in the 2015 fiscal year, down from $13 million the previous year. Viacom said in a statement that while Mr. Redstone’s salary was unchanged, he became ineligible to receive a bonus starting in the 2015 fiscal year. The company did not say why.Viacom, whose businesses include the television networks MTV, Comedy Central and Nickelodeon, as well as the Paramount Pictures film studio, took the unusual step of releasing the pay information for Mr. Redstone and the company’s chief executive, Phillipe P. Dauman, in advance of the filing of its proxy statement with the Securities and Exchange Commission, which is expected later this week.Viacom has come under fire in recent months from shareholders and activist investors. Both groups have questioned Mr. Redstone’s position at the company after a former companion of his filed a lawsuit describing him as a “living ghost” and challenged his mental competence.AdvertisementViacom has maintained that while Mr. Redstone has physical disabilities and speech impairments, he is engaged and attentive.AdvertisementAt the same time, Viacom’s business is on shaky ground. Total revenue for the company declined 4 percent during the 2015 fiscal year, which ended last Sept. 30. Profit was down about 20 percent during the period, when the company faced weak ratings and ad sales and a lackluster film slate. Viacom’s share price dropped nearly 45 percent during that fiscal year.Mr. Dauman, Viacom’s chief executive, also received a pay cut during the 2015 fiscal year; his bonus, salary and annual equity awards totaled nearly $37 million. The previous year, Mr. Dauman’s total compensation was $44.3 million, including some other items.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Dauman’s bonus declined 30 percent to $14 million during the 2015 fiscal year from $20 million the previous year. His salary, at $4 million, was about the same as the previous year. His annual equity award, at $18.9 million, was about $1 million less than the previous year.Shareholders are taking aim at executive compensation at Viacom as just one of the company’s problems. In a 99-page presentation on Viacom, Eric Jackson, an activist investor with SpringOwl Asset Management, described Mr. Dauman’s compensation as “astonishing C.E.O. pay for underperformance.” Separately, a shareholder lawsuit pointed to the “many millions of dollars” paid to Mr. Redstone as an example of how board members of Viacom and CBS Corporation are conflicted. Mr. Redstone also is the executive chairman and controlling shareholder of CBS.On Wednesday, Mr. Jackson said he was disappointed that Mr. Dauman did not take more of a pay cut.“The gravy train rolls on,” he said. “I might be naïve, but I would have thought that in a year in which you cut the stock in half, you should expect to see your executive compensation cut in half for the year, too.”Mario Gabelli, whose investment firm, Gamco, is the second-largest voting shareholder in Viacom, has said that if Mr. Redstone were paid anything at all in 2015 “it would have a hard time passing any smell test” based on the descriptions in the suit filed by Mr. Redstone’s former companion.“They are spoon-feeding to try to point out that it is down 85 percent,” Mr. Gabelli said on Wednesday. “The answer is: $2 million is still $2 million.”A version of this article appears in print on January 21, 2016, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Pay Cuts for Top Leaders at Viacom.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.