By BEN SISARIOOCT. 4, 2015
On Monday, Ticketmaster will gather a group of musicians’ managers at Barclays Center in Brooklyn to introduce a revamped system for handling services like V.I.P. packages and early ticket sales — programs that are often vital to the success of a tour.But the company has already faced complaints from some of those managers over its rules for these programs, particularly in how many tickets artists can make available to their fan clubs.For years, Ticketmaster, a division of the concert giant Live Nation Entertainment, has allowed acts to sell 8 percent or more of the tickets to their events through fan clubs and other channels. This opportunity has been prized by musicians as a way to interact directly with their audiences and make extra money through deals that include backstage meetings with the artists or special merchandise.But a growing number of managers say Ticketmaster has lately been enforcing archaic rules about what counts as a fan club, making it harder for bands to obtain these tickets and work with third-party companies that specialize in these packages. Among Ticketmaster’s more irksome requirements, several managers said, were that an artist’s website must have a chat room — which they say is an anachronism in the age of social media.Advertisement“They’re picking on us over 8 percent of the house,” said Traci Thomas, who manages Jason Isbell, a critically admired singer-songwriter.AdvertisementIn the case of Underoath, a Christian metal band from Florida that recently reunited after a hiatus of several years, the group’s representatives spent weeks working with Ticketmaster to satisfy its fan club requirements, only to be told that the club was too new to receive its ticket allotment, said Randy Nichols, the band’s manager.“It felt like it was a stalling tactic to force us to agree to use their system,” Mr. Nichols said. “The ultimate goal for Ticketmaster is to bring those fan club tickets onto their platform to have Ticketmaster sell your fan club tickets for you.”For Ticketmaster, which last year sold $23 billion in tickets, these fan club sales represent a negligible amount of income, particularly for midlevel acts like Underoath and Mr. Isbell. But they are part of a growing market of ticket services that Ticketmaster and Live Nation have moved into aggressively.Executives from the company have frequently boasted to investors, for example, about the potential income from secondhand ticket sales that are now part of Ticketmaster’s website, in direct competition with StubHub, the secondary ticket market owned by eBay.“We are an artist-centric company with the goal to grow our artists’ businesses,” Jared Smith, the president of Ticketmaster North America, said in a statement. “There’s no artist-focused proposition that is set in stone — we listen, grow and evolve with our artists’ needs.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.So far, the complaints over fan club tickets have been mostly confined to smaller acts, with only a few managers speaking publicly.But the issue may prove important for Live Nation to address. The company merged with Ticketmaster in 2010 and has been trying to reform Ticketmaster’s reputation as a frustrating outlet for consumers. It has developed extensive mobile and social media functions, for example, and been clearer about the ticketing fees it charges.At the same time, the company has faced a growing field of competitors like Artist Arena and Songkick that specialize in direct-to-fan services. Ticketmaster’s new system, OnTour, which it has been introducing to managers around the country in recent weeks, will include features like V.I.P. bundles, data analysis and fan clubs. Several managers also said that after they had raised complaints about Ticketmaster’s rules, the company acted quickly to resolve the problems — although without making any changes to its policies.AdvertisementWhether artists will want Ticketmaster’s new services is another question. Nearly a dozen artist representatives, some of whom spoke on condition of anonymity to preserve future dealings with the ticketing giant, said they preferred other companies’ handling of fan club and other direct-to-fan services, which offer more flexibility and customer data and can be more effective.“How many people really pay that much attention to an email they get from a ticketing company listing a boxing match, ‘Disney on Ice’ and the Foo Fighters?” said Richard Jones, the manager of the Pixies. “I think they would pay more attention to a message from an artist that they have a history with and says, ‘Get your tickets directly for your local show tomorrow right at this place.’ ”The issue of fan club tickets has been a sensitive one for Ticketmaster in the past. In 2003, the jam band String Cheese Incident sued Ticketmaster over such tickets, and a settlement guaranteed the band access to the tickets for five years. In 2012, the band challenged Ticketmaster and Live Nation again by paying $20,000 to buy its own tickets for a concert in Los Angeles, with the aim of reselling them to fans without service fees — in effect, scalping its own tickets.In a policy statement issued in July about its fan club tickets, Ticketmaster called the fan club allocation voluntary. But managers and agents throughout the business said that it had been accepted as a standard — if unevenly applied — practice for years, until Ticketmaster recently surprised the business by clamping down.“Ticketmaster has always agreed that for that 8 percent of tickets, bands could do pretty much whatever they want with them,” said Mike Luba, String Cheese Incident’s manager. “Now it feels like that scene in ‘Star Wars’ with the trash compactor, where the walls are about to squash everybody out.”A version of this article appears in print on October 5, 2015, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Managers Say Ticketmaster Hinders Bands’ Fan Services.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.