By MARY WILLIAMS WALSHJAN. 20, 2016
Jacob Lew, secretary of the treasury, said "tough actions have to be taken" on Puerto Rico's debt during his visit to the territory to meet with officials there.SAN JUAN, P.R. —  On his first official visit to the commonwealth, the Treasury secretary, Jacob J. Lew, said the financial crisis on the island was deepening and he urged Congress to act quickly to give the government the power it needs to restructure all of its debt.“The people of Puerto Rico are sacrificing,” he said in a news conference Wednesday here in San Juan. “But unless that sacrifice is shared by creditors in an orderly restructuring, there is no path out of insolvency and back to growth.”Mr. Lew met with Gov. Alejandro García Padilla and senior Puerto Rican legislators, as well as leaders from business, labor and civic groups. He said he believed there was still time to restore growth on the island, but the longer the process took, the harder it would be.He spoke as Puerto Rican lawmakers were pondering whether to authorize a separate restructuring plan for about $9 billion worth of debt on the books of the island’s big, troubled public utility, the Puerto Rico Electric Power Authority, known as Prepa.AdvertisementCreditors and other officials had sought for the legislature to approve the deal by Friday, but some lawmakers have expressed misgivings, saying the restructuring deal has not had proper review by a new regulatory commission created for the utility in 2014.AdvertisementPrepa’s $9 billion is part of the overall $72 billion debt Puerto Rico says it cannot repay. Last fall Prepa’s effort to negotiate a consensual restructuring with its creditors was hailed as a model for the rest of the government here to follow. But now there is interest in seeing whether Congress will provide new restructuring tools that could produce a more favorable outcome.Mr. Lew said the Treasury had been working with the National Economic Council at the White House to find forms of assistance that would not require an act of Congress — making sure funds appropriated for existing federal programs were transferred quickly, for example.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“But the fact is that no administrative authority can put an end to this emergency,” he said. “Only Congress can enact the legislative measures necessary for Puerto Rico to resolve this problem.”Insolvent cities and counties on the United States mainland have been able to find relief in Chapter 9 municipal bankruptcy in recent years. But the federal bankruptcy code specifically bars Puerto Rico and its local bodies of government from taking advantage of Chapter 9.In October, the Obama administration proposed that Congress give Puerto Rico a way forward, either by changing the bankruptcy code or by enacting a special law that would give distressed United States territories legal powers similar to those that municipalities can use while in Chapter 9 bankruptcy. Such powers would include the ability to force dissenting creditors to accept settlements deemed equitable by a judge.In the last few weeks, the congressional committees with jurisdiction over the affairs of the territories have been looking into this possibility under the Territory Clause of the United States Constitution. That clause states that Congress “shall have power to dispose of and make all needful rules and regulations respecting the territory or other property belonging to the United States.” If the Territory Clause were used as the basis of legislation it might steer clear of a contentious effort to amend the bankruptcy code.On Tuesday, a House subcommittee with territorial jurisdiction is scheduled to have a hearing on “The Need for the Establishment of a Puerto Rico Financial Stability and Economic Growth Authority.” The subcommittee on Indian, Insular and Alaska Native Affairs is expected to look at federal oversight mechanisms, possibly like the board that kept tabs on the District of Columbia in the 1990s.A version of this article appears in print on January 21, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Lew Visits Puerto Rico and Urges Federal Help.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.