AdvertisementSupported byBy ReutersWASHINGTON — Consumer prices unexpectedly fell in December as the cost of gasoline dropped and rents rose moderately — all signs of weak inflation that could indicate that the Federal Reserve won’t raise interest rates in March.Other data on Wednesday showed a drop in housing starts and building permits last month. The latest reports follow weaker numbers on retail sales, industrial production, exports, inventory and manufacturing surveys. All indicators suggest that there was a significant slowdown in economic growth at the end of 2015.Against the backdrop of renewed weakness in oil prices, which touched new lows on Wednesday, economists say the expected reversion to the Fed’s 2 percent inflation target is slowing.“The broad-based nature of the decline in inflation will hardly be encouraging news at the Fed, and if anything it is likely to temper their confidence in the outlook for inflation,” said Millan Mulraine, deputy chief economist at TD Securities in New York.The Labor Department said its Consumer Price Index slipped 0.1 percent after being unchanged in November. Despite that drop, the C.P.I. increased 0.7 percent in the 12 months through December, the biggest rise in a year.Economists had forecast that the index would remain unchanged last month and rise 0.8 percent from a year ago.Consumer prices increased 0.7 percent in 2015, the second smallest December-December gain in the last 50 years, after rising 0.8 percent in 2014.The so-called core C.P.I., which strips out food and energy costs, edged up 0.1 percent in December after advancing 0.2 percent in each of the previous three months.In the 12 months through December, the core C.P.I. increased 2.1 percent, the largest gain since July 2012. The Fed tracks a price measure that is running well below the core C.P.I.Last month, gasoline tumbled 3.9 percent after falling 2.4 percent in November. Food prices fell for a second straight month as meat, poultry, fish and egg prices posted their biggest declines since August 1979.The gain in the core C.P.I. was kept in check by moderate increases in rents and medical care costs. Rents rose 0.2 percent after a similar gain in November.The slowdown in rental prices signals the loss of economic momentum, said Steve Blitz, chief economist at ITG Investment Research in New York. “That momentum moved millennials off of their parent’s couch and onto their own, but momentum may no longer be strong enough to put the same upward pressure on rents,” he said.Medical costs edged up 0.1 percent, slowing from a 0.4 percent rise in November. The costs of doctor visits were unchanged after jumping 1.1 percent the previous month.A strong dollar as well as an inventory bloat is damping prices for some core goods. Apparel prices declined for a fourth straight month, while prices for new motor vehicles dipped 0.1 percent.In a separate report, the Commerce Department said housing starts dropped 2.5 percent to a seasonally adjusted annual pace of 1.15 million units as groundbreaking on both single- and multifamily projects fell.Advertisement