AdvertisementSupported byBy Matthew GoldsteinJoshua B. Newman, a New York entrepreneur charged last year with defrauding investors in several CrossFit training ventures, has reached a plea deal with federal prosecutors in New Jersey.Prosecutors said in a court filing on Tuesday that the deal with Mr. Newman was reached recently after months of negotiations. A criminal complaint was filed in May.The terms of the plea agreement were not disclosed.Mr. Newman is scheduled to appear before Judge William H. Walls of Federal District Court in Newark on March 23 for a “plea proceeding.”The filing with the court did not explain why the hearing was being held roughly two months after prosecutors and Mr. Newman reached an agreement. The agreement means a grand jury will not need to consider whether to indict Mr. Newman.Priya Chaudhry, a lawyer for Mr. Newman, said in an email response that she could not comment on the plea deal. Matthew Reilly, a spokesman for Paul J. Fishman, the United States attorney in New Jersey, declined to comment on the agreement as well.Last May, federal prosecutors charged Mr. Newman with two counts of wire fraud. Authorities said Mr. Newman, 36, defrauded more than a dozen investors out of at least $2 million in trying to raise money. Plea negotiations began shortly after he was charged.Mr. Newman, who graduated from Yale University in 2001, positioned himself in recent years as something of a local spokesman for the high-intensity fitness movement known as CrossFit. He was the co-founder of a big, independently owned CrossFit center in Manhattan.But behind the scenes, investors complained about Mr. Newman not paying debts owed to them. Last April, The New York Times reported a long list of disgruntled investors in Mr. Newman’s ventures, which also included a now-defunct film production company.CrossFit Inc. provides technical assistance to people looking to operate centers using the CrossFit brand name.Recently, Mr. Newman, despite the federal criminal charges pending against him, started a new online fitness training venture called Composite Fitness. The website for the new venture makes no mention of the fraud charges, but talks about the favorable media coverage he has received over the years.The website promises to refund customers who are dissatisfied with the training regiment that Composite Fitness creates.“If you don’t feel completely satisfied with any package you purchase from us, at any point, let us know,” the website said. “We’ll immediately refund your purchase, 100 percent, no questions asked.”Advertisement