
White Collar Watch By                     
PETER J. HENNING

JAN. 20, 2016
The Justice Department got its wish on Tuesday, at least in a backhanded way, when the Supreme Court unexpectedly granted review of an insider trading conviction.After rejecting the government’s request to review the decision of the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in United States v. Newman in October, which overturned two convictions for insider trading, the Supreme Court decided to review a decision by the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit in United States v. Salman that upheld a conviction for trading on inside information.Even though Justice Department lost a number of convictions as a result of the decision in the Newman case, the Salman case may be a better vehicle for the department to argue that the justices should take a broad view of the circumstances that will support finding that providing inside information was illegal.To prove an act of tipping is illegal, the Supreme Court stated in 1983 in Dirks v. S.E.C., “the test is whether the insider personally will benefit, directly or indirectly, from his disclosure.” That benefit can be tangible, like money or services, or “when an insider makes a gift of confidential information to a trading relative or friend.”AdvertisementIn the Newman case, the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit overturned the convictions of two hedge fund managers, Todd Newman and Anthony Chiasson, who received corporate earnings information through a chain of analysts, never dealing directly with the insiders who made the disclosures. The appeals court found that the jury instructions failed to require a finding that the defendants knew a benefit was passed between the recipients, called the tippees, and their tippers.AdvertisementIn reaching that result, the appeals court also explained that when the violation is based on friendship between tipper and tippee, then the government must show “a meaningfully close personal relationship that generates an exchange that is objective, consequential, and represents at least a potential gain of a pecuniary or similarly valuable nature.”That language drew the ire of the Justice Department, which asked the Supreme Court to review the decision. A brief filed by Donald B. Verrilli Jr., the solicitor general, argued that the Newman decision effectively rewrote the requirements in the Dirks case for proving tipping.If the case was not overturned, he wrote, it would “hurt market participants, disadvantage scrupulous market analysts, and impair the government’s ability to protect the fairness and integrity of the securities markets.”The Supreme Court rejected the government’s petition, leaving the appeals court’s decision undisturbed.It is unclear whether the concerns expressed about the potential impact of the Newman case were well founded. Just last week, the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit affirmed the conspiracy and securities fraud convictions of David Riley, the former chief information officer at Foundry Networks, for giving information to Matthew G. Teeple, an adviser to a hedge fund, about the impending acquisition of the company by Brocade Communications.Their relationship was based on friendship, much like in the Newman case, but the government’s evidence went further than just casual social interactions between them. Mr. Teeple gave Mr. Riley investment advice, assisted in his search for a job and advised an angel investment group Mr. Riley had put together with other former Foundry executives. The appeals court found this sufficient to establish the passing of an ”immediately pecuniary tangible benefit” between them, meeting the requirement of the decisions in the Newman and Dirks cases for a violation.The Justice Department and the Securities and Exchange Commission may well have made their peace with the Newman case, and the result in Mr. Riley’s case gave some comfort that the law would not take a strong turn against the government. But just days later came the Supreme Court’s announcement that it would review the Salman case to consider what the Dirks case requires for proving insider trading, calling into question whether the justices might raise the bar for proving liability for tipping.
                The United States attorney in Manhattan oversaw a sweeping crackdown on insider trading in the hedge fund industry, but a federal appeals court upended the campaign.            In that case, Maher F. Kara, a former investment banker at Citigroup, disclosed information about health care deals to his older brother, Michael. The brothers were part of a close family and spoke with each other nearly every day. Maher Kara testified that he gave his brother the information to “benefit him” and “fulfill whatever needs he had.”AdvertisementBassam Yacoub Salman, in turn, started receiving inside information through Michael, whom Mr. Salman knew because his sister had become Maher Kara’s fiancée. Mr. Salman was convicted of trading on the confidential information that Maher Kara took from Citigroup, making a profit of about $1.7 million. No money ever changed hands in exchange for the information, and the benefits were of the type usually seen in that situation: love and affection.In an interesting twist, the opinion of the Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit was written by Judge Jed S. Rakoff of the Federal District Court for the Southern District in Manhattan, who has presided over a number of insider trading cases and was sitting on the appeals court by designation. Although he would normally be bound by the decision in the Newman case in a matter in his own courtroom, he was not required to follow it when a different appeals court reviewed a conviction.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The appeals court rejected Mr. Salman’s argument that the Newman case required showing a tangible benefit beyond the close familial relationship. “To the extent Newman can be read to go so far, we decline to follow it,” Judge Rakoff wrote. Instead, the opinion concluded there was sufficient evidence that the information “was intended as a gift” to meet the requirements of the Supreme Court’s analysis in the Dirks case.The Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit did not specifically disagree with the Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, but it took a more forgiving approach to what is necessary to show a benefit in a tipping case.Does that mean there is a conflict between the appellate courts that the Supreme Court needs to resolve?The Justice Department pointed to the conflicting approaches as a reason for the Supreme Court to review the Newman case, asking the justices “to restore a uniform interpretation of Dirks.” But in opposing Mr. Salman’s petition for review, the government argued that “review is less warranted here than in Newman because the decision that petitioner urges this court to review is correct and wholly consistent with Dirks.”In other words, the Justice Department essentially claimed that after refusing to review the Newman case, the Supreme Court should just let sleeping dogs lie. That did not persuade the justices, however, especially as the Salman case squarely presents the question about how much evidence is needed to prove a benefit when it is based on friendship or family, not something tangible.Although the Justice Department might have preferred to have the Newman case reviewed, the facts underlying Mr. Salman’s conviction may give the government a better opportunity to ask the Supreme Court to uphold the conviction. As an initial matter, the jury has already found the evidence sufficient to show a benefit, so the justices may not want to substitute their judgment for that of the jurors.AdvertisementMr. Newman and Mr. Chiasson were far removed from the original sources of the inside information, who were never charged for their disclosure. That made it difficult to fathom how a tippee could be liable when the tipper did not rate being accused of violating the law. Thus, it was not difficult to see why the appeals court found that the government’s evidence “was simply too thin to warrant the inference that the corporate insiders received any personal benefit in exchange for their tips.”In Mr. Salman’s case, on the other hand, there was a close-knit family along with testimony from Maher Kara, the tipper, that he intended to benefit his brother Michael by dispensing highly sensitive deal information. Although earnings projections are passed around with regularity among analysts, information about deals is highly valuable and clearly confidential, so showing that a tippee knew about a benefit when it comes through family ties might be closer to what the Supreme Court has already said is a violation in the Dirks case.Judge Rakoff pointed out that if the evidence of the benefit in Mr. Salman’s case was insufficient, “then a corporate insider or other person in possession of confidential and proprietary information would be free to disclose that information to her relatives, and they would be free to trade on it, provided only that she asked for no tangible compensation in return.”Don’t be surprised to see the Justice Department quote this line as the primary basis for asking the Supreme Court to uphold the conviction and not impose more onerous requirements for proving that tipping confidential information is a violation.So although the government did not get what it wanted in the Newman case, it may get the result it desires – a broad reading of liability for tipping inside information – in the Salman case.Peter J. Henning, a professor at Wayne State University Law School, is a co-author of “Securities Crimes (2d edition).” Twitter: @peterjhenningWe’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »