By EMILY STEEL and CECILIA KANGJAN. 21, 2016
Comcast’s failed $45 billion merger with Time Warner Cable collapsed last year under pressure from regulators, who found that the combined company would have had both the power and incentive to inhibit the future of streaming video.Now, as rival Charter Communications seeks approval for its $67.1 billion takeover of Time Warner Cable and Bright House Networks, critics point to the same potential for harm.“If Comcast’s deal for Time Warner Cable was a Category 5 hurricane, Charter-Time Warner is a Category 4,” said Jeff Blum, deputy general counsel of Dish Network, the satellite television provider.Mr. Blum made his comments during a conference call Thursday held by a coalition of companies, advocacy and industry groups publicizing the potential harms of Charter’s takeover bid.AdvertisementIf approved, the proposed merger would create a powerful new force in the country’s broadband market. The combined company would rank as the country’s second-largest broadband provider behind Comcast with about 19.4 million subscribers, and the country’s No. 3 video provider with 17.3 million customers, across about 40 states. That increased heft is coming under close scrutiny as federal regulators continue their review of the Charter deals. If approved, the merger would most likely include strong conditions meant to prevent Charter from leveraging its market power to hurt rival streaming services, regulatory experts said. With increased clout, for instance, the company could restrict television networks from selling their content through stand-alone streaming services.AdvertisementCharter, which already has announced a number of commitments related to the merger, has extra incentive to agree to conditions. Time Warner Cable would receive a breakup fee of up to $2 billion if the transaction falls apart. The company received nothing when Comcast walked away from its deal.Another prominent issue is the role and influence of John C. Malone, the media mogul whose company Liberty Broadband would hold a 20 percent stake in a reconstituted Charter. Some groups have called for regulators to place restrictions on the involvement of Mr. Malone, saying that his interests in entertainment companies — including Discovery Communications and Starz — could represent untenable conflicts. Whit Clay, a spokesman for the Liberty businesses, declined to comment.Charter has argued that its deals pose no threat to the online video market because the future of its business depends more on broadband than its legacy video business. Alex Dudley, a Charter spokesman, said in a statement that the company is committed to creating American jobs, offering innovative products, faster Internet speeds, preserving an open Internet and online video with no data caps or modem fees.“It should come as no surprise that Dish and other parties seeking to use the regulatory review process to extract concessions are also engaging in tired P.R. tactics to further their self-interests,” Mr. Dudley said in a statement. “Their arguments against the pending transactions are baseless.”Federal regulators declined to discuss their reviews of Charter’s proposed merger with Time Warner Cable and Bright House. But in recent months, antitrust officials have provided some insight into their priorities when considering cable mergers. Central to their analysis has been whether bigger cable firms — with strong bargaining power with programmers and fast-growing broadband Internet businesses — could harm their newest threat: streaming video providers like Netflix and Hulu.In a September speech, Jonathan Sallet, the general counsel for the Federal Communications Commission, said that the agency focused on the streaming companies in its decision to reject Comcast’s bid for Time Warner Cable.The biggest concern was how a combined cable giant, with more than half of the high-speed Internet market and a major portion of the cable video market, could pressure programmers to keep their best content off online video services that competed with cable TV. Such market concentration over distribution would have given the company too much of an incentive to do so, Mr. Sallet said.Advertisement“Simply put, the core concern came down to whether the merged firm would have an increased incentive and ability to safeguard its integrated Pay TV business model,” Mr. Sallet said in the speech at a telecom policy conference.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Announced a month after Comcast aborted its bid last spring, Charter’s proposed acquisitions have been the target of significantly less backlash than the Comcast merger, which would have united the two largest cable operators in the country.Some of the loudest critics of the Comcast deal, like Netflix, have come out in support of Charter’s takeover bid. Reed Hastings, Netflix’s chief executive, said this week that it would be a “tremendous positive” for the streaming industry because of Charter’s agreement to a “multiyear, strong net neutrality policy” across its new, bigger footprint.“That means that we, Hulu, Amazon and others can compete on an open basis,” Mr. Hastings said. “We think it would be a huge step forward for U.S. policy” for streaming services.Yet criticism of the deal has escalated in recent weeks as a number of media and technology companies, public interest groups and other organizations stepped forward to voice concerns over Charter’s proposed acquisitions.In a meeting with F.C.C. officials last week, for example, executives from the media giant Time Warner said that public and private statements by Charter executives suggested that the deal could deter the development of streaming video options to the detriment of consumers. Dish, one of the most vocal opponents, has urged regulators to reject the proposed merger; its new Sling TV video service, which offers streaming television without a traditional cable or satellite subscription, is one of the offerings that could be harmed.Dish has joined other opponents of the deal to form a new Stop Mega Cable coalition, which wants to raise awareness of the harms that could result from the deal, including increased costs and worse service for customers. In addition to Dish, members of the coalition include the public interest group Public Knowledge and industry trade group USTelecom — The Broadband Association, and Consumers Union, the advocacy arm of Consumer Reports.“We want to make sure that the very dangers that enforcers were willing to challenge in the Comcast-Time Warner Cable merger are not allowed to go forward through a second company that can coordinate with Comcast,” Gene Kimmelman, chief executive of Public Knowledge and a former antitrust official at the Justice Department, said on the conference call Thursday.“There is the danger of coordination on one side,” he added in an interview later. “But the opportunity here, through the right enforcement requirements, is to actually push for a new business model. That won’t happen automatically. It will have to be pressured.”A version of this article appears in print on January 22, 2016, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Big Merger in Cable Faces Rising Opposition.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.