By ALEXANDRA STEVENSONJAN. 22, 2016
DAVOS, Switzerland — The Davos man who attends the World Economic Forum here each year is a member of the global elite — say, a banker or a politician — whose status is reinforced by an exclusive white badge that gives him access to V.I.P. lounges away from the masses at this alpine resort.But this year, there is another kind of Davos man. He is a former snowboarder and schoolteacher who now runs that country just north of the United States.Prime Minister Justin Trudeau of Canada, who is noticeable for the entourage of young and old that seems to trail him wherever he goes, has been bringing a message of optimism at a conference where attendees have had a tendency to focus on grim subjects like war and conflict, stock market turmoil, and economic strife.It was the same message that Mr. Trudeau, 44 , took to the Canadian electorate that voted him into office last year.AdvertisementIn Canada, he has captured the nation with a folksy appeal and inspirational messages about the country and its role in the world. It is an approach that has traveled far. He recently captured both Canadians and Indians overseas when a video emerged of him dressed in a white kurta-pyjama dancing to a Punjabi song.AdvertisementThis week, his speech here outlining Canada’s moment, saying there was no better time than now for the world to “look to Canada,” is sure to earn him points at home.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.On Thursday, Mr. Trudeau talked to a small group of W.E.F. Global Shapers, young people who have been singled out for the work they have done in their communities as entrepreneurs or activists. The group applauded Mr. Trudeau on his call for diversity and his treatment of migrants. He has appointed a cabinet that is ethnically diverse with an equal number of men and women and has welcomed Syrian refugees, calling them the economic future of Canada.One woman declared on Thursday, “You’ve done great things for the image of Canada.”The prime minister was at ease talking to a man from Jamaica about the importance of renewable energy in the Caribbean and congratulating a woman from Gaza who told her story of suffering.Then, in a gesture nearly unheard-of in Davos, Mr. Trudeau stood up and began to shake hands with each person in the room individually, until he ran out of time. He stood for a giant selfie with the group and then agreed to pose with many of the people individually, some of whom were effusive in their gratitude to Mr. Trudeau.The crowd was so taken with Mr. Trudeau that one young man from Nepal likened him to President Obama, quickly adding that he was referring to Mr. Obama’s early days as president.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »