AdvertisementSupported byAdvertisingBy Martha C. WhiteAs millennials begin to put down roots, Lowe’s, the home improvement chain, has been offering them tips for mending cracks, drips and scuffs with “Fix in Six,” a series of quirky how-to videos that it began posting two years ago on Vine, a mobile platform for short videos that play on a loop. Visually engaging with a do-it-yourself aesthetic, the six-second clips are ideal, marketing experts say, for connecting with tech-obsessed but nostalgic young adults.“One of the things we’ve seen with Vine, and what’s made it successful, is it’s really visually compelling and it can tell the story without the copy to support it,” said Bob Estrada, executive vice president and senior director at Lowe’s ad agency, BBDO New York. “The six-second creative constraint really forces you to get pointed and have a really clear way.”According to Paul Verna, senior analyst at the market research firm eMarketer, Vine caters to a young demographic. “It’s just an aesthetic they can relate to,” he said.In preparation for its Manhattan debut last summer, Lowe’s looked for an inventive way to introduce its new, small-format stores to a young, fast-paced urban audience. Taking advantage of its prime street-level space on Sixth Avenue in the fashionable Chelsea neighborhood, the company decided to take its Vine campaign offline and create an analog version of the videos.Lowe’s hired Spaeth Design, the firm responsible for many of New York City’s iconic holiday window displays, to build a pair of life-size dioramas that mirrored the “stop motion” animation style of the Vine series. The live-action Vines, on display for three weeks in late summer, were designed to imitate their digital counterparts as closely as possible — complete with a frame that resembled the feed as seen on a mobile device, a “like” button passers-by could physically press and counters that tallied the number of loops and likes.“You want to stop people in their tracks,” Mr. Estrada said. “We went immediately to some of the nostalgia that’s associated with store windows in the city.”Marketing experts who study the media preferences of millennials say the so-called Live Vine dioramas dovetailed neatly with the look and feel of the Vine series.“We know that millennials have this romanticized version of what life was like, even in the 1980s,” said Jason Dorsey, chief strategy officer and a millennials researcher at the Center for Generational Kinetics. They may be young, but their generation is infatuated with all things retro, he said.“I think home improvement has a tough time trying to break into urban areas,” Mr. Dorsey said. “The projects they use for examples are ideal.”The Lowe’s window displays worked because they depicted solutions apartment dwellers would appreciate, he said: hanging a bicycle from a ceiling hook to save space or painting a tiny room a lighter color to give the appearance of expanding it.Lowe’s isn’t the only retailer to pick up on millennials’ desire to make, build and repurpose. The Home Depot, a rival home improvement chain, holds in-store workshops on weekends with tutorials on making home decorations and seasonal crafts. Target and the crafts store Michaels sell prepackaged kits that take the guesswork out of homemade projects.An April report from the National Retail Federation noted the role of social media platforms like Pinterest in shaping those affinities. A how-to video on Vine goes one step further by suggesting ways — in a digestible format — that viewers can act on their impulses to craft and build.“Video delivers more engaging content than just text,” said Thales S. Teixeira, an associate professor of business administration who teaches digital marketing strategy at Harvard Business School, but he added that the window of opportunity to connect with viewers is fleeting. “You have to get people’s attention in the first five seconds.”Lowe’s thinks that it has cracked the code. “Our Vine campaign has the ability to target millennials and resonates with them,” said Brad Walters, the director of social media for Lowe’s. “Snackable content is the type of content that resonates. It gives them something quickly and it solves a problem quickly.”On Vine, part of the puzzle is how to get viewers to share what they have watched, Mr. Teixeira said. For millennials, many of whom grew up with web access, sharing can provoke anxieties about how an article or video will reflect on the user who shares it. “The reason many viral ads stop short is people second-guess themselves,” he said.Getting people to share a Vine video that wasn’t actually a video was its own challenge. Lowe’s emblazoned the dioramas with the campaign’s existing #lowesfixinsix hashtag and used Periscope, the Twitter-owned live video app, to stream a real-time video feed of the windows in its store. It also encouraged passers-by to take selfies by painting feet on the sidewalk to indicate where to stand to get the best shot. The company said these efforts yielded thousands of social media mentions and an estimated 34 million impressions across all platforms. On the street, 30,000 people took the time to press the like buttons built into the dioramas.“That’s the unexpected piece, the way they pulled the old and new together,” Mr. Dorsey, of the Center for Generational Kinetics, said. “That’s their message — take old and make it new.”Advertisement