AdvertisementSupported byBy Hiroko TabuchiDov Charney, the colorful ousted founder of American Apparel, made a last-ditch effort to wrest back control of the company on Thursday, accusing former partners of stealing away his multimillion-dollar empire and declaring that his new alliance with investors was the only way to save it.“There was a plan behind the scenes to steal the company from me,” Mr. Charney testified in Bankruptcy Court in Delaware. “Since then, it’s been a constant hide-the-ball.”“I’m a merchant, I’m a creative artist, I’m a photographer, I’m a marketer, I’m an industrialist,” Mr. Charney said, adding: “I don’t want to hand over my company. This is coercion.”After two days of testimony from various witnesses and in the face of an impending snowstorm, Judge Brendan L. Shannon said that he would postpone his ruling on American Apparel’s bankruptcy until Monday morning. But he could still decide to extend proceedings even longer or postpone the retailer’s exit from bankruptcy.“I recognize that there is not consensus in the room,” the judge said, referring to the differing plans between the investors backing Mr. Charney, and the company and its creditors who oppose the Charney proposal.American Apparel’s board fired Mr. Charney in 2014 from the company he founded decades earlier, accusing him of misusing company funds and of allowing an employee to post naked photographs of a former female worker, accusations Mr. Charney has denied. The retailer filed a petition for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection in October in the face of plunging sales and a legal battle with Mr. Charney.But a new alliance between Mr. Charney and the investment funds Hagan Capital Group and Silver Creek Capital — which have offered to buy American Apparel in a bid valued at $300 million and rehire its founder — has brought Mr. Charney back into the fray.At Thursday’s hearing, Mr. Charney, together with the Hagan Capital managing partner Chadwick Hagan, argued that American Apparel had not given their bid serious consideration. The company’s board rejected that bid last week in favor of one that would give American Apparel’s debtors control.American Apparel’s senior bondholders are seeking approval of an opposing plan, backed by a majority of the company’s creditors, which would cut about $200 million in debt. Under that plan, the retailer would be taken over by lenders, including Monarch Alternative Capital, Coliseum Capital and Goldman Sachs Asset Management.In animated testimony, Mr. Charney characterized the company’s snub as the latest move in a plot by current and former directors at the company, as well as onetime investment fund allies, who were now blocking his return.Mr. Charney’s account was disputed by American Apparel’s lawyers, and his testimony was interrupted several times by Judge Shannon, who asked him to stop “free associating.”Mr. Charney testified that the board had tried to blackmail him in 2014 by threatening a campaign of “character assassination” unless he surrendered his minority stake in the company and resigned.Mr. Hagan backed Mr. Charney’s allegations.“There was a lack of dialogue and negotiation,” Mr. Hagan said, calling the company’s interaction with his firm “hostile.”“In my opinion, there was a freeze-out of anyone involved with Dov,” he said. “I think they were trying to scare us away.”The dispute between Mr. Charney and his former company has been the latest messy chapter for a retail chain that Mr. Charney founded in 1989, and whose T-shirts and bodysuits came to define the alternative look of the 1990s and 2000s. The retailer’s commitment to keeping local manufacturing jobs in Los Angeles, and its championing of progressive causes like immigration reform and marriage equality also earned American Apparel a following among young shoppers.Mr. Charney fueled the dizzying growth of those early years, and his kinetic lifestyle seemed to embody American Apparel’s anti-establishment flair. But soon, the founder was accused of crossing boundaries, and of sexually harassing employees. Mr. Charney has steadfastly denied most accusations as unfounded.The two-day bankruptcy court hearing jumped from analyses of complex financial agreements to musings on the state of American manufacturing and retailing to a discussion of American Apparel’s famous disco pants.Paula Schneider, who took over as American Apparel’s chief executive in January 2015, painted a picture of a company that was in dire straits. “We were out of key sellers. We were out of disco pants. We were out of pleated skirts,” she testified on Wednesday.“Disco pants? You can’t have a shortage of those,” Judge Shannon remarked, to laughter from the court.“No, you really can’t,” Ms. Schneider said.American Apparel’s counsel opted not to cross-examine Mr. Charney, saying his rambling testimony had shown he could not be expected to provide information relevant to the company’s turnaround.“At the end of the day, the Hagan-Charney proposal that came forward is an inferior proposal,” said Scott Greenberg, a lawyer representing American Apparel.“The proposal leaves the debtors with more leverage, with less liquidity and comes with uncertain and uncommitted financing,” he said. “It requires by its own terms the consent of our bondholders, which is clearly not forthcoming.”The bid would therefore lead to “a series of litigious and potentially ugly battles that would further damage the company,” he said.Ms. Schneider said that American Apparel continued to reel from Mr. Charney’s freewheeling management. She said that the company’s hyper-sexualized advertising strategy had caused it to get kicked off Facebook, robbing the retailer of a big e-commerce sales vehicle, and had prompted several lawsuits in Europe.But she said the bankruptcy was the biggest drag on the company’s business.“Most people hear bankruptcy, and they think we’re going out of business,” Ms. Schneider said. “But they walk in the stores and are sorely disappointed that everything isn’t on clearance.“The quicker we can get out of bankruptcy, the quicker we can get new product in the stores, the better off the company will be.”Advertisement