AdvertisementSupported byBy Andrew E. KramerThe turmoil in global stock markets and the plunge in oil prices are shaking Russia’s economy, already wobbly from being cut off from Western finance by sanctions.Russia’s currency, the ruble, fell briefly on Thursday to 85 to the dollar, a record low, before creeping back to 82.5 by the close of trading.With alarm rising among policy makers, the chairwoman of Russia’s central bank, Elvira Nabiullina, canceled a trip to the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland, where she was scheduled to appear on Friday.The central bank announced the cancellation without elaborating. Interfax, a nongovernment news agency, reported that the central bank held an emergency meeting Thursday evening with Russian bankers.A main stock market index, the dollar-denominated RTS, recovered from an early decline to close up by 0.6 percent for the day. But it is still just above its post-2008-crisis low, and not much higher than in the late 1990s, indicating the severity of the retreat of Russia’s market.Another benchmark index, the Micex — which is denominated in rubles — was up 2.9 percent for the day.Aleksei L. Kudrin, a former finance minister, said at the World Economic Forum on Thursday that Russia should brace for oil’s bottoming out at $16 to $18 a barrel for a short period this year.“The price will, of course, correct and rise,” he said. “Certainly, there is a shock. But in a year or two the economy will pull through to positive growth.”Oil prices are nearing a level that could be catastrophic for Russia’s budget, analysts say, given that the government cannot tax oil companies more than the cost of producing oil in Siberia.The production cost in Russia is estimated to average about $15 a barrel. With roughly half of Russia’s budget derived from taxes on oil and natural gas, a sustained drop in oil prices to the levels Mr. Kudrin predicted would compel tax increases or a budget reduction known as a sequester, forcing salary cuts for teachers, soldiers and police officers, and lower pensions.Futures contracts for Brent crude, the international oil benchmark, traded below $28 on Wednesday, but were back in the $30 range on Thursday.In another reflection of the severity of the oil-price shock for Russia, the government is considering canceling a five-year-old social security program. It had deducted contributions from wages to build up funds for future retirees. The government plan would shift to financing pensions from current taxes, the daily newspaper Kommersant reported, even though demographic changes mean more workers will retire in future years.Also on Thursday, the Russian central bank revoked the banking licenses of three lenders — Vneshprombank, Miraf-Bank and Turbobank — that had become insolvent.Advertisement