AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael J. de la MercedDAVOS, Switzerland — President Obama may not be here at the World Economic Forum, shaking hands with fellow dignitaries as the snow flurries swirl. But another American president — albeit a fictional one — has been a talk of the town this week.The actor Kevin Spacey has attracted attention at his first visit to the forum, as even high-powered business executives whisper about glimpses of the man who plays President Frank Underwood in Netflix’s “House of Cards.”Officially, Mr. Spacey is here for a session on Friday to discuss playing the Machiavellian Mr. Underwood and the drama unfolding in the race for the United States presidency.But the actor has instead become quite the man about town.There he was at an intimate reception hosted on Wednesday by the Alibaba Group, the Chinese e-commerce titan, breaking bread with Leonardo DiCaprio and Bono.Soon after, he popped up at the famed piano bar at the Hotel Europe, the longtime redoubt of the Davos night life crowd. Invited as a guest of a party thrown by the investment firm Skybridge Capital, Mr. Spacey commanded the crowd’s attention around 11 p.m.Clad in a plaid suit and dark turtleneck, the actor wisecracked with the attendees, many of whom held their phones aloft to record the event. Slipping into the smooth Southern accent of Underwood, Mr. Spacey joked that the difference between Donald Trump and his television antihero was that “one of these characters is a fictional character, and the other is a fictional character.”Next came a zinger about Hillary Clinton and emails, in Mr. Spacey’s impression of President Clinton.Mr. Spacey then offered some sincere words about the crowd at the Forum. “It’s so incredible to be here the past couple of days and realize that change can happen and that ideas are extraordinary,” he said.Finally, he crooned a short tune a cappella, honoring a longtime tradition of the piano bar. Soon after his barely five-minute stint, as the crowd returned to sip high-end Champagne and Bordeaux red wine, the actor quietly slipped out of the bar and off into the night.Advertisement