By BROOKS BARNES and MICHAEL CIEPLYNOV. 8, 2015
For months, American moviegoers have either been going big or staying home.And if they keep behaving that way, 2015 may set new marks for both hits and misses — while leaving a hole in the middle, where Oscars are typically born.“Spectre,” the latest James Bond thriller, took in about $73 million in ticket sales at domestic theaters over the weekend, giving Hollywood one of its biggest openings of the year, even though sales were down sharply from those for “Skyfall,” the previous Bond movie. “Spectre,” the most expensive 007 installment ever, costing Sony Pictures Entertainment, Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer and Eon Productions roughly $400 million to make and market, has taken in an additional $223 million overseas, breaking records.The performance of “Spectre” in North America, along with very strong opening results for “The Peanuts Movie,” which collected about $45 million for 20th Century Fox, ended a funk that included October ticket sales dropping about 44 percent from a year ago, to $493.7 million, according to the database Box Office Mojo. But it also highlighted the unevenness in a year when September sales had just risen nearly 49 percent, to $677.5 million.September was driven by “Hotel Transylvania 2,” from Sony. October belonged to “The Martian,” from Fox.AdvertisementBut in both months, high-profile, midrange films that were being closely monitored as awards prospects flopped — among them Sony’s “The Walk,” Universal’s “Steve Jobs” and Warner’s “Our Brand Is Crisis.” And those joined more commercially oriented wipeouts like “Pan,” “Rock the Kasbah,” “The Last Witch Hunter,” “Jem and the Holograms” and “Scouts Guide to the Zombie Apocalypse.”AdvertisementTo make “Spectre” feel like a must-attend event, Sony booked the film into more than 800 large-format theaters, including Imax locations. Led by the Cinemark chain, Premium Large Format theaters contributed $8 million of the gross; Imax accounted for about $9 million in sales. Even though the Imax total was on the soft side — “Spectre” took in 29 percent less in Imax than “Skyfall” did in 2012 — Greg Foster, Imax’s filmed entertainment chief, said his company was “very happy” with the result.Mr. Foster noted that strong international sales were more than compensating for domestic soft spots. “Over time, everything is international, and China,” he said, referring to the strategic future of the major studios.Rory Bruer, Sony’s president of distribution, called the “Spectre” results “quite extraordinary,” noting that among the 24 Bond films, only “Skyfall” delivered a bigger opening total. “It sometimes takes a franchise of this caliber — big, iconic, beloved — to bring people back into theaters,” he said.One awards prospect that may break through the cloud of disappointment is Tom McCarthy’s “Spotlight,” a critically lauded newspaper drama from Open Road Films. That picture enjoyed a splendid opening in a very small number of theaters, taking in $302,276 in just five locations in New York, Los Angeles and Boston, where the movie is set. The strong sales, averaging more than $60,000 per screen, raised the possibility that “Spotlight” would become a classic midrange hit, mixing plaudits and ticket sales, just as “Argo” and “The King’s Speech” — both best-picture Oscar winners — did in years past.“There were multiple sellouts in every theater, every day,” said Jason Cassidy, Open Road’s chief marketing officer.The trick now, he acknowledged, will be to fan the flames by expanding the film to about 60 theaters in 17 cities next weekend, then to as many as 500 locations on Nov. 20. “There haven’t been too many movies that have been able to cut through the noise,” Mr. Cassidy said of the recent failures among smaller, more sophisticated films.Over all, North American ticket sales so far this year are up 5 percent compared with the same period in 2014, according to the Rentrak reporting service. But the increase does not reflect what has traditionally been considered a healthy movie marketplace — more hits than misses, with films of different sizes and aimed at different slices of the population, chugging toward profit.AdvertisementInstead, the boost comes almost entirely from a handful of megamovies: “Jurassic World,” “The Avengers: Age of Ultron,” “Inside Out,” “Furious 7” and those fall hits, “The Martian” and “Hotel Transylvania 2.”With the release of “Spectre,” Hollywood now turns to two movies that are expected to be monsters: “The Hunger Games: Mockingjay — Part 2” and “Star Wars: The Force Awakens.” Advance ticket sales for the new “Star Wars” installment, Hollywood’s closest thing to a guaranteed smash hit, have already shattered records.The question is whether the 70 or so other movies set for release between now and Jan. 1 will be left to pick up crumbs.One theory of the current dynamic is that studios have released too many movies that go after the same audience — “Steve Jobs” ate into “The Walk” ate into “Black Mass,” for example.But distributors have already trimmed schedules to curtail the cannibalism. Fox Searchlight, an Oscar powerhouse, introduced its dramedy “Demolition,” with Jake Gyllenhaal, at the Toronto International Film Festival in September, but held the movie for release next April. In all, Box Office Mojo counted 72 films in the marketplace during October, down from 77 last year (but still up from the mid-1990s, when October picture counts averaged 27).Another worry is that consumer behavior may be changing on a deeper level. In pursuit of global audiences and trying to combat the arrival of mammoth flat-screen televisions in America’s living rooms, Hollywood has steered sharply toward event movies. The likes of “Spectre,” “Star Wars” and “The Hunger Games” work so hard to get people into theaters — and make the 3-D tickets and costly concessions palatable — that consumers just can’t be bothered to check out the more modest offerings.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.They will catch those on their enormous televisions.Still, some midlevel films have quietly ground out decent results. Those lately have included “Goosebumps,” “Bridge of Spies” and “The Intern.”And the audience has a way of creating its own monsters, especially when it comes to end-of-year releases. This year, the late entries will include Pixar’s “The Good Dinosaur”; David O. Russell’s “Joy,” with Bradley Cooper and Jennifer Lawrence; Alejandro González Iñárritu’s western “The Revenant,” with Leonardo DiCaprio; Quentin Tarantino’s western “The Hateful Eight,” with Kurt Russell and Samuel L. Jackson; and Peter Landesman’s “Concussion,” with Will Smith.Last year, the last-minute surprise was Clint Eastwood’s “American Sniper,” which starred Mr. Cooper. Much like the midrange films that have been disappointing this year — say, Mr. Cooper’s “Burnt,” which arrived softly in late October — “American Sniper” had a big star and a relatively modest budget.AdvertisementReleased by Warner on Christmas Day, “American Sniper” shot past “The Hunger Games: Mockingjay — Part 1,” to become the year’s biggest hit, with six Oscar nominations and more than $350 million in domestic box office sales.This time around, Warner is hoping that a pair of dramas can deliver similar magic. “Creed” restarts the “Rocky” boxing series, and Ron Howard’s “In the Heart of the Sea” focuses on the sinking of a whaling ship.But it may be awfully hard for those films to draw crowds with behemoths like “Star Wars” hogging the marquees.A version of this article appears in print on November 9, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Hollywood Is Producing Higher Highs, Lower Lows.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.