By THE NEW YORK TIMESJAN. 22, 2016
The reaction to the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences saying on Friday that it was taking steps to double the number of female and minority members by 2020 was varied.Some members lauded the move, saying it was necessary in the wake of a second straight year in which no minority actors were cited among the 20 acting nominees. Other members were critical and wondered how older members of the academy would be affected.Stephanie Allain, a producer of “Beyond the Lights” (2014) and “Hustle & Flow” (2005) “I think it’s great they responded so quickly. I think, just from my cursory read of it, it is a really great way to go.”She said she was especially impressed with the addition of three members to the Board of Governors who would, she assumed, would be women or people of color.Advertisement“We’re so visible that we should play a leadership role,” she said, adding, “The world is watching, basically, so what are we going to do? Are we going to do the right thing? And I think that we have.”AdvertisementShe also said, “The Academy is the endgame. But the beginning of the game is the industry responding to the curated talent that comes through programs like Film Independent, the folks that go through the Sundance Film Festival and the LA Film Festival. They just need jobs. That’s how we’re really going to solve the problem — not by more programs or committees, but by jobs.”Kieth Merrill, who won an Oscar in 1974 for his documentary “The Great American Cowboy” and was nominated for best documentary short in 1997Mr. Merrill, 75, said he found the changes and the logic behind them outlandish.“I’m sure I’ll sound racist, I’m sure I’ll sound prejudiced, and I’m not. I think it’s completely ridiculous to bring in ethnicity to the evaluation of creative performances and filmmaking and acting,” Mr. Merrill said, noting several times that he had an adopted black daughter and four black grandchildren.“We’re supposed to be evaluating talent in categories, and one of the categories is ‘what is their ethnicity?’ ” he said. “To make it one of the categories is ridiculous.”Michael Moore, Oscar winner in 2003 for best documentary for “Bowling for Columbine”“These are good changes, but what’s amazing is how swiftly the Academy has reacted,” Mr. Moore said in an email. “A change like this in the old days would’ve taken years (if at all), not days. Now let’s hope that the real culprit in keeping Hollywood so white and male — the industry itself — will make similar changes.”He added that six years ago, “doubling the number of African-Americans in the doc branch would have meant doubling the number zero to ... zero. I and others began an effort to change this in 2010 and now we have around a dozen in our branch. I’m going to propose at the next meeting we double that number THIS year, not by 2020.”Sam Weisman, director of films like “George of the Jungle” and “Bye Bye Love” “I judge the Nicholl fellowships and the student Academy Awards, but am I not qualified to vote?” asked Mr. Weisman, referring to academy mentorship programs in which he has been involved.How the academy deals with the intricacies of “activity” in the film business, he noted, may raise complex questions. Mr. Weisman’s last feature credit was “Dickie Roberts: Former Child Star” in 2003, though he has done extensive television work since then. If, like Mr. Weisman, a director has had development deals that did not result in a film, will he be ruled out?Advertisement“This is a way to get this off their plates in advance of the awards show,” Mr. Weisman said, referring to the controversy over the lack of diversity among this year’s nominees.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »