AdvertisementSupported byBy Amie TsangHONG KONG — Markets in Asia sank on Thursday, as traders surrendered to the fears that had sent shares tumbling in Japan, Europe and the United States the previous day.Markets have been volatile this year, as slowing growth in China and lower oil prices have worried investors. Those concerns drove global markets lower on Wednesday; at the close of trading, London and Japan were down more than 20 percent from their near-term highs, in bear market territory.But through midday trading in Europe on Thursday, the Asian decline was not carrying over. All the major European indexes, including the FTSE 100 in London, were strongly higher.Markets sank shortly after opening in the United States, but quickly turned positive.Oil prices, which are expected to continue to slide when Iran increases its production and adds to the glut that has already pushed prices down, could be a boon for companies and consumers, reducing their costs. But traders have worried that the low price is also a sign of waning demand, already an issue with the slowdown in China’s economy.Asian markets seemed to reflect few of these worries Thursday morning, but the calm did not last past midday. The Nikkei 225-share index, which had closed down 3.7 percent on Wednesday, lost an additional 2.4 percent Thursday. The Hang Seng index in Hong Kong reversed the 1.5 percent it had gained in the morning and was down 1.8 percent at the close.Markets in mainland China were nervous through the day. The main Shanghai index finished 3.2 percent lower, while Shenzhen shares closed 4 percent lower. The CSI 300 index of blue-chip stocks, the measure for the new “circuit breakers” that caused turmoil at the start of the year, fell 2.9 percent.In the unsettling movements on Wednesday, the Euro Stoxx 50 closed down 3.3 percent. Although stocks in the United States plunged during the day, they pared losses later. The Dow closed down 1.6 percent, while the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index fell 1.2 percent. This led some analysts to suggest that financial markets might be overreacting and that the moves might not reflect the strength of the global economy.In Europe, the FTSE 100, which closed 3.5 percent lower on Wednesday, was up more than 1 percent through early afternoon on Thursday.Advertisement