By EMILY STEELJAN. 22, 2016
A California judge has ordered the ailing 92-year-old media mogul Sumner M. Redstone to undergo a medical examination, a major development in the continuing legal battle over his mental competence.In a tentative ruling on Friday, Judge David J. Cowan of the Los Angeles County Superior Court granted permission for a doctor to examine Mr. Redstone’s mental health. Mr. Redstone’s nurses and speech therapists may attend the evaluation, which should last an hour, the judge said.The decision adds a new twist in the suit filed in November by Mr. Redstone’s former companion, Manuela Herzer, that describes him as a “living ghost.” Lawyers for Mr. Redstone have called the suit a “meritless action, riddled with lies” and have filed a motion to dismiss it. The medical examination is expected to occur in the next 10 days. A hearing on the motion to dismiss has been pushed to Feb. 29.Last month, Judge Cowan rejected a petition to have Mr. Redstone interviewed by a geriatric psychiatrist. But on Friday, the judge said that a medical examination was necessary so that both sides had access to all the facts.Advertisement“The court finds that ultimately it has to hear somehow from Redstone directly to make a ruling on sufficient evidence,” Judge Cowan said in the ruling.The medical evaluation should not compromise Mr. Redstone’s privacy or dignity, Judge Cowan said. He added that Mr. Redstone should not face a deposition.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Redstone is the executive chairman of Viacom and CBS, and controls about 80 percent of the voting stock in the two companies. While the lawsuit concerns his personal life, the court fight has raised questions about whether he should continue in his roles at the two companies.New regulatory filings on Friday showed that Mr. Redstone, famously competitive in his heyday, now has a diminished role at Viacom.The company slashed Mr. Redstone’s annual pay by 85 percent during the 2015 fiscal year to $2 million, from $13 million the previous year. In the filing, Viacom directors stated that it was appropriate for Mr. Redstone to remain executive chairman “because of his position as our controlling stockholder, his role in founding Viacom, including managing it for many years, his extensive experience in and understanding of the media and entertainment industry and his relationships in the business community.”Last year, the company said that his tenure in that role was appropriate because Mr. Redstone “continues to actively participate in the development of the strategic direction of our company.” The same language was not repeated this year.The total compensation of Philippe P. Dauman, Viacom’s chief executive, increased 22 percent to $54 million during the 2015 fiscal year, from $44 million the previous year. Excluding stock awards, Mr. Dauman’s pay decreased about 16 percent to $37 million.A version of this article appears in print on January 23, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Judge Orders a Mental Examination of Redstone .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.