
Another View By                     
DAVID ZARING

JAN. 22, 2016
A bipartisan, if mildly conservative, group of senators has indicated that it will introduce legislation intended to increase the rule-making requirements on Wall Street regulators like the Securities and Exchange Commission and the Consumer Financial Protection Board.As Senator Ron Johnson, the chairman of the Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee, has put it, the “long-term growth of living standards depends on periodically lightening the regulatory load – the equivalent of scraping barnacles off the bottom.”The legislation would require more math and permit less flexibility by those regulators. But it would also limit Congress’s own ability to require the government to embrace good governance values like “transparency” and “honesty,” if the S.E.C.’s most recent rule-making is any guide.The senators have suggested that they would impose cost-benefit analysis requirements on America’s financial regulators. No important rule could be passed without establishing that the dollar impositions on the financial industry would not be outweighed by the dollar benefits created by the rule.AdvertisementThe S.E.C. has, because of a series of adverse court decisions, grudgingly embraced a version of this sort of cost-benefit analysis in its rule-making proposals.AdvertisementBut only sort of. The agency has declined to quantify its analysis too much. The regulator’s new resource extraction rule exemplifies this approach.The resource extraction rule is an odd good governance add-on to the Dodd Frank financial overhaul. That statute included a provision embracing an international campaign to require mining and energy companies to disclose every payment be made to any government with which they did business.The idea – promoted by the London-based Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative – is that if the companies commit to disclosing every jot and tittle of those payments, the likelihood of revenue disappearing for corrupt reasons will be diminished.But how do you measure the value of good governance? On the one hand, the agency’s economic analysis of the rule almost overwhelms the actual requirements contained in it. The S.E.C.’s proposed rule is 201 pages long, and 75 of those pages are dedicated to that analysis.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.That proportion of the agency’s analysis – the assessment of costs and benefits amounts to 37 percent of pages contained in the directive – is particularly high, but not inconsistent with the committed attention that the agency has devoted to economic justifications to its rules in the last five years.In those 75 pages, the agency conducted “both a qualitative assessment of the potential effects and a quantified estimate of the potential aggregate initial and aggregate ongoing compliance costs.”The agency used statistical programs to discern the companies likely to be subject to the requirements imposed by the rule and surveyed companies to determine what they thought the costs of disclosure would be.But its story about the benefits was much less quantitative. The S.E.C. said that it understood the requirement that it pass a resource extraction rule to be rooted in the “important U.S. foreign-policy objective of combating global corruption and, in so doing, to potentially improve accountability and governance in resource rich countries around the world.”AdvertisementThe agency concluded that it would be impossible to reduce the nature of these benefits to a particular number. It characterized the empirical evidence on resource extraction benefits as “inconclusive” and suggested that “important foreign-policy objectives” should necessarily be subject to a quantification requirement before adoption.The S.E.C. accordingly “declined to second-guess” the conclusion of Congress that the benefits of a resource extraction rule were manifold. The senators inclined to impose statutory cost-benefit analysis requirements on the agency would force this sort of second-guessing upon it.In this way, required cost-benefit analyses do not just limit the flexibility of agencies, but they also could end up constraining Congress itself. A legislature that cannot direct agencies to consider nonquantifiable values is one that must devote itself to legislation within narrow limitations.I do not relish those sorts of constraints on a democratically elected body, let alone on an agency unwilling to reduce everything to a numerical calculation. But we will soon see whether the Legislature will be inclined to adopt a similar view.David Zaring is assistant professor of legal studies at the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »