AdvertisementSupported byBy Danielle IvoryIn an embarrassing setback for litigation against General Motors over its defective ignition switch, the first federal civil trial to decide the automaker’s liability ended abruptly on Friday after the plaintiff agreed to dismiss his claims. The case became troubled after G.M. cast doubt on testimony given by the plaintiff, Robert Scheuer, an Oklahoman who was injured after his 2003 Saturn Ion crashed into a tree in May 2014.On Thursday, after evidence emerged showing that Mr. Scheuer might have provided misleading testimony about his finances after the accident, Judge Jesse M. Furman of Federal District Court for the Southern District in Manhattan suggested that the parties settle or otherwise resolve the matter.The claims were dismissed with prejudice, meaning that Mr. Scheuer cannot refile them. Mr. Scheuer agreed not to take any money on his claim, according to documents filed in court.The trial was the first of six so-called bellwether cases that the automotive company is facing. Bellwethers are often used in product liability litigation when many people have similar claims and allow lawyers for both sides to try out legal strategies or help them determine whether to settle and for how much.The allegations in this first case, one of three that were chosen by the plaintiffs’ lawyers, made this case an “outlier,” the judge said on Thursday, implying that it would not be as useful as a model for other similar cases.“Judge Furman’s comments suggest that he is very frustrated about what has happened and understandably so,” said Carl Tobias, a law professor at the University of Richmond and a product liability specialist.“Many resources were expended to move the first case to trial, and the purpose of bellwethers is to help move the large number of cases to settlement,” he added, cautioning that this case says “very little about other bellwethers.”Bob Hilliard, a lawyer for Mr. Scheuer, expressed disappointment that the trial had ended in such an “unexpected and unforeseen way.”“Especially one such as this where the concerns regarding the underlying safety of certain G.M. vehicles are legitimate and real,” he said in an email. “A jury’s decision regarding the existence of a defect will have to wait until the next trial.”In February 2014, G.M. began recalling what eventually added up to 2.6 million Chevrolet Cobalts, Ions and other small cars for a defect in the ignition switch. If jostled, the switch could unexpectedly shut off, cutting power to the engine and disabling airbags, power steering and power brakes. G.M., through its compensation program, has acknowledged that at least 124 deaths were linked to the defect.Mr. Scheuer, 49, claimed that the defective ignition switch in his car prevented the airbags from deploying during his accident, leading to neck and back injuries. G.M. has disputed his claim that the airbags should have deployed and has argued that Mr. Scheuer’s injuries did not stem from the crash. G.M. also disputed testimony that linked the injuries with the Scheuers’ eviction from their home. G.M. claimed that Mr. Scheuer and his wife, Lisa, had fabricated a story about their eviction from their home, which occurred about four months after the car accident. The automaker contended that Mr. Scheuer had altered a federal government check stub to show “proof of funds” to move into the family’s new house, but when his real estate agent found out, the family was evicted.The real estate agent approached G.M. after the trial started, the automaker said, after hearing about the case from a program on the radio.Both of the Scheuers had already testified in the trial about the eviction, and the company said it was ready to provide evidence that they had lied. Though this twist was not directly related to whether the airbags in Mr. Scheuer’s car should or should not have deployed in his crash, it might have poked holes in the Scheuers’ credibility with the jury.“The apparent lies the plaintiff and his wife told the jury ended the trial early, and we are pleased that the case is over without any payment whatsoever to Mr. Scheuer,” Jim Cain, a company spokesman, said in a statement.Howard Erichson, a professor at Fordham Law School, said the dismissal was a lost opportunity for the plaintiffs.“It’s not just a bad outcome for an individual. It’s a bad start for the plaintiff side as a whole,” he said. “Surely they were hoping for a trial victory to generate momentum. Instead, it became a momentum-killer.”Mr. Erichson cautioned, though, not to read too much into the dismissal. “This was more like a no-at-bat than an out,” he said.Mr. Tobias said that the result could help G.M. somewhat because the company did win the case and might derive some short-lived good publicity from it, but he said he doubted that the victory would affect Judge Furman’s views on other cases.The second bellwether case, scheduled for March, involves two plaintiffs, Dionne Spain and Lawrence Barthelemy, who are suing G.M. for injuries they claim were sustained in a January 2014 car accident in New Orleans. Advertisement