AdvertisementSupported byRevaluedBy David GellesAs recently as 2011, shares in Peabody Energy, the world’s biggest private sector coal company, traded at the equivalent of $1,000. Today, they hover around $4 each. Over that time, investors who held the stock lost millions.Peabody, like other coal companies, has been hammered as cheap natural gas erodes the demand for coal. But concerns about climate change are also an issue for the company as customers and investors turn away from fossil fuels.Peabody saw this coming. Even as the company privately projected that coal demand would slump and prices would fall, it withheld this information from investors. Instead, Peabody said in filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission that it was not possible to know how changing attitudes toward climate change would affect its business.Peabody’s double talk was revealed as part of a two-year investigation by the New York attorney general. In a settlement in November, Peabody agreed that it would disclose more about climate change risks in its regular filings with the S.E.C.In theory, however, Peabody should have been making such disclosures all along.In 2010, the S.E.C. told companies how it expected them to address the risks posed by climate change in their regular securities filings.Wall Street’s top regulator was not issuing a new rule. Rather, this was “interpretive guidance” on existing disclosure requirements. The S.E.C. chairwoman at the time, Mary Schapiro, noted then that the S.E.C. was “not opining on whether the world’s climate is changing, at what pace it might be changing, or due to what causes,” but asking companies to take stock of the risks to their businesses. Among the factors companies should address, the S.E.C. said, were legislation and regulation related to climate change, international treaties on the issue, and the physical impacts of climate change, like flood or drought.Initially, the S.E.C. appeared to put muscle behind its guidance. In the two years after the interpretive guidance, the S.E.C. issued 49 comment letters to companies addressing the adequacy of their climate change disclosures. But it issued only three such letters in 2012 and none in 2013.The issue can be overwhelming. The science is complicated. We get it. This is your cheat sheet.To advocates of more robust climate change disclosure, the impression was that the S.E.C. had taken its eye off the ball.“They did back it up in the first few years,” said Jim Coburn, senior manager of investor programs at Ceres, a nonprofit organization that advocates sustainability in business and that has lobbied the S.E.C. on the disclosure. “But the current chair hasn’t shown much interest in this issue.”Some shareholders and lawmakers are trying to change that. Last April, an alliance of 62 institutional investors wrote a letter to the S.E.C. calling for greater scrutiny of climate-related disclosures from energy companies in particular.“We are concerned that oil and gas companies are not disclosing sufficient information about several converging factors that, together, will profoundly affect the economics of the industry,” wrote the investors, which included Calpers, the California Public Employees’ Retirement System; the Connecticut state investment fund; and Calvert Investments.In a coordinated letter sent to the S.E.C. on the same day, the New York City and New York State comptrollers called for similar accountability. Then in October, a group of Democratic lawmakers added their voices to the debate. In a letter to the current S.E.C. chairwoman, Mary Jo White, 35 members of Congress asked for an update on the interpretive guidance issued in 2010, using the occasion to suggest that the S.E.C. had been asleep at the wheel.“The S.E.C. has been underreacting in the extreme,” Senator Brian Schatz, a Democrat from Hawaii and one of the lead authors of the letter, said in an interview.At the same time, officials in New York and California are investigating whether Exxon understood the risks posed by climate change decades ago, but withheld that information from investors. Exxon denies the allegations.The investors, comptrollers and lawmakers think that while companies should already be addressing climate change risk as part of their regular disclosures, only a minority are telling shareholders how warming oceans and extreme weather will affect their business.“Our markets work best when investors are provided with the necessary disclosures, and the S.E.C. needs to take action by enforcing the disclosure rules on the books,” Senator Jack Reed, a senior member of the Senate banking committee, said in an emailed statement.The S.E.C. declined to comment for this article. But in a response to Mr. Reed reviewed by The New York Times, Ms. White said her staff members examined the adequacy of climate change disclosures as part of its routine analysis of company filings, and were looking for instances where energy companies, for example, might need to disclose more. According to people briefed on the matter, the S.E.C. has made staff members aware of the Peabody settlement, encouraging them to be more vigilant in reviewing climate change disclosure.In her response to Senator Reed, Ms. White said that since the S.E.C. issued its interpretive guidance, “incrementally” more companies were making disclosures related to climate change. Yet many of these are vague generalizations that give investors little to work with.Chevron, for example, wrote that “incentives to conserve or use alternative energy sources” might reduce demand for its products. Exxon noted that new laws might “reduce demand for hydrocarbons.” Neither company made clear to investors what the financial costs might be.Evidence that climate change issues are already affecting big companies continues to mount. In December, on the first full day of trading after negotiators in Paris agreed to limit greenhouse gas emissions, Peabody shares dropped another 13 percent. This month, President Obama announced new limits on coal mining on federal lands. The next day, coal stocks, including Peabody, plunged once more.The S.E.C. is now reviewing what it requires companies to disclose, and it could introduce new rules this year. As part of the public comments process, some groups have suggested that the S.E.C. specify that companies address issues such as climate-related legal proceedings, or so-called stranded assets — oil and gas reserves that may never be used. But for now, the S.E.C. has no plans to require companies to be more forthcoming than they are now about climate change.At a time of upside-down weather patterns, volatile energy markets and mounting climate-related regulatory action, that is simply not enough for many lawmakers and investors, who worry that companies’ reticence is costing shareholders.“We’re not asking for anybody to predict the weather or to become climate scientists,” Senator Schatz said. “We’re simply asking that the S.E.C. acknowledge that there is real risk for companies, and that it ought to be disclosed.”Advertisement