By GEORGE GENE GUSTINESNOV. 8, 2015
Next Sunday, hundreds of newspapers around the country will give their comics readers a special treat: a colorful 16-page insert of classic newspaper strips.The insert is a celebration of the 100th anniversary of King Features Syndicate, a company that syndicates long-running features like Blondie, which started in 1930, and Beetle Bailey, which started in 1950 — and relatively new strips like Mutts, 1994, and Zits, 1997.Brendan Burford, the comics editor at King Features, is one of the chief architects of the insert, as well as of the hefty hardcover “King of the Comics: 100 Years of King Features.” His hope is that both projects will highlight the “amazing impact on a century of pop culture” that King and its comic strips have had.Newspaper strips are having a cultural moment — even if the attention is not coming from work printed on broadsheets. In July, Bloom County, by the cartoonist Berkeley Breathed, returned when Mr. Breathed started posting new installments on Facebook.AdvertisementIn September, “Hilo,” an all-ages graphic novel by Judd Winick that was partially inspired by his love of comic strips, was published. And last week, “The Peanuts Movie” was released. It is the latest trip to the big screen for Charlie Brown and his friends, who originated in the newspaper strips Li’l Folks in 1947 and Peanuts in 1950.AdvertisementMr. Burford’s responsibilities involve catering to a mix of old and new media relationships. He administers to the needs of the cartoonists of 65 syndicated strips that are published in more than 2,800 newspapers in 72 countries. “I’m also focused on our expansion into the entertainment space — seeing how we can make these comic properties into more than just comic strips,” he said during a recent interview at his office in Hearst Tower in Midtown Manhattan.The measure of success for a newspaper strip varies greatly. “If you look at it on an individual cartoonist basis, there is still this fluctuation,” Mr. Burford said. As an example, he cited Hilary B. Price, the creator of Rhymes With Orange — a favorite of her fellow cartoonist Alison Bechdel, whose graphic novel “Fun Home” was adapted as a musical. Ms. Price’s strip began in 1995, and Mr. Burford estimated that her syndication list has at least doubled in the last 10 years.While some cartoonists would be satisfied with making a steady living from their comics alone, others want more — be it merchandising deals or adaptation for other media.“The thing about comic strips is that they are all the same enough and different enough,” Mr. Burford said. Some of the strips better lend themselves to animation, others to live action, he said. “We’re totally agnostic,” he said. “It all depends on the creative think.”King Features has development deals in place with Sony Pictures for an animated film about Popeye and with 20th Century Fox for a live-action Flash Gordon. Mr. Burford noted that while Popeye began as a comic strip in 1929, it was the animated shorts in the 1930s that propelled the spinach-swigging sailor’s popularity. Then there was the 1980 live-action film starring Robin Williams, which was described by a film critic, Vincent Canby, as a “charming, immensely appealing mess of a movie.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I don’t think Popeye’s success is hinging on Peanuts’s success,” Mr. Burford said. But “if Peanuts is successful, you might find some producers and studios saying, we should be mining that comics page to see what other Peanuts might be hiding there.”Comic strips were “the first thing I ever read in a newspaper,” said Josh Fruhlinger, the creator of The Comics Curmudgeon, a blog that provides commentary on two or three newspaper strips almost every day.As a child, Mr. Fruhlinger said, he read every series on the comic pages, even if he did not understand them. “I remember the first time I got a Doonesbury strip, and I felt proud of myself,” he recalled. Around 2002, he became fascinated with the soap-opera-like series Mary Worth, Rex Morgan and Apartment 3-G.He started his blog in 2004 after his wife grew tired of hearing about the strips. His migration to the web has not been a solitary one. “There’s a whole wave of web comic artists,” he said, who are creating their own strips on their own sites. That transition may continue, especially as long-running series come to an end. Apartment 3-G, for example, which began in 1961, will end on Nov. 21.AdvertisementBut there is some consolation for Mr. Fruhlinger. His novel, “The Enthusiast,” which was inspired by Apartment 3-G and other soap opera strips, comes out next month.A version of this article appears in print on November 9, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Comics, Classic and Newer, Make a Comeback.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.