AdvertisementSupported byBy Ceylan YeginsuISTANBUL — Mustafa Koc, a prominent Turkish businessman who succeeded his father and grandfather in running one of the world’s largest conglomerates, Koc Holding, died here on Thursday. He was 55. The company announced his death.Mr. Koc (pronounced kotch), who was chairman of Koc Holding, Turkey’s largest conglomerate, died at the American Hospital, which his family owns, after having a heart attack while exercising at his home. He was resuscitated by his fitness coach and taken to Beykoz State Hospital in Istanbul before being transferred to his family’s hospital. He had a history of heart disease and had undergone weight-loss surgery.Educated in Switzerland and the United States, Mr. Koc had been chairman since 2003, when he took over from his father, Rahmi Koc. His company, based in Istanbul and founded by Vehbi Koc, Mustafa Koc’s grandfather, comprises more than 100 companies and has 90,000 employees. It is the only Turkish company listed in the Fortune 500.Among other companies, Koc Holding owns Turkey’s largest industrial enterprise, the Tupras oil refining group, as well as Arcelik, a household goods maker, and the Yapi Kredi Bank. It has joint ventures with Fiat and Ford, accounting for about 45 percent of Turkey’s automobile production.Mr. Koc was born in Istanbul on Oct. 29, 1960. He was educated at the Lyceum Alpinum Zuoz, an international boarding school in the Alps near St. Moritz, Switzerland, and attended George Washington University, graduating in 1984.In 2013, at the height of antigovernment protests in Taksim Square in central Istanbul, Divan Istanbul Hotel, a Koc property, opened its doors to protesters escaping tear gas fired by the police at the adjacent Gezi Park.The government accused the company of aiding the protesters, and several audit teams raided nine of its provincial offices, including those of Tupras.Mr. Koc denied having acted against the government, though he urged that it institute reforms to ensure a peaceful society without harming Turkey’s economy.Survivors include his wife, Caroline; two daughters, Esra and Aylin; and two brothers, Ali and Omer.Advertisement