AdvertisementSupported byBy Steve LohrDepressed oil prices, financial market worries and sluggish global growth threaten the industrial sector. But General Electric, the nation’s largest industrial company, seems to be weathering the challenges so far. The company on Friday reported solid fourth-quarter profit and delivered a cautiously optimistic outlook for 2016.Still, G.E.’s quarterly performance was mixed. Its revenue was weaker than Wall Street analysts had anticipated. The falloff in sales from its big oil-field equipment unit was one reason, but so was $1 billion in other equipment deals that G.E. expected to close in the fourth quarter but did not. G.E. executives insisted that most of those were fairly normal delays in completing heavy-equipment transactions rather than a signal that customers were becoming reluctant to buy, given the uncertain economic outlook.In a conference call, Jeffrey R. Immelt, G.E.’s chief executive, said the crucial signal of future business for the company — orders for its industrial products — was growing. And at the end of 2015, the company said it had a robust $315 billion backlog of orders for products including jet engines, power turbines and railway locomotives, and for services to care for the machinery.Mr. Immelt acknowledged the sluggish global economy and the “especially volatile” early weeks of 2016. But he emphasized that G.E.’s diverse collection of industrial businesses, its global reach and its cost-cutting programs should allow it to achieve double-digit profit growth this year. “We have all the elements to help ourselves in a tough economy,” he said.The financial scorecard for the fourth quarter and the full year of 2015 provides further evidence of the progress G.E. is making as it focuses increasingly on its industrial operations and pares back its once-huge finance arm, GE Capital.The company reported that its net profit increased 22 percent, to $6.28 billion, in its fourth quarter. G.E.’s earnings from continuing operations — mainly industrial businesses now — rose 27 percent, to 52 cents a share. That was slightly above the average estimate of securities analysts of 49 cents a share, compiled by Thomson Reuters.Revenue for the quarter rose 1 percent to $33.89 billion, below the analysts’ forecast of $35.96 billion. G.E.’s share price fell 2 percent shortly after it announced the results and closed down 1.2 percent.“The revenue shortfall was a disappointment,” said Steven Winoker, an analyst at Bernstein Research. But the strong order backlog and disciplined management of expenses, he said, should “ease concerns.”G.E. is undergoing two major shifts: in its portfolio of businesses, by shedding financial assets; and on the industrial side, by moving to become what G.E. executives call a “digital industrial company.”G.E. is a leader among industrial companies in placing sensors on heavy equipment and then analyzing the machine data with software to predict, for example, when a locomotive needs maintenance before it breaks down. The company’s revenue in its digital business rose 22 percent to $5 billion last year, with a goal, set by Mr. Immelt, of reaching $20 billion by 2020.As part of its campaign to become a digital-age industrial company, G.E. announced last week that it was moving its headquarters from Fairfield, Conn., to Boston, a hub of research universities and young, scientific talent.The company has also been enlarging its industrial business with the recent purchase of the electric grid and power generation assets of Alstom of France. The $10.6 billion acquisition was the largest industrial deal in G.E.’s history. The purchase involved lengthy negotiations with the French government. Integrating Alstom’s operations will be complex as G.E. trims the work force in some European countries at the same time it has pledged to add a net total of 1,000 jobs in France.But Alstom, G.E. executives said, adds significantly to the global stance of G.E.’s power-generation business. About $30 billion of G.E.’s $315 billion backlog comes from Alstom, said Jeffrey S. Bornstein, G.E.’s chief financial officer.With the tilt to industrial business, G.E. agreed last week to sell its consumer appliance business to China’s Haier Group for $5.4 billion. That deal came after an earlier deal with Electrolux of Sweden collapsed, when the Justice Department objected, saying the combination would reduce competition in the American appliance market.Advertisement