AdvertisementSupported byThe Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.31 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.40 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.26 percent.The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week: MONDAYFlorida Board of Education, $145 million of debt securities. Competitive.Independent School District No. 152 (Moorhead Area Public Schools), Minn., $76 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive. TUESDAYDecatur, Ga., $75 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Independent School District No. 879, Delano, Minn., $62.1 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive. WEDNESDAYMassachusetts Clean Water Trust, $211.4 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Virginia Beach, $113.5 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive. THURSDAYNew Mexico Finance Authority, $53.2 million of revenue bonds. Competitive. Waco, Tex., $77.8 million of certificates of obligation. Competitive. ONE DAY DURING THE WEEKChicago Board of Education, $875 million of unlimited tax general obligation bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Connecticut Health and Educational Facilities Authority, $250 million of Yale University revenue bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities. Grand Prairie Independent School District, Tex., $71 million of unlimited tax school building bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Indiana Health Facility Financing Authority, $80.5 million of Ascension Health Credit Group revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley. Kansas City, Mo., $187.6 million of sanitary sewer system improvement and refinancing revenue bonds. Siebert Brandford Shank.Katy Independent School District, Tex., $228.1 million of unlimited tax school building bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Kentucky Municipal Power Agency, $71 million of power system revenue refinancing bonds. Goldman Sachs.Lamar Consolidated Independent School District, Tex., $141.1 million of unlimited tax refinancing bonds. Raymond James.Michigan State Hospital Finance Authority, $81.1 million of Ascension Health Credit Group revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.Nassau County, N.Y., $273 million of general obligation bonds. Ramirez.Nebraska Public Power District, $139.2 million of general revenue bonds. Goldman Sachs.Philadelphia Authority for Industrial Development, $79.1 million of Temple University revenue bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Successor Agency to the Redevelopment Agency of Pittsburg, Calif., $204.6 million of debt securities. Morgan Stanley.Rockwall, Tex., $74.9 million of general obligation bonds. Robert W. Baird.San Francisco Airport Commission, $239.8 million of revenue refinancing bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Torrance Unified School District, Calif., $65 million of general obligation bonds. Raymond James.Woodhaven-Brownstown School District, Mich., $85.3 million of school building and refinancing bonds. Stifel, Nicolaus.Advertisement