AdvertisementSupported byBy Leslie PickerTyco International, the remnant of the industrial conglomerate that was marred with corporate scandal and later broken up, is in late-stage discussions to merge with Johnson Controls for as much as $20 billion, a person briefed on the discussions said on Sunday.The deal, which might be announced as soon as Monday, could still fall apart, said the person, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because the talks are were private. The exact terms of the deal could not be learned.With the planned spinoff of Johnson Controls’ automotive seating and interior unit in October, a deal with Tyco could help buttress its remaining building-products division.Johnson Controls’ diversified portfolio of products includes heating and air conditioning, and industrial refrigeration, while Tyco makes security and fire safety systems. Based on figures from the 12 months through September, the combined company could produce almost $50 billion in annual revenue, according to data provided by S&P Capital IQ.Representatives from Tyco and Johnson Controls did not respond to multiple requests for comment outside of normal business hours. Details of the deal were reported earlier Sunday by The Wall Street Journal.The transaction could be one of the biggest so far this year, as market volatility has slowed the pace of mergers and acquisitions, leaving would-be buyers on the sidelines. Tyco’s shares have slumped almost 30 percent over the last year, driving its market value down to less than $13 billion, while Johnson Controls’ stock has fallen to a market value of $23 billion.Tyco was founded more than five decades ago as a small research laboratory for the United States government and grew to become an industrial empire under the leadership of L. Dennis Kozlowski through a wave of acquisitions. The company became tainted in scandal after Mr. Kozlowski was convicted in 2005 of looting millions of dollars from the company. What was formerly Tyco has been sliced up several times, most recently in 2011.Tyco moved its headquarters to Ireland, and maintains a base in Princeton, N.J. Johnson Controls is based in Milwaukee.Other American companies have sought to combine with businesses based in Ireland in a structure known as an inversion because it helps them lower their tax bill. It was unclear whether this deal would be structured as an inversion.Michael J. de la Merced contributed reporting.Advertisement