By LANDON THOMAS Jr.JAN. 24, 2016
Currency turmoil in China and fears of a global slowdown have led investors to abandon emerging markets in droves, rattling the large asset management firms that have long promoted such investments in their hunt for higher returns.For more than a decade, star managers at Franklin Templeton, Pimco, Aberdeen and Oppenheimer seemed more like Marco Polos than Warren Buffetts, beating a path to Internet companies in China, oil giants in Brazil and gold mines in South Africa.Investing in these high-risk markets came to be seen as a necessity for a diversified portfolio as well as an opportunity for these firms to levy some of the highest fees in the industry.Now, with investors fleeing in a fury, asset management firms are struggling to stanch the bleeding.Last year, a record $105 billion was pulled out of global mutual funds, with 26 percent of that figure coming from asset managers based in the United States, according to the fund tracker EPFR.AdvertisementIt was the third consecutive year of bond and equity outflows and one would have go back to the Asian crisis era of the late 1990s to see a similar retreat, said Cameron Brandt, the head of research at the data provider.Advertisement“This has become a chronic condition as opposed to the sudden onset of something,” Mr. Brandt said. “There is almost no conviction out there right now.”For large fund companies whose assets under management ballooned on the back of these flows, the world has changed drastically, largely for the worse.Take the global bond manager Pimco. It has three bond funds that invest in developing markets that the research firm Morningstar tracks: a local currency sovereign bond fund worth $4.7 billion; a broader vehicle valued at $1.7 billion, and a corporate bond fund whose assets have eroded to $202 million from more than $1 billion.In total, investors pulled $6 billion last year from emerging market funds managed by Pimco, according to Morningstar.Pimco has had to steady itself after the explosive departure of a star manager, William H. Gross, in 2014. Yet the emerging market outflows, on top of the billions of dollars that followed Mr. Gross out the door, have only added to the firm’s woes.Pimco, once the world’s largest manager of emerging market bonds, has experienced industry- lagging returns from outsize bets in Brazil and Russia that have propelled an investor exodus that is getting worse by the month.Last December, investors pulled $619 million from the firm’s local currency fund, which has lost 21 percent of its value over the past year, trailing every fund in the category except one, according to Morningstar.AdvertisementA $15 billion fund in 2013, it now languishes below $5 billion.While Pimco may be struggling, it is certainly not alone. A debt fund run by MFS investment management in Boston lost $1.4 billion last year, and Trust Company of the West in Los Angeles had outflows of $1.8 billion from its $2.6 billion bond offering last year.On the equity side, the $28 billion Oppenheimer Developing Markets fund suffered by far the largest exodus last year, with $5 billion departing the fund, according to Morningstar.The fund is overseen by Justin Leverenz, who spends more than half the year circling the globe in search of unloved companies. But Mr. Leverenz was hurt in 2015 from big positions in Chinese Internet companies like Alibaba, which lost 30 percent over the last year.And in Europe, Aberdeen Asset Management, which manages $403 billion and specializes in emerging markets, had $48 billion leave the firm. Aberdeen’s stock price fell by half for the year.Traders and portfolio managers say that what worries them now is the sense that sophisticated institutional investors, who generally tend to take a longer-term view than their retail counterparts (and who might even be inclined to buy at these levels), have been the ones driving the selling over the last six months.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Instead of taking advantage of bond and company valuations that are at historic lows, these investors are acting more like lemmings, unloading the good and the bad in their portfolios because that is what they see their peers doing. The panicky climate is also forcing managers to have a chunk of cash on hand to meet redemption requests.“We are seeing evidence that institutional investors are capitulating,” said Charles Collyns, an economist at the Institute of International Finance, using an industry term to describe the practice of wholesale selling when all hope is lost.In a recent survey of more than 100 investment managers conducted by Northern Trust in Chicago, the No. 1 risk factor cited by respondents was that problems in China would continue to bring down growth rates in the developing world.Also of concern, regulators and economists say, is the fact that many emerging market securities, especially bonds, can be very hard to sell, especially when markets are declining.AdvertisementThe surprise decision by Third Avenue Management last month to close down a junk bond fund because it could not meet investor demands for cash has heightened fears that an emerging market bond fund could find itself in a similar position.“There is definitely a liquidity concern out there,” said Mr. Brandt, the research director at EPFR. “People are asking: ‘If I don’t get my stuff out now, will I be able to get it out later?’ ”Things would need to get much worse for that to happen. The bonds that trade in countries like Turkey, Mexico and Brazil are far more liquid than the deeply distressed corporate securities that Third Avenue’s credit fund favored.That has not stopped the selling though — especially in recent months. For example, of the $2.5 billion that left Pimco’s local currency fund last year, $1 billion came in the last two months of 2015, according to Morningstar.The emerging markets unit at Pimco is headed by Michael A. Gomez, a former debt trader at Goldman Sachs who has been at the firm overseeing these funds since 2003.The dismal performance of Pimco’s emerging market funds has done little to lift morale at the firm since the departure of Mr. Gross. And while Mr. Gomez’s difficult run — over the last three years his local currency fund trails 89 percent of its peers — and the sustained pace of outflows has put him under some pressure, his superiors continue to stand by him."Michael Gomez is the leader of the emerging market team and has our full trust and support," said Daniel J. Ivascyn, Pimco’s chief investment officer.Last year, in an effort to better gauge employees’ mood, the leadership of Pimco organized a companywide survey, according to people who were briefed on the initiative. It was the first time the company ever did such a thing, and while the 8,000 responses did vary, there were those who took the opportunity to vent — using strong language to complain about the company’s culture.AdvertisementAt an employee meeting last month at company headquarters in Newport Beach, Calif., Pimco’s president, Jay Jacobs, discussed the survey results. And he said that if there were no improvements he would, at some point in the future, step down.Also addressing the staff at the meeting was Mr. Ivascyn, who acknowledged the performance problems in emerging markets and said that the firm would continue to hire more experts to help matters, with Mr. Gomez leading the recruiting effort.As is often the case in emerging markets, the most opportune time to buy is when everyone else is selling. In that regard, the rally in oil and emerging market currencies last week could well be a sign that the pessimism of late has been overdone.Mark Meisel, who conducted the survey at Northern Trust, said that while it is true that global investors fear emerging markets more than anything else, they also said that the stocks and bonds in these countries were among the most undervalued investments to be found anywhere.An article on Monday about investors’ withdrawing money from emerging-market funds misidentified the MFS investment management fund that had investor outflows of $1.4 billion last year. It is the Emerging Markets Debt fund, not a local currency fund.A version of this article appears in print on January 25, 2016, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: A Struggle to Quell Investor Fears Over Unsettled Emerging Markets.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.