By JULIE WEEDJAN. 25, 2016
When Robert Kruszka of Virginia saw last weekend’s storm heading for the Washington area, he did not hesitate to find a place where he and his family could stay warm and comfortable — the nearby Hyatt Regency Tysons Corner Center.As warnings of the storm’s severity grew increasingly dire, the hotel offered a discounted $99 nightly rate — “a rate we rarely offer,” said Nancy Longstreth, the hotel’s director of sales.Mr. Kruszka said that so many other local residents had the same idea that “the place was full of families.” He called it “a little vacation, eating at restaurants and window-shopping — even though the stores were all closed,” he said. Both Friday and Saturday were sold out at the hotel.The increased business is part of the double-edged sword that severe weather presents to hotels in the form of lost revenue from cancellations — and the opportunity for new business.AdvertisementCanceled reservations can be offset by stranded travelers who need to extend their stays as well as by local residents and emergency workers who are looking for temporary lodging.AdvertisementFor the hotels, discounting rates during a storm helps fill otherwise empty rooms and can engender good will.Hotels are looking to replace lost business with any incremental revenue, said Professor Chris Anderson of the Cornell University School of Hotel Administration, “and even capture a guest who otherwise might not stay and introduce them to their product.”The Hyatt, which opened last spring, is part of a large mall complex and communicated the rate to management there for store employees and facility staff members who would be working on security or snow removal. The rate was also advertised through the hotel website and by representatives answering the phones.Some hotels offer discounts for emergency workers who would have a hard time commuting home between shifts.New Jersey’s South Brunswick police reserved a group of rooms at the Courtyard Cranbury South Brunswick by Marriott when the weather turned dangerous last week.“These guys are working around the clock and need a place to stay so we give the department our employee rate,” said Thaddeus Borsuk, the hotel’s general manager. The partnership has been in place since Hurricane Sandy.Still, the extreme weather does lead to lost revenue. Mr. Borsuk said that few of his weekend cancellations would be rebooked and only about half of the business reservations would be rescheduled.AdvertisementThis only adds pressure to gain back business that hotels lose during a storm.His hotel had set up discounted rates before Hurricane Sandy, Mr. Borsuk said, and found “the people who came from the local community ended up calling their friends to come on over.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In the future, Mr. Borsuk plans to advertise the new rates on the web and put up fliers at local retirement homes.While a significant percent of his room reservations were canceled over the weekend, Mr. Borsuk said his dining room was busy Saturday night.Hotels seem to be able to get through the worst weather largely unscathed, said Dennis Nessler, editor of Hotel Interactive, an online hospitality industry newsletter. “Most of the revenue effects are short term,” he said. The exception might be ski resorts depending on a large number of guests for a holiday weekend. “They might see a bigger effect if there’s a disruption that weekend,” he said.Hotels in the area were affected by last year’s snowstorms, said Michael Oshins, a hospitality professor at Boston University. But, he said, the rebounding economy more than made up for the losses and the hotels ended up having their best year in terms of revenue.For hotel operators like Mr. Borsuk, part of the challenge is to be ready for the bad weather.Hotels generally prepare for snow emergencies with backup generators and snow removal equipment to keep operations going, said Michael McGilligan, general manager of the Hilton Chicago O’Hare and a 22-year veteran of the hotel industry.The bigger challenges stemming from a storm, he said, almost always revolve around people because the same weather that prevents guests from leaving, can prevent staff from making it to work.Employees are sometimes asked to work double shifts during weather emergencies, he said, and hotels may make guest rooms available to them to stay overnight so they don’t have to commute home.Sometimes the need for sleeping spaces outpaces the available guest rooms.Last year, management at O’Hare International Airport in Chicago asked Mr. McGilligan to set up a hotel conference room full of cots so airport workers responsible for plowing runways could have a place to rest.Creativity is paramount at hotels when supply trucks do not arrive or the power goes out.“If food is running short, we might offer a limited menu and put out free snacks in the lobby so fewer people come to the dining room,” Mr. McGilligan said.Advertisement“They want to make this part of their guests’ unplanned stay as enjoyable as possible,” Mr. Anderson of Cornell said. “Service providers see this as an opportunity to shine.”A version of this article appears in print on January 26, 2016, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Comforts of a Hotel That’s Close to Home in Dangerous Weather.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.