AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael J. de la MercedDAVOS, Switzerland — The World Economic Forum has long been a citadel for corporate chieftains and government officials to bask in their collective stature, coming together to chat about what they can do as leaders about the world’s troubles.Yet this year’s gathering in the Swiss Alps, which ended Saturday, was marked by a bit more anxiety than usual.Even in the weeks leading up to Davos, corporate moguls were feeling more glum than in years past. Roughly one-third of chief executives surveyed by PricewaterhouseCoopers were “very confident” in their ability to spur growth in their companies in 2016. That was down from 39 percent last year.And just 27 percent of those C.E.O.s said they believed the overall global economy would grow this year, compared to 37 percent last year.Why the grim outlook? Any number of reasons hung in the crisp mountain air.Global events beyond the control of the World Economic Forum certainly played a role. The continuing depression in oil prices took the wind out of the sails of attendees from the Middle East and Russia whose swagger during previous forums was underpinned by the strength of their oil-based economies.“If you look at the figures, our economy will not look like anything good this coming year,” Vladimir A. Dmitriev, the chairman of Russia’s Vnesheconombank, sighed during a panel on the outlook for Russia.For others, the sharp swings in the markets took a toll. One financier who attended said that his optimism fluctuated with the vicissitudes of the market, particularly after the sharp plunge Wednesday as the forum began. The markets then rebounded on Thursday and Friday.Yet others appeared anxious over the very disruption that lay at the heart of the theme of this year’s World Economic Forum, the “Fourth Industrial Revolution.” It was a formulation aimed at describing the rise of new digital technologies that have been upsetting incumbents in a variety of industries.Several of those being disrupted seemed to be struggling to find their balance, even at a conference seemingly built to assure them of their importance. On a panel titled “Future-Proofing Global Finance,” Bank of America’s chief executive, Brian T. Moynihan, repeatedly both defended the importance of traditional banks and encouraged tougher regulation of the new financial technologies that have begun to eat into his business.Mr. Moynihan emphasized that Bank of America spent billions of dollars developing its technologies. He also highlighted what he described as the proved stability of the traditional bank payment infrastructure, as traditional players spend millions on digital security. Mobile payment systems in Africa — which have essentially taken the place of traditional banks and payments systems there — might be less rock-solid, he suggested.Imagine, he argued, if people couldn’t make payments for an hour, hinting at the chaos that might follow such an outage.“The payments side is critical,” Mr. Moynihan said.Both he and William T. Winters, the former JPMorgan Chase executive who now leads the British bank Standard Chartered, also argued that new entrants to the finance sector should be subject to more regulation. For both banking chiefs, it was a matter of protecting consumers — in the service of what they called “a level playing field.”“Payment systems have to be regulated,” Mr. Winters said on the finance panel. “They need to be observed.”Of course, not all in attendance espoused such glum outlooks.in an interview, Robert F. Smith, the chairman and chief executive of the tech-focused private equity firm Vista Equity Partners, openly embraced new technologies, promoting the possibilities that digital systems could bring to sleepy industries like car insurance.Automation and data analytics, he explained, could greatly lower the costs of car repairs for customers, insurers and auto repair shops by eliminating the waste of paper systems and duplicative data entry.Still others evinced little sign of discomfort with the winds of change. Stephen A. Schwarzman, the Blackstone Group’s chairman and chief executive, happily lauded the relative stability of his own industry during the finance panel.“We’re not disrupters,” he cracked. “We’re just lovable, friendly investors.”Advertisement