AdvertisementSupported byThe Week AheadBy The New York TimesOn Monday, Volkswagen is expected to announce that it is offering cash to the owners of diesel cars in the United States as it steps up its effort to recover some of the good will it lost after admitting that the vehicles were programmed to cheat on emissions tests.The company’s supervisory board is meeting on Monday as well to discuss the latest developments in the emissions crisis. The board, which oversees Volkswagen’s top executives, is also expected to get an update on an internal inquiry into who was responsible for installing the illegal software in 11 million cars. —Jack EwingInvestment analysts who follow the McDonald’s Corporation and investors who hold its stock will meet on Tuesday with Steve Easterbrook, who has been the company’s chief executive since March. Many analysts are swooning over McDonald’s improved performance in the third quarter after roughly two years of declining comparable store sales.Analysts expect an update on the company’s plan to sell off some of the stores it still owns. They are also betting that Mr. Easterbrook will announce more share buybacks, which effectively increase earnings per share as profits are spread over fewer shares. But mostly, they want to hear how changes in store operations are panning out, including the kiosks that allow customers to tailor their burgers and the recent rollout of all-day breakfasts. —Stephanie StromOn Wednesday, Chinese shoppers will be flocking online to take advantage of the discounts offered on Singles Day, the world’s largest Internet shopping event. Conceived as a way for unmarried people to shop away their loneliness, the event now gives small and medium-size businesses a crucial boost and drives billions of dollars of transactions through online platforms like Alibaba.Consumers’ growing taste for international products means the effects of the shopping drive will be felt beyond the borders of China as companies look to cater to the demand. Alibaba has even made globalization the theme of the gala it holds to count down to the start of the discounting. —Amie TsangAnheuser-Busch InBev has a Wednesday deadline to make a formal offer for SABMiller after British regulators granted an extension last week for the brewers to continue their takeover discussions. The world’s largest brewer, Anheuser-Busch InBev, the maker of Budweiser and Stella Artois, agreed in principle in October to acquire its closest rival, SABMiller, for about $104 billion.The companies said last week that they had made “good progress in agreeing on the terms of the possible offer.” The deal, if consummated, would create a behemoth in the beer industry with annual revenue of about $64 billion. —Chad BrayAs Greek government officials wrangle with the country’s international creditors over the economic reforms and austerity that must be enforced to unlock rescue loans, thousands of Greeks are expected to walk off the job on Thursday. The 24-hour walkout would be first general strike under the leftist-led Syriza party, which came to power in January on a promise to fight austerity and was re-elected in September, after months of tough negotiations with lenders, on a pledge to enforce the country’s third international bailout as painlessly as possible.The strike is expected to shut down public services and is likely to disrupt public transportation and flights. Echoing broader social discontent with years of austerity that have slashed living standards, Greek labor unions oppose plans for further tax increases and pension cuts.Eurozone finance ministers are expected to discuss Greece’s progress in fulfilling the terms of the bailout in a meeting in Brussels on Monday. Greek officials and creditors have been at odds over several economic reforms that are required for the release of the first installment of 2 billion euros, or about $2.1 billion, in loans from the bailout. —Niki KitsantonisAmundi, one of the largest asset managers in Europe, is expected to begin trading in Paris on Thursday after pricing its initial public offering. The French asset manager, based in Paris, was created in 2010 by a merger of the asset management operations of two French banks, Crédit Agricole and Société Générale.As part of the offering, Société Générale expects to sell its 20 percent stake in the company, which is expected to raise as much as 2.01 billion euros, or about $2.2 billion. —Chad BrayOn Friday, the University of Michigan will report preliminary data on consumer sentiment for November. Economists are expecting a slight increase from the reading for October, helped by stronger hiring, falling gas prices and a rebound on Wall Street last month. —Nelson D. SchwartzRetail sales data due from the Commerce Department on Friday are expected to show that sales climbed 0.3 percent in October after expanding just 0.1 percent in September, giving more impetus to the Federal Reserve to raise interest rates next month. Consumer sentiment is brightening, economists say, as companies hire at a more robust pace and gas prices fall.The retailers Macy’s, Nordstrom, Kohl’s, and J. C. Penney all report earnings this week, and investors will be looking for signs of brisk business ahead of the critical holiday season, after choppy performances so far this year. Macy’s reports earnings on Wednesday, Nordstrom and Kohl’s on Thursday, and J. C. Penney on Friday. —Hiroko TabuchiAdvertisement