
White Collar Watch By                     
PETER J. HENNING

JAN. 25, 2016
Martin Shkreli has made a name for himself by talking in the face of federal securities fraud charges, as well as fighting back against claims that he embodies greed in the pharmaceutical industry.But two congressional committees will not hear from him as Mr. Shkreli plans to assert the Fifth Amendment privilege against self-incrimination to refuse to answer questions and turn over documents related to the drug price increase.Mr. Shkreli can take to social media to communicate his views, but the Constitution lets him refuse to talk to those who desperately want him to speak to them. The key is that testimony before Congress — unlike a post on Twitter — is under oath, and lawyers steer their clients clear of that situation if there is any risk that the statements could be used in a future prosecution.So we have the odd situation of some who loves to talk, as The New York Times pointed out, getting to pick and choose when he does so.AdvertisementThe House Committee on Oversight and Government Reform issued a subpoena to Mr. Shkreli on Jan. 11, which he subsequently posted on Twitter, requiring him to appear at a hearing that was scheduled for Tuesday about recent drug price increases — although the weekend’s blizzard has caused the hearing to be postponed. He was chief executive of Turing Pharmaceuticals when it increased the price of Daraprim, a 62-year-old drug, in September to $750 a tablet from $13.50.AdvertisementMr. Shkreli was indicted in December in the Federal District Court in Brooklyn on charges of securities fraud related to a hedge fund he managed and claims that he misused the assets of another pharmaceutical company to pay off investors in the fund. He resigned his position at Turing when the charges came to light, which are unrelated to his move to raise the price of Daraprim.Nevertheless, Mr. Shkreli’s lawyer informed the committee that his client planned to assert his Fifth Amendment privilege because Turing is being investigated by the Federal Trade Commission over possible antitrust violations. Although the agency cannot pursue criminal charges, a violation could result in a prosecution, remote as that possibility might be.Asserting the Fifth Amendment does not require that the witness demonstrate that a statement can lead directly to criminal charges, and the person can even proclaim innocence but still assert the privilege. The Supreme Court explained in Hoffman v. United States that the constitutional protection extends to statements “which would furnish a link in the chain of evidence needed to prosecute the claimant for a federal crime.” That is a low threshold, so even the remote possibility that the antitrust investigation could lead to a criminal prosecution gives Mr. Shkreli a plausible basis to refuse to answer questions.That does not mean he can skip the hearing altogether. A Jan. 22 letter from Representative Jason Chaffetz, Republican of Utah and chairman of the committee, states that a failure to appear will result in Congress seeking to hold him in contempt.Congressional committees usually insist that witnesses who intend to assert the Fifth Amendment appear before them and refuse to answer questions in public. This leads to a bit of meaningless political theater of members of Congress haranguing the person and decrying the unfortunate state of affairs caused by the use of a constitutional right — unseemly, to be sure, but it usually makes the evening news.Howard B. Schiller, the interim chief executive of Valeant Pharmaceuticals who was also scheduled to testify at the committee hearing, said at a JPMorgan Chase health care conference recently that “you survive these things and then you move on.”So the law allows Mr. Shkreli to assert the privilege against self-incrimination, but he will have to endure the slings and arrows sent his way on Capitol Hill.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Congress could grant Mr. Shkreli immunity to allow him to testify, but the lessons learned almost 30 years ago in the Iran-contra investigation show the dangers of following that path. The convictions of Oliver L. North, the former Marine Corps lieutenant colonel and National Security Council aide, and others were set aside because the prosecution violated the immunity given to allow them to testify on Capitol Hill.AdvertisementMr. Shkreli also received a subpoena from the Senate Select Committee on Aging issued on Dec. 24, requiring him to produce documents from Turing related to the Daraprim price increase as part its investigation of pharmaceutic pricing. He has asserted the privilege against self-incrimination and refused to turn over any records. On the floor of the Senate last week, Senator Susan M. Collins, Republican of Maine and the committee chairwoman, said that “absent a valid justification of the grounds for invoking the Fifth Amendment, Mr. Shkreli’s assertion could hinder our important investigation.”The law is less clear about when a former corporate employee can assert the Fifth Amendment to refuse to turn over business records. The privilege against self-incrimination does not protect the content of voluntarily created documents, so an individual cannot refuse to turn over incriminating correspondence just because it might help the government prove a violation. Nor can a corporation refuse to comply with a subpoena for its records because the constitutional protection does not extend to a “collective entity,” according to the Supreme Court’s decision in Braswell v. United States.But the Fifth Amendment can protect the act of turning over records by an individual because that conduct communicates information about the existence of the documents, who possesses them and that they are covered by the subpoena. This is known as the “act of production” aspect of the privilege against self-incrimination, and it can be used to keep records away from the government because an individual cannot be compelled to communicate incriminating information.The interesting question is whether any records Mr. Shkreli may have are those of Turing, a limited liability company that would not be able to claim the Fifth Amendment, or are being held by him in a personal capacity. If they are corporate records, then he cannot refuse to turn them over as a representative of the company, even though he has resigned as its chief executive. But if a court were to conclude they are personal documents because he is no longer affiliated with the company, then the act of production could be incriminating and so he could refuse to turn them over to the Senate committee.The issue of how to treat corporate records when they are in the hands of a former employee is not entirely clear. A decision of the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in Manhattan called Three Grand Jury Subpoenas Duces Tecum permitted former employees to assert the Fifth Amendment for corporate documents in their possession.Judge José A. Cabranes dissented in that case, arguing that it creates a “powerful incentive” for former employees “to abscond with subpoenaed records in order to avoid judicial power.”If Congress sought to enforce its subpoena requiring the Turing records, the case is likely to be heard in the Federal District Court for the District of Columbia, which has not yet taken a position on this issue.So it is unclear at this point whether Mr. Shkreli would be vindicated by asserting the Fifth Amendment, although in the short term he can keep the records from being turned over to the Senate committee until any litigation over enforcing the subpoena is resolved.Mr. Shkreli is likely to keep up his barrage of comments on social media, no doubt tweaking Congress about its pursuit of him. The Fifth Amendment will let him refuse to answer questions, and maybe even keep documents from his time at Turing. The right to silence can be frustrating to those who are demanding answers.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »