AdvertisementSupported byThe Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.08 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.31 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.04 percent.The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week: MONDAYFlorida Department of Environmental Protection, $90 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Johnston Community School District, Iowa, $55.9 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive. TUESDAYWhittier Union High School District, Calif., $64.3 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Frisco Independent School District, Tex., $70 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Louisville-Jefferson County, Ky., $55.2 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive. Washington Suburban Sanitary District, Md., $150.7 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.New Jersey Environmental Infrastructure Trust, $117.5 million of revenue bonds. Competitive. Suffolk County Water Authority, N.Y., $75 million of bond anticipation notes. Competitive.THURSDAYState Public Works Board, Calif., $223.2 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Virginia College Building Authority, $207.3 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.ONE DAY DURING THE WEEKCentral Texas Regional Mobility Authority, $375.2 million of revenue bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities. DeKalb County, Ga., $67 million of water and sewer revenue refinancing bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Florida Development Finance Corporation, $1.75 billion of passenger rail project revenue bonds. Bank of America. Florida Development Finance Corporation, $97.2 million of educational facilities revenue bonds. BB&T Capital Markets.Floyd County Development Authority, Ga., $53 million of pollution control revenue bonds. Barclays Capital. Kershaw County Public Schools Foundation, S.C., $101.9 million of refinancing revenue bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Los Angeles County Metropolitan Transportation Authority, $65.6 million of general revenue refinancing bonds. Siebert Brandford Shank.Miami-Dade County School Board, Fla., $229 million of certificates of participation. Bank of America.New Jersey Economic Development Authority, $78.9 million of Liberty State Park project lease revenue refinancing bonds. Raymond James.New York State Housing Finance Agency, $53.9 million of affordable housing revenue bonds. Siebert Brandford ShankNorth Carolina A&T State University, $92.2 million of revenue bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.North Dakota Housing Finance Agency, $50 million of revenue bonds. Wells Fargo Securities. Ohio, $70 million of capital facilities lease appropriations bonds. Raymond James.Santa Monica-Malibu Unified School District, Calif., $50 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Stifel Nicolaus.Springfield, Ill., $498 million of electric revenue bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Vermont Municipal Bond Bank, $59.4 million of bonds. Morgan Stanley.Advertisement