By ANDREW POLLACKJAN. 25, 2016
J. Michael Pearson, the chief executive of Valeant Pharmaceuticals International, said on Monday that he was “on the road to recovery” but that the timing of his return to the company was still uncertain.Mr. Pearson, who is also Valeant’s chairman, was hospitalized in late December with what the company has described as severe pneumonia. Valeant was coming off a difficult year in which its pricing and distribution strategies became the subject of inquiries from Congress and the Justice Department.In his two-paragraph memo to employees, which the company released Monday morning, Mr. Pearson said that “some unexpected complications resulted in a longer hospital stay than anticipated.” He added: “I’m glad to say that I’m on the road to recovery, and although the timing of my return remains uncertain, I look forward to being back at work when able.”Valeant has provided little or no update on Mr. Pearson’s condition since he was hospitalized, and Mr. Pearson’s memo did not state whether he was out of the hospital.AdvertisementAbout two weeks after Mr. Pearson was hospitalized, the company named two directors as interim leaders, in an acknowledgment that Mr. Pearson would not be returning quickly. Howard B. Schiller, the company’s former chief financial officer, is serving as interim chief executive, and Robert A. Ingram, its lead independent director, is interim chairman.Valeant’s once high-flying stock has been battered in recent months by concerns over the company’s business model — particularly its practice of sharply increasing the prices of old drugs and its once secret relationship with a mail-order pharmacy that helped win insurance reimbursement for some of its expensive drugs. There have also been concerns over the company’s roughly $30 billion in debt, accumulated from numerous acquisitions it has made, and over its accounting practices.AdvertisementThe company has said that it is in the process of changing some of those practices.In his memo, Mr. Pearson thanked employees for their support and for their hard work. “While the past few months have been difficult,” he said, “I am convinced we will emerge stronger than ever and our future remains bright.”A version of this article appears in print on January 26, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Timing of Return to Work Is Unclear for Valeant Chief.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.