By ALEXANDRA STEVENSONJAN. 27, 2016
SunEdison, the renewable energy company, was once the darling of the hedge fund world. Big-name investors like Steven A. Cohen, Leon G. Cooperman and David Einhorn rode the stock as it soared to ever increasing heights. And then it crashed.Now, under pressure, SunEdison has agreed to give Greenlight Capital, which is led by Mr. Einhorn, a seat on its board and said it would amend some of its policies.SunEdison has appointed Claire Gogel, a former Greenlight executive, as an independent director and the hedge fund’s representative on the board, effective immediately, the company said on Wednesday. She will be a part of the company’s nominating and corporate governance committee as well as its finance and investment committee, SunEdison said.A seat at the table will give Mr. Einhorn the chance to turn things around, for both his investors and the company.AdvertisementGreenlight Capital lost investors 20 percent of their money in 2015, a sharp reversal of fortune for Mr. Einhorn, who was once a star trader followed by many in the industry. His position in SunEdison contributed to the losses. Greenlight Capital has a 6.8 percent stake, according to a Securities and Exchange Commission filing on Jan 25.AdvertisementMr. Einhorn is not the only one to have suffered a blow from SunEdison last year. And he is not the only voice to go up against the company, which has become a so-called hedge fund hotel, with more than 160 hedge funds in the stock in September, according to report by the research firm Novus.David Tepper and his firm, Appaloosa Management, are investors in TerraForm Power, a subsidiary of SunEdison, and filed a lawsuit this month over some details involving TerraForm’s acquisition of Vivint Solar, a rooftop panel installer.SunEdison, once a renewable energy power player, makes solar power plants and wind energy plants. But it has struggled recently under more than $11 billion of debt and has cut jobs and raised new money to stem losses and fight back concerns over its business model.As part of the deal with Greenlight Capital, SunEdison will not be able to issue equity without the approval of nearly all of its board members over a two-year period. This will take effect after it has finished its acquisition of Vivint Solar.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Emmanuel T. Hernandez, the executive chairman of SunEdison’s board, said on Wednesday that the move “makes clear our unequivocal commitment to SunEdison and its common shareholders.”He added, “As we work to navigate current market conditions, we are very pleased that we will have the benefit of tapping the expertise of a highly qualified director endorsed by a significant shareholder.”Last year was a particularly rough one for Mr. Einhorn. Halfway through 2015, it appeared as if SunEdison would be a bright spot in his otherwise beleaguered portfolio of stocks. He called it in a letter to investors “our only significant winner” at the time as the stock moved from $24 a share to $29.91 a share over the second quarter. On Tuesday night before SunEdison announced the change to its board, its stock had closed at $3.05.In that same letter last summer, Mr. Einhorn urged investors to sit tight and signed off with a quote from the inventor Thomas A. Edison: “A diamond is a piece of coal that stuck to the job.”AdvertisementA veteran in the hedge fund industry, Ms. Gogel worked for Discovery Technology Fund, and founded a long-short equity hedge fund called Perennial Advisors. She left Greenlight Capital at the end of 2014 “to pursue other interests and spend more time with her family,” Mr. Einhorn wrote to investors at the time.Mr. Einhorn and Greenlight Capital have had seats on the boards of other companies and he is currently chairman of the board at Green Brick Partners, a real estate operator. But he is perhaps best known for his battle against New Century Financial, the mortgage company. In 2006, after threatening to wage a proxy war and oust three directors from New Century Financial, the company made him a director.One year later, as the subprime market was imploding and New Century’s stock was plunging, Mr. Einhorn resigned from the lender’s board five days after it disclosed that federal authorities had opened a criminal probe looking into accounting irregularities. A month later the company filed for bankruptcy.Gaining a seat on the board of a company has not always been a successful move for other hedge fund managers. William A. Ackman resigned from the board of the retailer J.C. Penney in 2013 after a fight over top leadership.A headline on Thursday with an article about SunEdison’s agreeing to give Greenlight Capital, a hedge fund run by David Einhorn, a seat on its board misidentified the person who will hold that seat. Claire Gogel, a former Greenlight executive, will join the board — not Mr. Einhorn himself.Matthew Goldstein contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on January 28, 2016, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Under Pressure, SunEdison Adds Einhorn to Board.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.