AdvertisementSupported byBy Jackie CalmesWASHINGTON — If Treasury Secretary Jacob J. Lew was not aware that Americans have strong opinions about what, and who, is in their wallets, he certainly is now.Several million people have responded since Mr. Lew issued an unprecedented invitation to the public last June to help redesign the nation’s cash. His question: Which woman from American history should be chosen as the first on paper currency since Martha Washington briefly graced the $1 silver certificate in the late 19th century?The outpouring of responses about the forthcoming redesign of the $10 bill has surprised administration officials both by its numbers and by the volume of unanticipated complaints, forcing Mr. Lew to miss his self-imposed December deadline for an announcement and leaving unclear when he will decide.“I think it took us all by surprise just how much interest there really was,” Rosie Rios, the treasurer of the United States, said in an interview.Mr. Lew intended to inspire a national conversation about women’s contributions to the nation and to generate ideas for new symbols to reflect democracy on currency — “to make a statement about who we are and what we stand for,” as he said.What he got besides was something of a tempest that included reflections about the worth of women and about the relative merits of two particular men, Alexander Hamilton, a founding father, and President Andrew Jackson, whose portraits are on the $10 and $20 notes. The comments showed Jackson to be as reviled as Hamilton is revered, reviving an argument that the $20 bill should be redesigned before the $10 noteAll of this simmers as Mr. Lew is preoccupied with more typical matters for a Treasury secretary. In the last week he was in Puerto Rico to deal with its debt crisis, then in Davos, Switzerland, for the annual World Economic Forum.Yet the issue of how the $10 bill looks could well be the one for which he is best remembered.By law, the honoree must be dead. Surveys from advocacy groups and social media postings suggest that the contenders include the abolitionist Harriet Tubman, the suffragist Susan B. Anthony, the civil rights pioneer Rosa Parks and Eleanor Roosevelt, the reformist first lady, who was a member of the first United States delegation to the United Nations.The problem for the critics is not the administration’s idea of choosing a woman — with the exception of a few respondents, like the man who posted on Twitter that he would demand “two fives” if ever handed a $10 note featuring a woman. Rather, the common gripe is that the $20 bill was not chosen instead of the $10 bill for a woman’s portrait.To the bureaucrats, the choice of the 10 was natural and justifiable. For security reasons, the $10 bill was recommended for revision in 2012 by the Advanced Counterfeit Deterrence committee that is led by Ms. Rios and has representatives from the Treasury, the Federal Reserve, the Secret Service and the Bureau of Engraving and Printing.So the $10 note became the vehicle for an administration eager to make a historic statement about women before President Obama leaves office. Despite the complaints, officials say, they cannot switch bills.Yet they might have better anticipated the blowback, critics say.Even before Mr. Lew announced last summer that a woman would be on the $10 bill, a group called Women On 20s inspired Senator Jeanne Shaheen, Democrat of New Hampshire, and others in Congress to introduce legislation calling for a woman’s portrait on the 20. The National Organization for Women got behind the campaign, according to Terry O’Neill, president of the group.Barbara Ortiz Howard, the founder of Women On 20s, was at Mr. Lew’s announcement last June. “They were all excited with their plan, and we had some cautions,” she said. “We thought there might be some issues with it — like the fact that it’s not the 20.”The $20 bill is more numerous by far than the $10 note, and the common currency of the ubiquitous A.T.M. For a woman to be put on the $10 note instead suggests women are of lesser worth, some people complained. Though several of those critics said wryly that the lesser note would aptly symbolize that women still earn less than men on average.The bigger issue, however, turned out to be Hamilton versus Jackson. Many respondents asked: Why displace Hamilton, the first Treasury secretary and the architect of the American financial system, rather than eject Jackson from the $20 bill given his record of violence against Native Americans and opposition to national banking?Treasury’s initial assurance that Hamilton would somehow remain on the $10 bill, presumably as a secondary figure, only provoked more objections. “If she is worthy of being on a bill, she is worthy of not sharing it,” a woman wrote on The New York Times’s Facebook page.Just last week, Senator James Lankford, Republican of Oklahoma, a state that is 9 percent Native American, sponsored a resolution calling for Jackson to be replaced by a woman because of Jackson’s “policies that forced thousands of American Indians off their ancestral homelands.”A group called the Alexander Hamilton Awareness Society began a social media campaign to #SaveHamilton on the $10 note. Rand Scholet, the group’s founder, said in an interview that while Treasury’s initiative “is very laudable,” the reaction among Hamiltonians is, “How can a current secretary of Treasury displace or diminish the first secretary of Treasury?”The Treasury Department could not have anticipated that in the face of this dispute the musical “Hamilton” would become a Broadway smash, further elevating its subject. Mr. Lew took his wife to the show in August, for their anniversary, and met the cast backstage.Women On 20s has proposed a compromise, supported by NOW, to keep Hamilton alongside a woman chosen by Treasury and change the opposite side of the $10 bill, replacing the image of the Treasury building with a vignette of nearly a dozen female historical figures.“That’s not in lieu of having the prime territory, which is the portrait side,” Ms. Howard said. A woman’s portrait could replace Jackson’s the next time the $20 note is redesigned, she said.Treasury officials continue to promote the $10 redesign, however. Besides relying on social media, emails and letters, Mr. Lew and Ms. Rios have held town hall meetings around the country and round tables with interested groups, including historians. Ms. Rios has mingled among tourists at the Bureau of Engraving and Printing’s “money factories” here and in Fort Worth soliciting opinions from scores at a time.“It’s to their credit that they’ve opened themselves up to all this dialogue,” Ms. Howard said.Bank notes, and the portraits on them, have not changed significantly since 1929. But in the 1990s the government began routinely redesigning each denomination in turn to stay ahead of counterfeiters — a process of technological research, testing and production that takes years for each note.Mr. Lew will announce his decision “in the near future,” Ms. Rios said, but the new note will not go into circulation until 2020 because of the complexities of producing the anticounterfeiting features. Further complicating the process, as a consequence of a 2008 court order, the $10 bill will also be the first to include a raised tactile feature so that people with visual impairments can readily identify it.A rollout in 2020, not coincidentally, would be just in time for the centennial of the ratification of the 19th Amendment, which gave women the right to vote.Follow the New York Times’s politics and Washington coverage on Facebook and Twitter, and sign up for the First Draft politics newsletter.Advertisement