
Breakingviews By                     
ANTONY CURRIE

JAN. 26, 2016
The American International Group is making a renewed push to improve returns.Its chief executive, Peter D. Hancock, unveiled plans on Tuesday to sell businesses, slash costs and return $25 billion to shareholders over the next couple of years. That would be a lot for most companies under siege from an activist like Carl C. Icahn, who wants A.I.G. to break into three. So far, though, the push will take the giant insurer only toward mediocrity.Over the last five years, A.I.G. has delivered a respectable total return to investors, including reinvested dividends, of 37.5 percent. That’s better than both MetLife and Prudential, but a far cry from Travelers and its 109 percent.That also masks the weakness of the earnings in A.I.G.’s main business. Mr. Hancock’s plan is to elevate return on equity next year to a subpar 9 percent. MetLife is expected to do slightly better, according to Thomson Reuters data, when it reports last year’s profit later this week. Prudential is on track for 14.4 percent.A.I.G.’s new target is at least an improvement on recent years. It also explains why a breakup appeals to Mr. Icahn. Mr. Hancock rejects the argument on purely financial grounds. The company’s designation as a systemically important financial institution isn’t onerous, costing only $150 million extra a year. That could change once regulators complete the rules for insurers.AdvertisementCarving up A.I.G. now, though, would mean forgoing almost 10 times that amount in tax benefits. They disappear in three years, however. Credit rating agencies also like diversified insurers. Standard & Poor’s, for example, allows A.I.G. to hold more than $5 billion less capital to maintain its A-plus rating than it would if maybe, say, the property and casualty business was separated from life insurance.In some ways, that merely sets the terms for a smaller A.I.G. Mr. Hancock isn’t ruling out the idea. In fact, he may be providing investors with a road map with his reorganization that creates nine separate divisions – and a 10th to hold unwanted assets – with a promise to give out more details about their individual performance. All told, this restructuring story probably has further to go.AdvertisementDealBook readers: The Reuters Breakingviews predictions book, “Stairway to Heaven, Highway to Hell,” offers smart financial ideas for the 2016 playbook. Click here to read the book. (Or download the PDF.)Antony Currie is an associate editor at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »