By CLIFFORD KRAUSSNOV. 8, 2015
Peabody Energy, the world’s biggest private sector coal company, has agreed to make more robust disclosures to its investors about the financial risks it faces from future government policies and regulations related to climate change and other environmental issues that could reduce demand for its product.The coal giant’s concessions came in response to a two-year investigation by the New York attorney general that found that Peabody had not been forthright with investors and regulators about threats to its business that the company projected in private.The agreement between Peabody and Attorney General Eric T. Schneiderman was expected to be announced on Monday. Days before, Mr. Schneiderman’s office started a separate investigation into Exxon Mobil to determine whether the company lied to the public about the dangers of climate change while its scientists warned about the gathering threat to the environment posed by carbon pollution.The Peabody agreement will not include a monetary settlement. Its impact will surely pale in comparison with the other problems Peabody faces as demand for coal plummets, replaced by cleaner-burning natural gas.AdvertisementShares of Peabody, which is based in St. Louis, have lost more than 90 percent of their value over the last year as the entire industry has been overwhelmed by crippling debts and more stringent regulations on coal burning by electric utilities.Advertisement“This case represents an unprecedented first step in the absolutely critical work of forcing coal and other fossil fuel companies to start being honest about the damage they are doing to our planet,” Mr. Schneiderman said in a statement, “and the risks they create, both for the public and for shareholders.”Oil and coal companies have come under rising pressure from pension funds and other investors to disclose more about the risks their businesses face in their annual reports and other Securities and Exchange Commission filings — including the risks that they will not be able to extract all their reserves in the future. Similarly, future carbon taxes, the trading of carbon-emission permits and a variety of local and state regulations could raise the price of fossil fuels relative to other energy sources and result in a decline in demand.“The N.Y.A.G. concludes that Peabody’s disclosures denied its ability to reasonably predict the future impact of any climate change regulation on its business,” the settlement says, “while the company and its consultants projected severe impacts from certain potential regulations that would materially affect Peabody.”In its next filing to the S.E.C., Peabody agreed to a fuller disclosure of the risks as well as projections by the International Energy Agency of lower global coal demand in the future, should stronger regulatory action be taken around the world. The risks noted will include unfavorable lending trends for financing coal-fueled power plants overseas as well as divestment campaigns targeting the investment community, “which could significantly affect demand for our products or our securities.”“There is no acceptance or denial of their findings” from his company, said Vic Svec, a Peabody senior vice president. He added, in an email statement, that future company disclosures that include projections and predictions “shall be accompanied by a statement that Peabody has made projections of the impact of scenarios involving certain potential laws and regulations relating to climate change or coal, which could result in materially adverse effects on its markets.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.David M. Uhlmann, a University of Michigan law professor and former chief of the Justice Department’s environmental crimes section, described the agreement as “a modest settlement.” But he added, “It stands for an important principle about the need for honesty and transparency in financial statements.”Under New York’s Martin Act, the attorney general has broad powers to investigate companies that are suspected of misleading investors or regulators. Mr. Schneiderman’s aides noted that they could have negotiated fines as part of a settlement but concluded that any dollar amount would have been small, potentially diminishing the impact of the resolution.The attorney general’s office served its first subpoena on Peabody in 2007, while Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo held the office, seeking information and documents relating to its disclosure to investors on climate change and related regulations. In late 2013, Mr. Schneiderman requested additional documents and information.AdvertisementThe settlement noted two primary defects in Peabody’s past annual reports and other filings, one being an “incomplete discussion of the findings and projections of the International Energy Agency” regarding future coal demand.Most important was Peabody’s repeated statement that it was “not possible” for the company “to reasonably predict the impact that any such laws or regulations may have on (Peabody’s) results of operations, financial condition or cash flows.”That statement, according to the settlement, neglected to take into account a March 2013 company projection that aggressive regulatory action could reduce the dollar value of the coal mined out of the southern Powder River Basin by 38 percent and of the Illinois Basin coal by 33 percent by 2025.And in March 2014, an outside consulting firm commissioned by Peabody projected that the enactment of a $20-per-ton carbon tax would reduce the demand for coal as a source for electric power generation in the United States by 38 to 53 percent compared with 2013 levels.Commenting on the settlement, Brandon L. Garrett, a professor at the University of Virginia School of Law, said, “The most interesting question is whether this will be a template for further disclosure and greater transparency by other companies, particularly energy companies.”An article on Monday about Peabody Energy’s agreement to disclose more to its investors about the financial risks it faces related to climate change described the company incorrectly. It is a private sector company as opposed to a government-owned one, but it is not privately owned. (It is publicly listed on the New York Stock Exchange.)A version of this article appears in print on November 9, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: For Peabody, a Settlement on Disclosure.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.