By CHAD BRAYJAN. 26, 2016
LONDON — The Financial Conduct Authority of Britain on Tuesday named a longtime Bank of England official to serve as its new chief executive.Andrew Bailey, the deputy governor for prudential regulation at the Bank of England and the chief executive of the Prudential Regulation Authority, another British financial regulator within the Bank of England, is expected to take the top job at the Financial Conduct Authority once his successor is chosen, the central bank said.The Financial Conduct Authority said that it expected Mr. Bailey to begin the five-year term as chief executive in July.“We have cast the net far and wide for this crucial appointment and, having led the Bank of England’s response to the financial crisis, Andrew is simply the most respected, most experienced and most qualified person in the world to do the job,” George Osborne, the chancellor of the Exchequer, said in a news release on Tuesday. “His appointment is an important next step in the establishment of the F.C.A. as a strong regulator, independent of government and industry.”AdvertisementMartin Wheatley, who had been the Financial Conduct Authority’s chief executive since its inception in 2013, stepped down last year. Mr. Osborne has called for new leadership at the regulator.AdvertisementThe Financial Conduct Authority was created when the responsibilities of its predecessor agency, the Financial Services Authority, were divided between two organizations.A 30-year veteran of the Bank of England, Mr. Bailey, 56, has served as chief executive of the Prudential Regulation Authority since April 2013. His responsibilities include the supervision of about 1,700 banks, building societies and other financial institutions.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Although it had not been my intention to leave the P.R.A. during my term as C.E.O., a job that I enjoy enormously, it is a great honor to have been asked by the chancellor to take on the job of F.C.A. C.E.O.,” Mr. Bailey said in a news release. “After a lot of thought I have decided to move and do all that I can to make the F.C.A. effective and successful.”Mr. Bailey had served in a variety of roles at the central bank, including as executive director for banking services; head of the bank’s special resolution unit; and head of the international economic analysis division.He also served in a dual role where he worked at the Financial Services Authority from April 2011 until the regulator was dissolved in 2013. Its responsibilities were then divided between the Financial Conduct Authority and the Prudential Regulation Authority.“I am delighted that Andrew has been appointed as the new chief executive,” John Griffith-Jones, the Financial Conduct Authority chairman, said in a news release. “He brings unrivaled regulatory experience, a proven track record and an excellent reputation in the U.K. and internationally.”“Having been an F.C.A. board member since 2013, he has been fully engaged with all the regulatory issues that we have faced in recent years and in setting our strategy for the future,” he added.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.