By AURELIEN BREEDENJAN. 26, 2016
PARIS — Taxi drivers and air traffic controllers in France went on separate but simultaneous strikes on Tuesday, blocking traffic in major cities and disrupting flights at several airports.The strikes were part of a wider day of protests in the public sector, including hospitals and schools, to call attention to staff reductions, low salaries and education overhauls. More than 100 demonstrations were planned around the country, and CGT, one of the unions that organized the strike, said that 130,000 to 150,000 people participated nationwide.The police in Paris said that about 2,000 taxis had blocked or delayed traffic around Charles de Gaulle and Orly airports, as well as Porte Maillot, a major intersection in western Paris, and near the Ministry of Economy and Finance.Some taxi drivers set fire to tires and tried to block the highway that circles the French capital, but the police pushed the demonstrators back with tear gas.AdvertisementTwenty-four people were arrested, including the driver of an airport shuttle who had tried to force his way through a taxi roadblock near Orly, injuring two people, the French news media reported.AdvertisementSimilar Paris protests in June turned violent, with taxi drivers overturning cars and clashing with the police.Hundreds of taxi drivers also blocked traffic around airports and train stations in Lille and Toulouse on Tuesday, and they paralyzed traffic in central Marseille.Taxi unions called the strike to protest ride-booking companies like Uber, which allow people to summon drivers through a smartphone app. Taxi drivers argue that ride-booking companies do not respect certain regulations — like a ban on cruising for fares, which only taxis can legally do — and they say that drivers for ride-booking services have an unfair advantage because they do not have to pay for expensive taxi licenses.Uber is not the only company to organize ride-booking services in France, but it has become one of the most popular and has become a lightning rod for opposition to such services. The company has faced several legal challenges in the country, and two of its executives are scheduled to go on trial next month on criminal charges of organizing illegal taxi services through the company’s low-cost UberPop service.UberPop, which enabled drivers without a professional license to pick up paying passengers, has been ruled illegal in France, and it has been discontinued there by Uber.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Prime Minister Manuel Valls held an emergency meeting with taxi union representatives, the interior minister and representatives from the Transportation Ministry on Tuesday.Mr. Valls’s office said in a statement after the meeting that the government would increase enforcement of the 2014 law that regulates the activity of ride-booking companies, to “put an end to unfair behavior and guarantee the conditions of loyal competition.”The statement said that Mr. Valls was ready to consult industry and government representatives “on the economic equilibrium of the individual transportation sector and on the potential regulatory evolutions that might follow.”AdvertisementThe consultations will begin in February and will last about three months, the statement said, adding that a “qualified person” would be appointed in the coming days to lead the process.The statement also said that the government would provide support to individual drivers, but it did not provide any details. Some taxi unions have asked that drivers receive financial compensation from the state for their loss of business and the drop in the value of taxi licenses.Ahmed Senbel, president of the National Federation of Independent Taxis, said after the meeting that he felt Mr. Valls was fully aware of the problem, but he warned that the announcements might not placate the taxi drivers.“We’ve been containing it for seven years, but today we can’t contain it anymore,” Mr. Senbel said. Mr. Valls said earlier that the right to demonstrate should be respected but that violence was “unacceptable.”One in five flights was canceled at the two main Paris airports, and other flights were delayed as air traffic controllers protested job cuts and changes to how their salaries are calculated. Public transportation was not disrupted.Because of an editing error, an earlier version of this article misstated the number of taxis blocking traffic around Paris airports. It was 2,000, not 2,000,500.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.