By LIZ MOYERJAN. 26, 2016
Peter Hancock, chief executive of the starkest example of “too big to fail," is trying to fend off activist investors who are calling for the insurance giant to be broken in three.At American International Group, big is still better, at least for now.The insurance giant, which became the starkest example of “too big to fail” when it had to be rescued by the government during the financial crisis, is now trying to streamline itself to be more profitable and to fend off activist investors who are calling for it to be broken in three.After pressure from those activists mounted for months, A.I.G. announced a strategic shift on Tuesday that stopped well short of an outright breakup. Instead, the company will offer part of its mortgage insurance unit in an initial public offering, sell its financial advisory business and create nine distinct operations in its commercial and consumer divisions that could pave the way for future sales or spinoffs.The company plans to spend $25 billion on stock buybacks and dividends over two years, and to cut $1.6 billion from operating costs. It shored up its loss reserves by another $3.6 billion.A.I.G.’s president and chief executive, Peter D. Hancock, however, remained resistant to investor demands — led by Carl C. Icahn — that the company take radical action to shake off the regulatory burden of being labeled a systemically important financial institution, or SIFI, by the government.Advertisement“Now is not the time to be shortsighted and simply react to the demands of those who challenge us,” Mr. Hancock said in a memo to employees on Tuesday. He later told analysts during a presentation that the SIFI designation “may be issue number 15” on a long list of strategic issues that A.I.G. faces.AdvertisementWhether Tuesday’s strategic announcements will win over the activist shareholders remains to be seen. And Mr. Hancock did not entirely slam the door shut on further divestments.“There are no sacred cows,” he said.Still, the executive is taking a different approach than others like MetLife, which earlier this month announced plans to separate its United States retail operations to get them out from under the SIFI label. MetLife, which is also suing regulators over the designation, has said that the split will allow the businesses to compete more effectively with smaller companies that are not subject to the extra regulation and capital requirements that being a SIFI brings. General Electric is selling off its GE Capital unit piecemeal to escape the designation as well.Shares of A.I.G. closed up 1 percent on Tuesday.A former JPMorgan executive, Mr. Hancock joined A.I.G. in 2010, as the company was trying to recover from the financial crisis and its $185 billion government bailout. He took over as chief executive in September 2014, replacing Robert Benmosche, who died last year.To repay the government, A.I.G. sold dozens of businesses and other assets, halving its size and narrowing its focus, though activist investors said it still was not focused enough.But in that process, A.I.G. evolved into a company that had lower risk, fewer assets and less short-term borrowing compared with other SIFI companies like Prudential and MetLife, Mr. Hancock told analysts on Tuesday.That suggests he thinks that A.I.G. already holds enough capital to comply with whatever levels regulators will ultimately set. The regulations have yet to be written.“We had to deal up front with these issues,” Mr. Hancock said. “So we managed to get a jump on the whole process.”AdvertisementMr. Icahn, who said in November that he owned 42 million shares of A.I.G., did not respond to requests for comment.Still, he has made his impatience known. He could start a proxy fight to secure a board seat and make additional management changes.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Icahn first publicized his thoughts about breaking up A.I.G. in a series of letters starting last October. In the letters he quoted the hedge fund manager and fellow activist investor John Paulson, whose firm owns 14.6 million A.I.G. shares, as agreeing with him.Mr. Icahn has increased the pressure since then.“We believe the current situation is too time-sensitive to even wait until the company’s next annual meeting next spring,” he wrote in November. “Management has been either purposefully misleading in their public disclosures or is negligently uninformed regarding the feasibility” of a breakup plan, he said in another letter last week.For Mr. Icahn, the financial stakes of a successful outcome at A.I.G. are high. Despite successes such as Time Warner and eBay, his more recent investments, especially in energy, have faltered.He has argued that A.I.G. could extract more value for shareholders by splitting its life insurance operations entirely from its property and casualty business, which contributed 41 percent of operating revenue through the third quarter of last year. Companies focused on a single line of business, he says, generate better returns and have higher market values.The company says its annual cost of being a SIFI is $130 million versus the $1.3 billion tax benefit it gets from holding life insurance and property insurance together in the same company, making diversification, at least for now, more attractive.“We’re absolutely open to additional divestitures beyond what we’ve talked about even of our largest units,” Mr. Hancock told analysts on Tuesday. “But you don’t make a decision of that scale without thinking very hard about the impact on tax and on our financial strength.”As for the details of the plan announced on Tuesday, A.I.G. will have an I.P.O. for 19.9 percent of United Guaranty by midyear, with the eventual goal of full separation. It is selling A.I.G. Advisory Group, with 5,200 independent advisers and 800 employees, for an undisclosed amount to Lightyear Capital and the Canadian pension investment manager PSP Investments.AdvertisementIt is also moving underperforming older assets into a new “legacy” business to be run by Charlie Shamieh, who has led the life, health and disability insurance business. The legacy business will have $22 billion of equity and will aim to sell or wind down the businesses in the portfolio over time.Breaking down the remaining operations into clear divisions, or “modules” — Mr. Hancock referred to a similar action by Google Inc. — is supposed to make it easier for investors to analyze whether the individual businesses are performing up to snuff.“Management should be prepared for and willing to listen to investor comments about selling more of those modules,” two Citigroup analysts, Todd Bault and Erik Bass, wrote in a note on Tuesday.A version of this article appears in print on January 27, 2016, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Resisting Pressure to Break Up, A.I.G. Plans to Streamline Instead .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.