AdvertisementSupported byBy Stephen CastleLONDON — When it was announced last Friday, Google’s agreement to pay 130 million pounds in back taxes was welcomed by the country’s chancellor of the Exchequer, George Osborne, as a “major success.”Less than a week later, few are saying that of the deal, which has put Prime Minister David Cameron’s government on the defensive.Google’s $185 million settlement, announced last week, covers a 10-year period beginning in 2005 and was the result of a six-year inquiry by the British tax authorities. The agreement has been questioned by both the opposition Labour Party and by Conservative politicians including Boris Johnson, the mayor of London, and Steve Baker, a member of Parliament.Mr. Baker said the tax accord, while lawful and involving a substantial sum, was still “derisory” and “completely unacceptable to the public.”On Wednesday in Parliament, the agreement was criticized by the opposition leader, Jeremy Corbyn, who pressed Mr. Cameron over claims from some analysts that the payment represented an effective tax rate of around 3 percent. That has not been confirmed either by the tax authorities or by Google.Lack of transparency over how the amount was calculated has prompted additional complaints and led to fresh calls for companies to publish their tax returns to allow the public to judge for themselves. Mr. Corbyn noted that, unlike Google, ordinary taxpayers “do not get the option of 25 meetings with 17 ministers to decide what their rate of tax is.”Mr. Cameron countered that part of the tax recovered was based on revenue Google had generated in years which the Labour Party was in power under prime ministers Tony Blair and Gordon Brown.If Mr. Corbyn is angry, Mr. Cameron said, “maybe he should start by calling Tony Blair.” He continued: “You can get him at JPMorgan. Call Gordon Brown. Apparently, you can get him at a Californian bond dealer called Pimco.”With public spending restrained following the financial crisis of 2008, and amid a growing debate over wealth inequality, the amount of taxes paid by corporations like Google, Facebook and Amazon remains a highly sensitive issue. The ability of big multinational corporations to limit their tax liabilities has stirred resentment in many countries.The European Commission, the executive arm of the European Union, has attacked favorable tax treatments extended by member states like Luxembourg and Belgium to a host of multinationals. Officials in a number of European countries have criticized the complex strategies used by technology companies to reduce their local taxes, sometimes by routing sales through lower-tax jurisdictions. The British government has passed legislation to address such “diverted profits,” a measure quickly nicknamed the “Google tax.”Writing in The Daily Telegraph on Monday, Mr. Johnson said it was hard to blame companies for exploiting tax rules approved by politicians, but he also echoed the popular sentiment that Google and other multinationals were getting off lightly.“It has never seemed fair that some of these companies — no matter how wonderful the service they provide — should be paying so much less in tax than the high street tearooms and bookshops they have pulverized,” Mr. Johnson wrote.The British news media have contrasted their government’s approach to that of France and Italy, which, they have reported, are seeking to extract more in taxes from Google.In a statement, Google said that it would “now pay tax based on revenue from U.K.-based advertisers, which reflects the size and scope of our U.K. business.” It added, “The way multinational companies are taxed has been debated for many years, and the international tax system is changing as a result.”Advertisement