AdvertisementSupported byBy Raphael MinderMADRID — The Spanish Supreme Court ordered Bankia on Wednesday to reimburse two small investors for misleading them during its 2011 initial public offering.Under the ruling Bankia must pay one investor nearly 10,000 euros, or about $10,850, and the other nearly €21,000 euros, to cover their purchases of shares that eventually were nearly worthless.The ruling could be a boon to thousands of other investors who are suing the bank, accusing it of failing to fully disclose the loan problems that nearly caused the bank’s collapse in 2012.The bank said on Wednesday that it was aware of lawsuit claims totaling €819 million euros. Bankia said it had adequate provisions for legal liabilities, having set aside €1.84 billion.The Supreme Court, saying that Bankia’s prospectus for its public stock offering in 2011 had contained “serious inaccuracies, ’’ affirmed decisions by two regional courts that backed individual buyers of Bankia stock.The Supreme Court also turned down Bankia’s request to delay the lawsuits until after the outcome of a separate criminal case against Rodrigo Rato, the former head of Bankia, and other executives accused of misleading investors in order to ease Bankia’s 2011 listing.In May 2012, the Spanish government seized control of the bank and ousted Mr. Rato after Bankia disclosed that it needed about €22 billion in fresh capital to stay afloat. The near-collapse of the giant mortgage lender then forced Spain’s government to negotiate a European banking bailout of its savings banks. In the end, almost half of the 41 billion euros, or about $45 billion, of European rescue funding was required to shore up Bankia.Bankia, slimmed down and under new management, returned to profit in 2013 after reporting a loss of €19.2 billion for 2012, a record for the Spanish banking industry.Bankia raised over €3 billion in its initial public offering. The stock offering came after the merger of the seven savings banks, or cajas, that formed Bankia, under the leadership of Mr. Rato, a former finance minister and managing director of the International Monetary Fund. Bankia’s merger was part of a broader consolidation of the caja sector, after the bursting of Spain’s real estate construction bubble in 2008. The government encouraged the consolidation to get stronger cajas to absorb the mortgage losses of weaker ones.In addition to the stock-offering cases, Mr. Rato and other former directors also face a separate lawsuit over whether they misused their corporate credit cards to make personal purchases that totaled €15.25 million. Mr. Rato is among the executives who agreed to return money spent using his credit card while denying wrongdoing.Advertisement