By JANET MORRISSEYJAN. 27, 2016
Nothing unnerves consumers more and drives them away from a restaurant, food or beverage faster than a flurry of headlines about people being sickened by dreaded bacteria like E. coli or listeria.Just ask Chipotle Mexican Grill, which has been scrambling to recover from a multistate E. coli outbreak that drove the company’s stock down more than 40 percent and has resulted in a class-action lawsuit. Or Blue Bell Creameries, which faced several recalls and factory shutdowns and now faces a Department of Justice investigation in connection with listeria contamination of its ice cream.But often, troubles for one business can mean opportunities for others. And the competitive field of food testing is one. Companies big and small are looking for ways to make food testing faster, more accurate and less expensive. It requires sophisticated scientific and technological skills and is far from the easiest point of entry for a small start-up. But one Philadelphia biotech company led by a pair of entrepreneurs is hoping it has found a niche.The company, Invisible Sentinel, has developed a patented technology called Veriflow that uses a hand-held device to detect the DNA of micro-organisms like E. coli, salmonella and listeria quickly and at a relatively affordable price. The technology has been approved by AOAC International, an association that sets standards for microbial food testing.Advertisement“It’s like a pregnancy test — one line negative and two lines positive — except that it’s amplified DNA that you’re reading,” said Benjamin Pascal, a co-founder of Invisible Sentinel.AdvertisementToday, according to Invisible Sentinel, 114 companies in the United States and more than 50 internationally use the technology at more than 250 different sites in 18 countries.Wawa Inc., which owns dairy and beverage manufacturing plants as well as 715 convenience stores in six states, tested Veriflow for about six months before signing on in March 2013. “Invisible Sentinel’s technology was two to three times faster than others,” said Chris Gheysens, the company’s chief executive.Dawn Norton, director of food safety at WholeVine Products in Santa Rosa, Calif., said her company, which produces a variety of products from grape seeds and skins, has begun using Veriflow to make sure its plant equipment and surfaces are pathogen-free.Large food companies with in-house labs often pay tens of thousands of dollars for equipment and usually need highly trained lab technicians or microbiologists to run them.Invisible Sentinel can set up an in-house lab for about $5,000 and train almost anyone to use it in less than a day. It makes money by selling its proprietary test kits, which cost $240 for a package of 24 tests. The cost of $10 per test is higher than the industry average of $4 to $8, but Invisible Sentinel says competitors charge higher lab equipment costs.The in-house labs are particularly attractive to wine companies, which can use them to test for spoilage organisms at individual wineries rather than having to ship samples out for testing.“It allows us to do more testing with the same budget,” said Torey Arvik, a former technical director at Jackson Family Wines who now works for WholeVine.AdvertisementInvisible Sentinel’s sales have been on the rise. The company posted revenue of $50,000 in its first year of sales in 2013, $1.1 million in 2014 and more than $4 million in 2015. It has ambitious projections of $30 million in 2018 and $60 million in 2020. Nicholas Siciliano, the chief executive and a co-founder, expects the company to turn a profit in 2016.According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, each year, about one in six Americans becomes sick from contaminated foods or beverages, and 3,000 die.Globally, two billion tests are done annually for pathogens and spoilage organisms, and the rate is growing at about 5 percent a year, said Thomas R. Weschler, founder of Strategic Consulting Inc., a research and consulting firm in the industrial diagnostics industrySome of that growth is a result of the Food Safety Modernization Act, which President Obama signed into law in 2011. Considered the most sweeping reform of food safety laws in more than 70 years, it was intended to shift the focus from responding to contamination to preventing it.Companies, no matter how tight their profit margins, cannot afford to skimp on food testing. Recalls and reports of E. coli outbreaks can damage a brand, sometimes irreparably. “It’s the worst possible public relations nightmare you can face,” said Robert Passikoff, founder and president of Brand Keys, a brand research and consulting firm.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Invisible Sentinel was started by a pair of entrepreneurs with science backgrounds.Mr. Siciliano, now 37, was born in Philadelphia. Growing up, he had a fascination with science and building models. “I’d throw the directions away and figure out how to put it together myself and how to improve on it,” he said.He graduated from Villanova with a degree in chemistry in 2004 and obtained a doctorate in immunology and microbial pathogenesis from Thomas Jefferson University in 2015. In between, he took a consulting job at a biotech start-up, Integral Molecular, and later worked as a research specialist at the University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine.A mutual friend introduced Mr. Siciliano to Mr. Pascal in 2006, and the two formed Invisible Sentinel. “We did the business plan on the table in his mother’s kitchen while she was making pasta for us,” Mr. Pascal recalled.Born in Allentown, Pa., Mr. Pascal, 35, had a keen interest in medicine and biology at an early age. His father, Joseph, and two grandparents were doctors. He graduated with a bachelor’s degree in political communication from George Washington University in 2003 and a master’s in business administration from Lehigh University in 2009.He honed his biology skills at the National Institute for Medical Research in London, and then spent several years in research and development at B. Braun Medical Inc., before meeting Mr. Siciliano.AdvertisementThe two wanted to create a diagnostic device that was faster, easier and cheaper to use. They began with a modest $235,000 from friends and family. Then came the recession, which made it tough to bring institutional investors onboard.Mr. Pascal recalls traveling to a long-planned meeting with an institutional investor in New York in 2008. “It was the day the market dropped 770 points, and everyone looked like they were panicking,” he said. They obtained no funding that day.But in 2009, they raised another $1.1 million from friends and family, and $2 million more in 2011. So, in 2012, they started knocking on investors’ doors again.“We had 41 doors slammed in our face” before getting an offer, Mr. Siciliano said. But they raised $7 million at the end of 2013.Even after they had built the technology and got the certification approvals, they had a tough time breaking into the competitive testing industry. Companies like bioMérieux of France, Neogen, Thermo Fisher Scientific, 3M and DuPont dominated the sector. “Nobody knew who we were,” Mr. Siciliano said.Despite its advantages, the company’s technology has limitations. It cannot do sophisticated multiplex testing, in which several different organisms are detected in the same sample. And many of its customers still send the end product to third-party labs for validation, since retailers often insist on it.Also, competition remains intense. Products like Romer Labs’ RapidChek, Bio-Rad Laboratories’ iQ-Check and DuPont’s Bax system can also produce fairly quick results based on developments in a DNA testing technique from the 1980s. However, some involve costly lab equipment.Advertisement“You’d be naïve to think there isn’t competition in any large space you operate in,” said Bruce Peacock, an Invisible Sentinel investor who has worked in the biotech industry for more than 30 years. But he is betting that at least in the short run rivals will not develop a faster, more accurate and cheaper test than Invisible Sentinel’s.Investors expect the company to be bought eventually or to merge with a larger industrial diagnostic or biotech company. Mr. Siciliano said he had overtures but saw little reason to sell now.“We’re in this for the long haul,” he said. “We think we have a big business to grow and we’re just beginning to harvest that value.”A version of this article appears in print on January 28, 2016, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: A Food Testing Start-Up Looks to Stand Out in a Highly Competitive Field.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.