AdvertisementSupported byBy Chad BrayLONDON — The Royal Bank of Scotland said on Wednesday that it would report an annual loss for 2015 after taking a series of charges to close a deficit in its pension plan and to resolve past misconduct.The bank, based in Edinburgh, has not posted a full-year profit since 2007, and it is in the middle of a large restructuring as it shifts away from being a lender with global ambitions to focus on retail and corporate banking in Britain. In February, the bank announced that it would dismantle its global investment bank and decrease the number of countries where it operates.The bank’s results have been repeatedly dragged down by misconduct. It is compensating customers who were improperly sold so-called payment-protection insurance when taking out mortgages, applying for credit cards or seeking other loans. The payouts have  cost British banks billions of dollars.“I am determined to put the issues of the past behind us and make sure R.B.S. is a stronger, safer bank,” Ross McEwan, the chief executive, said in a news release. The lender, in which the British government has a stake of about 73 percent after a bailout in 2008, said that it would take additional provisions of 1.5 billion pounds, or about $2.1 billion, in the fourth quarter related to continuing civil litigation in the United States over the sale of residential mortgage-backed securities.The bank faces lawsuits and separate investigations by the Justice Department and several state attorneys general over its sale of the securities. No provisions have been made related to any potential resolution of those inquiries, the bank said.R.B.S. also said it would take a provision of £500 million related to the sale of payment-protection insurance, but Mr. McEwan said he hoped this would be the last.Regulators in Britain are considering setting a 2018 deadline for consumers to seek compensation for the improper sale of that insurance.Including the latest charge, the bank has set aside about £4.3 billion to cover customer redress related to payment-protection insurance.R.B.S. said it would take a noncash charge, known as a goodwill impairment, of £498 million related to its private banking business. After an accounting change, the bank said it would make an accelerated payment of future contributions to cover a deficit in its pension plan, reducing shareholder equity by about £1.6 billion for 2015. The payments were set to run through 2023.R.B.S. closed its pension plan to new members about a decade ago, but it still has about 220,000 members and it is one of the largest defined-benefit plans in Britain, Mr. McEwan said.The British government has started winding down its stake in the bank, which received a £45 billion bailout during the financial crisis. It raised about £2.1 billion in its first sale of shares it held in R.B.S. in August.Advertisement