
Global Manager By                     
SONIA KOLESNIKOV-JESSOP

NOV. 8, 2015
Kelly Kuhn  is president for Asia Pacific at Carlson Wagonlit Travel, based in Singapore.Q. Tell me about your upbringing, and how it influenced your leadership style.A. I grew up in a very small town in western Kansas, in the middle of a farming community. My parents are third-generation immigrants to the U.S., hard-working farmers, and my father just believed anything was possible. That’s something I learned early on, that whatever situation you’re in, you can always do something about it; never accept no for an answer.Q. You studied classical voice. How did you get from there to the travel industry?A. I was studying to be an opera singer, though I enjoyed musical theater. Then I got the bug for fund-raising. As part of my work-study program at Northwestern University I worked 10 hours a week in the department of development. The head of the department was an exceptional mentor for me and gave me a great opportunity to learn about fund-raising, so halfway through college I went to the dean of the school of music and told him I wanted to do something in arts administration. There wasn’t a degree back then, but the dean became my adviser, and I got a job at the Lyric Opera in Chicago, doing fund-raising work for them, which counted as credit toward my degree.After I graduated, while all my friends were going to New York, waiting tables and auditioning, I decided to stay and work for a few not-for-profits for the first few years. Then in 1989 I joined a small travel company, Arrington Travel, as a manager doing public relations and communications, though I was a team of one. In nine years, we grew the company and I learned everything about the company by working in every department, until I became its president.AdvertisementQ. What did you learn during those early years?A. I definitely had to earn my stripes. Mike Arrington, who had founded the company, was a take-the-hill kind of guy, not unlike my dad, he believed everything was possible. To be successful in his team you had to tell him “Yes,” and then go figure it out. Today I will still say to my staff, “Don’t bring me a problem without a solution, and always ask, ‘What is the alternative?,’ because there is always an alternative.”Q. Arrington Travel was bought by Navigant International and then Navigant later was acquired by Carlson Wagonlit Travel in 2006. How did you navigate these changes?A. During any acquisition, the difficulty was to convince employees and customers to stick around, because they were loyal to something that didn’t exist anymore. How do you sell the new vision of what the future holds? In some cases, not all employees want that, and seeing clearly very quickly who fits and who doesn’t is I think one of my gifts.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Q. How fast can you make changes?A. I have been called Typhoon Kelly [laughs], but someone has also told me I’m like a turtle, someone who makes progress when they stick their neck out. So I do believe in moving fast.When I came to Asia in 2011, we had very lofty goals and high-growth expectations for the company in the region. I had to make sure I had the right team in place to lead in a fast-paced region where there were many changes ahead. I really wanted to build a local leadership team that would sustain for the long term. So I changed out most of the leaders in the region within the first six months. Maybe it was fast, but I didn’t have any time to waste, because I had a lot of goals and targets to achieve and I wanted to settle things quickly so everyone could be on the right path.And to be honest, if someone is not successful in their job, they also deserve the truth. Some former employees have told me that I gave them a great gift, because after they left their dream job came around. Someone who is not successful is not happy. But of course these are the most difficult decisions any leader has to make and that’s when you need the best human resources partner, which I have here.AdvertisementQ. Why was it important to have a local team?A. It reflects the values, culture, and belief of our employees and our customers. We have very high employee engagement in this region. My philosophy is that highly engaged and motivated employees drive great customer satisfaction, and from there financial results will follow. So first take care of your employees, and they will take care of your customers, especially in this part of the world where service still does matter.Q. How do you hire?A. I put candidates through a lot of interviews because I want them to choose us as much as we’re choosing them. So we do a lot of peer-to-peer interviews, because most of the time we’re not just hiring for the job, we’re hiring for the future, so in many of the positions I’ve hired, they’ve already been promoted or have had their portfolio expanded. Within two to three years you can see the leadership skills.Q. What makes a great leader?A. Not being afraid to surround yourself with people who are smarter than you are. In every area of expertise you have to put the best person. My job is to manage myself out of a job. I have to get out of the way eventually so someone else can step up.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »