By REED ABELSONJAN. 28, 2016
Walgreens, the giant drugstore chain, offered the latest vote of no confidence for Theranos, the Silicon Valley laboratory testing company it had collaborated with to offer blood tests for some of its customers.In a statement issued on Thursday, Walgreens said that none of the tests for its customers could be performed at Theranos’s Newark, Calif., laboratory, which federal regulators just cited for violations of clinical standards. Walgreens said it was also suspending Theranos laboratory testing at its Palo Alto, Calif., store.Theranos contends that more than 90 percent of its laboratory analysis is done in Arizona, where it worked with Walgreens. But the statement did little to allay concerns about the reliability of Theranos’s technology. Walgreens said previously that it was evaluating its next steps regarding its relationship with Theranos, and a company spokesman had no further comment.Theranos said it remained “open for business” and would continue testing at its Arizona lab. “This is an issue that many other labs have faced, and we will fix it quickly and completely, working with our regulators as we always do,” said Brooke Buchanan, a spokeswoman.AdvertisementBut Walgreen’s decision underscores the concerns raised by a letter sent to the company by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, one of two federal regulators overseeing the Theranos laboratory operations, earlier in the week. The agency outlined five deficiencies, including one that it said posed “immediate jeopardy to patient health and safety” involving Theranos’s hematology testing, for blood cell counts or the monitoring of patients’ blood.AdvertisementTheranos, which said it was addressing the problems highlighted in the letter, said “a full plan of correction will be submitted to C.M.S. within days.”In its statement, Walgreens said it would wait to see what action the agency took before making any further decisions. “No patient samples will be sent to the Newark lab until all issues raised by C.M.S. have been fully resolved,” it said.Theranos was founded in 2003 by Elizabeth Holmes, a Stanford University dropout who promised to upend the traditional laboratory testing industry with a proprietary technology. She attracted widespread attention, and her company garnered an astonishing $9 billion valuation before questions surfaced over the company’s operations.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Wall Street Journal raised concerns about the accuracy of its test results and some of its claims. The Food and Drug Administration, the company’s other federal regulator, which had given approval for one of Theranos’s tests, for herpes, also said it was reviewing its analysis machines and processes while Theranos seeks approval for its other tests.The hematology testing highlighted in the letter from the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services echoed issues raised last fall by a former senior executive at Apple, Jean-Louis Gassée, who wrote a blog post about his experience. He compared Theranos’s results with those he received when he went to Stanford Hospital’s hematology laboratory for monitoring because of a hereditary condition. The results from the Stanford lab and Theranos differed, Mr. Gassée said.Since then, Mr. Gassée said he had met with Theranos executives at the company’s Palo Alto headquarters. In a telephone interview on Thursday, he said he was not swayed by its explanation of the significant test result variations. “I sort of shrugged and left,” he said.Ms. Buchanan, the spokeswoman, said Theranos executives discussed the differences between the two labs. “His results fell within the accepted variance,” she said. “We took time and effort and spent hours addressing this with him.”Mr. Gassée said he had his blood tested again later at a Theranos lab, and found that “the numbers were a little bit all over the place.”The actions by Medicare also signal that the company is definitely in the cross hairs of both of its regulators. “This is the sound of the other hand clapping,” said Lakshman Ramamurthy, a former F.D.A. official who is now an executive with Avalere Health, a consulting firm in Washington. The company must meet both regulators’ standards, he said, making it likely that the agencies are coordinating their efforts.AdvertisementWhile Ms. Holmes has expressed confidence in Theranos’s ability to get approval for its methods and the tests it plans to offer, the company must wait for the F.D.A. to weigh in. The company is permitted to use conventional methods to continue its testing, but it remains unclear how much of its own technology the company is able to use while awaiting regulatory approval.A version of this article appears in print on January 29, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Walgreens Suspends Tests of Blood by Theranos Lab.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.