By LIZ MOYERJAN. 28, 2016
After nearly four years as a top lieutenant to New York’s attorney general, Chad Johnson is stepping down as head of the state’s Investor Protection Bureau and moving to a private litigation firm, Quinn Emanuel Urquhart & Sullivan.Mr. Johnson has investigated and advised the attorney general, Eric T. Schneiderman, on a wide variety of Wall Street issues, among them high-frequency trading, credit rating practices and foreign exchange.His unit oversees the fraud investigation of a private stock trading operation run by Barclays. He also represented New York State in multibillion-dollar global settlements with several Wall Street banks over the way they packaged and sold residential mortgage-backed securities in the run-up to the financial crisis.He joined the office in fall 2012 as a senior trial counsel and later became deputy attorney general before becoming head of the Investor Protection Bureau in 2013. Before that he was a partner at Bernstein Litowitz Berger & Grossmann, where he represented investors in securities fraud cases.AdvertisementHe was also a partner at Latham & Watkins, handling cases for financial institutions and corporate executives.Advertisement“His aggressive but fair approach to enforcing New York’s securities laws has helped level the playing field for investors,” Mr. Schneiderman said in a statement.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Johnson said he planned to join Quinn Emanuel in March and will represent investors as well as defendants in complex litigation.While at the attorney general’s office, Mr. Johnson was instrumental in achieving a $714 million settlement with Bank of New York Mellon last year over cheating New York City teacher and police pension funds and other investors on the pricing of foreign-currency trades. That case that resulted in the firing of bank executives and admissions of wrongdoing, although the facts that the bank admitted to were narrower than the accusations prosecutors first leveled in 2011.He struck agreements with Wall Street firms to stop the practice of sharing research analysts’ views before publication, and with Thomson Reuters to stop selling high-frequency traders a first peek at market-moving information.But perhaps his most prominent assignments were the mortgage securities cases against the big banks, which were accused of abusive practices in the years leading up to the financial crisis. Bank of America ultimately settled for $16.65 billion, some $800 million of that specifically for New York. JPMorgan Chase settled for $13 billion, some $1 billion going to New York, and Citigroup paid $7 billion, including $182 million to New York.A version of this article appears in print on January 29, 2016, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Wall Street Enforcer Is Leaving Government .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.