AdvertisementSupported byBy Ravi SomaiyaThe Politico co-founder and chief executive, Jim VandeHei, and one of its best-known journalists, Mike Allen, plan to leave the publication after the November presidential election, its owner Robert Allbritton said in a memo to the staff on Thursday. Three other senior executives also plan to leave.Mr. VandeHei and Mr. Allen will depart after the November presidential election, the memo said. Mr. Allbritton said that he would become chief executive. John Harris, who founded Politico with Mr. VandeHei, will remain as publisher and editor in chief. Susan Glasser, Politico’s editor, will continue to run the Washington newsroom through the end of the year, before becoming director of innovation. Mr. VandeHei, Mr. Allen and Politico did not respond to requests for comment. But three people with knowledge of Politico’s operations described tensions in recent weeks, in part over management strategies. In his own memo, Mr. VandeHei said he was leaving to start a new venture. A person briefed on the matter, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, said Mr. VandeHei would start that venture with Mr. Allen and Roy Schwartz, the chief revenue officer who is credited with helping to build Politico’s innovative business model. It will not be a competitor to Politico, the person said. Mr. Schwartz will also leave after the election. The chief operating officer, Kim Kingsley, and the executive vice president for expansion, Danielle Jones, will leave sooner. In his note to the staff, Mr. Allbritton said that the transitions “make perfect sense for the publication” and described them as “fundamentally good news: an opportunity for more growth, for more people to take on great jobs. It is an occasion to show the world what has been true for a long time, which is that Politico is here for the long haul, powered by a team that is much bigger than any of us who happened to be here at the beginning.” The news of the departures shook the Washington political journalism establishment. In a fast-moving media landscape, Politico, which was founded as a website in 2007 with a few employees, has grown to become something of a fixture, with nearly 500. Mr. Allen’s morning newsletter, Politico Playbook, serves as a kind of agenda for those in politics and the news media, not to mention a diary of the comings and goings of those who make up the city’s power base. Mr. VandeHei started the site with Mr. Harris after leaving The Washington Post. The two had first suggested the idea to The Post, but decided to strike out on their own. Between them, they amped up the pace of political coverage in Washington: No scoop was too small, or too fast. In recent years, it expanded aggressively, under a business model that combined “pro” subscriptions for insiders willing to pay handsomely for highly detailed political news, and new consumer strands including a magazine that focuses on deeper and more expansive stories. It started a European operation, a joint venture with the German media company Axel Springer, and announced plans to expand into statehouses across America, the front line for many national political issues. As chief executive, Mr. VandeHei spearheaded those moves, and he has been an evangelist for the site and its business model. “Think about what you have done — and are doing,” he said in his memo to the staff. “You created a global brand, showed a profitable way to fund real journalism, changed forever the Washington media landscape, pioneered a new voice and speed for stories, inspired imitation and built a unique culture and high-achieving staff others admire and covet.” Mr. Allen, a bespectacled figure known for his boundless energy, his connections and the scoops that the combination of the two produced, is formally the publication’s White House correspondent. But he has grown to become a kind of public face for Politico, appearing often on political talk shows and at events put on by the publication. Jim Rutenberg contributed reporting.Advertisement