AdvertisementSupported byBy Jack EwingFRANKFURT — Volkswagen may buy back some diesel cars in the United States if it cannot make them compliant with air quality rules fast enough, a lawyer for the company says.The statement, made during a court hearing by Robert Giuffra, a lawyer defending Volkswagen against class-action suits by owners of tainted diesel vehicles, was the clearest indication yet that the company, which is based in Wolfsburg, Germany, may not have the technology to bring emissions for some of the cars into line with regulations without hurting performance and fuel economy.Mr. Giuffra spoke during a hearing in United States District Court in San Francisco last week, although his remarks did not attract wide attention at the time. Volkswagen officials have indicated that the company might buy back some cars in the United States. Mr. Giuffra’s comments suggested that option has become more likely.Volkswagen could probably find a solution eventually, Mr. Giuffra said. He added, “The question though is one of timing.“And for some of the vehicles it may well be that the timing is too far into the future,” he said, according to a transcript of the hearing. “So we might have to do a buyback or some sort of a solution like that for some subset of the vehicles, but that hasn’t been determined yet.”Volkswagen admitted that 11 million of its vehicles were equipped with software that was used to cheat on emissions tests. This is how the technology works and what it now means for vehicle owners.Volkswagen faces hundreds of lawsuits from diesel owners and independent dealers who say they are stuck with cars that have fallen in value after the company admitted rigging them to cheat on emissions tests. The number of affected vehicles was put at 575,000 during the San Francisco hearing.From September, when the Environmental Protection Agency first accused Volkswagen of emissions cheating, to the end of December, prices for VW diesels have dropped nearly 16 percent, according to data compiled by Kelley Blue Book. Some owners report steeper declines.Volkswagen has not found a way to reduce emissions that satisfies federal and California regulators. In any case, the company would still face legal claims from owners if the cars’ performance suffered and the vehicles lost resale value as a result. It may be simpler just to buy cars back, or offer owners generous trade-ins on new Volkswagen vehicles.“We have no comment other than to say that Volkswagen continues to work cooperatively with E.P.A. and CARB to resolve these issues as quickly as possible with approved remedies for the affected vehicles,” the company said, referring to California’s Air Resources Board.In Europe, where most of the 11 million vehicles are, Volkswagen is planning to update the engine software and in some cases add a part intended to reduce emissions by improving air flow into the engine.But that solution will not work in the United States because of stricter limits on nitrogen oxide, a pollutant linked to lung ailments and smog. It is particularly difficult for Volkswagen to fix older vehicles equipped with less effective emissions equipment than was installed on newer cars.About 320,000 of the Volkswagen diesel cars sold in the United States are equipped with the first generation of the motor, known as the EA 189, that is at the heart of the scandal. Those motors, which began appearing in the United States in the 2009 model year, have a device known as a nitrogen oxide trap that is considered less effective. Those cars are probably the most likely candidates for buybacks.Larger diesel vehicles such as the Touareg sport utility vehicle and Audi Q7, as well as Passat sedans since 2012, have a system that uses the chemical urea to neutralize nitrogen oxide. That kind of emission control is considered more effective and has little or no effect on fuel economy.The nitrogen oxide traps, by contrast, hurt fuel mileage and acceleration when the traps are fully deployed. That may be the reason Volkswagen programmed the cars to reduce emissions controls except when engine software detected that the car was undergoing tests.The Golf, Jetta and Beetle did not get the urea chemical systems until 2015.Volkswagen faces many class-action lawsuits from owners and some used-car dealers. The hearing in San Francisco on Jan. 21 was so crowded that lawyers spilled out of the courtroom into the corridor.After the session, Judge Charles R. Breyer of United States District Court appointed a steering committee of 21 lawyers representing VW owners and dealers to try to negotiate a settlement with the company. The negotiations will be overseen by Robert S. Mueller III, a former director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, who was appointed settlement master in the case. Elizabeth J. Cabraser, a veteran San Francisco lawyer who specializes in consumer fraud cases, will be lead lawyer for the plaintiffs.Judge Breyer said during the hearing that the civil cases were not a “whodunit” focused on who at Volkswagen was responsible for the cheating.“It is more of a case of how do we fix what was done,” he said. “If it can’t be fixed, then what is fair and just compensation for the people who have been damaged by this matter?”Mr. Giuffra of the law firm Sullivan & Cromwell said that the solution “needs to be a sustainable fix, and a fix that actually works, because we don’t want to do something that we think is a fix and doesn’t turn out to be a fix.”Advertisement