AdvertisementSupported byCommon SenseBy James B. StewartIn the 30 years since I chronicled the 1980s insider trading scandals in the book “Den of Thieves,” I’ve never seen the insider trading law in a greater state of confusion.A little over a year ago, a controversial ruling by United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit cleared two hedge fund managers who had traded on advance tips about company earnings. The ruling has thrown many insider trading prosecutions into disarray, and dealt a serious blow to the crackdown on insider trading by Preet Bharara, the United States attorney in Manhattan. Judges have dismissed insider trading charges against six people and vacated a dozen convictions from his office alone. Other investigations have languished or been closed. The few remaining cases are on appeal or under a cloud.“There’s been a huge amount of fallout from the Second Circuit’s decision, and none of it good,” said Thomas Lee Hazen, a professor at the University of North Carolina’s law school who has written widely about securities law.Consider the case of the former investment banker Sean Stewart and his father, Robert (no relation to my branch of the Stewart clan). Last year, federal prosecutors charged that Sean Stewart leaked information to his father on impending mergers gleaned from his work at JPMorgan Chase and Perella Weinberg Partners. He and a golfing buddy traded on the information, earning over $1 million in profits. And when the elder Mr. Stewart didn’t trade on one of his tips, his son chastised him: “I can’t believe I handed you this on a silver platter and you didn’t invest in it,” he said in one conversation recorded by a cooperating witness.A textbook example of insider trading, the Stewart case would once have seemed open-and-shut. And the father did plead guilty to insider trading last summer. But Sean Stewart’s lawyers have moved to dismiss the case, citing an “endemic problem” with insider trading law in the wake of recent appellate court rulings.Federal prosecutors and securities regulators worry that hedge funds and other traders have seized on the confusion by trading on tips and confidential information that would once have been forbidden. I spoke to several government lawyers and hedge fund officials, and while none said they knew of any illegal activity (or would agree to be quoted by name on such a thorny subject), they feared that the law now gave the dark underbelly of Wall Street legal cover.Now, the Supreme Court may come to the rescue. Last week, it agreed to hear another insider trading case, from California, involving tips to family members. The authorities are hopeful that this could be an opportunity to restore at least some degree of clarity to the law. The court “might well view it as an opportunity to make a decision that will be a road map for the future,” Professor Hazen said.Just about everyone I discussed the topic with this week agreed that some kind of road map is urgently needed. Prominent insider trading convictions, outsize Wall Street profits and the recent market volatility have shaken many Americans’ faith in the integrity of the financial markets.As I have written before, the root of the problem is that insider trading is a crime defined not by statute but by an accumulation of cases and judicial precedents that date from the 1960s. It has been open to interpretation by an ever-changing cast of prosecutors, regulators and judges on various federal courts, not all of which agree on what the law should be. Congress could — and should — pass a law defining and outlawing insider trading. But numerous efforts have failed, and no one expects anything soon given the current partisan divide on Capitol Hill.The Second Circuit upended insider trading prosecutions a little over a year ago when it swept aside the convictions of the two hedge fund managers. The court ruled that the traders weren’t guilty because they didn’t know the original sources of the inside tips and their immediate sources didn’t receive any benefit from passing on the information, unlike, say, the suitcases of cash that the former investment banker Martin Siegel received from Ivan Boesky back in the 1980s.Critics of the Second Circuit’s decision said it reflected a naïve view of how information is now traded on Wall Street, where virtually every favor carries a quid pro quo and hardly anyone is foolish enough to trade confidential information in return for cash.“Wall Street is a big favor bank,” said John C. Coffee Jr., a professor and expert in securities law at Columbia Law School. “There’s a culture of reciprocity.”The Supreme Court declined to review the Second Circuit case, so it remains the law in the trading-heavy jurisdictions of New York and Connecticut. But the court can hardly have failed to recognize the confusion that has ensued, even in what would seem straightforward cases like the one from California that it just agreed to review. In that case, United States vs. Salman, a former investment banker for Citigroup, Maher Kara, leaked confidential information about takeover deals to his brother, Mounir Kara, who in turn passed them to their sister’s fiancé, Bassam Salman.Testimony indicated that the families were close and that Mounir Kara and Mr. Salman, in particular, had become fast friends. When Mr. Salman asked the source of the information, Mounir Kara told him it was his brother Maher.Mr. Salman earned over $1.3 million on the trades, and was subsequently found guilty of insider trading. His conviction was upheld by the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit in California in an opinion written by Jed S. Rakoff, a federal trial court judge in Manhattan who was doing a guest stint on the Ninth Circuit. Judge Rakoff has taken a firm stand against insider trading in several rulings.The United States attorney in Manhattan oversaw a sweeping crackdown on insider trading in the hedge fund industry, but a federal appeals court upended the campaign.Like the Stewart case, Salman seems a particularly brazen example of insider trading — using confidential information to tip off relatives. (Another notorious example involving family members was Samuel Waksal, the former chief executive of ImClone Systems, who told his father and daughter to sell all their ImClone stock after he learned the Food and Drug Administration was about to reject his company’s cancer drug application.)The Second Circuit’s ruling has clouded all such cases. The court said that someone providing a tip must receive a benefit “that is objective, consequential, and represents at least a potential gain of a pecuniary or similarly valuable nature” to be guilty of insider trading. It suggested that familial love or friendship alone isn’t enough.But family members typically offer stock tips not for any immediate financial benefit to themselves, but simply out of the goodness of their hearts, or because they want to inspire feelings of gratitude and affection. Maher Kara testified he “loved his brother very much” and wanted to “fulfill whatever needs he had.”Sean Stewart’s lawyers argued that he gave the tips simply because Robert was his father. “The indictment does not even allege that Stewart provided information in expectation of any benefit,” they said in their motion to dismiss the case.But should the Supreme Court adopt that line of reasoning, and reverse Mr. Salman’s conviction, it might as well toss insider trading law out the window, not to mention several prominent Supreme Court precedents and decades of securities law enforcement. As Judge Rakoff pointed out, all someone privy to confidential market-moving information — corporate executives, investment bankers, lawyers — would have to do is tell a family member and ask for nothing immediate in return, which already seems to be one of the first instincts of many inside traders.For that reason, few think the Supreme Court will reverse Mr. Salman’s conviction, even though two justices — Antonin Scalia and Clarence Thomas — have in previous opinions demonstrated a hostility to the law. But assuming the Supreme Court upholds Mr. Salman’s conviction, it could provide guidelines and more clarity on the personal-benefit requirement, whether it be in cases involving family members or mere business relationships.Professor Hazen said he would like to see a far-reaching opinion that goes beyond cases involving family members or close friends. “I’d hope the court would go even further and say, if someone is giving you a tip or valuable information, then the presumption is they’re getting something in return,” he said. “It may just be a psychic benefit, but that should be enough. You shouldn’t have to prove an immediate tangible benefit.”He added, “The public already thinks the market is rigged. I don’t think the Supreme Court would want to add to that perception.”Advertisement