By PAUL MOZURJAN. 28, 2016
HONG KONG —  Gu Minghui’s sugar-cookie business is enjoying growing sales and continued profits. The big question, for China’s Alibaba Group and the Chinese economy, is whether the country’s appetite will last.Ms. Gu, a 37-year-old in Shanghai, worries that falling demand could hurt her business despite the current good times. “I’m not very confident” on e-commerce, she said. “The economic situation is not good this year, and I don’t expect it to be any better next year.”Economists and investors alike are watching Ms. Gu and the millions of others who sell goods on Alibaba’s Chinese e-commerce platforms for signs of resilience from consumers. That has made Alibaba a proxy for Chinese consumption and the economy — a proxy whose shares have been hurt in recent weeks in the face of growing unease about China.On Thursday, the United States-traded Alibaba offered investors a reason to cheer up. It said its profit doubled and its sales rose by nearly a third in its quarter ended in December in a potentially positive sign for consumer strength in its home country.AdvertisementGross merchandise volume, a closely followed measure of the total transactions on the company’s websites, rose 23 percent from the same period a year earlier, to $149 billion.Advertisement“The Chinese economy is going through a structural shift to more moderate, but more sustainable, growth,” Joe Tsai, Alibaba’s executive vice chairman, said in a conference call. He added, “it’s still one of the fastest-growing economies in the world and we have no reason to think anything different in the future.”Citing the fact that retail sales in China grew more than 10 percent in 2015, and that Alibaba is taking business from traditional bricks-and-mortar shops, Mr. Tsai said he thought Alibaba was insulated from the deceleration of the Chinese economy.Nevertheless, shares of Alibaba fell in the United States on Thursday after opening higher.China’s emerging buying class has grown in importance as the country’s previous growth engines, like heavy manufacturing and exports slow, hurting global markets. Investors are using Alibaba’s shares to make bets on the country’s prospects.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Beijing is hoping that consumer spending on sites like Alibaba’s will counterbalance the slowdown in other parts of the economy. Many investors doubt that will happen. They argue that market volatility, along with China’s slowing economy, will eventually leak into consumer sentiment and hit companies like Alibaba and another United States-traded rival, the search provider Baidu. Investors this year have punished Alibaba, pushing its shares down about 16 percent.“If you’re sitting in Boston or New York and you want to trade China, the most liquid proxies are Alibaba and Baidu,” said Chi Tsang, an analyst at HSBC.Alibaba on Thursday said it made continued progress in tapping the growing numbers of Chinese who use their smartphones to buy goods and services online. The company’s sales on smartphones almost tripled from the same period last year, and its monthly active smartphone users rose to 393 million, a jump of 47 million from the previous quarter.In 2015, Alibaba captured about 35 percent of the $15.8 billion mobile ad market compared with just 29.2 percent in 2014, according to the research firm eMarketer.If the company wanted to, it could also do more to extract money from vendors like Ms. Gu. With the power to drive traffic, Alibaba is mostly in the business of selling ads and spots that get Internet traffic to vendors.Still, the company has been spending big to bolster growth in new sectors, including an expensive dive into online-to-offline services, which allow customers to use their smartphones to order a variety of goods and services, including meals and massages.A version of this article appears in print on January 29, 2016, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Strong Sales at Alibaba Bode Well for China.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.