AdvertisementSupported byBook EntryBy Jonathan A. KneeAdam Grant is a serious social scientist, master storyteller and infectious optimist.In his best-selling first book, “Give and Take,” Mr. Grant made a convincing case that giving unconditionally in the workplace is in one’s professional self-interest. “Givers,” according to Mr. Grant – as distinguished from “takers” or even “matchers” – “dominate the top of the success ladder.”He points out, however, that “givers” are also overrepresented at the bottom of the success ladder. His book is both a clarion call for greater selfless professional generosity and a how-to guide for becoming the more rather than less successful breed of giver.Mr. Grant’s new book, “Originals: How Non-Conformists Move the World” (Viking: 2015), follows an identical story arc. The counterintuitive insight at the core of “Originals” is not just that conventional forms of achievement are less socially useful. It is that the alternative, originality, can and should be taught and nurtured. “This book is about how we can all become more original.”The book’s primary preoccupation is to provide practical tools to “unleash” the hidden creativity in all of us. These relate not just to our own self-improvement, but to how we can “build cultures of originality” both at home and at work.Like “Give and Take,” “Originals” is filled with fresh insights on a broad array of topics that are important to our personal and professional lives. Mr. Grant has an uncanny ability to infuse a familiar topic with deeper meaning and leave the reader feeling hopeful and a little exhilarated.When Mr. Grant turned the discussion of how procrastination actually encourages originality into an Op-Ed article in The New York Times a few weeks ago, it quickly attracted 159 enthusiastic responses.Although “Originals” matches “Give and Take” in scholarly foundation, practical applicability and general delightfulness, its overarching conceit is less convincing. Broad psychological theories based on a handful of categories can be hugely valuable despite their inherent oversimplifications. The teeming social ecosystem of “givers” and “takers” described by Mr. Grant in “Give and Take” is redeemed by the introduction of a third category – “matchers” – whose role in protecting givers and punishing takers is central. The nuance this category provides to the allegory both supports its credibility and promotes Mr. Grant’s mission of encouraging more people to become givers.By contrast, the simple conformist/nonconformist dichotomy at the heart of “Originals” is not similarly balanced. The result is that although I finished “Give and Take” excited about being more giving, after “Originals,” I was not so sure that the world would be better off with more nonconformity. My nagging uncertainty stems from two aspects of Mr. Grant’s narrative.First, in an extended discussion of the research on the impact of birth order, Mr. Grant details the tendency of later-born children to be more original by distinguishing themselves from more obedient firstborns. Such children grow up to be much more likely to successfully steal bases (if they play professional baseball) or become great comedians. On the other hand, Mr. Grant mentions almost in passing, although later-born children tend to champion scientific upheavals, firstborns are way more likely to win Nobel Prizes — or become chief executives, for that matter. The review of this literature left me wondering what the optimal mix of conformists and nonconformists is in society rather than committed to a campaign of increasing originality at all costs.Second, everyone has both rebellious and deferential tendencies in different measure and in different contexts. Mr. Grant effectively debunks the myth that entrepreneurs and originals of all types are inherently less risk-averse. The distinguishing feature of the “originals” highlighted is their effectiveness in “balancing” their “risk portfolios.” That is, choosing wisely when to conform precisely so that they have the psychological freedom to rebel aggressively elsewhere. Again, however, this left me feeling that the most important question was how we choose which parts of our lives to be original in, not whether to be an “original” as such.These quibbles do not detract from how consistently thought-provoking and enjoyable “Originals” manages to be. Mr. Grant has carved out a narrow niche among contemporary public intellectuals – one equally committed to undertaking scholarly research as to translating how it can be used to make the world a better place. Along the way in “Originals,” Mr. Grant reveals that he is a “card-carrying firstborn.” Regardless of whether one agrees that originality is good in itself, there is no more compelling evidence of Mr. Grant’s contention that originality can be cultivated successfully regardless of the circumstances of birth.Jonathan A. Knee is professor of professional practice at Columbia Business School and a senior adviser at Evercore Partners.Advertisement