AdvertisementSupported byAnother ViewBy Jeff GrammJeff Gramm is the author of the forthcoming book “Dear Chairman: Boardroom Battles and the Rise of Shareholder Activism” (HarperBusiness). He is a hedge fund manager who teaches value investing at Columbia Business School.Last week in Davos, Switzerland, a group of giant pension funds unveiled a new stock index, the Standard & Poor’s Long-Term Value Creation Global Index.In the image of the World Economic Forum whence it came, the index aspires to collect the best-run global companies, by evaluating their governance, financial quality and sustainability initiatives. Most Standard & Poor’s indexes are defined by mere region and asset class. What is the purpose of a stock index composed of supposed global elites?“We are trying to use the index to change corporate behavior,” said Mark Wiseman of the Canada Pension Plan Investment Board, a member of the group that established the index.So how will the Standard & Poor’s Long-Term Value Creation Global Index work? Its marketing materials point out that despite the qualitative nature of the criteria — long-term strategy, innovation, sustainability — do not worry, “expert judgment is limited.” Instead of experts using their brains, the “index” will rely on a messy stew of checklists and quantitative models. The “quality score,” for instance, seeks to tell us how good a business is based on a formula with three inputs: return on equity, financial leverage and a rudimentary balance sheet metric. This is, of course, madness.Here we have an opaque, quantitative investment strategy masquerading as an S.&P. index based on qualitative factors. And what are the largest holdings of this “index” of long-term value creators? What are the elite companies that Mr. Wiseman hopes will be the envy of their peers? Perhaps visionaries like Google, Amazon or Berkshire Hathaway? Nope. The top 10 holdings include two cigarette makers, McDonald’s, and, why not, McGraw Hill Financial, which happens to own Standard & Poor’s.What’s especially frustrating about this ill-advised plan is that the Canada Pension Plan Investment Board and its cohorts should know better. Public pension plans have learned a lot of tough lessons about the cost of bad public company governance. For much of the 1970s and 1980s, passive institutional investors struggled with their responsibilities as large public company shareholders. After they were exploited for years by both corporate raiders and entrenched management teams, General Motors’ 1986 buyout of Ross Perot’s stake in the automaker drove them over the edge. The head of the State of Wisconsin Investment Board proclaimed, “If shareholders continue to be passive, they will continue to be shorn like sheep.”By the end of the 1980s, many large institutional investors were doing their homework. They ran proxy fights, submitted scores of shareholder resolutions and formed opinions on sophisticated corporate governance issues. This paved the way for the kind of shareholder activism that dominates markets today. The current explosion in hedge fund shareholder activism, which has pressured corporations like Microsoft, Apple, DuPont and General Electric, has been fed by the (often tacit) support of large institutional investors behind the scenes.And now, rather than directly challenging offenders as a shareholder activist might, the pension funds want to ride the growing wave of indexation to create an exclusive collection of best-in-class companies. They hope to lure retail investors into this “index,” which they believe can provide excellent investment returns while encouraging corporate management teams to focus on long-term value creation. The problem is, you can’t identify great, long-term oriented companies with quantitative models and checklists.The proxy adviser Institutional Shareholder Services provides a cautionary tale about relying on checklists to evaluate corporate boards. Robert A.G. Monks and Nell Minow, two renowned scholars of corporate governance, founded I.S.S. in 1985 with the best intentions. Mr. Monks and Ms. Minow used their own expert judgment to advise public company shareholders on how to vote their proxies. Since they sold the business in 1992, it has changed hands several times and grown rapidly. Regulations that require investment firms to have robust proxy voting policies have had the peculiar effect of pushing more of them to outsource the responsibility to I.S.S.As the proxy adviser’s growth forced it to resort to standardized, checklist-style evaluations, some of its recommendations became shockingly imprudent. In 2004, I.S.S. advised Coca-Cola shareholders to withhold votes from Warren E. Buffett because of conflicts of interest related to his ownership of Dairy Queen. Apparently, there was no question on I.S.S.’s checklist that asked, “Is the candidate the greatest capital allocator to ever live?”Mr. Wiseman, the Canadian pension board and their pension fund partners should know that wise, long-term corporate governance requires the kind of sound business judgment you cannot evaluate by employing a hundred-page checklist. Markets will only reward companies that govern themselves for the long term when large institutional owners use their expert judgment to vote bad boards out of office.Advertisement