By KEITH BRADSHERJAN. 28, 2016
As Japan’s economic doldrums have lingered, its leaders have tried a number of tricks over the years, from increasing government spending to flooding the financial system with cash.With the global economy looking increasingly fragile, Japan is now taking a more aggressive step by cutting interest rates below zero on Friday.The policy — which means banks are essentially paying for the privilege of parking their money — represents a last resort for a country that has struggled through a quarter-century of weak growth. In theory, negative rates will push banks to lend more to companies, which would then spend and hire.The Bank of Japan is following other central banks in going negative on rates, a sign of the continuing global trouble from plummeting low oil prices, stalling international trade and slowing growth in China. Japan’s prime minister, Shinzo Abe, is seeking new ways to break the country’s cycle of decline.The Bank of Japan's governor, Haruhiko Kuroda, said the negative interest rate was in response to global economic instability.Mr. Abe has championed a system of temporary tax cuts and heavy government spending to spur growth and stoke inflation. But Japan, the world’s third-largest economy, has moved in and out of recession under his administration, sowing doubts about his policies.AdvertisementThe bank’s policy makers, who voted 5-4 to approve the measure, took great pains to say the rate cut was based on global conditions, not the Japanese economy itself. The decision surprised financial markets, which moved higher in Asia trading.Advertisement“Japan’s economy has continued to recover moderately,” the bank said in a news release. “Recently, however, global financial markets have been volatile against the backdrop of the further decline in crude oil prices.”Global difficulties might hurt the business confidence of Japanese companies and encourage deflation, the bank added, and the measures announced on Friday would “pre-empt the manifestation of this risk.” In a statement explaining the move, the Bank of Japan even said that it might cut the interest rate further if necessary.The Japanese central bank was also uncommonly blunt in mentioning the economy of another country, China, as one of the factors that could damage Japan’s economy.“We saw risks from China’s and other emerging countries’ economies as well as the oil price decline,” the central bank’s governor, Haruhiko Kuroda, said in a news conference Friday evening. “Since the beginning of the year, the financial market has been reflecting such an unstable situation.”“What is most important is that there is a growing possibility of its making negative impacts on Japanese enterprises and people’s mind-set to get away from deflation,” he added. “For those concerns, we will respond without any hesitation.”Moving to negative rates reflects a measure of desperation on the part of central banks. Their traditional tools have been largely exhausted, as most countries’ interest rates have been pushed to almost nothing.With weak prospects for economic growth in many countries, businesses are reluctant to borrow for practically any new projects. And if deflation becomes a problem, with prices falling for a wide range of goods, then repaying even a loan at an interest rate near zero could become difficult.AdvertisementThree other countries, Denmark, Sweden and Switzerland, already have negative interest rates. Deposits held by the European Central Bank have a negative rate: minus 0.3 percent.Japan’s new negative interest rate, minus 0.1 percent, will take effect on Feb. 16. It will be assessed only on balances that commercial banks deposit at the central bank in excess of regulatory minimums.The move buoyed markets in the region on Friday. The Nikkei 225 index of shares in Tokyo ended the day with a gain of 2.8 percent. After months of losses, the Shanghai market rebounded by 3.1 percent.Despite the drastic move on Friday, the Bank of Japan could have gone even further, said Thomas Lam, the chief economist for industrialized countries at RHB Securities Singapore.The central bank could have opted to expand its already considerable purchases of bonds, in a bid to drive near-zero interest rates in debt markets even lower. Not going that route could indicate a hope on the part of some Japanese central bankers that Mr. Abe’s government will also adopt fiscal measures to help the economy.“This should at least be nudging the Abe administration toward more aggressive measures and positive fiscal initiatives,” Mr. Lam said.And in a global marketplace, Japan’s decision could have ripple effects, further clouding the outlook for the world economy.The move to negative rates, for example, weakens the yen. That, in turn, creates a potential problem for China as Beijing struggles to contain outflows of money and prop up its own currency.AdvertisementThe People’s Bank of China, the country’s central bank, said last month that it was shifting away from pegging the value of its currency, the renminbi, closely to the dollar. Instead, it preferred to link the renminbi to a basket of currencies, with the yen playing one of the largest roles after the dollar. If it ends up doing so, it could result in a weaker renminbi, as the yen falls.A parade of Chinese officials has reassured financial markets in recent days that Beijing will not tolerate any further depreciation of the currency. Beijing’s leaders, in part, are trying to stem a wave of outflows; Chinese companies and individuals have been sending large sums of money out of the country, fearing a repeat of the 4 percent devaluation of the renminbi last August.But the pressure is swelling. By Friday evening, the yen was trading at 120.91 to the dollar, off 1.76 percent.Hisako Ueno contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on January 30, 2016, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Bank of Japan Surprises by Adopting a Negative Rate.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.