
Corner Office By                     
 ADAM BRYANT
 
JAN. 29, 2016
This interview with Liz Pearce, C.E.O. of LiquidPlanner, a project management software firm, was conducted and condensed by Adam Bryant.Q. What were you like as a child?A. My mom says I was pretty strong-willed and strong-minded as a toddler. She would try to get me dressed in the morning, and I would say, “I’m only wearing dresses.” So she would go out and buy me all kinds of dresses, and then I would say, “I’m only wearing pants.”The nursery school teacher also said I had strong leadership skills, which I think was her way of saying I was really bossy. I’m the oldest of three girls, and I was not the kindest sister in my younger years, although I’ve turned things around now as an adult, and my sisters have forgiven me for all my sins of the past.I was also geeky and a bit nerdy as a kid. My mother is a devout Catholic, and I grew up going to church every Sunday, and went to Catholic elementary school. There was a time where I thought that I had to become a nun. I was relieved when I learned that was not the case.AdvertisementHow do you think your parents have influenced your leadership style?One thing that was a steady current through my childhood was that my mother was politically conservative and, for a while, socially conservative. And my dad was very liberal. They were the two ends of the political spectrum.I remember sitting at the dinner table, and it was like watching a tennis match. They would debate back and forth. And it made me naturally inclined to look at everything from both sides, to understand the different angles.It’s made me a bit more apolitical as an adult because I really want to understand the issues before I form an opinion, and it’s so hard to get enough information to really understand the issues. But it has also really impacted the way I look at problems in business. I have all of these sources of data about the company, and I look at them a lot. It’s almost like channel surfing for me. And I just remember the numbers. It freaks our employees out a bit.And tell me about your college years.I was way more interested in my jobs than I was in my coursework. I was a graphic designer in the student services organization, and I thought, “These are my people.” I could combine my love of art with technology, and I was learning computer programs. I got a lot of exposure to leaders in the university through that work.Then after graduation in 2003, I learned about a job at Google as a marketing coordinator. I was there for only nine months, but they were like dog years. The company was exploding. I was working 17-hour days. I was running 200 projects at a time. I would break my day down into 15-minute increments and ask, “What is the most important thing to do in these 15 minutes?”AdvertisementAfter a brief stint at Amazon, I started consulting, and that’s what led to working for LiquidPlanner, and I eventually joined them as director of marketing in 2008. Four years later, I became C.E.O. When the board approved my new role, it just hit me like a ton of bricks that this is really happening.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.What do you like about being C.E.O.?I like to put all the pieces together. It’s like a Rubik’s Cube. When you’re running a start-up, you have this finite set of resources, and you have this huge goal. So you look at all the angles, and twist things this way and that as you’re thinking, “What if we did it this way?”And every new employee who comes in is like Christmas morning. What are they going to bring to the table? What do they know that can help us? How can we help them?The job has a lot of pressure, too. The perfectionist student in me wants to hit every single number every single month. And that’s been a big part of my evolution as a leader — to be O.K. if we don’t execute perfectly every month, and to keep people focused on tomorrow and moving the business forward.Any surprises in the role?I’ve had light-bulb moments when I realized I have to be really thoughtful about what I ask for and how I ask for it, because people are watching and listening closely, and caring in a way that they didn’t when I didn’t have this title. That’s always been a little bit uncomfortable for me. I don’t have this grand image of myself. I’m just like everybody else.How do you hire?With some people, I’ll ask questions like, “When nobody is watching you, outside of work, what do you do to be great that is only for you and that no one else will ever see?” I’m just looking for that internal drive.I’ll also ask people to tell me about times when they have been on a path to failure, and what their mental dialogue was to reset that. Because I want to understand their psychology a little bit. How do you give yourself a pep talk? What do you say to yourself? What are the games you play in your head to right things? Because you will encounter those moments when a task just seems insurmountable.I also really want to understand people’s intentions, and why they do the things they do. For example, I’ll ask about the thought process behind taking different jobs they’ve had.What career advice do you give to new college grads?I give them my mom’s advice: Don’t worry about the money, don’t worry about the title, don’t worry about the company. Just take the job where you can learn the most.And if people are early in their career and they desperately want to change, I coach them to not change everything all at once. Change one dimension, or maybe two — like the industry or the size of the company — but give yourself some advantage going into the next job that will set you up for reaching your goal.Each week, Adam Bryant talks with top executives about leadership. Follow him on Twitter: @nytcorneroffice. This interview has been edited for space and clarity.A version of this article appears in print on January 31, 2016, on Page BU2 of the New York edition with the headline: Solving the Rubik’s Cube of Leadership.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »