AdvertisementSupported byDealBookBy Andrew Ross SorkinWilliam A. Ackman, the activist investor, has described his billion-dollar bet and continuing crusade against the nutritional supplements company Herbalife as a “moral obligation.” In at least one presentation, he nearly cried onstage and said that if his Herbalife trade was successful, he would give the profits to charity because he would consider them “blood money.”Over the years, Mr. Ackman has made the case that his investments are guided by a strict moral code. He says he believes that Herbalife is a pyramid scheme targeting low-income people, and has resolved to bring it down because people hurt by the company “are not in a position to defend themselves.” He has also said he won’t invest in Coca-Cola because, “I think it’s bad for children and bad for people.”And yet Mr. Ackman has spent the last several weeks defending his investment in Valeant, a pharmaceutical company whose financial practices have come under scrutiny and that is under federal investigation for its drug pricing and distribution practices. In two cases, Valeant acquired two old heart drugs and increased their prices, one by more than 500 percent and the other by more than 200 percent.“The biggest regret I have with Valeant is that we’re not in a position to buy more,” Mr. Ackman told his investors in a call on Monday. In a letter to Valeant’s chief executive, J. Michael Pearson, he said, “You are one of the most shareholder-oriented C.E.O.s I know. You have assured me that you and the rest of the board are considering any and all alternatives that would benefit shareholders and other stakeholders. That is very comforting to us.”What?How can Mr. Ackman find comfort in Valeant’s management — which has expanded its business by buying rival companies, slashing their research and development arms and then raising drug prices — while at the same time calling Herbalife’s chief executive “a predator” running a “criminal enterprise”?When I reached Mr. Ackman on Monday, he told me, “The premise of your entire article is false.” He said it made no sense to compare Herbalife to Valeant. More on that in a moment.This column is not meant to judge Herbalife or Valeant as investments. Nor is it a judgment on the tactics of Mr. Ackman and other investors who made big bets against stocks — selling them short, in Wall Street parlance — and then publicizing those bets. (Herbalife has fought back against Mr. Ackman, not only denying his accusations but asking the government to investigate his hedge fund, Pershing Square Capital Management, for market manipulation.)Instead, it is worth taking note of the confounding, and at times contradictory views of Mr. Ackman, one of the market’s most influential investors, whose fund was up more than 40 percent last year. Mr. Ackman’s moves are closely followed by fellow activists and mutual funds, notwithstanding missteps like his investment in J. C. Penney and now Valeant. (This year, after a steep fall in Valeant’s share price, his fund has dropped nearly 20 percent.)Forbes magazine compared him to Warren E. Buffett, putting him on its cover with the headline “Baby Buffett.” It is a comparison, of course, that Mr. Ackman welcomes and sometimes makes himself. “The structure of Pershing Square historically is one that is used by many hedge funds, but it’s really much more similar to Berkshire Hathaway in terms of approach,” Mr. Ackman has written.More recently, he likened Valeant’s acquisitive business model to Berkshire’s, a comparison that drew the ire of Mr. Buffett’s partner, Charlie Munger. Mr. Munger told Bloomberg News that Valeant was engaged in “price-gouging” and was “deeply immoral.”Mr. Ackman is no charlatan; he genuinely believes what he says. But he also seems to be able to compartmentalize his views and rationalize his investment philosophy in contradictory ways. His declaration that he will never own Coca-Cola because its products are unhealthy is tough to square with his ownership of a position in Burger King.Wall Street is fascinated by Mr. Ackman because he makes big, bold bets and is never shy about talking about them. He is seemingly interested only in home runs, which means he’s also likely to strike out with some frequency.He is also willing to push the boundaries of traditional investment conventions: Last year, he teamed up with Valeant to try to buy Allergan, and had acquired more than $1 billion of its shares in advance of the takeover offer. The moves caused some people, including this columnist, to question whether the law should allow such a maneuver.Andrew Left, the analyst at Citron Research, first raised flags about Valeant, and has also noted the difficulty in squaring Mr. Ackman’s short position in Herbalife and his big investment in Allergan.“If Mr. Ackman feels so much moral indignation about a company selling health shakes to people and takes such umbrage at their sales channel that he launches a full-on jihad against them,” said Mr. Left, “how can he stand by a company that charges $300,000 a year to cure Wilson’s disease?”On Monday, Mr. Ackman said he wasn’t defending Valeant on moral grounds. “If it turns out Pearson has been found to have committed a crime, he’ll be out,” he said. But, Mr. Ackman added, “He shouldn’t be convicted unless he’s proven guilty.”He went on to say, “Valeant makes products that save and improve lives and no one has questioned the efficacy of its products.” (He added that Herbalife’s model, on the other hand, is based on a questionable business opportunity for the prospective sellers and the dubious efficacy of its products.)Mr. Ackman said he believed that Valeant’s business model and management had been badly mischaracterized by the media. He believes that Valeant’s strategy of cutting research and development budgets has been wildly overstated, suggesting the company only eliminates wasteful research and development. Still, he acknowledged, “I’m not a supporter or defender of buying drugs and marking them up” and noted that Valeant had pledged to stop the practice.As for not investing in Coke but owning Burger King, he compared Burger King to a supermarket. “I wouldn’t be against owning a supermarket and they sell Coke,” he said, drawing a distinction between soda, which he believes has no redeemable value, and a business that sells many products and allows consumers to make their own choice.In a call with clients on Monday, Mr. Ackman said he recognized that given his high profile and his disappointing Valeant investments, he was in the cross hairs: “We’re prepared to accept a fair degree of snide comments in the press.”Advertisement