AdvertisementSupported byGlobal ManagerBy Sonia Kolesnikov-JessopChristine Edwards  is founder and managing director of The Honeycombers, a Singapore-based online lifestyle publication.Q. You started your online publication in 2009. How did you get into that business?A. I came to Singapore from Australia as trailing spouse. I had worked in food marketing, but when I came here, I found it hard to get a similar job for the kind of salary I was expecting. I ended up getting a job as a general manager with a publishing company for their custom publishing business.Looking back, it was a great opportunity, because I learned a lot about publishing and launching a magazine — from how to price a rate card to managing editorial and sales. But at the time, I didn’t really enjoy it. I had to manage a team of 10 local staff and I didn’t have any experience about the Singaporean way of doing things. I lasted six months and my husband begged me to resign. I had some friends who had approached me to help them monetize their business, which was setting up very nice websites, and that was my first entry point into online publishing.Q. What is the “Singaporean way of doing business,” as you put it?A. In Australia, if there is a problem, you will go to your boss. Here, no one will tell you there is a problem until it’s beyond the problem and they’re resigning because they’re too stressed out. I think it has a lot to do with the millennium generation. They often live with their parents, so they don’t have the financial pressures and they work to have a good time. Work has to be fun or they won’t do it. That’s compounded with employment laws that make it much easier for people to find jobs, which is great for Singaporeans, but also creates a rather carefree culture. If this job doesn’t work, I’ll find another. So as a manager it’s important to realize that to retain staff it’s not about financial rewards but about fun projects, career progression, something they will be proud to do.Q. When you set up Honeycombers, did you have a grand plan, or was it more organic?A. The idea from the outset was that we were always going to get money out of advertorial content — brand-funded content as opposed to banner ads. Most normal blogs produce content and expect to make money out of the banner space, or at least that was typical back then. No one was focused on content marketing.To start, I built an email list of maybe 5,000 people, friends and friends of friends, and launched the site by blasting an email to that database. As soon as I started sending emails out, I had people approach me, because we had a unique design and style and tone of voice, and they wanted us to write about their products. So I had inbound sales enquiries after six months.I just did a lot of sales work, because my skills are more on the marketing side than editorial. I understood from the outset there was no point of writing content if you can’t monetize it. For the first two or three years I wrote all the articles and my husband edited all. I was working from home, it was really a very small business, and I actually didn’t pay myself any salary for three years, even if I was paying others. So I hate to think what that would be worth [laughs].I hired my first writer in 2011. Now I have a team of about 28 people and the company’s annual revenue is over 1 million Singapore dollars [about $700,000].Q. There are plenty of new websites every day. What do you think made yours successful?A. For the web, timing is everything. A good idea is only as good as your timing. You could be too early or too late, and it’s really hard to know. We launched about the same time as Time Out Singapore. I was lucky because there wasn’t much out there when I launched, and I also launched before content marketing became so prolific. Over the last four years, the consumption of digital media has gone up by 83 percent, while print and magazine has dropped by 20 to 25 percent.I don’t know how you get the right timing. A little bit is luck. And if it doesn’t make sense, it’s almost certainly something worth pursuing: If it makes sense, you’re probably too late!Understanding SEO [search engine optimization] is also massively important. Our traffic doubled this year because we changed our SEO policy, and for us to have this growth rate because we’re just tweaking something is phenomenal.Q. The rules of the game on the Internet are constantly moving. How do you stay on top?A. I’ve hired some smart people. However great your idea is, you’re only as good as the people around you, so who you hire is hugely important, particularly if you don’t have a big budget! The digital world and social media are constantly changing, so you have to constantly adapt. Personally, I think it’s good to focus on one or two things and do them well. Five years ago we were very focused on Facebook. Now we’re very focused on Instagram because we feel that’s where our audience has moved to.Q. What has been the most important skill needed to set up your business?A. It’s not so much about skill set than it is about personal drive, and your will to win. I don’t think you have to be incredibly smart or a great writer. The fact that I’m a marketer helps because it made me see the big picture of how we are helping our readers and how we are helping our advertisers and how we can bring the two together. But I think it’s more about personality than skill set.Advertisement