By REUTERSFEB. 1, 2016
SHANGHAI —  A Chinese court has sentenced 10 employees of the American food supplier OSI Group to prison and fined the company up to 2.4 million renminbi, or $364,875, over claims that it reused returned food products to avoid losses.The verdict is the end of a long-running investigation into OSI after a safety scandal in 2014 involving the fast-food giants it supplied — McDonald’s and Yum Brands, owner of KFC, Pizza Hut and Taco Bell in China.The Shanghai Jiading People’s Court said in a statement on Monday that Yang Liqun, a general manager at OSI China, would be sentenced to three years in prison and deported. It was not clear whether Mr. Yang, who the court said was an Australian citizen, would serve jail time in China. OSI has criticized the handling of its case by the local food regulator, a rare act in China, where foreign firms typically steer clear of any public criticism of the authorities. The company said in a statement that the verdict was “inconsistent with the facts and evidence.”The court statement said Mr. Yang and other workers at OSI’s China units reused products from returned or canceled orders. Nine other people in the case will be given shorter jail terms and will have to pay fines. Jail sentences for four of the nine will be suspended, the court said.The court said the punishments were relatively lenient because the defendants cooperated.China is trying to clean up its reputation for food safety scandals, which range from recycled “gutter oil” and “zombie meat” — smuggled frozen meat years beyond its expiration date — to crops tainted with heavy metals. The scandal dragged down sales at McDonald’s and its rival Yum in China after a Chinese TV report in July 2014 showed workers at a Shanghai unit of OSI supposedly using out-of-date meat and doctoring production dates.A senior executive for OSI in China said last July that the scandal had cost the firm nearly a billion dollars in lost revenue.A version of this article appears in print on February 2, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Jail Terms and Fines for Supplier to McDonald’s and Yum Brands in China .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.