AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben SisarioFor years, the music industry’s lobbying efforts have been hampered by factionalism, as different sides of the business competed to influence lawmakers. Now, with copyright and royalties issues taking center stage in the music world, the organization behind the Grammy Awards wants to unite the industry’s voice in Washington.The organization, the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences, is creating a political action committee, the Grammy Fund for Music Creators, that will raise money from its thousands of members — among them performers, songwriters and producers — and funnel it to congressional candidates deemed sympathetic to their causes.The Grammys’ fund will face no shortage of competition for dollars in Washington, as music organizations like the Recording Industry Association of America and the performing-rights group Ascap have associated political action committees, or PACs, and have been lobbying on behalf of their members for decades. Among its likely opponents are technology companies like Pandora and the powerful National Association of Broadcasters, which for decades has opposed the music world’s efforts to expand radio royalties.The Grammy Fund, which the recording academy plans to establish through a filing on Tuesday with the Federal Election Commission, will have a first-year fund-raising goal of $100,000, according to Daryl P. Friedman, the academy’s top official in Washington. That amount is roughly comparable to those of the PACs for music organizations like the Recording Industry Association, but far less than that of the broadcasters’ group, which last year raised almost $1.2 million, according to the Federal Election Commission.“We won’t be the largest PAC in Washington,” Mr. Friedman said in an interview, “but we will be the loudest.”The primary focus of the Grammy Fund will be advocating for fair compensation for creators of music, Mr. Friedman said — a broad mandate that includes improved royalties from streaming music as well as payments for performers on broadcast radio. In the United States, radio stations pay songwriters but not the performers of songs, an arrangement that has long rankled the music industry.The fund will solicit contributions from its members, with campaigning by star “ambassadors” including Babyface, Nile Rodgers, Anita Baker, Sheila E. and the producers Rodney Jerkins and Jimmy Jam, many of whom have deep associations with the academy; Mr. Rodgers, for example, is on the organization’s board of trustees.The establishment of the Grammy Fund is the latest step in the recording academy’s increasing efforts at lobbying and rallying its members. In 2014, the group started a campaign called Grammys in My District, in which about 100 of its members visited congressmen in their district offices. By its second year, that effort grew to include 1,650 members.In the past, the various music-industry lobbying groups have competed against one another, a situation that sometimes undermined efforts to influence policy, said Hilary Rosen, a former chief executive of the recording industry association who is now a Democratic operative and no longer involved with music.“There were warring factions everywhere,” Ms. Rosen said. “There were constant fights within the business community between the music publishers and the record companies.”Those disagreements remain, but music executives said there was a growing push for unification to oppose the lobbying by broadcasters and technology companies. Among the more pressing issues before the industry are an effort to change the decades-old regulatory agreements that govern Ascap and BMI. The Justice Department has been reviewing those agreements for nearly two years.“The interests of the music community are dwarfed a thousand times over by big technology giants,” said Jonathan Lamy, a spokesman for the recording industry association. “We welcome any opportunity for our community to speak with a stronger voice.”Harvey Mason Jr., a producer and songwriter who has worked with artists that include Whitney Houston and Jennifer Hudson, said that he had frequently invited lawmakers and others to his studio in Los Angeles to show the many rank-and-file jobs — invisible behind the stars — that are at risk in the industry.“We are regular people trying to make a living, playing in bars, in other parts of the country besides New York and L.A.,” said Mr. Mason, who is the co-chairman of the academy’s national advocacy committee.“We represent everybody, not just superstar artists,” Mr. Mason added. “So we are careful in how we disseminate our message, and when we go to D.C. or have events, it is with a variety of people from the bottom to the top.”Advertisement