AdvertisementSupported byDealBookBy Andrew Ross SorkinMost money managers clamor for companies to provide detailed guidance on their next quarter, down to the penny — but not the world’s largest investor.Laurence D. Fink, co-founder and chief executive of BlackRock, which with more than $4.6 trillion in assets under management makes it the world’s largest investor, sent a letter to 500 chief executives late Monday urging them for the first time to stop providing quarterly earnings estimates.“Today’s culture of quarterly earnings hysteria is totally contrary to the long-term approach we need,” Mr. Fink wrote.The proposal, a provocative recommendation from the influential Wall Street executive, is aimed at trying to curb companies’ short-term focus on quarterly results.“To be clear, we do believe companies should still report quarterly results — long-termism should not be a substitute for transparency,” he said. “But C.E.O.s should be more focused in these reports on demonstrating progress against their strategic plans than a one-penny deviation from their E.P.S. targets or analyst consensus estimates.” (E.P.S. stands for earnings per share.) Mr. Fink has made a series of proposals over the last several years to encourage longer-term thinking by companies, including a plan to change the tax code and the treatment of capital gains. But his latest proposition goes further than his previous efforts. Mr. Fink, co-founder and chief executive of BlackRock, sent a letter to 500 chief executives urging them to stop providing quarterly earnings estimates, as a way to curb the focus on short-term results.While Mr. Fink wants to eliminate quarterly guidance, he is also making perhaps an even more controversial request, asking chief executives and company boards to provide a “a strategic framework for long-term value creation” that could extend to multiple years. In other words, a company should give shareholders a detailed long-term plan for its business.“Annual shareholder letters and other communications to shareholders are too often backwards-looking and don’t do enough to articulate management’s vision and plans for the future,” Mr. Fink wrote. Without management providing a road map for the next few years, he said, “some short-term investors (and analysts) offer more compelling visions for companies than the companies themselves, allowing these perspectives to fill the void and build support for potentially destabilizing actions.”Activist investors are increasingly pressuring companies to return money to shareholders or buy back shares. Last year through the end of the third quarter, according to Mr. Fink, buybacks skyrocketed 27 percent over the previous year, which itself had been a record. Companies that buy back shares reduce the amount of stock they have outstanding, a move that can have the effect of increasing earnings per share and the stakes of existing shareholders. Mr. Fink’s call comes at a time of stepped-up chatter among big investors and other business leaders to try to encourage companies and investors to be less focused on short-term efforts to lift earnings. Critics of buybacks question whether the purchases are a productive use of profits, rather than investing in their businesses and creating jobs. BlackRock, along with other mutual fund giants like Fidelity Investments and T. Rowe Price, recently held a meeting with Warren E. Buffett at the invitation of JPMorgan Chase’s chief executive, Jamie Dimon, to devise a series of voluntary standards that companies should adopt, according to people briefed on the meetings. Another meeting is planned for next month. The discussion of short-termism on Wall Street has also become part of the presidential campaign. Hillary Clinton made a policy speech last year that endorsed many of the ideas Mr. Fink had raised. There has long been speculation that Mr. Fink could eventually land a senior government post in Washington.In an interview, Mr. Fink said he wrote this letter now to get ahead of proxy season, a period during the spring when many companies hold their annual meetings and vote on shareholder resolutions. He hopes to influence how chief executives discuss their companies’ performance and goals in their annual letters to shareholders.Of course, some companies in fast-moving businesses like technology might argue that it is impossible to present a multiyear road map without telegraphing plans to rivals.Mr. Fink dismissed that possibility. “I don’t think a public discourse on how a company’s C.E.O. sees their position is going to result in proprietary secrets being revealed.”Investors are eagerly awaiting guidance from management about when higher short-term interest rates will impact the banks’ bottom lines.He doesn’t want to put all of the responsibility on the chief executive. His letter presses company boards to publicly affirm the chief executive’s long-term plan. All too often, there is a disconnect between the vision of a chief executive and the board, especially when things go wrong.Of course, the other challenge with a company offering a long-term vision is not only meeting its goals, but also changing them if the market or economy change. Mr. Fink said he appreciated that argument, but contended that boards that lay out multiyear plans won’t feel locked into them.“Given the right context, long-term shareholders will understand, and even expect, that you will need to pivot in response to the changing environments you are navigating,” Mr. Fink wrote. “But one reason for investors’ short-term horizons is that companies have not sufficiently educated them about the ecosystems they are operating in.”That may be true, but it is admittedly difficult for executives to reverse course without worrying about losing face.Mr. Fink is also pushing for companies to consider environmental, social and governance issues “ranging from climate change to diversity to board effectiveness.” These issues have long been an afterthought for most companies, and in particular, for investors, who have simply sought companies that deliver the highest returns.“These issues offer both risks and opportunities, but for too long, companies have not considered them core to their business — even when the world’s political leaders are increasingly focused on them, as demonstrated by the Paris climate accord,” Mr. Fink wrote. Finally, Mr. Fink suggests that business actually needs to take on a greater responsibility in pushing for change in Washington. He says that tax policy needs to be reformed and investment in infrastructure must become a priority. If the government fails to invest in our nation’s infrastructure, it “will not only cost businesses and consumers $1.8 trillion over the next five years, but clearly represents a threat to the ability of companies to grow.”He says he believes that corporate America needs help from Washington to shift to a more long-term focus. “We recognize that the culture of short-term results is not something that can be solved by C.E.O.s and their boards alone.”Advertisement