By LIZ MOYERFEB. 1, 2016
Peter Hancock, chief executive of A.I.G., is sticking with a strategic plan that aims to streamline the company but falls far short of calls from activist shareholders to break into three.American International Group is sticking with a strategic plan that aims to streamline the company but falls far short of calls from activist shareholders like Carl C. Icahn to break into three.On Monday, Mr. Icahn told Bloomberg News that the plan was inadequate and that he would propose a slate of possible board members by the end of next week. Mr. Icahn has said he owns 42 million A.I.G. shares, making him the largest activist shareholder, followed by the hedge fund manager John Paulson, with 14.6 million shares.Mr. Icahn did not return a phone call.In a statement released after the stock market closed on Monday, A.I.G. said it had been talking to shareholders in the week since presenting its strategic plan.Douglas M. Steenland, the company’s nonexecutive chairman, said: “Our board of directors and management are fully aligned behind the strategy outlined on Jan. 26. We look forward to continued discussions with our shareholders on the strategy we have advanced.”AdvertisementThe company also released materials that it said would help answer the questions it has received from shareholders, including a report by the consulting firm Oliver Wyman on the benefits of remaining a diversified company, a legal memorandum from Sullivan & Cromwell about tax considerations, and an overview of the regulatory environment.AdvertisementLast week, the insurance giant, which became a stark example of the concept of “too big to fail” when it had to be rescued by the federal government during the financial crisis, announced that it would slim down to try to be more profitable.A big part of the strategic plan is the promise of at least $25 billion in stock buybacks and dividends, something, it says, that it could not deliver in such a large quantity — if at all — were it to be broken into pieces.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Icahn has pressured the company to break into three parts — separating its property and casualty business from its life insurance business and mortgage insurance operations — to shrink below the federal government’s label of it as a systemically important financial institution, or SIFI. That label brings with it extra regulation and capital constraints.A.I.G.’s chief executive, Peter D. Hancock, has said that from the company’s standpoint, being labeled a SIFI isn’t as bad as it sounds. The Oliver Wyman report, which focuses on the benefits A.I.G. gets out of being in many types of businesses at once, says breaking up would have the opposite effect the activists intend.A split of the businesses “would impose additional capital constraints and as a result would likely impact A.I.G.’s ability to return capital to shareholders,” it said.In information the company added to its presentation from last week, A.I.G. said it made more sense to wait until the rules for nonbank SIFIs were formalized before making drastic changes. The outcome of a pending lawsuit by MetLife, which is challenging its designation as a nonbank SIFI, “may provide further clarity” on its own situation, the A.I.G. information says.That might take too long for the activists. In a letter to A.I.G. in November, Mr. Icahn said action needed to be taken immediately. He added that he would probably propose adding a new director who would agree in advance to succeed Mr. Hancock as chief executive if the board requested that.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.