AdvertisementSupported byItinerariesBy Martha C. WhiteRose Wang, a frequent traveler, is willing to concede that she sort of misses the kitschy SkyMall catalog and its quirky roundup of gadgets, pet accessories and other oddities.But Ms. Wang, who lives in the Washington area and is a consultant to government contractors, is less than enthusiastic about what she perceives as a creeping influx of retail pitches that she encounters while in flight.“When you get on the entertainment console, there are more ads, and if you log onto the Wi-Fi, of course, there’s ads,” she said.Airlines say they are just giving passengers what they want: a chance to shop.“They’re looking for other things to entertain themselves,” said Jamie Perry, vice president for brand and product development at JetBlue Airways.It’s all made possible with the advent of Wi-Fi on planes. Short of a patient in a dentist’s chair, it’s hard to find a more captive audience than airline passengers.When JetBlue added its Fly-Fi wireless network a little more than two years ago, Mr. Perry said the airline initially anticipated that travelers would mostly be interested in logging onto social networks during flights.“It was a little bit of a surprise to us, early on, how much time people spent shopping,” he said.Airlines are counting on nimbler technology and faster, more reliable Wi-Fi in the air to deliver virtual catalogs, promotions and a host of goods and services.They are betting that passengers will warm to the idea of browsing via the seat-back entertainment console or their own devices at cruising altitude — and are counting on getting a piece of what GuestLogix, a travel retailing technology company, says is a $5 billion annual business, either directly or through affiliate programs.“Where we’re starting to see this is in the airlines that have made the big investments in in-flight Wi-Fi,” said Michael Reyes, director of customer centricity at Sabre Airline Solutions.“They’ve always been chasing ways to find new revenues,” he said. “The big difference now is the connectivity. They can have a lot more data piped up to the plane.”The onboard retail market is growing at a 13 percent rate, year over year, according to Craig Proud, senior vice president for platform at GuestLogix.“The technology is there,” he said. “Based on our experience, the market opportunity is still really huge, but merchandising is the key to success.”In November, LSG Sky Chefs, an airline catering company and a division of Lufthansa Group, acquired one of its partners, the Irish technology company Retail inMotion, to help it expand into what it called the “increasingly important onboard retail business.” In a release, LSG Sky Chefs said its intention was to sell passengers everything from merchandise to tickets for events or attractions at the flight’s destination.“We see the growth rate much bigger than the growth of passengers,” said Stefan Patermann, Retail inMotion’s chief commercial officer, estimating the onboard retail market in Europe alone to be worth about 1 billion euros, or about $1.09 billion, a year.Analysts say this evolution was only a matter of time: The unbundling of services and amenities like food and preferred seats in coach cabins made the buy-on-board retail model standard. At the same time, a fast, unbroken Wi-Fi connection eases onboard shopping and allows airlines to process credit card transactions in real time.“Carriers are finding more ways to push more offers through that technology,” said Robert W. Mann, an airline industry consultant.What airlines see as a new revenue stream, though, some travelers see as an irritant, especially in a market in which airlines are already earning eye-popping profits.Industry consolidation, fuller planes and the falling price of oil combined to deliver nearly $19 billion in profits for the domestic airline industry in the first three quarters of 2015, according to the Department of Transportation.“Everybody’s pushing retail at you,” said James Condon, a consultant who lives in the Washington area and travels frequently for work. He said that marketing seemed heaviest on international flights, where the airline’s window of time to make pitches to customers is longest.Some carriers seek an alternative to the hard sell. Virgin America goes for a feel-good sentiment with its in-flight retailing, letting travelers purchase carbon offsets to help reduce the environmental impact of their trips, or make charitable donations. British Airways and Virgin Atlantic take a selective approach.“We’re always looking for bespoke and unique products that are exclusive to Virgin Atlantic,” a representative for that airline said via email.Late last year, JetBlue teamed up with Amazon to make Amazon’s library of media available to Prime members as well as to passengers who sign up for a free trial or a subscription to the service, which a surprising number do.“We’ve seen a very high uptake of Amazon Prime from people who were not previously Prime,” Mr. Perry said. “It seems that the carrot of free video streaming onboard is quite an attractive one.”The airline also has promoted a sweepstakes that passengers enter by signing up for J. Crew’s mailing list, and giveaways from Dunkin’ Donuts for joining the chain’s loyalty program through JetBlue’s platform. By the middle of this year, Mr. Perry said, JetBlue hopes to let members of its frequent-flier program earn loyalty points when they shop on Amazon in flight.Unlike most other airlines, JetBlue offers its basic Wi-Fi free. (Passengers can pay for more speed.) The carrier calculates that its investment will pay off in the long run as more people browse and buy items or subscribe to services, effectively subsidizing the Wi-Fi and earning JetBlue extra revenue.“Once you have a free model, essentially what you’re monetizing is eyeballs,” Mr. Perry said.Abby Lunardini, vice president for brand marketing and communications at Virgin America, said that a technology upgrade the carrier began last year would let it offer an array of goods and services, along with promotions for media and entertainment providers like Netflix and Spotify.“It certainly opens up a whole new range of possibilities,” she said, adding that Virgin America wanted to make its offers in an unobtrusive way. For travelers like Mr. Condon, anything that makes the in-flight offers less obtrusive would be an improvement. “Frankly, it’s annoying,” he said. “Essentially, they’ve taken the SkyMall catalog and put it in electronic format.”Advertisement