AdvertisementSupported byBy Sydney EmberA New Hampshire woman who accused Bill Cosby last year of drugging and sexually assaulting her in 1965 has sued the entertainer, contending that he wrongly branded her a liar after she came forward.In a federal lawsuit, filed on Monday in Massachusetts, Kristina Ruehli says Mr. Cosby, through his former lawyer Martin D. Singer, defamed her in a statement he released after Philadelphia Magazine published an article last November about her accusations.In her suit, Ms. Ruehli, 72, says she met Mr. Cosby in 1965, when she was a 22-year-old secretary at a talent agency. She contends that Mr. Cosby invited her to his home, where he gave her drinks and she later passed out. After “an unknown period of time,” the suit says, she regained consciousness and found herself lying on a bed, naked, with Mr. Cosby trying to force her to give him oral sex. Mr. Ruehli says she became nauseated and vomited. Based on her experience and the accounts of other women, she says, she now believes Mr. Cosby had slipped a drug into her drink.Mr. Cosby, 78, who has been accused by dozens of women of sexual assault, also faces three other defamation suits, filed by women in California, Massachusetts and Pennsylvania. He has denied all wrongdoing and has never been charged with a crime.Ms. Ruehli says in the lawsuit that she came forward to support other women who had decided to accuse Mr. Cosby publicly. After her accusations were published in the magazine, the suit says, Mr. Singer released a statement in which he called the women’s accusations “unsubstantiated, fantastical stories about things they say occurred 30, 40, or even 50 years ago.”Ms. Ruehli says that Mr. Singer’s reference to “even 50 years ago” was directed at her. Mr. Singer’s statement is also cited in the suits brought in Massachusetts and Pennsylvania.Andrew Wyatt, a spokesman for Mr. Cosby, said the entertainer’s legal team had no comment at this time.Ms. Ruehli’s lawyer, Megan C. Deluhery, said in a statement that “Ms. Ruehli stands ready to tell her story, under oath, to a jury of her peers and allow them to pass judgment and affirm that Ms. Ruehli’s account, like so many others, is true, and the only other person in the room that night in 1965 surely knows it.”New accusations and lawsuits against Mr. Cosby have been surfacing since July, when excerpts from a deposition he gave in a 2005 civil case became public. In the deposition — for a case brought by Andrea Constand, who said Mr. Cosby had drugged and molested her — he comes off as a cavalier playboy who unapologetically pursued women for sex and obtained powerful sedatives to use as party drugs.According to Ms. Ruehli’s suit, she offered to testify on behalf of Ms. Constand, but the case was settled before Ms. Ruehli could be deposed.Advertisement