AdvertisementSupported byWhite Collar WatchBy Peter J. HenningIn the movie “The Big Short,” which is concerned with how the housing bubble led to the financial crisis in 2008, one of the characters tries to explain why no one at the banks was being held accountable. “Tell me the difference between stupid and illegal, and I’ll have my wife’s brother arrested,” he says.Figuring out that difference may well be the challenge in sorting out whether anyone will be accused of a crime for the contamination of the drinking water in Flint, Mich.The Justice Department and the Michigan attorney general’s office are investigating whether the series of decisions that led to the high levels of lead in Flint’s water involved criminal conduct. Unlike environmental violations that result from a single event, like the Gulf of Mexico oil spill, what happened in Flint was the result of bad choices made over the course of months by officials at the local and state level that ultimately proved disastrous.Proving a crime will require looking beyond laws protecting the environment to see if public officials tried to cover up what they were doing, or failed to fulfill their legal obligations in dealing with the city’s water issues.The main federal environmental law in this area is the Safe Drinking Water Act, which authorizes the Environmental Protection Agency to set standards that rely primarily on the states and local governments to keep contaminants away from the sources of tap water.The lead levels in Flint’s water far exceed what the law allows, and the E.P.A. issued an emergency administrative order on Jan. 21 finding that “the city of Flint’s and the state of Michigan’s responses to the drinking water crisis in Flint have been inadequate to protect public health and that these failures continue.”That law, however, does not provide for criminal prosecution except in limited circumstances. For example, a “willful” violation of an underground injection program can result in up to three years in prison, and selling water coolers that are not lead-free can be punished by a five-year sentence. But neither of those provisions apply to what happened in Flint, where untreated water from the Flint River corroded the aging pipes in the city, resulting in high levels of lead leaking into the water.Other federal statutes, like the Clean Water Act, regulate the discharge of pollutants and wastewater treatment, but not what is required for drinking water. The environmental laws focus more on external sources of pollution in water and air, so what happened in Flint falls outside their purview.To bring a criminal case, the Justice Department will have to focus on whether any reports filed by officials in Michigan with the E.P.A. were false — the old Watergate approach of punishing the cover-up. Even that approach may be difficult because federal law generally requires proving that a statement was actually false and not just incomplete, so it can be open to interpretation whether a defendant intended to lie when submitting information about Flint’s water.A more likely path to pursuing individual officials may be under Michigan law. Bill Schuette, the Republican state attorney general, appointed a former prosecutor who now works as a defense lawyer along with the former head of the Detroit office of the F.B.I. to investigate who was responsible for the contamination, which could reach all the way to Governor Rick Snyder’s administration.The appointment allows Mr. Schuette to avoid conflict of interest problems related to his office defending state officials in lawsuits arising from water contamination, including a case filed last Wednesday under the Safe Drinking Water Act by a group of pastors and the American Civil Liberties Union, among others. Appointing an independent counsel also gives him a bit of political cover: The New York Times has reported that he is likely to run for governor in 2018 to succeed Mr. Snyder.Michigan law allows for the prosecution of public officials for “misconduct in office” under a statute that permits charges based on common law crimes that are not otherwise included in any statute. This crime dates to England before the American Revolution, and is defined by the courts as “corrupt behavior by an officer in the exercise of the duties of his office.”The breadth of this offense is alarming, at least for those involved in any of the decisions regarding Flint’s water or the response to reports of contamination. The Michigan Court of Appeals explained in People v. Coutu that this crime “encompasses malfeasance, which is the doing of a wrongful act, misfeasance, which is the doing of a lawful act in a wrongful manner, and nonfeasance, which is the failure to do an act required by the duties of the office.”A violation requires more than negligence, so the government would have to prove the official’s misconduct was done intentionally.What the crime does not require, however, is showing that the person gained anything from the conduct, or even that the person intended any harm. Failing to fulfill the duties of office or acting wrongfully, even if not illegally, can result in a felony conviction.This crime is charged with some regularity in Michigan. Cases have been filed against police officers for not adequately investigating illegal activity at a strip club and the former mayor of Detroit, Kwame M. Kilpatrick, for lying about an affair with his chief of staff in his testimony in a whistle-blower lawsuit.The state investigation of the Flint water crisis can focus on whether any officials failed to take steps to protect against the contamination despite being warned about it, or turned a blind eye to what was happening by not reporting it to the E.P.A. The decisions leading to the current problems touch the city’s elected officials and administrators, the emergency manager appointed by Mr. Snyder who approved switching the water supply to the Flint River, all the way up to state officials in the Michigan department of environmental quality and perhaps even in the governor’s office.The crime of misconduct in office covers both what officials did, misfeasance or malfeasance, or what they failed to do, nonfeasance. That means the state investigation can range much more broadly than the violations that could be pursued by the Justice Department.There is a difference between stupidity and criminality, and the investigation of the Flint water crisis may reveal just how close they really are.Peter J. Henning, a professor at Wayne State University Law School, is a co-author of “Securities Crimes (2d edition).” Twitter: @peterjhenningAdvertisement