By BROOKS BARNESFEB. 1, 2016
LOS ANGELES — Many of the movies that played at this year’s Sundance Film Festival, which ended on Sunday, have already been forgotten. It’s harsh but true. Buzz comes and goes fast in the social media age.But David Larkin says he believes he has a digital solution.Mr. Larkin is the chief executive of Plexus Entertainment, a start-up behind the website and app GoWatchIt. The service has multiple functions, but a primary one allows users to add the titles of unreleased movies to a digital queue. When the film does become available, GoWatchIt sends an alert. Mr. Larkin’s research indicates that Sundance entries are released, on average, 206 days after their festival premieres.“It’s pretty obvious that more people read about and are interested in Sundance films than actually go to Sundance, but the challenge is converting that buzz into paying customers,” Mr. Larkin said. “Generating awareness is great, but it does very little good unless the consumers you have made aware are then escorted to a purchase.”GoWatchIt expanded its partnership with Sundance this year — there was a GoWatchIt button on each page of the festival’s digital program guide — and Mr. Larkin said that “low tens of thousands” of people added films to queues. For the art films that play Sundance, that could be an impactful number, “helping kick-start word of mouth for a limited theatrical run or helping get on the iTunes top-seller list,” he said.AdvertisementMr. Larkin said that tests showed that GoWatchIt users opened emails notifying them of film availability in theaters, or on sites like Amazon, Netflix and iTunes, at a rate of up to 62 percent and then click through to a movie service where a film can be bought or rented in up to 18 percent of cases. Those rates are sharply higher than the industry norm for entertainment-related emails, according to Constant Contact, an online marketing company.GoWatchIt makes money by charging fees to studios like Warner Bros., Universal and Paramount for access to the site’s data for specific films. (The company has a partnership with the online movie section of The New York Times.)AdvertisementMr. Larkin, whose association with the entertainment business started in 1984 when he was production manager for a stoner comedy called “Hollywood Hot Tubs,” got the idea for GoWatchIt after a film he helped produce, “Made In China,” won an award at the 2009 South by Southwest film festival. “But everyone promptly forgot about us,” Mr. Larkin said. “The buzz slipped through our fingers.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.