AdvertisementSupported byBy Alexandra StevensonAfter a bitter face-off for more than a decade between Argentina and a group of disgruntled New York hedge funds, both sides have come to the negotiating table with fresh hopes of a resolution.But the dispute, which has left Argentina largely cut off from international markets, still promised a few twists as a new round of talks took place this week in Manhattan.On Tuesday, Argentina struck a deal to pay $1.35 billion to a group of Italian investors whose bonds the country defaulted on in 2001, according to news reports.The deal is the first settlement with so-called holdout creditors who have not participated in earlier restructurings over debt from nearly 15 years ago. But Argentina has yet to come to an agreement with the New York hedge funds — holdouts led by the billionaire Paul E. Singer’s Elliott Management.A stalemate involving the creditors and Argentina’s last president, Cristina Fernández de Kirchner, led the country to default on its debt again in 2014. The new administration of President Mauricio Macri has indicated that it wants to resolve the debt as part of a bigger move to reform Argentina’s economy.Luis Caputo, the newly appointed finance secretary, and other senior government representatives met this week with principals at the hedge funds — including Mr. Elliott’s NML Capital unit, Aurelius Capital, Montreux Partners, Dart Management and Davidson Kempner — in Manhattan, according to a court-appointed arbiter Daniel A. Pollack. The group is seeking a resolution for claims totaling around $9 billion, he added.In dispute is how much Argentina should pay in interest.At a news conference in Buenos Aires announcing the deal with Italian bondholders, Argentina’s economic minister, Alfonso Prat-Gay, touched on the question of interest payments. “We have said that we will respect the bond principal and that we are going to be firm in negotiating the interest, and in this particular agreement we have achieved just that.”But, Mr. Prat-Gay added, “The difficulty that we have right now is that some bondholders want to be paid an interest rate that, under any type of judicial criteria, is unacceptable.”The battle between Argentina and its holdout creditors stems from 2001, when the country defaulted on billions of dollars in debt. Argentina offered to exchange the bonds it defaulted on for new bonds worth significantly less, a move that holdouts rejected. NML Capital sued Argentina seeking full repayment — principal and interest — and a Manhattan district court judge ruled that whenever Argentina paid one group of bondholders, it would also have to pay the holdouts.This ruling could complicate Argentina’s deal with Italian holdout creditors. As part of the deal reported on Tuesday, Argentina will pay 150 percent of the original $900 million that the Italian bondholders hold from Argentine debt issued more than a decade ago. These details were reported by Bloomberg and Reuters, citing Task Force Argentina, the representative for the bondholders.There are other issues that stand to complicate negotiations. Mr. Caputo is expected to publicly announce a proposal for the New York hedge funds this week. But these holdouts have requested that Argentina sign a nondisclosure agreement promising not to discuss the negotiations publicly.Under President Macri, who was sworn in as president in December, the government has already taken steps to reform the economy, removing capital controls on its currency, the peso. It has also made efforts to rebuild relationships with the financial community. Representatives from Argentina held meetings with members of the International Monetary Fund during the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland, seeking to reset frayed relations under Ms. Fernández de Kirchner.“I want to insist that after so many years of conflict, we are ready to reach a settlement agreement in fair conditions,” Mr. Macri said at a news conference during the forum in Davos on Jan. 22.The negotiations between Argentina and its creditors are being watched closely by the investment world. On Tuesday, another New York hedge fund, Gramercy, filed a $1.3 billion claim against Peru over what Gramercy claimed is that government’s refusal to properly repay defaulted debt.Jonathan Gilbert contributed reporting.Advertisement