AdvertisementSupported byBy Stephanie StromChipotle Mexican Grill revealed on Tuesday that federal prosecutors had expanded their inquiry into the company’s multistate outbreaks of food-borne illnesses, further threatening sales that declined steeply by the end of last year.In a statement that accompanied its earnings report, the company said that the investigation, which had been focused on an outbreak of norovirus in just one Simi Valley, Calif., restaurant, had been broadened to a companywide inquiry. It said it received another subpoena last week, seeking documents and information that covered all of the company’s food safety matters dating to the beginning of 2013.That expanded timetable predates the company’s troubled summer and fall, when not just norovirus but E. coli episodes wreaked havoc with sales and traffic.Sales in stores open at least a year, or same-store sales, sank 14.6 percent in the quarter that ended Dec. 31. Profits plunged 44 percent to $67.9 million, or $2.17 a share, compared with $121.2 million, or $3.91, in the same quarter last year, the company said.Since last summer, shares have largely plummeted and the company did not predict a fast turnaround in its fortunes. During a conference call with investment analysts, Jack Hartung, Chipotle’s chief financial officer, reminded Wall Street that it typically took restaurant companies that suffered a food safety scandal as many as six quarters to regain their footing — and that Chipotle suffered six such episodes since last July. Mr. Hartung said the company was cooperating with investigators.“This has been an unfortunate set of events,” Steve Ells, the company’s founder and co-chief executive, said during the call. “I’m confident Chipotle will emerge as a strong company.”Since July, more than 500 people who have eaten in Chipotle restaurants from the Pacific Northwest to Boston have become ill. The majority of them, about 370, were infected with norovirus after eating at a restaurant in Simi Valley, Calif., and a restaurant in Boston.More than 60 people got sick from salmonella poisoning after eating at a Chipotle restaurant in Minnesota.Most concerning were outbreaks involving two strains of E. coli, bacteria that can cause severe intestinal cramps, diarrhea and fever. The first of those outbreaks, in October, sickened 53 people in multiple states, though the majority of victims were in Oregon and Washington. A separate E. coli strain was identified in November, after five people became sick in Kansas, North Dakota and Oklahoma within a week of eating at Chipotle.The cost of those outbreaks became apparent on Tuesday. New food safety equipment and procedures, testing done to try to determine the cause of the problems and the cost of discarding food, hiring auditors and consultants and training employees in new procedures reduced profit margins by more than 8 percent in the fourth quarter, Mr. Hartung said.A new marketing and promotional campaign that will begin next week will most likely cost the company $50 million, Mr. Hartung said, or more than three times the amount the company spent on such programs in the first quarter of last year. It will be the most expensive marketing campaign in Chipotle’s history.Mr. Hartung said he could not say precisely how much the new campaign would cost because that would depend on how many customers redeem the promotional offers.Chipotle hired the food safety specialist Mansour Samadpour, the chief executive of IEH Laboratories & Consulting Group, who overhauled its food safety regime to a level that he has said brought the risk of contamination to “near zero.”Lettuce is now being cleaned and cheese is being grated in a central location and packed in sealed containers, then shipped to individual restaurants. Onions, jalapeños and other vegetables that arrive in the restaurant whole are being blanched in boiling water to kill microbes, and raw meat is being handled differently, Mr. Ells told the analysts.“We have gone to all our suppliers, especially suppliers that have high-risk items like meat and produce, and implemented high-resolution DNA testing as laid out by Dr. Samadpour,” Mr. Ells said.The company also instituted a paid sick leave policy, unusual in the fast-food business. On Monday, it plans to close all stores for a few hours to review the food safety changes it has made and discuss them with employees.The company has become a lightning rod for its in-your-face advertising and marketing critical of commercial food operations and for its decision to end the use of ingredients from genetically engineered sources. (Drinks it sells may still contain genetically engineered ingredients, and its meat may come from animals fed genetically altered grains.)The biotech lobby has tried to pin the company’s problems on its use of fresh, locally sourced ingredients, but food safety experts and federal officials argue that many restaurants today make food from the same kind of ingredients.Despite all its well-publicized woes, Chipotle managed to increase sales in 2015 to $4.5 billion from $4.1 billion in the prior year. Net income for the year rose 10.6 percent to $475.6 million, or $15.30 a share, compared with $445.3 million, or $14.35 a share, in 2014.Advertisement