AdvertisementSupported byDeal ProfessorBy Steven Davidoff SolomonTheranos is in trouble, and David Boies, a star lawyer, has placed himself at the heart of it, a decision that he may come to rue.Theranos, a blood-testing start-up founded by Elizabeth Holmes when she was 19, is fighting for its survival. After reports in The Wall Street Journal raised questions about the company’s technology, Theranos has been in a tailspin.The company’s methodology and science are in doubt, a federal regulator found that one lab had violated several clinical standards and the drugstore chain Walgreens has suspended tests at a Theranos lab in California.Theranos is fighting back, claiming that its technology is valid and asserting that the facts will prevail as its technology is scientifically tested.At the center of the company’s defense is Mr. Boies, a founder and the chairman of Boies Schiller & Flexner.Mr. Boies is known as one of the smartest and shrewdest litigators in the country. He represented Al Gore in the 2000 presidential dispute, he litigated the Microsoft antitrust case for the federal government, and he is representing Maurice R. Greenberg, the former chief executive of the American International Group, in his suit against the government.In the wake of the questions being asked about Theranos, the company hired Mr. Boies. He had represented Theranos before and his firm’s ties with the company ran deep. The general counsel of Theranos is a former Boies Schiller partner.That Mr. Boies is representing an embattled client is nothing new. But this time, the lawyer has raised the ante by becoming a director of Theranos.Let’s stop here and note that this has the potential to blow up. Mr. Boies is taking on two different roles at Theranos. A lawyer represents a client — here Theranos — while a director, even at a privately held company like Theranos, represents the company’s investors.Depending on what unfolds at Theranos, Mr. Boies may be put in a position where he either has to protect the company (as its lawyer) or the shareholders (as a director).I asked one of my colleagues, Jo-Ellen Pozner, a professor at the Haas School of Business at the University of California, Berkeley, who specializes in business ethics, about this potential conflict. She was skeptical of Mr. Boies’s dual role.“I have a hard time believing that an experienced litigator can adequately represent investors — one of the primary responsibilities of a director — while being attentive to potential legal strategies, which might cause him to privilege the interests of management,” she told me. “It just seems a difficult line to walk.”No doubt Theranos waived the conflict in lots of documented forms. And the American Bar Association does allow this type of dual role. But just because a conflict is allowed doesn’t mean it will not lead to problems.If the technology of Theranos turns out to be not what it claims, investors would almost certainly seek to sue the chief executive, Ms. Holmes, and the company, as well as the board that allowed this to happen.This gets complicated for Mr. Boies, because Theranos is a corporate governance disaster.Ms. Holmes controls the company, and she solidified that control in 2013 by arranging for the company to adopt a high-vote stock structure that gave her most of the votes. This is a problem because the company is essentially Ms. Holmes, although it has raised hundreds of millions of dollars from outside investors. She founded it, had the idea and has led the technology. If the technology is shown to be flawed, she may not be quick to admit that to the benefit of the remaining shareholders.Mr. Boies, of course, is no expert in blood testing technology. But in evaluating the firm’s technology, he will get little to no help from his fellow board members. Before the first Journal article appeared, the board of Theranos had no outside scientific experience. It consisted mainly of statesmen, including two former senators and even Henry Kissinger. Most of these board members have now been demoted to advisers.The Theranos board is now five people, including Ms. Holmes and the company’s chief operating officer. None of the rest have scientific experience. Two other directors are a retired Marine Corps general and the chief executive of Bechtel, the construction company. Then there is Mr. Boies.This is, frankly, a weak board and another potential land mine for Mr. Boies, as the weakness of the board does not lessen the fiduciary duty he has to all Theranos shareholders.The potential for conflict is particularly great. What if Ms. Holmes resists changes that would be in the interest of shareholders? What if the board decides that it is time for her to go — and she stands her ground?The board could do little more than throw up its collective hands under the current governance structure.Mr. Boies, and the other outside directors, could resign in protest. But why would anyone, particularly Mr. Boies, be a director on a board that lacked the power to make fundamental changes?Indeed, what is Mr. Boies thinking? He may be paid lots of money for his roles, but for someone so successful and savvy to put himself in a position that is bound to be problematic is puzzling.A request for comment to Boies Schiller was referred to a representative who declined to comment. Theranos did not immediately respond to a request for a comment.There is also a lesson for those venture capitalists who invested in Theranos.The recent bubbly years when unicorns — start-up companies valued at $1 billion or more — seemed to emerge almost daily led venture capitalists to agree to governance structures that placed all power with the founder. After all, this is a structure that worked for Facebook.But Theranos is no Facebook. That Theranos had no real board in place and took repeated steps to place all power with Ms. Holmes may not have been a problem when Theranos was a start-up darling. But now, Theranos has fallen and will have to prove itself. Governance matters most in crisis times, and Theranos lacks it, to the chagrin of its investors. Even Mark Zuckerberg put together a real board and hired Sheryl Sandberg as a check.One has to wish Mr. Boies luck. If Theranos turns wildly successful, then there will be no problem. But if its troubles continue, he will have to do something he is less experienced at — be a director and corporate leader. The question will be whether the litigator in him will prevent that.Steven Davidoff Solomon is a professor of law at the University of California, Berkeley. His columns can be found at nytimes.com/dealbook. Follow @stevendavidoff on Twitter.Advertisement