
Breakingviews By                     
DOMINIC ELLIOTT

FEB. 2, 2016
Running an investment bank is a well-paid but sometimes frustrating business.At UBS, the investment bank president, Andrea Orcel, has presided over several quarters of more than 20 percent returns on equity, as rivals have barely managed half that. Yet in the quarter that just ended, UBS’s broker-dealer business squeezed out only a 4.4 percent return.Since Mr. Orcel’s first full year in 2013, UBS’s investment banking revenue is up a bit, even as rivals have experienced declines. Full-year return on equity in 2015 was just below 26 percent. Mr. Orcel’s background is in advising, not trading, where most of the performance has originated, but arguably his fresh eyes and attention to detail helped. UBS also has a better relationship with its regulators now than it did then.If he deserves credit for the rise, what about the fall? Investment banking has two main drivers — trading activity and a willingness among corporate clients to make deals. UBS was reminded in the last quarter that it had little control over either. There were some discrete afflictions: losses on energy loans, the costs of Britain’s balance-sheet tax and restructuring charges. But it was the overall 10 percent top-line decline that did most of the damage.Time for another strategic shift. UBS’s China exposure meant the recent slowdown hurt it especially. Equities trading revenue fell almost one-fifth versus a slight aggregate rise on Wall Street because of its skew toward structured products sold to its wealthiest private banking clients in Asia.AdvertisementMr. Orcel wants more revenue in the United States to rebalance its business. But UBS’s American advisory brand was hammered after the 2008 crisis as rainmakers decamped to boutiques. And all banks are trying to grow in more vanilla equities trading, given its relatively light capital treatment.UBS has done this before and isn’t the only one that needs a new strategy. Corporate finance activity was tepid in January. The first quarter of the year, traditionally the strongest for investment banking, could mirror UBS’s fourth-quarter experience. If that’s the best that an investment bank chief can hope for, it could be a long year ahead.AdvertisementAlternative careers in more predictable businesses like commercial banking have rarely looked so appealing – and not just for Mr. Orcel.Dominic Elliott is a columnist at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »