AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Neil UnmackThe advance of the China National Chemical Corporation, a state-owned company, on Syngenta leaves Monsanto in a thorny spot.The Chinese company, known as ChemChina, is nearing a deal for Syngenta, the Swiss seeds and pesticides maker. Its friendly nature and the cash involved probably make it better than a similarly valued offer last year from the American rival Monsanto, whose merger options are getting tougher.Having kicked off the industry’s mating season, Monsanto is for now on its own. It made repeated overtures to Syngenta to combine the world’s leading players in seed production and crop protection. Its most recent offer was 470 Swiss francs in cash and stock per share in August 2015.Syngenta argued that Monsanto was trying to buy it on the cheap at a low point in the agrochemical cycle, but it now looks ready to accept a similar price from ChemChina. By offering all cash, the Chinese company could wind up being less intrusive for both employees and senior management.Monsanto can try to argue that ChemChina’s bid is problematic anyway. Competition concerns seem unlikely, but there’s a risk that the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States will fret over Chinese ownership. That Syngenta’s stock price is still 16 percent below the expected sale price suggests that investors do harbor some doubts.Even so, Monsanto would probably need to sweeten its offer to overpower ChemChina’s. Its last one is now worth about 426 Swiss francs for each Syngenta share. Matching ChemChina’s figure, even with just 75 percent cash, would increase Monsanto’s debt to more than four times earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, analysts at Bernstein say, a risky level given the weak commodity cycle.Alternatively, Monsanto could look elsewhere. The merger of Dow Chemical and DuPont puts additional pressure on it to find a deal partner. BASF’s crop protection business is the third-largest in the sector and would make a sensible target. But BASF, a German conglomerate, has no need to sell low when the business is in a slump. There may be other joint ventures available to Monsanto, but the M.&A. seeds are looking harder to sow.Neil Unmack is a columnist at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.Advertisement