AdvertisementSupported byBy Leslie Picker and Chad BrayChina is on the verge of its biggest ever foreign deal — and another possible political storm.The state-owned China National Chemical Corporation is nearing a deal to acquire Syngenta of Switzerland, one of the world’s biggest manufacturers of agriculture chemicals and seeds, people with knowledge of the discussions said on Tuesday.The deal values Syngenta around $43 billion, one of the people said. An acquisition would signal China’s continued global business ambitions even at a time when worries about its slowing economic growth have gripped the world’s markets.An announcement could come as soon as Wednesday, when Syngenta reports earnings, said the people, who spoke on the condition of anonymity.A purchase of Syngenta could help China, the world’s second-largest economy after the United States, revolutionize its agriculture sector. A deal could help accelerate China’s push for food independence.Yet questions are expected about its intentions.“Normally, the biggest worry is market concentration, but in this case, it’s the Chinese government,” said Joseph Foudy, a professor of Asian economics at the Stern School of Business at New York University. “Are we comfortable with the Chinese government controlling our genetically modified seeds? What if they limit to countries they don’t like?”Similar concerns about control emerged in 2005, when China National Offshore Oil Corporation bid $18.5 billion for the American energy company Unocal. Ultimately, Congress raised objections to the proposed combination, leading Cnooc to withdraw its offer and paving the way for Chevron to step in.No prominent politicians have raised objections as of yet, but no deal has yet been announced. The price and timing of the proposed transaction were not final and the deal could still fall apart, the people said.An acquisition is likely to face months if not years of scrutiny, both in Europe and the United States. Because Syngenta has a significant presence in the United States, the Committee on Foreign Investments in the United States, a government panel that reviews takeovers by foreign buyers, would most likely scrutinize any deal.The Chinese company, known as ChemChina, may have timed a takeover in anticipation of a long review process. As the Chinese economy churns along at the lowest growth rate since 2009, ChemChina may be better off trying to strike a deal now to expand its presence in markets outside China.Additionally, the agriculture sector as a whole has been hit by the slowdown, which is part of the reason some companies have sought to consolidate in the first place.Syngenta had earlier rebuffed an offer from an American company because of the risk that regulators would not approve the deal. The Swiss company rejected a $47 billion takeover bid by Monsanto in August, arguing the American company’s offer was undervalued and might be difficult to execute.  But after Dow Chemical and DuPont agreed to combine in December, Syngenta’s opportunity for a merger of its own could be more limited, according to a note by Citigroup analysts. They said that the two most feasible outcomes, from a regulatory standpoint with divestitures, would be an acquisition by either Monsanto or ChemChina.Several months after Syngenta rejected the takeover bid from Monsanto, the Swiss company’s chief executive, Mike Mack, stepped down. John Ramsey, the company’s chief financial officer, ascended to the role in the interim.The new management could make Monsanto more amenable to a refreshed bid, according to Mr. Foudy of N.Y.U.ChemChina is no stranger to foreign deals. Ren Jianxin started the business in the 1980s by rolling up a series of chemical plants and turned abroad a decade ago in purchasing Adisseo of France for 400 million euros. Since then, the company has done more than a half-dozen acquisitions of companies in Europe, the Middle East and Australia, and posted a description of its integration strategy — in English — on its website.Over the last year, ChemChina has been on an acquisition spree. In its latest deal, it took a minority stake in Mercuria, a Swiss energy and commodities company, in a move to diversify its portfolio and expand into the energy sector.Last year, ChemChina bought Pirelli, the Italian tire maker, for 7.1 billion euros ($7.8 billion). And just last month it sealed a deal for KraussMaffei, a German manufacturer of plastics and rubber processing machinery, for about $1 billion.ChemChina has offered to pay about 470 Swiss francs ($461) for every share of Syngenta, one of the people said. That would value Syngenta at approximately $43 billion.Shares of Syngenta surged 3.7 percent, to 392.30 Swiss francs, in Zurich after reports that the companies were near a deal. In United States trading, shares of Monsanto fell 2.9 percent.Syngenta declined to comment on Tuesday; ChemChina did not respond to a request for comment.Amie Tsang contributed reporting.Advertisement