By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSFEB. 3, 2016
WASHINGTON — Companies in the service industry grew in January at the slowest rate in nearly two years, a survey released on Wednesday said, raising concern that global economic challenges may be starting to affect consumers.A separate survey by the payroll processing firm ADP showed that companies added a solid 205,000 jobs last month, lifted by robust gains in services and construction.The Institute for Supply Management said that its services index fell to 53.5 last month from 55.8 in December. The January figure was the lowest since February 2014, when it was 52.6. Still, any reading above 50 signals that services companies are expanding.“It’s a little bit of a cooling off,” said Anthony Nieves, chairman of the ISM nonmanufacturing business survey committee. “As long as we’re staying above the 50 baseline, things are still going in the right direction.”AdvertisementThe economy is off to a rocky start in 2016. Stocks have plunged. Manufacturing activity fell in January for the fourth consecutive month. Economic growth in the United States slowed sharply in the final months of 2015. China, Japan, Europe and Brazil face more immediate financial challenges.AdvertisementStill, the services sector has been a source of stability. The ISM index has been expanding for the last six years, its gains dovetailing with the recovery from the recession.The majority of respondents to the survey for the services index were positive about business conditions. But they expressed concern about the global economy and the turbulent stock market eroding consumer confidence.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The services survey showed continued but slower growth for business activity, new orders and employment.The ADP report said Wednesday that financial services, retailers and professional services companies also hired at a steady pace. The figures suggest that companies focused on the domestic economy remain healthy, despite gyrations in the financial markets and slowing global growth.Manufacturers have suffered from the strong dollar, which makes American goods more expensive overseas, and they did not add any jobs last month.“All this turmoil in financial markets hasn’t done any damage yet that I can see,” Mark Zandi, chief economist at Moody’s Analytics, said. “That is a very good sign.” Moody’s helps compile the ADP data.The data comes just two days before the government’s official jobs report for January. Economists forecast that the report will show that employers added 200,000 jobs and that the unemployment rate remained at 5 percent.The ADP survey covers only private businesses and frequently diverges from the official figures.Still, the data suggests that layoffs and weak hiring are confined to the oil and gas drilling and manufacturing industries.A version of this list appears in print on February 4, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Business Briefing; Service Industries Helped to Lift Jobs Numbers.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.