By ALEXANDRA STEVENSON and MATTHEW GOLDSTEINNOV. 9, 2015
The billionaire investor William A. Ackman, whose firm is among the worst-performing hedge funds this year, used an investor conference call on Monday to take a swipe at the media and those on Wall Street who he said relished “betting against” him.Mr. Ackman, the founder of the $16.5 billion Pershing Square Capital Management, responded aggressively to the news media’s coverage of a four-hour conference call he held on Oct. 30 to defend his hedge fund’s 21-million-share stake in Valeant Pharmaceuticals. Valeant’s stock price has plunged more than 60 percent over the last several months because of its controversial pricing tactics.In a separate call for investors on Monday, Mr. Ackman complained that news accounts of the earlier call had focused unfairly on the time he spent defending the Valeant investment to investors, who include some of the nation’s biggest pension funds. In reality, he said, most of the time was devoted to answering investors’ questions. He added that in doing so, he was prepared to accept a “fair degree of snide comments from the press.”Mr. Ackman’s defense came as he discussed the performance of Pershing Square and its investments. Pershing Square is down 19 percent for the year, in large measure because of the big plunge in shares of Valeant, but also as a result of several of the firm’s other stock bets on publicly listed companies.AdvertisementMr. Ackman also said he was aware there were a fair number of “people betting against Pershing Square” by taking opposing positions in stocks his firm owns and positioning themselves for the possibility that Pershing Square will have to sell some of its holdings.AdvertisementSome of Mr. Ackman’s critics on Wall Street have questioned whether he might be forced to sell off some of his firm’s holdings if too many investors seek to redeem some of their money at year’s end. In response to that speculation, Mr. Ackman countered that roughly 50 percent of his firm’s capital is not subject to periodic investor redemptions.Still, his firm’s investment in Valeant has become a lightning rod for criticism, putting pressure on the investor at a difficult time. He has lost about $2.2 billion on his investment in Valeant, assuming an average purchase price of $200 a share. Pershing began buying shares in the Canadian drug manufacturer on Feb. 9, when the stock was trading at around $160, and continued buying as the price quickly climbed to about $200. By the middle of March, his firm disclosed it had accumulated 19 million shares, a 5.7 percent equity stake, in Valeant.Much of the tone of Monday’s call, which lasted just under two hours, was defensive. The average hedge fund is posting barely positive returns this year, as measured by Hedge Fund Research, and the S.&P. 500 is up just under 1 percent for the year. Some of the industry’s biggest names, like David Einhorn of Greenlight Capital and Larry Robbins of Glenview Capital Management, have generated headlines for investors’ losses of hundreds of millions of dollars over the last quarter.More so than other hedge fund managers, Mr. Ackman attracts attention for his success — last year he finished the year up nearly 40 percent — and for an investing style that focuses on taking outsize positions in companies in which he has either a strong conviction or has been agitating for corporate change. The strategy has its risks because it leaves Pershing Square with highly concentrated stock positions, making it more vulnerable than other hedge funds to sudden moves in a particular company’s stock price. When the strategy pays off, however, it can do so handsomely.Mr. Ackman reaffirmed his bet on Valeant, saying that at the current stock price it was an “extraordinary bargain.” But the pharmaceutical company has come under intense scrutiny after a report published by a prominent short-seller that accused Valeant of fraud connected to its drug pricing. The company’s share price has dropped by 44 percent since the report was published on Oct. 21.Valeant also faces a federal investigation into some of its drug-pricing strategies and questions about the nature of its relationship with a specialty pharmacy group called Philidor Rx Services.While Valeant initially defended its relationship with Philidor in a conference call, it moved quickly to cut those ties after accusations that Valeant was using the pharmacy to create phantom sales.AdvertisementAs the stock got pummeled in the face of controversy over its relationship with Philidor two weeks ago, Pershing Square quickly acquired another two million shares. Valeant, by market value, is now the fifth-largest position in Pershing Square’s portfolio, a position Mr. Ackman said on Monday he thought was appropriate.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.With the share price under pressure, Mr. Ackman decided to hold his own conference call and webcast on Oct. 30 to defend his firm’s investment in Valeant. During the marathon event, Mr. Ackman criticized Valeant for being too “scripted” in its call to investors and said he was disappointed in the company’s response to the furor.But Mr. Ackman said he still believed in Valeant’s long-term prospects, even though the company might well end up paying a penalty to regulators for its reliance on Philidor to sell certain drug products.Mr. Ackman’s unusual and lengthy defense of Valeant in that call did not do the stock much good. Shares of Valeant fell 16 percent that day.The stock fell 15 percent more on Nov. 5, after investors reacted negatively to a front-page story in The Wall Street Journal in which Mr. Ackman sought to explain why he remained loyal to Valeant. Investors read the story as an indication that Mr. Ackman harbored doubts about the leadership of Michael Pearson, the chief executive of Valeant.The stock’s plunge prompted Mr. Ackman to send an email to Mr. Pearson in which he wrote that he and his firm “share the board’s confidence in you and your leadership.” Mr. Ackman’s representatives made sure copies of the supportive email were released to the news media.Valeant has since announced that it will sever the relationship with Philidor and that it will hold its own conference call on Tuesday to discuss its future business practices without Philidor.During the call on Monday, Mr. Ackman periodically interrupted his own analysts, whom he had brought on the call to discuss his firm’s particular stock holdings, to offer his own views. Introducing the question-and-answer period of the call, Mr. Ackman speculated that some people submitted questions to his conference calls simply “to have their questions read so that they can make a point.”In addition to its troubles over Valeant, the firm has also had a disappointing result with Herbalife, the nutritional supplement manufacturer that Mr. Ackman has argued for the last three years is an unlawful pyramid scheme that will ultimately collapse. In 2012, his firm initially placed a $1 billion “short” bet that shares of Herbalife would plunge to zero.But just as Valeant’s stock performance has turned against Mr. Ackman this year, a 48 percent rise in the price of Herbalife stock since early January has also punished his firm. As of midday Monday, shares of Herbalife were trading around $55 — roughly $14 above the price of trading when Mr. Ackman first publicly unveiled his bearish bet in December 2012.An earlier version of a capsule summary on this article described Monday’s conference call incorrectly. It was a regular investors’ call; it was not a “marathon conference call,” which describes a call Mr. Ackman held on Oct. 30. An earlier version also rendered incorrectly a quotation from Mr. Ackman. In his investor call, he said he was prepared to accept a “fair degree of snide comments from the press” — not “snide coverage.” The error was repeated in an earlier version of the headline.A version of this article appears in print on November 10, 2015, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Pershing’s Founder Defends Valeant Losses and Digs at ‘Snide Comments’.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.