By MATTHEW GOLDSTEIN and ALEXANDRA STEVENSONFEB. 3, 2016
Martin Shkreli was back in federal court on Wednesday, and for a change the brash New York businessman, who is facing securities fraud charges, had little to say.Dressed in white chinos and a navy blazer, Mr. Shkreli sat quietly during a short appearance to discuss the status of his pending criminal case. “Yes, judge,” he said in response to a question from Judge Kiyo A. Matsumoto of Federal District Court in Brooklyn.In the future, Mr. Shkreli, who has frequently posted on Twitter and appeared in live-stream videos since his arrest in December, may be a lot less visible and vocal. Benjamin Brafman, his new defense lawyer, said he had told his client to adopt a lower profile and stop granting interviews to the news media.Mr. Brafman said after the court proceeding that he expected Mr. Shkreli to largely comply with his advice to stop talking.AdvertisementThat would also appear to include a congressional hearing on Thursday to which Mr. Shkreli was subpoenaed to discuss the issue of big price increases in the pharmaceutical industry.AdvertisementMr. Brafman said in a phone interview after the hearing that his client would assert his Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination.The House Committee on Oversight and Government Reform has told Mr. Brafman that Mr. Shkreli must appear on Capitol Hill to assert his constitutional right in person.The committee subpoenaed Mr. Shkreli to ask him questions about the decision by Turing Pharmaceuticals to raise the price of a decades-old drug by 5,000 percent shortly after the company that Mr. Shkreli used to lead acquired the rights to the drug.The testimony before the committee is not expected to touch on the fraud charges pending against Mr. Shkreli, which involve an allegation that he looted another pharmaceutical company, Retrophin, to pay back investors in former hedge funds he once ran.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In a somewhat related action, Retrophin, which fired Mr. Shkreli as chief executive in 2014, agreed this week to settle a lawsuit brought by investors who claimed that the company had concealed transactions that benefited Mr. Shkreli. In agreeing to settle the dispute, Retrophin pledged to pay $3 million to the investors.A federal judge in Manhattan gave preliminary approval to the settlement on Tuesday and will hold a hearing on June 10 to decide whether to give the deal final approval.The accusations in the investor lawsuit bear some resemblance to allegations in the indictment filed by federal prosecutors in Brooklyn against Mr. Shkreli. Recently unsealed documents in the criminal case reveal that prosecutors began investigating Mr. Shkreli’s activities at Retrophin in May 2014, when a grand jury issued its first subpoena seeking documents and records. It was not until October of that year that Retrophin’s board ousted Mr. Shkreli.On Wednesday the court also heard that Mr. Shkreli is worth a lot less than he was just a month ago.Prosecutors disclosed in court that the assets in several brokerage accounts at E-Trade that were posted as security for Mr. Shkreli’s bail of $5 million have shrunk considerably. The accounts, which once totaled about $45 million, are now worth a little under $5 million.AdvertisementThe bail order requires E-Trade to notify prosecutors anytime the value of the assets in the accounts falls below $5 million. If the account value dips further, prosecutors said it could prompt a reassessment of Mr. Shkreli’s bail terms.Much of the decline in the E-Trade account is a result of the collapse in the price of shares of KaloBios Pharmaceuticals, another company that Mr. Shkreli briefly led, authorities said. The stock, once valued at more than $30 a share, is trading at around $2. KaloBios fired Mr. Shkreli after he was indicted, and the company filed for bankruptcy in late December.Days before Mr. Shkreli was arrested, KaloBios raised about $8 million from a group of investors in a private placement of stock. Some of the investors in that offering, called private investment in public equity, are suing in United States Bankruptcy Court for the return of their money, claiming they were misled by the company and Mr. Shkreli.A version of this article appears in print on February 4, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Accepting Lower Profile, Shkreli Appears in Court.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.