By EMILY STEELFEB. 3, 2016
The 92-year-old media mogul Sumner M. Redstone has declared repeatedly over the years that he would never retire from his perch at the top of his $39 billion entertainment empire.But now Mr. Redstone, under pressure from shareholders and facing a lawsuit challenging his mental competence, has resigned as executive chairman of CBS. The company’s board announced on Wednesday that it had appointed Leslie Moonves, the CBS chief executive, as his successor.At the same time, a contentious and complex battle for control is underway at Viacom, the other half of Mr. Redstone’s conglomerate, which includes the MTV, Nickelodeon and Comedy Central cable networks and Paramount Pictures film studios.As of Wednesday, Mr. Redstone remained executive chairman of Viacom. Carl Folta, a company spokesman, said that the Viacom board was scheduled to meet on Thursday, when it was expected that directors would discuss who would succeed Mr. Redstone.AdvertisementThe likely successor is Philippe P. Dauman, the Viacom chief executive. But unlike Mr. Moonves’s appointment at CBS, it is not expected to be a unanimous vote because he appears not to have the support of Mr. Redstone’s daughter, Shari Redstone, who now is vice chairwoman of CBS and Viacom.Advertisement“The elevation of Moonves is unsurprising considering his unique popularity within both the investment community and the industry,” said Brian Wieser, a media analyst with Pivotal Research. “For Redstone-controlled Viacom the news is arguably more meaningful. Investors have been understandably disappointed in the company, and have been generally more disappointed in management in recent periods.”The moves close a chapter in the long reign of Mr. Redstone atop one of the world’s biggest entertainment conglomerates. He won control of Viacom in 1987, took over CBS in 2000 and presided over both through National Amusements, the private theater chain company started by his father. Tenacious and combative in his prime, he was known for monitoring quarter-point fluctuations in Viacom’s stock, has feuded with his daughter and son, and set up a complicated trust arrangement for National Amusements that has created a complex path to succession planning at the two companies.Investors and analysts have raised questions in recent months about his health and whether he should continue as executive chairman of the two companies. A lawsuit filed in November by a former companion challenged his mental capacity and depicted him as a “living ghost.”Mr. Redstone continues to control about 80 percent of the voting stock in the two companies through National Amusements. Viacom and CBS, which used to be one company, formally split in 2006. Mr. Redstone did not release a public statement on Wednesday.Mr. Redstone often said he would live forever and never publicly unveiled detailed succession plans for the two public companies. Rather than clarify the situation, the rare statements he made about the future leadership of the two companies often fueled more speculation and uncertainty, setting the stage for what many analysts expect to be a fierce and litigious struggle for power.Most recently, after new reports in May stated that Ms. Redstone was in line to take over for her father as chairman of CBS and Viacom, Mr. Redstone released a statement through a lawyer that decisions about who would succeed him would be made “by the boards of the respective companies and not by any individual.”“Despite press reports to the contrary, such decisions have not yet been made,” Mr. Redstone’s statement said.AdvertisementThe executives who prevail will set the agenda at two of the world’s largest entertainment companies as they try to position themselves for a digital future. Media bankers and analysts also are preparing for CBS and Viacom to be involved in a new a wave of deal activity that could reshape the media landscape in the months and years to come.“Thinking about what this change for CBS and Viacom could mean for the broader media landscape, we believe that changes for the Redstone-controlled empires could be the trigger for media company consolidation as each company will be forced to figure out if they are a buyer or seller in the coming months,” Michael Nathanson, an analyst with MoffettNathanson, said in a research note.While some media bankers have speculated that Mr. Redstone’s death would make way for Viacom and CBS to reunite, Mr. Moonves is said to not support that idea, according to people briefed on his thinking.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The battle for Mr. Redstone’s empire has featured Shakespearean twists and turns. There was the divorce from his wife of 52 years, a second marriage and a string of girlfriends, and bitter public disputes with his children. More recently, the lawsuit challenging his mental capacity has put forth embarrassing claims about his physical condition, his sexual appetite and what it portrays as the “ineffable tragic mental collapse of a great man who enjoyed stupendous business success and fame.”Operating underneath him at his companies were richly paid executives, each making alliances and angling to secure their positions for the long term even as the entertainment industry faced sweeping change. Mr. Redstone’s prized companies have faced turmoil of their own; share prices have plunged about 30 percent at Viacom and 15 percent at CBS over the last year.Another consideration in the succession planning was the employment contracts of Mr. Moonves and Mr. Dauman, both of whom have clauses stipulating that they report directly to their respective boards after Mr. Redstone’s departure. If that does not happen, Mr. Moonves is entitled to a payout totaling about $223 million and Mr. Dauman a payout of about $88 million, according to company filings.The shift at CBS came after Mr. Redstone sent a letter Tuesday to Mr. Moonves and CBS directors announcing his resignation, according to two people briefed on the developments who spoke on the condition of anonymity.The board subsequently met on Wednesday and first offered the chairman position to Shari Redstone. Ms. Redstone declined and instead nominated Mr. Moonves, whom the board approved unanimously. Mr. Moonves has been president and chief executive of CBS since 2006. He will continue in those positions.CBS announced that Mr. Redstone had stepped down as executive chairman and taken the new title of chairman emeritus.AdvertisementThe outlook at Viacom is more complicated.If Mr. Redstone dies or is found to be incapacitated, his stake in National Amusements is to be held by a trust. Voting control will go to seven trustees. Those trustees include Ms. Redstone and Mr. Dauman.In a statement on Wednesday, Ms. Redstone confirmed that the terms of her father’s trust state that she succeed him as nonexecutive chairwoman at both CBS and Viacom.Separately, Ms. Redstone had made a deal with Mr. Moonves for him to take on the chairmanship at CBS, according to people briefed on the discussions. At Viacom, Ms. Redstone has not made a similar arrangement with Mr. Dauman, according to two people. Those who know her say she has not been satisfied with his stewardship of the company, which has struggled in the face of the digital upheaval transforming the industry.In her statement on Wednesday, Ms. Redstone hinted that she would not support Mr. Dauman as chairman.“It is my firm belief that whoever may succeed my father as chair at each company should be someone who is not a trustee of my father’s trust or otherwise intertwined in Redstone family matters, but rather a leader with an independent voice,” she said.Yet Ms. Redstone has told people that she would turn down the position of chairman of Viacom. That leaves the decision to the company’s board.Viacom has been the target of the activist shareholder SpringOwl Asset Management, which has called for replacing Viacom’s management and board. On Wednesday, the firm released a statement urging Viacom’s management and board to appoint an independent director as chairman of the company and that it not be Mr. Dauman.A version of this article appears in print on February 4, 2016, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: A Mogul Dethroned.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.