By MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDFEB. 3, 2016
The China National Chemical Corporation’s $43 billion bid to buy Syngenta is enormous by many measures. But one of the lead advisers who helped put the deal together is just a one-man shop.In Syngenta’s announcement of the deal, one name curiously comes before recognizable firms like JPMorgan Chase, Goldman Sachs and UBS: Dyalco.That happens to be Gordon E. Dyal, the former head of Goldman’s mergers business and a former co-chairman of the firm’s investment bank. He arrived at the firm in 1998 as a partner, coming from its rival Morgan Stanley.Mr. Dyal, who was based in London, had counted Syngenta as a client for years.He stepped down last spring, and many presumed he would end up spending much of his time on his ranch in Montana, a sprawling lot near property owned by David Letterman.AdvertisementHis emergence as an adviser on a blockbuster merger is only the latest instance of star deal makers who land plum assignments independently of their former employers.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In 2012, for example, Michael S. Klein, a former rainmaker for Citigroup, played a critical role in the long-awaited merger of Glencore International and Xstrata. He has since set up his own shop, known as M. Klein & Company.AdvertisementAnd then there is Paul Taubman, the veteran mergers banker who left Morgan Stanley in 2012 after clashes with his co-head of the firm’s banking and trading unit. Since leaving, Mr. Taubman went on a tear while flying solo, including helping broker Verizon’s $130 billion deal to buy full control of its cellphone unit from Vodafone and Comcast’s since-aborted $45 billion bid for Time Warner Cable.Mr. Taubman eventually built his own firm, first by poaching senior deal makers from Morgan Stanley and elsewhere, and then by taking over the Blackstone Group’s advisory business to create the publicly traded PJT Partners.Whether Mr. Dyal will follow that path remains to be seen.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.