By BILL VLASICFEB. 3, 2016
DETROIT —  With American consumers buying new vehicles in record numbers, General Motors is raking in big profits and promising even better earnings in 2016. G.M., the nation’s largest automaker, said on Wednesday that it earned a profit of $9.7 billion in 2015 primarily because of its strong performance in its core North American market.The results were bolstered by special items, including changes in valuations for certain assets, which added $1.5 billion to its net income.The valuation adjustments helped G.M. overcome other charges it took last year to settle a Justice Department investigation into defective ignition switches tied to at least 124 deaths and to compensate victims of accidents in the affected vehicles.G.M. said its performance was a company record and represented a marked improvement over its net income of $2.8 billion in 2014.AdvertisementDespite concerns among investors that vehicle sales in the United States may have peaked, G.M. executives expressed confidence that the industry will surpass the 17.5 million cars and trucks sold last year.Advertisement“We believe the fundamentals support a continued strong U.S. industry,” Mary T. Barra, the chief executive of G.M., said in a conference call with analysts on Wednesday.Ms. Barra said G.M.’s strong earnings would help it add models and invest in electric vehicles and other new technology.She emphasized that G.M. was behaving more like a technology company than a traditional automaker by investing in ride-sharing services and autonomous vehicles.Like other major carmakers, G.M. is trying to keep pace with technology companies like Google that are developing driverless cars.“We know our industry is being disrupted,” Ms. Barra said. “And we are aggressively leveraging our technology leadership and global resources to lead that disruption.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Still, investors have not rewarded G.M.’s accomplishments with a higher stock price. The company’s shares closed Wednesday at $28.92, which is considerably lower than its 52-week high of $38 achieved last spring.Analysts are giving much of the credit for G.M.’s performance to the economic conditions supporting the soaring market for new vehicles.“G.M.’s strong 2015 fourth quarter and full-year performances certainly reflect the current health of the U.S. auto sector that is benefiting from low gas prices, ready availability of credit and a favorable pricing environment,” said Bruce Clark, senior vice president of Moody’s Investors Service.AdvertisementHe said G.M. was “doing a good job of controlling costs, managing production in line with retail demand and keeping its new product pipeline fresh.”For the year, G.M. reported revenues of $152.4 billion, compared with $155.9 billion in 2014. It said the change was mostly related to the negative impact of currency exchange rates in some markets.The company said results in North America were the driving force behind its record performance.G.M. said it earned a pretax profit of $11 billion in the region in 2015. Under the terms of the contract it signed last year with the United Automobile Workers, the results translate into profit-sharing checks of as much as $11,000 for each of its 49,000 hourly employees.The automaker had varied results in other global regions, reporting pretax losses of about $800 million in Europe and $600 million in South America, and a pretax profit of $1.4 billion in its international division that includes China.For the fourth quarter of last year, G.M. said it earned net income of $6.3 billion, which represented a significant gain over the $1.1 billion it earned in the fourth quarter a year earlier.The company posted revenue of $39.6 billion in the fourth quarter, which was about the same as the previous year.A picture caption on Thursday with an article about General Motors’ annual earnings misidentified the Chevrolet model that was shown being unveiled at the event. It is a Chevrolet Bolt, not the company’s Volt model.A version of this article appears in print on February 4, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Buoyed by North America, G.M. Posts $9.7 Billion Profit for 2015.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.