By LANDON THOMAS Jr.NOV. 9, 2015
Pimco, the bond investment giant, responded on Monday to a $200 million lawsuit filed by its former star portfolio manager, William H. Gross, by asking that his claim be dismissed as “legally groundless.”Mr. Gross sued his former company about a month ago, arguing that he was illegally removed from the firm, where he had worked for 40 years, and was deprived of money owed to him.Pimco recently hired the prominent lawyer David Boies to lead its defense.And while Mr. Gross has chronicled a Shakespearean plot on the part of his former colleagues to force him from a firm that he had made famous, Pimco has left out the lurid details in its response, dismissing the claim as more a vindictive screenplay than a serious legal document.“This suit is only the latest step in Mr. Gross’s effort to resurrect a personal reputation damaged by his own unacceptable behavior,” Pimco said in a preliminary statement.AdvertisementPimco gave no specific examples in terms of this conduct, although it was widely known that Mr. Gross was quick to anger and would on occasion raise his voice in exchanges with his colleagues.In a response, Mr. Gross’s lawyer, Patricia L. Glaser of Glaser Weil Fink Howard Avchen & Shapiro, said, “We are disappointed that Pimco has chosen to use a procedural tactic to delay getting to the merits of the case.”AdvertisementShe said that Pimco’s response did not “dispute the substance of Mr. Gross’s allegations in any material way.”In the statement, Pimco said that in his last year at the firm Mr. Gross had “engaged in a pattern of conduct that was incompatible” with Pimco’s values.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Pimco has argued that there was no breach of contract connected to Mr. Gross’s departure and that he had no further rights to the firm’s profit-sharing plan.Pimco has been doing the best that it can to leave all the drama surrounding Mr. Gross’s last days at the firm in the past. It has presented a revamped leadership structure to investors, under the supervision of a new investment chief, Daniel J. Ivascyn.But with funds still leaking out of the total return fund that Mr. Gross once managed, continued publicity related to their former star manager does the firm little good.“Pimco has moved forward since Mr. Gross’s resignation,” the firm said. “It is time for him to do the same.”A version of this article appears in print on November 10, 2015, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Bond Giant Answers Suit From Former Star Manager.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.