By ALEXANDRA STEVENSONFEB. 5, 2016
Whether it is the billionaire Steven A. Cohen’s family office or a global bank, federal and state regulators are increasingly insisting on a monitor as part of the settlement of legal charges with firms.And now, two former federal prosecutors who trained under Mary Jo White, the former United States attorney for the Southern District of New York, are setting up their own firm to tap into the growing demand for such supervisors.The women behind the new firm, the Pallas Global Group, know a lot about this growing corner of the regulatory world. Bonnie Jonas was the deputy chief of the criminal division in the Southern District of New York, and Tiffany Moller was the assistant deputy commissioner and chief of compliance and oversight of the New York Police Department.For more than a year, Ms. Moller was charged with overseeing investigations into the use by the New York Police Department of tactics like the chokehold. The maneuver was banned by the department 20 years ago but has resurfaced as an issue once again after the death of Eric Garner on Staten Island. Ms. Moller also oversaw the adoption of new protocols and pilot programs for the department, like the wearing of video cameras by police officers.AdvertisementAs a federal prosecutor, Ms. Jonas most recently led the criminal investigations of General Motors and Toyota, which both resulted in settlements with federal authorities. As part of the agreement, G.M. paid $900 million and Toyota $1.2 billion in penalties. Both companies also agreed to be subjected to independent monitoring of their safety practices, which have fallen under Ms. Jonas’s watch.Advertisement“In bigger, more complicated cases, those cases can only be resolved with an agreement that big companies are going to be reformed,” said Richard B. Zabel, former deputy United States attorney in Manhattan who is general counsel at Elliott Management, a hedge fund. “Unless you want a government official to sit inside the company, then you need a monitor,” he added.Pallas Global will provide independent monitoring for companies across all industries as well as for government units like police departments, a growing area of focus amid a national debate over the use of police force. It will also conduct claims resolutions and provide administration services.The monitoring of Wall Street firms has become a particularly lucrative new area for former prosecutors, some of whom are also finding work in beefed up compliance departments at hedge funds. Mr. Cohen, whose former SAC Capital Advisors pleaded guilty to insider trading violations, has sought to fill his new firm, Point72, with former prosecutors and F.B.I. agents. It hired a former federal prosecutor, Vincent Tortorella, and Kevin J. O’Connor, a former United States attorney for Connecticut.Ms. Jonas and Ms. Moller first met working under Ms. White, now chairwoman of the Securities and Exchange Commission, in the 1990s, during Ms. White’s tenure as a United States attorney.Before her 18 years of working in government, Ms. Jonas was a lawyer at Paul, Weiss, Rifkind & Garrison. Ms. Moller was a lawyer at Sullivan & Cromwell and focused on criminal defense of large financial institutions.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We’ve been in the trenches,” Ms. Moller said, adding that their experience will serve them well in a business that requires both investigative skills and the ability to be neutral.Across the corporate world, monitors are being used with increasing frequency as a means to get companies to reform practices deemed abusive or unfair by regulators.Tougher regulatory scrutiny after the 2008 financial crisis and changes to the law have forced many industries to spend more on compliance. “You’re seeing an expansive use of monitors,” Ms. Jonas said.AdvertisementLawrence Byrne, deputy commissioner for legal matters at the New York Police Department, said there was a need for people like Ms. Moller and Ms. Jonas as the demand for monitors continued to grow. Speaking about Ms. Moller’s compliance work at the New York Police Department, he said, “She was essential in setting it up and creating the protocols and systems.”As is often the case in the legal and regulatory world, Mr. Byrne also has direct knowledge of Ms. Jonas’s prosecutorial skills, having defended Royal Ahold in a case that was brought against its executives by Ms. Jonas and the S.E.C.In the hedge fund and private equity industry, firms have spent millions of dollars on new compliance measures to make sure they are not ensnared in the regulatory net. One of the best known monitors is Bart M. Schwartz, a former federal prosecutor, who has served as an independent monitor in several government investigations, and at SAC Capital Advisors.Last month, Mr. Cohen reached a deal with the S.E.C. that will bar him from managing money for outside investors for two years. As part of the deal, Point72 will be subjected to examinations by the S.E.C. and will have to retain an independent monitor to watch its trading activities.It is unclear whether that position — a highly coveted one — is still open.A version of this article appears in print on February 5, 2016, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Seeing a Business Opportunity for Firms’ Outside Overseers .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.