By ALEXANDRA STEVENSON, CHAD BRAY and AMIE TSANGFEB. 3, 2016
America’s biggest pork producer and a major agricultural commodities trader have been among China’s prized acquisitions in recent years.Now, the state-owned China National Chemical Corporation, known as ChemChina, has clinched a deal to buy Syngenta, a giant in farm chemicals and seeds, for $43 billion, underscoring China’s desire to secure a sustainable food supply for its population of 1.4 billion people.As in deals for energy and other natural resources, Chinese companies have shown themselves willing to put up increasingly larger sums of money to acquire foreign agricultural counterparts — and expertise.“The background here is that China is very sensitive to dependency on foreign food,” said Derek M. Scissors, an economic policy fellow at the American Enterprise Institute in Washington who studies Chinese overseas investment.AdvertisementGovernment regulators in China have struggled to control and maintain the nation’s food supply chain in recent years. Food safety scandals — for example, when dairy producers sold milk formula laced with melamine, putting 300,000 babies in the hospital and killing six — have produced embarrassing headlines for Beijing. At the same time, as the average income of Chinese families has risen, their taste preferences have changed.AdvertisementHow to meet this growing demand has been a priority for many in China’s food production industry.Three years ago, the president of the state-owned foodstuffs conglomerate Cofco Corporation — which bought the agriculture division of the commodities trader Noble Group of Hong Kong — was at a conference in Beijing showing participants two sets of PowerPoint slides.One slide revealed that 30 million Chinese were eating Western-style foods at the time. Another slide estimated that by 2018, 300 million Chinese would be consuming Western foods, according to Alan C. Middleton, an assistant professor at the Schulich School of Business at York University in Toronto, who attended the conference and recounted a conversation with Yu Shubo, Cofco’s president.China produces nearly one-third less wheat, corn or other grains per hectare (2.47 acres) than the United States, according to United Nations data. A smaller portion of its land is arable because of overcrowding, pollution and a harsh environment in the country’s western region.Even within its farmland, China, with its legacy of industrialization, fast growth and lax regulatory enforcement, has struggled: In 2014, the authorities said nearly one-fifth of its arable land was polluted.Those factors have spurred China to rely increasingly on imports, stoking concern among some officials in Beijing about dependence on foreign supplies of food.Still, the timing of the deal was in ChemChina’s favor. Six months ago, Syngenta said no to a $47 billion takeover attempt from Monsanto, arguing it was too risky. But things have changed significantly. Commodities prices have slumped, decreasing the chances of a big payday for Syngenta.When ChemChina offered to buy Syngenta — but leave Syngenta’s Swiss headquarters and management in place — the answer was an enthusiastic yes.AdvertisementUnder terms of the deal, ChemChina will pay $465 a share and a special dividend of five Swiss francs, or about $4.90, upon closing. That would be the equivalent of 480 francs a share, representing a 22 percent premium to Syngenta’s closing price on Tuesday.But the deal is not just about China’s demand for food security. It is also part of a bigger trend of Chinese companies, often with government encouragement, seeking to take a seat at the table with global corporate chieftains.“ChemChina is yet another in a long line of Chinese companies which say: ‘We want to be a global player,’ ” said Andy Rothman, an investment strategist at Matthews Asia, an Asia-focused asset manager in the United States.Syngenta will remain mostly independent and continue to be run by its existing management, according to terms of the deal, which requires at least two-thirds of Syngenta’s shareholders to agree to sell their stock to ChemChina.“The easiest way to say it is that Syngenta will remain Syngenta,” Michel Demaré, Syngenta’s chairman, said in a video on the company’s website.The deal also comes as Beijing grapples with its long-held resistance to genetically modified crops. China does not generally allow the growth of genetically modified crops for human consumption, though its farmers and processors use them for oils and animal feed. Genetically modified crops face widespread public skepticism in a country where food quality is a constant fear.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Chinese leaders have nonetheless taken steps to nurture a homegrown genetically modified crop industry. Two years ago, China also began to make public efforts to ease that skepticism — a function of a time when it may need G.M.O. crops to feed its growing population.The country has also been seeking resources deals, and consistently tops the rankings when it comes to buying companies in commodities and agribusiness.For its part, ChemChina has been active buying up other companies. It has engaged in more than a half-dozen acquisitions of companies in Europe, the Middle East and Australia.AdvertisementIt recently took a minority stake in Mercuria, a Swiss energy and commodities company, in a move to diversify its portfolio and expand into the energy sector.Last year, ChemChina bought Pirelli, the Italian tire maker, for 7.1 billion euros, or about $7.7 billion. And just last month it sealed a deal for KraussMaffei, a German manufacturer of plastic- and rubber-processing machinery, for about $1 billion.“The discussions between our two companies have been friendly, constructive and cooperative, and we are delighted that this collaboration has led to the agreement announced today,” Ren Jianxin, ChemChina’s chairman, said of Wednesday’s deal. “We will continue to work alongside the management and employees of Syngenta to maintain the company’s leading competitive edge in the global agricultural technology field.”Syngenta, based in Basel, Switzerland, is one of the world’s largest producers of agricultural chemicals, including insecticides, fungicides, herbicides and seeds. The company reported sales of $13.4 billion in 2015 and employs more than 28,000 people in over 90 countries.It was created in November 2000 by the merger of the agribusinesses of Novartis and AstraZeneca.The ChemChina deal is likely to face significant regulatory scrutiny, particularly in Europe and the United States. Some observers expressed skepticism that it would take place at all.Under the plan, four of Syngenta’s existing directors would be part of its new 10-member board, and ChemChina said it would seek to publicly list a minority stake in Syngenta down the road.The question remains whether regulators will block the deal, particularly in the United States. North America accounted for about 27 percent of Syngenta’s sales in 2015.Because of Syngenta’s presence in America, the Committee on Foreign Investments in the United States, a government panel that reviews takeovers by foreign buyers, will probably take a close look at the transaction.The committee raised “unforeseen concerns” in October about a similar deal in which Philips, the Dutch electronics giant, would sell a controlling stake in its automotive and LED components business to GO Scale Capital, an investment fund sponsored by GSR Ventures of China and Oak Investment Partners.Advertisement“ChemChina and Syngenta are highly complementary businesses with relatively limited overlaps in products,” Mr. Ren, the ChemChina chairman, said in a video. “We will work closely with all of the regulatory agencies involved, and we are confident that we will receive regulatory approval.”A version of this article appears in print on February 4, 2016, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Food Needs Again Drive a Big Bid From China.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.