
Common Sense By                     
 JAMES B. STEWART
 
FEB. 4, 2016
With its movie studio, broadcast television network and theme parks, Comcast-owned NBCUniversal sits squarely in the geriatric old-media camp of Disney, Viacom, CBS, 21st Century Fox and Time Warner, all of which are struggling to varying degrees with the digital revolution and innovative upstarts like Netflix.But Comcast startled investors and analysts on Wednesday with earnings that suggested there was still growth potential in old media. Not only did the cable giant stem the tide of so-called cord cutters by adding video subscribers, but results from NBCUniversal were every bit as dazzling as the latest financials from Amazon or Google’s parent, Alphabet.Universal theme park revenue jumped 39 percent for the quarter and the movie business rose 26 percent. Over all, NBCUniversal revenue rose more than 13 percent. Comcast doesn’t break out earnings for NBCUniversal, but operating cash flow rose 8.7 percent.Since 2009, when Comcast first bought a stake in NBCUniversal from its former parent General Electric (an acquisition completed five years ago), NBCUniversal’s cash flow has doubled. The NBC television network, which had been in fourth place for so long (seven years) that many doubted it could be resurrected, is the leading network for the coveted 18-to-49 age group, powered by high ratings for “Sunday Night Football” and “The Voice.” Strong franchises “NBC Nightly News” and “Today” have recouped the top spots in the ratings that had been threatened by scandal (Brian Williams at “Nightly News”) and a tearful on-air departure (Ann Curry at “Today”).AdvertisementUniversal Studios, ranked fifth out of six Hollywood studios when Comcast bought it, was the top studio last year with record-breaking revenue and three blockbusters — “Jurassic World,” “Furious 7” and “Minions” — that topped $1 billion at the box office. The Universal theme parks, long overshadowed by Disney’s, introduced the hugely popular Harry Potter attraction and have doubled revenue since 2010.AdvertisementI sat down this week with Steve Burke, chief executive of NBCUniversal, in his spacious, light-filled office at NBCUniversal’s headquarters at 30 Rockefeller Plaza. Despite the pressures of running a media giant with $28.5 billion in revenue, he looks younger than his age of 57 years. In our conversation, one thing stood out about NBCUniversal, which is true of all old-media companies: It’s all about the people. “This isn’t like manufacturing,” Mr. Burke said. “It’s about talent. If you get that wrong, the whole enterprise goes bad very quickly.”Mr. Burke grew up in broadcast television — his father, Dan Burke, was a former president of CapCities ABC, and Steve Burke worked at Disney under the former chief executive Michael Eisner and then at Comcast, where he was president of the cable division, under the chairman and chief executive, Brian Roberts.Today much of Mr. Burke’s time seems to be spent courting, coaxing, stroking, cajoling — and in some cases ejecting — high-paid, high-profile stars and executives, many with outsize egos. In 2011, Mr. Burke had to replace the prominent NBC Sports head, Dick Ebersol, just four weeks before the rights to the Sochi Olympics were auctioned.Last year, when the NBC Nightly news anchor, Brian Williams, acknowledged he fabricated details about his experiences covering combat in Iraq, Mr. Burke had to put their close friendship aside and deliver an in-person ultimatum to take a six-month leave without pay. (“Agonizing,” Mr. Burke told me.)He flew to California and spent a weekend with Jay Leno to negotiate the delicate transition to Jimmy Fallon as host of the “Tonight” show a year before Mr. Leno’s contract was set to expire.Still, dealing with stars like Mr. Leno and Mr. Fallon can’t be delegated. It was Mr. Burke who coaxed Steven Spielberg back to his production roots at Universal Studios. And some deals — NBC’s multibillion-dollar, nine-year extension of “Sunday Night Football,” for example — are so big they require the presence of Mr. Roberts, Mr. Burke’s boss.While Mr. Burke comes across as genial and low-key, he’s a demanding boss. Of the 16 NBCUniversal executives Mr. Burke inherited from G.E., only four remain.AdvertisementEarly in his tenure, he summoned the top 200 managers to Orlando and told them they had to do better. “I had to be stern,” Mr. Burke said. “People thought everything was fine. It wasn’t. I had to paint reality. I ranked our top 10 businesses based on operating cash flow. Eight of the 10 were in the third quartile,” meaning they woefully lagged their competitors. He charged them to act like owners, not renters — which means to invest for the long term, to take responsibility and to fix problems themselves — a mantra now printed on the back of every NBCUniversal business card. It’s also one emphasized by Warren E. Buffett to the managers running the various businesses at his conglomerate Berkshire Hathaway, where Mr. Burke serves on the board. (Disclosure: I’m a weekly contributor to CNBC, the NBCUniversal-owned business channel.)Tom Williams, chairman and chief executive of Universal Parks & Resorts, has been at Universal for 46 years. “The previous mentality was, How can we take cash out of the business?” Mr. Williams said. “Comcast encouraged, even mandated, reinvestment. We’ve had great success with creative concepts that have resonated with consumers. Steve and Brian have said, ‘Keep reinvesting.’ The returns are stellar.”James B. Stewart, appearing on CNBC, described the situation in Viacom as "King Lear in the board room" and also discussed strong earnings at Comcast.Universal recently acquired 51 percent ownership of Universal Studios Japan, is opening another Harry Potter attraction in Hollywood and is building a new park in Beijing.With NBCUniversal pretty much firing on all cylinders, Mr. Burke has been able to turn his attention to the digital revolution. He said he was looking to hire digital talent, had personally interviewed 25 people in the last month and would probably establish an NBCUniversal digital headquarters in Santa Monica, also known as Silicon Beach. The company has taken $200 million stakes in the digital media companies BuzzFeed and Vox Media, and has started Seeso, a digital comedy channel.“It’s my biggest challenge,” he said. “Big media made the transition from broadcast to cable. But we were still dealing with channels. Now we have to move to digital. Digital is different. The DNA doesn’t already reside in the company.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.At the same time, new media is moving onto NBCUniversal’s turf. Netflix and Amazon have made big splashes with original programming, and the two emerged this year as the biggest buyers at the Sundance Film Festival. Amazon’s chief executive, Jeff Bezos, donned a tuxedo for the Golden Globes, where Amazon’s “Mozart in the Jungle” won this year for best television series in the musical or comedy category.Investors have already declared a winner in this emerging showdown: Comcast stock trades at a price-to-earnings ratio of 18; Netflix’s is 324 and Amazon’s is 425, meaning that investors are anticipating much higher growth at those companies.Still, as old and new media converge, and talent increasingly rivals engineering prowess in importance, it may be worth asking how much old-media DNA resides in digital media giants like Facebook, Amazon and Alphabet. Mark Zuckerberg, Mr. Bezos and Larry Page, their respective chief executives, aren’t primarily known for their people skills, let alone the ability to cultivate Hollywood celebrities and TV stars.Mr. Burke typically shuns the spotlight, and insists that it is the reinvigorated culture and a deep bench that explains NBCUniversal’s recent success and momentum. He said he was also aware that success in entertainment is often cyclical.Still, it’s obvious that recent successes have fulfilled a lifelong goal. “I’m a product of my dad’s influence at CapCities ABC, my time at Disney, and then at Comcast,” Mr. Burke said. “I developed all these theories about how to run a big media company and I finally got an opportunity to try them.”A version of this article appears in print on February 5, 2016, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Old Media, but Still Showing New Tricks.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »