AdvertisementSupported byBy Andrew Pollack and Emmarie HuettemanMartin Shkreli’s grilling by Congress on Thursday proved to be the spectacle that many had long anticipated.Lawmakers excoriated him. He fidgeted, he smirked, he smiled for the cameras. And he refused to answer questions.Mr. Shkreli, the former chief executive of Turing Pharmaceuticals, who is facing federal securities fraud charges, repeatedly exercised his Fifth Amendment right to avoid self-incrimination, infuriating members of the House Committee on Oversight and Government Reform.“I don’t think I’ve ever seen the committee treated with such contempt,” Representative John L. Mica, a Florida Republican, said after Mr. Shkreli was excused and left the hearing. Mr. Mica asked if Mr. Shkreli could be held in contempt of Congress. The committee chairman, Representative Jason Chaffetz, Republican of Utah, said he did not intend to do so.The hearing, about drug prices, focused on the actions of Turing and another company, Valeant Pharmaceuticals International, which acquired the rights to decades-old drugs and increased their prices by huge amounts overnight.Rising drug prices have spurred public outrage, provided grist for the presidential campaign and attracted the attention of various congressional committees.The price increases by Turing and Valeant on obscure drugs account for little in terms of overall drug spending compared with smaller but still substantial increases made by other companies. But these particular increases seem to have spurred outrage even among Republicans, who in general have been less willing than Democrats to criticize the drug industry’s pricing practices.Little of substance was discussed on what to do about the increases. Instead, lawmakers from both parties took turns berating Mr. Shkreli, Turing and Valeant with words like “scandal,” “disgusting” and “disgraceful.”Mr. Chaffetz, citing internal Turing documents, pressed Nancy Retzlaff, the company’s chief commercial officer, into conceding that Turing had increased salaries of some executives to $600,000 or more and had paid $23,000 to rent a yacht for a party.Mr. Shkreli did answer “yes” when Representative Trey Gowdy, Republican of South Carolina, asked if he had pronounced his name properly.Mr. Gowdy, a former federal prosecutor, pounced on that, saying that Mr. Shkreli could indeed answer questions if they were not about the matters for which he was indicted, including whether he had actually purchased the single copy of an album by Wu-Tang Clan. Mr. Gowdy complained that Mr. Shkreli “didn’t have to be prodded to talk” when granting television interviews or tweeting or live-streaming his daily life.Mr. Shkreli replied: “I intend to follow the advice of my counsel, not yours.” Mr. Shkreli’s lawyer, Benjamin Brafman, stood up to intervene but was ordered to sit down and be quiet by Mr. Chaffetz.After being excused and leaving the room, Mr. Shkreli promptly called the lawmakers “imbeciles” on Twitter.Under Mr. Shkreli, Turing acquired the rights to Daraprim, a 62-year-old drug for a parasitic infection, and raised the price fiftyfold, to $750 a pill.Valeant has increased the price of numerous old drugs, but the House committee focused on two heart drugs, Isuprel and Nitropress. Valeant acquired both a year ago and immediately raised the price of Isuprel by more than 500 percent and of Nitropress by more than 200 percent, provoking protest from the hospitals that buy these drugs.Howard B. Schiller, interim chief executive of Valeant, said the two drugs were bought by hospitals, not individual patients, and that hospitals were reimbursed a set amount for the procedures in which the drugs are used. He said Valeant realized it could raise the prices substantially, cutting into hospital profits but not making the procedures unprofitable for them, and not impeding patient access to the drugs.Mr. Schiller, who is running Valeant while the chief executive, J. Michael Pearson, is on medical leave, told the committee that the company now recognized it had been too aggressive on certain pricing decisions.“Where we’ve made mistakes, we’re listening and we’re changing,” he said He said the company had decided to freeze prices of most of its drugs, though he would not say how long that would last.Both Mr. Schiller of Valeant and Ms. Retzlaff of Turing said their companies provided financial assistance to patients, in some cases paying virtually all of their co-payments, so that the high prices should not be a barrier to patients’ obtaining the drugs.Mark Merritt, president of the Pharmaceutical Care Management Association, which represents pharmacy benefit managers, testified that co-payment assistance programs drove up overall medical costs by removing a barrier to the use of more expensive drugs. Patients are spared the out-of-pocket expenses, but insurers are then left to pay the bill for the expensive drugs, eventually leading to increases in premiums, he said.Members of the committee, both Republicans and Democrats, either did not understand the arguments of Turing and Valeant or did not accept them.Representative Matt Cartwright, a Democrat from Pennsylvania, attacked Valeant for increasing the price to hospitals of its heart drugs. “Hospitals are struggling in this country. We have to keep hospitals alive,” he said.Valeant’s shares rose nearly 3 percent Thursday, a sign that investors did not think the hearing did much damage. Turing is privately held.Mr. Chaffetz, the committee chairman, questioned Ms. Retzlaff’s assertion that Turing, a one-year-old company, was losing money, saying the company was “raking it in hand over fist,” and had been planning another price increase for Daraprim.He said the sales of Daraprim were $98 million in 2015. Ms. Retzlaff said that after rebates and discounts, net sales were only $20 million.The most substantial idea discussed to offset such big price increases was to speed up approvals of generic drugs.Isuprel, Nitropress and Daraprim are all so old that they are no longer protected by patents. Before the large price increases, sales of those drugs were probably too small to interest generic manufacturers. But with the greater revenue from higher prices, that could change.However, the Food and Drug Administration has been faced with a huge backlog of applications for approval of generic drugs, giving companies like Valeant and Turing a few years to enjoy high profits before facing competition.Dr. Janet Woodcock, a senior F.D.A. official, told the committee that the agency was making swift progress in whittling down the backlog.Mr. Merritt said in his written testimony that the F.D.A. should consider expedited reviews of generic versions of drugs that have sharply increased in price. The F.D.A., however, typically does not pay attention to drug prices.Elijah E. Cummings of Maryland, the top Democrat on the committee, who had pressed for the hearing to be held, lectured Mr. Shkreli.At one point, after Mr. Shkreli had apparently smirked, Mr. Cummings snapped: “It’s not funny, Mr. Shkreli. People are dying and they are getting sicker and sicker.”He called on Mr. Shkreli to use his newfound fame and knowledge of the drug industry to become an advocate on behalf of patients for lower prices.“The way I see it, you can go down in history as the poster boy for greedy drug company executives or you can change the system. Yeah, you,” Mr. Cummings said.Mr. Brafman, who became Mr. Shkreli’s lawyer only this week, said some of his client’s behavior at the hearing was a result of “nervous energy.” He said it was frustrating that Mr. Shkreli could not counter false statements about Turing because of the pending criminal charges.“When all of the facts about Daraprim and Turing are openly disclosed, I think everyone will recognize that Mr. Shkreli is not a villain, he’s not a bad boy,” Mr. Brafman said after Mr. Shkreli had left the hearing. “I think at the end of this story, he’s a hero.”Advertisement