By JAMES KANTERFEB. 4, 2016
BRUSSELS — Growth across the European Union will be slower than previously estimated this year and next as the world economy shifts into a lower gear and European leaders wrangle over how to handle an influx of refugees, officials warned on Thursday.European Union officials said in a forecast that a drop in China’s external trade was expected to hurt the European economy, that reactions in Europe to large-scale migration from the Middle East and Africa could impede trade between European countries, and could distract policy makers from making sorely needed economic overhauls.The lack of a unified response to the migration crisis in the European Union has led countries like Denmark and Germany to temporarily re-establish border controls with neighboring member states. That threatens to slow commercial truck traffic and other cross-border business, and presents a significant economic risk, particularly if there is a surge in migration this year.The turmoil is also threatening the European Union’s Schengen agreement, which normally allows for borderless travel in much of the bloc.Advertisement“There is a high cost for our economies if Schengen would be at risk,” Pierre Moscovici, the European commissioner for economic and financial affairs, told a news conference.AdvertisementGovernment investment in accommodating migrants and enhancing border security could lift growth in some European countries by up to 0.5 percent, Mr. Moscovici said. But it is too early to make any forecasts about the net effect of the influx, he said.In China, efforts by the leadership to rebalance the economy away from low-end manufacturing have put markets around the world on edge. That has helped to stir concerns about a “disorderly adjustment in China,” the commission said in a short statement accompanying its forecast.The commission’s statement also warned of risks from a further interest rate increase in the United States that could cause disruption in financial markets, and from a further fall in oil prices that could hurt oil exporting countries and crimp demand for European exports.Mr. Moscovici played down the risks that Britain — the second biggest economy in the European Union last year after Germany — would vote to leave the bloc in a referendum that is expected to be held as soon as June.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I’m not talking about Brexit because we are all fighting to avoid that risk,” said Mr. Moscovici, using the shorthand for a British vote to exit the bloc. “That’s why it’s not in these forecasts, because it’s not in our minds.”The European Commission, the executive arm of the European Union, cited numerous “supportive” factors that were helping to offset those risks, including plunging oil prices, low interest rates and cheaper exports after the decline in the value of the euro against the dollar, according to the statement.As a result, the commission’s growth forecast was only slightly more pessimistic than its previous predictions.The commission said that the economy of the 28-member European Union grew 1.9 percent last year — in line with its previous forecast, in November. But it lowered its forecasts by 0.1 of a percentage point in 2016, to 1.9 percent, and by the same amount in 2017, to 2 percent.AdvertisementThe United States economy has been growing faster than that of Europe in the past few years — by 2.4 percent in 2015, for example — although it, too, has shown signs of slowing.The European Commission estimated on Thursday that the 19-member eurozone grew 1.6 percent last year, and that it would grow 1.9 percent in 2017. Those figures were in line with its previous forecasts. But the commission slightly lowered its prediction for eurozone growth this year, to 1.7 percent of gross domestic product, from 1.8 percent.Such a slight decline would represent a reduction in the eurozone’s G.D.P. of about 11 billion euros, or $12 billion, the commission said.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.