AdvertisementSupported byBy Jonathan Soble and Paul MozurNAGOYA, Japan — One by one, Japan’s famed consumer electronics companies have in the last five years given up on the business of manufacturing video displays, thwarted by lower-cost competition from South Korea and China.Each time, the Japanese government has been there to scoop up the unprofitable operations they could no longer afford to maintain. Toshiba, Hitachi, Sony — all of their display businesses were swept up into a state-financed investment fund.The goal was to keep production of liquid-crystal displays in Japan, along with the jobs and technology that go with it. But the final piece of the puzzle the government needs to create a national champion may elude it: Sharp, the century-old company that is Japan’s biggest LCD producer, is looking abroad for help.On Thursday, Sharp said it was leaning toward a takeover offer from Foxconn, the giant Taiwanese contract manufacturer that assembles iPhones and other products for Apple.Foreign buyers that have tried to acquire Japanese companies have often failed — blocked by reluctant managers, a protectionist government or both — but this bid is looking like a deeper test for corporate Japan. It pits the sort of government-led industrial policy long favored by Japanese elites against the forces of a more open global market.Sharp’s chief executive, Kozo Takahashi, said Sharp would take the month to make its decision. On the table are the offer from Foxconn, also known as Hon Hai Precision Industry, and a competing one from the Innovation Network Corporation of Japan, or INCJ, the government-backed fund that has been trying to consolidate the display industry.Foxconn is offering twice as much money — at least 600 billion yen, or about $5 billion — though the bids are difficult to compare directly. INCJ is promising to secure additional support from Japanese banks, whose emergency loans have kept Sharp from going under as its business has deteriorated.Mr. Takahashi suggested that Sharp’s board favored the Foxconn offer, though he denied news reports that Sharp had granted Foxconn exclusive negotiating rights. Those reports, initially by the Japanese national broadcaster NHK, drove Sharp’s share price higher before Mr. Takahashi’s news conference, after the market closed.“We are putting more resources on studying the Hon Hai offer,” Mr. Takahashi said. “We are considering the offers from the point of view of all of Sharp’s stakeholders, its employees and shareholders.”Sharp has lost about $10 billion over the last half-decade as LCD prices have fallen and foreign rivals have grabbed its market share. It reported on Thursday a net loss of 24 billion yen for the latest quarter.INCJ has been courting Sharp for months, and was widely seen as the company’s most likely savior. Japan Display, the company created from the operations of Toshiba, Hitachi and Sony in 2012, has struggled, and its backers hoped that adding Sharp’s production volume would make it more competitive.But Foxconn’s richer bid altered the script.“Even Nikkei started asking whether it’s O.K. to use taxpayer money to save a company that’s basically a zombie,” said Takashi Hiroki, chief strategist at Monex, a Japanese stock brokerage, referring to Japan’s dominant financial newspaper. “Public opinion started to question the old collusive way of doing things, which is good.”Sharp has turned to Foxconn for help before. In 2012, Foxconn’s billionaire founder, Terry Gou, privately bought a minority share in an underused Sharp LCD factory in western Japan. Foxconn simultaneously offered to buy a stake in Sharp itself, though that part of the deal fell apart over a price disagreement.Foxconn’s current move to buy Sharp caps a long effort to expand beyond its core electronics assembly business.Over the last two decades, Mr. Gou built Foxconn by instilling militarylike efficiency on plants the size of cities where Chinese migrant laborers assemble electronics for the world’s biggest companies, including Apple. Yet, as those efforts turned Foxconn into the maker of many of the world’s most popular devices, it also left the company dominant in a market space where margins are low.In recent years, Foxconn has invested in a growing number of industries to improve its profits. In Taiwan, it has bought cellular spectrum and taken a stake in a telecommunications group. In China, it has moved into robotics and electric cars, while also creating a venture capital fund to seed smaller hardware makers.Despite Foxconn’s impressive roster of customers and mastery of the electronics supply chain, analysts have wondered whether it would be able to turn Sharp around. Fixing the company’s difficulties would be a challenge for any company, but for one coming from outside Japan with less understanding about Sharp’s core business, it could prove impossible, analysts argue. They point to Foxconn’s failure in 2012 to close the deal as evidence of a lack of understanding of the business.Still, moves by Apple to use other Taiwanese manufacturers, like Pegatron, to put together some of its phones, and a broader weakness in electronics demand mean the deal may look like a way to find growth through efficiency as the global economy struggles.Jonathan Soble reported from Nagoya, Japan, and Paul Mozur from Hong Kong. Makiko Inoue and Hisako Ueno contributed research from Tokyo.Advertisement