AdvertisementSupported byBy Margalit FoxLorna Jorgenson Wendt, whose high-stakes, highly publicized divorce settlement of 1997 engendered a national conversation about the economic worth of corporate spouses, died on Thursday in Stamford, Conn. She was 72.The cause was complications of multiple myeloma and plasma cell leukemia, her son-in-law Andrew Regier said.Ms. Jorgenson Wendt had been married for more than 30 years to Gary C. Wendt when, in 1996, she learned that he planned to divorce her. At the time, Mr. Wendt was the chief executive of the GE Capital Corporation, the financial services arm of General Electric, which was widely described as the company’s most profitable subsidiary.Connecticut, where the couple’s divorce played out, is not a community property state. Ms. Jorgenson Wendt, who estimated her husband to be worth more than $100 million, refused his proffered settlement of roughly $10 million, demanding 50 percent of his net worth. As a result, she became a nationally known symbol of the company wife as hardworking silent partner.“This is not about need,” Ms. Jorgenson Wendt told The New York Times in January 1997. “I can get along on $10 million, but why should he get $90 million? I entered into this marriage as a partner. I don’t know when he decided that it was not a partnership.”Mr. Wendt countered that he was worth only $20 million and therefore had indeed offered her 50 percent.Because divorce laws vary from state to state, Wendt v. Wendt was not expected to set a national legal precedent, whatever its outcome. But it did set something of a social precedent, raising the question of whether it is appropriate, or even possible, to put a price on traditional spousal fealty.Ms. Jorgenson Wendt argued that she been a crucial associate in her husband’s climb up the corporate ladder — supporting him through business school, maintaining their home, raising their children and serving for years as an indefatigable hostess.“I ran his family very smoothly,” she said in court. “I ran his household. He never had to question what was going on in the household with his family. He came home. He was taken care of. Now, if a man had to do this — if he had to buy his groceries, do all the things that a wife does, plus raise a family, plus keep the home — he couldn’t be where he is today if there wasn’t someone at home allowing him to do those things.”The case spawned both eager anticipation and anxious apprehension among the corporate-jet set nationwide. Ms. Jorgenson Wendt appeared often on television and was featured on the cover of Fortune magazine in February 1998 under the headline “What’s a Corporate Wife Worth?”What Ms. Jorgenson Wendt was worth, according to the 519-page opinion handed down in December 1997 by Judge Kevin Tierney of the State Superior Court in Stamford, was about $20 million.His ruling split the couple’s competing demands, giving Ms. Jorgenson Wendt half of her husband’s hard assets — including cash, securities, homes in Connecticut and Florida and $252,000 a year in alimony — while awarding her a far smaller percentage of his future earnings, 50 percent of which she had also sought.In what The Times later characterized as “the understatement of the year,” Judge Tierney wrote, “This court is mindful that this decision will be read with a great deal of interest by corporate officers.”Ms. Jorgenson Wendt appealed the ruling, requesting at least $35 million. In 2000, Connecticut’s Appellate Court upheld Judge Tierney’s original award.After her divorce, Ms. Jorgenson Wendt spent many years lecturing on financial parity during, and after, marriage. (She strongly recommended prenuptial agreements.) In 1998, she founded the Equality in Marriage Institute, a clearinghouse for information on the subject, which she ran until it ceased operations in 2006.The daughter of a Lutheran minister and a homemaker, Lorna Joyce Jorgenson was born in Minot, N.D., on June 14, 1943. When she was a teenager, the family moved to Rio, Wis., where she fell in love with young Mr. Wendt, a classmate.The couple earned bachelor’s degrees — hers in music — from the University of Wisconsin, and in 1965, after graduating, were married. They began their wedded life, she later said, with $2,500 between them.The Wendts moved to Cambridge, Mass., where Mr. Wendt attended Harvard Business School. Ms. Jorgenson Wendt worked as a music teacher, though she gave up her professional life for good a few years later, after the birth of their first child.When her husband earned his M.B.A., Ms. Jorgenson Wendt was awarded a Ph.T. — an actual certificate, presented by a Harvard dean to students’ wives in those years for, in its words, Putting Hubby Through.Ms. Jorgenson Wendt’s survivors include her companion of 17 years, Spencer Dean Wallin; two daughters, Sarah Wendt and Rachel Nash; five siblings, Karen Rudrud, Kathy Seyberth, Ruth Nordal, Ronald Jorgenson and Rick Jorgenson; and three grandchildren.Mr. Wendt, who remarried in 1998, is now the chairman of Deerpath Capital Management.In recent years, Ms. Jorgenson Wendt, who lived in Stamford and on the Upper West Side of Manhattan, devoted herself to philanthropic causes.Though she became a standard-bearer for compensating the woman behind the man, Ms. Jorgenson Wendt always asserted that her case was more about principle than payout.“I was not a 10 percent partner in our marriage, I was a 50-50 partner,” she told “CBS This Morning” in 1997. “He may have earned the bacon, but I shopped for it.”Advertisement