AdvertisementSupported byBy Jack Ewing and Jad MouawadVolkswagen said on Monday that it would begin talks with worker representatives about how to cut costs, in the latest sign that the company’s crisis over cheating on emissions tests is taking a heavy toll.Separately, the German automaker said it would offer up to $1,000 to owners of diesel cars in the United States affected by the scandal. Some critics quickly called the gesture inadequate.Monday’s carefully worded statement on cost-cutting does not mention layoffs, but nevertheless raises the specter of job reductions at a company with some 614,000 employees, nearly twice as many as Toyota, which produces roughly the same number of vehicles. “In the present difficult situation we must jointly make decisions that factor in economics just as much as employment,” Matthias Müller, the chief executive of Volkswagen, said in the joint statement with the company’s labor leadership.The combined statement with Bernd Osterloh, the powerful head of the Volkswagen works council, was intended as a show of solidarity between the two sides. There have been signs of tension between Mr. Müller and labor leaders, which is unusual at Volkswagen.In a letter to employees on Friday, Mr. Osterloh complained that top executives had no clear strategy for addressing the emissions crisis. He also accused Volkswagen managers of making proposals to cut costs without consulting worker representatives. That is taboo at Volkswagen, where according to a special law, workers have veto power over decisions to move or close factories.Partly for reasons like these, open disputes between labor and management are practically unheard-of. On the contrary, the two groups have been accused of being too close, as in 2007 when high-ranking company executives were accused of paying bribes to worker representatives and financing trips abroad that included the services of prostitutes. A former member of Volkswagen’s management board was convicted of bribing top labor representatives, though charges that he had used company funds to pay for prostitutes were dropped. He received a suspended sentence. While manufacturers in the United States have typically tried to keep unions out of factories, Volkswagen encouraged the United Automobile Workers to organize its plant in Chattanooga, Tenn., over the objections of local political leaders.Volkswagen admitted that 11 million of its vehicles were equipped with software that was used to cheat on emissions tests. This is how the technology works and what it now means for vehicle owners.“The work force will stand behind the company,” Mr. Osterloh said in his Monday joint statement with Mr. Müller. But he also said that the support of workers was conditional on “agreeing on a balanced package of investments, economy measures and forward-looking projects.”The company said in September that 11 million cars, including about 500,000 in the United States, were rigged to produce artificially low emissions readings when being tested. Then, last week, Volkswagen said that it underreported carbon-dioxide emissions for 800,000 cars in Europe and exaggerated their fuel economy. Volkswagen must now repair the vehicles to make them compliant with emissions limits and repay tax breaks that its customers received from European countries.Volkswagen has already allocated nearly 9 billion euros to cover costs stemming from deceiving regulators and customers. That figure does not include future fines that Volkswagen may be required to pay to national authorities or legal judgments from the hundreds of lawsuits filed by disgruntled customers. Nor does it include other financial fallout, like lost sales.Because of the financial toll, Fitch Ratings said on Monday that it lowered its view of Volkswagen’s creditworthiness. If other ratings agencies follow suit, the company will have to pay higher interest rates to borrow money.The offer of up to $1,000 in compensation will be applicable to owners and lessees of 2-liter TDI models affected by the problem in the United States, the company said. The customers would be eligible for a $500 cash card to spend as they wish and another $500 to spend at Volkswagen dealerships, and free 24-hour roadside assistance for three years.Car owners who accept the offer will not be asked to waive future rights to sue or claim other compensation, a Volkswagen spokeswoman said.Volkswagen has already promised to make changes to cars so they comply with emissions limits. The repairs are likely to be costly and complicated, and Volkswagen has not said how they will be carried out.Cars with illegal software include the diesel Volkswagen Golf, Jetta, Beetle and Passat and the diesel Audi A3 sold since the 2009 model year. Volkswagen has already offered cash incentives to owners if they buy or lease a new car, as well as big discounts for new buyers at dealerships.It is unclear whether the offer will be enough to assuage Volkswagen drivers who have expressed anger at the company’s actions. “So basically VW is offering a $500 gift for the fraud it perpetrated on me,” said Elizabeth Humstone, the owner of a 2011 Volkswagen Jetta who lives in Charlotte, Vt., and the chairwoman of the Vermont Natural Resources Council, an environmental group. She said she considered the offer insufficient, saying she was still stuck with a car “I no longer want to drive.”Volkswagen, which called the offer a “good-will package,” also came under criticism from two lawmakers. In a joint statement, Senators Richard Blumenthal, Democrat of Connecticut, and Edward J. Markey, Democrat of Massachusetts, called the offer “insultingly inadequate” and a “fig leaf attempting to hide the true depths of Volkswagen’s deception.” The lawmakers said Volkswagen should offer car owners a buyback option if they wanted to get rid of their cars, or a compensation for the loss of resale value, fuel economy and other damages.Jack R. Nerad of Kelley Blue Book, an auto research organization, said there was a precedent for payments like these. A few years ago, he pointed out, Hyundai agreed to pay a lump sum of $353 to car owners after it admitted to inflating the mileage on some of its models.The Volkswagen offer does not extend to 3-liter Volkswagen, Audi and Porsche models that the Environmental Protection Agency had recently said were also equipped with illegal software. Volkswagen has denied that the software in those cars was designed to cheat on emissions tests.Volkswagen is at the center of multiple investigations in the United States and Europe over the emissions-testing fraud. In the United States, the company faces lawsuits from owners seeking compensation for the decreased resale value of vehicles that were equipped with the illegal software.As Volkswagen contends with the crisis, any job reductions will be particularly tricky to achieve because of the strong voice that worker representatives have in management decisions. Worker representatives hold half of the 20 seats on the supervisory board, in line with laws that apply to all large companies. In addition, the German state of Lower Saxony, where Volkswagen is based, has another two seats on the board and generally votes with labor. That means no major decision can be made without worker support.As a result, Volkswagen is likely to do everything possible to avoid forced layoffs of permanent workers. The company could, for example, reduce use of temporary workers, who under German laws have fewer protections against being fired.In addition, Volkswagen could shorten the number of hours worked. In the early 1990s, when a slump in auto sales pushed the company close to bankruptcy, Volkswagen introduced a four-day workweek rather than lay off workers.Barry Meier contributed reporting.Advertisement