AdvertisementSupported byBy Jack EwingFRANKFURT — Volkswagen said on Friday that it would delay reporting its annual earnings and move back the date of its annual shareholders’ meeting because of uncertainty about the cost of its diesel emissions scandal.The delays reflect the company’s problems from the fallout of its admission in September that it had equipped 11 million diesel vehicles with software that could enable them to cheat on emissions tests.The postponements announced on Friday also highlighted how difficult it was for Volkswagen to calculate the cost of the scandal and prepare credible financial statements. The company, based in Wolfsburg, Germany, faces official investigations in the United States and other countries and lawsuits by thousands of aggrieved car owners.A news conference to present the annual earnings report had been scheduled for March 10, and the annual meeting for April 21. The decision to delay the meeting will also put off a reckoning with fund managers and shareholders, who might have been expected to use the forum to criticize top Volkswagen managers like Hans Dieter Pötsch, the chairman of the supervisory board, and Matthias Müller, the chief executive.“It shows that VW is very uncertain where to go from here,” said Ferdinand Dudenhöffer, a professor at the University of Duisburg-Essen. “They don’t know what to say to their shareholders.”Eric Felber, a Volkswagen spokesman, said the decision to postpone the report and the annual meeting did not reflect any new information. The company simply decided it needed more time to reach conclusions about the costs it faces, he said.Volkswagen might be finding it difficult to arrive at figures that would be approved by outside auditors. The accounting firm PricewaterhouseCoopers already expressed reservations in its review of Volkswagen’s report on third-quarter earnings in October. The firm said that, because investigations of the scandal were not completed, it had not been able to determine whether the amount of money that Volkswagen had set aside was appropriate.The company has set aside 6.7 billion euros, or about $7.27 billion, to cover the cost of making the faulty diesel engines compliant with air quality regulations. In addition, Volkswagen will probably be required to pay billions of dollars, if not tens of billions, in fines and legal settlements. Analysts say the exact cost is impossible to predict.Despite the unexpected delay in financial reporting, Volkswagen shares rose 3 percent in late afternoon trading in Frankfurt after the company said that operating profit in 2015 would be about the same as in 2014, in line with earlier forecasts.It is not unusual for companies to delay earnings. But it is often a harbinger of bad news, according to a 2014 study by Eric So, an associate professor at the M.I.T. Sloan School of Management.Volkswagen acknowledged in September that it had installed so-called defeat devices in cars with diesel engines, including about 600,000 in the United States, to get around limits on nitrogen oxide pollutants linked to lung ailments.Volkswagen’s attempts to put the scandal behind it have been bumpy. In the United States, the Environmental Protection Agency and the California Air Resources Board have rejected the company’s proposals to fix Volkswagen brand diesels, as well as some diesel vehicles produced by its other brands, Audi and Porsche, so they no longer exceed limits on tailpipe emissions.Mr. Müller caused a furor in the United States last month when he said during an interview with the radio broadcaster NPR that, “We didn’t lie.” He later apologized and said, “We fully accept the violation.”Volkswagen sales have also suffered. In January, the company said sales of Volkswagen brand cars in the United States fell 15 percent compared with a year earlier, to about 20,000 vehicles. Sales of the Passat, a sedan made in Chattanooga, Tenn., that was supposed to lead a Volkswagen resurgence in the United States, fell 43 percent in January to about 3,600 vehicles.Perhaps more alarming for Volkswagen, sales have also been falling in Europe, where the company is by far the largest carmaker. Even in Germany, where Volkswagen is one of the largest employers, sales of VW brand cars fell 9 percent in January.In the European Union as a whole, the Volkswagen brand’s market share slipped to 11.5 percent in December from 12.6 percent in December 2014, according to the European Automobile Manufacturers Association, which has not yet published figures for January. Rivals like Peugeot, Renault and Ford of Europe gained share.Volkswagen said on Friday that it would stick with plans to present an internal report in late April on who was responsible for the deception.The company said it would announce new dates for the report and for the meeting soon.Advertisement