By BROOKS BARNESFEB. 5, 2016
LOS ANGELES — Joe Earley, who resigned in October from the Fox Television Group, where he served in senior leadership roles for more than two decades, will return to his old stamping grounds — sort of — starting Friday.Mr. Earley, 49, has been named president of the Jackal Group, a new television, film and live theater company that is co-owned by Fox and Gail Berman, a longtime entertainment executive. Ms. Berman announced his hiring in a statement on Friday, calling Mr. Earley “an exceptional leader with a sharp eye for terrific content.”Ever since Mr. Earley left Fox, becoming one of the rare executives to leave a top television job without being promoted or pushed, Hollywood has been eager to know where he would land. “My job had become increasingly operational, and I wanted to be closer to the creative side of the business again,” Mr. Earley said by phone. “As fate would have it, the opportunity to work with Gail again was the perfect fit.”It will be a reunion for the two executives. For a number of years in the early 2000s, Ms. Berman ran the Fox broadcast network and Mr. Earley served as her head of communications and de facto chief of staff. By successfully introducing shows like “American Idol” and “House,” the two helped Fox become the top-rated network for the first time in its history.Ms. Berman left in 2005 to become president of Paramount Pictures. Mr. Earley continued to rise at Fox, ultimately becoming chief operating officer of the Fox Television Group, overseeing television marketing, research, talent relations and scheduling, among other duties, across multiple divisions.The Jackal Group, founded a year and a half ago after Ms. Berman’s departure from BermanBraun, a company known for websites like Wonderwall and Purple Clover, already has shows on the air, including the comedy “Cooper Barrett’s Guide to Surviving Life.” Other projects include a TV version of “The Rocky Horror Picture Show,” a new “Addams Family” movie and an Elvis Presley biopic.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.