
White Collar Watch By                     
PETER J. HENNING

NOV. 9, 2015
The recent conviction of Michael Coscia in the Federal District Court in Chicago in the first prosecution for “spoofing” provides more clarity to high-frequency trading firms about how they can operate. The message is to tread carefully when a strategy depends on using orders that will be quickly canceled because the government may claim they are an effort to manipulate the market by fooling others into trading.Spoofing was made illegal in the Dodd-Frank Act, which prohibits “bidding or offering with the intent to cancel the bid or offer before execution.”Mr. Coscia faces a prison term for using an algorithm to enter and cancel large orders for futures contracts in less than a second while placing smaller ones on the opposite side that would become profitable once other firms reacted to his orders that indicated an increase in buying or selling interest.According to the Justice Department, he reaped over $1 million in profits through his firm, Panther Energy Trading, in just a few months using programs intended to fool traders.AdvertisementLike most white-collar crime prosecutions, this one turned on the tricky issue of proving the defendant’s intent. Prosecutors relied on the high volume of orders put out by Panther Energy that in most instances were canceled within 400 milliseconds, about the blink of an eye. To prove Mr. Coscia wanted to spoof the market into believing there was legitimate interest in trading, the government relied on evidence that the algorithm Mr. Coscia had used meant there was almost no prospect that the orders would be completed .AdvertisementIn an uncommon move, Mr. Coscia testified in his own defense, asserting that he “absolutely wanted to fill every order.” The jury found him guilty of six spoofing charges and six counts of commodities fraud, returning its verdict after only an hour of deliberations.That may be something close to a record for deciding a complex white-collar prosecution, indicating that his testimony was far from persuasive.The conviction shows that the volume of canceled orders, along with their size, is a key to proving spoofing. But orders are canceled all the time, with estimates that more than 90 percent are not filled. There are even orders that are intended to be canceled quickly, such as “fill or kill” orders that require the entire amount be traded or it is canceled immediately. So a high volume of cancellations alone might not be sufficient to establish a violation.The government argued that Mr. Coscia was different from those using order types that were likely to result in cancellations because his algorithm sought to cancel every order to drive the market in the direction that would allow him to profit from his small orders while avoiding having the large ones filled. So it was not just the canceling orders alone, but coupling them with profitable trades driven by the cancellations as a way of demonstrating that there was never any intention that the orders be filled — hence, spoofing rather than ordinary market activity.Of course, the reason for trading is to make money, so proving a motive to profit would not be difficult in most cases. It is linking profitable trades to order cancellations that can establish spoofing. The proof of intent comes from the design of a program, not what was in the mind of the person at the moment the orders are entered and canceled. Indeed, the whole concept of high-frequency trading is to eliminate the human element by executing transactions in the blink of an eye.The successful prosecution of Mr. Coscia shows the potential power of the spoofing provision to reshape how high-frequency trading firms operate, because canceling orders becomes the starting point for assessing whether a market strategy crosses the line into spoofing. The more successful an algorithmic program is, the greater the likelihood that regulators and prosecutors will be suspicious of how it operates if it entails a heavy volume of canceled orders.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Although Mr. Coscia’s case involved as many as 14,000 orders canceled over five to six weeks, the spoofing statute says only that the trader must intend that the order not be completed, with no minimum number required to prove a violation.The Commodity Futures Trading Commission and the Securities and Exchange Commission are cracking down on spoofing as a means to constrain some of the methods used by high-frequency trading firms that have raised questions about the fairness of the markets. Reuters reported that Timothy G. Massad, the chairman of the C.F.T.C. who spoke with reporters at a futures industry conference after Mr. Coscia’s conviction, warned firms that “if they’re entering a lot of orders without the intention to consummate, then they should go talk to their lawyers.”AdvertisementAndrew J. Ceresney, the director of enforcement at the S.E.C., said in a speech last Monday that the agency was focusing on spoofing “as well as other modern manipulation and abusive trading schemes.”The conviction of Mr. Coscia is only the first step, as an appeal is likely to challenge the definition of spoofing. In a pretrial motion to dismiss the spoofing charges, he argued that the statute was unconstitutionally vague because it did not distinguish between lawful cancellations of orders and those that constitute a violation. That claim was rejected, and pursuing a vagueness claim on appeal will be difficult because courts are loath to invalidate a statute, especially after a jury verdict.A better line of attack on appeal may be to question the six convictions for violating the broad securities and commodities fraud statute, 18 U.S.C. § 1348. That provision makes it a crime to “execute or attempt to execute a scheme or artifice” to defraud in connection with any commodity or futures contracts.The government argued that entering the orders with the intention to cancel them misled other market participants, who inferred from the orders there was greater buying or selling interest than actually existed. Unlike spoofing, which focuses on the trader’s intent to cancel, a fraud charge requires showing an intent to deceive a victim.It is an interesting question whether an algorithm intended to mislead other computer programs into trading constitutes a fraud. In a typical case, there is a misstatement or failure to disclose information on which the victim relies. But Panther Energy entered legitimate orders, even if they were going to be quickly canceled, so the deception was in how competing algorithms interpreted the orders that resulted in their own trading.Absent a falsehood or some other deception, it is arguable whether spoofing the market is itself a type of fraud, or just a particular form of manipulative conduct that is unfair but not a fraudulent scheme.The prosecution of Mr. Coscia will give the federal courts an opportunity to shape how the law of spoofing develops because the statute gives little guidance in locating the line between permissible order cancellations and a violation. For now, high-frequency trading firms will have to be careful in how they operate to stay away from crossing over into a violation that can result in civil liability and, perhaps, even a criminal prosecution.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »