AdvertisementSupported byThe Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.29 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.44 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.22 percent.The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week:Minnesota Public Facilities Authority, $350.8 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Dallas Independent School District, $305 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.New York City Transitional Finance Authority, $250 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Clark County, Nev., $283.7 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Washington, $522.1 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.University of Illinois, $120.5 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Virginia Commonwealth Transportation Board, $52.7 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.College Station Independent School District, Tex., $68 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.South Carolina, $66.7 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Cleveland Airport System Revenue Bonds, $150.5 million of revenue bonds. Stifel, Nicolaus.Columbus, Ohio, $137 million of general obligation bonds. Bank of America.Community United School District No. 308, Ill., $103.4 million of general obligation refunding bonds. Raymond James.Connecticut Housing Finance Authority, $145 million of mortgage finance program bonds. Bank of America.Cuyahoga Community College District, Ohio, $56.7 million of refunding bonds. KeyBanc Capital Markets.Evergreen Elementary School District. Calif., $50 million of general obligation bonds. Stifel, Nicolaus.Florida State Board of Administration, $1.2 billion of revenue bonds. J.P. Morgan Securities.Guam Waterworks Authority, $143 million of revenue bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Houston Combined Utility System, $800 million of revenue and refunding bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Indiana Municipal Power Agency, $146 million of refunding revenue bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Lamar Consolidated Independent School District, Tex., $107.6 million unlimited tax refunding bonds. Raymond James.Magnolia Independent School District, Tex., $87.4 million of schoolhouse and refunding bonds. Stifel, Nicolaus.Missouri Joint Municipal Electric Utility Commission, $222.2 million of revenue refunding bonds. Goldman Sachs.New York City Transitional Finance Authority, $750 million of subordinate bonds. Bank of America.Pennsylvania Turnpike Commission, $365 million of revenue refunding bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.University Hospitals Health System, Ohio, $181 million of revenue bonds. Bank of America.University of New Mexico, $152.9 million of refunding and improvement bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Wisconsin, $230 million of general obligation refunding bonds. Bank of America.Advertisement