By ALEXANDRA STEVENSONFEB. 7, 2016
For Ray Dalio, the billionaire founder of the world’s biggest hedge fund, Bridgewater Associates, transparency is a core principle.But what is now going on at the top of the firm — long popular with public pension funds and sovereign wealth funds — is something of a mystery.Days after a report of a schism between Mr. Dalio and Greg Jensen, Bridgewater’s co-chief executive and co-chief investment officer, it is unclear whether the turmoil will lead to any change in management.While Mr. Jensen and Mr. Dalio denied anything was amiss, the firm has held discussions on whether Mr. Jensen has too much on his plate with the two executive posts he holds.AdvertisementOn Sunday, Mr. Dalio said the firm was continually assessing the responsibilities of Bridgewater’s executive team. “We need to strike the right balance between him managing the investments as a C.I.O. and managing the business as a C.E.O., and we are figuring out exactly how to do that,” he said.AdvertisementThe statements follow a report by The Wall Street Journal on Friday that things were so tense between Mr. Dalio and Mr. Jensen that the two called on senior employees and Bridgewater stakeholders to take a vote on each man’s conduct.The debate stems from a unique culture at Bridgewater, which is based in Westport, Conn., and manages $154 billion. Employees are encouraged not to say anything about someone else in private that they would not say publicly to that person’s face. The firm’s rules of conduct are detailed in a 123-page book of principles laid down by Mr. Dalio, who founded Bridgewater in 1975.“I learned that finding out what is true, regardless of what that is, including all the stuff most people think is bad — like mistakes and personal weaknesses — is good because I can then deal with these things so that they don’t stand in my way,” Mr. Dalio writes in the book.On Friday, Mr. Jensen played down the idea that he and Mr. Dalio were battling for power.“This story is getting blown out of proportion,” Mr. Jensen said in an email statement. “Ray and I have had (and will have) many disagreements. We have a process for handling them and both of us believe that process is working well.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Dalio, echoing a similar sentiment, said: “The article is a sensationalistic mischaracterization of what is going on.”The issue of just who will replace Mr. Dalio at the helm of Bridgewater has been a cause of concern for investors for years. Mr. Jensen long has been seen as the heir apparent to Mr. Dalio, who is 66. But the dispute at the top may raise concerns about whether Mr. Jensen, 44, will ultimately take Mr. Dalio’s spot.At any hedge fund, especially one that manages as much money as Bridgewater, succession is important because firms are often closely identified with their founders.Whether a hedge fund founder has a clear succession plan is frequently asked by investors. Many of them are institutional investors like pension funds, which will keep their money with one manager for the long term, sometimes for decades.A version of this article appears in print on February 8, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Bridgewater Executives Deny Report of Hedge Fund Rift.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.