AdvertisementSupported byThe Week AheadBy The New York TimesHere’s what to look for this week.Chipotle Mexican Grill plans to close its more than 2,000 restaurants on Monday until 3 p.m. local time to address its 60,000 employees about the food-borne illnesses that have put a severe crimp in its financial performance and have led to lawsuits and a federal investigation.According to Chipotle, the event will be used to thank employees for their hard work in learning new food safety protocols and to explain the steps Chipotle is taking to improve food safety. Several competitors, including Freshii and Moe’s Southwest Grill, are hoping to capitalize on Chipotle’s four-hour closing with special promotions. —Stephanie StromViacom and CBS are scheduled to report earnings this week against the backdrop of a tumultuous battle for power and control within the top ranks of the media giants. Last week, the mogul Sumner M. Redstone resigned as executive chairman of both companies. His successors are Philippe P. Dauman, chief executive of Viacom, and Leslie Moonves, chief executive of CBS. Analysts and investors cheered the appointment of Mr. Moonves. In contrast, Mr. Redstone’s daughter, Shari Redstone, and other shareholders have voiced their concerns about the consolidation of power with Mr. Dauman at Viacom.Media companies are facing corporate challenges in the face of questions about traditional media’s role in an increasingly digital world. Viacom, CBS and others are scrambling to adapt their businesses and dealing with issues like cord cutting, ratings declines and a weak ad market. Viacom and CBS should shed some light this week on how they are faring. Viacom is scheduled to report earnings on Tuesday and CBS on Thursday. —Emily SteelThe question for the Walt Disney Company this week is not whether its quarterly results will be strong. Due out Tuesday afternoon, the company’s numbers, bolstered by sales of “Star Wars”-related merchandise, are expected to be spectacular. Rather, the question is whether Robert A. Iger, Disney’s chief executive and chairman, can execute a broader course correction when he speaks to analysts on a post-earnings conference call.Over the last seven months, as a handful of analysts have pummeled Disney over a slowdown at ESPN, Disney’s stock has fallen 28 percent. “Disney needs to change the ESPN narrative” to show that “longer-term concerns are unfounded,” the influential media analyst Michael Nathanson wrote in a January report. —Brooks BarnesTwo longtime rivals, Coca-Cola and PepsiCo, will announce earnings this week as consumption of their signature beverages continues to slip. Investment analysts have an average estimate for Coke’s earnings, which will be released on Tuesday, of 37 cents a share in the fourth quarter, or a 16 percent decline from the previous year.PepsiCo, whose portfolio of snack foods and cereals helps offset declining soda sales, is expected to report estimated earnings on Thursday of $1.06 a share, or a 5 percent decline from 2014. Both companies’ earnings will probably be negatively affected by the strong dollar.— Stephanie StromJanet L. Yellen, the Fed’s chairwoman, will speak publicly for the first time in almost two months when she testifies on Wednesday before the House Financial Services Committee and on Thursday before the Senate Banking Committee. Ms. Yellen was last seen in mid-December explaining why the Fed planned to keep raising its benchmark interest rate in 2016.Now, because of concerns about turmoil in financial markets and the weakness of the global economy, investors can judge how much of that confidence remains. —Binyamin AppelbaumTwitter will report its fourth-quarter earnings on Wednesday, a pivotal moment for its recently named chief executive, Jack Dorsey, to prove he is on the path to turning the ailing company around. Investors will pay particular attention to the number of new users Twitter added over the last quarter, an issue that Twitter has struggled with since its initial public offering in 2013. —Mike IsaacEuropean Union authorities are expected on Wednesday to propose new rules for gas buyers aimed at curbing the bloc’s dependence on Russia and Russia’s energy giant Gazprom for natural gas. Weaning the bloc off Russian gas has been a priority for a decade, and European regulators are taking several approaches, including a separate antitrust case against Gazprom.The latest effort, to be presented on Wednesday by Maros Sefcovic, a vice president of the European Commission who is from Slovakia, is partly aimed at establishing rules to dissuade Germany from going ahead with Kremlin-backed plans to expand the Nord Stream pipeline system that already delivers substantial volumes of Russian gas to Europe. —James KanterRetail sales figures from the Commerce Department on Friday are expected to show tepid consumer spending for the month of January, hurt by a blizzard that shut down much of the East Coast during one of the critical post-holiday weekends. Heavy discounting by retailers desperate to get rid of inventory after a similarly slow December also points to further weakness in retail.In an early sign of lackluster spending, Retail Metrics, a private research firm, said sales at stores open at least a year fell 0.9 percent in January from a year earlier, a far larger dip than analysts had expected. Strong jobs growth and rising wages, however, should soon give spending a lift, and retailers should rebound — if they make it through the tough winter months. —Hiroko TabuchiThe European Union’s statistics agency will publish an estimate on Friday of eurozone growth during the fourth quarter. Economists expect that the region grew about 1.2 percent on an annualized basis, little changed from the previous quarter. The fastest growth may have been in countries like Spain that are bouncing back from the financial crisis. Analysts will also be watching closely for signs of a rebound in Italy, which has seen little growth for a decade. —Jack EwingAdvertisement