AdvertisementSupported byItinerariesBy Julie WeedIt has been a winter to forget for many ski resorts in the Northeast, even with a heavy storm forecast for Monday night. At Killington in Vermont, fewer than half the trails are open. Even the January blizzard passed it by.But all is not lost for the resort. Prospect Capital Management, an investment firm in Manhattan, will fill 62 rooms at the Killington Grand Resort Hotel this week. Next week 170 employees from a technology company will descend on the resort, the first of three groups totaling 430 guests from the company this winter.Instead of skiing, guests can always use the resort’s spa or ride on a newly installed mountain coaster. They are part of $2.5 million in new investments, including a mountainside yurt, made in part to attract conferences and corporate retreats.For Killington and other ski resorts, conferences help fill the hotel during slower periods, particularly on weekdays, when recreational skiers are working. They are also a more dependable source of revenue, often booking blocks of rooms months in advance.It is a longtime strategy that has taken on greater significance, industry officials and analysts said.“The unevenness of winter is problematic,” Michael Berry, president of the National Ski Areas Association, “but more conferences and meetings can help ski resorts that invest in that area to get very close to break-even from a cash flow standpoint.”While the association does not collect data on corporate versus recreational business over all, Mr. Berry said, “More and more resorts are building hotels that have meeting and convention elements, showing that this is a growing segment of the business.”Taconic Hotel, a Kimpton property that opened in December near Bromley and Stratton Mountain Resort in Vermont, was built with business clients in mind. Topnotch Resort in Stowe, Vt., renovated 9,000 square feet of conference space in 2013.For companies and their meeting planners, heading to a ski resort at the start of a new year is a way to reward top performers, show appreciation to major partners or gather to plan for the months ahead.Reitler, Kailas & Rosenblatt, a Manhattan law firm, started holding a small gathering at Killington, Vt., 10 years ago to thank its most important clients and to network with them. Since then, the firm has expanded the event. This year, it rented 130 rooms at the Killington Grand Resort Hotel, more than five times as many as for its first conference. The gatheringnow includes investors and young entrepreneurs.Although his firm’s annual event was called “V.C.s on Skis,” Imtiaz Zainule, the firm’s controller, said that weather conditions during the annual March event in the last four years have varied between three feet of fresh snow and 80-degree heat at the base of the mountain.“A few years ago, we had to turn the whole thing from a ski weekend to a golf weekend,” he said.Resorts are offering a range of activities, including new spa treatments, skeet shooting and meet-and-greets with Olympic athletes. A few resorts have put in zip lines, bowling lanes and rope courses, partly to hedge against warm winter weather.Killington’s new Beast Mountain Coaster, which takes riders down the mountain on an elevated steel track much like a roller coaster, was introduced over the summer and runs all year, snow or no snow.Westgate Park City Resort and Spa in Utah hired a business development director last year to target the corporate market.“The business meetings provide a great base to insulate us from the ups and downs of snowfall,” said Jim Goslin, Westgate’s director of group sales.Not only do his larger groups, which take up 50 rooms a night or more, book months in advance and come regardless of the snow, they also “tend to book additional activities such as a trip to Olympic Park, a day of spa treatments for the group or dine-arounds to mitigate the impact of a low snow year,” he said. These extras add to the hotels’ per-guest bottom line.Another important reason to attract corporate customers is that workers may be inspired to return when conditions improve. “The clients are generally from an upper-income level as well, and we hope they return with their families,” Mr. Goslin said.The Omni-Mount Washington Resort, which hosted the 1944 Bretton Woods International Monetary Conference, opened 30,000 square feet of meeting space and a 25,000-square-foot spa and salon in 2009.The focus is paying off, according to Craig Clemmer, the resort’s director of sales and marketing. Last month, a range of companies booked hotel time, including Keurig, Apex Driving Events, a pharmaceutical company and two financial institutions.Mr. Clemmer likened the varying snow to any outdoor weather uncertainty.“It’s like when rain cancels a golf tournament,” he said. “We might do an indoor putting contest in the ballroom and hold a bourbon tasting.”Last year, the snow was a different story. Guests were snowmobiling in October, Mr. Clemmer said. “This year we haven’t really started that activity yet,” he said.Advertisement