By LESLIE PICKERNOV. 9, 2015
The Match Group is seeking a valuation of about $3.1 billion as it prepares for an initial public offering.The company, which owns the online dating brands OkCupid and Tinder, said on Monday that it planned to sell 33.3 million shares for $12 to $14 apiece. Those terms indicate an offering size of $433 million and a market valuation of $3.1 billion at the midpoint.In setting these terms, Match begins a roadshow, meeting with investors who will help the company set an official I.P.O. price in a few weeks, based on demand.The media conglomerate that owns Match, IAC/InterActiveCorp, whose chairman is Barry Diller, has been acquiring a number of dating sites over the last few years. As the online-dating industry increased in popularity, legacy sites like Match.com started facing more competition from free models like OkCupid. Mr. Diller’s strategy was to build scale by acquiring a portfolio of brands – now 45 in all – and eventually spin them off under the Match umbrella.Match is selling 14 percent of itself in the I.P.O., the first step in a split from IAC. But IAC will maintain control.AdvertisementMatch will give three classes of stock, by which IAC’s Class B shares will represent an economic stake of 86 percent and 98.4 percent of the voting power. The class of shares sold to the public through the I.P.O. – known as common stock – will have 1.6 percent of voting power. There will not be shares of Class C, the third class, outstanding after the I.P.O.AdvertisementMatch plans to use the proceeds generated from the I.P.O. to repay debt to IAC.The company, based in Dallas, generates revenue from both paid subscribers and advertising. Match had $752.9 million in revenue during the first nine months of the year, an increase of about 16 percent from the year prior. Match had 4.7 million paid members during the quarter through Sept. 30.One thing that could differentiate Match from other companies that have gone public recently: profit. The company generated $84.7 million in net earnings during the nine months through September, although that narrowed from the same period a year prior, as Match spent more on product development and general and administrative expenses.JPMorgan, Allen & Company and Bank of America Merrill Lynch are managing the offering. The stock will be listed on the Nasdaq stock market under the symbol MTCH.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.