By MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDFEB. 9, 2016
In its first six weeks, 2016 has largely been devoid of big initial public offerings. But a major food distributor is planning to change that.US Foods disclosed on Tuesday that it intended to go public, less than a year after its planned merger with a rival, Sysco, collapsed because of opposition from government regulators.US Foods, which is owned by the private equity firms Clayton, Dubilier & Rice and Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Company, is the biggest company to file for an offering so far this year.The pace of companies entering the public markets has been slow in the new year, as economic turbulence has made would-be debutants wary. Just a handful of businesses have gone public in 2016, including two small biopharmaceutical companies.AdvertisementAn initial public offering of US Foods was presumably not the first choice of its owners, who bought the business from the Dutch supermarket operator Royal Ahold in 2007 for $7.1 billion. In late 2013, Clayton Dubilier and K.K.R. agreed to sell US Foods to Sysco for $3.5 billion.AdvertisementBut the Federal Trade Commission sued to block the deal, arguing that combining the country’s two biggest food distributors could harm schools, hospitals and other customers.Even after Sysco and US Foods proposed compromises like selling some divisions, a federal judge sided with the F.T.C. in believing that the merger would be bad for competition.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Private equity firms often tend to prefer an outright sale of a company they have acquired instead of an initial public offering, since such a move is quick and decisive. In an initial offering, these firms must often wait several years to fully sell their stakes.Tuesday’s filing listed a $100 million preliminary target to determine the registration fee but otherwise did not disclose fund-raising ambitions.According to the filing, US Foods has had sales rise modestly almost every year since 2010. But revenues in the first three quarters of 2015 were essentially flat from the previous year, at $17.2 billion. The company reported a $177 million profit last year, swinging from a $121 million loss in 2014.US Foods operates under a significant debt load. The company reported $4.7 billion in total debt as of Sept. 26, or roughly 6.5 times its earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization.The company plans to trade on the New York Stock Exchange under the ticker symbol USFD. Other information about the offering, including which banks will lead the stock sale, was not disclosed.A version of this article appears in print on February 10, 2016, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: US Foods Plans I.P.O., Revving Up a Slow Year.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.