By LIZ MOYERFEB. 8, 2016
Timothy F. Geithner has joined fellow Warburg Pincus partners in securing financing to make personal investments in the private equity firm’s funds.Mr. Geithner, the former Treasury secretary who joined Warburg two years ago as its president, has a line of credit with JPMorgan Chase, according to a December filing with New York State.Warburg’s co-chief executive, Joseph P. Landy, and four managing directors — Christopher C. Gunther, Peter R. Kagan, James W. Wilson and Daniel Zilberman, — also arranged lines of credit with JPMorgan in the last year backed by collateral that includes stakes Warburg funds, according to the filings.The $12 billion Warburg Pincus Private Equity XII fund would be the first main fund the firm has closed since Mr. Geithner joined it. Before being Treasury secretary, he was president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York for six years.AdvertisementThe former regulator, who oversaw JPMorgan during his time in government, is now playing his part in a common Wall Street practice. Many executives invest in funds managed by their firms, and for some, it is an executive perk.AdvertisementOutside investors have demanded increasingly large commitments from the partners who manage investment funds in the years since the financial crisis.“They want these people to have a lot of alignment” with the interests of outside investors, said Alan Johnson, a consultant on Wall Street executive pay.A spokeswoman for Warburg declined to comment on Monday. The filing was reported earlier by Bloomberg.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Warburg closed the Warburg Pincus Private Equity XII fund in November. It is investing another $800 million of the firm’s money. It said last fall that investors in the fund included pensions, sovereign wealth funds, insurance companies, endowments, foundations and wealthy families, with big interest coming from investors overseas.In late 2014, the firm closed its $4 billion energy fund, which is the companion to an $11 billion general fund it closed in late 2013, just before Mr. Geithner joined the firm.Warburg specializes in investing in five sectors: energy, health care, financial services, industrial and business services and technology, media and telecommunications.Last fall, the holding company for the family of the French billionaire Marc Ladreit de Lacharrière acquired a 5 percent passive stake in Warburg, with a pledge to invest as a limited partner in future funds raised by the firm.The filings do not disclose the size of the credit lines, but in some cases disclose which funds are to be used as collateral.Mr. Kagan, for example, who leads Warburg’s energy group, amended his financing agreement in October to add the Warburg Pincus Energy Partners fund. An earlier filing cited a stake in the Warburg Pincus XI Partners fund.AdvertisementOther Warburg Pincus executives who have credit lines outstanding include David B. Krieger and James Neary, who have financing through UBS, according to filings.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.