AdvertisementSupported byBy Chad BrayLONDON — The chairman of the insurer Standard Life will join Barclays in January as deputy chairman and senior independent director, the British bank said on Monday.The Standard Life chairman, Gerry Grimstone, will replace Michael Rake, who is leaving the Barclays’ board of directors after becoming chairman of Worldpay, a British payment processor, in September. Mr. Rake will leave the board on Dec. 31, and Mr. Grimstone will join as a director on Jan. 1.Mr. Grimstone was appointed chairman of Standard Life in May 2007 and is a former vice chairman of the investment banking business at Schroders. He “commands great respect within the financial services industry and will bring immense experience, integrity and knowledge to the role,” John McFarlane, the Barclays chairman, said in a news release.The appointment continues a series of leadership changes at Barclays since Mr. McFarlane replaced David Walker as chairman this year.Antony Jenkins was ousted as chief executive in July after directors lost confidence in his ability to improve shareholder returns. James E. Staley, known as Jes, is a former top executive at JPMorgan Chase who is to assume the role of Barclays chief executive on Dec. 1.“I am particularly looking forward to supporting John McFarlane and Jes Staley as they seek to complete the cultural transformation of Barclays and accelerate the delivery of sustainable shareholder returns,” Mr. Grimstone said in the news release.Mr. Rake, who oversaw the search for chief executive, has been a Barclays director since January 2008 and its deputy chairman since July 2012. Worldpay announced his appointment as chairman in July.He is also the chairman of the telecommunications company BT Group and president of the Confederation of British Industry, a trade group.“The last eight years have been an eventful and difficult period for the banking industry,” Mr. Rake said in the news release. “However, Barclays is emerging in a stronger position, and I am very confident that it will succeed and prosper under its new leadership.”Advertisement