AdvertisementSupported byBy Chad BrayLONDON — James E. Staley, the new Barclays chief executive, has turned to another veteran of JPMorgan Chase, his former employer, to fill out the bank’s executive ranks.Barclays said on Tuesday that Paul H. Compton, who most recently served as JPMorgan’s chief administrative officer, would join Barclays in May as chief operating officer. In his new role, Mr. Compton would become a member of the executive committee at Barclays and report directly to Mr. Staley.Mr. Compton is the second JPMorgan veteran to join the British bank in the last two weeks. Barclays announced last month that C. S. Venkatakrishnan, the head of operational risk at JPMorgan, would join the bank as its chief risk officer in May.“For nearly 20 years, Mr. Compton has served in a variety of senior operating roles,” Mr. Staley said in a news release. “His huge, directly relevant experience will prove invaluable as we continue our strategic transformation.”Mr. Staley, who is known as Jes, spent more than 30 years at JPMorgan, serving as the top executive in its investment banking and asset management units. Mr. Staley left JPMorgan in 2013 to join the hedge fund BlueMountain Capital Management and joined Barclays in December.After Mr. Compton’s appointment, Jonathan Moulds, the current Barclays chief operating officer, will leave the business to pursue other opportunities, the bank said. Mr. Moulds joined Barclays as chief operating officer last February.In his newly configured role, Mr. Compton will be responsible for operations and technology, structural reform, cost transformation, major project delivery, administration, corporate real estate services and sourcing at the bank.“I’m thrilled to be joining Barclays and its talented team,” Mr. Compton said. “I’m looking forward to working with Jes and the rest of the management team to continue the progress of the business and deliver the performance Barclays’ shareholders expect.”Mr. Compton joined JPMorgan in 1997 and has held a variety of roles at the company. He previously worked for the accounting firm Ernst & Young for more than a decade.Advertisement