By REUTERSFEB. 9, 2016
WASHINGTON — Job openings in the United States surged in December and the number of Americans voluntarily quitting work hit a nine-year high, pointing to labor market strength despite a slowdown in economic growth.The signs of a robust jobs market, reported Tuesday by the Labor Department, could ease concerns about the health of the economy, which were raised by other reports on Tuesday showing a drop in small business confidence in January to a two-year low and further declines in wholesale inventories.“If the labor market is tightening, can the economy really be faltering?” said Joel Naroff, chief economist at Naroff Economic Advisors in Holland, Pa.Job openings, a measure of labor demand, increased 261,000 to a seasonally adjusted 5.61 million in December, the Labor Department said in its monthly job openings and labor turnover survey. It was the second-highest reading since the series started in 2001.AdvertisementThe so-called Jolts report is part of the data watched by Federal Reserve officials to get a pulse on both the labor market and inflation.AdvertisementThe increase lifted the jobs openings rate to 3.8 percent from 3.6 percent in November. The hiring rate was unchanged at 3.7 percent, indicating that employers were having trouble finding qualified workers for vacant positions.A total of 3.1 million Americans quit their jobs in December, the highest number since December 2006. That pushed the quits rate, which the Fed looks at as a measure of confidence in the jobs market, to 2.1 percent — the highest level since April 2008.“Skeptics may argue that these numbers are backward looking, and that spillovers from tighter financial conditions or the energy slump will curb labor market dynamics in the months to come,” said Harm Bandholz, chief United States economist at UniCredit Research in New York.“This is certainly a risk and one important reason why the Fed is currently sitting back and waiting. But why should this happen now when it hasn’t over the past several months? After all, oil prices started to fall in mid-2014, and most of the adjustment occurred in the first half of 2015,” he said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The number of unemployed job seekers per open job, a measure of labor market slack, fell to 1.4 in December, the lowest level since March 2007 and down from 1.5 in November.While a separate report from the National Federation of Independent Business showed that its small business optimism index fell 1.3 points to a two-year low of 93.9 in January, businesses continued to report tightening labor market conditions.Small businesses reported a shortage of qualified workers to fill job openings, prompting some to start raising wages to attract and retain them. The share of small businesses raising compensation increased to its highest level since 2007.“The combination of more job openings and more people quitting could result in pay increases, and we have seen a few other signs that wages have increased as the labor market has tightened,” said Daniel Silver, an economist at JPMorgan Chase in New York.AdvertisementWage growth, which has been frustratingly slow, picked up significantly in January. Still, growth in average hourly earnings is yet to break above 2.5 percent on a year-over-year basis. Economists say wages need to grow 3 percent to 3.5 percent to lift inflation near the Fed’s 2 percent target.In a third report on Tuesday, the Commerce Department said wholesale inventories dipped 0.1 percent in December after dropping 0.4 percent in November.The weak inventory data added to soft December construction spending and factory orders reports in suggesting that fourth-quarter gross domestic product growth could be revised down to an annual rate of about 0.4 percent from the 0.7 percent pace reported last month.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.