AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben ProtessFour years after a trading fiasco upended JPMorgan Chase and cost it $6 billion in losses, a British regulator on Tuesday accused a former bank executive of failing to be “open and cooperative” about the matter, the latest twist in a long-running episode known as the London whale.The regulator, the Financial Conduct Authority, took aim at Achilles Macris, fining him 792,900 pounds, or about $1.1 million. Mr. Macris, the agency said, sugarcoated the extent of the problems JPMorgan had faced in early 2012 as it racked up losses on a soured derivatives portfolio.“A failure to communicate openly with us can affect the well-running of markets and cause unnecessary harm to investors, especially in times of financial stress or crisis,” Mark Steward, the F.C.A.’s director of enforcement and market oversight, said in a news release. “Mr. Macris should have explained the position more squarely, especially when he knew the synthetic credit portfolio’s losses had worsened.”Mr. Macris settled the case, but issued a defiant statement defending his actions. In the statement, Mr. Macris said, “While I maintain that my efforts in this regard were above and beyond any reasonable standard of transparency with regulators, now that the F.C.A. has accepted that I did not deliberately mislead it, I have decided not to prolong what has been a drawn out and burdensome process and have settled.”At JPMorgan, Mr. Macris led the London outpost of the chief investment office, which was supposed to invest money for the bank and help offset potential losses in other businesses. But the unit’s bad bet on credit derivatives in London cost the bank $6.2 billion in 2012.The trader who helped design the bet, Bruno Iksil, was nicknamed the London whale because of the outsize nature of his position.The ensuing scandal engulfed the bank, which ultimately paid more than $900 million to resolve investigations by regulators in the United States and Britain. The regulators accused the bank of misstating its financial results and lacking sufficient internal controls, a reputational blow to a bank that was known for managing risk.The episode put a rare spotlight on JPMorgan’s leader, Jamie Dimon, and weakened its standing in Washington. JPMorgan also cut ties with several employees linked to the trading.Federal prosecutors in Manhattan filed criminal charges in the case, not against the London whale himself, but against two of his colleagues.Those cases have stalled because of hurdles in the extradition process. One of the traders lives in his native France, which typically does not extradite its citizens. The other was arrested while on vacation in Spain, his home country, and last year a Spanish court declined a request for extradition.Both men, however, still face civil cases from the Securities and Exchange Commission. The agency is expected to obtain depositions from the men in Europe beginning in May, setting up a possible trial for next year.Mr. Macris, who oversaw Mr. Iksil and the two men criminally charged, faces no action from regulators or prosecutors in the United States.In the F.C.A. case, the agency said that the synthetic credit portfolio began to suffer significant losses from the beginning of 2012 and that traders were told that March to make no further trades.At the time, Mr. Macris asked for internal daily risk reports on the portfolio and took a variety of measures, including requesting assistance from other parts of JPMorgan and arranging daily progress meetings with traders and risk managers, the authority said.In late March 2012, he attended a supervision meeting with the regulator at which the portfolio was discussed, the F.C.A. said. The regulator said it was told that the portfolio had lost $200 million and that it had experienced rebalancing problems, but that it was balanced at that time and required no additional trading.“Mr. Macris did not provide the authority information about the full extent of the difficulties that the synthetic credit portfolio was then facing,” the F.C.A. said.In April 2012, Mr. Macris took part in a telephone call with the authority and allowed “an inaccurate impression to be given” that there had been no changes since the March meeting with regulators, despite knowing the losses in the portfolio had grown.Mr. Macris could have been fined as much as £1.1 million, but he was given credit for agreeing to settle the claims at this stage of the investigation, the F.C.A. said.Mr. Macris has separately sued the authority, saying that he was improperly identified in the regulator’s notice when it fined JPMorgan in 2013. The notice, he said, “wrongly and unfairly accused me of deliberately misleading” regulators without offering him a chance to rebut the claims.The F.C.A. has challenged his view in court, but was unsuccessful last year in its appeal of a court finding in favor of Mr. Macris. The agency has asked the Supreme Court of Britain to review the finding and a hearing is expected this year.“Today’s outcome represents a major climbdown by the F.C.A., after four years that I have spent fighting to clear my name,” Mr. Macris said in a statement on Tuesday.“That notice was released to the public without the F.C.A. ever having properly heard my side of the story,” he said in the statement. “Today the F.C.A. has finally accepted that this allegation against me was utterly wrong.”Advertisement