By VICTORIA FINKLEFEB. 10, 2016
WASHINGTON — The “too big to fail” label is finally having its day in court.A federal judge raised tough questions on Wednesday over regulators’ decision to designate the insurer MetLife as “systemically important” to the financial system.Judge Rosemary Collyer focused on how a body of regulators, known as the Financial Stability Oversight Council, made its decisions about companies that could harm the economy, as well as whether regulators followed their own guidelines in the MetLife case.“I’m trying to figure out if this is a reasonable way for this process to work,” she said in the Federal District Court for the District of Columbia.MetLife sued the government in January 2015 after regulators determined the insurer was a “systemically important financial institution,” or a Sifi, that could damage the entire economy in times of distress. The company is being represented by Eugene Scalia, a partner at the law firm Gibson, Dunn & Crutcher and the son of Justice Antonin Scalia. He has accumulated a handful of decisive wins against the Securities and Exchange Commission and the Commodity Futures Trading Commission over the last decade.AdvertisementWhile banks are subject to stricter supervision based on asset size under the Dodd-Frank reform law, regulators are empowered to look at insurers and other financial institutions based on a variety of factors, including how a firm is interconnected with other companies and the scope of existing regulation, when deciding whether it is systemically important. Designated firms are subject to stricter oversight by the Federal Reserve. The financial oversight council has also labeled Prudential Financial and the American International Group, along with General Electric’s financial unit, GE Capital.AdvertisementJudge Collyer examined several aspects of the government’s defense of the MetLife designation. She took issue, for example, with the structure of the council, asking whether it has appropriate systems in place to separately gather the evidence and analyze the numbers about possible Sifis and then fairly judge the firms.There is “nobody neutral” in the process, the judge said.She also raised questions about whether regulators changed their designation process for the insurer from that laid out in earlier interpretive guidance.MetLife has argued that the agency improperly imagined a situation in which the insurer was in financial distress and measured the predicted impact, as opposed to considering the probability that it would find itself on the brink of bankruptcy. The government, MetLife says, initially said it would do the latter when looking at a firm’s riskiness.Regulators “keep changing the rules of the game and raising the bar so that MetLife cannot win,” Mr. Scalia said in court.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The judge noted that the council was focused on a need for consolidated oversight by regulators, which could make it hard for any large institution to ultimately “escape” designation once it is being investigated.Eric Beckenhauer, a lawyer for the Justice Department, sought to alleviate the judge’s concerns, arguing that there was no mandate that regulators could not blend their functions when making a designation. He defended regulators’ interpretation of the Dodd-Frank law and its own guidance document in the MetLife case.Still, despite the sharp questioning, MetLife may face an uphill fight, given the courts are often inclined to defer to the judgment of regulators.Judge Collyer, who will decide the case, noted several times that the Dodd-Frank law asked regulators to designate institutions that “could” threaten the financial system, language that invites a certain amount of discretion.Advertisement“You can’t run away from it,” because the wording is in the statute, she said, adding that it is “not a high bar.”At the same time, the designation process is already having a real-world impact on the financial industry, even as the legal challenge plays out. MetLife announced last month that it was selling a large chunk of its American life insurance business, partly in response to regulatory factors. General Electric is also divesting its financial unit to escape new rules and A.I.G. is streamlining parts of its business.MetLife is the first to take the battle over the designation process to court, but others could follow if it is successful.While those worried about “too big to fail” see this downsizing as a sign the financial reform law is working, financial industry officials argue that it is unfairly disruptive to the system. “Perhaps this wasn’t intended as punishment,” but being labeled systemically important has “costs” and “burdens,” Mr. Scalia said.A version of this article appears in print on February 11, 2016, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: MetLife Makes Its Case Against ‘Too Big to Fail’.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.