
Breakingviews By                     
KEVIN ALLISON and


ROB COX

FEB. 10, 2016
Anheuser-Busch InBev is getting the better of Asahi of Japan on three middling beer brands. While the $2.9 billion price tag is a bit lower than expected, the Japanese brewer’s acquisition of Peroni, Grolsch and Meantime clocks in at what may be some 25 times one measure of operating profit. The deal is only justifiable under the demographic logic of the buyer’s shrinking home country.It could be worse: The Yomiuri newspaper in Japan reported last month that the $14 billion Japanese brewer was limbering up to pay as much as $3.4 billion for the brands, the sale of which is intended to ease antitrust clearance for AB InBev’s takeover of SABMiller. Investors pushed the value of Asahi’s shares down 8 percent on Wednesday in Tokyo, before the deal was announced.But even at the lower price, Asahi is paying up for some so-so businesses. Financials provided by the acquirer show combined earnings before interest and tax at Italy’s Peroni and the Netherlands’ Grolsch fell by more than a quarter to around 50 million euros in the fiscal year that ended in March 2015. Hold that figure steady, add in import sales of the brands growing at 30 percent and assume that the tiny but fast-growing British craft brewer Meantime’s operating profit doubles, and it pegs the value of Asahi’s offer at roughly 25 times the combined EBIT, well above the 15 times Asahi itself fetches.Using different metrics, the deal looks less frothy. Leave out depreciation and amortization, and Asahi is paying around 15 times the midpoint of various estimates of the three brands’ Ebitda for the year ending in March. That’s still higher than Asahi’s own 10 times Ebitda multiple. And the Japanese buyer’s tiny footprint in Europe means there are few obvious opportunities to wring out cost savings.True, Japanese companies have a lower cost of capital than many of their Western counterparts. It’s also plausible that buying a clutch of European brands with decent cachet — SABMiller considered them among its premium marques — and distribution could eventually help Asahi increase sales of its own brand outside its aging and economically stagnant home market.Still, like Nikkei’s recent $1.3 billion purchase of The Financial Times or Suntory Holdings’ $16 billion deal for Jim Beam, Asahi’s latest acquisition looks like an attempt to escape demographic destiny.An earlier version of this article misstated the size of Asahi’s bid relative to operating profit of the three beer brands. When a 30 percent growth rate of import sales is iactored in, the offer is 25 times the combined operating profit, not 50.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »