AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael J. de la MercedBuried in the latest quarterly earnings report from Natixis, the big French bank, was some surprising news: The firm has acquired a majority stake in one of the United States’ oldest boutique advisory shops.Natixis said on Wednesday that it had acquired a 51 percent stake in the Peter J. Solomon Company, founded nearly 30 years ago as an independent adviser on mergers and other transactions.The deal will give the French bank a bigger presence in the United States. But it will also bring significant financial backing to Peter J. Solomon at a time when boutique investment banks — those without lending or trading arms — have grown in prominence.It will also help solve issues like succession for the firm’s eponymous founder, Peter J. Solomon, a longtime deal maker who created the bank in 1989 after leaving Shearson Lehman Brothers after a clash with his then-boss, Peter Cohen.“It’s a fabulous opportunity for my people and our clients,” Mr. Solomon, who is 77, said in a telephone interview.Wednesday’s announcement was born of a longtime friendship between Mr. Solomon and Guy de Panafieu, a French banker whom he had known since Peter J. Solomon Company formed a partnership with Crédit Lyonnais.Last May, Mr. Panafieu offered to introduce Mr. Solomon to Natixis, describing the French bank as a “terrific firm interested in getting into the U.S.,” Mr. Solomon said.(Mr. Solomon also has a long history of ties to France, having worked in Paris early in his career.)In its earnings release, Natixis said that the deal “will strengthen M.&A. business in the U.S. and is consistent with the objectives of developing asset-light activities and of achieving selective growth on international platforms.”Mr. Solomon declined to comment on financial terms of the transaction. But he said that Peter J. Solomon would retain operating control. Moreover, he has signed a 10-year contract to remain at the firm, though he pointedly added that he did not ask for any extension.The introduction came at a propitious time for Mr. Solomon. He had been thinking about how to handle succession for the firm that bears his name and about the bank’s role in the changing advisory landscape.The firm had carved out a niche as an adviser on deals in the retail and consumer sectors, working on transactions like Google’s acquisition of Zagat and on the proposed merger of Staples and Office Depot. But the boutique’s setup has also meant that it has missed out on some business, like advising private equity firms, because it does not have a lending arm.Mr. Solomon also emphasized that, with the help of Natixis, Peter J. Solomon can continue to evolve in other ways. Hundreds of small advisory firms have cropped up since he founded Peter J. Solomon in 1989. (One of those firms, Centerview Partners, recently hired Peter J. Solomon’s former president, Ken Berliner.)Natixis’ backing could help Peter J. Solomon acquire those smaller advisers.“I think we can be the consolidator of some of these very good small firms,” Mr. Solomon said. “I have a list on my desk of 300 firms that call themselves independent investment banks. We have been talking to them.”Advertisement