AdvertisementSupported byBy Liz MoyerTwo billionaire investors who have been agitating for the breakup of American International Group, the giant insurer, have gotten seats at the table.Carl C. Icahn, the activist investor, and John Paulson, the hedge fund manager, will gain two seats on A.I.G.’s board, though Mr. Icahn said on Thursday that he would appoint an associate of his investment firm instead of himself because he is occupied with several other companies.The agreement reached Thursday will add two directors to the board at A.I.G.’s annual shareholder meeting in May, for a total of 16 seats.The announcement ended the threat of a proxy battle after nearly four months of bitter debate between the activists and A.I.G., which has resisted calls to break apart. It is unlikely, however, to end the debate over the ultimate future of the company. It merely moves that battle into the boardroom.“Icahn and Paulson don’t want just board seats,” said Erik Gordon, a clinical assistant professor at University of Michigan’s Ross School of Business. “ They want a breakup.”A.I.G. said Mr. Icahn and Mr. Paulson had agreed not to carry out a proxy fight, but it also did not back down from the less radical strategic plan it announced last month.Douglas M. Steenland, the chairman of A.I.G., said, “We look forward to benefiting from their insights as we move forward with our strategy to create a leaner, more profitable and focused A.I.G.”The investors had been pressuring A.I.G. to split up to shed the federal government label of being a “systemically important financial institution,” a designation that brings extra regulatory scrutiny and costs.But A.I.G.’s management rejected the idea that smaller was better. The two sides continued talking in the last few weeks.In a statement on Thursday, Mr. Icahn said, “We continue to believe that smaller and simpler is better and look forward to working collaboratively with the board and management to help catalyze a turnaround.”A.I.G. announced last month plans to streamline through cutting costs, spinning off its mortgage insurance business and selling its financial advisory unit. A.I.G. is also dividing its operations into distinct units that will make them easier to sell or spin off in the future, based on their performance.But that fell far short of demands by Mr. Icahn and other shareholders. He and his various investment funds own 42.7 million shares of A.I.G., or 3.46 percent.A successful outcome at A.I.G. would help Mr. Icahn balance some recent financial bets that have gone awry, especially those in Chesapeake Energy and Cheniere Energy. He has scored some other victories, notably Xerox’s plan to split in two, an outcome for which Mr. Icahn had campaigned in the last few months. He will get seats on the board of one of the new companies.Mr. Icahn and Mr. Paulson argued that A.I.G. could extract more value for shareholders by focusing on one line of business. They had demanded a more radical shift — the separation of A.I.G.’s life insurance business from its property and casualty division, plus the sale or spinoff of the mortgage insurance unit. Mr. Icahn has been talking with A.I.G. management and the chairman but has expressed frustration and impatience with the pace of the discussions.A.I.G.’s management argued that the company benefits from being in diverse businesses and that the costs of the federal designation are not as burdensome as the activists have claimed.In several recent securities filings, Mr. Icahn has hinted at his plans to propose his own slate of directors.A.I.G. said Mr. Icahn’s representative on A.I.G.’s board will be Samuel Merksamer, a managing director of his investment firm.In three letters to A.I.G.’s board and management since October, which he also released to the public, Mr. Icahn increased the pressure, saying he had the support of other investors, including Mr. Paulson, the president of Paulson & Company. Mr. Paulson declined to comment.In November, Mr. Icahn said he would be preparing a consent solicitation for shareholders that may propose to add a new director who could succeed A.I.G.’s chief executive, Peter D. Hancock.The company’s strategic plan, outlined on Jan. 26, did not silence the skeptics. Josh Stirling, an analyst with Sanford C. Bernstein who also has been critical of A.I.G.’s management, said in a recent research note, “We like many are torn between the incremental positives the firm revealed and the frustrating feeling that A.I.G.’s leadership does not have the vision or credibility to truly handle the job.”A.I.G. also reported a $1.3 billion fourth-quarter loss after Thursday’s market close, or $1.10 a share.Shares of A.I.G. were trading up early Thursday evening, after closing down 3.7 percent.Alexandra Stevenson contributed reporting.Advertisement