By JACKIE CALMESFEB. 11, 2016
WASHINGTON — The Senate gave overwhelming final approval Thursday to the most comprehensive overhaul of customs law in decades, giving presidents new tools to combat unfair trade, yet falling short of bipartisan demands for penalties against other nations that manipulate their currencies.Senators voted 75 to 20 for the Trade Facilitation and Trade Enforcement Act, a blend of bills the House and Senate passed separately nearly a year ago. The bipartisan compromise was reached by negotiators in December, with White House support, and was quickly approved by the House. Senate action stalled partly because of an unrelated dispute over taxing Internet sales.The White House, in a statement, hailed the bill’s passage as “an important milestone in our overall trade agenda,” and said President Obama would sign it into law “to help strengthen enforcement of the rules and level the playing field for American workers and businesses.”Senator Orrin G. Hatch, Republican of Utah and chairman of the Senate Finance Committee that is responsible for trade issues, called the package “a major step forward in advancing a robust agenda for international trade that better reflects the realities of the 21st-century global economy.”AdvertisementThe trade enforcement package took shape last year as a way to persuade trade skeptics in Congress to support a separate measure renewing presidents’ bolstered authority to make trade deals. The idea was to assure legislators that the federal government would have enhanced powers to act against trade violations once Mr. Obama completed negotiations on the 12-nation Trans-Pacific Partnership accord.AdvertisementCongress did narrowly approve so-called trade-promotion authority for Mr. Obama and his successor, but the enforcement package is not expected to similarly improve Mr. Obama’s low odds of winning congressional approval this year of the Pacific agreement, which was concluded in October.The administration, in its statement, reiterated its objection to a provision that the United States make it a condition of trade deals that other nations not join a movement to boycott Israeli businesses operating in Israeli-occupied Palestinian territories. While the administration opposes the so-called Boycott, Divestment and Sanctions movement against Israel, it objected that the language of the trade bill — by covering the occupied territories — “contravenes longstanding U.S. policy” against Israel’s construction of settlements there.In the main, the trade measure defines a new process for the Customs and Border Protection service to act quickly against foreign businesses that evade anti-dumping laws and American duties on imports, or that traffic in counterfeit goods. It also addresses a loophole that allows some imports made with forced or child labor to get through customs, and includes new protections for businesses’ intellectual property rights.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Among the strongest supporters were the National Association of Manufacturers and the National Retail Federation; both served notice to lawmakers that this would be among the “key votes” when they assess whom to support at election time.But labor unions, led by the A.F.L.-C.I.O., were adamantly opposed. Labor had supported last year’s Senate version of the trade bill, which mandated import duties against countries found to manipulate their currencies to make their exports cheaper to American consumers.That penalty was dropped, however, from the final bill, and House Republicans won other concessions that infuriated unions. The new language, proposed by Mr. Hatch and two Democrats – Senator Michael Bennet of Colorado and Senator Thomas R. Carper of Delaware – calls for the president to seek “enhanced bilateral engagement” with suspected manipulators, and to keep violators out of trade pacts with the United States.Critics dismissed the language as toothless. China and Japan are considered the worst offenders at manipulating currency.Most of the 20 senators who opposed the trade bill were Democrats, though more than half of Democrats – led by Senator Ron Wyden of Oregon, the senior Democrat on the Senate Finance Committee – strongly backed the final compromise.Unions, joined by senators from both parties, also objected to a provision unrelated to trade. It would prohibit state and local governments from taxing Internet access. That, the critics said, would close off a revenue source to those governments as they seek funds for public services.AdvertisementBut Senator Richard J. Durbin, Democrat of Illinois, and others got a promise from the majority leader, Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, to allow a vote this year on a bill allowing states to tax sales of retailers that sell only online. Supporters say online sellers have a competitive advantage over “brick and mortar” stores that must collect sales taxes.Follow the New York Times’s politics and Washington coverage on Facebook and Twitter, and sign up for the First Draft politics newsletter.A version of this article appears in print on February 12, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Senate Sends Big Trade Enforcement Bill to Obama.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.