By CHAD BRAYFEB. 12, 2016
LONDON — Countryside Properties, a British home builder that is majority-owned by the American private equity firm Oaktree Capital Management, said on Friday that its initial public offering had valued the company at 1.01 billion pounds, or about $1.46 billion.Countryside said that the 135 million shares in the offering were priced at 225 pence a share, the bottom of its expected range of 225 pence to 275 pence a share.The I.P.O. on the London Stock Exchange represented about 30 percent of the company’s outstanding shares.“The announcement today is a significant moment in the 58-year history of Countryside,” David Howell, the Countryside chairman, said in a news release. “We look forward with confidence on the next stage of our development as a listed business.”AdvertisementShares of Countryside rose about 3 percent in conditional trading on the London Stock Exchange on Friday. Unrestricted trading is expected to begin on Wednesday.AdvertisementThe offering is a return to the markets for Countryside, which first went public in London in 1972. Funds advised by Oaktree took a majority stake in the company in 2013, acquiring its stake from the Lloyds Banking Group.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Countryside, which announced plans in January for the I.P.O., received net proceeds of £114 million from the sale. The company said it planned to use the proceeds to pay down its debt and to accelerate development at several housing sites.Entities controlled by Oaktree and members of Countryside’s management and employees sold shares in the offering.If an overallotment of shares is not exercised, Oaktree would own 60.6 percent of the company’s outstanding shares, and Countryside’s directors and senior management would own about 7.6 percent.Countryside, based in Brentwood, England, develops residential homes and mixed-use communities, primarily operating in the London area and in the southeast, the east and the northwest of England. The company, which was founded in 1958, posted revenue of £615.8 million in its 2015 fiscal year, which ended Sept. 30.JPMorgan Chase, Barclays and Numis Securities led the offering.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.