AdvertisementSupported byBy Elizabeth OlsonAfter several years of turbulence, including the indictment of J. Dennis Hastert, a former House speaker who led its public policy practice, the once-prominent Washington law firm Dickstein Shapiro is folding and becoming part of a larger Philadelphia firm, Blank Rome.Dickstein Shapiro has been buffeted in recent years as the legal economy has changed. Known particularly for its regulatory, litigation and intellectual property practices, the 53-year-old firm in its heyday had 400 lawyers with five offices, including one in New York. Its profit per partner – a public measure of the firm rankings by the publication The American Lawyer – was around $1 million as recently as 2014.But a year earlier, the firm’s fortunes began to change when it lost 17 percent of its partners, including its insurance coverage practice group, to other firms. More recently, a major firm rainmaker, Barbara Van Gelder, left for another firm. She is one of Washington’s more prominent female lawyers, representing a number of Bush-era officials.That occurred in the wake of the indictment of Mr. Hastert, 74, who joined the firm in 2013 to help rebuild its lobbying practice. In May 2015, Mr. Hastert, a former Illinois lawmaker, resigned from the firm after he was indicted on charges of violating federal mandatory banking reporting requirements by withdrawing cash in small amounts. The money was used for payments to conceal past questionable conduct.As Mr. Hastert’s troubles unfurled publicly, the buildup of the firm’s lobbying practice – part of a major revamping plan — slowed. That, together with firm defections, set the stage for Dickstein Shapiro’s merger talks with Bryan Cave, a St. Louis firm, but those talks ended without a deal.Of those left at Dickstein, about 100 lawyers and staff will join Blank Rome, which has about 470 lawyers, the Philadelphia firm announced. The 70-year-old Blank Rome had $825,000 in profit per partner as of 2014, according to published figures.The combination, part of the consolidation trend in the legal world, will leave the newly formed firm — to keep the name Blank Rome — with more than 620 lawyers in 14 offices, including 150 lawyers in New York City, according to its announcement of the arrangement on Thursday.This is Blank Rome’s biggest acquisition to date. Last year, it merged with a 24-lawyer Houston firm that specialized in maritime and litigation. The latest combination, which will have about 150 lawyers in its Washington office, tucks in Dickstein Shapiro’s well-known government contracts group, which represents federal, state and local government contractors across a wide range of industries.Advertisement