AdvertisementSupported byAnother ViewBy Jeremy G. PhilipsJeremy G. Philips is a general partner at Spark Capital.For a moment, there was no more prestigious endorsement for a technology start-up than joining the so-called Unicorn Club, consisting of more than 150 private technology companies valued at a billion dollars or more. Now, with valuations deflating, it’s often viewed as more of a scarlet letter.However, because the only membership criterion is valuation, the members of this club have about as much in common with each other as a gram of gold has with a barrel of oil.Some private market valuations got ahead of themselves, requiring adjustment. But that’s hardly remarkable; this happens frequently in public markets, too. The issue is that many unicorns are not sustainable; they have a shiny veneer of revenue growth, without a sufficiently durable competitive advantage to create substantial, long-term value.The rise of the unicorns was fed by an almost universally accepted theory that, as the commentator Om Malik recently wrote, “Most competition in Silicon Valley now heads toward there being one monopolistic winner.” Because “winner take all” markets tend to be highly profitable, this idea stoked investor enthusiasm to find leaders in any category, leading to a multibillion-dollar experiment to treat valuation as largely a function of growth, irrespective of business economics and market structure.Several well-known Internet companies, particularly the so-called FANG stocks — Facebook, Amazon, Netflix and Google, now a unit of Alphabet — have built powerful positions. The market recognized this by adding more than $250 billion in market cap to this group over the last 12 months — even while the broader market was down more than 10 percent.The huge success of the FANG stocks, however, distracts from the reality that the web has ground down the barriers to entry in many technology markets, increasing transparency and competition. For new entrants, lower barriers create opportunity. But they create the same chance for scores of other start-ups, too, making it challenging to build a durable advantage.Just when a firm seems to be getting a dominant foothold, a plethora of start-ups emerge to erode its advantage. Less than a year ago, GrubHub had a market cap of more than $4 billion and seemed to be on the way to a powerful monopoly in food delivery. But myriad start-ups, backed by billions of dollars, have been competing for its market. Investors no longer see GrubHub as a putative monopoly. Accordingly, its stock is down more than 60 percent over the last year.There are limited sources of genuine competitive advantage in Silicon Valley, as with other businesses. Most significant are economies of scale. McDonald’s buys ingredients more cheaply than a stand-alone burger joint, and its marketing costs are spread across tens of millions of customers.For technology companies, the holy grail is a specially durable subset of scale advantage: network effects, virtually unknown in the rest of the economy. The most potent flavor is on the consumer side, where a service’s utility increases as more people use it. That creates a powerful barrier: If one’s friends and family are all on Facebook, an alternative social network, even with superior features, is unlikely to be tempting — which is why Facebook has more than 1.5 billion users each month, and rising. A Big Mac, in contrast, does not taste any better even with millions of simultaneous consumers.In Silicon Valley, virtually every pitch deck claims network effects — but they are rarely spotted in the wild. The largest on-demand home cleaning service in any locale may have a cost and speed advantage versus competitors, which helps attract more consumers and more cleaning people.But this virtuous cycle, despite the common misconception, is just a garden variety impact of local scale — not network effects. A large customer base does not make any service even a smidgen more valuable to someone getting their home cleaned. For a small discount, customers will happily try an alternative cleaning service, on-demand car valet or flash sale. Monopolies in these categories, like most others, are unlikely. In contrast, it’s unclear what — if anything — it would take to pry Snapchat out of a teenager’s hands — but it sure wouldn’t be a cheap coupon.It’s not just start-ups that find it hard to build a monopoly. Even in the rarefied air of the FANG stocks, monopolies are hard to come by.Amazon is a powerhouse with substantial scale advantages — its latest quarterly revenue was $36 billion, and it has increasing customer loyalty, including more than 50 million paying Prime subscribers. But Amazon is far from a monopoly. In retail, beyond a few narrow categories where it dominates (notably: books), Amazon is a leading player in intensely competitive markets. In cloud computing, its innovative Amazon Web Services is the leading player serving start-up customers and is making inroads with enterprises. But it does not have the cloud to itself. It is locked in ferocious competition with Microsoft, Google and several others. Unsurprisingly, in the decade since its debut, the service has cut prices more than 50 times.Similarly, Netflix is the leading subscription video distributor. It has more than 75 million subscribers and is producing hundreds of hours of original content. Netflix has scale advantages and strong customer captivity, but zero network effects; it does not become more entertaining with more subscribers. It is well placed to create enormous value as a long-term leader in this market but is far from a monopoly. It’s too late for start-ups to enter the fray, but there are already formidable competitors, such as HBO and Amazon, driving up content acquisition costs and keeping a lid on consumer prices. Netflix is already on track to spend more than $5 billion on content this year — more than half its forecast revenue. And other deep-pocketed players, such as YouTube and Apple, have adjacent businesses that are strong enough to be potentially serious future players as well.That Silicon Valley is not all bulletproof billion-dollar companies and “winner take all” markets is no cause for gloom. The current environment is a reminder of the primacy of business economics and market structure. At least for the moment, investors will revert to saving billion-dollar valuations for exceptionally defensible, growing businesses. That closes the chapter on the ill-fated unicorn experiment, which valued growth at any cost. Hopefully, it also spells the end of the term itself — which predictably turned out to be as useless a descriptor on the way down as it was on the way up.Advertisement