By CHAD BRAYFEB. 12, 2016
Baidu, China’s equivalent of Google, said Friday that it had received a nonbinding proposal to acquire its majority stake in the Chinese video streaming website Qiyi.com, valuing the business at about $2.8 billion.Robin Yanhong Li, the Baidu chairman and chief executive, and Yu Gong, the chief executive of Qiyi, offered to acquire the 80.5 percent stake in Qiyi owned by Baidu.The consolidation of ownership by Mr. Li and Mr. Gong could be a first step toward an initial public offering of stock for iQiyi. In recent years, iQiyi’s executives have said repeatedly that they are planning to list the company in the United States in the next few years. Listing the video site, which Baidu acquired in 2012, allows it to retain talent by offering new stock incentives and greater independence to the company’s leaders.Qiyi, now known as iQiyi, started in 2010 with investments from Baidu and Providence Equity Partners. Baidu bought out Providence’s stake for an undisclosed amount in 2012.AdvertisementBaidu competes with its Chinese rivals Alibaba and Tencent to invest in online-to-offline services, the sorts of businesses where the Chinese use smartphones to order things as diverse as meals and massages brought to their homes. This has been an expensive undertaking, with Baidu operating profit for the quarter ended Sept. 30 falling by more than a third from a year ago in part because of rising costs.AdvertisementThe buyers would expect that Qiyi would remain a strategic partner after the transaction and enter into cooperation agreements with Baidu if the deal were consummated, Baidu said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“The board cautions Baidu’s shareholders and others considering trading in its securities that the board recently received the nonbinding proposal and no decisions have been made with respect to Baidu’s response to the proposal,” Baidu said in a news release.“There can be no assurance that any definitive offer will be made, that any legally binding agreement will be executed or that this or any other transaction will be approved or consummated,” Baidu added.Such a transaction by a management-involved group for iQiyi would lighten Baidu’s burden in another expensive area: streaming video. Baidu competes with Alibaba, Tencent and other Chinese companies to create or buy movies and television shows — both foreign and domestic, with iQiyi showing a range of programs from Chinese costume dramas to American shows like “Homeland” — that Chinese viewers stream through their smartphones, tablets and computers. Baidu has told investors it expects the costs of buying and producing content to continue to rise as a percentage of its income.Baidu said its board had formed a special committee of three independent directors to evaluate the transaction. The law firm Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom has been hired to advise the committee.Paul Mozur contributed reporting from Hong Kong.A version of this article appears in print on February 13, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Business Briefing; Baidu Receives Offer for Stake in Video Platform Qiyi.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.