By JONATHAN SOBLEFEB. 12, 2016
TOKYO — The Japanese stock market on Friday underwent its second major rout of the week, falling more than 5 percent and capping its worst single-week performance since the depths of the global financial crisis in 2008.The benchmark Nikkei 225 average fell as much as 5.4 percent before closing 4.8 percent lower as investors continued their flight from relatively risky stocks and into bonds and other assets seen as havens. The shift has rattled markets around the world, but Japan is particularly vulnerable because of a jump in the value of the yen. A stronger currency hurts profits at companies like Toyota and Hitachi, which earn much of their income abroad.The yen climbed as high as 110.9 to the dollar Friday before settling back to about 112 in late-afternoon trading. The currency’s value has increased about 10 percent since its most recent low in December.Investors’ embrace of the yen has been little affected by the Bank of Japan’s introducing negative interest rates two weeks ago. The move pushed the yield on 10-year government bonds into negative territory this week and should in theory make holding yen less attractive. But investors appear to believe that the alternatives are worse.AdvertisementThe Nikkei more than doubled between late 2012 and the middle of last year, buoyed by an improving global economy and the loose monetary policy of the central bank. Under Haruhiko Kuroda, the governor appointed in early 2013, the bank has been flooding financial markets with cash by buying large amounts of government bonds. The policy led to a sharp devaluation of the yen, but its weakening effect on the currency appears to be waning.The Japanese finance minister, Taro Aso, sought to calm the market turbulence on Friday.“The flight from risk is spreading to financial markets around the world, but the Japanese economy is in very solid shape, so investors’ psychology is too pessimistic,” he told reporters after a regularly scheduled Cabinet meeting.AdvertisementHe added that “abrupt exchange rate movements are undesirable” — a phrase often used by the Japanese authorities to signal displeasure with the yen’s direction, which has sometimes been followed by actual financial intervention to reverse its course.Follow Jonathan Soble on Twitter @jonathan_soble.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.