AdvertisementSupported byThe Week AheadBy The New York TimesMario Draghi, the president of the European Central Bank, is likely to face questions on Monday about his response to fears of a renewed banking crisis when he appears in Brussels at a hearing of the European Parliament’s Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs.Investors will also be listening to Mr. Draghi’s remarks for clues about what steps the central bank may take at its March 10 meeting to further stimulate the slow-growing eurozone economy. —Jack EwingEuropean Union authorities on Tuesday are expected to make their latest proposals aimed at weakening the bloc’s dependence on Russia for about a third of its natural gas requirements. One of the measures would give the European Commission more scope to review gas supply contracts with foreign suppliers before they are signed.Officials hope that the measures will dissuade member countries like Germany from going ahead with projects like the expansion of the Nord Stream pipeline, which critics say will deepen reliance on Russia for energy. Weaning the bloc off Russian gas has been a priority for the European Commission for the last decade, and the regulator is taking several approaches, including an antitrust case against the Russian gas exporter Gazprom, which has not yet been resolved.—James KanterThe Federal Reserve put on a brave face after its most recent policy-making meeting, held in January, declaring it still intended to raise interest rates gradually despite wobbly financial markets and the weakness of the global economy. The Fed will release an account of that meeting on Wednesday.There is a growing divide between officials at the central bank, who continue to express confidence in the underlying health of the economy, and financial markets, which are behaving as if there is a significant chance of a new recession. The meeting minutes will probably underscore the Fed’s reasons for confidence, but that’s not likely to change minds on Wall Street, where there is a growing conviction that the Fed is once again overestimating the strength of the economy. —Binyamin AppelbaumOn Wednesday morning, the Federal Reserve will release the latest data on industrial production in January. After declining for three months in a row late last year, factory activity probably ticked up slightly last month, economists say. Colder temperatures probably brought an increase in production at utilities, while there is evidence that manufacturing has rebounded slightly after softness in the fourth quarter. —Nelson D. SchwartzWalmart reports fourth-quarter earnings on Thursday, when analysts expect to see the world’s largest retailer by sales book sound profits after a favorable holiday season. Inclement weather in the new year, however, as well as falling food prices, may have helped slow sales toward the end of the quarter, which ran through January.Walmart has been investing heavily in higher store wages and in its e-commerce business in a bid to better compete against its online nemesis, Amazon. Last month, the retailer announced it would shutter 269 stores around the world in a bid to bolster profitability. Nordstrom is also set to report earnings on Thursday amid a sectorwide slowdown in department store sales. —Hiroko TabuchiOn Friday morning, the Labor Department will release its latest reading on the Consumer Price Index. Experts are looking for a slight decline in overall prices when the data for January comes out, led by a big drop in energy prices, especially gasoline.The core C.P.I., which strips out volatile food and energy prices, is expected to show a 0.2 percent increase. Neither index reading suggests there’s much danger from inflation. Some economists, in fact, are more worried about deflationary pressures in the global economy right now. —Nelson D. SchwartzAdvertisement