AdvertisementSupported byDeal ProfessorBy Steven Davidoff SolomonThe battle over Argentina’s debt is at the end stage, as the hedge funds and the country enter into negotiations to resolve the dispute.The hedge funds may claim victory, reaping billions of dollars on legal technicalities, but there are no real winners in this sorry affair.The fight began after Argentina defaulted on about $92 billion worth of sovereign debt in December 2001.In the past when countries defaulted, there was not much that the holders of the debt could do. Sovereigns are immune from suit in other countries and their home courts. A bondholder can’t just go into court and sue to collect his or her money, leaving the holder stuck unless the country decided at some later date to repay.Still, hedge funds arose specializing in buying this debt at a discount and harassing governments into repaying. The funds would scour the globe trying to find a friendly jurisdiction to seize the country’s assets and sidestep the rule of sovereign immunity. Elliott Management, for example, seized a $39 million shipment of oil from the Republic of Congo to collect on debt the fund had bought for only about $2 million.But this was small beer, and involved only tens of millions as debtor countries for the most remained safe to default.This all changed with Argentina.A number of hedge funds bought this debt, including Elliott and Aurelius Capital. At first the funds tried the old tricks, even briefly seizing an Argentine frigate in Ghana. Today, Argentina’s president flies in a rented plane in order to avoid the embarrassment of having a jet seized.But Elliott has lawyers who specialize in leveraging legal rules. And with Argentina, Elliott again found a successful legal strategy.After the default, Argentina restructured the old bonds, offering 30 cents on the dollar in new bonds. About 93 percent of holders took up this offer, thinking that this discount was better than nothing. But some hedge funds and a number of other holders refused to give in, hoping for a better offer.The old bonds contained a legal clause that contained the seeds of the hedge funds’ victory. This pari passu clause, from the Latin meaning “on equal footing,” was historically intended to prevent a sovereign from subordinating the bonds in order of securityThe hedge funds, however, argued in the United States District Court in Manhattan that this clause also prohibited the payment of the new bonds without paying the old. It was a novel claim and a clever way of getting around the legal obstacle of suing Argentina for payment.Instead of asking for money, the funds were simply asking for the clause to be enforced so that no other Argentinian bonds could be paid unless they were as well.This legal argument was a moonshot, but the funds got Judge Thomas P. Griesa to bite. In a series of rulings, he sided with the funds and issued an injunction stating that if Argentina paid the new bonds, it would have to pay the old ones.The ruling was a shock to many because the clause had never been interpreted this way before. And it seemed odd to create a new precedent amid a battle between a sovereign and hedge funds.But the judge highlighted the fact that Argentina was unusual – the country’s adamant refusal to pay on the bonds made it subject to special treatment for its inequitable conduct.Indeed, Judge Griesa curiously phrased the battle in ethical terms, calling Argentina “immoral” for refusing to pay and even holding the country in contempt of court for refusing to repay the hedge funds and other debt holders. Why this would be a moral question was never really clear. Argentina was taking a legal position, just like the hedge funds.This is where Argentina got stuck, however. The judge’s ruling effectively locked it out of the capital markets. And it pitted Argentina’s creditors against each other as the country could no longer pay its new bonds without fear of having the money seized by the hedge funds. Argentina now needs a settlement for the good of its people and economy.With the election of Mauricio Macri as president last year, Argentina is trying to settle old debts. In the last few weeks it has agreed to pay $1.35 billion to individual Italian bondholders who were holdouts (Argentina and Italy have old ties, and many of the bonds were sold to Italian citizens). And Argentina has also settled with two hedge funds, Montreux Partners and Dart Management and offered $6.5 billion to settle the whole affair.But there is still some way to go for a resolution. The negotiations are continuing before a court-appointed mediator and the remaining holdouts appear to be resisting Argentina’s offer, arguing that it favors other funds at their expense.In part this is again because of yet another legal quirk. Some funds, instead of suing on the basis of the pari passu clause, instead sued to collect their debt directly. These funds won a judgment for the face value of their debt, hoping that they could then use it to seize assets of Argentina in other countries. Once the judgment was entered though, the bonds stopped accruing interest according to their terms and instead received court-ordered post-judgment interest at about 0.5 percent.The other hedge funds never enforced their debt, instead suing on the pari passu issue and collecting interest on the face value of the bonds, which they claim exceeded 100 percent a year. The second set of bonds is now worth much more because they accrued more interest.Argentina has responded with different offers. One set – those who did not sue on the pari passu clause – were offered 150 percent of their judgment.The second set who have not sued to collect on their bonds but instead sued to enforce the pari passu clause, have been offered up to 72.5 percent of their claims.Notice the “up to” here – we don’t know the exact amount. Still, the holdout hedge funds don’t like this offer because it doesn’t compensate them for the higher rate of interest they feel they were entitled to. But as Matt Levine of Bloomberg asked, is it fair for a hedge fund “to get paid interest at 101 percent a year on bonds issued in 1998, while Argentina has long since moved on and improved its credit profile?”Let’s just stop here and highlight this absurdity. The hedge funds who sued on the pari passu clause but not to enforce their debt are getting more, but not enough. Merely because of the choice of legal strategy.It all highlights how an entire country has been subject to the vicissitudes of luck and litigation strategy.A representative of Elliott declined to comment on this matter.With its new offer, Argentina also raised the ante. It has brought in new lawyers and made a motion in federal court before Judge Griesa arguing that now that it is willing to bargain with the hedge funds it is no longer a recalcitrant debtor and the court should lift the injunction prohibiting Argentina from paying the new bonds without paying the old bonds under the pari passu clause.It’s hard to see a judge who so many times ruled against Argentina ruling in favor of them. But this is just part of the negotiating strategy – indeed using the hedge funds’ legal strategies against them. And the judge was once in favor of Argentina, not the hedge funds.Indeed, it is going to be harder for these funds to say this is a moral matter when making claims of more than 100 percent interest. Nonetheless, according to a person close to the creditor hedge funds, the parties are not that far apart — possibly only as much $200 million — in their negotiations.That’s a small sum in the scheme of things, and settlement seems so close. After over a decade of litigation, however, it appears as if the parties can’t kick their habit of going to court.Advertisement