By MARY WILLIAMS WALSHFEB. 16, 2016
A plan to restructure about $9 billion of Puerto Rico’s debt, hailed as a model for the rest of the island’s debt-laden government, moved toward the desk of Gov. Alejandro García Padilla to be signed into law on Tuesday, after winning approval by Puerto Rico’s House of Representatives.The Puerto Rico Senate, which approved a similar bill last week, was still working on Tuesday to iron out differences between the two bills. The restructuring deal was set to expire at midnight on Tuesday if not signed by the governor, but a person with knowledge of the proceedings who spoke on the condition of anonymity, said the lawmakers were within striking distance of agreement and the creditors were not inclined to enforce the deadline.The $9 billion in debt is mostly in the form of municipal bonds issued by the Puerto Rico Electric Power Authority, or Prepa. When the utility failed to make a debt payment in 2014, its bondholders decided to try to restructure the debt consensually instead of going to court. Last year, a majority agreed to a debt exchange, in which bondholders would get new bonds worth 85 percent of the face value of their old bonds. The new bonds would also have a slower payment schedule and lower interest rates.The plan appeared to be in trouble earlier this year when lawmakers seemed to have second thoughts and delayed approval. Unionized electrical workers protested in front of the legislature this week while lawmakers debated and voted.AdvertisementIf the restructuring bill is signed into law by the governor this week, the plan must next survive a rate-setting process by a newly formed regulatory body. The new bonds will also need investment-grade ratings for the exchange to happen.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Whether they can get such a rating will depend, in part, on the government’s own finances. The government of Puerto Rico constitutes the utility’s biggest customer, and many agencies are having trouble paying their electrical bills.On Tuesday, lawmakers also tried to find out why the government had been unable to issue audited financial statements from 2014. Late in the day, the government responded by issuing unaudited financial statements, saying that the information “could be useful in evaluating Puerto Rico’s financial condition and new legislative measures to address the current fiscal crisis.”AdvertisementIt said in a statement that there was “substantial doubt as to the ability of the commonwealth and most of its public corporations and retirement systems to continue as going concerns.”A version of this article appears in print on February 17, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Puerto Rico Debt Bill Takes Step.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.