By MICHAEL J. de la MERCED and LESLIE PICKERNOV. 10, 2015
Molson Coors Brewing Company is close to an agreement to buy the rest of MillerCoors from SABMiller, a person briefed on the deal said.SABMiller plans to sell its 58 percent stake in MillerCoors to Molson Coors, said the person, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because the deal terms are private. The companies are expecting to announce the deal on Wednesday, the person said.The transaction may be the linchpin that SABMiller needs for a much bigger deal to happen — its sale to Anheuser-Busch InBev for about $104 billion. The two companies reached a preliminary agreement last month, and face a Wednesday deadline to announce final terms.The Molson Coors purchase of full control over MillerCoors is conditioned on the deal between Anheuser-Busch InBev and SABMiller closing, the person said.AdvertisementAnalysts have said that the Justice Department would almost certainly require SABMiller to divest its stake in MillerCoors to enable the larger beer deal to get done.AdvertisementMolson Coors and SABMiller formed their MillerCoors joint venture seven years ago to combine their businesses in the United States, which include Miller Lite, Blue Moon and Coors Light. If Molson Coors were to obtain full control over MillerCoors, it would also be able to sell Miller beer internationally, the person said.The terms of the joint venture show that Molson Coors has the right to make the first offer for SABMiller’s stake, and match the last offer, if SABMiller decides to sell.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The companies needed to extend the deadline on Nov. 4 for a third time for Anheuser-Busch InBev to make a formal offer for SABMiller. That deadline, set under British takeover rules, is now Wednesday, and if it misses that deadline, Anheuser-Busch InBev would not be able to make another offer for SABMiller until next spring.Shares of Molson Coors gained more than 1 percent after The Wall Street Journal reported the company’s intentions to acquire the remainder of its MillerCoors joint venture for $12 billion.The net income of MillerCoors declined 8.6 percent to $344.4 million in the third quarter, because of lower volume and higher marketing costs, the company said Nov. 5. Analysts have said that Molson Coors could save hundreds of millions of dollars by buying out SABMiller’s stake in MillerCoors.That same logic — cost savings, in response to slowing growth — is what encouraged Anheuser-Busch InBev to bid for SABMiller in the first place. SABMiller said a combination would cut annual costs by at least $1.05 billion by March 2020, with 70 percent of the savings from procurement operations and the rest from manufacturing and distribution.Even after selling assets to achieve regulatory approval, a combination of Anheuser-Busch InBev and SABMiller would represent 29 percent of global beer sales, according to research by Euromonitor International from October, when the deal was announced.Representatives from MolsonCoors and Anheuseur-Busch InBev declined to comment on the deal, while those from MillerCoors and SABMiller didn’t respond to requests seeking comment after business hours.A version of this article appears in print on November 11, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: SABMiller Is Said Near Deal to Sell MillerCoors.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.