AdvertisementSupported byBy Leslie PickerThe ADT Corporation, which provides home and business security systems for 6.5 million customers, is being acquired by the private equity firm Apollo Global Management for $6.9 billion in the largest leveraged buyout so far this year.Apollo intends to merge ADT with Protection 1 and ASG Security, two other security companies that the firm agreed to purchase last May, although they will all operate under the ADT name. The combined company would create pro forma annual revenue surpassing $4.2 billion.ADT traces its roots to Edward A. Calahan, the man who invented the stock ticker in 1867. When Mr. Calahan, the president of Calahan’s Gold and Stock Telegraph Company, found a burglar in his home, he created a telegraph-based alert system. After more than a century of acquisitions and antitrust rulings, ADT was acquired by Tyco in 1997. Tyco decided to be broken up into three units in 2012, making ADT once again an independent company.ADT was the last of Tyco’s largest former subsidiaries to be acquired. The company first merged its flow-control unit with Pentair in 2012. In January, the security and fire-safety systems company that maintained the Tyco name decided to combine with Johnson Controls.ADT agreed to be acquired by Apollo for $42 a share, or a 56 percent premium over ADT’s closing price on Feb. 12, according to a news release issued by the company on Tuesday.An analyst at William Blair, a financial services firm, said one catalyst for the offer by Apollo was the drop in ADT’s stock price after the company reported earnings for the first quarter of the 2016 fiscal year that showed a decline in free-cash flow before special items. On Tuesday, ADT’s stock surged 47.5 percent to $39.64 — a few dollars shy of the takeover price. About 21 percent of ADT’s shares outstanding were sold short, so a lot of that gain was from investors covering those positions, said the William Blair analyst Nicholas Heymann.While the board of directors approved the transaction, the deal includes a “go shop” period, in which ADT can solicit other bids that it might deem superior, over the next 40 days.Timothy J. Whall, president and chief executive of Protection 1, will lead the combined business. Protection 1’s “commercial presence” will help ADT expand into that customer base by increasing sales and technical skills in that area, Mr. Whall said.In a market that has been inhospitable to leveraged buyouts, the ADT deal is the largest in 2016. Only 10 leveraged buyouts have occurred so far this year, with none before ADT surpassing $1.5 billion in value, according to data compiled by Dealogic.This month, another large private equity deal, Apollo Education agreed to be taken private for $1.1 billion by a consortium led by the Vistria Group that also included Apollo Global Management and Najafi Companies.Under the ADT deal, funds managed by Apollo and its co-investors will provide $4.5 billion for the transaction. The deal will also be financed by $1.6 billion through new first-lien loans and $3.1 billion in second-lien loans, as well as $750 million in preferred securities through the investment arm of Koch Industries, according to the statement. Barclays, Citigroup, Deutsche Bank and Royal Bank of Canada are providing the financing and they have provided financial advice to Protection 1.The acquisition is expected to be completed by June, subject to shareholder approval and antitrust waiting periods.Ian Zaffino, an analyst at Oppenheimer & Company, said the deal was “highly likely” to be completed. He said the price Apollo was paying was fair, when compared with estimates for earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization for 2016.Goldman Sachs is serving as the lead financial adviser to ADT, while Bank of America is also providing financial advice, and Simpson Thacher & Bartlett has given legal advice. Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton & Garrison are advising Protection 1 and Apollo.Advertisement