AdvertisementSupported byBy Stephanie StromThe McDonald’s Corporation will increase its spending to buy back shares and for heftier dividends for shareholders, Steve Easterbrook, its chief executive, said on Tuesday.Mr. Easterbrook and a team of other McDonald’s executives met with investors and investment analysts in New York to try to convince them that the company is on track to stop its long decline in the United States and to build on growth in markets like Australia and France.“We’ve begun to feel traction take hold in the business,” Mr. Easterbrook said in remarks supplied to reporters after the meeting began. “And while we’re realizing the benefits of our actions in recent weeks, it takes time for the actions underpinning this shift to take root.”Mark Kalinowski, an analyst for Nomura who attended the meeting, said Mr. Easterbrook and the other McDonald’s executives there conveyed the impression that they were working seriously to get the company back on track.They told investors that they expected to produce positive comparable-store sales, or sales in stores open at least a year, in the current quarter, and that a new program called “chef crafted” that will increase customization was showing promising results in test markets.“Part of the implicit message today was that they’re focused on fixing their business,” Mr. Kalinowski said. “That’s as it should be.”In the remarks, Mr. Easterbrook said McDonald’s had for too long asked its customers to adapt to it when it should have been adapting to their tastes and preferences. McDonald’s is now toasting buns longer and changing the way it grills meat to increase juiciness, as well as improving order accuracy with new training programs and procedures, he said.“We have focused too intently on the functional components of value, specifically price,” Mr. Easterbrook said. “This has emphasized the transactional, less emotional aspects of our brand.”He said the company had decided not to put its valuable real estate into a real estate investment trust, after determining “the potential upside is not compelling.” Glenview Capital Management, which owns shares in the company, had pushed for such a trust, saying it could unlock $20 billion in value for shareholders.But rent from its real estate accounts for almost a quarter of McDonald’s revenue, a nice cushion when other parts of the business are not operating at their best.Instead, McDonald’s will increase its dividend and borrow money to increase its share buyback plan. After the announcement, Standard & Poor’s lowered its credit rating on the company one notch to BBB+ from A-, but Mr. Kalinowski said McDonald’s borrowing plan was a good one.Analysts were waiting for more detail about how offering some of McDonald’s popular breakfast items all day was affecting business, but in his remarks, Mr. Easterbrook offered little more than optimism that the program would add to sales and profits.Franchisees, who long lobbied for all-day breakfast, are now complaining that while it has added incremental sales, it also has also complicated operations. Advertisement