AdvertisementSupported byBy Liz MoyerThe Securities and Exchange Commission on Wednesday settled with a former stock analyst over accusations that he had failed to tell investors what he really believed about the value of a company’s shares he was promoting.Charles P. Grom, who worked for Deutsche Bank, will pay $100,000 to settle charges by the regulator that his recommendation to buy shares of the retailer Big Lots was inconsistent with his own negative view of the stock, which he privately expressed to a few colleagues and hedge fund clients.Mr. Grom, who neither admitted nor denied wrongdoing, will be suspended from the securities industry for one year. He was dismissed from Deutsche Bank in 2013 for “conduct not consistent with firm standards,” the S.E.C said.Patrick Smith, a lawyer for Mr. Grom, said his client was “pleased to put this matter behind him and looks forward to continuing his career in the future.”A spokeswoman for Deutsche Bank declined to comment.Regulators have been looking at the issue of analyst conflicts for more than a decade. In 2003, the former Merrill Lynch tech stock analyst Henry Blodget paid $4 million in fines and disgorgement and was permanently barred from the industry. He neither admitted nor denied wrongdoing.The Blodget settlement was part of a much broader one across Wall Street that exposed the conflicts of interest between research analysts and investment bankers during the dot-com boom. Collectively, 10 big banks paid $1.4 billion after prosecutors said they had lured investors into buying billions of dollars’ worth of stocks in companies they knew had issues.Mr. Blodget went on to found the online news site Business Insider. He sold a controlling stake in it to the German media company Axel Springer last year.The global Wall Street settlement was supposed to radically change the way banks handle stock research, and included incentives to reduce or eliminate conflicts of interest in dealing with their clients. The changes did not erase the need for Wall Street executives to cultivate client relationships, however.The S.E.C. said in a statement on Wednesday that Mr. Grom did not downgrade his buy recommendation on Big Lots shares in March 2012 because he wanted to maintain rapport with the retailer’s management. Privately, Mr. Grom had become concerned by cautious comments made by Big Lots executives at a road show sponsored by Deutsche Bank.Mr. Grom had discussions with several hedge fund clients after the Big Lots meetings, and four of those hedge funds sold their positions in Big Lots stock, the S.E.C. said.Still, the next day, the statement continued, Mr. Grom published research on Big Lots that had a buy recommendation, and Mr. Grom certified that the views expressed in the research reflected his personal views.Despite that certification, Mr. Grom told fellow research and sales personnel hours later that he kept the buy rating to maintain good client relations. “We just had them in town so it’s not kosher to downgrade on the heels of something like that,” he said on an internal conference call, according to the S.E.C.A month later, he was quoted in another conference call saying: “I think the writing was on the wall. We were getting concerned about it, but I was trying to maintain, you know, my relationship with them. So that’s why we didn’t downgrade it a couple of weeks back.”Andrew J. Ceresney, the S.E.C.’s director of enforcement, said: “When research analysts tell clients to buy or sell a particular security, the rules require them to actually mean what they say. Analysts simply cannot express one view publicly and the opposite view privately.”Advertisement