AdvertisementSupported byBy Andrew E. KramerMOSCOW — Russia filed a lawsuit against Ukraine in the London High Court on Wednesday over $3 billion in unpaid loans, escalating a legal battle that is adding to the geopolitical tensions between the two countries.The lawsuit centers on a controversial $3 billion loan that Russia granted to Ukraine in 2013 under the former Ukrainian president. In December, Ukraine declared a moratorium on paying the debts, unless Russia joined a restructuring program that included other creditors.The dispute is the latest between Ukraine and Russia to spill off the battlefield and into European courts. While a shaky cease-fire has reduced violence in eastern Ukraine, a year-old peace accord still faces major obstacles.The new Ukrainian cabinet has insisted that Moscow agree to the same 20 percent write-down and delay in repayment that was accepted by commercial creditors in a restructuring deal last year. President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia has rejected the deal as unfair.Russia’s finance minister, Anton Siluanov, told reporters in Moscow that his ministry had sued after “repeated unsuccessful attempts to encourage Ukraine” to settle in negotiations.Ukraine was not “negotiating in a spirit of good will,” Mr. Siluanov said in announcing the lawsuit.Despite blaming the West for geopolitical woes, many Russian companies and even government ministries prefer to settle commercial disputes in European courts, which are perceived to be more evenhanded than those in former Soviet countries.The Russian energy giant Gazprom is seeking $29.2 billion from Ukraine in a Stockholm arbitration court for what it says are various breaches of the terms of a natural gas contract.Ukraine’s prime minister, Arseniy P. Yatsenyuk, announced in Parliament on Tuesday that Kiev, in turn, was seeking $22.5 billion from Gazprom in countersuits. Neither side is likely to collect in full.The murky structuring of the loan is proving contentious in the latest run-in between Ukraine and Russia. Moscow provided the funds to Ukraine in December 2013 in an unsuccessful attempt to prop up the government of President Viktor F. Yanukovych, who was ousted two months later. Russia had, for unclear reasons, structured the loan as a Eurobond, a financial instrument typically used in commercial transactions rather than in loans between two countries.The new Ukrainian government, deeply at odds with Russia, has insisted that the loan now be treated as a commercial transaction, making it subject to the restructuring deal.Russia argues that the bonds should not be subject to the terms of the commercial debt restructuring, a position backed by the International Monetary Fund.Advertisement