AdvertisementSupported byYour Money AdviserBy Ann CarrnsShoppers stumped about what holiday gifts to give friends or relatives often fall back on gift cards. When choosing such a card, it may be wise to take the recipient’s age into account, a new analysis finds.People under 65 tend to prefer general-purpose cards, like those from American Express or Visa, which can be used at multiple merchants, research published this week by the financial website Bankrate finds.Older people, however, prefer store- or restaurant-specific cards, which may offer a veneer of personalization for what is often considered an impersonal gift choice.“When buying, know your audience,” said Claes Bell, a banking analyst with Bankrate.Bankrate reviewed the terms and conditions for 60 widely available gift cards in September. The site also commissioned Princeton Survey Research Associates International to conduct a telephone survey of 1,000 adults about their gift-card habits in early October.General-purpose gift cards may offer the recipient more flexibility, but at a cost. These cards typically carry a purchase fee, paid when you buy the card, of $4 to $7. In contrast, just a small proportion of store-specific cards charge a purchase fee, according to Bankrate’s analysis.A persistent problem with gift cards is their tendency to go astray. About a quarter of Americans have lost a gift card, the survey found. Millennials — those in their late teens and 20s — are particularly prone to misplacing the cards, with almost four in 10 saying they have lost one before using its entire balance.Regardless, the cards remain popular. Bankrate’s survey found that more than 80 percent of Americans have received a gift card. CEB, a consulting company that tracks the cards, estimated that spending on gift cards in the United States would reach nearly $130 billion in 2015, up about 6 percent from last year.Here are some questions and answers about gift cards:■ How can I get the most value when buying a gift card?Brian Riley, a principal and executive adviser with CEB, suggests using your credit card, airline or hotel reward points to get free gift cards. Many companies offer gift cards at a rate of about a penny a point — so, for instance, a $25 gift card would cost 2,500 points.Also, he suggests looking for stores and restaurants offering special holiday incentives — like a $10 bonus for every $50 spent on gift cards. (Make sure to read the offer’s fine print, though; sometimes restaurant bonus cards may be good for a limited period of time.)■ What security features do gift cards offer?Some cards — like those from Starbucks and Crate & Barrel — offer online registration, which protects recipients if the card is lost or stolen. More cards now include a PIN that must be used when paying with the card online, or in some cases in stores, and some general-purpose cards offer holders the option of selecting a customized PIN, Mr. Bell noted.Electronic gift cards, which are bought and delivered online, are more likely to have loss protections, the analysis found. Bankrate said 67 percent of the gift cards it reviewed were available as e-cards, up from 59 percent last year.Keep in mind that some merchants may require proof of purchase to replace the value of a lost card. So when you’re giving a gift card, it’s not a bad idea to include the receipt.■ Do I need to worry about card expiration dates and inactivity fees?Under federal rules in effect for several years, gift cards may not expire for at least five years. (Just a few of the cards reviewed by Bankrate had an expiration date.) And inactivity fees can’t be imposed unless the card has been dormant for at least a year.Still, it’s best to use the cards sooner rather than later — if only to reduce the chance that you’ll “put them in a drawer and forget about them,” said Tod Marks, senior project editor with Consumer Report. “If you get one,” he advised, “use it as quickly as possible.”Advertisement