AdvertisementSupported byBy Glenn RifkinIn September 2014, Scott Benner, a former heavy equipment operator, was homeless, unemployed and staying at Father Bill’s Place & MainSpring, a shelter in Quincy, Mass.Fending off a debilitating illness and depression, Mr. Benner spent hours making art, something he had done much of his life. His compelling pen and ink drawings enticed the Boston start-up ArtLifting to add him to its collection of homeless and disabled artists whose work was being featured and sold on its website.So good was Mr. Benner’s work that Liz Powers, founder of ArtLifting, arranged for a solo gallery show on Boston’s fancy Newbury Street at which several of his pieces were sold for hundreds of dollars.For Mr. Benner, 58, who lost his job in 2009 and despaired as his marriage broke up and he spiraled into homelessness, the solo show in Boston served as a startling juxtaposition from where he had been to where he might be going.“When I had that show, I had to get special permission from a counselor at the shelter to stay out beyond 6 p.m.,” he recalled. “There I was with people sipping wine, eating cheese and crackers, and talking about art. And an hour after the show was over, I was on the T going back to Quincy, where I had to turn in my wallet and medications, be searched and then go back into the shelter where guys were fighting and puking and passing out. It was surreal to go from one world to the next.”“Before Hand After Hand,” a work by Scott Benner.A few months after the show, Mr. Benner found subsidized housing on the Maine coast, and last Christmas, ArtLifting sold one of his drawings for $2,500. Like his fellow ArtLifting artists, Mr. Benner said Ms. Powers had played a significant role in turning around his fortunes. “She exudes energy,” he said. “Even though I just met her, I turned over my whole life’s artwork to her because I knew I was in good hands.”Ms. Powers, a 27-year-old Harvard sociology graduate, founded ArtLifting with her brother Spencer in 2013 after years of searching for a creative way to mitigate the anguish of homelessness. She began working with the homeless as an 18-year-old freshman. “I was flipping pancakes and making eggs at 6:30 in the morning at the shelters, but I didn’t really get to know anyone,” she said.When she was a sophomore, she joined LIFT, a national nonprofit organization, where she was trained to work with the homeless, helping people grapple with housing issues, unemployment, food access and self-esteem.During her one-on-one sessions, Ms. Powers heard a familiar refrain. “A lot of our clients said to me, ‘Liz, I’m incredibly lonely,’  ” she said. How, she wondered, could she create a safe space to bring these people together to support one another?Having been an artist, she combined her passions and urged local shelters to create art groups where their residents could come together, make art and earn one another’s trust. With a public service fellowship from Harvard, she spent a year working on her concept.What Ms. Powers discovered was that many shelters already had art programs and closets filled with discarded artwork. There was no place to display the work and no obvious use for it once it was completed.But in the mix was enough quality material to get her thinking. These artisans needed only an opportunity for their work to be seen, and they might be able to sell it and make money. She organized a few art shows at Boston-area churches, with limited response. But in 2013, Boston Properties, a real estate trust, donated a space inside the city’s Prudential Center shopping mall, and Ms. Powers mounted an art show for shelter artists. Shoppers stopped, admired the art, bought some of the work and asked, “When is the next show?” Something clicked for Ms. Powers, and ArtLifting was born.“My brother Spencer and I brainstormed, ‘How can this be scaled? How can we help people not just in Boston but across the country? How can we help not just one day a year but every day?’  ” she said.ArtLifting is a for-profit company that began as an online gallery for homeless and disabled artists but has quickly evolved into something more ambitious. The goal was to provide a way for these disenfranchised artists to sell their work, enhance self-esteem and change their lives. Starting with a $4,000 investment from their savings, the Powerses started ArtLifting, got noticed in the Boston media, and the fledgling venture took off.The company now has contracts with more than 70 artists, six-figure revenue, seven full-time employees and artists in eight cities. Spencer Powers departed for business school, leaving his sister in charge. Last summer, Ms. Powers raised more than $1 million from more than 20 venture capitalists and angel investors. Among them was Blake Mycoskie, the founder of TOMS, a social enterprise that began by giving away a pair of shoes to a needy person for every pair the company sold. Mr. Mycoskie started the TOMS Social Entrepreneurship Fund last fall, and ArtLifting was among its first investments.“Liz’s realization that talented homeless and disabled artists should have a market to sell their artwork — and that a purpose-driven business could fill this need — felt very much like the ‘Aha’ moment to start TOMS,” Mr. Mycoskie said. A believer that the best ventures combine profit and purpose, Mr. Mycoskie eschewed the nonprofit route because he did not want to depend on an endless series of grants and fund-raising to sustain the business. It is a philosophy shared by Ms. Powers.Ms. Powers is eager to dispel any misconceptions about the company. ArtLifting is not a charity, and she is not a caseworker seeking artists living under overpasses. ArtLifting is an art broker, and all the artists are recommended by someone from various shelters around the country; the artists must apply to ArtLifting to represent their work. The artwork must fit the company’s mission and be of high enough quality to be approved by a staff curator. The staff includes three art history majors, two of whom worked at Boston area art museums, including the Museum of Fine Arts.“The easiest way to describe a good fit is that it is salable art,” Ms. Powers said. “It can be abstract, or realistic, but it must be something you can imagine in someone’s home or office.”Artists receive 55 percent of the profit from the sale of their work, while ArtLifting seeks individual customers and corporate sales. ArtLifting has already sold artwork to the Staples headquarters in Framingham, Mass., and the Microsoft Innovation Center in San Francisco. In addition, the company is seeking licensing deals with corporate clients to get artists’ work on totebags, greeting cards, smartphone cases and other products.According to Kelly McKenna, ArtLifting’s chief operating officer, the company is basing its sales projections on similar business models, such as that of Etsy, the online artisan site, which increased sales tenfold in its second year. ArtLifting is building a sales force to fuel similar growth.“We have the funding right now, but it isn’t going to be here forever,” said Ms. McKenna, a Harvard Business School graduate who said she turned down more lucrative job offers to join ArtLifting. “This is a critical year to grow sales, and we’re hoping to close two major licensing deals and do 10 times the sales with e-commerce.”Though there is potential for an artist to strike it big with a lucrative licensing deal, Ms. Powers said the more realistic outcome is providing the artists with the self-confidence and assurance that springs from being appreciated and paid for their talent. The objective is less about money than about providing hope in people’s lives, she said.Kitty Zen, a 25-year old Boston artist, has been homeless since age 16, and her connection to ArtLifting has not solved her housing issue. But her experience with the company has been revelatory. Her first sale was for $1,000, with $550 for her.“When I got that first check, it was amazing!” Ms. Zen said. “I didn’t want to cash it. I wanted to frame it. The biggest absolute feeling of ‘wow’ was having my art displayed at the Museum of Fine Arts, knowing that the summer before that, I was selling my art outside on a blanket on the Boston Common.”Advertisement