AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Quentin WebbThe ghosts of past failures haunt China’s new mergers and acquisitions players.Most of the country’s big overseas takeovers to date have fared poorly. Large bets on oil, mining and finance were victims of terrible timing. Though more recent deals like the China National Chemical Corporation’s $44 billion takeover of Syngenta look less cyclical, real challenges remain.To date, 13 of the 20 biggest completed deals by Chinese buyers outside the People’s Republic and Hong Kong have been in natural resources, Thomson Reuters data shows. Nine involved the state oil majors: Sinopec, the China National Offshore Oil Company and China National Petroleum. Another four were by state-backed specialists in metals, oil field services, chemicals and investment.Big mistake. Oil prices have more than halved since those deals were struck. And there were operational headaches, too. Cnooc’s $18 billion purchase of Nexen left the Chinese group grappling with spills, fleeing civil war in Yemen and struggling to extract crude oil from Canada’s tricky oil sands. Nomura analysts say Cnooc could soon have to take an impairment charge of more than $5 billion on Nexen.The record is not much better outside commodities. The $5.5 billion that the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China invested in South Africa’s Standard Bank has more than halved in dollar terms. The China Investment Corporation invested in Morgan Stanley and Blackstone before the depths of the financial crisis. Shares in Portugal’s utility EDP are worth a fifth less than the price at which China Three Gorges invested $3.5 billion in it. The WH Group, which is listed in Hong Kong, is down roughly a third since floating in 2014, suggesting that investors have lost their appetite for its $7 billion push into American pork.The list of value-destroying deals is worrying, given the rush to seek outward mergers and acquisitions, which hit a record $113 billion in 2015. Of course, Chinese buyers may have learned some lessons. There’s also a huge difference between chasing energy security and a seasoned deal maker like ChemChina’s chairman, Ren Jianxin, adding world-beating foreign companies to his stable.Still, like other cross-border buyers, Chinese companies can struggle to run new overseas outposts effectively, while also keeping staff and governments onside. A poll by the consulting firm BCG found that Chinese acquirers thought just 32 percent of their foreign deals were “trouble-free.” Towering piles of debt – a staggering $43 billion is being raised in Syngenta’s case – raise the stakes further. The only consolation is that China’s outbound M.&A. record cannot get much worse.Quentin Webb is an associate editor for Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.Advertisement