AdvertisementSupported byBy Dan HorchSÃO PAULO — The fallen businessman Eike Batista lost another legal battle Tuesday as Brazil’s markets regulator banned him from serving as an officer of a publicly traded company for the next five years.Mr. Batista was once the world’s eighth-richest man, whose six publicly traded companies gave him an estimated net worth of more than $30 billion. But despite initially strong stock market performance, the companies collapsed as they failed to make enough money to service their debt.His petroleum company, OGX, defaulted in 2013 on more than $5 billion of debt. The default left many foreign investors, including the bond giant Pimco, with heavy losses. Three other of Mr. Batista’s companies defaulted soon after OGX did.The regulator, C.V.M., said on Tuesday that Mr. Batista had broken rules against conflicts of interest when he voted as a shareholder to approve the OGX 2013 balance sheet. At the time he was also the company’s chief executive.Tuesday was the second time the regulator has found Mr. Batista liable for misconduct, but his lawyers are appealing both rulings, which remain suspended until the appeals are judged — a process that can take years.The collapse of OGX has also led to a criminal case against Mr. Batista on accusations of insider trading and stock market manipulation, but that case is at a standstill.The trial began last year but was suspended in February after the judge in charge was filmed driving Mr. Batista’s Porsche, which the same judge had ordered seized. The court has yet to set a date for the trial to resume.Heloisa Estellita, a professor of criminal law at the Fundação Getúlio Vargas law school in São Paulo, said there was no procedural reason the criminal trial could not have resumed immediately.“It’s a common strategy for defense lawyers to try to delay trials until the statute of limitations frees defendants,” she said.Ms. Estellita said the court would probably try to avoid that outcome in Mr. Batista’s case, though she also said that even if he was tried in time and judged guilty, it would be “very difficult” for him to serve jail time.“If convicted, he would be a first-time offender, and sentences of up to four years can be converted to community service.”Advertisement