

      By JAN M. ROSEN

FEB. 19, 2016

Various breaks can reduce tax bills. Here is a look at what helped one hypothetical family -- and what might work for you.
This hypothetical suburban New York couple are in the 25 percent federal tax bracket, but thanks to various breaks their federal income tax (excluding Social Security and Medicare taxes) is much less than that: only 7.52 percent of their adjusted gross income. Here’s a look at how we reduced their taxes:Big corporations and billionaires get plenty of tax breaks. People with more modest incomes get plenty of bills. That may be the way it feels, year after year. But wait a minute. There are many tax breaks available, and with careful financial planning and knowledge of which deductions and credits to claim, it is possible to cut your tax bill significantly. Don’t know how? Help is as near as your computer and this sample return, which I prepared in consultation with Bob Meighan, a vice president of TurboTax, the tax software published by Intuit. First, a few general topics to consider. Exemptions: Exemptions reduce your taxable income. You can deduct $4,000 for each exemption you claim in 2015. Above-the-line deductions: These are adjustments that reduce your income regardless of whether you itemize your deductions. Some include alimony payments, moving expenses, I.R.A. contributions and student loan interest. See the I.R.S. site for rules and a list of qualifying items. Standard deductions: Most taxpayers have a choice of either taking a standard deduction or itemizing their deductions. Standard deductions are higher for taxpayers who are 65 or older or who are blind. Either way, it may be worth your time to fill out Schedule A (details below) to see if the itemized deductions you can take are greater than the standard deductions in your situation.  certain tax benefits for high income taxpayers. It helps to ensure that those taxpayers pay at least a minimum amount of tax. Many taxpayers will have to fill out Form 6251 to see if they are subject to the A.M.T.Filing Status and ExemptionsThis return is for a hypothetical suburban New York couple, Samuel and Felicity, both of whom work.They have three dependents: their children, Cyril and Heidi, and an elderly parent, Sydney, who lives with them. Thus, they claimed five personal exemptions. Itemized deductions and education credits also helped to reduce their taxable income.Income and Adjusted Gross IncomeForm 1040 asks a taxpayer to lists all income. Then, it factors in various adjustments, deductions and personal exemptions to determine how much of the income is taxable. Most of the numbers are bottom-line figures transferred from worksheets or supplemental forms and schedules. Taxable income and the tax on it are calculated on Page 2, as are any credits, which are more valuable than deductions because they reduce taxes dollar for dollar. In this sample return, the self-employment tax (Line 57), which covers what Samuel must pay for Social Security and Medicare, is added to income taxes for the total tax calculations. The last number on Page 2 shows either a refund or payment due. The Internal Revenue Service encourages taxpayers to file electronically, and e-filing is included with TurboTax. However, people who prepare their own returns still have the option of mailing in paper forms, and any taxpayer who attaches explanatory statements will need to file on paper, regardless of whether a professional or the taxpayer prepared the return. Either way, the preparation is the same. First, gather all the papers related to your income and deductions, including the official forms: W-2, 1099, 1098, K-1 and any others sent by employers, banks, brokerage firms and anyone else who paid you. Payers must also send copies to the I.R.S., where computers compare returns with what the payers report. So don’t guess at a number if you are missing a W-2 or a 1099; go to the source for a new copy. In addition, Mr. Meighan pointed out, “Many taxpayers will be receiving a new form this year: Form 1095. This form provides you with information about the health coverage you had or were offered in 2015.” Tax and Credits After itemized deductions of $51,307 (Line 40, from Schedule A - see below for a breakdown) and five personal exemptions worth $20,000 (Line 42), the couple’s taxable income is $91,613 (Line 43). The regular tax on that is $14,389 (Line 44). Alternative Minimum Tax  An enormous complication in the tax code is that taxpayers are expected to calculate their regular tax, then the alternative minimum tax, which denies personal exemptions and certain other tax breaks, notably the deduction for state and local taxes, and pay whichever tax is higher. Line 45 is blank on this return because TurboTax determined that the Taxpayers were not liable for the alternative minimum tax. Next are their credits, which reduce taxes dollar for dollar. The Taxpayers claim credits of $1,281 (Line 50) and $854 (Line 68), both from Schedule 8863 for Cyril’s college costs. Because of their income level, those credits are below the maximum levels for education credits. Other TaxesSelf-employment tax of $13,564 (Line 57) comes from Schedule SE (see below for details).PaymentsIncome taxes of $13,500 were withheld from Felicity’s salary (Line 64). Because Samuel is self-employed, his earnings were not subject to withholding. Nor were taxes withheld on their investment income, so they paid quarterly estimated taxes of $12,000 (Line 65). Refund or Amount You OweThe bottom line (78) is that they owe $318. Many Americans would be disappointed not to get a refund, but Samuel and Felicity are pleased — they calculated their estimated payments carefully and did not give the Treasury an interest-free loan. Nor did they incur a penalty for failing to pay a sufficient amount of tax during the year.Medical and Dental Expenses Medical expenses (Line 1) can be deducted only to the extent that unreimbursed outlays exceed 10 percent of adjusted gross income, so many people cannot take that deduction. However, the Taxpayer family qualifies for a deduction of $17,677 (Line 4), mainly because of the premiums for Sydney’s Medicare supplement insurance and for treatments for his multiple medical problems that are not covered by Medicare or his Medigap policy. Taxes You Paid The couple can deduct state income taxes of $7,234 (Line 5) and real estate taxes of $12,950 (Line 6). Interest You Paid The couple can deduct home mortgage interest of $9,600 (Line 10). Gifts to Charity They also deduct gifts to charity of $3,846 (Line 19). Those gifts include $3,600 in cash (Line 16) and $246 (Line 17) for the thrift-shop value of good used clothing that was donated to a church rummage sale. If audited, filers must be able to show written evidence, like bank records, for all cash donations and receipts issued by the charity for any gift valued at $250 or more. Casualty and Theft Losses  Casualty and theft losses (Line 20) can be deducted only to the extent that losses not recouped through insurance reimbursements or other payments exceed $100 per incident plus 10 percent of adjusted gross income. Relatively few people are eligible for this deduction. Those who are must file Form 4684 (not shown) with their returns. Job Expenses and Certain Miscellaneous Deductions  Because miscellaneous itemized deductions such as union or professional dues, unreimbursed employee business expenses and tax preparation fees (Line 27) are generally allowed only for expenses that exceed 2 percent of adjusted gross income, this couple, like most filers, could not take any. Total Itemized Deductions  Their itemized deductions total $51,307 (Line 29), well exceeding the standard deduction of $12,600 for married couples filing jointly. Some upper-income taxpayers’ itemized deductions are limited, but the worksheets for Schedule A showed that this couple’s are not. As an unincorporated engineering consultant, Samuel Taxpayer must file Schedule C for a sole proprietorship.part 1: Income and part 2: ExpensesHe reported gross income of $126,400 (Line 7) and expenses of $30,403 (Line 28). He has a deduction of $3,591 (Line 9) for driving his car 6,245 miles at 57.5 cents a mile (Form 4562, not shown) for business purposes. The largest expense, detailed in Part II, was $10,800 for office rent (Line 20b). Having bought new office furniture and equipment in recent years, Samuel did not buy anything last year that would qualify for an immediate write-off known as a Section 179 deduction, as opposed to depreciating the equipment over several years (Line 13), but that deduction can be important to business people who do make such purchases.Net Profit or LossReturns containing Schedule C have above-average audit rates, and filers who are audited will need to substantiate deductions, so it is important to keep detailed records. Samuel reported net earnings of $95,997 (Line 31).Asset sales last year that resulted in a net capital gain or loss are reported on Schedule D, which uses numbers tabulated on Form 8949 (below). Schedule D is also used to report sales of real estate, artwork and other assets, including municipal bonds. Only the interest on these bonds, not any profit on sales, is tax exempt. The Taxpayers did not have any of these sales to report. The costs for the sales reported include brokerage fees and charges, and the sale price is calculated after deducting such fees. Assets held for a year or less are considered short term, and their sales are reported in Part I. Short-term gains are taxed like ordinary income. Long-term gains are taxed at lower rates than ordinary income and are generally tax free for those in the 10 and 15 percent brackets. part 1: A Short-Term capital Gain and losses – Assets held one year or less Felicity, who had bought Netflix stock in March, decided to sell 120 shares. That resulted in a short-term gain of $7,760 (Schedule D, Part I, Lines 1b and 7, from Form 8949, Part I, Lines 1 and 2.) Part 2. long-term capital gains and losses – Assets Held More Than One YearIn the spring of 2014 when the price of oil was above $100 a barrel, fueling a boom in energy issues, Samuel wanted a piece of the action. But oil prices tumbled last year, and his stocks, Chevron and Halliburton, dropped. He sold them, taking a loss of $11,400, reported on Form 8949 (Part II, Line 2) and Schedule D (Part II, Line 8b). The Taxpayers also had a mutual fund capital gain distribution of $644 (Schedule D, Line 13), which brought their net long-term loss down to $10,756 (Line 15). Part 3: summaryUp to $3,000 in net capital losses can be taken against current income; any excess may be carried forward to future years to reduce income.The short-term gain of $7,760 from Part I and the net long-term capital loss from Part II combine to result in a capital loss of $2,996 on Schedule D (Part III, Lines 16 and 21), which is carried over to Line 13 of the Form 1040. Form 8949 tabulates the net capital gains and losses reported on Schedule D. Part 1. Short TermThis lists the transactions of capital assets held one year or less. In the case of the Taxpayers, this involved the sale of 120 shares of Netflix.Part 2. Long TermThis lists the transactions of capital assets held one year or more. In the case of the Taxpayers, this involved 200 shares of Chevron and 200 shares of Halliburton, all of which were sold for a net loss.Farmers (Line 1a) and independent contractors or consultants like Samuel must pay self-employment taxes for Social Security and Medicare. Section A – Short Schedule SE Samuel’s net profit of $95,997, as reported on Schedule C, is entered on Lines 2 and 3 of Schedule SE, and multiplied by 92.35 percent to determine his taxable earnings base, $88,653, on Line 4. That number is multiplied by 15.3 percent, which is the sum of 12.4 percent for Social Security and 2.9 percent for Medicare. The result, $13,564 on Line 5, is Samuel’s self-employment tax. The calculation is slightly different for people whose earnings base exceeds $118,500, because Social Security taxes end there, but Medicare taxes apply to all earned income. They must multiply the amount on Line 4 by 2.9 percent, add it to $14,694, and enter the result on Line 5. In either case, half the amount on Line 5 — $6,782, for Samuel — is entered on Line 6, then carried over to Line 27 of Form 1040 to be deducted from income.Two credits for education, the American Opportunity Credit, which may be claimed for four years of undergraduate education provided the student is enrolled at least half time, and the Lifetime Learning Credit may be claimed on this form. Part 1. Refundable American Opportunity Credit and Part 2. NonRefundable education CreditsThe income limit for claiming the full American Opportunity Credit is a modified adjusted gross income of $80,000 for single filers, but those with incomes up to $90,000 can claim a reduced credit. The range is $160,000 to $180,000 for married couples filing jointly.The Taxpayers, whose modified adjusted gross income fell within the range, were able to claim a $2,135 credit (Line 7) for Cyril, a college student. On Page 1 of the form, that amount is separated into a refundable credit of $854 (Part I - Line 8) and a nonrefundable credit of $1,281 (Part II - Line 9). Refundable credits allow eligible taxpayers whose taxes are below the amount of the credit to claim a refund for the difference.The tax code also has other breaks for educational costs, which your tax software program may identify for you.Source: Intuit and Internal Revenue ServiceProduction by Pradnya Joshi and Eric OwlesAdvertisement