AdvertisementSupported byDeal ProfessorBy Steven Davidoff SolomonIf you are tired of high chief executive compensation, you’re probably not going to like the latest issue du jour: rising director pay.The issue is front and center because of litigation brought against the Internet behemoth Facebook, claiming that Facebook’s directors voted to pay themselves too much by raising the average compensation of outside directors to $461,265 for 2013.A Facebook shareholder filed suit in a Delaware court claiming that this was just too much. The shareholder complained that not only were directors setting their own compensation, but that the amount was 43 percent higher than Facebook’s peers paid their directors. Not only that, but Susan Desmond-Hellmann, the chief executive of the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, received incentive options that year worth more than $900,000 for joining the Facebook board, close to the amount of her $1 million-a-year salary at the Gates Foundation.The charge of director overreach is important because not only is this Facebook, but the Facebook board is Silicon Valley royalty. Marc Andreessen, Reed Hastings and Peter Thiel are members, as well as the Facebook executives Mark Zuckerberg and Sheryl Sandberg.What the crème de la crème will pay itself sets the tone for other directors. And this will be one of the first cases in which a Delaware court has considered how much is enough for directors.It raises a good question: How much should a director be paid?The battle raging over executive compensation is continuing as the average pay package for a chief executive of a Standard & Poor’s 500 company last year rose to $12.2 million, and the median was $10.3 million, according to Equilar.In contrast, director pay is peanuts, really. According to Equilar, the median pay of directors was $233,600 in 2014, up about 17 percent since 2010. That is still a nice piece of change for the common worker, but nothing compared with a C.E.O.’s pay.Still, many argue that directors are underpaid, at least for the level of work that they do.It used to be that being a director was a sinecure. Directors didn’t do much, mainly showing up for an annual meeting. Directors were friends and celebrities. Those were the days when O. J. Simpson was a member of the board and audit committee of Infinity Broadcasting.It is a different world today. Now, the focus is on engagement. Boards have more meetings and more required work, largely because of changes starting with the Sarbanes-Oxley  law of 2002. The average board now meets eight times a year, according to the consulting firm Spencer Stuart. There is not just more work, but also a higher likelihood of being sued if things go wrong.More work and more liability exposure has made it harder to get the right kinds of people for boards, as top executives prefer to concentrate on their day jobs.In their pursuit of good director nominees, hedge funds are now even paying directors a cut of their profits, an arrangement known as a golden leash. Golden leashes have been used by activist hedge funds in proxy contests involving Agrium, General Motors and Hess. In each of those contests, directors stood to make millions if the hedge fund did; the compensation was meant in part to attract the best candidates.Compared with the golden leash arrangements, the Facebook directors are a bargain.An argument could be made that board pay should, indeed, be higher and that the Facebook director compensation is a pittance. Of course, on the other side, why should any public company pay one cent more than it has to — particularly when the compensation is voted on by the directors themselves?The irony is that in many cases the compensation figure is completely meaningless, while in other cases it means way too much.Does it make sense that Mr. Andreessen, Mr. Hastings and Mr. Thiel, all billionaires, are on the Facebook board for money? More likely they, like many other directors, are there for the prestige of being labeled a “Facebook director.”But other directors probably care way too much about the money. Take the Square board, for example. It has Ruth Simmons on it, the former president of Brown University who resigned from the Goldman Sachs board after the financial crisis. She received an option to buy 38,000 shares of Square to join the board, far less than Lawrence H. Summers, the former Treasury secretary, who received an option to buy almost 1.1 million shares. In both cases, though, these are significant sums when measured against their net worth. The Square directors, who include Magic Johnson, have almost no banking experience, by the way.It all means that director compensation, no matter how high the figure goes, often simply doesn’t make sense. In many cases it has no bearing on the experience brought to the table. In other cases, directors may be too beholden to the nice paycheck and unwilling to challenge management.And there is no evidence that paying directors more actually improves company performance.In fact, director pay is one area in which pay for performance may not even be the best idea. It could give directors incentive to encourage a company to take outsize risks. Since directors are usually protected from the downside and unlikely to be held liable, missteps might end up hurting shareholders. The directors can just continue in their regular jobs. Compare this to chief executives who have their whole career and reputation staked in the company.Which brings us back to Facebook.It would be a mistake to get too excited about the possibility that this court case is going to strike a blow against director compensation. The Delaware courts have always allowed wide latitude in executive compensation in cases with much higher numbers. The court  decided, for example, that it was O.K. for the board of Walt Disney to pay Michael Ovitz $140 million in severance after 14 months of work.Again, though, given Facebook’s riches, board members’ pay is small. Other companies pay more, including Google and Salesforce.com, which each paid directors around $650,000 in 2013. Facebook even dropped its director compensation to about $370,000 last year.And so, the Facebook case shows, perhaps, that when it comes to director pay, there is no clear answer. Given the uncertainties, perhaps director compensation should be more like a holiday present for a not so close or very beloved relative: You really want to pay enough to make sure they feel as if they got something, but not much more.In some cases it is too much pay, in others it is too little, and no one can agree what is the right amount. Instead, we’re left wondering why a suit against Facebook and not any other company.Steven Davidoff Solomon is a professor of law at the University of California, Berkeley. His columns can be found at nytimes.com/dealbook. Follow @stevendavidoff on Twitter.Advertisement