AdvertisementSupported byBy ReutersWASHINGTON — The number of Americans filing for unemployment benefits unexpectedly fell last week, pointing to labor market strength that could keep Federal Reserve interest rate increases on the table this year.Other data on Thursday showed that factory activity in the mid-Atlantic region contracted at a slower pace in February and hinted at a pickup in wage growth. But the signs of stabilization in the struggling manufacturing sector were tempered by further declines in new orders and employment.“The economy is better than the markets think,” said Chris Rupkey, chief economist at MUFG Union Bank in New York. “We wouldn’t rule out another rate hike at the March meeting as financial market turbulence fades away and the economic outlook remains positive.”Economists had forecast claims rising to 275,000 in the latest week. The four-week moving average of claims, considered a better measure of labor market trends as it irons out week-to-week volatility, fell 8,000 last week, to 273,250.In a second report, the Philadelphia Federal Reserve said its business activity index increased to a reading of −2.8 this month from −3.5 in January. The index has been now been negative for six consecutive months.The health of the job market could determine whether the Fed raises rates this year. The central bank lifted its benchmark overnight interest rate in December, the first increase in nearly a decade. Bets for a March rate increase have largely been eliminated against the backdrop of tightening financial market conditions and worries about the American and global economies.Claims are being closely monitored for signs of a pickup in layoffs after the recent stock market sell-off. There is no indication so far that companies have responded to the tighter financial market conditions by reducing staff.Claims have now been below the 300,000 threshold, which is associated with a strong labor market, for 50 straight weeks, the longest stretch since the early 1970s. The claims data covered the survey period for nonfarm payrolls in February.The four-week average of claims declined by 12,000 between the January and February survey periods, suggesting an acceleration in job growth. Nonfarm payrolls rose by 151,000 in January. Economists said the drop in claims during the survey was consistent with job gains of about 200,000 in February.“With anxiety around the state of the global economy already elevated and mixed readings across a number of domestic economic indicators, the recent decline in jobless claims is a welcome development,” said Jim Baird, chief investment officer at Plante Moran Financial Advisors in Kalamazoo, Mich.A third report showed that the Conference Board’s leading economic index fell in January for a second straight month because of the stock market volatility.Advertisement