AdvertisementSupported byBy Liz MoyerWalmart said on Thursday that profit fell about 8 percent last quarter, and it lowered its sales forecast for this year, citing a strong dollar and the costs of a plan to close more than 200 stores worldwide.Walmart, based in Bentonville, Ark., has been fighting for a firmer footing in a retail market increasingly dominated by the online behemoth Amazon.Walmart’s efforts to entice more web and mobile customers resulted in 8 percent sales growth for the quarter, the company said. But e-commerce sales growth has been steadily declining for the last year, from 17 percent growth in the first quarter, despite heavy investments in the business.In contrast, Amazon said sales rose 26 percent in its fourth quarter, compared with 15 percent sales growth in the first quarter.Walmart executives cited challenges in international markets, especially China, Brazil and Britain. Last year, Walmart introduced a mobile payment application as a way to bridge the customer experience between its online and in-store sites. The executives said they would continue to build that service and expand the online sale of groceries from the 20 markets where it is offered already.Shares of Walmart were down about 3 percent in late-afternoon trading on Thursday.Sales during the recent holiday season slowed from the third quarter, Walmart said, and it reported fourth-quarter profit of $4.57 billion, down 7.9 percent from the same period a year ago, on declining revenue and same-store sales.For the current fiscal year, which began this month, sales are projected to be flat, whereas previous estimates called for growth of 3 to 4 percent.Walmart is among the big retailers struggling to adapt to the popularity of online shopping. Last month, the company announced plans to close 269 stores, including 154 in the United States, a move that will affect 16,000 workers.In Walmart’s fourth quarter, sales at stores open at least a year, a crucial metric in retailing, rose 0.6 percent in the United States. That quarter included the critical holiday shopping season and was the sixth consecutive quarter of growth. The increase, though, fell short of the 1.5 percent growth in the third and fourth quarters a year ago. Customer visits to United States stores rose 0.7 percent, slowing from an increase of 1.7 percent in the third quarter.“This past year has been a year of investment, operational improvement and change, even while we delivered solid growth,” said Doug McMillon, Walmart’s president and chief executive. “We do see an underlying strength in our Walmart U.S. business that wasn’t there a year ago.”Quarterly revenue, which reached $129.7 billion, fell 1.4 percent from the year-ago period, with currency adjustments shaving off $4.8 billion.Earnings per share were $1.43, compared with $1.53 a year ago. Costs associated with the store closings cut 20 cents off earnings per share, which was partly offset by tax-related gains of 14 cents a share. Excluding items, adjusted earnings per share were $1.49.For the full fiscal year, profit was $4.57 a share, or $4.59 excluding certain one-time items, compared with $4.99 the year before, and revenue was $482.1 billion, compared with $485.7 billion in the year-ago period.Nordstrom, the luxury retailer, also reported lackluster earnings for the fourth quarter, which ended Jan. 30, and shares of the retailer fell more than 6 percent in after-hours trading. The company’s fourth-quarter profit fell 29 percent from the previous year’s quarter, and it warned that earnings per share in the first half of its fiscal 2016 could fall further.Nordstrom said the fourth-quarter profit of $180 million, or $1 a share, included a charge of 17 cents a share for asset impairment. But even without that charge, the results fell short of what analysts were expecting.While overall sales rose 5.2 percent in the quarter, and 7.5 percent for the year, its comparable sales, or those in stores open more than a year, rose by about 1 percent.Nordstrom got better results from online sales and sales through its discount stores.Full-price store net sales fell 2.5 percent, and same-store sales fell 3.2 percent. Sales through Nordstrom.com rose 11 percent and those at Nordstrom Rack and NordstromRack.com/HauteLook rose 12 percent.The company also said earnings per share through the first half of 2016 could fall 30 percent, reflecting last year’s sale of its credit receivables and the costs of new stores and other growth projects.Advertisement