By ADAM LIPTAKNOV. 10, 2015
WASHINGTON —  Facing a Supreme Court generally hostile to class actions, thousands of workers at an Iowa pork processing plant may nevertheless have found a narrow path toward victory at an argument on Tuesday, one that would allow them to band together in a single lawsuit seeking overtime pay.Justice Anthony M. Kennedy, whose vote will probably prove crucial, suggested that the defendant, Tyson Foods, had committed litigation missteps that could doom its case. “I just don’t understand your arguments,” Justice Kennedy told Carter G. Phillips, a lawyer for the company.Justice Kennedy added that plaintiffs seeking to recover overtime pay under the Fair Labor Standards Act may use statistics to prove their case that could not be used in other kinds of class-action suits.The workers sought to be paid for the time they had spent putting on and taking off protective gear and other work-related functions. Tyson had not kept records, and the workers tried to prove their damages based on an expert witness’s statistical inferences from hundreds of videotaped observations of how long it took the workers to get ready.AdvertisementTyson objected, saying that approach was at odds with the court’s 2011 decision in Wal-Mart Stores v. Dukes, an employment discrimination class action that rejected what it called “trial by formula.”AdvertisementThe Tyson workers did not have enough in common to pursue their claims together, Mr. Phillips said. The case, he said, concerned “more than 400 jobs, which required widely differing amounts of time to perform their donning, doffing and washing tasks.”“All you’ve got,” he said, “is averaging across the widest imaginable range of employees performing different tasks with different requirements.”Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg responded that the basic tasks “weren’t all that different.”David C. Frederick, a lawyer for the workers, said most of the equipment was quite similar, too. “We’re talking about a difference between a Kevlar belly guard and a Plexiglas belly guard or a mesh, metal mesh belly guard,” he said. “We’re talking about the same basic kinds of gear. We’re talking about different kinds of gloves.”Mr. Frederick added that “the reason averaging works is because the workers were rotating among different assignments.”Justice Kennedy asked whether it was too burdensome to require employers to keep track of the various work-related tasks.Mr. Frederick responded that there was an easy solution. “Had they put the punch clock right outside the locker room so that the workers, as soon as they went in the locker room and punched in,” he said, “this problem would have been eliminated.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Several justices said that cases concerning overtime pay were different from other class actions, pointing to a 1946 precedent, Anderson v. Mt. Clemens Pottery. “Where the employer’s records are inaccurate or inadequate and the employee cannot offer convincing substitutes,” the court said in 1946, it is enough for workers to rely on “sufficient evidence to show the amount and extent of that work as a matter of just and reasonable inference.”In Tuesday’s case, Tyson Foods v. Bouaphakeo, No. 14-1146, a judge allowed more than 3,000 workers to band together, awarding them about $6 million. It was not clear how the money would be distributed.AdvertisementMr. Phillips said that it was too late to allocate that money in a sensible fashion. “You can’t unscramble this egg at this point,” he said.Justice Samuel A. Alito Jr. seemed to agree. “I don’t see how this can be done in other than a very slapdash fashion,” he said.But Justice Ginsburg wondered why this mattered to the company. “Why would Tyson’s care?” she asked. “They have to pay the same amount of dollars.”The case is one of three heard by the court in the last month with the potential to cut back on the availability of class actions. Last month, in Campbell Ewald Company v. Gomez, No. 14-857, the court considered whether companies may pick off plaintiffs seeking to represent a class one by one by offering them individual settlements.Last week, in Spokeo v. Robins, No. 13-1339, the court heard arguments over Congress’s ability to authorize lawsuits by plaintiffs who cannot prove they suffered a concrete injury.By the end of Tuesday’s argument, Justice Kennedy was asking questions about what a decision in favor of the plaintiffs would look like, a sign that he was looking for a way to write a narrow ruling. Mr. Frederick’s answer did not satisfy him.Elizabeth B. Prelogar, a lawyer for the federal government who was arguing in support of the workers, seemed to meet with more success.“The jury was told in this case that they could only rely on representative evidence if all of the employees performed substantially similar activities,” she said, “and that substantial similarity is what we think is the proper standard to determine whether an inference here would be just and reasonable.”Follow the New York Times’s politics and Washington coverage on Facebook and Twitter, and sign up for the First Draft politics newsletter.A version of this article appears in print on November 11, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Supreme Court Hears Case for Tyson Foods Class-Action Lawsuit.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.