AdvertisementSupported byBy Chad BrayLONDON — Thomas King, the American in charge of the investment banking business at Barclays, is set to retire from the lender next month, the London-based bank said on Friday.The departure of Mr. King, the chief executive of the Barclays investment bank, is the most prominent exit in a shake-up of management at the bank under its new chief executive, James E. Staley.Mr. Staley joined Barclays in December after the lender ousted its former chief executive, Antony Jenkins. Mr. Staley has since brought in several executives from his former employer, JPMorgan Chase, as he looks to put his stamp on the business and turn around the lender.Barclays has been shrinking its investment bank — which has large operations in New York — and grew quickly under Robert E. Diamond Jr., who preceded Mr. Jenkins as chief executive.“While sad to see him leave Barclays, I understand and respect Tom’s decision to retire,” Mr. Staley said in a statement. “Tom’s work in particular in leading the change in our investment bank strategy before and since May of 2014 has been very important to ensuring Barclays’ future success. Tom’s trademark has always been his focus on the needs of clients and colleagues, and we are grateful to him for his stewardship.”Mr. King, who joined the bank as head of banking for Europe, the Middle East and Africa and as co-head of global corporate finance in 2009, is expected to leave the bank on March 4, just days after the bank is expected to report its full-year results and update investors on its strategy.Mr. Staley, who is known as Jes, spent more than 30 years at JPMorgan, serving as the top executive in its investment banking and asset management units. Mr. Staley left JPMorgan in 2013 for the hedge fund BlueMountain Capital Management and joined Barclays in December.Barclays has previously announced it will bring two JPMorgan veterans in to join its management team this year.In January, the bank said that C.S. Venkatakrishnan, the head of operational risk at JPMorgan, would join the bank in May as its chief risk officer. This month, the bank said that Paul H. Compton, who most recently served as JPMorgan’s chief administrative officer, would join the bank in May as chief operating officer.“After nearly 25 years in my career, and having now seen the investment bank through a period of extraordinary change and on to a solid footing for the future, I feel the moment is right for me to pass the baton,” Mr. King said in a news release. “I am so proud of what we have achieved together at Barclays through what has been a hugely challenging period, and I shall leave the firm with fond memories of great clients and great colleagues.”In the years since the financial crisis, costly new regulations and a series of embarrassing investigations have weighed on Barclays’ results. A scandal over potential rigging of a global benchmark interest rate known as Libor cost Mr. Diamond his job in 2012 after just 18 months as chief executive.Mr. Jenkins, a retail banker by trade, was brought in to change the bank’s culture and return the lender to profitability.He was praised for his efforts to reshape the bank’s culture, but was ousted after directors, including the new chairman, John McFarlane, lost confidence in his ability to improve returns to shareholders.Mr. King, a former Citigroup banker, also clashed with Mr. Jenkins over the strategic direction of the investment banking business ahead of Mr. Jenkins’ departure last year.Under Mr. Jenkins, the bank announced in May 2014 that it would cut 19,000 jobs by the end of this year, including about 7,000 in its investment banking division.Despite his departure, the bank has continued many of the cost-cutting initiatives announced by Mr. Jenkins.In January, it emerged that Barclays planned to scale back its operations in Asia, end its physical presence in several countries and eliminate as many as 1,200 jobs across its global investment banking operations.About two-thirds of the job cuts are expected in Asia. Barclays, which had about 132,000 employees worldwide at the end of 2014, plans to focus on its home markets in Britain and the United States.Advertisement