AdvertisementSupported byRevaluedBy David GellesOne afternoon in late January, prominent New York restaurateurs, including Danny Meyer and Tom Colicchio, took the stage at the Ford Foundation to celebrate the release of a new book by Saru Jayaraman, an outspoken leader in the food labor movement.It was not an obvious pairing. “Forked: A New Standard for American Dining,” paints a grim picture of the food business today: Millions of service industry employees live in poverty, most big restaurants are not great employers, and many still pay servers $2.13 an hour, the federal minimum for workers who receive tips. But the book also makes the case that restaurants can survive and even prosper while paying workers well and offering them generous benefits.Mr. Meyer, the entrepreneur behind Shake Shack, the Modern and Blue Smoke, has recently embraced this cause, pledging to do away with tipping at his restaurants, as a means to combat income inequality. He contends that paying workers well is not only the right thing to do, but is also good for business — well-compensated employees, the thinking goes, will be happy, loyal and hard-working.That big-name restaurant owners are today willing to stand side by side with Ms. Jayaraman shows just how far she has come after 15 years of organizing. Even a few years ago, her message was falling on deaf ears.“In the early days, if I heard Saru was coming, I ran the other direction,” Mr. Meyer said. “You cannot be in the restaurant industry and not have had Saru on your radar.”Ms. Jayaraman earned the fear of restaurant owners with a mix of dogged organizing, costly lawsuits and nationwide lobbying. Today she is pushing to change the laws that she says enable restaurants to mistreat employees. She is a leading voice in the so-called Fight for $15, the national campaign to raise the minimum wage. She is struggling to eliminate the lower, tipped minimum wage. And she is campaigning for mandatory paid sick days.In the beginning, however, she was just trying to lend a hand after the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks, which brought down the World Trade Center and Windows on the World, the restaurant on the top floors of the north tower.In late 2001, the union representing the Windows workers approached Ms. Jayaraman, then a budding organizer. With Fekkak Mamdouh, who had been the head server at Windows, Ms. Jayaraman founded the Restaurant Opportunities Center United, with the goal of helping the roughly 250 surviving Windows employees find new jobs and gain access to donations that had poured in from around the world.But before long, Ms. Jayaraman had a fight on her hands.The proprietor of Windows, David Emil, had pledged to help his former employees find work. But in 2002, when Mr. Emil opened a four-story restaurant in Times Square, only a handful of the Windows workers were offered jobs. Ms. Jayaraman organized a picket line, and soon Mr. Emil capitulated, hiring all of the former Windows servers who wanted jobs at his new venture.Ill-treated workers around the country started calling Ms. Jayaraman, asking for help. R.O.C. began helping workers organize and sue their employers. The center says it has prevailed in 15 campaigns against restaurant companies, winning more than $10 million for workers in cases involving back wages, sexual harassment and stolen tips and wages. Ms. Jayaraman has secured pledges to improve working conditions with better pay, sick days and policies against sexual harassment.Though Ms. Jayaraman is effective, her tactics can be off-putting to management and owners. After all, it is not good for business to have protesters outside fine dining establishments wearing chef’s aprons and holding signs that read “Hungry for Justice.”But as restaurateurs like Mr. Meyer have grown more sympathetic to the needs of employees, Ms. Jayaraman has tried softer approaches as well. R.O.C. recently started a trade group to promote good actors in the industry. Restaurants Advancing Industry Standards in Employment, or Raise, counts Mr. Meyer’s company as an early member.The daughter of Indian immigrants, Ms. Jayaraman grew up east of Los Angeles. She was accepted to Harvard at 16, but her parents insisted she attend U.C.L.A. to stay closer to home. At Yale Law School, she studied with Jennifer Gordon, who won a MacArthur Foundation fellowship, or “genius grant,” for her efforts to organize mistreated immigrant workers. It was while employed at the organization Ms. Gordon founded, the Workplace Project, that Ms. Jayaraman received the call from the Windows employees.“I marvel at her energy and creativity,” Ms. Gordon said. “She’s really an extraordinary leader in the movement for fair food and workers rights.”After years of battle with the worst actors in the food industry, Ms. Jayaraman wanted to demonstrate how a restaurant should behave. So in 2006, R.O.C. rented a space near Astor Place in Manhattan and opened Colors, which bills itself as “a socially conscious restaurant.” Tipped workers are paid at least $9 an hour, offered paid time off and health care, and employees are promoted from within. During the day, the restaurant is an R.O.C. training site for workers seeking new skills. (The menu is gluten-free.)“We wanted to show people that there’s another way of doing business,” Ms. Jayaraman said. Today, Colors restaurants operate in New York and Detroit, with plans to open in New Orleans and Washington.But Colors has not quite proved the point; it operates at a slight loss. Margins could improve if the restaurant served lunch instead of offering training, but committing to pay high wages and benefits adds more pressure in an industry where profits can be elusive.Ms. Jayaraman still faces plenty of challenges. The federal tipped minimum wage is still just $2.13. Lots of big restaurants have no interest in raising wages and enhancing benefits. But after more than a decade of tireless organizing, Ms. Jayaraman’s efforts are finally starting to pay off.“While it’s been a long time coming, right now we are at an inflection point when it comes to transforming the restaurant industry,” said Darren Walker, president of the Ford Foundation, one of R.O.C.’s funders for nearly a decade. “She is the tip of the spear.”Advertisement