AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Dominic ElliottRegional lenders like Wells Fargo, Nordea and the Sumitomo Mitsui Financial Group have been bulking up in repo, a form of short-term collateralized lending that principally helps nonbank financial groups fund themselves and their clients. It’s not a wholly positive trend.New regulations have forced big investment banks to pull back from the business. Repo lending is low-margin and balance-sheet-intensive, making it one of the first areas to be cut because of tougher leverage and liquidity regulation. Morgan Stanley data shows that as of June 30, JPMorgan Chase had slashed repo assets by a quarter since the middle of 2011, while Credit Suisse and UBS were down two-thirds.Just as striking has been the zeal of commercial banks to plug that gap. Nordea and Sumitomo Mitsui of Japan have doubled their repo books over the same period. Wells Fargo has increased its business 84 percent, Morgan Stanley says.There’s no cause for fear just yet. Total repo volumes have fallen significantly since the global financial crisis. Average daily lending by primary dealers in the United States was just under $4 trillion in October, down from a peak of more than $7 trillion in the first half of 2008, according to the Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association.In Europe, the total value of repos was 5.6 billion euros as of June 10, down from a peak of 6.8 billion euros in June 2007, the International Capital Markets Association’s latest survey showed.Still, repo financing played a central role in transmitting contagion during the crisis. A Yale professor, Gary B. Gorton, has argued that it was pervasive use of the repo market that allowed the mispricing of securitizations to wreak such widespread damage. Taken together, these two areas account for a majority of what policy makers call shadow banking, which they are still struggling to comprehend.What’s more, European volumes have started to tick back up, rising 2 percent from December last year. That may have something to do with Nordea and other Scandinavian banks simply doing more collateralized — and hence safer — lending than they have in the past.But regulators need to take care the repo grenade doesn’t blow up in the hands of nonexperts.Dominic Elliott is a columnist at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.Advertisement