By CHARLES DELAFUENTEFEB. 19, 2016
You cannot turn the clock back to make yourself younger. But you may be able to turn it back to a time when it was easier to obtain certain income tax deductions.Deducting the interest on auto loans and credit card debts is no longer permitted. Yet for people who qualify, there is a way around this problem.To manage this perfectly legal trick, you need to own a house, a condominium or a co-op, and have equity in it, as well as a decent credit rating. Then you can borrow against your home and use the proceeds to pay off your other, nondeductible debt.What makes this maneuver possible is the fact that interest on home mortgages is still deductible, though only $100,000 of a mortgage or home equity loan may be deducted if it is used to pay down other debt.AdvertisementThat $100,000 limit is embedded in tax law. The interest on a far greater amount can be deducted if the loan is used to buy, build or improve a residence. But the law lets taxpayers deduct interest on up to $100,000 in debt, secured by a mortgage, that is used for any purpose at all, according to Avery E. Neumark, a lawyer and accountant at the New York accounting firm Marks Paneth.AdvertisementMr. Neumark says this strategy makes sense for many people. “If you’re saddled with an 18 or 21 or 24 percent credit card and you have $30,000 or $40,000 on it, it’s a no-brainer,” he said. But he cautioned that people who have amassed that much consumer debt should use a low-interest deductible loan to “pay it off and then rip up the credit cards,” he said.The approach will not work for some taxpayers, though. Interest on mortgage debt that is not used to finance a residence cannot be deducted by a taxpayer who is subject to the alternative minimum tax, according to Julian Block, a tax lawyer in Larchmont, N.Y. (If you are subject to that tax, you can stop reading here.)The details on deductibility can be found in Internal Revenue Service Publication 936: “Home Mortgage Interest Deduction.”Among those for whom the alternative minimum tax is not a barrier, people who own their homes outright could take out a mortgage for this plan. And those with significantly more equity than the balance of the current mortgage could refinance the mortgage.But even if you qualify, this tactic may not be right for you. Both a first mortgage and a refinancing carry high closing costs that may exceed the savings from the interest deduction.In that situation, a home-equity loan or line of credit probably makes more sense than refinancing, because the closing costs are much lower and may even be paid by the lender.Home equity loans have advantages and disadvantages. While shifting borrowing to a mortgage makes sense, by “drastically reducing the interest rate, to maybe 5 percent on a home equity line, there is no free lunch,” warned Greg McBride, chief financial analyst at Bankrate.com. That is because the borrower is “trading away unsecured debt for debt secured by a home, so the consequences of default are a whole lot bigger,” he said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.There are two kinds of these loans, Mr. McBride explained. In a straight home equity loan, the borrower takes a fixed sum, and pays it back in equal installments, usually over 10 or 15 years.AdvertisementA home equity line of credit, he said, is somewhat like revolving credit, because the borrower can take some of the maximum loan allowed now, and more later. In addition, there is “a lot of flexibility on repaying,” he said. On some loans, the borrower pays only interest during the first 10 years, called the draw period. “Then the loan converts to an installment loan amortized over 10 or 15 more years,” he said, adding that some lenders require a minimum draw when the loan is taken out.That means that the payback period may be much longer than that of a car loan or credit card debt.As of Thursday, according to Mr. McBride, the average rate for a home equity line of credit was about 4.7 percent, and for a fixed-term home equity loan about 5 percent.Another possible disadvantage of a home-equity loan is the temptation to keep borrowing.One of a financial planner’s worst nightmares is the person who borrows against the value of a home to pay for a vacation to Las Vegas or Bora Bora. Equity loans may be better for reducing the bite of excess borrowing in the past than for financing yet more debt.“Debt, in and of itself, is not bad,” said Marc J. Minker, an accountant and financial planner who is a tax partner at the accounting and business-consulting firm CBIZ MHM in New York. “Prudent debt, in my view, is one of the best and most effective ways to manage personal finances.”But, he said, such debt is effective only “if the people who are driving those decisions understand the consequences.”“Prudent” means that “you try to educate everybody,” he said, “so that they are not piling on more and more debt and creating a terrible financial situation.”Lenders want to see good credit, a fair amount of equity and the income to pay off the new loan. Many home equity lenders will make loans only if the original mortgage combined with the new loan does not exceed 80 percent of the home’s current value, Mr. McBride said — although, he added, “in some instances lenders will go higher.”Whatever is borrowed should be used to pay off existing high-rate debt, not to create new debt, Mr. Minker emphasized. He likens prudent borrowing to staying on a diet.“Don’t binge,” he said.A version of this article appears in print on February 21, 2016, on Page BU13 of the New York edition with the headline: For Costly Debt, Home Is Where the Deduction Is.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.