AdvertisementSupported by2016 TaxesBy Conrad De AenlleMarijuana is legal to buy in several states, but no law says that selling it will be free from cumbersome expense and paperwork, especially when it comes to taxation.Sales of the drug are permitted for recreational use in just four states — Colorado, Oregon, Washington and Alaska — and the District of Columbia; 18 other states allow sales for medicinal use. But marijuana is still illegal under federal law, and that helps explain why production and sale are tightly controlled.A record of each plant must be maintained, beginning before the seed even sprouts, and it must be updated with every significant movement or activity involving the plant, business owners and their advocates within the industry say. Once a plant is processed for consumption and reaches a store, the authorities want to get their cut.City, county and state governments tax marijuana sales, often at rates that differ from place to place and are higher than for other products. To complicate matters further, customers typically must pay different tax rates on the substance itself, depending on whether it is intended for medical or recreational use, and yet another rate on related items, say, vintage Mr. Natural T-shirts.“There’s definitely a great deal of regulation,” said Keith Stroup, legal counsel for the National Organization for the Reform of Marijuana Laws, known as Norml. “Most states that have legal marijuana have seed-to-sale” tracking rules. “It reflects the reality that marijuana has been illegal for 75 to 80 years.”The reality for Derek Peterson, chief executive of Terra Tech, the first publicly traded American marijuana grower, is “a significant burden from a manpower and data-collection standpoint.”“A lot of banks won’t serve the industry,” Mr. Peterson said. That forces him to devote extra labor to “counting and organizing dollars on a monthly basis and cash on a daily basis to avoid shrinkage and theft,” he said. “The cash-management aspect is the most difficult hurdle any of us have.”Without access to routine banking services, just paying employees becomes problematic for marijuana businesses, said Eddie Miller, chief strategy officer at GreenRush.com, an online delivery platform offering products from about 180 marijuana vendors. Handling the part of their salaries that employees are not paid is also difficult.“You can’t do federal withholding” for income tax and Social Security contributions “because you can’t get a bank account,” he said. “Cannabis businesses have all the compliance that regular businesses have to follow, and they have to jump through even more hoops.”Their tax liability is likely to be higher, too, another effect of marijuana’s dubious reputation. Certain jurisdictions tack a special-purpose tax onto the sales tax, Mr. Peterson noted. Oakland, Calif., for instance, adds 5 percent to the city’s regular 10 percent sales tax.Just because marijuana can be sold legally in some states does not mean that Washington approves of the practice. It is still considered illegal drug trafficking under federal law, and the Internal Revenue Service taxes the industry accordingly. Section 280E of the Internal Revenue Code forbids businesses that traffic in controlled substances from deducting business expenses, apart from the cost of goods sold.“That makes our business challenging,” Mr. Peterson said. “We’ve got all these states establishing laws, but we have to answer to federal authority on taxes. There’s no break or pass that any of us are getting.”He is able to organize his operation to minimize the impact of 280E by ensuring that many of his expenses can be counted as costs of goods sold. He also takes care to distinguish production and sales of the drug from the rest of the business, the part that involves ancillary items, from which deductions are permitted.The difficulties that growers and retailers face are being eased by a range of software systems tailored to the industry. With names like Proteus 420, BioTrack THC, MJ Freeway and BudMate POS, these systems track various bits of data related to plants and employees and help companies meet the onerous seed-to-sale requirements.The software “helps business owners get away from the paperwork and grow their businesses,” said Kyle Sherman, chief executive of Flowhub, a Denver company that provides an application designed to “track plants throughout the life cycle” for growers and to aid retailers by logging sales of items that receive different tax treatment. His system also allows users to transmit information to state authorities, but so far only in Colorado and Oregon.Josh Ginsberg, chief executive of Native Roots, an operator of marijuana retail outlets across Colorado, said he chose Flowhub’s system because of its utility in dealing with the state’s regulatory environment. Mr. Peterson at Terra Tech said he chose MJ Freeway, a much larger company, because he thought it would better meet the needs of a business that, like his, operates in several states.As much as marijuana providers may grumble about the tax and regulatory obligations imposed on them, Mr. Stroup, who founded Norml in 1970, considers it merely a cost of doing business. Without the stringent and expensive requirements, moreover, he wonders whether legalization would have occurred.“I’m sympathetic to those in the industry who end up having to hire legal counsel and regulatory experts,” he said. “There are a lot of items to worry about, but it’s not the only industry to face heavy regulation, and you can still charge a fair price and show a hefty profit at the end of the year.”If you do it right, that is. As with any other product line, “a successful business plan is essential,” Mr. Stroup said. “It’s a naïve concept that growing marijuana is just about throwing a few seeds in the ground and watering them occasionally.”Advertisement