By REUTERSNOV. 10, 2015
The price of imports in the United States fell in October as the cost of petroleum and a range of goods declined, indicating that a strong dollar and soft global demand continued to exert downward pressure on imported inflation.Other data on Tuesday showed a surprise increase in wholesale inventories in September, suggesting that the slowdown in economic growth in the third quarter was not as abrupt as initially believed.The Labor Department said import prices dropped 0.5 percent last month after declining 0.6 percent in September.Import prices have now fallen in 14 of the last 16 months. Imported petroleum prices fell 2.1 percent after slipping 6 percent in September.Advertisement“We believe that weakness in emerging Asia, especially China, is likely to push down import prices over and above any effect from the appreciation of the dollar,” said Rob Martin, an economist at Barclays.AdvertisementIn the 12 months through October, prices of imports tumbled 10.5 percent. The robust dollar and a sharp decline in oil prices have weighed on overall inflation, which is persistently running below the Federal Reserve’s 2 percent target.Weak inflation pressures, however, are unlikely to deter the Fed from raising its benchmark interest rate next month after job growth surged in October and the unemployment rate fell to a seven-and-a-half-year low of 5 percent.A tightening labor market could give Fed officials confidence that inflation would gradually move toward its target.A Reuters survey of over 80 leading economists published on Tuesday showed a 70 percent median chance the Fed would raise its benchmark overnight interest rate at its Dec. 15-16 policy meeting.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The dollar has gained 16.6 percent against the currencies of the United States’ main trading partners since June 2014. Its impact on inflation was underscored by a 0.4 percent drop in import prices excluding petroleum last month, the largest decrease since January.On Tuesday, the dollar rose to a fresh seven-month high against a basket of currencies as traders anticipated the first interest rate increase from the Fed in nearly a decade.In a separate report, the Commerce Department said wholesale inventories rose 0.5 percent as increases in automobiles, furniture, farm products and apparel offset declines in machinery, petroleum and a range of other goods.Wholesale stocks rose 0.3 percent in August.Inventories are a crucial component of revisions in the gross domestic product. The component of wholesale inventories that goes into the calculation of G.D.P. — wholesale stocks excluding autos — increased 0.5 percent.AdvertisementThat is more than the government estimated in its advance G.D.P. estimate, which showed that inventories sliced off 1.44 percentage points from growth in the third quarter, leaving output expanding at a 1.5 percent annual rate.As result, economists expect that third-quarter growth could be revised up to as high as a 1.9 percent rate later this month.“The third-quarter inventory correction now looks less severe than we had previously believed,” said Daniel Silver, an economist at JPMorgan Chase.A version of this article appears in print on November 11, 2015, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Import Prices Fall on Weakness in Oil, and Wholesale Inventories Show Gains.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.