AdvertisementSupported by2016 TaxesBy David M. HerszenhornWashington is gripped by partisan divisions, but there is overwhelming agreement on at least one important issue: The United States is long overdue for the sort of sweeping, once-in-a-generation tax overhaul that last occurred in 1986.There is also broad, bipartisan consensus that it’s unlikely to happen in 2016 — largely because of the near paralysis in policy making that typically accompanies a presidential campaign season.But after the enactment in December of a big, complicated tax law that gave permanence to a litany of previously temporary tax breaks for individuals and businesses, many of the smaller, recurring disagreements that bedevil policy makers have been swept aside, and the stage seems set for a big overhaul, whenever the time is ripe.Much, of course, will hinge on the outcome of the presidential race, but even this year, some important policy changes may emerge, particularly in the area of international business taxes. There is rising consternation among Democrats and Republicans alike over corporate inversions, in which some major companies have managed to shift their tax headquarters outside the United States and reduce their tax liabilities. And there is also general agreement that the United States is losing the global competition to create a business-friendly tax environment.President Obama’s just-released budget for 2017 makes changing international business tax provisions the administration’s top priority on tax policy. The proposals include a new tax credit to encourage companies to bring jobs and business operations back to the United States.Another important factor pushing tax policy to the top of the agenda was the ascendance of Representative Paul D. Ryan, Republican of Wisconsin, to speaker of the House in October. Before then, Mr. Ryan had been chairman of the tax-writing Ways and Means Committee, which he had long called his dream job, and he has also been the author of his party’s boldest tax overhaul proposals.Mr. Ryan has often said that individuals and corporations should pay no higher than 25 percent, compared with the current 39.6 percent top bracket for individuals and 35 percent top rate for corporations.With deductions, credits and loopholes, few corporations or sophisticated taxpayers actually pay that high a percentage, but all the major Republican presidential candidates share Mr. Ryan’s view that taxes must be cut. Mr. Ryan’s past budget proposals have called for eliminating income taxes on capital gains, dividends and interest as well as eliminating the estate tax and the alternative minimum tax.In general, Mr. Ryan has attacked the tax code as too complicated and he has called for ending or sharply reducing an array of popular tax breaks, like the tax exclusion for employer-sponsored health plans, and the mortgage interest deduction. In their place, Mr. Ryan has called for across-the-board rate reductions, and potentially the imposition of a consumption tax.Many Democrats fiercely disagree with any plan that would reduce taxes for the wealthiest, but even Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. in recent weeks has taken aim at the tax code as being unduly complex and filled with inefficient exceptions, exclusions and other loopholes.“There is no question, everyone recognizes this tax code has outlived its usefulness and now is a drag on our economy,” said Representative Kevin Brady, Republican of Texas, who took over as chairman of Ways and Means in November.President Obama has weighed in with his own jabs at the tax system, often denouncing the ability of wealthy individuals to pay less than most Americans. “It’s sure not the average family watching tonight that avoids paying taxes through offshore accounts,” Mr. Obama said in his State of the Union address.In a visit to Detroit last month, Mr. Obama also chided Republicans. “They’ve somehow still convinced themselves that cutting taxes for folks at the very top is to help you succeed. I think there’s a better plan.” Despite the persistent disagreements and continuing vitriol, Democrats and Republicans found common ground in adopting December’s big year-end tax law.That law gave greater certainty to breaks for businesses for research and development and for capital expenditures, deductions for individuals of state and local sales taxes, and a small but symbolic tax credit for teachers who spend their own money on supplies.The bill also made permanent (a status that, of course, could be changed by a future Congress) several provisions important to lower-income families: the earned-income tax credit; the child tax credit; and the American Opportunity tax credit, which provides up to $2,500 for higher-education expenses.Republicans and Democrats alike said the clarity afforded by the new legislation would help set the parameters of the sweeping changes that many expect will seek to “broaden the base and lower the rates”: That is to say, it will end many tax exemptions and exclusions and use the increased revenue to lower what are known as marginal tax brackets. (Those define what you will pay for all net taxable income beyond certain thresholds.)In the process, policy makers hope to give the United States a cleaner, easier-to-understand tax code. Yet some of the current exemptions are hugely popular, like the deduction for home mortgage interest or for state and local taxes. Everyone wants a simple tax code, but few people want to eliminate provisions that benefit them. That helps explain why it is so difficult to make big changes.Mr. Ryan, in his first major policy speech after becoming speaker, talked about rewriting the tax code, which has been a personal passion throughout his years in office. “You know what the first item on that agenda is? It’s creating jobs and raising wages,” Mr. Ryan said in the speech at the Library of Congress in December. “We know what’s standing in our way. Instead of a tax code that all of us can live by, we have a tax code that none of us can understand.”After noting that Canada has lower business tax rates, Mr. Ryan continued: “The only way to fix our tax code is to simplify, simplify, simplify. Close all those loopholes and use that money to cut tax rates for everybody. Take the seven tax rates we have now and collapse them into two or three.”The speaker is not the only one railing against the tax code. Consider the man Mr. Ryan challenged on the ballot in 2012: Vice President Biden.“Guys, when Reagan was president there was $600 billion in tax expenditures,” Mr. Biden said in a speech last month to House Democrats, referring to the same provisions that Mr. Ryan called “loopholes.” Whatever you call them, many are hugely popular and various interest groups will invariably fight to preserve them. For that reason, big tax overhaul plans often call for a phase-in process so that any shift is not excessively abrupt.“There are now $1.2 trillion in tax expenditures,” Mr. Biden said. “Find me a responsible economist that can justify more than $500 billion to $600 billion of those tax expenditures having any socially redeeming value whatsoever.”Mr. Biden then decided to take aim at just one tax break, known as “stepped-up basis,” in which the capital gains liability is reduced on inherited assets. As Mr. Biden explained, stepped-up basis reduces capital gains taxes on inherited assets when they are sold. So if a stock was purchased at $10 a share, and later bequeathed at $50 a share, the $40 a share in gain is effectively tax-free. Capital gains tax would be due only on any amount greater than $50.Mr. Biden said stepped-up basis costs $14 billion a year “to benefit two-tenths of 1 percent of the population that is already very wealthy, does not need it, does not indicate they will invest it in any way that will improve the economy differently.” He continued, “And for that we can send every kid to community college for free and cut the deficit at the same time” by an additional $8 billion.Despite some points of agreement, Mr. Ryan and Mr. Biden do not agree on the best ways to revise the tax code, and much will depend on who wins the presidency.The major Republican contenders also disagree on many of the ways they would change the code, with some favoring fewer brackets and lower rates, and others favoring the introduction of a broad-based consumption tax.Donald J. Trump’s plan would reduce revenues by $9.5 trillion over a decade, according to the Tax Policy Center, a Washington think tank, while Senator Ted Cruz of Texas would cut $8.6 trillion and Senator Marco Rubio of Florida would trim $6.8 trillion. In each case, the cuts would largely benefit the wealthy, and would sharply raise the deficit unless they spurred remarkable economic growth. Critics say the proposals are not realistic.On the Democratic side, Hillary Clinton has proposed a 4 percent surcharge on the wealthiest Americans, while Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont has called for tax increases on virtually everyone, but particularly on the wealthiest.While the larger debate may have to wait until after the November election, many lawmakers see an urgent need to enact policies that will end new incentives for companies to relocate jobs or offices overseas, or even to reincorporate entirely through tax inversions in which an American company is acquired by a foreign company, and the headquarters is shifted to a lower-tax jurisdiction overseas.Many policy makers are also deeply concerned about the estimated $2 trillion in corporate earnings that American companies have stockpiled offshore and refuse to repatriate because they would then owe taxes on that money.There are acute worries on Capitol Hill and throughout Washington that American companies will end up paying far more taxes to foreign countries — especially in Europe — as a result of an effort by the world’s major developed economies to streamline tax policies and prevent increasingly mobile companies from exploiting differences in the laws.In a report last year, a bipartisan working group of the Senate Finance Committee warned that inaction could be costly for the United States and for American companies.“If policy makers fail to implement new rules in a timely fashion to combat overseas action,” the group wrote, “unilateral actions around the globe will undoubtedly result in far more taxes paid into foreign coffers by U.S. multinational companies, with a corresponding revenue and job loss here in the United States.”Mr. Ryan and Mr. Brady are hoping to take action on that front this year. Still, it could be difficult to reach a consensus.While Republicans are eager to ease the tax burden on American companies and to repatriate profits held overseas, Representative Sander Levin of Michigan, the senior Democrat on the Ways and Means Committee, said that the focus should be on blocking inversions like the recent deal between Tyco and Johnson Controls, in which the combined company’s headquarters is to be relocated to Cork, Ireland, from Milwaukee.“Essentially people are using the need to do international tax as a reason not to act on inversions,” Mr. Levin said in an interview. “We should put a stop to the takeovers.”He said he believed Republicans were more interested in allowing American companies to repatriate profits now held overseas by offering some sort of tax holiday.“They are talking about ways to repatriate,” Mr. Levin said. “There’s serious disagreement under what circumstances and also what the rate would be. We went through it once before. It was a fiasco. They said the money would be used for job creation, and none of it was.”In short, something needs to be done. but there is no agreement on exactly what. Senator Charles E. Grassley, Republican of Iowa, who spent a decade as the top Republican on the Finance Committee, put it this way: “You are not going to get Congress to move unless there is more of a consensus on it.” A new president may have to lead the way, he said.Of course, Mr. Grassley said, there will always be opponents to reform. “Accountants don’t like it,” he said. “They’ll have to become productive members of our society.” In the meantime, there is plenty of work for accountants and lawyers.Welcome to tax season.Advertisement