By ALEXANDRA STEVENSON and MATTHEW GOLDSTEINSEPT. 30, 2015
It was an upstart hedge fund that pitched large returns in periods of market turbulence by relying on a complex and controversial trading strategy.At the height of the 2008 financial crisis, investors would have had a gain of more than 600 percent, according to projections in investor documents for the new hedge fund, Spruce Alpha.But when markets again turned volatile this August, Spruce Alpha, which had started in April 2014, failed to turn the turmoil to its advantage. For that month — a particularly difficult period for many money managers — Spruce Alpha fared worse than most, losing investors 48 percent of their money, according to documents reviewed by The New York Times.The under-$100 million fund, which was managed by the $1.5 billion Spruce Investment Advisors, has for now moved its positions into cash, said a person briefed on the fund. The fund has told investors that they can redeem what remains of their money.AdvertisementThe sudden reversal of fortune at Spruce Alpha sheds a spotlight not only on how managers market new hedge funds to investors, but also on the way some hedge funds rely heavily on exchange-traded funds and derivatives to profit from short-term turmoil in the stock markets.AdvertisementSpruce Alpha’s woes are a black eye for Spruce Investment, the 14-year-old Stamford, Conn., firm led by John C. Bailey, who previously worked at an asset management firm that was once owned by the bond giant Pimco.Spruce Investment specializes in managing money for the wealthy and institutional investors like the Hamlin School, a private all-girls school in San Francisco, which did not invest in the hedge fund. Roughly half the money that Spruce Investment manages belongs to three family offices, a corporation and a pension plan.The Alpha fund was the asset management firm’s first foray into direct hedge fund trading. The firm said it had planned to raise as much as $500 million for the portfolio.To sell the fledgling fund to investors, Spruce emphasized not only an outsize hypothetical performance going back as far as 2006 — but also that one of its top managers, Robert Stock, was a former researcher who had worked on simulations of laser defense missiles.In April, Mr. Stock left the firm. Several other top executives have also left Spruce Investment this year.The implosion in Spruce Alpha is unlikely to make waves in the more than $3 trillion hedge fund industry. For the investors who have lost nearly half of their investment, however, it is a cautionary tale of relying on glowing, but backdated, performance data.Back-tested results in hedge fund marketing materials have long drawn scorn from some in the hedge fund world. The results are typically recreated with the benefit of hindsight, making it easier for a fund to post hypothetical good results.AdvertisementNorman Kilarjian, a partner with Aksia, a hedge fund advisory firm to institutional investors, said individual investors should not put great credence into back-tested results in hedge fund marketing material because the results are derived assuming optimum trading conditions.“I’ve never seen a back-test that didn’t look fantastic, but investors are often falling for it,” he said, not commenting on any specific hedge fund.Our columnist Andrew Ross Sorkin and his Times colleagues help you make sense of major business and policy headlines — and the power-brokers who shape them.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.It is not clear exactly what caused the big losses in August. Spruce Alpha used a sophisticated strategy that involved derivatives to amplify returns from trading in exchange-traded funds, or E.T.F.s, of various strategies. The strategy seeks to make money off the volatility in the stock market.E.T.F.s are securities that hold a portfolio of stocks and trade shares throughout the day. At first, these securities mostly just mirrored the holdings of major stock indexes, but they have since grown increasingly complex, with some relying on derivatives to amplify returns.Trading in E.T.F.s has recently touched a nerve on Wall Street. Big-name investors like Carl C. Icahn and Leon Cooperman have blamed them for causing violent gyrations in the market. Laurence D. Fink, the chief executive of BlackRock, which is a big seller of more traditional E.T.F.s, has warned that leveraged E.T.F. strategies — those that rely on derivatives — could “blow up” the entire industry one day.In 2009, both the Securities and Exchange Commission and the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority warned about the risks of investing in the strategy. “Investors should be aware that performance of these E.T.F.s over a period longer than one day can differ significantly from their stated performance objectives,” the regulators said in an investor alert.The back-tested results for the Spruce Alpha fund may not have taken into account how markets and investors would react given the kind of circumstances that took place in August. The hypothetical results could have underestimated the fact that some E.T.F.s are used as trading instruments that big money managers move quickly in and out of in times of extreme market volatility.In a disclaimer to its marketing materials, Spruce Alpha also noted some of the unreliability of back-tested returns. The hypothetical results “do not represent the results of actual trading” and “were achieved by means of the retroactive application of a hypothetical model that was designed with the benefit of hindsight and could be adjusted at will until desired or better performance results were achieved,” the disclaimer reads.AdvertisementThe tests had apparently not simulated a situation like Aug. 24, when some E.T.F.s seized up in the first few minutes at the start of trading. But a handful of nimble managers still managed to excel, some even maintaining double-digit returns for the year at the end of the month.Todd Rosenbluth, director of E.T.F. research for Standard & Poor’s Capital IQ, said leveraged E.T.F.s were an inherently risky strategy that is more akin to “gambling than investing” and should be viewed as purely a trading strategy.Mr. Rosenbluth said he was not surprised by Spruce Alpha’s poor performance in August because it used a strategy that tends to perform best when markets are volatile in one direction as opposed to the big up and down swings in stock prices seen in August.“It’s investing on steroids, and there can be benefits to taking on leverage, but it is easy to get hurt and even easier to get hurt when the markets react differently than you expect,” Mr. Rosenbluth said.The person briefed on the Spruce Alpha fund said the August losses were the result of unprecedented upheaval in the history of the VIX, an index that measures volatility in the market.Mr. Bailey of Spruce Investment did not respond to requests for comment.Often quoted in the media about hedge fund investing, Mr. Bailey once told Bloomberg TV that “there are too many hedge funds and many are mediocre.” In that interview, Mr. Bailey also said that his firm looked for managers who are experienced and “have a track record.”Several executives at Estancia Capital, a private equity firm that has a 25 percent stake in Spruce Investment, did not return requests for comment.Mr. Stock said the Alpha fund’s poor performance in August was a mystery to him. He noted that the hedge fund had posted strong returns early this year.“There is so much that goes into the strategy that it’s hard to encapsulate it,” Mr. Stock said in an interview. “There’s a multitude of ways one could picture implementing this strategy,” he said, adding that sizing of positions, risk management and choosing the right E.T.F.s were all factors that contribute to the success or failure of the strategy.AdvertisementReferring to the Alpha fund’s August performance, Mr. Stock added: “I have trouble understanding the kind of performance they got.”A version of this article appears in print on October 1, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Risky Strategy Sinks Small Hedge Fund .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.