FEB. 21, 2016
The Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.30 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.45 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.27 percent.The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week:Florida Department of Transportation, $301.2 million of debt securities. Competitive.Baltimore County, Md., $254.9 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Highland Park Independent School District, Tex., $203.1 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.AdvertisementOhio, $276.4 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Snohomish School District, Wash., $91.6 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.AdvertisementAlabama, $99.1 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.North Carolina, $330 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Wisconsin, $297.7 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Allen Independent School District, Tex., $145 million of unlimited tax refinancing bonds. Bosc.Arizona Board of Regents, $179 million of University of Arizona revenue bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Bonneville Joint School District, Idaho, $54 million of general obligation bonds. Piper Jaffray.Chester County, Pa., $60.8 million of general obligation bonds. Piper Jaffray.Columbus City School District, Ohio, $57.2 million of school facilities construction and improvement refinancing bonds. Stifel Nicolaus.Friendswood Independent School District, Tex., $83.5 million unlimited tax refinancing bonds. Raymond James.Hampton Roads Sanitation District, Va., $206 million of wastewater revenue bonds. Bank of America.Hays County, Tex., $59 million limited tax refinancing bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Iowa Finance Authority, $51.1 million of single-family mortgage bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Maryland Economic Development Corporation, $135.3 million of University of Maryland student housing revenue refinancing bonds. RBC Capital Markets.AdvertisementMissouri City, Tex., $71.7 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Loop Capital Markets.Napa Valley Unified School District, Calif., $87.2 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Nashville and Davidson County, Tenn., Health and Educational Facilities Board, $62.5 million of Lipscomb University revenue financing and improvement bonds. SunTrust Robinson Humphrey.New York City, $800 million of general obligation bonds. Jefferies.University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, $401 million of taxable general revenue refinancing bonds. Bank of America.Northern California Transmission Agency, $181 million of Oregon transmission project debt securities. Citigroup Global Markets.Plano Independent School District, Tex., $305.2 million of unlimited tax refinancing bonds. Bosc.Rhode Island Housing and Mortgage Finance Corporation, $50 million of multifamily development bonds. Bank of America.San Mateo-Foster City School District, Calif., $74 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Stifel Nicolaus.Waxahachie Independent School District, Tex., $50 million of unlimited tax school building bonds. Raymond James.Willis Independent School District., Tex., $66.6 million of unlimited tax school building bonds. Bosc.Willoughby-Eastlake City School District, Ohio, $115.8 million unlimited tax general obligation bonds. Piper Jaffray.A version of this article appears in print on February 22, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Treasury Auctions Set for This Week.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.