AdvertisementSupported byBy Brooks BarnesLOS ANGELES — In the second major management shake-up at Disney in less than a week, Leslie Ferraro resigned under pressure on Monday as co-chairwoman of consumer products and digital media, a job she took only nine months ago.Thomas O. Staggs, the Walt Disney Company’s chief operating officer, said in a news release that Ms. Ferraro — one of the few women to run or co-run a Disney business unit — was eager to return to her marketing roots. Mr. Staggs had served as an advocate for Ms. Ferraro inside Disney, helping to promote her late last spring to run the consumer products and digital media division in conjunction with James Pitaro.Mr. Pitaro will now run the division by himself, reporting to Mr. Staggs and Robert A. Iger, Disney’s chief executive.“Jimmy’s strong and successful leadership make him the natural choice,” said Mr. Staggs, who is viewed as the most likely successor to Mr. Iger. Regarding Ms. Ferraro, Mr. Staggs said, “I have great respect for her abilities and appreciate her contributions.”Last week, the president of ABC Entertainment,  Paul Lee, was fired.  ABC is owned by Disney.A longtime theme-park marketer, Ms. Ferraro never found her footing at Disney Consumer Products and Interactive Media, which had $5.7 billion in revenue last year and $1.9 billion in operating income. She was adept at managing character franchises, but some retail partners complained that she did not adequately understand the business, which activates licensing deals with third parties.“I am excited to pursue my long-term passion for marketing, branding and creating winning consumer engagement strategies,” Ms. Ferraro said in a statement.Until June, when Disney combined its consumer products and digital media divisions, Mr. Pitaro oversaw the digital unit, which includes Disney.com and the company’s various video game endeavors.Mr. Pitaro, a lawyer and former Yahoo executive, is mostly known at Disney for successfully shepherding a project he inherited called Infinity, a gaming and collectible toy offering.Disney Consumer Products, the world’s largest licenser of merchandise, has had huge success recently because of items related to “Star Wars: The Force Awakens,” “Frozen” and various Marvel superheroes. But the traditional toy business continues to become more digital, and Disney on Monday positioned Mr. Pitaro as best suited to lead those efforts.Mr. Staggs, for instance, praised his “keen eye for digital innovation.” For his part, Mr. Pitaro said that he was honored to be given sole oversight “as we combine our technology-driven efforts and our more traditional product lines.”So far, Disney has a mixed track record in this area. While Infinity has been a hit, a lavishly publicized line of so-called smart toys called Playmation was a relative dud. Introduced in October, Playmation sought to give children the ability to become superheroes by wearing interactive devices.“Consumers didn’t quite understand the product,” Jim Silver, the editor of TTPM, a toy review website, said in an email.Advertisement