AdvertisementSupported byBy Leslie Picker and Michael J. de la MercedWhen the United Technologies Corporation approached Honeywell International about a merger late last spring, it appeared that a union of the two industrial giants could finally come to pass.Yet after months of discussions, United Technologies broke off the talks, worried about who would run the combined company and whether it would pass regulatory muster.Since then, Honeywell has pursued a potential merger with its rival, and early last week presented an offer that it valued at about $108 a share in stock and cash, a roughly 25 percent premium to where United Technologies’ stock traded at the time, according to people briefed on the matter.But United Technologies declined that proposal, and on Monday it publicly asserted that regulators would probably reject any deal.The impasse between the two has halted, at least for now, the creation of what would be a nearly $150 billion industrial giant, one whose products would include thermostats, Pratt & Whitney jet engines and Otis elevator equipment.When the two companies first began merger talks, United Technologies had the bigger market value. But since then, its slumping stock price has erased $38 billion in valuation, while Honeywell’s shares have remained relatively stable.The two companies disagreed on several points, including who would run the combined company. By late last year, United Technologies said that it would walk away, with its lawyers citing worries about antitrust approval.Both companies supply parts to Boeing and Airbus. Analysts said the idea of one behemoth controlling so many of the pieces that go into an airplane might concern regulators.One of the people briefed on the matter said that United Technologies did not want to go through the approval process because it could be long and disruptive to business, and it was unlikely to lead to approval.Yet Honeywell believed that government regulators would require only a small divestiture of the two companies’ businesses. It also believed that its chief executive, David Cote, should run the combined company, and that its shareholders should own about 60 percent of the merged operation.Honeywell and United Technologies declined to comment, as did Boeing. Airbus officials did not respond to requests seeking comment after business hours.Shares of United Technologies gained 4.7 percent after CNBC first reported on Monday that the two had been in talks. Honeywell’s stock slipped 2 percent.The companies have flirted with combining for years. In 2000, United Technologies offered to buy Honeywell, but General Electric superseded it. The G.E. deal ultimately did not receive regulatory approval in Europe.United Technologies posted revenue of $56 billion last year, while Honeywell generated $39 billion. Still, Honeywell’s market cap is larger, closing at $80.91 billion on Monday.If the two were to combine, “surgical adjustments” would be needed to have any hope of regulatory approval, said Nicholas Heymann, an analyst at William Blair, referring to potential divestitures. United Technologies and Honeywell overlap in about 70 percent of their markets, largely in aerospace and building controls, Mr. Heymann said.Still, it does not appear that either side is very serious about a transaction now. Mr. Cote sold 344,936 shares on Feb. 16, worth about $36 million, not a typical move before a revolutionary merger.And the United Technologies side may require a large premium to compensate for the 30 percent decline in its stock price over the last year. Even then, it may not agree to a deal out of concern that regulators would not approve it anyway.If the transaction were to come to fruition, however, it would make sense strategically, said Jim Corridore, an analyst at S&P Global Market Intelligence.“There seems to be potential revenue and cost synergies that could be worked out,” Mr. Corridore said. “We don’t think antitrust should be a concern because there are still competitors in all of those segments.”Advertisement