AdvertisementSupported byBy Andrew PollackJ. Michael Pearson, the embattled chief executive of Valeant Pharmaceuticals International, sought on Tuesday to reassure investors that the once highflying company still had a solid future despite a steep fall in its stock price and growing questions about its business model and debt levels.“The company is going to survive,” he said toward the end of a morning conference call. “Our cash flows are strong and our momentum is good. We just have to work through these issues.”Mr. Pearson said the company’s recent problems — which include broad criticism of sharp price increases on its drugs and its controversial relationship with a specialty pharmacy — would cause a disruption to Valeant’s business, particularly in dermatology in the fourth quarter. He said the company was offering bigger discounts to try to retain business and had put in place a plan to retain employees over the next 12 to 18 months.He also promised that Valeant would listen more closely to its patients, partners and critics.“The past few weeks have been a painful learning experience for me personally, and I know that it’s been painful for many of you as well,” he said.“One of the consequences of such rapid growth is that you don’t always take the time to listen to what the broader world outside your company is saying. This has been a mistake on our part as a company and on my part as its leader. We’re going to fix that.”Valeant said it would provide projections of future sales and earnings sometime in December.Shares fell 2 percent Tuesday, closing at $83.68. Analysts said the call allayed some concerns but not all.The company is facing federal inquiries into its patient assistance programs, pricing, distribution and information that it provides to Medicare and Medicaid. “We still see a number of unresolved issues,” David Steinberg, an analyst at Jefferies, wrote on Tuesday, citing the federal investigations, political pressure and possible greater scrutiny of its drugs by health plans. “As such, the likely best way for sentiment to improve will be continued strong financial performance — though this will likely take some time,” he wrote.The billionaire investor William A. Ackman has repeatedly defended his stake in Valeant, even though the pharmaceutical company’s slide has significantly hurt the performance of his hedge fund, Pershing Square Capital Management.Valeant became a Wall Street star from Mr. Pearson’s strategy of buying other drug companies rather than conducting its own research and development. But the company’s shares have lost two-thirds of their value since early August as criticism has grown about two of its practices in particular.One is its tendency to sharply increase the prices of drugs it acquires. That has drawn scorn and demands for information from politicians.The other is its relationship with Philidor Rx Services, a mail-order pharmacy that was used to help sell Valeant’s expensive dermatology drugs. Valeant did not reveal the existence of the relationship until word started to spread last month. After accusations surfaced that Philidor might have used questionable tactics to get insurers to pay for the drugs, Valeant said on Oct. 30 that it would sever ties with the pharmacy and that the pharmacy would close.Valeant held a conference call last month to discuss its relationship with Philidor, defending it at the time.Mr. Pearson said terminating the relationship with Philidor would cause a “significant” disruption to the dermatology business. In the third quarter, Valeant’s United States dermatology business grew more than 50 percent from the year earlier and accounted for more than 16 percent of its revenue. In that quarter, nearly 7 percent of Valeant’s overall revenue went through Philidor.Mr. Pearson said he expected the dermatology business to recover by the second half of next year.He said the company would make new arrangements with one or more other specialty pharmacies, but these would be purely contractual, whereas Valeant had an option to acquire Philidor and consolidated its financial results. In the meantime, the company was meeting with dermatologists and was accepting lower payments for its drugs to keep prescriptions coming.He also said the company was losing some sales of Isuprel and Nitropress, two old heart drugs used by hospitals. Valeant acquired them in February and immediately increased their prices more than 500 percent and 200 percent, prompting congressional inquiries.Mr. Pearson said Valeant had been meeting with the hospitals that are the biggest users of the drugs and offering to sell to them directly at a discount to retain their business.But Mr. Pearson said that other Valeant businesses, like contact lenses, gastrointestinal drugs and overseas businesses, were not being affected and continued to grow.A big question for some jittery investors has been whether more problems are coming. Even rumors or unfounded accusations have been enough to drive down the price of the company’s stock.Mr. Pearson said the company’s controls were strong, saying Philidor was an exception because it was a separate company. “We’re unaware of any other issues,” he said, “but again, in a company this size, it’s impossible to have full knowledge of everything at any one time.”Another concern to Wall Street, judging by the questions asked on the call, is the huge debt — more than $30 billion — Valeant has accumulated from buying so many companies.Valeant executives said the company was in no danger of defaulting on its debt or not meeting its loan covenants. Still, Mr. Pearson said the “lion’s share” of the company’s free cash flow would now be used to pay down the debt.He said a stock buyback, which the company had said it was considering, was “largely off the table in the short term.”While this was not addressed directly on the call, the remarks seemed to suggest that the company would not devote as much cash to acquisitions in the future. And with its stock price depressed, it cannot easily use its stock as currency to buy other companies, either.Much of its compensation is tied to stock performance, so the company said it had put in place a retention plan for certain employees below the top executive level. But Mr. Pearson said that the “silver lining” of the criticisms and accusations against the company had been that “it’s pulled the company together and people are very, very determined to execute well.”Advertisement