By DANIEL VICTORFEB. 22, 2016
The author of a deleted SB Nation article on Daniel Holtzclaw, a former police officer and convicted rapist, that was criticized as being overly sympathetic  apologized on Monday, saying that he had produced a piece with “massive shortcomings” but that at least four editors had cleared it before publication.The writer, Jeff Arnold, wrote the nearly 12,000-word article last week on Mr. Holtzclaw, a former college football player who was convicted in December of 18 counts of sexual assault against 13 black women while on duty as an Oklahoma City officer. Editors for SB Nation, a sports website owned by Vox Media, removed the piece about five hours after it was published, and one editor called it “a complete failure” in an editor’s note.Mr. Arnold, a veteran freelance sportswriter, said in a statement that his intention was to present “a more fully rounded portrait of Mr. Holtzclaw than had appeared in the press” and investigate “what could have led to him to become a convicted rapist and sexual predator.”The profile, however, scarcely addressed the victims — some of whom had spoken out — and they were not contacted for interviews. The article attracted fierce criticism almost immediately.Advertisement“Now that I have some distance on the piece, I see that it presented a lopsided account that failed to acknowledge the suffering of Mr. Holtzclaw’s victims,” Mr. Arnold said. “For that, I apologize.”AdvertisementSo far, editors have said little publicly about the editorial process behind the piece, which Mr. Arnold said took two months to report. Spencer Hall, the website’s editorial director, said in the editor’s note that objections by senior editorial staff members were ignored, but he did not give more detail about the objections or who exactly made them.What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Hall declined to comment Monday after he was reached by email.SB Nation has severed ties with Mr. Arnold and is putting its long-form program on hiatus while it conducts an internal review, according to a memo obtained by Deadspin.Mr. Arnold has written several articles about golf, hockey and college football in recent months for The New York Times.In his statement, he said that he and his editors at SB Nation were mindful of not losing sight of the victims, but that he had failed to do so.“By not spending more time reaching out to victims or their families as a way of accounting for the horrific abuse they suffered, I made a grave mistake,” he said. “I accept responsibility for that.”A version of this article appears in print on February 23, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Business Briefing; Writer Apologizes for Article About Convicted Rapist.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.