AdvertisementSupported byBy Mike IsaacMichael Jaharis, whose business expertise in the pharmaceutical industry made him a fortune estimated at more than $2.2 billion, and who gave major gifts to cultural institutions like the Metropolitan Museum of Art, the Art Institute of Chicago and the Metropolitan Opera, died on Wednesday at his home in Manhattan. He was 87.His death was announced by Peggy Nicholson, executive director of the Jaharis Family Foundation. She did not specify a cause.For nearly half a century, Mr. Jaharis navigated the highly competitive pharmaceutical industry, tinkering with existing drugs to create, and ultimately successfully sell, a series of more refined products.Mr. Jaharis often said he found his way into the drug industry by sheer luck. Shortly after graduating from college in 1950, he was drafted into the Army and eventually assigned to a Medical Corps unit in Zell am See, Austria, where he helped run the unit’s medical and pharmaceutical supply management.After his discharge, Mr. Jaharis continued his pursuits in the pharmaceutical industry, finding success as a sales representative at Miles Laboratories and eventually in the company’s executive ranks. In 1972, he became president and chief executive of Key Pharmaceuticals, where he was credited with revitalizing a 50-year-old asthma medicine, theophylline, sending sales of the re-engineered drug formula skyrocketing.Fourteen years later, he successfully negotiated the sale of Key to the Schering-Plough Corporation for more than $600 million. He repeated that success in 2006 with the sale of Kos Pharmaceuticals, a company he founded in 1988 that was known for its advances in cardiovascular drug therapies, to Abbott Laboratories for $3.7 billion.In the years after his success in the drug industry, Mr. Jaharis spent much of his time in philanthropic efforts. Using gifts from Mr. Jaharis and his wife, Mary, the Metropolitan Museum renovated portions of its medieval art galleries, and the apse beneath the Great Hall Stairs became part of the Mary and Michael Jaharis Galleries for Byzantine Art.Emmanuel Michael Jaharis was born in Evanston, Ill., on July 16, 1928. His parents, Michael and Katerina Jaharis, had immigrated from the village of Agia Paraskevi on the Greek island Lesvos.After high school, Mr. Jaharis received a bachelor’s degree from Carroll College in Wisconsin and a law degree from DePaul University in Chicago.In addition to his wife, he is survived by a son, Dr. Steven Jaharis; a daughter, Kathryn Jaharis; and five grandchildren.After the sale of Kos Pharmaceuticals, Mr. Jaharis formed an investment firm, Vatera Healthcare Partners, which focused on making big bets on health care companies working on drug treatments in areas like pulmonary and infectious disease.Even after his age and his wealth might have suggested a comfortable retirement, Mr. Jaharis continued coming into his foundation’s office.“The ideas of new discoveries and innovation kept him ticking,” Ms. Nicholson said.Advertisement