By MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDFEB. 23, 2016
"It just cannot happen," said Gregory Hayes, chief executive of United Technologies, in rejecting a union of the industrial giants based on worries about who would run the company and whether it would pass regulators.Could a merger of United Technologies and Honeywell — two huge industrial conglomerates that have flirted with combining in the past — ever happen?It depends on whom you ask.United Technologies, which began discussions that led to months of exploratory talks, has made it clear that it does not think that a merger would pass regulatory muster. But Honeywell, which presented a takeover offer worth about $90 billion last week, has continued to argue the merits of a union.“It ain’t going to happen,” Gregory Hayes, the United Technologies chief executive, said in a CNBC interview on Tuesday. “There is just no way to get it done.”Yet, Honeywell sees the antitrust issue differently. Its advisers have calculated that less than 5 percent of the two companies’ target sales overlap, according to a person briefed on the company’s thinking, posing what the manufacturer views as relatively limited objections from government regulators.Advertisement“We do not see the regulatory process as a material obstacle to a transaction,” Honeywell said in a statement on Tuesday.Put together, the two would sell products like home thermostats and Pratt & Whitney jet engines. The combined company would have a market value of just under $160 billion, making it an enormous industrial conglomerate, though still considerably smaller than the major competitor, General Electric.AdvertisementIn its statement, Honeywell argued that putting the two companies together could yield about $3.5 billion in cost savings.If completed, a merger with United Technologies would be a crowning achievement for Honeywell’s chief executive, David Cote, who arrived in 2002 as the company was reeling from the collapse of its planned sale to G.E., whose offer beat out the one by United Technologies. (The G.E. deal died after European antitrust regulators blocked it.)Under Mr. Cote, Honeywell has steadily lifted its stock price, outpacing even G.E. United Technologies shares have posted more modest gains, and the company has sought to move on after the abrupt retirement of a previous chief, Louis Chênevert, in 2014 after the board questioned his focus.Though executives of both United Technologies and Honeywell and their advisers held discussions for months about how to pull off a merger — at one point deliberating a so-called merger of equals structure — changes in the fortunes of each conglomerate and how they affected the potential deal appeared to have also played a role in scuttling the talks, according to the people briefed on the matter but not authorized to speak publicly.Each company wanted its chief executive to run the combined business. Yet, over the course of 2015, the stock price of United Technologies fell 30 percent, making it smaller than Honeywell by market value even though its sales were 44 percent higher.Our columnist Andrew Ross Sorkin and his Times colleagues help you make sense of major business and policy headlines — and the power-brokers who shape them.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In its most recent approaches, Honeywell has proposed giving its shareholders a 60 percent stake in the combined company and having Mr. Cote run the new business.AdvertisementLast week, Honeywell presented a bid valued at about $108 a share, composed of about $42.54 a share in cash and the remainder in stock. That would offer significant upside to United Technologies’ shareholders if the combination proved successful, the company argued in private.United Technologies has expressed doubts about some of those assumptions, according to a person briefed on its deliberations.United Technologies’ primary stated objection, however, remains antitrust issues, particularly at a time when other major deals have hit roadblocks because of objections from regulatory authorities. The proposed merger of Staples and Office Depot has drawn strong criticism from the Federal Trade Commission.Analysts appeared to have concluded that putting the two together poses some antitrust risk.United Technologies and Honeywell would not likely generate antitrust worries about overlaps in jet engines and building heating systems, according to analysts at RBC Capital Markets. But the analysts added that regulators could still object to combining the two companies’ other jet-component operations and, to a lesser extent, the conglomerates’ fire and security divisions.Other analysts, as well as Mr. Hayes of United Technologies, questioned whether the two conglomerates’ biggest customers — including the plane manufacturers Boeing and the Airbus Group — would tolerate a merger of such central suppliers.In its statement, Honeywell said that it would not “pursue a transaction that is not in the best interest of our share owners” and remained confident in its stand-alone growth prospects. The company is disinclined to pursue a hostile bid, according to a person briefed on the matter.A version of this article appears in print on February 24, 2016, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Honeywell and United Technologies Disagree on Merits of Merger.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.