By BINYAMIN APPELBAUMNOV. 10, 2015
WASHINGTON —  Neel T. Kashkari, who oversaw the government’s bailout of the banking industry as a Treasury official in the George W. Bush and Obama administrations, was named the next president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis on Tuesday.Mr. Kashkari, 42, will succeed Narayana R. Kocherlakota in that post in January. He will also take Mr. Kocherlakota’s place as the youngest of the 17 members of the Fed’s policy-making committee, the Federal Open Market Committee.“Mr. Kashkari is an influential leader whose combined experience in the public and private sectors makes him the ideal candidate to head the Minneapolis Fed,” MayKao Hang, a Minneapolis Fed board member who was co-chairwoman of the search committee, said in a statement.Mr. Kashkari is the third person this year appointed to lead a regional reserve bank, and all three of the new presidents previously worked at Goldman Sachs. The Philadelphia Fed in March appointed Patrick Harker, a former Goldman trustee, as its new president. The Dallas Fed in August selected Robert S. Kaplan, a former Goldman vice chairman.AdvertisementMr. Kashkari will join a minority of Fed officials who do not have advanced degrees in economics, but he has expressed strong views on monetary policy.AdvertisementIn 2012, Mr. Kashkari criticized the Fed’s decision to start a second round of bond-buying.“At the end of the day, this is not going to lead to real economic growth,” he told CNBC at the time. “Unfortunately, it likely leads to an inflationary outcome.”He also has compared bond-buying to dosing the economy with morphine — “Makes u feel better but doesn’t cure,” he posted on Twitter in 2013 — and suggested that financial markets would resist weaning.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Those views suggest Mr. Kashkari will break with his predecessor. Mr. Kocherlakota began his term at the Minneapolis Fed as a vocal skeptic of the Fed’s ability to improve economic conditions but underwent a battlefield conversion and became a leading proponent of the Fed’s efforts. He is now the only Fed official pushing to expand its stimulus campaign.Mr. Kashkari will not vote on monetary policy until 2017. The Fed’s policy committee will next meet on Dec. 15, and it is widely expected to begin slowly raising interest rates to head off inflationary pressures in an improving economy.As president of the Minneapolis Fed, Mr. Kashkari will also direct a staff of research economists and oversee operations like the distribution of currency to banks. The reserve banks also house regulators who oversee the commercial banks in each district, but that work increasingly is directed by officials at the Federal Reserve’s Board of Governors, in Washington.Mr. Kashkari’s peripatetic career has included stints as an aerospace engineer, a banker in Goldman Sachs’s San Francisco office and, most recently, a job as a managing director at the investment firm Pimco. Last year, he ran for governor of California, finishing a distant second after a campaign in which he spent a week living on the streets of Fresno, pretending to be homeless.In an interview with The Star-Tribune of Minneapolis, he said he was eager to return to public service.“If you want to help 1,000 people, donate to a charity. That’s really, really important,” Mr. Kashkari told the paper. “If you want to help a million people, or 10 million people or 100 million people, the only way you can do that is by improving public policy.”A version of this article appears in print on November 11, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Minneapolis Fed Bank Names Next President, Once of Goldman Sachs.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.