AdvertisementSupported byBy Nathaniel PopperJPMorgan Chase executives painted a positive picture of the American economy and the bank’s business at their annual investor day, but they failed to beat back the pessimism that has battered bank shares and the broader stock market in recent months.The bank, America’s largest, saw its share price fall throughout its investor day on Tuesday after disclosing during the morning that it is putting aside an additional $500 million to cover potential losses from falling oil prices. The stock ended the session down 4.2 percent, falling more than the broad indexes.Since late November, JPMorgan’s stock price has dropped 17 percent. Many banks are trading even lower, reaching levels near those hit in 2011.JPMorgan’s stock has performed better than that of most of the other large banks and JPMorgan executives insisted on Tuesday that they were optimistic about nearly all of their business lines and planned to report record profits once again this year.“There’s an awful lot of noise out there,” the bank’s chief executive, Jamie Dimon, told the investors gathered at JPMorgan’s Manhattan headquarters. “There are pretty good odds the noise will sort out and we’ll be O.K.”Mr. Dimon himself made a bet that investors have become too pessimistic when he bought $26 million worth of JPMorgan shares two weeks ago. Since then, the stock rose 10 percent before losing ground on Tuesday.“I look at it as just a very good long-term buy,” he said on Tuesday.On Tuesday, the bank’s executives were fighting against new economic data from the Conference Board showing that consumer confidence fell in February to a seven-month low.Mr. Dimon and other executives said that when they look at the bank’s data, they are not seeing any sign that consumers are cutting back. Fewer consumers are having trouble paying loans, and new loans are growing.But much of the recent damage to the stock market has come from concerns over the global economy and the declining price of oil, and those were the subjects many of the analysts and investors were asking about on Tuesday.Douglas Petno, head of the JPMorgan division most involved in the energy industry — the commercial bank — said the real impact of the lower price of oil has not yet been felt on what was a booming American energy sector.“I think we’ve only begun to see the range of bankruptcies in oil and gas,” Mr. Petno said.He and other executives said JPMorgan and most other banks had limited their overall exposure to these sorts of losses.Marianne Lake, the chief financial officer, said that by the end of this quarter, JPMorgan would have put aside $1.3 billion to cover for possible losses in the energy sector, up 60 percent from the end of 2015. The bank has $44 billion in loans to the oil and gas sector.Ms. Lake said that the bank could be forced to put aside $1.5 billion more for losses if the price of oil remains close to $25 for over a year. That alarmed investors and appeared to be the main factor behind the JPMorgan stock sell-off. The anxiety was heightened by Tuesday’s comments from an official in Saudi Arabia who indicated that the country did not plan to cut its oil production.Even with the increased reserves, JPMorgan envisions the possibility of profits of $30 billion in the next few years, up from $24.4 billion in 2015.As in recent years, the bank’s profits have come, in part, from lowering its head count and expenses. On Tuesday, JPMorgan executives emphasized the investments in technology the bank is making and that should allow it to continue to reduce its staffing levels and expenses.Unlike other banks, the head of JPMorgan’s Wall Street operations, Daniel Pinto, said that the bank was not cutting significantly from its bond and currency trading operations, which have been hit by new regulations.“At some point, this business will go back to growth — it’s not going to be contracting forever,” Mr. Pinto said.Advertisement