By EMILY STEELFEB. 23, 2016
Viacom announced on Tuesday that it was pursuing a deal to sell a minority stake in its Paramount Pictures film and television studio after being approached by several strategic investors.Several details about the potential transaction — including the identity of the investors, the deal’s value and how a new partner would affect the studio’s operations — remain unclear. An agreement is expected by the end of June.Viacom management is under pressure to reverse the company’s fortunes. Shares are down about 45 percent in the last year because of concerns over the company’s leadership and weak results across both its television and film groups, as well as concerns over the company’s leadership. Viacom also owns the MTV, Comedy Central and Nickelodeon cable networks. Shares of Viacom rose 1 percent to close at $41.01 on Tuesday.“The advantages for Viacom and Paramount are significant,” Philippe P. Dauman, Viacom’s chief executive, said in a note to staff members. “A strategic partner can enhance Paramount’s business by adding overall expertise, funding expanded production, building on our distribution clout and scale, and providing new creative opportunities for our employees, our talent and our studio production partners.”AdvertisementThe ailing 92-year-old Sumner M. Redstone stepped down just weeks ago as executive chairman of the company. In 1994, he added Paramount to his media empire, beating out Barry Diller and John C. Malone.AdvertisementIn recent weeks, investors and analysts have advocated for Viacom to pursue a potential sale or other transaction for Paramount and other company assets to shrink debt and increase the company’s stock price. Analysts have estimated the value of Paramount, under the leadership of Brad Grey, at about $4 billion to $5.5 billion — a steep drop from Viacom’s $9.9 billion takeover of Paramount in 1994. (That decline largely reflects the 2006 spinoff of its large television operation.)Mario Gabelli, whose investment firm Gamco is the second-largest voting shareholder in Viacom, has called for Viacom to create a joint venture for Paramount to bring in cash and digital distribution expertise. In a post on Twitter, he called Tuesday’s development a “logical first step.”Paramount Pictures has struggled in the last year, largely because of a lack of theatrical hits and the ancillary income they generate once distributed on DVD and on television. When the studio has succeeded, as with “Mission: Impossible — Rogue Nation,” its upside has been limited because other companies have held stakes. In the quarter ended Dec. 31, revenue declined 15 percent to $612 million. Mr. Dauman has said that Paramount’s output will increase to a 15-film slate in the current fiscal year. In the fiscal year just ended, the studio made 11 films.Paramount finished 2015 in last place among the six major studios at the North American box office, with market share of about 6 percent and total domestic ticket sales of $674.7 million. (To compare, Universal Pictures, the leader, had 21.3 percent market share and $2.4 billion in domestic ticket sales.)The studio found a modest hit in December with “The Big Short,” which received five Oscar nominations, but its challenges show no sign of letting up, in part because it is enormously difficult for a studio to speed up its movie pipeline when it has slowed it to the degree Paramount has in recent years.“Zoolander 2” flopped, the apparent victim of poor scheduling. Paramount released it against the comic-book adaptation “Deadpool.” Michael Bay’s “13 Hours: The Secret Soldiers of Benghazi” was also a misfire, costing $50 million to produce and taking in $56.8 million worldwide, roughly half of which goes to theater owners.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Paramount, which has three more “Transformers” sequels in the works, will try again on March 4 with “Whiskey Tango Foxtrot,” which is set in Afghanistan.The ownership of the major film studios has been surprisingly stable for years, after decades in which they were traded — in whole, or in part — among investors who might lose money on operations, but usually sold their interests at a profit.AdvertisementThe most recent experiment with split ownership ended in 2013, as Comcast bought a 49 percent interest in NBCUniversal from General Electric for about $16.7 billion, after a period of partnership between the companies.Historically, split ownership has led to some ferocious conflicts. In the 1980s, for instance, the media mogul Rupert Murdoch and the oil entrepreneur Marvin Davis were co-owners of 20th Century Fox. After considerable pushing and shoving, Mr. Murdoch bought Mr. Davis’s share in the studio, which has since remained nested in his own corporate family.An obvious advantage to Paramount would be access to moviemaking capital, always a concern to studios, which invest heavily in projects that usually yield a return over years, if ever. As the cost of large-scale sequels and effects-driven fantasy movies has risen, most companies have sought investment directly in their film slates, or, sometimes, from friendly governments, as did Warner, which financed the Hobbit films with the help of a $100 million-plus contribution from New Zealand.In 2013, Daniel S. Loeb, an activist investor, suggested that the Sony Corporation should spin off as much as 20 percent of its entertainment interests, which include Sony Pictures Entertainment. But its parent, based in Tokyo, resisted that call.Michael Cieply and Brooks Barnes contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on February 24, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Viacom Says It Will Sell a Stake in Paramount Pictures.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.