

 Eduardo Porter
 

ECONOMIC SCENE
FEB. 23, 2016
Why don’t Americans save more for old age? Even when their employers promise to match their savings, workers often fail to salt away their earnings for the future, inexplicably leaving money on the table.Psychology has offered an answer: procrastination. And it has suggested a cure: rather than giving workers the choice to sign up for a 401(k), sign them up automatically and give them the choice to opt out.The switch has led to a sharp increase in workers’ participation in retirement savings plans. It is perhaps the most successful contribution of so-called behavioral economics to public policy.Yet, though lauded by policy makers as a powerful new tool in the policy kit, the approach poses a risk, too. It fosters a belief that tweaks based on an understanding of people’s psychology could lead to a vastly improved society at little or no cost to taxpayers.Advertisement“The insights from behavioral economics are beautiful from a research perspective,” said Eldar Shafir, a professor of psychology at Princeton who is an expert on decision-making and a leading proponent of the behavioral approach to economics. “But its popularity no doubt comes from a combination of lack of funds and political helplessness.”AdvertisementGiven Washington’s political paralysis, it’s no surprise that “nudges” like these are all the rage in the Obama administration, which has brought in some leading behavioral experts. In 2009, the White House hired Cass R. Sunstein — a legal scholar who wrote the book “Nudge” with Richard H. Thaler, a behavioral economist.In September, the administration’s Social and Behavioral Sciences Team issued its first report extolling the many benefits of applying behavioral insights to policy.Sending text messages to low-income high school graduates about prematriculation requirements for college increased enrollment rates. Well-written emails increased the participation of military service members in the federal employees savings plan. They also bolstered enrollment in health insurance plans under Obamacare.But here is the reality check: We haven’t yet nudged ourselves out of a retirement trap. Traditional defined-benefit pensions have all but disappeared in the private sector, but only 40 percent of American families in the bottom half of the income distribution have any form of retirement savings plan. And even among those who have one, their savings total, on average, is just $40,000.Automatic enrollment in retirement accounts counts as the most successful nudge yet tested on a large scale. It also underscores the limitations of the strategy.America’s shortcomings are serious. The United States has the deepest poverty rates among rich countries. It is at the bottom of the pile in terms of infant mortality, obesity and diabetes, and has the highest teenage pregnancy rate among rich members of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, the club of advanced industrial nations. The death rate from drug overdoses among young white adults is now about as high as the death rate from AIDS was at its peak in the mid-1990s.It’s great to know that there are promising ways to improve society by developing a smarter email or changing the default choice on an application form. But if the question is whether policy makers can cheaply nudge Americans out of destitution onto a path to prosperity, the answer must be no.AdvertisementThe limits of nudging come into focus in an evaluation by the research firm MDRC of a set of behavioral nudges intended to increase poor fathers’ payment of child support for their children.In Franklin County, Ohio, careful reminders increased the share of noncustodial parents who paid support, to 51.5 percent from 48.5 percent. In Cuyahoga County, Ohio, text message reminders increased the payment rate to 49.8 percent from 47.3 percent. In both cases, the researchers observed, the payments were quite small.If the government’s objective was to change the landscape of child support — a critical policy question considering there are 25 million children living with a single parent — this will not be enough.Policy experimentation is always welcome. But the approach taken in this instance seems to spring from a shaky assumption: Poor noncustodial fathers can afford child support but choose not to pay it. As the MDRC researchers put it, “the modest findings suggest that the targeted noncustodial parents may have a limited ability to pay.” Dealing with that, however, might cost taxpayers real money.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Other behavioral interventions have run into similar hurdles. A recent study by George Loewenstein, a behavioral economist and noted critic of “nudges” from Carnegie Mellon University, with Cäzilia Loibl of Ohio State University and two other colleagues, also suggests that fancy cognitive tricks may fail to overcome the main obstacle faced by the poor: a lack of money.They tried several behavioral techniques to persuade poor Americans to take advantage of individual development accounts, savings accounts topped off by the federal government at a rate of $2 for every $1 saved. That’s quite a deal.But nothing worked. “People are not saving because they have such low incomes,” Professor Loewenstein concluded.This is not to bash behavioral economics. It offers invaluable insights into how real humans depart from the robotic assumptions of most economists, who posit that any rational individual will jump through every hoop to gain a benefit if it exceeds its cost.Emily Schmitt is a senior social science research analyst at the Administration for Children and Families in the Health and Human Services Department. She ran the child support experiments in Ohio along with a dozen others testing how to improve people’s access to government programs.AdvertisementShe noted that behavioral insights are critical to ensure that the poor gain access to the benefits available to them. “Unintentional barriers can screen out the people that need programs the most,” she said.And there is more. If we want to diminish poverty, it is crucial to understand the actions of the poor better.Experiments by Professor Shafir at Princeton and others have documented how poverty itself leads people to make self-destructive decisions,  perhaps by forcing them to focus attention on satisfying immediate needs to the exclusion of other considerations.“The poor lack two things: money and cognitive freedom,” Professor Shafir told me.That understanding might act as a corrective for the belief that poor people are mostly to blame for their poverty. And it poses a challenge for those who argue that the government’s role should mostly be to curb dependence on public support while exhorting the poor to get their act together, marry, get a job.It could shift the onus onto those with power over poor Americans — employers, government — not just to design their application forms, their business hours, their policies in a way that takes into account the restrictions poverty imposes, but also to shift real resources to where they would make the biggest difference.This is hardly a cheap lunch, however.Take retirement savings. The government has encouraged employers to nudge their employees into opening savings accounts. But what if the problem is bigger? What if workers simply cannot assess how much they need to save today to navigate turbulent financial markets and still have a decent nest egg 20, 30 years down the road?In such a case the better response — drawing from the insights unveiled by behavioral economics — might be to replace all the tax subsidies and other incentives for so-called defined-contribution pensions with something that works more effectively for more Americans.“The single biggest contribution of behavioral economics to public policy is taking this flawed approach to retirement savings and making it a little bit more viable,” Mr. Loewenstein told me. “The downside is that if we make it just sufficiently viable, people won’t recognize how bankrupt the concept is.”Society could be nudged in the wrong way.Email: eporter@nytimes.com; Twitter: @portereduardoA version of this article appears in print on February 24, 2016, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Nudges Aren’t Enough to Solve Society’s Problems  .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »