By MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDFEB. 23, 2016
Centerview Partners, one of the most prominent boutique investment banks, has drawn another longtime deal maker to its ranks.The firm said on Tuesday that it had hired Jack Levy, who spent several decades as a top mergers banker at Goldman Sachs and Merrill Lynch, as a partner.The hiring is the latest move by an established, big-firm banker to a boutique focused primarily on advising clients, without the huge ranks of traders and lending professionals.Centerview — itself founded by executives from UBS and Morgan Stanley, among other firms — has been one of the busiest in recent years, advising Kraft in its sale to Heinz (where independent investment banks were the only ones involved), Time Warner Cable in its deal with Charter Communications and Pfizer in its takeover of Allergan, a fellow drug maker.AdvertisementLast month, Centerview hired Kenneth Berliner, who was most recently president of another boutique, the Peter J. Solomon Company, as a partner.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Levy, who retired from Goldman last summer as a co-chairman of the firm’s global mergers team, spent 15 years at the Wall Street giant. He joined there from Merrill Lynch, where he served as that firm’s head of mergers for a decade.Among the deals he helped broker in recent years were Humana’s sale of itself to Aetna and Jos. A. Bank’s sale to Men’s Wearhouse.Advertisement“Many of our partners have worked with Jack over the years, and we are delighted that he has joined our firm,” Blair W. Effron, a co-founder of Centerview, said in a statement. “In addition to being one of the most experienced tacticians and strategic counselors in the industry, we look forward to benefiting from Jack’s commitment to culture-building, mentoring colleagues and advising on firm matters as we continue to grow our business.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.