By JAD MOUAWADNOV. 10, 2015
The Justice Department said on Tuesday that it would seek to block United Airlines from further expanding its hold at Newark Liberty International Airport because the carrier already has a near monopoly there.In a complaint filed in a federal court in New Jersey, the Justice Department is challenging a recent agreement between United and Delta Air Lines to exchange takeoff and landing rights between Newark and Kennedy International Airport in New York. It argues that the transaction would increase United’s dominant position and make it harder for other airlines to compete.“Competition in Newark is in critically short supply,” William J. Baer, the assistant attorney general, said in a statement. “Allowing United to acquire even more slots at Newark would fortify United’s monopoly position and weaken rivals’ ability to challenge that dominance, leaving consumers to pay the price.”After approving large-scale airline mergers in recent years, including the 2010 combination of United and Continental, the Justice Department has started to take a closer look at the industry recently. In July, federal prosecutors said they had begun an investigation into possible collusion among the airlines to limit capacity on their routes.AdvertisementUnited’s position in Newark stands out. The carrier controls more than 70 percent of the airport’s capacity and flights, a dominance that no other airlines have at their biggest hubs. Airfares from Newark are among the highest in the nation, according to the Justice Department, because United is already extracting what it termed a “Newark premium.”AdvertisementIn June, United said that it planned to move out of Kennedy because it had failed to make a profit there for seven years, and that it would instead focus its West Coast flying out of Newark. To do so, United planned to lease 22 slots from Delta in Newark in exchange for 24 slots at Kennedy, according to the complaint.United said that the agreement benefited its customers and the region, and that it would “vigorously defend” its case. The New York market, which is served by three major airports, “is the most competitive air transportation market in the country,” Rahsaan Johnson, a United spokesman, said in an emailed statement.George Slover, a senior policy counsel for Consumers Union, said the Justice Department’s action “highlights the harm that airline mergers and the increased market concentration are doing to consumers. This concentration makes it too easy for airlines to restrict consumer choice and jack up fares.”Airfares from Newark were the highest among the top 12 airports in the first quarter this year, according to the most recent figures compiled by the Transportation Department.Four major carriers — United, Delta, American Airlines and Southwest Airlines — now control about 80 percent of the nation’s capacity as a result of the mergers. Airline executives have argued that the industry, which lost $60 billion in the last decade, needed to restructure around fewer airlines to make a profit. They argue that consumers benefit because bigger airlines are able to offer more destinations than smaller ones.Because of traffic congestion, Newark is one of four airports where the Federal Aviation Administration has set up a system of flight restrictions that limits the number of landings and takeoffs each day.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.This system, which is also in effect at La Guardia and Kennedy airports in New York and at Ronald Reagan National Airport in Washington, has been criticized by many airlines, including Southwest, Virgin America and JetBlue Airways, which complain it shuts them out since slots are rarely available for lease or sale in a transparent and open way.When federal officials approved the merger between United and Continental, they insisted on a critical concession: that the airline must lease 36 slots to Southwest to resolve competition concerns. The move led to a drop in fares for destinations served by Southwest from Newark.AdvertisementUnited’s latest transaction with Delta is its third attempt to reverse the effects of that decision, according to the complaint.In July 2014, United sought to buy back the slots from Southwest but dropped the plan after antitrust authorities objected. United returned before the Justice Department in March 2015 with a different proposal to buy 18 slots at Newark from American in exchange for 26 slots at Kennedy. The deal, once more, was abandoned after federal officials expressed their concerns.United does not even use all the slots at Newark that it already owns, according to the complaint. While it controls 902 slots at the airport, it does not use as many as 82 of them.Tuesday’s announcement is only the latest trouble for United in Newark.In September, Jeff Smisek, its chief executive, was forced out of his job during a federal investigation into whether the airline had traded favors with the chairman of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, which owns the airport. Federal prosecutors are examining whether United agreed to run an unprofitable flight for the benefit of David Samson, then the Port Authority’s chairman, who has since retired, in return for improvements it wanted at Newark.A version of this article appears in print on November 11, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Justice Department Opposes United and Delta Swap at Newark.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.