By RAVI SOMAIYAFEB. 23, 2016
The New York Times announced on Tuesday that it had chosen three journalists to spend two years in its newsroom as part of a fellowship named for the  media columnist David Carr.The Times had initially said it would select just one person for the fellowship, which was created after Mr. Carr’s death in 2015. Instead, John Herrman, a co-editor and media reporter for The Awl; Amanda Hess, a staff writer at Slate; and Greg Howard, a reporter for Deadspin, will all join the Times newsroom on March 15.The three were chosen from more than 600 applicants, from countries all over the world, by a panel of Times editors.“We found these three candidates so compelling that we decided to select all of them,” said Dean Baquet, The Times’s executive editor. “They are thoughtful, deep reporters. We will learn as much from them as they will from us.”AdvertisementMr. Herrman, 28, known for his long essays about the Internet and technology, will work with The Times’s media group and write primarily for the Business section. Ms. Hess, 30, who covers the human side of web culture for Slate, will join the Culture section. And Mr. Howard, 27, who has written about race and sports at Deadspin since 2013, will work with The New York Times Magazine and other sections.AdvertisementThe Times created the fellowship to honor Mr. Carr, who was known for a writing style that was both plain-spoken and elegant. In his weekly  Media Equation column, he displayed his passion for chronicling the ways in which technology was affecting the media industry and culture at large.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He began his career with alternative weekly newspapers and joined The Times in 2002 as a reporter. He was a finalist for the Pulitzer Prize for commentary in 2015. He also wrote a memoir, “The Night of the Gun,” which chronicled his battles with addiction, and he was a star of the documentary “Page One: Inside The New York Times,” about The Times.He was also a mentor to many young journalists at The Times and other organizations. He could often be seen standing outside The Times’s 40th Street entrance, engaged in deep conversation with someone seeking his counsel. In 2014 he began teaching a course at Boston University’s College of Communication.“In the spirit of David’s curiosity, his ability to see around the corner, and his preference to show rather than tell, I can say with certainty that he would have made these choices himself,” said Jill Rooney Carr, Mr. Carr’s widow.“On behalf of the Carr family, we congratulate Amanda, Greg and John and can’t wait to see their work on the written page, on the screen or in a nascent medium that’s yet to be explained.”A version of this article appears in print on February 24, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Journalists Chosen for a Times Fellowship.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.