AdvertisementSupported bySuperReturn InternationalBy Chad BrayBERLIN — Oh, what a difference a few years make.In 2013, Leon D. Black, the chief executive of Apollo Global Management, famously said that the company was “selling everything that not’s nailed down.”That came near the height of a period of selling when private equity firms returned hundreds of billions of dollars in capital to investors and exited investments, including dozens of public listings of portfolio companies in London and the United States.But a global upheaval in markets in recent months, driven in part by a drop in energy prices and a slowdown in China’s economy, has brought the initial public offering market to a halt in the United States and begun to weigh on the valuations of companies both private and public.That is creating an opportunity for private equity firms to become buyers once again, industry leaders said at the SuperReturn International conference in Berlin on Tuesday.“The macro today is just terrible if you’re a seller,” Donald J. Gogel, the chairman and chief executive of Clayton Dubilier & Rice, said during a panel discussion on Tuesday. “But as private equity investors, we’re both buyers and sellers. We’ve just come off of five extraordinary years last year in terms of where the private equity industry returned some $900 billion of proceeds back to investors. It’s very churlish to complain about exits constrained in 2016.”“The flip side of all of this turmoil is that we can put our buyers hats on again and go back to doing what I think our investors expect us to do: to find good values in the most turbulent of times,” he added.Steve Koltes, the co-founder of CVC Capital Partners, said valuations of potential private equity targets remain high, in part because of the low cost of capital.But he said he would expect the decline in valuations of publicly traded companies in recent months to trickle into the private market.Mr. Koltes said that CVC had sold 6 billion euros, or about $6.6 billion, in public stocks from its portfolio last year through I.P.O.s and block trades. He said the turmoil in the markets in recent months had reduced the valuation of those companies by €1.5 billion since CVC’s exit.“When I look at those stocks that are now worth four-and-a-half billion, I say those are pretty good values,” Mr. Koltes said.William E. Ford, the chief executive of General Atlantic, said there was a “real turning of the tide” in terms of the investment environment, with a significant valuation reset in the public markets.“That’s likely to follow through to the private markets,” Mr. Ford said. “I think we’re in the early stages of the private market revaluation. It will take on the order of six to 12 months to really take hold.”As for Mr. Black, he said Apollo’s teams were reviewing three or four memos a week related to the debt of “very good, franchise companies” were the pricing has come down substantially in recent months and can provide attractive returns.“That is a very attractive risk-reward opportunity,” he said. “There are a lot more of them coming.”He also noted that Apollo had put about a third of the capital in its latest fund – about $18 billion – to work up until about a month ago.In the last month, Apollo has agreed to deals to acquire the Apollo Education Group, the troubled for-profit education company that owns the giant University of Phoenix, for about $1.1 billion and the ADT Corporation, which provides home and business security systems for 6.5 million customers, for about $6.9 billion.If the deals are completed, Apollo will have put about half of the capital in its latest fund to work, Mr. Black said.“I think there are opportunities on a selective basis on the equity side,” he said. “I think, increasingly over this next year, there will be more opportunities on the debt side.”Advertisement