AdvertisementSupported byBy ReutersWASHINGTON — Sales of new single-family homes in the United States tumbled in January from a 10-month high, but the overall housing market recovery remains intact.Other data on Wednesday showed that the services sector contracted in early February for the first time since October 2013 at a time of concerns about the economic outlook. Bad weather also hampered activity.The Commerce Department said single-family-home sales dropped 9.2 percent last month to a seasonally adjusted annual rate of 494,000 units, almost unwinding December’s sharp increase. December’s sales pace was unrevised at 544,000 units.Sales in the West, where home prices have increased sharply at a time of tight inventories, plummeted 32.1 percent, to a 110,000 unit rate, the lowest level since July 2014. The percentage decline was the largest since May 2010.Sales rose 3.4 percent in the Northeast, despite a blizzard in late January. They fell 5.9 percent in the Midwest and rose 1.8 percent in the South.The new-homes market, whose sales account for 8.3 percent of the overall housing market, appears to have cooled, with construction activity falling in January and home builder sentiment softening this month. But housing in general remains supported by a tightening labor market, which is lifting wage growth and bolstering household formation.Reports on Tuesday showed sales of previously owned homes hitting a six-month high in January and house prices rising 5.7 percent in the year to December. While mortgage applications fell last week, they retained half of the previous week’s increase.In a separate report, the data firm Markit said its flash United States services PMI business activity index fell to 49.8 early this month from 53.2 in January. A reading below 50 indicates a contraction in services sector activity.But with respondents also blaming the harsh weather in the Northeast, the decline in the index probably exaggerates the slowdown.A firmer housing market should help prop up the economy as it navigates rough seas caused by a robust dollar, spending cuts by energy companies hurt by lower oil prices and sluggish global demand. Efforts by businesses to sell off inventory are holding back growth.The economy grew at a 0.7 percent annual rate in the fourth quarter. Growth estimates for the first quarter are currently above a 2 percent rate.Last month, the inventory of new homes on the market increased 2.1 percent to 238,000 units, the highest since October 2009. Still, housing stock remains tight.At January’s sales pace, it would take 5.8 months to clear the supply of houses on the market, up from 5.1 months in December. The median price of a new home fell 4.5 percent from a year ago to $278,800.Advertisement