AdvertisementSupported byBy Emily SteelPhilippe P. Dauman, the chief executive of Viacom, has been ordered to sit for a deposition in the legal battle over the mental competency of the media mogul Sumner M. Redstone, a New York judge ruled during a hearing Thursday.The development is a victory for Manuela Herzer, the former companion of Mr. Redstone, who claims in a lawsuit that Mr. Redstone, who is 92 and in frail health, lacked the mental capacity to remove her from a directive that would have put her in charge of his health decisions. Mr. Dauman replaced her on the health directive.Mr. Redstone’s lawyers have called the suit “meritless” and said that Ms. Herzer is motivated by money. On the same day that Mr. Redstone changed the health directive in October, he removed Ms. Herzer from his estate plan, in which he had planned to leave her $50 million and his Beverly Hills mansion worth about $20 million.Ms. Herzer has said that she is fighting the court battle out of concern for Mr. Redstone’s well-being. A Los Angeles judge is scheduled to decide at a hearing Monday whether to dismiss the suit.The dispute concerns Mr. Redstone’s personal life, but the outcome could have broad implications for his controlling stakes in Viacom and CBS.This month, Mr. Redstone stepped down as executive chairman of the two companies after the lawsuit prompted questions by investors and analysts about corporate governance issues. Mr. Redstone continues to hold about 80 percent of the voting shares in the two companies.Ms. Herzer claimed that Mr. Dauman’s statement in a November legal filing was “riddled with falsehoods” and sought permission to take his testimony. He fought the subpoena in State Supreme Court in New York, where he is based.In a declaration in November, Mr. Dauman said that Mr. Redstone was “engaged and attentive.” Mr. Dauman said that although Mr. Redstone had a substantial speech impediment, he spoke with him several times a week by telephone, visited him monthly and had “extensive business discussions.”Les Fagen, a lawyer for Mr. Dauman at Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton & Garrison, said in January that Mr. Dauman’s testimony would be “legally irrelevant” and was an attempt by Ms. Herzer to draw Mr. Dauman and Viacom into her “legally irrelevant harassment campaign.”On Thursday, Mr. Fagan said in a statement that Mr. Dauman was “pleased to cooperate and fully prepared to comply with the request for appropriate and legally relevant information in the California proceeding.”No date has been set for the deposition, but it is expected within the next 30 days.“We are thrilled about this significant positive development as we continue to gather more and more incriminating evidence that Mr. Redstone is the victim of severe mental and emotional abuse, fraud and manipulation by those close to him in positions of trust and confidence who have betrayed this great man,” Pierce O’Donnell, a lawyer for Ms. Herzer, said in a statement.Advertisement