By VINOD SREEHARSHAFEB. 25, 2016
RIO DE JANEIRO — Shares of the Brazilian telecommunications company Oi plunged on Thursday after TIM Participações, the Brazil operator of Telecom Italia, rebuffed an offer made by the Russian oligarch Mikhail Fridman to merge the two companies.A unit of LetterOne, an investment firm founded by Mr. Fridman, said that it had been told by TIM that the telecommunications giant “does not wish to enter into further discussions about the facilitation of a merger between Oi and TIM in Brazil.”Last October, LetterOne said that it was willing to invest as much as $4 billion in Oi on the condition that it merge with the mobile operator TIM. Oi has long struggled to adapt to the growing mobile market in Brazil and shift away from its dominance in fixed lines.LetterOne, which is based in Luxembourg, was in negotiations for approximately four months, it said. “There have been extensive talks with many stakeholders in Brazil, and talks with TIM,” it wrote.AdvertisementShares of Oi fell by more than 15 percent in trading in São Paulo on Thursday.The Ukraine-born Mr. Fridman had been seeking to gain a foothold in Brazil, Latin America’s largest economy. LetterOne has other telecommunications investments, including VimpelCom in Amsterdam and Turkcell in Turkey.AdvertisementEven while there is appetite for consolidation in Brazil’s telecommunications industry, a potential merger between Oi and TIM has been greeted with skepticism. Oi has some 38 billion reais in net debt, which is five times its earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, according to a research note issued this month by JPMorgan Chase.That report said that the potential benefits of a merger “may be outweighed by negative equity value at Oi given its high leverage.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Oi is scheduled to report its financial results for the fourth quarter next month, but there isnot much optimism about the results.Credit Suisse wrote in a research note this month that “We expect revenues in Brazil to decline in all three business divisions.”Oi has had a rocky recent history. In 2013 it approved a merger with Portugal Telecom, which already had a stake in Oi. At that time the two companies had the same chief executive.That went forward despite protests from minority shareholders in Oi who complained they were being saddled with debt as a result of the deal. They also said there were numerous conflicts of interest.Brazil’s securities regulator sided with Oi at the time, although the newspaper Valor Econômico reported this month that the regulator had decided to re-examine that deal and investigate whether there was an abuse of power by controlling shareholders.That could create new problems for Oi.An earlier version of this article misstated which company withdrew from merger talks. It was TIM Participações, not Oi.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.