AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Dominic ElliottHSBC is adopting the “just add Goldman Sachs” recipe plan for its investment bank.The London-based bank is recruiting Matthew Westerman, a former top partner at the Wall Street firm, to help lead a reordering of HSBC’s operations serving big global clients. His arrival implies that the bank’s ambition to crack the top league requires fresh impetus.Mr. Westerman and HSBC have some history together. The Goldman veteran, who held several top investment banking jobs at the bank run by Lloyd C. Blankfein over a 16-year period, is a longtime adviser to HSBC and knows Asia, HSBC’s most fertile territory, well.He and Robin Phillips – with whom Mr. Westerman will co-head HSBC’s newly created global banking division — should have enough to do to keep them from the kind of power struggle that often imperils such co-executive partnerships. HSBC is folding hundreds of commercial banking clients into the new unit, as well as adding in corporate and asset-backed finance businesses – a reversal of their separation into a stand-alone arm in 2013. The head of investment banking at HBSC, Samir Assaf, reckons this will help with cost-cutting.It sends an odd signal to shareholders, though. HSBC has tried and failed to grow in higher-margin corporate finance businesses before, notably under the deal-maker John Studzinski, who now works at the Blackstone Group. Rivals including Barclays are considering moving the dividing line between corporate and investment banking to maximize cross-selling opportunities. But it feels a little too soon for HSBC to do so given it outlined a series of investment bank targets barely over six months ago.Perhaps the adage “no one ever got fired for hiring Goldman” applies to investment bankers as well as their corporate clients. Deutsche Bank has recruited the former Goldman financial sponsors head Alasdair Warren as its European head of investment banking. Bank of America Merrill Lynch, historically weaker in Europe than its home market, in 2012 hired a Goldman alumnus, Diego de Giorgi, as a top executive for the region, and has performed creditably in European league tables since.Nonetheless, the sluggish start to the year in terms of primary capital market and merger volumes has made it tough for investment banks to expand. Other second-tier players looking to grow include the French lenders BNP Paribas and Société Générale, as well as UniCredit of Italy. The catch is that with markets skittish, investing to grow looks almost pointless, no matter the pedigree of leadership.Dominic Elliott is a columnist at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.Advertisement