
Street Scene By                     
WILLIAM D. COHAN

FEB. 26, 2016
Long gone are the days on Wall Street when our leading investment banks were stock-market highfliers.When Goldman Sachs went public in May 1999, for instance, after years of internal debate, it was valued at more than four times its book value. That was a slight premium above where its then-biggest competitors, Morgan Stanley and Merrill Lynch, were trading.That seems like a long time ago now. Not a single one of the leading American investment banks – supposedly the best in the world – trades above its book value. They trade like utilities. Goldman trades at 0.86 times its book value; Morgan Stanley trades at 0.74 times its book value; and Bank of America, which now owns Merrill Lynch, trades at just more than half its book value. JPMorgan Chase, our largest bank by asset size, trades just below its book value. (The dynamic is even worse in Europe, where the big banks seem to be melting down in real time.)What gives? And is there any chance the market will ever again take a more charitable view of the value of these so-called “Too Big To Fail” banks?AdvertisementNot if the apostate Neel T. Kashkari has his way. He is the former Goldman Sachs junior banker who was recently appointed president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.AdvertisementIn a speech on Feb. 16 at the Brookings Institution that could just as easily been given by Senator Bernie Sanders, Mr. Kashkari advocated breaking up the big banks “into smaller, less connected, less important entities” and “taxing leverage” throughout the financial system “to reduce systemic risks.” He also called for the big banks to become more like “public utilities” by “forcing them to hold so much capital that they virtually can’t fail.”When Mr. Kashkari, a Republican candidate for governor of California who lost to Jerry Brown in 2014, starts sounding like Mr. Sanders and Senator Elizabeth Warren, the time has come for the leaders on Wall Street to take matters into their own hands and shake up the way these companies are managed before others do it for them.At the top of the list, as I have written before, is the need to revamp the Wall Street compensation system, which is Wall Street’s largest single variable cost and continues to reward bankers, traders and executives for taking risks with other people’s money.This cannot continue. The compensation system must be changed so that the leaders of these companies have their full net worth on the line as they did when the businesses were still private partnerships. And there is little choice but for the overall compensation on Wall Street to fall further than it already has in the aftermath of the financial crisis.Part of the reason Wall Street companies are trading like utilities these days is that, generally speaking, their return on equity has been so dismal. Quarter after quarter, these companies struggle to break the 10 percent threshold that in the old days would have been considered an abject failure.Return on equity, or R.O.E., is important because it measures a corporation’s profitability by showing how much profit a company makes with the money shareholders have invested.Goldman, which as a private partnership used to have a return on equity of more than 50 percent, had a return in 2015 of 7.4 percent. At Morgan Stanley, the return for 2015 was 7.8 percent.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.There are reasons for this, too: New regulations require that the banks have more equity capital and that they get out of the riskiest business lines — such as proprietary trading — that occasionally generated huge profits but sometimes led to huge losses.AdvertisementAs a result, the denominator of the return on equity calculation – equity – is higher while the numerator — net income — is lower. The combination of the two results in returns on equity that are underwhelming, disappoint investors and result in stock prices that value these companies below their book value.What can be done? Either the return on equity benchmark has to be junked and replaced by another ratio that better judges the new realities on Wall Street or Wall Street has to become more profitable. Since return on equity looks like it is here to stay, that leaves one option: Wall Street has to become more profitable if it wants to avoid the worse option of being broken up into smaller pieces. And the only way to do that is to reduce the largest variable cost these firms have: compensation.What the leaders on Wall Street need to do to get their stocks roaring again is to cut compensation. They should reverse-engineer their income statements to increase their profits. If the market is demanding a return on equity of, say, 15 percent, then each quarter, the big banks should solve for the compensation expense that will yield a 15 percent return on equity. For instance, at Goldman in 2015, compensation expense was $12.68 billion, or 37.5 percent of the company’s revenue.For Goldman to achieve a return of 15 percent on its equity capital of $76 billion, it needs to generate an annual net income of $11.4 billion. To have achieved that amount in 2015, it would have needed to increase its reported net income of $6 billion by another $5.4 billion. The obvious place to find that money is by reducing compensation expense by that amount, or by 43 percent.Obviously, the idea of cutting compensation at Goldman Sachs by 43 percent will not be popular among the people who work at Goldman Sachs. But it still would mean they get paid more for working at Goldman than they could doing anything else without putting their own capital at risk.Investment bankers by their very nature are the most risk-averse people on the planet. Where else can you work and get paid huge salaries without risking your own capital? My bet is the compensation on Wall Street can be cut in half and most of the people who work there will stay put.This is what must happen given the new realities of life on Wall Street. Either Lloyd Blankfein and Gary Cohn can make this happen at Goldman on their own or something even worse can be forced upon them by the likes of Mr. Sanders and Mr. Kashkari.An earlier version of this article misstated what Morgan Stanley shares are trading for in relation to their book value. They are trading at 0.74 times book value, not 0.69 times.William D. Cohan is a former senior mergers and acquisitions banker who has written three books about Wall Street. His latest book is “The Price of Silence: The Duke Lacrosse Scandal, the Power of the Elite, and the Corruption of Our Great Universities.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »