AdvertisementSupported byBy Matthew GoldsteinAn accounting fraud case at a once-prominent New York law firm that captured front-page headlines in 2014 is now looking more ordinary.On Friday, a New York State Supreme Court judge threw out all the grand larceny charges against the two remaining defendants stemming from the collapse of the law firm, Dewey & LeBoeuf, in 2012.The decision means prosecutors intend to go to trial this year against the two, Joel Sanders and Stephen DiCarmine, with just a few criminal charges — none of them the most serious offenses originally charged by prosecutors in Manhattan nearly two years ago.“We are very gratified by the court’s decision,” said Andrew J. Frisch, a lawyer for Mr. Sanders.The latest whittling down of the criminal case is another blow to Cyrus R. Vance Jr., the Manhattan district attorney, in one of the most notable white-collar cases filed by his office.Earlier this year, Mr. Vance agreed to deferred prosecution deals to dismiss eventually the charges against two of the original four defendants, including Steven H. Davis, the former chairman of Dewey.Last year, a jury acquitted Mr. Davis, Mr. DiCarmine and Mr. Sanders on a number of low-level criminal charges before deadlocking on dozens of other charges after a six-month trial in Lower Manhattan. The trial judge, Robert M. Stolz, declared a mistrial after the jury had deliberated for 21 days.Afterward, prosecutors dismissed many of the original charges against the three men.The fourth defendant, Zachary Warren, a low-level employee who has since become a lawyer, recently reached a deferred prosecution agreement just a month before he was scheduled to go on trial.Austin V. Campriello, a lawyer for Mr. DiCarmine, the former executive director of Dewey, said he hoped prosecutors would consider offering a deferred prosecution agreement to his client after reassessing what remains of the case.Speaking outside the courtroom, Mr. Campriello said Mr. Vance’s prosecutorial team needed to re-examine the case because “the judge has dismissed the heart of the people’s case.”Joan Vollero, a spokeswoman for Mr. Vance, had no comment on Justice Stolz’s decision.In March 2014, when prosecutors announced a 106-count indictment in the case, Mr. Vance said the four original defendants had helped orchestrate a nearly four-year scheme to manipulate the law firm’s books. The men, he said, were trying to keep the law firm afloat during the financial crisis, in the process defrauding bank lenders and institutional investors in a debt offering.The indictment painted a portrait of a law firm run like a criminal enterprise. Mr. Vance said those at the top of Dewey had “directed employees to hide the firm’s true financial condition from creditors, investors, auditors and even partners of the firm.”Two years later, the guts of the prosecution’s case have been reduced to six counts against Mr. Sanders, the firm’s former chief financial officer, and Mr. DiCarmine.Justice Stolz, in a ruling from the bench, said he was dismissing the 15 grand larceny charges because no reasonable jury would be able to convict Mr. Sanders or Mr. DiCarmine on them.The judge, however, denied the defendants’ motion to dismiss the still pending conspiracy, scheme to defraud and securities fraud charges.A conviction on any one of the grand larceny charges could have resulted in a sentence ranging from eight and a third years in prison to 25 years. A conviction carries a mandatory prison sentence of one year.By contrast, the maximum sentence on the scheme to defraud charge could result in a sentence of up to four years in prison. But a judge is not required to impose a prison sentence as part of the punishment.Even before the judge tossed out the grand larceny charges, prosecutors said a second trial would be shorter and simpler than the first.In interviews after the trial, a number of jurors said prosecutors had made the case too complex by bringing too many charges and letting the proceedings stretch through the summer.Seven former Dewey employees, most of them low-level workers who had pleaded guilty to participating in a scheme to manipulate the firm’s finances, testified at the first trial. It is not known if prosecutors will call them as witnesses again. Many of them are not expected to receive prison time.The star witness at the first trial was Francis J. Canellas, the firm’s former finance director, who told the jury that the plan to manipulate the financial books and records of Dewey was first discussed over steak dinner at Del Frisco’s in Midtown Manhattan in late December 2008. Mr. Canellas, who pleaded guilty to a single count of grand larceny in return for a more lenient sentence, testified that Mr. Sanders and Mr. Warren attended that dinner.On Monday, lawyers for the Securities and Exchange Commission, which filed its own fraud lawsuit against several former Dewey executives, told a federal judge that the S.E.C. had reached a partial settlement with Mr. Canellas in that litigation.Advertisement