By BRETT COLENOV. 10, 2015
SYDNEY, Australia — A group of infrastructure investors and operators has emerged as a rival suitor for Asciano, the Australian port and railroad company.Asciano agreed in August to be acquired by Brookfield Infrastructure Partners for $6.6 billion. But three companies — the New York-based Global Infrastructure Partners, the Canada Pension Plan Investment Board and the Australian port operator Qube — have come forward with an alternative proposal.They have offered to pay 9.25 Australian dollars, or about $6.52, per share in cash and Qube stock for Asciano. Brookfield’s cash and stock offer is currently valued at 9.21 dollars. Asciano shares were trading at 8.95 dollars on Tuesday.Because of exchange-rate fluctuations since August, each of the competing proposals is valued at about $6.3 billion. (The proposals also include the assumption of debt, which brought the enterprise value of the original Brookfield bid to $8.8 billion.)AdvertisementQube and its partners have made a nonbinding proposal that they hope will force Asciano’s board to grant them due diligence, after which the consortium plans a formal takeover offer.AdvertisementAsciano, based in Melbourne, Australia, said Tuesday that it was unmoved. “The board continues to unanimously recommend the Brookfield proposal,” Asciano said in a statement.But the bid by Brookfield, a global asset manager based in Toronto, may not pass regulatory muster.Last month the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission expressed misgivings about the company’s acquisitions of Asciano’s business, saying it would “lead to a substantial lessening of competition in related markets for the supply of rail haulage services in Western Australia and Queensland.”Asciano owns railroads that haul iron ore, coal and grains. It also owns container terminals, dry bulk ports and a cargo-loading company.The commission noted that Asciano’s Pacific National railroad company operates on Brookfield’s rail network in Western Australia, Brookfield Rail, and transports coal to Brookfield’s coal terminal in central Queensland. Brookfield operates both assets under 35-year leases.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Market participants have raised strong concerns about Brookfield’s ability and incentive to favor Pacific National,” the commission said.The regulator is expected to rule Dec. 17 on the acquisition proposal by Brookfield’s sponsored and managed private funds and two institutional partners.Qube and its partners said their bid faced no such regulatory concerns. Global Infrastructure Partners and the Canada Pension Plan said they would acquire Asciano’s rail business, while Qube would buy Asciano’s container terminal businesses.“The consortium considers the proposed transaction uncontroversial from a competition law perspective,” Qube, Global Infrastructure Partners and the Canada Pension Plan said in a statement.AdvertisementQube and its partners acquired a 19.99 percent stake in Asciano on the open market last month in an effort to block Brookfield’s offer, which requires approval by at least 50.1 percent of Asciano’s shareholders.Brookfield said last Friday that it had acquired a 19.2 percent stake in Asciano by buying shares in the market. On Monday, Asciano postponed a shareholder vote on Brookfield’s takeover bid. No new date has been set.Australia is attracting some of the world’s largest pension and sovereign wealth funds to a government sale of infrastructure. As much as $93 billion worth of electricity, port, airport and rail assets may be sold by Australian states and the federal government, according to government documents.Citigroup, the Macquarie Group and the law firm Herbert Smith Freehills are advising Brookfield. Credit Suisse, UBS and the law firms Allens and Gilbert & Tobin are advising Qube, Global Infrastructure Partners and the Canada Pension Plan. The boutique Australian investment bank Gresham Advisory Partners, Goldman Sachs and the law firm King & Wood Mallesons are advising Asciano.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.