By REUTERSFEB. 26, 2016
LONDON — The International Airlines Group, the parent company of British Airways, forecast on Friday a rise in profit of 40 percent this year, with its chief executive saying he planned to steer the group toward further growth.I.A.G., whose portfolio also includes the airlines Aer Lingus, Iberia and Vueling, says it will benefit this year from lower fuel prices, a long-term strategy of reducing costs and growing demand for travel.But the group faces uncertainty in the form of volatile currencies, the British referendum in June on leaving the European Union and pressure on ticket prices from increased competition in Europe and on trans-Atlantic routes.Willie Walsh, the I.A.G. chief executive, said the company was well positioned to grow in spite of those headwinds. “Clearly it will be a challenging environment,” he told reporters, “but the good news is that we’re very confident in terms of our performance.”AdvertisementMr. Walsh, 54, who once said he would retire at 55, is also planning to stay to oversee that growth for at least 18 months. “I’ll still be 55 until October of 2017, until my 56th birthday, so there’s still time for me,” he told the BBC.AdvertisementThe forecast of 40 percent growth in profit this year — equivalent to more than 900 million euros, or about $992 million — represents a slower pace than the 65 percent jump in operating profit it reported for 2015 on Friday.That guidance puts it on course to post profit of €3.2 billion in 2016, slightly behind the €3.4 billion consensus forecast according to Reuters data.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The group’s stock initially spiked to its highest in more than a month in reaction to the results for 2015, before trading down 2.9 percent at 543 pence, or about $7.57, by late morning in London.Damian Brewer, an analyst at RBC Capital Markets in London, said he was confident about the group’s prospects. “We see I.A.G. having the ability to deliver” earnings per share and core earnings “without just depending on what external G.D.P. or fuel prices do,” he said.Like many European airlines, the International Airlines Group will be helped this year by an oil price which has almost halved over the past 12 months, as long-term fuel hedges fall away, allowing more of the benefits to be felt.The challenge for the company is to retain the benefits of cheaper fuel amid pressure on ticket prices from operators such as the budget carrier Ryanair.Recent falls in the value of the pound on uncertainty about the outcome of the referendum on Britain’s membership of the European Union are also a risk to the group because its major expenditure is on fuel, which is priced in dollars.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.