By ANDREW POLLACKNOV. 10, 2015
Ocata Therapeutics, a sometimes controversial pioneer in developing human embryonic stem cells, will be acquired by Astellas Pharma for about $379 million, the companies announced on Monday night.Astellas, one of the major drug companies in Japan, will make a tender offer worth $8.50 a share in cash, a 79 percent premium to Ocata’s closing price on Friday. Ocata’s shares rose 89 percent to $8.44 on Tuesday. Shareholders must still approve the deal by tendering their shares.Despite its small size, Ocata, known for most of its existence as Advanced Cell Technology, has often been in the headlines for pushing the frontiers of cloning and embryonic stem cell technology.It is arguably the most advanced company in testing medical treatments derived from human embryonic stem cells. Such cells are controversial because their creation usually involves the destruction of human embryos (though Ocata says it can avoid embryo destruction).Ocata, based in Marlborough, Mass., has reported early but encouraging results from clinical trials in which it turned embryonic stem cells into a type of retinal support cell and implanted them into the eyes of people suffering from two blinding diseases, the dry form of age-related macular degeneration and Stargardt disease.Despite the company’s pioneering efforts, much of its history has been marked by a struggle for money to stay in business and by sometimes premature announcements of achievements that were criticized as publicity stunts.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In 2001, for instance, Advanced Cell Technology claimed to have created the first human embryos produced by cloning, though other scientists disputed that, pointing out that the embryos had quickly died. The year before it made an early effort to save an endangered species by cloning.“We highly value Ocata’s R&D capabilities, including its world-leading researchers in cell therapy,” Yoshihiko Hatanaka, chief executive of Astellas, said in a statement. “We are confident we will turn innovative science into value for patients.”Paul Wotton, chief executive of Ocata, said, “I am impressed by the vision and commitment of Astellas,” adding that the Japanese company’s resources would help bring his company’s cell therapies to market.An important question is whether Dr. Robert Lanza, Ocata’s chief scientific officer and the driving force of the company, will remain after the acquisition. Dr. Lanza declined to comment.A version of this article appears in print on November 11, 2015, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Drug Maker in a Deal for Pioneer in Stem Cells.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.