AdvertisementSupported byBy Chad BrayLONDON — The Royal Bank of Scotland reported on Friday a multibillion-dollar loss in the fourth quarter that was worse than analyst expectations, driven by 2.21 billion pounds, or about $3 billion, in additional provisions for legal and regulatory matters.R.B.S., which is based in Edinburgh, is in the middle of a large restructuring as it shifts away from being a lender with global ambitions to focus on retail and corporate banking in Britain and Ireland. The lender announced plans last year to dismantle its global investment bank and to reduce the number of countries where it operates.For the three months ended Dec. 31, the bank reported a loss of £2.74 billion, compared with a loss of £5.79 billion in the fourth quarter of 2014.For the full year, it reported a loss of £1.98 billion, compared with a loss of £3.47 billion in 2014. The full-year results included restructuring costs of £2.93 billion.The results sent R.B.S. stock down as much as 11 percent in early trading in London.The bank, which warned in January that it would report a loss in 2015, has not posted a full-year profit since 2007.The British government currently has a stake of about 73 percent in R.B.S., after a £45 billion bailout during the financial crisis. It started winding down its stake last year, raising about £2.1 billion in its first sale of shares it held in the bank in August.The fourth quarter included a provision of £1.5 billion for mortgage-backed securities litigation in the United States and £500 million for charges related to payment protection insurance, which was sold to customers taking out mortgages, applying for credit cards or seeking other loans.Improper selling of payment protection insurance cost British banks billions of dollars, as they were ordered to compensate customers who filed complaints. Including the latest charge, the bank has set aside about £4.3 billion to cover customer redress related to the insurance.On a conference call with reporters, Ross McEwan, the R.B.S. chief executive, said the lender’s efforts to address prior misconduct and to restructure the bank had produced financial results that were “noisier than any of us would’ve liked, but it has resulted in a much stronger and simpler bank.”“There are clearly big conduct challenges we still face,” Mr. McEwan said. “I look forward to the day when we can put these issues behind us.”Ewan Stevenson, chief financial officer of R.B.S., warned on Friday, however, that the bank expected “further substantial conduct costs to come.”The lender faces lawsuits and separate investigations by the United States Justice Department and several state attorneys general over its sale of the securities. None of the provisions taken in the fourth quarter related to potential resolutions of those inquiries.Investors are eagerly awaiting guidance from management about when higher short-term interest rates will impact the banks’ bottom lines.The bank said that its bonus pool for 2015 fell 11 percent to £373 million, and that its average bonus was “relatively modest,” with 52 percent of employees receiving £2,000 or less.“While the bonus pool has been coming down year on year, including a further reduction in 2015, it is important that R.B.S. does not become too disconnected from industry norms,” Sandy Crombie, the chairman of the bank’s performance and remuneration committee, said in its annual report.Mr. McEwan did not receive a bonus for 2015, but his overall pay doubled, to £3.79 million, compared with £1.82 million for 2014. His pay for 2015 included the vesting of £1.35 million in long-term incentive awards he was granted in March 2013, when he was in charge of the lender’s retail banking business in Britain.Mr. McEwan also received 159,393 shares as part of his fixed-share allowance for 2015, which he plans to transfer to charity after they vest, the bank said.On an adjusted basis that strips out litigation and other costs, the bank reported an operating profit of £4.41 billion for the full year, down from an operating profit of £6.06 billion in 2014.Net interest income, the measure of what a bank earns on its lending after deducting what it pays out on deposits and other liabilities, declined 9 percent to £2.16 billion in the fourth quarter, from £2.38 billion in the same period last year.Operating expenses rose 33 percent to £5.76 billion in the quarter, from £4.32 billion in the fourth quarter of 2014.Advertisement