By CHAD BRAYFEB. 26, 2016
LONDON — The London Stock Exchange Group and Deutsche Börse, which announced this week that they were in merger talks, said on Friday that the combined company would most likely be based in London and be led by the German exchange’s top executive.The all-stock deal would unite two of the biggest European exchange operators and create a new giant in an industry that has rapidly consolidated. The companies announced on Tuesday that they were in discussions regarding a “merger of equals.”The transaction would also allow London, which has served as a financial gateway to Europe, to maintain economic ties to the Continent, even as Britons are set to vote in June on whether to leave the European Union.On Friday, the companies said any potential merger would not be conditioned on the outcome of the June 23 referendum, but a decision by Britain to leave the European Union could “well affect the volume or nature of the business conducted in the different financial centers served by the combined group.”AdvertisementThe talks came four years after Deutsche Börse dropped plans to merge with the parent of the New York Stock Exchange after European antitrust regulators threatened to block the deal. It is also the third time since 2000 that the London Stock Exchange and Deutsche Börse have considered a tie-up.AdvertisementUnder the terms of the proposed merger disclosed on Tuesday, shareholders in the London Stock Exchange would receive 0.4421 of a new share in the combined company for every share of the London Stock Exchange they own. Their counterparts at Deutsche Börse would receive one share of the new company for each of their shares, giving them a 54.4 percent stake in the united market operator.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Under the deal being contemplated, the combined company would be based in Britain and maintain headquarters in London and Frankfurt, the home of the Deutsche Börse. It would list its stock in London and Frankfurt.Carsten Kengeter, the Deutsche Börse chief executive, would serve as the chief executive of the combined company, and Donald Brydon, the London Stock Exchange chairman, would be its chairman. The combined company’s board of directors would have equal representation from both exchanges.Xavier Rolet would step down from his role as chief executive of the London Stock Exchange.“Xavier has been the architect of L.S.E.G.’s considerable value creation and has offered to retire in order to ensure the successful creation of the new group,” Mr. Brydon said on Friday. The company’s board of directors “is indebted to Xavier for this action which is consistent with his focus on putting the interests of shareholders and clients first.”The companies said they had “initiated discussions” about a potential merger with their primary regulators, as well as the governments of Britain, France, Germany and Italy. The London Stock Exchange Group also operates the Borsa Italiana in Milan.“The parties are proceeding on the basis that existing regulatory and political structures remain in place,” the companies said.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.