AdvertisementSupported byBy Keith BradsherSHANGHAI — For the second time since last summer, an avuncular, graying man has stepped out of Beijing’s shadows and calmed financial markets after a Chinese devaluation — but once again, his assurances came after nearly a month of turmoil and growing worry about the country’s economic health.Mixing folksy charm with deft explanations of economic thought, Zhou Xiaochuan, the governor of China’s central bank, held a rare news conference in Shanghai on Friday morning, as finance officials from around the world gathered for the Group of 20 major economies meeting. Mr. Zhou acknowledged worries about spiraling debt at Chinese corporations and local governments but offered reasons why the Chinese economy might be uniquely able to deal with it for the time being.He also dismissed American hedge funds’ concerns about the erosion of China’s foreign exchange reserves and assured the audience that China did not plan to further devalue its currency to increase its already formidable export prowess.China’s supply of foreign exchange reserves “is not an oil field with a static stock of oil. It is like water in a reservoir, so there are constant flows in and flows out,” he said.Following Mr. Zhou’s remarks, the Shanghai stock market rebounded 1 percent on Friday, on the heels of a 6.4 percent plunge on Thursday. The value of the renminbi also steadied on Friday in largely unregulated trading in Hong Kong, although it still dipped slightly against the dollar for the day.What Mr. Zhou did not do on Friday, however, was provide any indication of when he might next offer an explanation of Chinese monetary policy. He also did not announce any plans for the People’s Bank of China to follow other leading central banks — like the Federal Reserve, the European Central Bank and the Bank of Japan — in holding regular news briefings after important policy decisions.“It is very clear that he still does not want to talk too much about policy; he wants to leave it a bit uncertain,” said Zhou Hao, the Asia economist for Commerzbank, who is not related to Zhou Xiaochuan. “From China’s perspective, if it’s too transparent, then people will expect too much of you.”China’s economy is faltering, prompting concerns that are now shaking global stock markets.In contrast with the central banks of other major economies, China’s central bank is to some extent an advisory body instead of an independent, decision-making institution. The final say on major economic decisions, like interest rate moves or devaluations, belongs to the country’s political leadership.Regular statements from the People’s Bank of China could limit those leaders’ ability to pivot quickly on policy. But quick changes — including a 4 percent devaluation of China’s currency against the dollar in early August, and a gradual devaluation in late December and early January — have led to global bouts of market turmoil.On both occasions, Mr. Zhou said fairly little until the next meeting of the Group of 20 finance ministers and central bank governors a month later. The last ministerial meeting was in September in Ankara, Turkey; China holds the group’s presidency this year and chose Shanghai for the gathering on Friday night and Saturday.The secrecy of the central bank was not a problem for Chinese policy makers as long as they maintained strict regulation of money moving in and out of the country. But Mr. Zhou has dismantled many of those controls over the past two years as part of a successful move to increase international use of the renminbi and to win the International Monetary Fund’s approval of it in November as a reserve currency. That has left interest rates, stock prices and money flows in China much more exposed to international sentiment about the country’s economic prospects.United States Treasury Secretary Jacob J. Lew added his voice late Friday afternoon to those calling for China to explain policy changes.“The exchange rate policy is one in particular that needs to be clearly communicated, and it’s important that as they make their transitions, that they do it in an orderly way,” he told a small group of reporters in Shanghai before a meeting with other finance ministers.Although Mr. Zhou spoke for more than an hour at his news conference on Friday morning in a large, tastefully decorated hall on the fourth floor of the central bank’s Shanghai branch office, he said virtually nothing that would limit the political leadership’s options. He did not, for instance, categorically rule out another decline in the renminbi at some point against the dollar.When one question suggested the renminbi was pegged to a basket of other currencies, Mr. Zhou quickly objected. He said instead that the value of the renminbi would be set “with reference” to a basket of other currencies — essentially a weighted average. He preserved even more flexibility for China’s leadership by emphasizing that the renminbi would not be measured against just one basket, but against several.As the economy stumbles, individuals and companies are pulling money out of China en masse, leaving the government scrambling to limit the outflows.Mr. Zhou decisively ruled out a depreciation for the purpose of trade advantage, but did not address whether the currency might someday rise or fall for other reasons.“We will not resort to competitive depreciation so as to boost our advantage in exports,” he said.Mr. Zhou hinted at another Chinese policy effort to strengthen economic growth when he talked about there being room for banks to lend more money for mortgages. Although companies and local governments are heavily in debt, Chinese households generally are not, he noted.The People’s Bank of China recently cut the regulatory minimum for down payments on mortgages to 20 percent of a home’s value, from 30 percent.Mr. Zhou also offered explanations why foreign investors were wrong to worry about China’s rising overall levels of credit, relative to economic output. China has a far higher savings rate than most other economies, so banks have a lot in deposits to lend, he said.China’s stock markets are somewhat small, compared with the size of its economy, forcing companies that need money to rely more on bank loans and bonds, he added. And because China was poor until very recently, many families have not had enough time to accumulate the wealth to start businesses just with their own savings.“If you don’t have a lot of accumulation,” he said, “you have to borrow.”Follow Keith Bradsher on Twitter @KeithBradsher.Owen Guo contributed research.Advertisement