AdvertisementSupported byBy Leslie PickerActivist investors may be on the rise and takeover efforts may have become more aggressive, but Warren E. Buffett is committed to a strategy he has pursued for the better part of 51 years.“We go only where we are welcome,” Mr. Buffett wrote in his annual letter to shareholders on Saturday.Mr. Buffett, who buys stakes in publicly traded companies as well as whole companies outright, reiterated in his letter that his company, Berkshire Hathaway, would not engage in unfriendly takeovers.“To be sure, certain hostile offers are justified: Some C.E.O.s forget that it is shareholders for whom they should be working, while other managers are woefully inept,” the billionaire investor wrote. “We, though, will leave these ‘opportunities’ for others.”Activist investors have gained steam in recent years, with hundreds of billions of dollars being funneled into funds that focus on acquiring stakes in companies to agitate for change. These investors often publicly push for steps like stock buybacks, management reshuffling and even the sale or spinoff of a company — events that they believe will increase shareholder value.But rather than criticizing the leaders of what he calls his “Big Four” investments — American Express, Coca-Cola, IBM and Wells Fargo — Mr. Buffett said those companies were “run by managers who are both talented and shareholder-oriented.”Mr. Buffett said he preferred to own a sizable stake in a “wonderful” company than the entirety of a so-so company. “It’s better to have a partial interest in the Hope Diamond than to own all of a rhinestone,” he wrote.When it comes to acquisitions of whole companies, Mr. Buffett tends to use a similarly passive approach. He explained in the letter how he makes acquisitions only where the managers are already avoiding bloat.That contrasts with a deal partner, the Brazilian investment firm 3G Capital, which eliminates costs immediately after buying a company, he said.Berkshire Hathaway is an amalgamation of businesses, including daily newspapers, car dealerships and ice cream stores. Conglomerates have become prime targets of activists, who have sought to break up large companies into smaller, more focused businesses.Mr. Buffett defended his hands-off, buy-and-hold style, however, recalling a line from Berkshire Hathaway’s 92-year-old vice chairman, Charlie Munger.“If you want to guarantee yourself a lifetime of misery,” he wrote, “be sure to marry someone with the intent of changing their behavior.”Advertisement