AdvertisementSupported byAdvertisingBy Zach SchonbrunFor almost two years, the United States Soccer Federation fiddled with the redesign of its most conspicuous symbol: the red, white and blue crest adorning the jerseys of the men’s and women’s national teams.But when it finally came time to unveil the new crest, the federation, the national governing body for soccer, elected to largely bypass the traditional news media. Its announcement on Monday will instead be delivered directly to fans via a more immersive experience — one that involves Google Cardboard, a virtual reality promotional video and a United States Soccer Federation scarf.The federation is hoping that this unorthodox approach will help draw more attention to its first major rebranding since 1995. It could also become a case study of sorts on the effectiveness of virtual reality as an advertising and marketing tool, particularly for sports leagues that are experimenting with different avenues to connect with fans.“This is an area that I think is still in a really unique phase,” said Jay Berhalter, U.S. Soccer’s chief commercial officer. “We’re not really sure what it will end up being. But when we looked at it to launch the new crest, we thought it would be a really good fit for this type of dynamic.”U.S. Soccer planned to surreptitiously deliver packages containing the gifts Monday morning to the doorsteps of about 8,000 registered club supporters as well as an additional 2,000 development academy players and other soccer fans across the country. The official unveiling will be later in the day.Shel Holtz, a public relations consultant and principal of the firm Holtz Communication & Technology, said that by doing something unusual, U.S. Soccer might be able to get away with bypassing the normal P.R. route. He likened it to Ford’s effective use of Facebook to unveil its new Explorer model in 2011.“There’s a lot of content these days, a lot of noise,” Mr. Holtz said. “But as long as you can be early with some of the new technology people are talking about, then you have an edge.”The approach also echoes what rugby did in the days leading to its World Cup in September, when New Zealand’s national team, in collaboration with American International Group, created a virtual reality experience that it gave away to 1,000 fans. Joe Favorito, an instructor in strategic communications at Columbia University who consulted on the project, said that effort significantly helped raise awareness of the event.“You want people to get genuinely excited about something, and you want to do it in an atmosphere that they can embrace,” Mr. Favorito said. “Sometimes the best way to do it is literally to drop it on their doorstep.”He says sports entities have used guerrilla marketing tactics in the past — the Los Angeles Galaxy, for instance, mailed packages with branded goods such as sunscreen to fans — but virtual reality adds another layer.And the experimentation is not limited to sports. The North Face recently gave visitors to its store in a South Korean mall a virtual dogsled ride through the South Pole using Oculus Rift headsets, followed by an actual ride through the mall, pulled by real huskies. The Savannah College of Art and Design mailed cardboard headsets to 5,000 prospective students to help them envision life on campus. When Volvo tried virtual reality for the debut of its redesigned XC90 S.U.V. last winter, however, it made a splash, but left some viewers unpersuaded.Mike Gressle, U.S. Soccer’s director of marketing, said that the organization considered the demographics of its fan base before choosing virtual reality.“Our fans are pretty early adopters to technology,” Mr. Gressle said. “Given that this is the next new thing, we think they’ll be pretty interested in it.”The rebranding effort is centered on the crest. Crests are like logos for soccer federations, and they are treated reverentially by soccer enthusiasts. The old mark — which included a flying soccer ball at its center, a rippled top, and six blue stripes below a red field — was ridiculed as dated and cartoonish. The new one is not unveiled until the end of a two-minute virtual reality highlight reel, which was shot by StriVR and contains 360-degree video from the most recent men’s national team game and the women’s World Cup.Mr. Berhalter said the rebranding and unveiling added up to one of the costliest marketing efforts in the federation’s 102-year history — reaching seven figures and far outpacing a standard news conference unveiling that might cost around $30,000.“We kept on coming back to the notion that the press conference isn’t really something that drives the fan experience,” he said. “Therefore we’ve moved away from that to something that is more immersive and interacting and experiential for the fan.”(Of course, the federation also reached out to The New York Times in hopes of publicizing the new crest through a more traditional avenue.)The soccer federation enlisted Nike, its sponsor since 1995, to help formulate the look of the new crest. The process began in the fall of 2014 and involved several hundred iterations.The new look is more streamlined, featuring a squared upper limit and 13 vertical stripes (seven red and six white) below a dark blue field containing the block letters U.S.A. The design evokes U.S. Soccer’s original crest from 1913, yet, according to Mr. Berhalter, it conveys an identity that is more modern, aggressive and patriotic.In the days leading up to the unveiling of the new logo, U.S. Soccer scrubbed the previous logo from its website, social media and even the doors of its headquarters in Chicago.First to go from the older crest were its three stars, said Garret Drexler, U.S. Soccer’s fan services manager. Stars traditionally signify World Cups won by that nation, and the United States men’s team has won none (the crest for the women’s team, which has won its World Cup three times, will keep its stars).“I think there’s been a pretty good segment of our fans that have long hoped for an updated identity,” Mr. Drexler said. He added: “Our crest means a lot to our fans. To change it is no small thing. We took a lot of time to make sure we got it right.”Advertisement