
NOV. 12, 2015

As The Times seeks its first David Carr Fellow,
six journalists remember his most important lessons.
David Carr, one of the most important voices in journalism, nurtured countless journalists throughout their careers. As we continue our search for our first David Carr Fellow, we have been reminded how much David continues to inspire younger journalists. We asked a few of those journalists, and David’s daughter, the documentary filmmaker Erin Lee Carr, to share a lesson David taught them. We hope you will consider joining us at The New York Times for the two-year fellowship, which is open to journalists pursuing any field of interest. The application deadline has been extended to Dec. 1. The fellowship begins in early 2016. “David Carr was my friend, my brother at arms and my teacher. He was, quite simply, the greatest journalistic influence on my life and the greatest teacher of the craft that I’ve ever known. His wisdom was vast. But in matters of journalism, I think it can be distilled into his own pithy words – ‘Tell stories.’ Storyteller. That was David. That is all we are all trying to be.”Twitter: @tanehisicoates “David was always asking me what else I could do besides write. ‘Remember as you go along on your way to be working on all platforms,’ he wrote to me in 2008. He told me that journalists needed to be good at video and text, news and commentary. That summer, he told me to start a blog. Develop your web skills, he said, develop a voice. I can trace my entire career to that blog I started in 2009.”Twitter: @melbournecoal“Do the work. No matter how many followers you have, or people congratulating you on Twitter – what do you have to show for it? Your last byline doesn’t matter. What’s the next? Always have something better in the works.”Twitter: @jennydeluxe “David taught me to be exceedingly fair and polite, to never set out to make enemies, but he also tried to give me the confidence to upset the status quo, if that’s where the reporting took me. ‘You have to break some eggs to make an omelet,’ David would say.”Twitter: @amychozick “Of the many things I learned from David Carr, his relentless pursuit of truth and accuracy and the humility with which he approached his position as someone charged with informing the public are the most enduring. The former was a product of the latter. Carr – almost none of us called him David – was quite simply the most consistently and unsparingly honest journalist I’ve ever known. Twenty years after he hired me as an intern, my inner editor and fact-checker still speaks to me in his indelible rasp.”Twitter: @jelani9 “Sometimes I would take notes when we spoke. I looked into my notebook from a year ago and it said ‘ask questions but ask the right questions.’ ” Twitter: @erinleecarr The New York Times is sponsoring a fellowship that will bring an outside journalist to The Times to pursue the kind of work that made Mr. Carr’s career so exceptional.The online home of the “Media Equation” columns by David Carr, which focused on the intersection of media and technology.Mr. Carr, a shrewd and well-informed skeptic, wriggled away from the demon of drug addiction to become an unlikely name-brand media columnist at The New York Times.AdvertisementThe New York Times is sponsoring a fellowship that will bring an outside journalist to The Times to pursue the kind of work that made Mr. Carr’s career so exceptional.The online home of the “Media Equation” columns by David Carr, which focused on the intersection of media and technology.Mr. Carr, a shrewd and well-informed skeptic, wriggled away from the demon of drug addiction to become an unlikely name-brand media columnist at The New York Times.