AdvertisementSupported byPrototypeBy Claire MartinTwo summers ago, Jack Bonneau started a lemonade stand to earn some cash. Instead of setting it up on a street corner in his Broomfield, Colo., neighborhood, he and his father, Steve, came up with a more ambitious plan. Jack, then 8, would peddle cups of lemonade at the local farmers’ market throughout the summer.The strategy was a success.“I had sales of around $2,000, and my total profit was $900,” Jack said, adding that the experience increased his confidence in school. He also enjoyed learning “financial literacy,” by which he meant “adding and subtracting, and profit and loss, and subtracting expenses from revenue, and just learning about margins, and all of that stuff.”By the next spring, the Bonneaus had named the operation Jack’s Stands and devised an expansion plan. They built a website and additional stands and began selling lemonade at three more farmers’ markets.They used funds from a $5,000 loan that Jack’s Stands secured from Young Americans Bank, a Denver bank that specializes in loans to children. The loan was guaranteed by the bank’s companion organization, the nonprofit Young Americans Center for Financial Education.The Bonneaus also recruited a sales team. Other children eager to earn a buck, and whose parents saw this as a good learning opportunity, volunteered for shifts at Jack’s Stands.Jack was excited to teach other children what he had learned. He taught them how to operate the stand, and at the end of each shift, he showed them how to count money and calculate profits and losses. The children, ranging in age from 7 to 11, walked away with tips and a cut of the profits, usually $30 to $50.Jack, now 10, is among thousands of children in the Denver area who have enrolled in courses at the Young Americans Center for Financial Education or have taken out loans from Young Americans Bank. The center teaches financial literacy and personal finance to people ages 6 to 21. It also runs entrepreneurship programs at 420 schools in Colorado and runs a summer camp for children in second through sixth grade.When he was 6, Jack got his first account at the bank, which offers checking and savings accounts, certificates of deposit, lines of credit, credit cards and business loans to people 21 and under. It charges low service fees.Earning money was Jack’s initial motivation for the stand because he longed for a $400 Lego Star Wars Death Star set that his father insisted he pay for himself. But there was an important nonfinancial perk to the project, too: “It was really fun,” Jack said.From the start, Steve Bonneau wanted the lemonade stand to be a learning experience for Jack. Mr. Bonneau is a former nuclear engineer who has been an entrepreneur for more than 20 years. His current company, Buybak, buys and resells used consumer goods.“We wanted to make sure that Jack wasn’t getting out the Country Time Lemonade, using cups we already had in our kitchen and ice from the refrigerator,” Mr. Bonneau said. “And then at the end of the day, whatever was sold was his profits, without taking out any expenses or learning the other side of it.”Early on, Mr. Bonneau taught his son business basics. Now that Jack is in fifth grade and studies seventh-grade math, the lessons are more advanced. Mr. Bonneau said he guided Jack through wholesale pricing, applying for a sales tax license and establishing business relationships.“It’s a collaborative effort,” Mr. Bonneau said of Jack’s Stands, acknowledging that his son’s age and the complexity of the business means there are things Jack is not yet capable of doing. These range from carrying and assembling the 40-pound wooden lemonade stands to solving business challenges like finding organic, locally made lemonade or meeting the requirements of new farmers’ markets they work with.In 2015, sales for the business were $25,000. This year, it plans to add several new stands in the Denver metro area, and one in Detroit; this expansion will be financed by a crowdfunding campaign.Another successful business affiliated with the Young Americans Center for Financial Education and Young Americans Bank is Sweet Bee Sisters, a lip balm and lotion company founded in 2009 by Lily, Chloe and Sophie Warren, now ages 15, 13 and 11. Their products are sold online and in 15 stores in Denver, as well as at farmers’ markets and through representatives who make sales calls at large companies during the holidays.A priority for the Warrens is to encourage and mentor other children. “Whether it’s business or sports, or whatever kids want to pursue, they can totally do it,” Lily Warren said.So when Jack approached them a year ago to ask if he could carry their products at his lemonade stands, they agreed. They felt that his business ethos was similar to theirs, Ms. Warren said. When he showed or sold their products to other children, his message was: “‘Hey, I’m not the only kid out here doing this. You definitely can join this bandwagon,’ ” she said.The bandwagon gained more momentum last winter when Jack set up two new stands in a crafts marketplace at a Littleton, Colo., shopping mall. One is a stand that sells apple cider and hot chocolate instead of lemonade, and the other, called Jack’s Marketplace, features products made by other children.Sweet Bee Sisters and about eight other child-run businesses sold their wares at the marketplace stand during the holiday season. Two girls who started out selling apple cider and hot chocolate quickly caught the entrepreneurial bug and began making their own products — scarves, headbands and decorated picture frames and magnets — and selling them at Jack’s Marketplace.Very young business owners have the advantage of abundant curiosity and resilience, traits coveted by older entrepreneurs. They’re also “young, ambitious, adorable,” said Maura McInerney, program coordinator for the Young Americans Center for Financial Education. But their youth can be a liability. “They’re not always taken seriously at first,” she said.That hasn’t been a problem for the entrepreneurs at the Jack’s Marketplace stand in the shopping mall. According to Lisa Roina, who owns the company that runs the mall’s crafts marketplace, the children not only appear to have fun selling their products, they are good at it.On weekdays and other times when the children aren’t able to work at the stand, she sends in a rotating cast of adults. But when the children return to operate the stand themselves, sales quadruple, Ms. Roina said.“They can sell the heck out of their stuff,” she said.Advertisement