AdvertisementSupported byBy John KoblinIt all began to unravel for Melissa Harris-Perry four weeks ago.It was a day before the Iowa caucuses, and despite being in Des Moines, she was not hosting the weekend show on MSNBC that bears her name. That privilege belonged to the network’s legal correspondent, Ari Melber, who quickly introduced her in a split-screen at the beginning of the show.“It’s a very exciting day here in the ‘Place for Politics,’ ” he said, referring to MSNBC’s slogan. “We are going to get to Melissa, who everyone can see there live in Iowa, in just a second.”Ms. Harris-Perry vanished from the screen and Mr. Melber added, “That’s what we call proof of life.”Mr. Melber was joking but the phrasing turned out to be eerily prescient when it came to how Ms. Harris-Perry felt she was treated by the network in the following weeks.Two days after an email became public in which Ms. Harris-Perry said she felt “worthless” to NBC News executives, and after two weeks of her show being pre-empted so that the network could cover other news, an MSNBC spokesman on Sunday confirmed that the network and Ms. Harris-Perry were “parting ways.”Ms. Harris-Perry said in an email on Sunday that she was not in direct communication with anyone at the network but that “terms of severance, not reconciliation” were still being negotiated.Ms. Harris-Perry also posted a message on Twitter that said, “Inviting diverse new voices to table was a privilege. Grateful for years of support & criticism.”Even by the occasionally dramatic standards of television news, this was an unusually messy breakup. In an interview with The New York Times on Friday, Ms. Harris-Perry said that she was frustrated that MSNBC had effectively sidelined her.MSNBC, which significantly trails Fox News and CNN in ratings, is in the midst of an overhaul, pivoting away from its left-leaning identity toward hard news in the daytime hours. Ms. Harris-Perry had been the host of her show, which focused on issues like racism and social justice, since 2012.On Friday, she went public with an email that she sent earlier that week to staff members in which she complained that the NBC News chairman, Andrew Lack, and Phil Griffin, the president of MSNBC, were letting her twist in the wind.“I will not be used as a tool for their purposes,” she wrote. “I am not a token, mammy, or little brown bobble head. I am not owned by Lack, Griffin, or MSNBC. I love our show. I want it back.”She later explained in an interview she did not believe that her lack of airtime was because she was black.When she was in Des Moines and Mr. Melber was hosting from New York, Ms. Harris-Perry said she felt “like a guest” on her show. It was the first bad sign for what she would call a “painful” four-week stretch. She wanted to host the show from Iowa, and other primary states, but she was told by network executives that there were “insufficient resources” to allow that to happen, she said.The following week, on Super Bowl Sunday, she said she planned to discuss Beyoncé’s new video, “Formation,” and how it addresses race, but was encouraged to focus on the election instead. She wound up discussing the video anyway but as she did, video of Jeb Bush and Chris Christie rallies in New Hampshire appeared in a box, a notable juxtaposition for a network that is now emphasizing round-the-clock election coverage.It was the last time she would appear on MSNBC. Her show was pre-empted each of the next two weeks. “The branding was taken, editorial control was taken and I was no longer invited to host the show,” she said in the interview on Friday.The MSNBC spokesman explained that there have been pre-emptions because of news coverage across the network as it focuses on the election. Since the beginning of the year, the network has had strong ratings gains in the daytime hours.Ms. Harris-Perry, who is also a professor at Wake Forest University, said on Friday that she had not been given clarification on whether her show would continue but an MSNBC executive who spoke on the condition of anonymity said that she was told several times that “Melissa Harris-Perry” had not been canceled. It was only after her email became public, the executive said, that a breakup was inevitable. News that MSNBC was officially ending its relationship with Ms. Harris-Perry was first reported by The Washington Post.On Twitter, the former attorney general, Eric Holder Jr., called the move of Ms. Harris-Perry being dropped from MSNBC “a real loss.” He added, “She brought to television voices/perspectives too often unheard/ignored. Truth was her guide.”Jamil Smith, a former segment producer for the show who is now a correspondent for MTV, said that Ms. Harris-Perry’s program championed diversity, and that she invited people onto the show who otherwise had “no shot at getting on cable news.”“Right now in the cable news universe, you still don’t regularly see the diverse panels and conversations ‘Melissa Harris-Perry’ was having,” Mr. Smith wrote in an email. (Mr. Smith was also the person who posted Ms. Harris-Perry’s email to her staff on the website Medium on Friday, after she gave him permission to publish it.)Before the email became public, Ms. Harris-Perry was invited to come back on the air over the weekend. But in her email to colleagues last week, she said she wasn’t going to return.“While MSNBC may believe that I am worthless, I know better,” she wrote. “I know who I am. I know why M.H.P. Show is unique and valuable. I will not sell short myself or this show. I am not hungry for empty airtime. I care only about substantive, meaningful, and autonomous work. When we can do that, I will return — not a moment earlier.”Advertisement