AdvertisementSupported byBy Andrew PollackJ. Michael Pearson has returned as the chief executive of Valeant Pharmaceuticals International after two months of medical leave, vowing to improve the embattled company’s relationships and restore investor confidence.Valeant announced Sunday evening that Mr. Pearson had returned, effective immediately. Howard B. Schiller, who had been the interim chief executive in Mr. Pearson’s absence, will step down as a company executive but remain a member of the board.Mr. Pearson, however, will not return to his previous role as chairman. That post will go to Robert A. Ingram, who has been interim chairman. Separating the roles of chairman and chief executive is considered good corporate governance by many investors.Valeant also announced that “given the timing of Mr. Pearson’s return,” the company would postpone releasing its preliminary earnings for the fourth quarter, canceling a conference call it had scheduled for Monday. The company said it would provide that information and financial guidance for 2016 in the “near term,” but for now was withdrawing its previous financial guidance.Mr. Pearson, 56, was rushed to the hospital on Dec. 24, suffering from what the company later described as severe pneumonia. Mr. Pearson said in a letter to employees in late January that some “unexpected complications resulted in a longer hospital stay than anticipated.”His temporary departure from the company came after a rocky few months during which Valeant’s once high-flying stock lost two-thirds of its value as questions arose about the exorbitant price increases on many of its drugs, its once-secret relationship with a mail-order pharmacy, its sometimes opaque accounting practices and its ability to pay off its more than $30 billion in debt.“I realize that recent events are disappointing to everyone, and it is my responsibility to set the appropriate tone for the organization,” Mr. Pearson said in a statement on Sunday. “My immediate priority will be to build stronger relationships with important constituents, such as managed care and other channel partners, regulators and government representatives, while improving Valeant’s reporting procedures, internal controls and transparency.”He added that he would “ensure that we maintain a culture that adheres to the highest ethical standards.”Mr. Pearson’s return will probably elicit a range of reactions, though on balance it will probably be positive because many investors regard him as the hard-driving architect of Valeant’s business model and rapid growth.Instead of doing much of its own research, which Mr. Pearson regarded as overly risky, Valeant acquired dozens of other companies, dismissing most of their workers and keeping the drug lines.In some cases, it increased prices — sometimes by several hundred percent — in some older drugs after acquiring them. It also used a mail-order pharmacy with which it had a financial relationship to help circumvent efforts of pharmacies and insurance companies to substitute cheaper generic alternatives for some of Valeant’s high-priced products.But many of those practices came under intense scrutiny starting in September, amid rising public concern over drug prices. Valeant said federal prosecutors were investigating its drug pricing and distribution practices and it has been called before Congress, which is also looking at the matter.The company severed ties to the mail-order pharmacy, Philidor Rx Services, and entered into a new arrangement with Walgreens. It has said it would devote much of its cash flow this year to paying down its debt, rather than making acquisitions.That will mean more reliance on increasing sales of existing drugs. The company said Sunday that a division of the drug maker Allergan had filed to introduce a generic version of the gastrointestinal drug Xifaxan, Valeant’s biggest seller. Allergan will have to overcome numerous patents Valeant says protect Xifaxan, and some analysts said they did not see an immediate threat.Mr. Ingram, the chairman, said in the latest release that he hoped that a board committee reviewing the Philidor relationship would finish its work soon. The company said last week that it anticipated having to restate a small amount of some past earnings in response to those findings.Mr. Ingram also said that in light of Mr. Pearson’s illness, succession planning would become a priority for the board.Advertisement