AdvertisementSupported byBy Reed AbelsonAn H.M.O. by any other name is still an H.M.O.Once emblematic of everything wrong with health insurance, the health maintenance organization is making a grudging, if somewhat successful, comeback.But its reputation for skimping on care has so tainted the plans that the insurers and companies resurrecting them have gone through innumerable steps to try to avoid using the term H.M.O. — only to be told, at least in one case by state regulators, that an H.M.O. must still be called an H.M.O.That’s because its defining feature is the restriction placed over which doctor or hospital a patient can use, which was a primary reason so many floundered in the 1990s. Doctors and patients complained about their lack of choices. Critics also accused the plans of denying patients tests and procedures to save money, and many plans were seen as offering low-quality care.Despite the stigma and many failed efforts, insurers say they are eager to push a revamped version that revives many of the same features that restrict choices as a way of lowering costs. Insurers are already promoting H.M.O.s on the state exchanges created under the federal health law, and many are trying to persuade more companies and their employees to sign up.“We’re starting to see the resurgence of interest,” said Steve Hamman, a senior executive at the Health Care Service Corporation, which operates several nonprofit Blue Cross plans, including one in Illinois.In October, Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Illinois teamed with the state’s largest health system, Advocate Health Care, to offer a new H.M.O, BlueCare Direct, to individuals and small businesses buying coverage on the state exchange. The new plan is the least expensive one offered by Blue Cross on the exchange, and Advocate Health says it attracted 60,000 customers.But a close look at Blue Cross of Illinois’s experience shows just how complicated a comeback will be. While Blue Cross has had successful H.M.O. plans for decades, the overall enrollment in the plans offered to employees has not budged from around 700,000 members over the last several years, out of 4.6 million signed up for employer-based coverage.Some of the best-known H.M.O.s, like Kaiser Permanente, have their own doctors and hospitals. But insurers like Blue Cross will contract with a network of providers to form an H.M.O. or E.P.O., an exclusive provider organization, which also limits coverage to a specific network. Insurers use the same approach with so-called narrow network plans, which either limit coverage to a narrow set of hospitals or doctors or make it much more expensive to see an outside provider.The lines have blurred; some plans promise to coordinate care and others focus on getting the best prices from a smaller group of doctors and hospitals. Large health systems and insurers are also offering A.C.O.s, or accountable care organizations, which operate much like H.M.O.s.“What’s interesting to me is the new types of health systems and plans that are being rolled out are seemingly nothing more than H.M.O.s on steroids,” said Larry Boress, the chief executive of the Midwest Business Group on Health, which represents employers. “We’re clearly seeing an interest among employers.”The most visible sign of the H.M.O.’s return has been in the state exchanges created under the federal health care law. According to the McKinsey Center for U.S. Health System Reform, 43 percent of the midprice plans being offered are H.M.O.s; another 13 percent are categorized as E.P.O.s. Insurers are turning to these models as a way of offering less expensive plans to price-conscious shoppers.But there is still considerable resistance. Some consumers were outraged when their only choice on a state exchange was a version of an H.M.O.“I went into shock,” said Ramon Cinco, a Houston area schoolteacher who carefully selected a policy the year before that provided his family with a wide choice of doctors and hospitals. ”I want to go to a good doctor and a good hospital,” he said. “I want to take my child to Texas Children’s.”In Illinois, Blue Cross received much the same outcry when it dropped its broad traditional plan in the exchange for 2016 coverage in favor of H.M.O.s and narrow-network plans. People “would like access to their name-brand, high-cost academical medical centers,” said Mr. Hamman.The Advocate H.M.O. solves some of that problem because the system, even before its proposed merger with NorthShore University HealthSystem, has a broad array of services, including its own children’s hospitals. “Our network really covers everything from transplants down to primary care,” said Dr. Lee Sacks, the chief medical officer for Advocate.But employers, particularly large companies, remain wary. “A lot of employers don’t feel comfortable limiting their employees’ options,” said Paula Wade, an analyst at Decision Resources Group, which tracks different types of plans. “They’re going to be very reluctant to put them in a network that seems to be too limited or limited in the wrong ways.”Even Blue Cross of Illinois and Advocate were reluctant to call their plan an H.M.O., but state regulators insisted. “We call it a high-performing network,” said Dr. Sacks. “It was a term we stole from a consultant a year ago to kind of get away from the negative connotations of narrow network.”Mr. Hamman said some thought had even been given to lobbying state lawmakers to change the name to something along the lines of H.I.O., with the middle initial standing for improvement. “We’re not trying to trick anybody,” he said. “We’re just conscious of the historic bad name that H.M.O. has had. We firmly believe that it is very different today.”A main selling point for employers has been the cost, said David C. Cook, the executive director of the Intergovernmental Personnel Benefit Cooperative, which is composed of local governments in Illinois. His members’ H.M.O. rates have fallen by 4 percent over the last year, and more people are choosing the plans. In the last three years, enrollment has climbed about 40 percent, to 4,500 members.Blue Cross of Illinois says it will introduce H.M.O. plans that are even more attractive by including deductibles and co-payments, which employers have relied on to lower premiums in other types of plans. The new H.M.O.s will be much less expensive than a traditional plan. “We’re anticipating a significant bump for our H.M.O. enrollment,” Mr. Hamman said.The model’s price advantage can come from something as simple as avoiding a second CT scan because the records are all in-house, said Dr. Michael Fitzgerald, a family medicine doctor at DuPage Medical Group, who is part of the Illinois Blue Cross H.M.O. network. If a patient goes to a specialist within the network, for example, he said he could easily approve the patient’s physical therapy by looking at the shared medical record, while someone seeing an outside specialist might have to first be seen in person.Dr. Fitzgerald also says the H.M.O. allows him to offer additional services, like visits to a dietitian, to help a patient struggling with weight. His pitch to patients is that he can make getting the right care much easier. “I’m looking to negotiate the health care maze for you,” he said.One critical difference in many of the newer H.M.O.s is the lack of a gatekeeper, the primary care doctor who traditionally had to approve all referrals to specialists and for tests. In the BlueCare Direct H.M.O., for example, customers are not required to pick a specific primary care doctor and do not usually need referrals if they stay within the network.But patients must sacrifice choice for the promise of lower costs and managed care, whether the plan is called an H.M.O., an A.C.O. or a narrow network. Insurers are able to get low prices for care when they can offer doctors and hospitals a large volume of patients, and providers say they need to have more control over where their patients can get care if they are going to be responsible for costs and the long-term quality of care.“It’s hard for me to come up with a model that doesn’t limit patients to networks that are going to solve the problem,” Dr. Sacks said.Advertisement