AdvertisementSupported byThe Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.32 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.46 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.25 percent.The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week: Florida Department of Transportation, $301.2 million of refinancing and revenue bonds. Competitive.Delaware, $242.1 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Jacksonville, Fla., $68.3 million of sales tax revenue bonds. Competitive.Orange County Sanitation Department, Calif., $145.1 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Fremont Unified School District, Calif., $130 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.University of Louisville, Ky., $52.2 million of revenue refinancing bonds. Competitive.Rockwood School District, Mo., $73.8 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Tulsa, Okla., $57 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Antelope Valley Healthcare District, Calif., $140 million of refinancing debt securities. Lancaster Pollard.Bridgeport, Conn., $77.6 million of general obligation bonds. Morgan Stanley.California Statewide Communities Development Authority, $282.7 million of University of California, Irvine, student housing refinancing revenue bonds. Barclays Capital.Fairfax County Economic Development Authority, Va., $168.1 million transportation district improvement revenue refinancing bonds. Morgan Stanley.Grand Rapids Public Schools, Mich., $134.9 million of school building, site and refinancing bonds. Stifel Nicolaus.Illinois Housing Development Authority, $72.8 million of revenue bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Indiana University, $86.3 million revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.Irving Independent School District, Tex., $75 million unlimited tax refinancing bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Kentucky State Property and Buildings Commission, $668 million of revenue bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Laredo, Tex., $52 million general obligation refinancing bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Lehigh County Industrial Development Authority, Pa., $108.3 million of PPL Electric Utilities pollution control revenue refinancing bonds. SunTrust Robinson Humphrey.Lehigh County Industrial Development Authority, Pa., $115.5 million of PPL Electric Utilities pollution control revenue refinancing bonds. Morgan Stanley.Los Angeles County Public Works Financing Authority, $246.3 million of lease revenue bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Los Angeles Unified School District, $1.2 billion of general obligation debt securities. Citigroup Global Markets.Massachusetts, $1.1 billion of general obligation bonds. Bank of America.Miami-Dade County School Board, Fla., $94.9 million of certificates of participation. Wells Fargo Securities.New Braunfels, Tex., $61.8 million utility system revenue and refinancing bonds. RBC Capital Markets.New York City Municipal Water Authority, $335 million water and sewer system revenue bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.New York Metropolitan Transportation Authority, $500 million of dedicated tax fund refinancing bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Northern Indiana Commuter Transportation District, $89 million limited obligation revenue bonds. Bank of America.Ohio State University, $600 million of federally taxable general receipts bonds. Barclays.Orange County School Board, Fla., $218.9 million of certificates of participation. J. P. Morgan Securities.Pepperdine University, Calif., $100 million of debt securities. Morgan Stanley.Phoenix Industrial Development Authority, Ariz., $50 million Eastern Kentucky University project lease revenue bonds. KeyBanc Capital Markets.Princeton University, N.J., $100 million of taxable bonds. Goldman Sachs.Rutgers, the State University of New Jersey, $161.1 million general obligation refinancing bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.San Diego Public Facilities Financing Authority, $401.5 million sewer revenue refinancing bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Sumpter Township, Mich., $51.7 million of school facilities revenue refinancing bonds. Piper Jaffray.Tampa Bay Water, Fla., $56 million utility refinancing bonds. Bank of America.Tri-County Metropolitan Transportation District of Oregon, $63.7 million payroll tax revenue refinancing bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Utility Debt Securitization Authority, N.Y., $381.7 million of restructuring bonds. Barclays Capital.West Contra Costa Unified School District, Calif., $200 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Piper Jaffray.Advertisement