AdvertisementSupported byGlobal ManagerBy Sonia Kolesnikov-JessopJenny Dearborn is chief learning officer at the German software company SAP. She is based in Silicon Valley.Q. What led you to pursue a career in people development?A. When I was growing up, I had some learning disabilities — dyslexia and A.D.H.D. — that were not properly diagnosed. My true potential was overlooked and I felt I was left to fend for myself in terms of personal growth and development. Becoming a people manager and a learning professional gave me the opportunity to right that wrong by doing for others what was not done for me. It became my covenant, and it’s been very healing for me.I especially feel it when I find diamonds in the rough, incredible talent maybe overlooked, and bring them into my organization, pour my heart into developing them, then push them out of the nest to see them grow. Each time I’m able to do that, I feel that much lighter and I’m very proud of all the people I’ve helped who now have fulfilling careers and make significant contributions to their organizations.Q. What’s the difference between a good leader and a great leader?A. A good leader makes incremental improvements, takes the status quo and tweaks and enhances it, making positive progress but maybe at a slower curve. A great leader looks for opportunities for disruption, doing things completely differently. They’re able to step away from the current situation, get into a different mind-set and tackle the problem in ways no one else would have imagined.Q. What are the key managerial lessons you learned early on?A. When I joined Hewlett-Packard, I was maybe 25-26 years old and I had to manage, for the first time, people the age of my parents. I tried to be as respectful as possible of that situation. That was my first lesson in the importance of connecting with and really understanding each person I was managing on a one-on-one level, to understand and show respect for each individual’s drive and personal motivation. My door is always open and I love having skip-level meetings with anyone in my group, so I can learn more about the team and what’s working or what’s not in my department.Q. How do you find that diamond in the rough?A. Extremely talented people are sometimes buried in an organization. That’s why skip-level meetings work so well to find those talented people with a great deal of potential. Motivated employees have the drive to push themselves into the next big thing or that next level in the organization. They just need doors opened to them. Any leader will tell you, the greatest development they’ve ever had was from on-the-job experiences like stretch assignments or special projects. So the diamond in the rough person finds me and I find that person and together we create a special project to grow and develop their talent.Q. You are mentoring as well as sponsoring people. What do these roles entail and what are the differences?A. As a mentor, I’m helping someone junior whose potential is still untapped by giving them guidance and advice. The mentee comes to me with an agenda and questions, and they initiate contact and engagement. As a sponsor, I have an agenda to help advance someone with tremendous talent and proven potential. I take ownership of promoting this person, not literally within the organizational structure, but in term of opening doors, introducing them to others who can help them, thinking about giving them opportunities to get them visibility and exposure. They are both rewarding roles, for different reasons.Q. You travel a lot to train others. How do you adapt to different cultures?A. I’m 6 feet tall, I like to wear high heels and I have red hair; I know when I come into a room, people turn because I’m the gigantic American. I have to balance being my most authentic self with being respectful of local norms of speaking, greetings, interaction.The hardest thing for me is traveling in the Middle East. Even when I wear a full burka, I’m still very tall, and it’s unsettling for some people. I put the focus on the content so male audiences can focus on my message without being overly distracted by the fact that it’s coming from a woman. I don’t change what I’m saying, the wording, but I will change the tone and soften my hand gestures and try to be less expressive with my body.Q. You’re a mother of four. How do you juggle the work-life balance?A. Working for a global corporation has actually been an advantage, because in a global corporation work follows the sun — your work never stops. Because my manager and my peers are in Germany, and my clients and staff are all around the globe, I actually have some freedom to set my own schedule. I don’t need to work from 9 to 5. Sunday night at 10 is the morning for someone else, and I just manage my schedule like that. I can volunteer in my kids’ classrooms, because I’ll be working my Sunday night.A lot of things I have to do as a mom are in my own time zone, so it actually works out perfectly if my clients and my staff are in other time zones. If everything in my life were happening in the same eight hours, I couldn’t do it all!Q. What would you tell your younger self?A. What I tell my kids. Your career is going to be long, and there will be a time in your life when you will need to make practical, sensible choices. When you are unmarried and don’t have a mortgage or kids, make bold choices. Follow your heart. Do what is passionately exciting to you. Follow your instinct to make a difference in the world. Go to another country and teach English or build communities with the Peace Corps; something you’re going to be able to look back on and be so proud of the courage that you had to do something that was really outside of your comfort zone. There will always be time to worry about material comforts, but it will never feel as good as dedicating your whole self to helping other people.Advertisement