AdvertisementSupported byBy Emily SteelThe lawsuit challenging the mental competence of the ailing 92-year-old media mogul Sumner M. Redstone will go to trial in May because of a “plethora of disputed factual issues” over his capacity and current medical care, a California judge ruled on Monday.The decision puts an even brighter spotlight on a salacious personal court battle that could have major implications for Viacom and CBS, the two entertainment companies that Mr. Redstone continues to control. Philippe P. Dauman, Viacom’s chief executive, has been ordered to sit for a deposition in the case.Judge David J. Cowan of the Los Angeles County Superior Court outlined how the mountain of evidence presented by each side paints two strikingly different pictures of Mr. Redstone. At the top of the list: While Mr. Redstone’s primary physician stated that Mr. Redstone was mentally fit, a geriatric psychiatrist examined Mr. Redstone in January and found that he lacked mental capacity.“Suffice it to say, though not conclusive as to capacity, that those details are difficult to read in describing how this man is hanging on to life,” Judge Cowan said in the ruling. “It will therefore be the court’s primary task at trial to determine which of these physicians most accurately states Redstone’s mental status.”During a brief hearing Monday morning in Los Angeles, Judge Cowan remarked that it “seems sad” that Mr. Redstone is the subject of a trial at this point in his life. “At the same time, I have to follow the law,” he said.The legal battle has been going on since November, when Manuela Herzer, a former companion and one-time romantic partner of Mr. Redstone, filed suit. In the suit, Ms. Herzer claims that a confession of infidelity by an ex-girlfriend sent Mr. Redstone spiraling downward physically and mentally. She claims that Mr. Redstone was not mentally competent when he removed her from a directive that would have put her in charge of his health care and alleges that Mr. Redstone was under the “undue influence” of his daughter.Lawyers for Mr. Redstone called the suit meritless and had moved for it to be dismissed. While Ms. Herzer has said that she is concerned about Mr. Redstone’s well-being, his lawyers have said that Ms. Herzer is motivated by money. On the same day that Mr. Redstone changed his health plan, he also removed Ms. Herzer from his estate plan, in which he had planned to leave her $50 million and his $20 million mansion in Los Angeles.“As in many cases, there may be elements of truth to what both sides say,” Judge Cowan said. “Human nature is complicated. This is why courts hold trials.”A trial is scheduled for May 6.Gabrielle A. Vidal, a chairman of trust and estate litigation at the Loeb & Loeb law firm, which represents Mr. Redstone, said in a statement that Mr. Redstone should prevail after the court evaluates the evidence.“This decision is not a finding on the merits and it does not change the fact that Ms. Herzer’s motives are purely financial,” Ms. Vidal said.Much of the evidence presented in the case, including the medical examination of Mr. Redstone, nurses’ logs and other records, will remain confidential until at least March 18, when the judge is scheduled to consider a motion from Mr. Redstone’s lawyers to keep the documents under seal.Mr. Redstone was executive chairman of CBS and Viacom until February, when he ceded the titles. He remains chairman emeritus of both companies and continues to hold about 80 percent of the voting shares in CBS and Viacom.In the 21-page ruling, Judge Cowan listed several points of contention in the suit that require it go to trial, including Ms. Herzer’s motivation in bringing the suit. While Mr. Redstone’s lawyers claim that Ms. Herzer is after Mr. Redstone’s money, Ms. Herzer claims that Mr. Redstone was under the influence of his daughter, Shari. Redstone, who she alleges was seeking to avoid an obligation to pay Mr. Redstone’s estate taxes by giving money to charity instead of Ms. Herzer.Nancy Sterling, a spokeswoman for Ms. Redstone, said in a statement that the family had “no financial interest in the case and always understood and supported Sumner’s plan to honor his legacy by leaving his estate largely to charity.”She said that Ms. Redstone and her family were “well provided for by the multibillion-dollar company National Amusements Inc.,” the private theater chain company that holds the Redstone family shares in CBS and Viacom.One issue not in dispute, the judge said, is that Mr. Redstone needs someone to take charge of his care, regardless of the state of his mental capacity. The judge raised concerns about who — if anyone — was looking after Mr. Redstone.A declaration from Ms. Redstone in which she said that she had patched up past disagreements with her father and was available to help him at a moment’s notice “raises more questions than it answers,” the judge said.Judge Cowan pointed out that Ms. Redstone lives in Massachusetts. He added that it was perplexing that Mr. Redstone named Mr. Dauman, a busy New York-based executive, as his health care agent rather than his own daughter.“It has to be an unusual situation where a parent still at this late date puts his East Coast business colleagues ahead of an adult child, or for that matter adult grandchildren, in terms of his care,” Judge Cowan said.Ms. Sterling said in the statement that Ms. Redstone was a health care proxy for her father before Ms. Herzer, and had resumed some of those responsibilities after his relationship with Ms. Herzer ended, which she said was “reflective of the strong relationship that exists between Shari and her father.”Ms. Redstone attended Monday’s hearing, sitting silently through the proceedings. When it finished, she put on her sunglasses and walked out of the courthouse, surrounded by lawyers.During the hearing, Judge Cowan remarked on Mr. Redstone’s notable absence from the legal battle. Notoriously outspoken and combative at his prime, Mr. Redstone has not appeared before the court or submitted a statement of his own. “There are a lot of things that have been said about what Mr. Redstone wants,” Judge Cowan said, “but unfortunately I have no declaration from him.”Noah Smith contributed reporting.Advertisement