AdvertisementSupported byWhite Collar WatchBy Peter J. HenningThe explosion of the Deepwater Horizon drilling rig in the Gulf of Mexico in 2010 and the demise of venerable New York law firm Dewey & Leboeuf in 2012 could not be more different. One causing widespread pollution along with 11 deaths, while the other involved questionable accounting to keep the firm afloat as it struggled to deal with a changing marketplace.What links them is that the efforts by prosecutors to hold individuals responsible for wrongdoing in these organizations have almost completely failed, as events last week showed.The cases highlight just how hard it is to convict those involved in complex corporate decisions where there is diffuse responsibility. Despite a renewed emphasis from the Justice Department to focus on corporate officials for prosecution when there are violations, it remains open whether we will see many successful cases against individuals.A few months after the oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico caused extensive environmental damage, Eric H. Holder Jr., then the attorney general, visited the site of the disaster and promised: “We will be meticulous, we will be comprehensive, and we will be aggressive. We will not rest until justice is done.”Federal prosecutors eventually filed criminal charges against five defendants, four from BP, which leased the well , and one from Halliburton Energy Services, which helped construct the well that blew up.The last of those cases ended on Thursday with a jury returned after just two hours of deliberation with a not-guilty verdict on charges of violating the Clean Water Act for Robert M. Kaluza, one of the supervisors of the rig. His lawyer argued that the government was making him a scapegoat for the disaster.Mr. Kaluza was indicted along with Donald J. Vidrine, another supervisor, on multiple counts of manslaughter, charges that were later dismissed. Mr. Vidrine subsequently pleaded guilty to a violation of the Clean Water Act, and the government has recommended he be sentenced to probation.Two other defendants pleaded guilty to minor violations and received probation. The highest ranking official at BP accused of a crime, David I. Rainey, a vice president, was acquitted last year of making a false statement to the F.B.I. in an interview after another charge of obstructing a congressional investigation into the oil spill was dismissed.The government had much more success in pursuing cases against the companies, securing guilty pleas from BP, Halliburton and Transocean Deepwater. BP paid $4 billion in fines and penalties for its violations, the largest ever imposed for criminal conduct.Compared with the corporate prosecutions, the Justice Department fared much worse in the individual cases. That happened even though charges under the Clean Water Act can be proven by showing a defendant was only negligent, a lower standard of intent than required in most white-collar crime prosecutions.Although not a federal case, another white-collar prosecution illustrates the challenges for prosecutors.Two years after the collapse of Dewey & LeBoeuf, the Manhattan district attorney, Cyrus R. Vance Jr., announced an indictment of three top leaders of the firm on multiple charges, including grand larceny and fraud, along with a young “client relations manager” responsible for collecting on the firm’s outstanding bills. Mr. Vance said that they were responsible for “concocting and overseeing a massive effort to cook the books at Dewey & LeBoeuf” that contributed to its collapse.After a six-month trial last year of three Dewey & LeBoeuf executives — Steven H. Davis, the firm’s former chairman; Stephen DiCarmine, the former executive director; and the former chief financial officer, Joel Sanders, — the jury acquitted them of 58 lesser charges. But jurors could not reach a verdict on 93 more serious offenses, resulting in a mistrial.Prosecutors then entered into a deferred prosecution agreement with Mr. Davis under which he would refrain from practicing law and not commit any crimes for five years, after which the case would be dismissed. The result is little more than a slap on the wrist when compared with the severity of the original charges that could have resulted in a prison term of more than eight years.Zachary Warren, the firm’s client relations manager, entered into a similar agreement shortly before his separate trial that requires 350 hours of community service and steering clear of any crimes for a year. He had little involvement in the major accounting decisions at the heart of the case, and as James B. Stewart pointed out in his Common Sense column, “the real question is why Mr. Warren was charged in the first place.”The district attorney’s case took another hit on Friday, when the judge presiding over the retrial dismissed the grand larceny charges against the remaining two defendants, Mr. DiCarmine and Mr. Sanders, the most serious offenses left in the case. He found that there was not enough evidence to prove they sought to steal from the law firm.The New York Times reported that the case has now been whittled down to fraud, conspiracy and securities fraud charges, a shell of the blockbuster scheme Mr. Vance once described. Mr. DiCarmine’s lawyer urged the Mr. Vance’s office to offer a deferred prosecution agreement similar to the others to resolve the case.Seven Dewey & LeBoeuf employees pleaded guilty before the case was filed in 2014, and testified against their former bosses during the first trial. None are expected to be sentenced to any time in prison, but they are in an anomalous position as the prosecution of senior management seems to be winding down.Will the cooperators end being the only ones to suffer a criminal conviction, and the collateral consequences that can bring, while the firm’s leadership might avoid such an outcome?White-collar cases are usually made through cooperating witnesses working at a lower level inside a company who can testify about the intent and knowledge of their superiors, who are the focus in most prosecutions. Without them, it is difficult to win a conviction because the managers can claim to be have been kept in the dark about what was really happening. But when the government is unable to secure convictions of more senior management, it can leave workers beneath them as the only ones bearing the cost of corporate misconduct.Sally Q. Yates, the deputy attorney general, issued a memorandum last year to federal prosecutors, stating that the government’s policy was to condition any cooperation credit for a corporation being investigated on disclosing “all relevant facts about individual misconduct.” The Justice Department wants to refute claims that arose after the financial crisis that it avoided bringing cases against corporate officers by only pursuing the companies.It is easy to proclaim a policy of pursuing individuals more aggressively. Whether the Justice Department is able to follow through by successfully bringing those cases against more senior managers remains to be seen in light of how individual prosecutions played out in the Deepwater Horizon and Dewey & LeBoeuf cases.Advertisement