AdvertisementSupported byBy Leslie PickerThe hundreds of investors who attended Square’s initial public offering marketing lunch on Wednesday could have asked management the tough questions.They could have sought clarity on how the payment start-up’s chief executive, Jack Dorsey, would achieve profitability while splitting his time as the chief executive of Twitter. They could have asked about the protection for one class of investors at the expense of others — known as a ratchet — that is embedded in its later round and will most likely take effect at the offering.But tough questions are not really common during group I.P.O. lunches. Anything that might embarrass Mr. Dorsey could prevent these investors — who were there because they were not picked for more intimate meetings with management — from getting in on the offering. And if Square’s stock rises that first day, that would mean leaving a lot of money on the table.In the smaller, more intimate meetings, harder questions were asked and answered, according to a person who attended one of them.Responding to concerns about his dual role, Mr. Dorsey explained that he split his time equally between Square and Twitter a few days a week and balanced the rest of his time based on need, said the person, who spoke on condition of anonymity because the meeting was private. Mr. Dorsey, 38, also emphasized the power of his team, saying that any of its members could step in and be chief executive, the person said.Square’s efforts to ease concerns about Mr. Dorsey’s ability to run two big companies at once were evident in the public roadshow video on Square’s website. Mr. Dorsey’s face time represented a mere five minutes of the 35-minute video, which featured other executives, like Sarah Friar, the chief financial officer.A representative from Square declined to comment on the meetings, which are closed to the news media. But accounts of the event were provided by investors who attended.The larger group lunch was held not at the usual hotels, such as the Waldorf Astoria and New York Palace, but at the chic Midtown Loft & Terrace, an event space in the Manhattan neighborhood known as NoMad. The event was packed. One determined investor said he walked up 11 flights because the elevator wait was too long.Square set a price range of $11 to $13 a share, implying a valuation of about $3.9 billion at the midpoint. Square was valued at $6 billion in its latest private valuation a year ago. The valuation discount was large enough to make investors flock to the meeting.Square passed out copies of a 250-page prospectus that was square-shaped, rather than the standard 8.5 by 11 inches. Lunch was served by the New York restaurants Little Beet and Mayhem & Stout.Mr. Dorsey spoke at the lunch and is expected to attend all the events, in which management meets with prospective investors across the country (and sometimes around the world) before an initial offering.For Mr. Dorsey, the event was a coming-out of sorts. Despite his being a co-founder of Twitter, which went public two years ago, this is Mr. Dorsey’s first real roadshow test. In 2010, Twitter named Dick Costolo, who is about 13 years older than Mr. Dorsey, its chief executive. Mr. Costolo held that role through the $2 billion public offering, when Mr. Dorsey was chairman and not a major participant in the company’s investor meetings.In June, however, Mr. Costolo resigned from Twitter, leaving Mr. Dorsey as interim chief executive, a position made permanent in October. Over the last year, Twitter’s stock price has declined more than 30 percent as the company has struggled to attract new users, who bring in more advertising dollars.Investors who attended the meeting said they were largely impressed by Mr. Dorsey’s preparedness and charisma.The low price and overall scarcity of tech public offerings could help cause a Day 1 pop when Square starts trading. Only 14 percent of initial public offerings this year have come from tech companies, the smallest percentage since 2008, according to the analytics firm Dealogic. Goldman Sachs, Morgan Stanley and JPMorgan Chase are managing the Square deal.Square’s valuation is also likely to set off what is known as a ratchet, a type of protection for private investors if a start-up does a subsequent round of funding at a lower valuation than the previous one. In Square’s case, this will happen if the company prices its offering at anything less than $18.56 a share, which would activate a provision giving later investors more shares to make them whole.The offering, if priced at the midpoint, would provide Square’s latest investors an additional 5.3 million shares, representing about 1.6 percent of those outstanding.Square’s management plans to visit other cities, including Chicago and Boston, and then head back west to San Francisco on Monday. The company has no plans for international trips. Square is expected to set an official offering price for its shares on Nov. 18 and start trading the next day.Advertisement