By KATIE ROGERSMARCH 1, 2016
Ms. Andrews, a sports journalist, gave a tearful testimony on Monday, as part of her case that a stalker secretly made nude videos of her and posted them online. She filed a $75 million lawsuit against the stalker and the owner and manager of a Marriott.In the seven years since Erin Andrews learned that a man had surreptitiously taken video of her while she was naked in a hotel room, she has been forced to relive the memory daily, the Fox sportscaster told a Nashville court this week.Appearing in court to testify on Monday and Tuesday, Ms. Andrews said the violation by Michael David Barrett, the Illinois man who pleaded guilty and served more than two years in prison for traveling across state lines to film her multiple times in 2008, had resulted in a daily stream of commentary on her appearance in the video.“I feel so ashamed,” she said in the testimony broadcast by several news outlets. “This happens every day of my life. Either I get a tweet, or somebody makes a comment in the paper, or somebody sends me a still of the video to my Twitter, or somebody screams it at me in the stands. And I’m right back to this.”A look at Ms. Andrews’ social media accounts on Tuesday provided examples. On a message she posted to Twitter about hockey on Feb. 21, a person asked in reply if she was aware that the video taken by Mr. Barrett is still widely available.AdvertisementAnother person, using the handle banksthelab, told her on Instagram, “Everyone knows the entire video was a publicity stunt set up by you. #staged #ESPN #publicitystunt.”AdvertisementOn Tuesday, Ms. Andrews said that the attention had made her scared to meet new people or go on a date. Before going out, she would ask herself: “‘Has he seen the video?’”Ms. Andrews said she believes the harassment she faces could have been avoided, and she is suing Mr. Barrett and the owner and managing company of the Nashville Marriott where she was filmed, for $75 million. She said the Marriott employees should have let her know that a man had asked if she was staying at the hotel.“This could’ve been stopped,” she said. “The Nashville Marriott could’ve just called me and said, ‘We’re putting this man that requested to be next to you, is this O.K.?’ And I would’ve called the cops and we would’ve gotten him. I’m so angry. I’m so mad.”According to court documents, Ms. Andrews is accusing West End Hotel Partners and Windsor Capital Group, companies that own and manage the Nashville Marriott, for negligence leading to emotional distress and invasion of privacy. Mr. Barrett is also named as a defendant in the lawsuit, and is accused of invasion of privacy, negligence and intentional infliction of emotional distress.Marriott International, which was dismissed last month as a defendant in the lawsuit, told an ABC affiliate in Nashville that it was sympathetic to Ms. Andrews, but that the company was not responsible for what happened to her.Ms. Andrews, who was a reporter for ESPN when the illegal footage was distributed online, said that people accused her of leaking the videos to gain publicity. She said that ESPN required that she give a sit-down interview to refute the accusations before she was allowed to go on the air again.Ms. Andrews said she chose to do the interview with Oprah Winfrey because the talk show host had been open about her past as a survivor of sexual abuse.Advertisement“I talked to her producers; I told her I didn’t want to do it,” Ms. Andrews said. “But this was the only way I was going to be put back on air, so we went to the Oprah show.”Since the civil trial began last week, Ms. Andrews’s parents have testified that the episode has made her afraid of people. Ms. Andrews, who works for Fox Sports and as a host on the television show “Dancing With the Stars,” said that she was in hysterics after finding out that the video had been posted on the web, and that it had been shared widely online.What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I grabbed my laptop, I flipped it open,” said Ms. Andrews, who grew tearful as she spoke, adding, “I called my parents. I was just screaming that I was naked all over the Internet and I didn’t know what it was.”The court has also viewed a two-hour previously taped deposition in which Mr. Barrett described how he filmed nude videos of Ms. Andrews in Nashville and in Columbus, Ohio, by using a hacksaw to alter the peepholes on her hotel room doors. Mr. Barrett has also admitted to filming other women without their knowledge.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.