AdvertisementSupported byBy Alexandra AlterThe Hachette Book Group has reached an agreement to buy the Perseus Books Group’s publishing business, 18 months after its previous attempt to acquire the company fell through.The new agreement, which was announced on Tuesday, comes six months after Perseus, a large independent publisher, began looking for a buyer again after the first deal with Hachette collapsed.The financial terms of the deal were not disclosed.The acquisition will strengthen Hachette’s position in a publishing landscape where the biggest companies often dominate. It is the latest in a wave of consolidations that has swept the industry in recent years, including the 2013 merger of Penguin and Random House, which created a publishing behemoth with about 250 imprints, and the News Corporation’s acquisition of the romance publisher Harlequin for $415 million in 2014.By buying Perseus’s publishing program, Hachette will fulfill the long-term goal of its parent company, Hachette Livre, which is owned by the French media conglomerate Lagardère, to expand its publishing footprint in the United States. In recent years, Hachette has acquired Black Dog & Leventhal Publishers and Hyperion’s adult books list. The Perseus deal is Hachette’s largest acquisition to date.For Hachette, which publishes about 1,200 books a year through imprints like Grand Central and Little, Brown, the addition of nine imprints from Perseus will help fill out and balance its publishing program in areas like nonfiction and travel. Hachette has cultivated a stable of best-selling authors, including James Patterson, Michael Connelly and Donna Tartt, and like most of the big five publishing houses, it remains in many ways dependent on blockbuster hits to drive revenue.Perseus, on the other hand, has built its business on reliable backlist sales of perennial best sellers — it has 6,000 backlist titles — and niche nonfiction titles that appeal to specific audiences. Its imprints, which publish around 500 books a year, will give Hachette a stronger toehold in the nonfiction market and add to its overall market share. Last year, Perseus’s publishing program generated nearly $100 million in revenue, through imprints like Basic Books, Avalon Travel, Da Capo, Nation Books and PublicAffairs.“It’s a great publishing program with a lot of diversity within it, and we’re very happy to have all this excellence to add to what we already bring forth,” Michael Pietsch, the chief executive of the Hachette Book Group, said in an interview. “Every publisher likes the idea of selling books for every kind of reader, and the Perseus lists are rich in areas where Hachette books in some cases doesn’t publish at all, like travel, and in other cases where we’d like to publish more, like public affairs, health and wellness, pop culture, illustrated books.”Adding heft will probably help Hachette in a cutthroat media landscape where publishers are increasingly being squeezed by major retailers like Amazon and Barnes & Noble. It will also make the company less dependent on best sellers. “It expands our overall profile and gives us more areas of publishing,” Mr. Pietsch said.The acquisition could be a sign of more consolidation to come as the top five publishing houses compete for market share in a shrinking retail environment.“They all want more volume, and Perseus is one of the largest trophies out there,” said Mike Shatzkin, the founder and chief executive of the Idea Logical Company, which analyzes the book industry. “If you take the long view, I’d be so bold as to say we’ll have two big trade publishers 10 years from now, and no more.”Hachette’s earlier attempt to buy Perseus faltered because of the complexity of the arrangement, which included a sale of Perseus’s books distribution business to the Ingram Content Group, a major book printer and distributor. Perseus’s distribution arm, which is separate from its publishing division, distributes books for about 600 independent publishers and brings in $300 million annually to Perseus.When Hachette first tried to acquire Perseus in June 2014, it agreed to buy the entire company, then sell the distribution business to Ingram. At the time, Hachette was engulfed in a brutal fight with Amazon over e-book pricing, and the retailer had removed the buy button from some Hachette titles and delayed shipping on others. The deal between Hachette and Perseus collapsed less than two months later.Last fall, Perseus’s board decided to explore a sale again. It hired an investment banking firm, Greenhill & Company, to advise it. The board decided to solicit offers for the entire company, but also to entertain bids from buyers who wanted just the publishing or distribution arm.About a half-dozen serious offers came in, and Hachette immediately expressed interest in the publishing program. Perseus is also close to signing a deal on its distribution services, said David Steinberger, the president and chief executive of the Perseus Books Group.Perseus has been rumored to be for sale ever since the death of its founder, Frank Pearl, in 2012. The company is owned by Centre Lane Partners, a private investment firm. Mr. Steinberger said that after several potential buyers expressed interest, the company’s board decided to sell to provide a return to its investors.Mr. Steinberger, who has led the company since 2004, said he would leave the company after the sale of the distribution services was complete.Hachette plans to make Perseus a publishing division, which will be led by Susan Weinberg, the senior vice president and group publisher for Perseus.“Hachette is a great long-term home for Perseus,” Mr. Steinberger said. “It’s a company with a great longstanding commitment to authors and the written word.”Advertisement