
Breakingviews By                     
SWAHA PATTANAIK

MARCH 1, 2016
In the realm of bonds, negative yields are no bar to positive returns.That’s just as well, because more than a quarter of JPMorgan’s Global Government Bond Index, or $6.4 trillion worth of debt, was trading with a negative yield last week. German 10-year government bond yields could soon join Japanese and Swiss peers in subzero territory. Investors need to be nimble to make money in this looking-glass world.Negative-yield bonds are worth buying as long as yields keep declining. Yields move inversely to prices so this sort of trend allows investors to bank capital gains. But when these gains are the only difference between making or losing money, even small price swings hurt. This was the case in April 2015, when German yields started bouncing back from record lows. As more and more investors were forced to bail, yields shot up 21-fold in less than two months.Investors need to be quick to spot when a falling yield trend might be about to reverse, even if only temporarily. They also need to exploit pockets of relative value quickly before they disappear. For example, some negative-yield French bonds might be more attractively priced than their German counterparts and thus offer more scope for capital gains.There are good reasons longer-dated bond yields can keep falling in Germany and Japan. Central banks in both countries are buying government debt at a fair clip, and the president of the European Central Bank, Mario Draghi, might even increase purchases at a March 10 policy meeting. Nor is there any sign of the nascent price pressures that might spell an end to such asset purchase programs. Investors are so sure of this that Japan on Tuesday became the first Group of 7 leading industrial nations to auction 10-year debt at a negative yield.But shocks cannot be ruled out. Imagine if Mr. Draghi unexpectedly ditches the requirement to buy bonds in proportion to each eurozone country’s contribution to the E.C.B.’s capital. Anything that implies fewer-than-expected purchases of German government bonds would produce a sharp reversal in the trend of lower Bund yields – and a lot of burned fingers.Swaha Pattanaik is a markets columnist at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »