

      By BROOKS BARNES

MARCH 3, 2016

Shareholder meetings can be dull as dirt, even for corporate governance enthusiasts. The Walt Disney Company’s annual powwow is an exception.For a start, Disney is one of the few remaining mega-corporations selling single shares, which are often held by children. That means children, as investors, can ask questions. At this year’s meeting, held on Thursday in Chicago, a girl quizzed Robert A. Iger, Disney’s chairman and chief executive, on his favorite movies. He named “Toy Story” and the original “Cinderella,” which he said his grandparents took him to see as a boy. (Aww.)Disney also tends to put on a show, unveiling exclusive movie footage and making at least one splashy announcement. And because Disney is a symbol of America, the company often draws activists looking to make a point about one cause or another; at the 2009 meeting, a group protesting “golden coffins,” or posthumous benefits for executives, handed out four-inch nails. (This longtime Mouse reporter keeps one on his desk.)Then there is the folksy minutiae. Among the pressing shareholder concerns this year were the size of a Disneyland parking lot, whether Harley-Davidson motorcycles are used in Marvel films and whether the next annual meeting could, pretty please, be held in Hawaii. At least this year did not include complaints about the trading of collectible pins, a perennial meeting topic.Here are a few highlights:Last year, Mr. Iger announced a sequel to “Frozen.” Some people thought that he might unveil a release date this time around, or at least bring a trailer for the next “Star Wars” spinoff movie, which arrives in December and is called “Rogue One.” Nope. The big announcement involved one of Disney’s smallest businesses: Disney Cruise Line, which currently operates four ships, will expand by 50 percent.Two new ships will have their debuts in 2021 and 2023. Each will have about 1,250 rooms, the same as Disney’s last two ships, which cost about $900 million each to build. The business subtext is that as Disney’s cash cow, ESPN, faces questions about its future growth, the company is under pressure to speed up expansion of other units.The Disney brand in many ways turns on nostalgia, at least at its theme parks and for its re-re-re-releases of animated movies on DVD. But honoring the birthplace of the company’s founder — Chicago — has never been a priority for the company. Instead, Disney usually plays up Walt Disney’s time as a teenager in bucolic Marceline, Mo.But Mr. Iger announced on Thursday that Disney would contribute $250,000 to a slowly advancing effort to turn the Chicago house where Walt Disney was born (in an upstairs bedroom) into a children’s center and mini-museum.All 11 Disney board members were re-elected, including Sheryl Sandberg of Facebook and Jack Dorsey of Twitter, with each receiving at least 94 percent support from votes cast before the meeting. Two are new. Last fall, Disney added Maria Elena Lagomasino, a wealth management executive, in part to keep a Hispanic presence in its boardroom; Monica C. Lozano, chairwoman of U.S. Hispanic Media, had to step down after 15 years, Disney’s board term limit.Mark G. Parker, the chief executive of Nike, was added in January. Disney has tended to keep a 10-member board, but increasing it to 11 was seen as making sure that Disney retains a seasoned group as other longtime directors reach their term limits in the coming years.In other meeting business, shareholder-introduced proposals to change board voting rules and require Disney to disclose more information about its corporate lobbying were defeated, by wide margins. Disney had opposed both proposals.Mr. Iger is generally very good at maintaining an avuncular cheer, patiently fielding questions from shareholders. He even agreed to give a child a private tour of Pixar. (Her question was: Why doesn’t Pixar give tours?) But his patience clearly wore thin at a couple of moments.Dwight Morgan, a shareholder who often pops up at the annual meeting (usually to complain about pin trading), criticized the company for increasing the prices of theme park annual passes. Mr. Iger rather crisply told him that he would take the comments “into consideration.”Another shareholder, Martin Glotzer, heckled Mr. Iger over a lack of access to board members, saying that he was “very offended” by not getting to “speak face to face” with them. (Join the club!) Mr. Iger successfully navigated the moment, only to have Mr. Glotzer, who identified himself as affiliated with the Cincinnati Union Stock Yard Company, return to the microphone to ask the motorcycle question.Daniel Miller, a reporter for The Los Angeles Times, described Mr. Iger’s reaction this way on Twitter:There are a number of subjects Disney finds touchy, and one of the touchiest is “Song of the South,” a controversial 1946 film that Disney has long locked away in its vaults. Parts of the movie are now considered racist because slaves are depicted as happy. But Disney’s refusal to engage on a release has only made people more curious, and Mr. Iger has been peppered with questions about the film at annual meetings in the past.This time around, Disney struck first. A shareholder proposal, filed late last year, called for a vote on releasing the movie — considered by animation historians to be a groundbreaking example of the combination of cartoons and live action — on Blu-ray disc. But Disney got it bounced by using a Securities and Exchange Commission rule that allows companies to exclude proposals that delve too far into specific product offerings.Advertisement