By MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDMARCH 1, 2016
What was shaping up to be the first big merger battle of 2016 has ended, at least for now.Honeywell said on Tuesday that it was withdrawing its $90 billion takeover bid for United Technologies after its rival steadfastly argued that a union of the two would be blocked by government regulators.In a statement, issued a day before Honeywell holds an annual presentation for investors, the company argued again that it believed a merger would have posed little antitrust risk. Putting the two companies together would have created a $160 billion titan, with a range of products like thermostats and advanced jet engines.Yet Honeywell’s options for prolonging the fight are limited. The company missed the deadline for nominating candidates for United Technologies’ board, which passed on Jan. 28.And several important customers of the two companies — including Airbus and Boeing — have issued statements expressing varying levels of opposition to a prospective deal.AdvertisementHoneywell’s only remaining option is to persuade its competitor’s shareholders to put pressure on United Technologies management to restart talks. Shares of United Technologies have risen 9.5 percent since it confirmed that the two companies had held merger talks, but Honeywell’s shares have fallen more than 5 percent.Advertisement“We made a full and fair offer that would have greatly benefited both sets of share owners,” David M. Cote, Honeywell’s chairman and chief executive, said in a statement. “However, continuing to try to negotiate with an unwilling partner is inconsistent with our disciplined acquisition process.”In a statement, United Technologies called Honeywell’s retreat “the appropriate outcome given the strong regulatory obstacles, negative customer reaction and the potential for a protracted review process that would have destroyed shareholder value.”Honeywell shares closed 4.5 percent higher, and shares of United Technologies dropped 1.6 percent.The announcement on Tuesday caps nearly a year’s worth of back-and-forth discussions between the two companies. The talks began last April, when United Technologies’ chief executive, Gregory J. Hayes, raised the issue of a potential merger with Mr. Cote. More talks followed over the ensuing months, before United Technologies broke away, arguing that regulators were likely to block the combination.At the same time, United Technologies’ stock price fell, while Honeywell’s shares remained stable. And the two companies disagreed over who would have run the combined business, with each jockeying for control.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Yet Mr. Cote and his advisers remained convinced that a merger made sense, calculating that putting the two businesses together would have yielded $3.5 billion worth of cost savings.By late last year, Honeywell offered a new proposal in which it would essentially buy United Technologies even though it had only about two-thirds as much revenue as its rival. Mr. Cote would run the combined company, and his shareholders would have owned 60 percent of the combined business.Last month, Honeywell put forward an offer of $108 a share in stock and cash, which was roughly 22 percent higher than where United Technologies’ shares were trading at the time. In its statement on Tuesday, Honeywell said that during that meeting, executives at Honeywell said that “such a combination would be fabulous” and that they would take the offer “very seriously.”But United Technologies dismissed the bid later that week as unacceptable.Other big deals have hit potentially crippling antitrust hurdles. A proposed merger of Staples and Office Depot has drawn strong opposition from the Federal Trade Commission. And Comcast walked away from its proposed $45 billion takeover of Time Warner Cable last year as it faced intense regulatory scrutiny.AdvertisementUnited Technologies’ own antitrust advisers have calculated that a union would lead to at least $10 billion in overlapping sales, or about 10 percent of the two companies’ combined revenue. (Honeywell has argued that less than 5 percent of their target sales overlap.)Among the biggest areas of overlap, analysts have said, are plane components and heating and cooling systems for buildings.The apparent end of merger discussions between the conglomerates is not the first time an attempted union of the two collapsed. United Technologies offered to buy its rival in 2000, but was outbid by General Electric. Yet the G.E. deal for Honeywell fell apart after European regulators blocked that transaction.A picture caption on Friday with an article about Honeywell’s withdrawal of a bid for United Technologies misidentified the type of aircraft shown. It is a turboprop plane, not a jet.A version of this article appears in print on March 2, 2016, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Honeywell, Facing Resistance on Antitrust Grounds, Drops United Technologies Bid.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.