By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMARCH 2, 2016
WASHINGTON — The economy was expanding in most of the country in January and February, helped by gains in consumer spending and home sales. But headwinds from falling oil prices and a strong dollar held back some sectors, the Federal Reserve said on Wednesday.The Fed’s latest survey of business conditions in its 12 regions found moderate gains in most regions. Two areas — New York and Dallas — described activity as flat. The Kansas City region, hurt by weakness in energy and farming, reported a modest decline.The Fed survey, known as the Beige Book, will be discussed at the central bank’s next meeting on March 16 and 17. Most economists expect the Fed to leave a crucial interest rate unchanged.The Fed found that while consumer inflation was holding steady, wage growth varied considerably, from flat to strong. The central bank is hoping that rising employment will increase pay, which has lagged since the current recovery began in mid-2009.AdvertisementButtressing that view of a resilient labor market was a separate report by the payroll processor ADP that said United States businesses added a healthy 214,000 jobs last month, up from a revised 193,000 in January.Advertisement“The labor market is healthy,” said Mark Zandi, chief economist at Moody’s Analytics. “This is very good news, particularly in the context of the turmoil in the financial markets in the past several months.”
            A roundup of regional economic conditions in the Federal Reserve’s 12 districts, according to survey results released by the Fed on Wednesday. The survey is based on information collected on or before  February 22, 2016.        IncludesAlaska andHawaiiMINNEAPOLISSAN FRANCISCOCHICAGOCLEVELANDBOSTONNEW YORKGrowth was noted in construction and real estate, tourism and manufacturing.Consumer spending and professional services were mixed, while energy, mining and agriculture were down. Labor markets remained tight.Price inflation was minimal while upward wage pressures increased. Retail sales and demand for business services grew modestly. The agriculture sector was flat, while real estate markets expanded.    Construction, real estate activity and manufacturing production slightly increased, along with consumer and business spending. Financial conditions tightened while both price and wage pressures remained subdued. Manufacturing output increased slightly. The housing market improved. Retail sales were mixed. Auto sales were higher on a year-over-year basis. Oil and gas extraction and coal production declined.    Most retailers and manufacturers reported higher sales or revenue than a year earlier. Staffing firms cite strong revenue growth. Residential real estate markets remain strong.Labor markets continue to tighten. Manufacturers saw weakening activity, while service-sector firms noted some recent contraction. Consumer spending  increased slightly, while tourism activity remained sluggish.  PHILADELPHIARICHMOND, VA.ATLANTAST. LOUISKANSAS CITY, MO.DALLASBusiness activity continued to grow at a modest pace. Firms hired additional employees at a similarly modest pace; exceptions were staffing firms,  with moderate gains, and manufacturing firms, with declines.Manufacturing activity decreased, with a slight decline in shipments and new orders. Revenue at services firms weakened, while retail and auto sales increased. Tourism grew, along with residential real estate activity.Retail and auto sales grew modestly. Tourism activity remained strong. Residential and commercial construction increased. Banks reported higher loan activity, while labor market activity was mixed. Businesses reported stronger wage pressures, while employment and prices grew slightly. Retail sales were generally flat. Real estate activity was robust. Banking conditions improved with strong growth in loan demand.Consumer spending decreased as sales in the retail, auto, restaurant and tourism sectors fell. Manufacturing activity weakened. Transportation and wholesale trade contacts noted declines. Real estate activity slightly decreased.Manufacturing weakened modestly and nonfinancial services firms reported mixed results. Real estate and financial services activity continued to expand. Retail sales declined while the energy sector continued to contract.MARCH 2, 2016
Fed officials believe that rising wages will help lift inflation closer to the Fed’s target of around 2 percent a year. Inflation has been running below that for the last three years.Manufacturing was feeling the effects of the stronger dollar, which hurts United States exports, and slowing activity in important United States markets like Europe and China. Manufacturers also complained about cutbacks in demand coming from weakness in the energy sector.Manufacturing contacts in eight districts — Boston, Philadelphia, Cleveland, Chicago, St. Louis, Kansas City, Dallas and San Francisco — all reported “significant headwinds” because of sluggish demand from energy companies. Many districts said manufacturers were also being hurt by the strong dollar and weaker global outlook.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.According to ADP, manufacturers shed 9,000 jobs in February, the first time the sector had cut payrolls since October.Most economists believe that the economy, which slowed to growth of just 1 percent in the October-December quarter, will rebound to growth of around 2 percent in the current January-March quarter.The Fed approved its first rate increase in nearly a decade at its December meeting, choosing to wait and see how global market turbulence at the beginning of the year and weaker United States exports affect the overall economy. Many analysts believe that the Fed will increase rates only twice this year and will not move until June.The Fed survey was based on data collected before Feb. 22.The ADP report, which covers only private business and often diverges from official figures, comes out two days before the government’s official jobs report.Economists surveyed by the data firm FactSet predict that American employers — including government — added 195,000 jobs last month, up from 151,000 in January. They expect that the unemployment rate remained at an eight-year low of 4.9 percent.A version of this article appears in print on March 3, 2016, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Fed Report Shows U.S. Economy Gaining Strength.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.