By PETER EAVISMARCH 2, 2016
In the 2008 crisis, Neel Kashkari worked to save big banks. Now the president of the Fed Bank of Minneapolis says it is time to think about breaking them up.Governments around the world have built over the last few years a vast new system of rules that would allow banking giants to fail and shield taxpayers from bailouts.Though this new regulatory architecture is eye-numbingly complex, its builders contend that it has made the financial system much safer without having to resort to measures like forcing a breakup of the largest banks.But that reassuring view has taken a beating of late.Recent turmoil in European debt markets pointed to a possible weakness in a crucial part of the new regulatory system.Shares of large banks have been under pressure, trading at valuations that indicate investors have little faith in the companies’ sprawling business models.AdvertisementSome mergers-and-acquisitions bankers on Wall Street are privately beginning to conclude that some of the largest banks may break up in the coming years.AdvertisementThen, last month, a new Federal Reserve official surprised many by declaring in his first speech on the job that the “too big to fail problem” had not been solved.The assertion was surprising because the official, Neel Kashkari, was at the Treasury Department in 2008 during the big bailouts. But having had time to survey the overhaul ushered in by the Dodd-Frank Act, he says that he believes more has to be done. “We need to act while we still remember how painful the crisis was,” Mr. Kashkari said in an interview.Those behind the financial overhaul might be forgiven for being taken aback by the skepticism. They have achieved many important goals, and there are signs that the new regulations are causing the banks to shrink and, over time, they may even break themselves up to satisfy their shareholders.The gradualism of the current overhaul has a steely edge that the banks and their lobbyists have, for the most part, not been able to resist, supporters of the new rules also point out.Still, the largest banks remain huge.For instance, four United States banks have more than $1 trillion of assets, and two have more than $2 trillion. And now, if the fresh doubts about the overhaul grow, and market turbulence continues to weigh on the banks, politicians and regulators may press for much more direct policies to reduce the size and complexity of the largest financial firms.Mr. Kashkari, who in January became president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, has also started an initiative aimed at developing a plan to address the too-big-to-fail issue.“It’s a hard question, and I give Neel a lot of credit for wanting to drill down,” said Phillip L. Swagel, a professor at the University of Maryland School of Public Policy, who was an assistant secretary for economic policy under Treasury Secretary Henry M. Paulson Jr.AdvertisementOfficials at regional Fed banks do not write new banking regulations; that is the job of staff members of the Federal Reserve in Washington. Yet Mr. Kashkari’s intervention makes it more likely that the debate over the banks will continue through the presidential election, in which Wall Street may become a prominent issue.“The regulators should take very seriously the fact that the public is still overwhelmingly skeptical of whether these reforms have fundamentally changed anything,” said Sheila C. Bair, a former prominent banking regulator who is now president of Washington College.Our columnist Andrew Ross Sorkin and his Times colleagues help you make sense of major business and policy headlines — and the power-brokers who shape them.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Proponents of the current overhaul contend that much has been done.Compared with 2008, the big banks have much higher levels of capital, which in practice means they use less debt to finance their loans and trades — a change that should make them more resilient to shocks and losses.Banks are also safer because they use far less of a type of borrowing that can evaporate in a crisis, causing a run. At Bank of America, for instance, this short-term borrowing was at the end of last year equivalent to just over 18 percent of the bank’s assets, compared with nearly 36 percent at the end of 2008.And the higher capital requirements — which rise in line with a bank’s size — appear to be pressing big banks to shrink. JPMorgan Chase, the nation’s largest bank by assets, trimmed $220 billion of assets last year, done, in part, in response to stiffer capital regulations.When given the leeway under Dodd-Frank, regulators have mostly gone for a stricter approach. The Volcker Rule, which aims to stop a bank’s traders from making risky wagers for its own profit , ended up being quite stringent, for example.And the Fed may not be done.It may, for instance, decide to use its annual regulatory stress tests to make capital rules more onerous.And big banks have to submit plans that would act as a road map for regulators if the banks collapsed. If the Fed and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, another bank regulator, conclude that these plans are not credible, they can require remedial actions that include making the bank unload some of its businesses.AdvertisementIn the coming weeks, the Fed and the F.D.I.C. will announce the results of their latest assessments.One of the most potent criticisms of the overhaul, however, is that it is too clever by half.This point is directed in particular at a very important part of the overhaul that is intended to make it possible to wind down a dying bank without using taxpayer backing.Under this part of the overhaul, banks have to issue debt that can be turned into equity capital when a bank fails. The idea is that the debt would act as a source of new capital for the seized bank, removing the need for taxpayer funds.But some banking experts say this part of the overhaul might spread panic, not contain it. Before the collapse, the price of this debt could start to plunge in the markets. Investors might then flee the ailing bank and stop lending to other banks, even those that are in better shape.Mr. Kashkari asserts that, to reduce the risk of such contagion, it may make sense to not rely on the debt component and instead just have banks hold a lot more equity capital at the outset.“Why not get rid of all this complexity and ambiguity and make it equity?” he asked.Such concerns gained some credibility after recent movements in the prices of special debt securities issued by large European banks. In a crunch, these securities can be transformed into pure equity capital. Those issued by Deutsche Bank fell steeply in price, prompting selling of similar securities issued by other banks.But making the banks finance themselves with more equity could cause their stock prices to fall even more than they have. To those who favor doing more, however, such a decline may underscore that banks still need to shrink in order to improve their profitability.Mr. Kashkari said he recognized that a stricter overhaul could add new costs to the banks, and he added that taxpayers might still need to bear some of the risks embedded in the banking sector. But he argued that voters had not yet been given a clear choice on that question.“I want to be candid with the American people about which piece we have solved, and which piece we have not solved,” he said. “And we as a country could decide that we have done enough.”A version of this article appears in print on March 3, 2016, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: New Tremors in High Finance Rattle Foundation of Postcrisis Regulations.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.