AdvertisementSupported byBy Mary Williams WalshSAN JUAN, P.R. — The mystery man at the heart of what is being called “a monumental fraud” in Puerto Rico broke his silence this week, answering questions under oath about whether conspirators at the island’s electric utility overcharged residents by hundreds of millions of dollars and worsened the island’s debt crisis.How did William R. Clark respond to suggestions that he and other utility officials took gifts and favors from vendors seeking lucrative contracts to sell substandard fuel to Puerto Rico’s giant electric authority?“I never received a thing,” said Mr. Clark, who for 18 years led the authority’s fuel oil purchasing office. “Not money, not gifts, not bribes, not trips, not parties.”Mr. Clark retired in 2014, just as oil prices were crashing and the bottom dropped out of the electric authority’s finances. A widely viewed television documentary in Puerto Rico at the time, “Why Do We Pay So Much?” reported that oil companies and other grateful vendors had just thrown Mr. Clark a sumptuous retirement party, and showed him walking into a high-end restaurant while the announcer talked about possible conflicts of interest.Mr. Clark promptly went into seclusion, and until this week remained shrouded in rumor and folklore. On the anniversary of “Why Do We Pay So Much?” last year, Puerto Rican television broadcast another show, this time about the unsuccessful efforts to find him, called “Where Is William Clark?”Meanwhile, negotiators have been struggling to restructure the electric authority’s $9 billion of debt — one-eighth of the island’s total $72 billion — and special investigators have been homing in on its Fuel Procurement Office, scrutinizing the way it did business with oil suppliers and the laboratories that tested whether each shipment measured up to clean-air requirements.Suspicions about the oil quality have been circulating for years. The Puerto Rico Electric Power Authority, known as Prepa, has been under a federal consent decree since 1999 for violations of the Clean Air Act, requiring it to limit its emissions of sulfur and other substances.Puerto Ricans have complained since at least the 1990s that neighborhoods near power stations were hot spots for asthma, respiratory diseases and other illnesses. Those complaints were among the factors that led to the consent decree.In testimony this week before a special investigative committee of the Puerto Rican Senate, Mr. Clark expressed frustration at the way the media had portrayed him and called himself “a disciplined observer of the rules and regulations” who had done nothing wrong. He said he was eager to dispel myths about goings-on in the Fuel Procurement Office, where just three people control the contracting process.“Questions are welcome,” he said in his opening statement. “Each of them has an adequate, logical and reasonable response. There is no need to speculate, conjecture, imagine or extrapolate. There is no need to draw conclusions in a vacuum. Detailed explanations exist; the only thing missing has been a willingness to listen to them.”As for nagging accusations that he had allowed the utility’s power plants to burn fuel with unlawful levels of sulfur, he said that testing for sulfur “was always done in compliance with the authority’s applicable protocols.”“No one has shown they have a monopoly on the truth,” he added, nodding to “differences of opinion” that had cropped up in certain situations. By following rules set by the power authority, he said on Tuesday, he was able both to buy fuel that was within “acceptable margins of error,” and to approach “the most effective, efficient and economical operating practices.”Almost immediately after he made that statement, the going began to get rough.“You are the second witness to talk about ‘acceptable margins of error,’ ” said the main investigator, a retired prosecutor named César López Cintrón. The first had been Mr. Clark’s former deputy in the Fuel Procurement Office, Edwin Rodríguez, who has held the job since Mr. Clark retired. He testified last week.Both those statements on acceptable margins of error “are absolutely false,” said Mr. López Cintrón.Mr. Rodríguez cut his own testimony short last week and walked out in the middle of his appearance, after Mr. López Cintrón ordered his lawyer to leave for violating procedural rules. Mr. Rodríguez has since offered to return, but the special committee has not yet decided whether to receive him.Mr. López Cintrón walked Mr. Clark step-by-step through his duties as the utility’s purchasing chief. Yes, Mr. Clark had signed contracts. Yes, he approved invoices. He evaluated inventories. He authorized emergency purchases. He calculated prices. It all added up to a picture of Mr. Clark in absolute control.Mr. Clark tried to assert, however, that it was not his job to select the labs that would test oil shipments for sulfur. Mr. López Cintrón pounced.“Who put the signature on this contract?” he demanded, showing an agreement with a lab that Mr. Clark had signed.“Yes, but —” said Mr. Clark.“I just want to know if that’s your signature,” Mr. López Cintrón said.Mr. Clark confirmed it was his, and Mr. López-Cintrón asked what it would mean if Mr. Clark had played favorites among the outside labs, perhaps steering business to the ones he could rely upon to say the oil was compliant.“Then I would not have been doing my job correctly,” Mr. Clark replied.As Mr. Clark spoke, up to the witness table marched two auditors from the Puerto Rico Comptroller’s Office, to the apparent surprise of Mr. Clark and his lawyer, who asked to be excused for a moment. But Mr. López Cintrón made them stay.The auditors sat down next to Mr. Clark and testified that they had been tracking the electric utility’s disbursements since 2008. They produced records showing that in fact, one lab had received 87 percent of the oil-testing business.And so it went, hour after hour.It was the fourth week of testimony before the Senate panel, which is trying to nail down reports that for decades, the electric authority was buying cheap, dirty fuel and overcharging customers for it. The disparity, the theory goes, created a spread between two prices that would have been multiplied across millions of barrels of oil for nearly 30 years, giving rise to a big slush fund.If such a fund existed, no one has explained who may have had access to it or what it might have been used for. But there is substantial speculation.“They kept buying oil that was not the specified quality or the specified amount. Why were they doing that?” said Eduardo Bhatia, president of the Puerto Rico Senate and a member of the special investigative committee. “The only reason I could think of was, at some point they were getting benefits out of that. What benefits were they getting? Were they being paid off? Were they getting kickbacks? Were they coming up with the money for financing political campaigns, or what?”The committee’s rules put all investigative powers into the hands of Mr. López Cintrón and two other independent investigators, to keep senators and other elected officials from trying to tamper with the process in an election year.So Senator Bhatia and other lawmakers must wait for the investigators to present their evidence and eventually refer the matter to law enforcement agencies if that seems warranted.Senator Bhatia has already said publicly that he has seen enough to be persuaded that “a monumental fraud” took place within the power authority.Advertisement