
Breakingviews By                     
OLAF STORBECK

MARCH 2, 2016
Usually, appointing a company’s biggest shareholder to its board is a matter of form. Yet these are not normal times at the British engine maker Rolls-Royce.A series of profit warnings in 2014 and 2015 swept away the top management. Its new chief executive, Warren East, suspended a costly share buyback plan, halved the dividend and kicked off an ambitious re-engineering of internal processes.Now, the crisis is leaving its mark in the company’s governance as well. On Wednesday, Rolls-Royce announced that Bradley E. Singer, a partner and chief operating officer of the hedge fund ValueAct Capital, was joining its board. With a 10.8 percent stake, the hedge fund, based in San Francisco, is Rolls’s biggest shareholder. Should it pursue a classic activist strategy of breaking up the company, Rolls’s predicament could worsen.The company generates two-thirds of its revenue in civil and defense aerospace. As there are few operational synergies in the remaining units – power systems, marine and nuclear – selling them may look like a straightforward way to unlock value. Yet the remaining company would eventually be more vulnerable: Aviation’s decade-long product cycles mean that cash flows are inherently volatile over time.AdvertisementDesigning new generations of engines and increasing production is initially very cash-consuming. It takes years for that pattern to change, when many engines are deployed and serviced. There is little Rolls-Royce can do about this – the best way to cope is to have other business units that are exposed to different cycles and balance cash flows over time.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Moreover, it is doubtful even in the short term that splitting up Rolls-Royce would unlock additional value. Despite the sharp losses in its share price over the last two years, the company is trading at 25 times the next 12 months’ earnings, while the wider European aerospace and defense industry is valued at around 16 times, Thomson Reuters Starmine data shows.RBC Capital Markets in mid-February estimated the company’s sum-of-the-parts value at 600 pence a share – around 11 percent below the current share price.AdvertisementMr. East has stopped the company’s descent: Shares are up 17 percent this year, while the FTSE 100 stock index has lost 2 percent. Mr. Singer’s best bet is to foster and support this recovery rather than impede it.Olaf Storbeck is a columnist for Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »