AdvertisementSupported byBy Leslie PickerFew spend 49 years working for the same company. And fewer still do so at an investment bank.But Eric Dobkin, among the longest-serving partners at Goldman Sachs, achieved that distinction, as the company announced his retirement on Wednesday.Mr. Dobkin, age 73, is known by many as the father of the modern-day initial public offering of stock. In 1985, he created the firm’s equity capital markets division, which changed the way I.P.O.s were conducted by focusing on mutual funds rather than individual investors. It was a pivot that put Goldman Sachs in the forefront of some landmark deals, including Britain’s largest privatizations and Microsoft’s initial offering.“Eric’s passion, creativity, market judgment and trusted advice have helped the firm and our clients tremendously,” Lloyd C. Blankfein, the chief executive of Goldman Sachs, and Gary D. Cohn, the bank’s president , said in a memo to the company on Wednesday.After graduating from Harvard Business School, Mr. Dobkin joined Goldman Sachs in 1967 in the institutional sales group in Philadelphia. Seven years later, he was transferred to Chicago, and then to New York, and he made partner in 1982. When Goldman Sachs went public in 1999, Mr. Dobkin stayed at the company, despite the windfall of cash that the partners received at the time.Around that time, Mr. Dobkin stepped down as partner but continued to serve on a number of committees, including the commitments committee and the suitability committee, which look at whether a deal might put Goldman Sachs’s financial health, clients and reputation in jeopardy.Mr. Dobkin said in an interview that nothing in particular encouraged him to retire. He said he was still in great health and pretty active, and wanted to spend his time doing one more “big gig” in business and in philanthropy. What that will be, though, he is not sure yet.His wife, Barbara Dobkin, is involved with the American Jewish World Service, a humanitarian nonprofit organization. They recently celebrated their 50th wedding anniversary.The highlight of Mr. Dobkin’s storied career, he said, was winning the British privatization mandates, including those for British Gas, British Steel and British Petroleum. At the time, he had just taken over the equity capital markets division and Goldman had never tackled such a huge international project.But his group was able to persuade the government of Margaret Thatcher, the British prime minister, to hire Goldman to sell shares on either side of the Atlantic Ocean.When asked what he thought his legacy would be, Mr. Dobkin responded that he was best known for creating the globalization of the equity business, so that an initial public offering could be sold to anyone in the world.Over the next 30 years, the I.P.O. process will continue to evolve, Mr. Dobkin said. He predicts that private companies will have more conversations with prospective public-market investors well before they raise equity; by the time they do an initial offering, buyers of equity will already understand the business.Even though Mr. Dobkin is retiring from his day-to-day role at the bank, he said his phone line would still be open for executives to call for advice.“I might be leaving 200 West physically,” said Mr. Dobkin, referring to the address of Goldman Sachs’s headquarters in New York. “But I’ll never leave 200 West emotionally.”Advertisement