By MIKE McPHATEMARCH 1, 2016
Craig Windham, a veteran NPR reporter known for delivering bite-size reports for top-of-the-hour newscasts in a warm, familiar tone to millions of Americans, died on Sunday in Winston-Salem, N.C. He was 66.His brother, Cris Windham, said the cause was a pulmonary embolism. Craig Windham had been visiting his brother in Winston-Salem when he fell ill.Mr. Windham joined NPR in 1995 and worked as a reporter, and sometimes as an anchor, in Washington. His reports on the events of the day, in roughly 40-second segments, covered topics ranging from natural disasters to hearings on Capitol Hill.In an interview on Tuesday, Robert Garcia, the executive producer of NPR’s newscasts, described Mr. Windham’s reports as “gorgeous, beautifully layered audio.”AdvertisementCraig Windham was born in Washington on June 20, 1949, the first of two sons of Robert and Dorothy Windham. He graduated in 1971 with a major in government from William and Mary, where he got his start as a radio reporter at the student-run station. He went on to earn a master’s degree and a doctorate in counseling from George Washington University.After working a four-day week at NPR, Mr. Windham would spend Fridays and Saturdays counseling young people on substance abuse and depression at a private clinic in Bethesda, Md., his brother said. He also taught a counseling course at George Washington University and sang in the National Cathedral’s choir.What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Before joining NPR, Mr. Windham was a national correspondent for the Unistar/RKO radio networks and a news director at WASH-FM in Washington.In a 2010 interview, Mr. Windham said his most memorable reporting experiences came during natural disasters.“I love seeing how people come together for the better to help one another,” he told a campus publication at William and Mary. “It shows the resilience in people.”In addition to his brother, he is survived by a niece and a nephew.Britt Rathbone, who owns the practice in Bethesda where Mr. Windham worked as a counselor, said he had been calling clients to tell them that Mr. Windham had died.Advertisement“Several parents have told me that he saved their kids’ lives,” he said.A version of this article appears in print on March 3, 2016, on Page A20 of the New York edition with the headline: Craig Windham, NPR News Voice, 66.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.