AdvertisementSupported byBy ReutersWASHINGTON — The number of Americans filing for unemployment benefits unexpectedly rose last week, the Labor Department said on Thursday, but the underlying trend continued to point to a strengthening labor market.The labor market’s resilience was reinforced by another report on Thursday showing that announced layoffs by United States companies tumbled 18 percent in February. The signs of sustained labor market strength were the latest indication the economy is regaining momentum after slowing in the fourth quarter.Initial claims for state unemployment benefits increased 6,000 to a seasonally adjusted 278,000 for the week ended Feb. 27, the Labor Department said. Claims have been below the 300,000 threshold, which is associated with healthy labor market conditions, for a year. That is the longest period since the early 1970s.The four-week moving average of claims, considered a better measure of labor market trends as it irons out week-to-week volatility, fell 1,750 to 270,250 last week, the lowest level since late November.In a separate report, the global outplacement consulting firm Challenger, Gray & Christmas said that companies based in the United States announced 61,599 job cuts last month, down from 75,114 in January. It said layoffs remained concentrated in the troubled energy industry, which has been hit by a slump in crude oil prices, where employers announced 25,051 job cuts in February.But the firmer labor market picture was dimmed by a third report showing that employment in the vast services sector contracted in February, for the first time in two years.The Institute for Supply Management said its index of services industries employment fell 2.4 points to a reading of 49.7 for February. That contributed to the institute’s nonmanufacturing index dipping 0.1 point to a reading of 53.4 last month.The claims data has no bearing on the employment report for February, to be released by the government on Friday, as it falls outside the survey period. But it is the latest indication that the labor market remains on solid footing despite a recent tightening in financial market conditions. A report on Wednesday showed strong private sector hiring last month, suggesting a pickup in overall job growth.In a fourth report on Thursday, the Commerce Department said new orders for manufactured goods rebounded 1.6 percent, after dropping 2.9 percent in December. That was the largest increase since June, and it came after two consecutive months of declines.The increase in factory orders was the latest suggestion that the worst of the factory slump was most likely over. Factory activity, which accounts for about 12 percent of the economy, has been hurt by a strong dollar and weak global demand, which have undercut exports. Spending cuts by energy companies in the wake of a plunge in oil prices are also a drag, as are efforts by businesses to reduce an inventory glut.In another report, the Labor Department said nonfarm productivity fell at a 2.2 percent rate in the fourth quarter and not the 3 percent pace it reported last month. Still, labor-related costs increased solidly as companies employed more workers to raise output.While weak productivity has bolstered employment growth as companies hire more workers to increase output, sustained weakness could undermine Americans’ living standards. Soft productivity has significantly lowered the economy’s long-run potential.Growth in unit labor costs, the price of labor per single unit of output, was revised down to a 3.3 percent rate from a 4.5 percent pace.Advertisement