By ELIZABETH OLSONMARCH 3, 2016
As a young girl helping her parents run their Brooklyn bodega, Damaris Hernández would not have dared to dream that she would one day become a lawyer, let alone a partner in one of world’s most rarefied legal firms.But Ms. Hernández was recently promoted to the job , making her the first Latina to reach that coveted spot at Cravath, Swaine & Moore.That achievement is an acknowledgment of her talent and hard work. But the story of her route to the top also reveals how much more complex the journey is for minorities and women than for the white men who overwhelmingly dominate the firms. Skill is only one of the keys. Being able to navigate unspoken rules is at least as important.“When I was the only one of color or the only woman in the room, I had the confidence to believe in my ability,” said Ms. Hernández, 36, describing the advantages of the program to her. “When you are the first, you need someone to have your back.”AdvertisementOver the last decade and a half, she and 100 others who attended the New York University School of Law received that support from a scholarship program that paid their full tuition and also gave them access to a network of luminaries including federal judges, law firm partners and even Supreme Court justices.AdvertisementGraduates, who typically are the first in their families to seek a professional or graduate degree, have gone on to jobs at elite law firms such as Davis Polk & Wardwell or Shearman & Sterling, as well as public interest jobs. The scholarships — which each provide about $175,000 for three years of legal education — are for those from disadvantaged backgrounds, said the program’s founder, Anthony Welters, a 1977 N.Y.U. law school graduate who is executive vice president of the health care company the UnitedHealth Group.“The program aims at economic diversity,” said Mr. Welters, 60, an African-American who grew up in Harlem and was the first in his family to pursue an advanced degree. After stints as a Capitol Hill aide and securities lawyer, he made his fortune when AmeriChoice, the Medicaid services provider he founded, later merged with UnitedHealth.“It’s not just giving cash,” he said of the program, which he and his wife, Beatrice, a former American ambassador to Trinidad and Tobago, founded in 1998. They called it AnBryce, a name derived from the first initial of each family member’s name. “It’s more than academic credentials. It takes a hell of a lot to become a successful lawyer. These students can compete; they just have to know the rules of the road.”Those rules are crucial to securing jobs at premier law firms, which can pay their partners salaries in the millions of dollars but where varied personal backgrounds can often be missing. African-American and Latino lawyers are scarce at the coveted partner level, hovering around 2 percent for each group. Ms. Hernández is joining a select group since about a few dozen Hispanic women are partners at firms that have 500 to 700 lawyers each.Only a handful of schools have programs providing tuition as well as opportunities for professional development and mentoring, said Evan R. Chesler, partner and chairman of Cravath, Swaine & Moore, which participates in several diversity efforts to broaden its choice of legal recruits.“The legal profession traditionally is not one that looks inward and helps itself,” said Mr. Chesler, a 1975 N.Y.U. law school graduate. But the Welters, he said, took an approach that would develop professionals “right from the beginning of their time in law school.”Mr. Welters, who also is chairman of the law school’s board of trustees, said he funded the scholarship because he wanted to give exceptional students the “embedded knowledge” that those from more privileged backgrounds come by automatically.AdvertisementThe program has benefited from the participation of prominent friends and colleagues. Interviews for the first scholarship, for instance, were held in the chambers of Justice Clarence Thomas, of the United States Supreme Court, a friend and colleague of Mr. Welters.That interview was intimidating and memorable, said Leila K. Mongan, 41, who was one of the early scholarship recipients. Even though she had a troubled childhood — her father had taken her and her sister, at ages 7 and 9, changed their names and moved them to Mexico for two years — she excelled when she returned to school. The mentoring aspect of the AnBryce scholarship was more appealing to her than the money, she said.“I was startled because they wanted to know about my experiences, not my grades, which was a weird reversal,” she said of her interview. “They made it seem like my life was not a strike against me but an honor.”AnBryce has gradually expanded with more donor money, and it now chooses 10 scholars per law school class, for a total of around 30 each year based on economic background and leadership potential — regardless of race or ethnicity.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.It includes scholars like Angela M. Libby, 29, who is white and grew up in Limington, a town in rural Maine. She said the participants formed a close bond because “we were all outsiders in some way.”“I’m from a small, white farming town in Maine without a strong culture of college and little understanding of race,” Ms. Libby said. Her adjustment to law school was not smooth, she added. Initially, she said, “I wasn’t even sure I wanted to be a lawyer.” She has practiced at Davis Polk since her 2011 graduation.Like others, Ms. Libby relied on the AnBryce network to help her through. Many scholars develop close personal relationships with the Welters, who make themselves available for questions and advice, hold dinners for students at their New York apartment, invite business and legal leaders for regular talks and host each scholar for at least one Thanksgiving at their Virginia residence.“It was, and is, very much a family,” Ms. Hernández said. Her father died when she was an undergraduate at Harvard, and she took two years off to work at several jobs in Buffalo, where her future husband was in school. Her mother, originally from Puerto Rico, lost the bodega and moved to live with her in Buffalo.Later, Ms. Hernández returned to Harvard and graduated in 2003. She was accepted to N.Y.U. law school the next year and won an AnBryce scholarship — also interviewing in Justice Thomas’s chambers. She said that she took a photograph just to prove she had been there.Advertisement“The scholarship is meant to take away economic need so a person can focus on their studies, but I also had a family to take care of,” she said.Aside from the personal, the scholarship network connects students like Ms. Hernández to top-ranked law firms to compete for scarce first-year summer jobs, which can help shape a legal career. Ms. Hernández landed at Dewey Ballantine for her first summer. But when the economy was starting to reduce the number of legal jobs, she was able to turn to scholarship contacts “to open doors you didn’t know existed.”When she graduated in 2007, Ms. Hernández was hired by Cravath, which is known for its team training that allows rotation among different legal areas.“I called it ‘curly locks’ — meaning my hair — and the three partners,” she said of her litigation team experiences, which included representing IBM in a federal investigation of some of its overseas operations, Novartis Pharmaceuticals and Credit Suisse. She then earned the status of partner.“Damaris is an exceptional lawyer,” said Mr. Chesler, who interviewed Ms. Hernández before she was hired and has since worked with her on two cases.More law schools, he said, “need to have programs like AnBryce, which provides a constellation of support for students who came from families who were not able to help them, and equips them with a basket of skills they would not necessarily have.”“And skills,” he said, “are an enormous leveler in the legal profession.”A version of this article appears in print on March 4, 2016, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: A Law School Opens Doors to a Rarefied Realm.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.