By REUTERSMARCH 3, 2016
HERZOGENAURACH, Germany — The German sportswear company Adidas said on Thursday that it expected sales and net profit to rise at a fast pace in 2016, helped by aggressive marketing and big events like the European soccer championship and the Summer Olympics in Rio de Janeiro.The upbeat forecast came as the company reported a fourth-quarter net loss of 44 million euros, or about $48 million. Sales were up 15 percent, to €4.167 billion, it said. The fourth-quarter result compared to average analyst predictions of a loss of €39 million on sales of €4.151 billion.Adidas, which had already given a positive outlook when it published preliminary 2015 results last month, said it expected both sales and profit to increase 10 percent to 12 percent this year.Its bigger American rival Nike is growing even faster, helped by strong demand in North America and China. Orders of Nike products for delivery from December through April rose 20 percent, excluding currency effects.AdvertisementAdidas has come under pressure from investors after having lost ground to Nike in recent years. On Wednesday, Adidas proposed board seats for two influential new shareholders.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The German company said optimism for 2016 was supported by rising consumer spending, new products, increased marketing and coming sporting events.Advertisement“Our order books are full across all major performance and lifestyle categories. And our brands are set to shine at this year’s major sporting events,” Herbert Hainer, the company’s departing chief executive, said in a statement. Mr. Hainer will be replaced by Kasper Rorsted, an executive at the German consumer products company Henkel, this year.Sales of the core Adidas brand were particularly strong in Western Europe, which saw a 31 percent rise, and in North America, with a 12 percent lift. Those figures far outpaced the 5 percent growth recorded by the company’s long-struggling fitness brand Reebok.Some investors say they hope that Mr. Rorsted will consider selling Reebok, which Adidas acquired in 2005 as part of its attempts to stem Nike’s dominance of the North American market.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.