
Breakingviews By                     
KEVIN ALLISON

NOV. 11, 2015
Molson Coors Brewing is getting a tasty chaser from its rivals’ mega-deal.Molson, a Canadian-American brewer, is paying SABMiller $12 billion in cash for its 58 percent stake in the companies’ United States joint venture. By helping to ease antitrust pressure on Anheuser-Busch InBev’s $106 billion purchase of SABMiller, Molson is avoiding a premium. It is also pouring out pure gold in the form of around $450 million of annual savings.The brewer, which owns Coors and Blue Moon, is paying its business partner the equivalent of just over 12 times SABMiller’s share of MillerCoors’s 2014 earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and amortization, or Ebitda, to take full control. That is roughly in line with the average Ebitda multiple commanded by other large brewers, according to Thomson Reuters data.Usually, the exiting party in a joint venture would expect a modest premium. But Molson is in an ideal position. SABMiller is effectively a forced seller: Its deal with Anheuser-Busch InBev would almost certainly be blocked by regulators if it held its stake. Moreover, a longstanding change-of-control agreement gives Molson right of first refusal on the assets and entitles it to 50 percent of the joint venture – and management control – regardless of who buys the rest. That probably deterred other bidders.The expected cost savings ought to be worth around $1 billion, once taxed, capitalized and adjusted for the four years it will take to realize them. At 2.5 percent of the joint venture’s 2014 sales, the proposed savings are modest compared with recent brewing mergers. Anheuser-Busch InBev and SABMiller are aiming for synergies worth 7 percent of SABMiller’s last full-year sales in their merger, excluding MillerCoors revenue. Molson’s expected tax benefits, with a net present value of $2.4 billion, according to Molson, increases the total.Molson plans to finance the purchase with cash on hand and new debt – but also new equity. That should leave its balance sheet with some room to invest in the competitive United States market, where independent craft brewers have been taking market share from established mass-market brands. In the meantime, it is an easy deal for the brewer’s investors to swallow.Kevin Allison is a columnist at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »