AdvertisementSupported byBy Leslie Picker and Julie CreswellIn late January, about 40 Wall Street financiers packed into a private dining room at III Forks Steakhouse in Houston for an update on the troubled multibillion-dollar merger of the pipeline companies Energy Transfer Equity and the Williams Companies.With shares of Energy Transfer down 50 percent since the transaction was announced in September, the investors interrogated Energy Transfer’s chief financial officer, Jamie Welch. He tried to assuage the analysts and investors, assuring them that his company was committed to closing the deal.Less than 10 days later, Energy Transfer fired Mr. Welch.Mr. Welch’s ouster stunned most investors, causing Energy Transfer’s stock to drop 42 percent in one day, but not everyone was surprised. Since December, Mr. Welch, a former investment banker who helped sculpt the $38 billion acquisition, had been actively trying to recut the deal, or get out of it entirely.In recent months, Mr. Welch has called Williams shareholders, urging them to push the board to reconfigure the deal or vote against it, according to interviews with five shareholders who requested anonymity because they were not authorized to discuss the private conversations.Mr. Welch argued that the deal’s terms, a mix of stock and a sizable $6 billion cash payout to Williams shareholders, would crush the combined new company under a mountain of debt. In one call, a shareholder said, Mr. Welch referred to the cash payout as “mutually assured destruction.”Deal advisers and bankers said it was extremely unusual for an executive of an acquiring company to contact shareholders of a target to persuade them to back out of a deal. But there have been instances of a company or its executives trying to wiggle out of a deal after it was signed.In July 2007, at the peak of the buyout boom, Hexion, a company owned by the private equity firm Apollo Global Management, agreed to pay $6.5 billion for the chemical maker the Huntsman Corporation. As the credit markets tightened and chemicals sales declined, Apollo asked a Delaware court to rescind the deal, arguing that the combined company would be insolvent. The judge ordered Apollo to try to close the transaction. After months of rancorous litigation, the two sides eventually settled over the busted deal.Jill E. Fisch, a corporate law professor at the University of Pennsylvania Law School, said that Mr. Welch’s communications with some Williams shareholders did not appear to violate any securities laws.“There could be something in the merger agreement that says the company has to support the deal and executives have to support the deal to shareholders,” Ms. Fisch said. “But even then, the board and the managements can’t commit to recommending a deal if doing so would not be in the best interest of shareholders.”Another explanation may be that Mr. Welch’s view on the merger was more negative than anyone else’s inside the company, she said. “Maybe he went rogue,” Ms. Fisch said. “Maybe others inside the company are still in favor of the deal.”Mr. Welch did not respond to multiple requests for comment. A spokeswoman for Energy Transfer did not return emails or calls seeking comment.Investors say tensions between Mr. Welch and Energy Transfer’s chief executive, Kelcy Warren, had been brewing since the deal was announced. Besides the cash portion of the deal, another sticking point between the two executives was Energy Transfer’s decision to burn through more than $1 billion in cash last year by buying back the company’s stock when it traded closer to its peak of $35 a share. Today, Energy Transfer’s stock trades around $8.In conversations with investors and analysts, Mr. Warren has said the removal of Mr. Welch, who was the point person on the deal with investors, was a result of a “difference in communications.”The marriage between Energy Transfer and Williams was hailed as a transformative deal, one that would create the country’s largest network of pipelines, zigzagging over 100,000 miles.Instead, it has become one of the most ill-fated deals in recent years. As oil and natural gas prices have collapsed, so have the stocks of both companies, which have lost more than half their value since the deal was announced in September. There are growing concerns about the debt levels that the combined company would have. And questions swirl around how that debt could affect the new company’s debt rating and its ability to pay cash distributions in the future.All of this is likely to come to a head in the spring, when Williams shareholders will vote on the deal. If it is approved, shareholders can decide whether to receive either all stock or a stock-and-cash mix.Over the last two and a half years, the oil industry experienced its deepest downturn since at least the 1990s.Inside Energy Transfer, the fear is that the deal that was long coveted could now severely weaken the combined company if energy prices do not rebound. But under the terms of the agreement drafted, in part, by Mr. Welch, the company’s options appear to be severely limited.One potential way out would have been to persuade Williams to agree to terminate the deal. That would have cost Energy Transfer at least $2 billion in a one-time payment to compensate Williams for the breakup, a figure that Energy Transfer briefly weighed but quickly decided was unrealistic, two people briefed on the strategy said last week. The Williams board, which was fiercely divided at the time the deal was signed, unanimously supported the takeover on its original terms by mid-January.Under the agreement hashed out between the two companies’ boards, Williams shareholders will receive stock in the new company and $8 a share in cash. To make the cash payment, Energy Transfer will have to take on an additional $6 billion in debt. The concern is that the debt could cause rating agencies to slash its debt rating, increasing its cost of borrowing.Mr. Welch, a boisterous deal maker who formerly ran investment banking for Credit Suisse in London, commuted between his home in London and Energy Transfer’s headquarters in Dallas. He had worked with Mr. Warren on several other top mergers and was lured to Energy Transfer in 2013 with a pay package that at the time was worth about $45 million.Mr. Welch wanted the cash portion of the Williams deal to go away. So, starting in December, he began reaching out to Williams investors, urging them to push the Williams board to renegotiate for an all-stock transaction with Energy Transfer, according to people familiar with the conversations. Mr. Welch’s pitch was that even though the overall transaction value would be lower with an equity deal, it would be in the best long-term interest of the combined companies not to take on so much debt, these people said.They said Mr. Welch feverishly tried to cajole investors to change the deal, calling them as often as once a week. One of the investors said he threatened that Energy Transfer might simply walk away from the transaction — an empty ultimatum because the ironclad agreement he helped structure made it nearly impossible to do so.Advertisement