By JOHN KOBLINMARCH 4, 2016
The much-anticipated return of Megyn Kelly and Donald J. Trump to a prime-time debate started innocently enough.“Mr. Trump, hi,” Ms. Kelly said at the Republican debate Thursday night.“Hello,” Mr. Trump replied.Further pleasantries were extended before Mr. Trump added: “You’re looking well. You’re looking well.”“As are you,” she replied.And then she kicked off a fairly intense interrogation of Mr. Trump over 40 minutes, during which she questioned him about his stance on immigration, a Trump University lawsuit and whether he flip-flopped on statements he made about Syrian refugees.It was the first time the two shared the same stage since the first Republican debate, in August, when Ms. Kelly asked Mr. Trump about his treatment of women and he responded sharply. He drew criticism in the days that followed for suggesting that Ms. Kelly had been angry at him and that she had blood pouring out of her “wherever,” a remark many saw as a reference to menstruation.AdvertisementThat debate, which drew a record 24 million viewers, set off a monthslong feud. In that time, Mr. Trump has said repeatedly that he had no respect for Ms. Kelly, and, as a result, he has been in an on-again, off-again war with Fox News. In late January, he skipped a Fox News debate that Ms. Kelly was moderating and taunted the network, saying, “Let’s see how much money Fox is going to make on the debate without me.’’AdvertisementThat wild back story stoked enormous anticipation for Thursday night, and when they were finally reunited, Ms. Kelly did not back down.In her first question to Mr. Trump, Ms. Kelly asked whether his stance on deporting illegal immigrants was more flexible than he had led voters to believe. She referred to a Buzzfeed article that said he had expressed a less-than-firm commitment in an off-the-record portion of a meeting with The New York Times editorial board. Mr. Trump said he remained committed to the issue but conceded: “There’s always give and take. There’s always negotiation.”The Times reporter Nick Corasaniti discusses key moments from the Republican presidential debate on Thursday in Detroit, as the field of candidates narrowed to a four-man race.Throughout the night, Fox News deployed slides and videos to fact-check the candidates’s statements, and to show what appeared to be a reversal of positions on various issues. And during the occasionally raucous debate, Ms. Kelly said “stand by” seven times to interrupt cross-talking candidates, something that many people on social media said was a remarkably polite way to say “shut up” (Ms. Kelly also said “with respect” five times, a gentle way to either course-correct the conversation, or to ask a clarifying question of Mr. Trump).“Mr. Trump, one of the things people love about you is they believe you tell it like it is,” Ms. Kelly said at one point. “But time and time again in this campaign, you have actually told the voters one thing, only to reverse yourself within weeks or even sometimes days.”Fox News then reeled off three videos — on the war in Afghanistan, Syrian refugees and whether Mr. Trump thinks former President George W. Bush lied about the reasons he gave for the war in Iraq. It set off an intense 12-minute back and forth.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Rubio got involved, and brought up what he called the Better Business Bureau’s D-minus grade of Trump University in a review. Mr. Trump disputed this before Ms. Kelly intervened and confirmed “the rating from the Better Business Bureau was a D minus.” She then asked further questions about a lawsuit against Trump University and brought up yet another slide from a court opinion on the case.Mr. Trump scoffed but did not express the same level of pushback as in the first debate.After the debate on Thursday, in an interview with Bill O’Reilly of Fox News, he said he found the moderators to be “very fair.”Mr. Trump later appeared with Sean Hannity of Fox News and gave Ms. Kelly and Fox News strong reviews.“I really think the moderators were very, very good tonight, the three moderators,” he said. “I thought Fox did a very good job tonight.”AdvertisementFor the time being, détente.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »