By MARY WILLIAMS WALSHMARCH 4, 2016
A group of retirees whose pensions were cut three years ago have won a lengthy battle with the multibillionaire Ira Rennert, a mining industrialist, onetime junkbond king and owner of a Hamptons mega-mansion.The retirees’ victory is only the second time in 42 years that the federal Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation has required a company to unwind a pension “termination” — a dreaded deal in which a bankrupt company cuts off a pension fund and leaves it for the government to take over. The government insures company pensions, but its insurance is limited, so retirees can face sharp losses.In a settlement announced on Friday, Mr. Rennert’s sprawling conglomerate, the Renco Group, will be required to pay — in full — the pensions of about 1,350 retirees who worked at a subsidiary, R. G. Steel, which went bankrupt in 2012 and is being liquidated. That means reversing pension cuts that were made in their plan’s termination.Tom Reeder, executive director of the pension insurer, called the settlement “an extraordinary outcome for plan participants” because it is so rare for pensions to be cut and then restored to their original value.AdvertisementThe settlement dates the restoration to November 2012, the termination date, and is meant eventually to make the retirees whole for the money they missed in the period when their benefits were reduced. Mr. Reeder also said Renco had agreed to reimburse the pension agency for its outlays.AdvertisementIn a statement, the company denied any liability or wrongdoing. It said that the “settlement with P.B.G.C. was the most sensible, economic and practical resolution to the dispute, and it puts an end to the significant expense and distraction of continued litigation.”Typically, the federal agency takes over a failing pension plan if a judge rules that doing so is the only way a company can possibly restructure. The agency has taken that step for more than 4,600 pension plans since its founding in 1974. The retirees then typically get their checks from the agency for the rest of their lives.But the R. G. Steel bankruptcy was far from typical. R. G. Steel was more or less like the bankrupt offspring of a superrich parent. In cases like that, special rules kick in — in particular, a rule that the wealthy corporate parent and any brethren under the same corporate control are jointly responsible for the pension troubles of their bankrupt kin.In Mr. Rennert’s case, that meant exposure, not just for his conglomerate of mines, smelters and assembly lines as far away as Peru, but also for his palatial home in Sagaponack on Long Island, reported to be the largest occupied single-family residence in the United States.Our columnist Andrew Ross Sorkin and his Times colleagues help you make sense of major business and policy headlines — and the power-brokers who shape them.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The house, known as Fair Field, sprawls across 62,000 square feet on a 64-acre seaside plot. Its assessed value last year was $248 million — more than three times the shortfall in R. G. Steel’s pension fund when the company went bankrupt. And Fair Field’s legal owner, a private company, Blue Turtles, is also controlled by the Renco Group and thus jointly liable for the steel company’s pensions.Fair Field found itself at similar risk 10 years ago, when another company among Mr. Rennert’s holdings, WCI Steel, went bankrupt. The pension agency signaled that it was ready to seize  Fair Field and other holdings in 2006 to make sure Renco made up a $189 million shortfall in that company’s pension plan before any termination.In what appears to be coincidence, the assessed value of Fair Field then was $185 million, almost exactly the amount the pension fund was short. But Renco eventually agreed to pay the WCI Steel retirees their pensions, even though it lost control of the bankrupt company. Its pension fears allayed, the government backed off.AdvertisementBy 2012, something similar seemed to be happening at R. G. Steel. Renco bought it in 2011 for $1.2 billion. It had a pension that was underfunded by nearly $70 million. In 2012, it was declared bankrupt.Shortly before the bankruptcy, Mr. Rennert’s company went looking for new financing for the subsidiary. The deal it eventually struck called for Cerberus, the private equity group, to buy a 24.5 percent equity stake in R. G. Steel.The Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation said the deal was intended not to revive R. G. Steel but to reduce Renco’s ownership stake from 100 percent to less than 80 percent — the cutoff for being included in the so-called controlled group that is jointly responsible for pension obligations.The company denied that had been its intent, saying in its statement that it had “acted appropriately and within its rights when it concluded a financing transaction that had the incidental effect of releasing Renco from liability for R. G. Steel’s pension plans.”In addition, the statement said, “The singular purpose of Renco’s efforts to obtain financing for R. G. Steel was to solve the company’s liquidity problem and save it from bankruptcy.”The government also said that Renco had lied when asked about the transaction, to keep the pension insurer from finding out about the ownership change until it was too late. Once a controlled group has been broken, the pension agency loses its ability to go after the parent company’s assets.When R. G. Steel declared bankruptcy, the federal government had to take over the pension obligations and cover a $70 million loss. It sued Renco for fraud, arguing that the deal with Cerberus was intended primarily to break the link between R. G. Steel and Renco’s wealth.A version of this article appears in print on March 5, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Retirees Win Lengthy Pension Fight With Renco.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.