AdvertisementSupported byThe Week AheadBy The New York TimesHere’s what to look for this week:Urban Outfitters, a clothing retailer for young adults that also runs the Anthropologie and Free People brands, is expected to report fourth-quarter results on Monday, and analysts expect lackluster earnings after a less-than-robust holiday season. In particular, weak sales at its core women’s apparel segment probably offset growth driven by new categories, like home and beauty, at Anthropologie. The holiday was a mixed bag over all at teen retailers, as a lack of must-follow trends in apparel as well as warm weather for much of the season hurt sales of winter coats and boots. —Hiroko TabuchiEuropean Union finance ministers, at their monthly meeting in Brussels on Tuesday, are expected to try to reach a preliminary agreement on a law that would help curb corporate tax avoidance. The law would require companies to report their tax-relevant information in each of the bloc’s 28 member states in which they operate. The idea is to dissuade companies, including American multinational corporations, from avoiding taxes by shifting profits to lower tax jurisdictions. The law under discussion on Tuesday would make the information accessible to the bloc’s national tax administrations. But pressure has been building on ministers to devise additional steps to make the information public. —James KanterSquare, the mobile payments company, is set to report its fourth-quarter and full-year earnings on Wednesday, a first for the company since it debuted on the New York Stock Exchange in November. Investors will pay close attention to the growth in Square’s payments processing business, which generates the majority of its revenue. But close watchers of Square will also be looking at the performance of its ancillary businesses, including cash advances and subscription software products for small businesses. —Mike IsaacOn Thursday, the European Central Bank is expected to take further measures to stimulate the wavering eurozone economy when its Governing Council meets in Frankfurt. Analysts expect the central bank to raise the penalty it charges banks to store money in its vaults, and increase purchases of assets like government bonds to pump money into the eurozone economy. There is speculation that the central bank could go further in response to signs of slower growth in Germany and other countries by, for example, buying corporate bonds. Mario Draghi, the president of the central bank, will hold a news conference that day as well. —Jack EwingAdvertisement