AdvertisementSupported byBy Stephanie StromMondelez International, the large snacks and confections business that used to be part of Kraft, is introducing its first new product line in years.The new line of thin, savory crackers, called Good Thins, plays to consumers’ growing interest in unconventional snack ingredients. One variety of the crackers, for instance, is made from sweet potatoes (albeit in powdered form), while another is based on chickpeas.“A lot of ingredients are coming into their own these days,” said Danielle Brown, marketing director for Good Thins. “You see phenomenal growth in things with alternative bases like rice and ancient grains or chickpea.”Like many other big food companies, Mondelez has struggled to increase volume sales of its products as smaller, newer competitors win consumers’ affections. Higher prices helped its so-called organic revenues — sales generated solely by operations and not mergers or acquisitions — grow 4.7 percent in the fourth quarter of last year. But volume sales, the actual amount of products sold, dropped 3.1 percent.In particular, sales of chocolate, which account for almost a third of Mondelez’s business, have been harmed by price increases, making the company’s snack and biscuit businesses more important.To develop Good Thins, Mondelez talked to consumers about what they wanted in a snack, Ms. Brown said. Consumers told Mondelez they did not want things like artificial colors and flavors, cholesterol or high-fructose corn syrup in their snacks. But they wanted good taste and texture, characteristics that often rely on those unwanted ingredients.“Five years ago, you found products without all those things on the shelf, but they didn’t really taste great,” Ms. Brown said. “People were willing to accept that then — but they aren’t now.”Snacking is a $6.2 billion business and growing. The Hartman Group, a consumer research firm, estimates that snacking accounts for about half of all eating occasions, replacing breakfast and lunch in particular, and says that 90 percent of consumers report snacking multiple times during the day.“Snacking is the hottest topic we have right now — all our clients want to know about it,” said Melissa Abbott, vice president for culinary insights at Hartman. “Snacks used to be a once-a-day treat, but consumers now think snacking is healthier than sitting down to three meals a day, in part because more snacks are being made with wholesome ingredients and less processing.”For food businesses, snacks tend to offer higher margins, although more sophisticated snacks, studded with nuts, seeds and dried fruits and drizzled with honey or chocolate, contain more expensive ingredients, too.But companies still see room in the market for new snack products. Abbott Laboratories, which makes medical devices and equipment as well as baby formulas and nutrition drinks, recently introduced a line of snack bars called Curate, with flavor combinations like fig and balsamic vinegar, and apricot and Marcona almond.And Quaker, a unit of PepsiCo, is introducing Quaker Breakfast Flats, bars aimed at what the company calls a “new eating occasion,” the midmorning snack.Advertisement