
Fair Game By                     
 GRETCHEN MORGENSON
 
MARCH 4, 2016
As one surprising announcement after another has unspooled in recent months at Valeant Pharmaceuticals International, its shareholders may well have thought they were watching Abbott and Costello performing the comedy skit “Who’s on First?”That routine was funny, though. Valeant’s stumblebum moves have been anything but. In fact, they raise genuine questions about whether shareholders should rely on anything Valeant’s management and board tells them, now or in the future.Valeant’s business model — buying older drugs that it considers underpriced, ramping up their costs and reaping the profits — once made it a stock market darling. Now the practice has turned it into an outcast. Valeant’s stock has tumbled to about $61 from over $260 last summer.The company’s recent missteps have only compounded those problems. To get the full effect, we have to roll some videotape.AdvertisementOn Dec. 16 last year, J. Michael Pearson, Valeant’s longtime chief executive, presented guidance on the company’s full-year results to investors and analysts. Although he conceded that revenue and other 2015 metrics would come in below Wall Street’s expectations, the coming year looked bright, Mr. Pearson said. He predicted that revenue in 2016 would rise as much as 21 percent and suggested that other measures could vault even higher.AdvertisementWith just one week to go in the company’s fourth quarter, investors viewed this information as reliable. Although disappointed by the 2015 reductions, investors liked the upbeat projections for the coming year. Valeant’s shares rose 8 percent that day, closing at $118.47.Nine days later, on Christmas Day, Valeant said Mr. Pearson had been hospitalized and was on medical leave. Diagnosis: a severe case of pneumonia.Howard Schiller, Valeant’s former chief financial officer, took over as interim chief executive on Jan. 6 in what would be a two-month stint. On Feb. 4, Mr. Schiller testified before Congress about Valeant’s drug pricing. He conceded that the company had made mistakes.Things were quiet until Feb. 22, when Valeant dropped a bombshell. It had to restate its 2014 and 2015 earnings because of $58 million in sales that had been recognized during the wrong period. It wasn’t a ton of money, but it invalidated the guidance provided by Mr. Pearson in December.Valeant promised to hold a call on Feb. 29 with analysts and investors to discuss fourth-quarter results. The stock fell 11 percent.On Feb. 28, Valeant announced that Mr. Pearson was returning as chief executive. The company canceled the conference call it had scheduled for the next day.In the same announcement, the company said it would be late in filing its annual report with securities regulators.AdvertisementThen, on Feb. 29, the company confirmed that it had received a subpoena from the Securities and Exchange Commission during the fourth quarter of 2015. The existence of an investigation had been flagged the previous day by Probes Reporter, an independent research firm that focuses on S.E.C. filings.Only after fielding news media requests about the subpoena did Valeant disclose its existence; the company said it would have told investors about the S.E.C.’s action in its annual financial filing, which had been delayed.Truly, this was a bevy of blunders. And you would think they were actions that would raise red flags.But that’s apparently not the view of many analysts in Valeant’s amen corner on Wall Street. Marc Goodman at UBS, one of two analysts who scored an audience on March 1 with Mr. Pearson, concluded in a report that day: “Nothing we heard changes our positive view.” Mr. Goodman’s buy recommendation carries a stock price target over the next 12 months of $213 a share.Wall Street analysts are famous for ignoring realities that are staring them in the face, of course. Investors with their own money on the line can’t afford to make the same mistakes.I asked Valeant to tell me why it thought shareholders should rely on its disclosures now after all that’s gone on. In a statement, Mr. Pearson responded: “The past several months have taught us some painful lessons, and I apologize for the turmoil that has impacted investors’ and other constituencies’ confidence in our company. We are working diligently to announce Q4 2015 results and updated guidance as soon as possible. I and our board are committed to working our hardest to restore faith in our company and its future.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.They clearly have some work to do.It’s worth keeping in mind as Valeant talks of an accounting restatement that the company has been far more aggressive than its peers in burnishing its financial results. In the quarter that ended Sept. 30, for example, Valeant’s exclusion of an array of real costs from its pro forma calculations allowed it to report fantasy earnings of $2.74 a share; back on planet Earth, under generally accepted accounting principles, each Valeant share earned 14 cents.Valeant claims this financial reporting practice helps investors by providing “a meaningful, consistent comparison of the company’s core operating results and trends for the periods presented.”Now that it’s under pressure, Valeant says it is taking a new approach to its business. It will no longer pursue acquisitions as assiduously and it is increasing its research and development.AdvertisementOn Wednesday, Valeant shareholders received another surprise.Deb Jorn, one of the company’s top managers, resigned abruptly. An executive vice president and company group chairwoman, she was responsible for running Valeant’s United States dermatology and gastrointestinal businesses.Investors are left to figure out what this company might be worth under its new regime. They are on their own.Michael Krensavage, founder of Krensavage Asset Management, is a former health care analyst who has made his name questioning the consensus on companies he follows. He had this to say about Valeant, a company whose shares his firm has bet against:“Determining the real growth of a company that makes serial acquisitions is extraordinarily difficult,” Mr. Krensavage said. “The company’s adjusted numbers are garbage. Cash flow is the only number that matters, and investors can’t verify that without financials.”A version of this article appears in print on March 6, 2016, on Page BU1 of the New York edition with the headline: A Troubling Blooper Reel at Valeant.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »