AdvertisementSupported byThe Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.27 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.46 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.25 percent.The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week:Cherokee County School District, S.C., $60 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Florida Department of Transportation, $301.2 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Boston, $140 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Lancaster, Pa., $125.8 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Washington State, $74.5 million of certificates of participation. Competitive.Alaska, $134.8 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.New Jersey Educational Facilities Authority, $217.2 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Birmingham, Ala., $66.7 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Cabarrus County, N.C., $75 million of limited obligation bonds. Piper Jaffray.California, $2 billion of various purpose general obligation bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Columbus City School District, Ohio, $53.6 million of unlimited tax general obligation and various purpose refinancing bonds. Ross, Sinclaire & Associates.Dallas Independent School District, $262 million of unlimited tax school building debt securities. Citigroup Global Markets.El Paso County, Tex., $53.3 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Ramirez & Co.Hillsborough County School Board, Fla., $55 million of master lease program refinancing certificates of participation. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Hollister Joint Powers Financing Authority, Calif., $75 million of wastewater refinancing bonds. Stifel Nicolaus.Indiana Finance Authority, $103 million of revolving fund program bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Kaufman Independent School District, Tex., $52 million of unlimited tax school building bonds. Raymond James & Associates.Las Vegas Valley Water District, $608 million of general obligation water improvement and refinancing bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Las Vegas Valley Water District, $108.4 million of general obligation bonds. Morgan Stanley.Lincoln Consolidated School District, Mich., $60.1 million of general obligation unlimited tax bonds. William Blair.Louisiana Public Facilities Authority, $198.7 million of revenue refinancing bonds. Morgan Stanley.Massachusetts Housing Finance Agency, $65.8 million of single family housing revenue bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Michigan State Housing Development Authority, $96.9 million of single family mortgage revenue bonds. Barclays Capital.Minnesota Housing Finance Agency, $50.3 million of homeownership finance bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Missouri Housing Development Commission, $76.3 million of single family mortgage revenue bonds. Stifel Nicolaus.Nevada System of Higher Education, $50 million of certificates of participation. Citigroup Global Markets.New York City Housing Development Corporation, $124.3 million of multifamily housing bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.New York State Urban Development Corporation, $1.3 billion of personal income tax revenue bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Northside Independent School District, Tex., $81.1 million of unlimited tax general obligation bonds. William Blair & Co.Ohio Water Development Authority, $160 million of water development revenue bonds. Ramirez & Co.Renton School District, Wash., $59.6 million of unlimited tax general obligation bonds. Piper Jaffray.Sweetwater Union High School District, Calif., $264 million of general obligation bonds. Mesirow Financial.University of Arkansas, $108.6 million of various facility revenue bonds. J.P. Morgan Securities.Washington, D.C., $56.8 million of revenue bonds. Robert W. Baird.Advertisement