By GEORGE GENE GUSTINESMARCH 6, 2016
“Like millions of Americans, I grew up with ‘Peanuts.’ But I never outgrew it.”So begins the foreword written by President Obama for the 25th volume of “The Complete Peanuts,” the latest in a series of hardcover books reprinting every daily and Sunday strip of the iconic series that appeared from 1950 to 2000. The volume, which is scheduled for release in May, covers Jan. 1, 1999, through Feb. 13, 2000, when the final “Peanuts” strip was published the day after the death of its creator, Charles M. Schulz.“For decades, ‘Peanuts’ was our own daily security blanket,” President Obama writes in his introduction. “That’s what makes ‘Peanuts’ an American treasure.”No one would agree with that assessment more than Gary Groth, the president and co-founder of Fantagraphics Books, which has been publishing “The Complete Peanuts” since 2004. Mr. Groth wanted to make sure this volume was special, beginning with the introduction — and who was going to write it.“Obama was inevitably at the top of the list,” he said. “Let’s just reach for the stars. All he can do is say no.”AdvertisementJake Tapper of CNN, who wrote the foreword to Vol. 22, put Mr. Groth in contact with the White House and the request eventually found its way to the president.“It was a great day when we got the word that he agreed do it,” Mr. Groth said.The idea for the collected editions came to Mr. Groth in 1997, when he interviewed Mr. Schulz for The Comics Journal, a trade magazine. “Previously ‘Peanuts’ had been collected only in sporadic volumes: thematically or randomly,” Mr. Groth said. “Maybe someone should publish a uniform series,” he recalled suggesting to Mr. Schulz. “And that someone could be me,” he added.Mr. Schulz resisted at first, but eventually gave his consent. Still, the project did not really take shape until after his death, from colon cancer. Mr. Groth credits the cartoonist’s widow, Jeannie Schulz, for cutting through the red tape involved with securing the publication rights to make the series possible.Still, a series of hardcover reprints was not a safe bet. Previous collected editions of Prince Valiant, Pogo, Popeye and others “were almost always a hard sell,” Mr. Groth said. “There was no market for newspaper strip reprints. You were really targeting the hard-core comics and cartoon aficionados.”But “The Complete Peanuts” found an audience. Fantagraphics has produced two volumes a year, each selling around 15,000 to 20,000 copies, Mr. Groth said, followed by another 20,000 for a boxed set every holiday season combining the year’s releases.AdvertisementWhile the 25th volume wraps up the daily newspaper strips, it also includes a look back. It reprints “Li’l Folks,” the weekly comic from Mr. Schulz published from 1947 to 1950, which was a forerunner to “Peanuts.” The final “Complete Peanuts” volume, due in October, will provide something different: a collection of stories and drawings that appeared outside the comic strip.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“It is a real treasure trove of little-seen and never before reprinted work — all drawn by the hand of Charles Schulz,” Mr. Groth said.In 2005 “The Complete Peanuts” won two Eisner Awards, the comic book industry’s equivalent of an Oscar, for best archival collection (which it won again in 2007) and for best publication design — no doubt thanks to the evocative covers by the artist known as Seth, each featuring a gray-toned close-up of one of the “Peanuts” gang as drawn by Mr. Schulz. The series also paved the way for other lavish and comprehensive reprint editions including “The Complete Calvin and Hobbes,” by Bill Watterson.But the biggest impact of “The Complete Peanuts” was on Fantagraphics.“We’re an independent publisher: We have no backers, no investors. We have only the books we publish and our wits to fall back on,” Mr. Groth said. “We found ourselves in periodic financial crises. We published the ‘Peanuts’ right in the nick of time. It changed the fortunes of the company by allowing the company to continue to exist.”President Obama joins an eclectic group of “Complete Peanuts” foreword writers, including Garrison Keillor, Jonathan Franzen, Diana Krall, John Waters, Billie Jean King, Alec Baldwin and Patton Oswalt. “Whoopi Goldberg was terrific,” Mr. Groth said. “Some celebrities — especially the ones who turned us down — not so much.”Mr. Groth’s experience with President Obama was very satisfying, he said: “It’s great to tell the president, ‘We need it by this date. Don’t be late.’ ”An article on Monday about the 25th volume of “The Complete Peanuts,” for which President Obama wrote the foreword, misspelled, in some copies, the surname of the creator of the comic strip “Calvin and Hobbes.” He is Bill Watterson, not Waterson.An article on Monday about the 25th volume of “The Complete Peanuts,” with a foreword by President Obama, misstated the chronology of “The Complete Far Side” by Gary Larson relative to the “Peanuts” series by Charles M. Schulz. The two-volume “Far Side” set was published in October 2003; the first “Peanuts” volume came out in 2004. Therefore it is not the case that the “Peanuts” series “paved the way” for the “Far Side” reprint edition.A version of this article appears in print on March 7, 2016, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Obama Pays Tribute to the ‘Peanuts’ Gang.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.