AdvertisementSupported byBy Clifford KraussOKLAHOMA CITY — The diverse worlds of energy, politics and sports assembled at the Crossings Community Church here Monday to pay tribute to Aubrey McClendon, the natural gas wildcatting pioneer who helped catalyze the nation’s energy revolution.Kevin Durant and other players of the Oklahoma City Thunder, the National Basketball Association team that Mr. McClendon part-owned and helped bring from Seattle, were among a few thousand guests who attended the public memorial service in a tribute marked by praises of his groundbreaking business career and his philanthropy, and music played by members of the Oklahoma City Philharmonic.Mr. McClendon, 56, was remembered as an ambitious executive, legendary even in an industry known for larger-than-life characters. He transformed a tiny oil company, Chesapeake Energy, which he co-founded in 1989, into the second-biggest gas producer in the United States after Exxon Mobil.“He changed an industry and put America on the path of being energy independent,” said Tom Blalock, the chief legal officer of American Energy Partners, Mr. McClendon’s latest business venture. Mr. Blalock described him as a man of great intensity, contagious curiosity, laughter — and 5 a.m. emails. “The icing on the cake was pixie dust and he had an endless supply,” Mr. Blalock added in his tribute.Mr. McClendon died on the morning of March 2 when he crashed his sport utility vehicle into the side of a highway overpass while not wearing a seatbelt. A day earlier, he was indicted on charges of conspiring with two unnamed companies, believed to be Chesapeake Energy and SandRidge Energy, to fix prices of oil and gas leases in Oklahoma. The cause of the crash is under investigation.Mr. McClendon intertwined his personal financial well-being with that of Chesapeake Energy, taking a personal stake in company wells, then using those investments as collateral for up to $1.1 billion in loans to himself. Such behavior led the activist investor Carl C. Icahn and the Chesapeake board to force him to leave the company three years ago.But at the service Monday, Mr. McClendon was remembered as a philanthropist, a booster of Oklahoma City and a man who filled his life with golf, Jet Skiing, classic rock music, red wine and steak. He was described as a man not too big to take out the garbage at the office.He developed a campus for Chesapeake here that made the company resemble an Ivy League university, complete with a gym, day care center and a dental clinic for employees. He was a champion of natural gas as a replacement for coal and an adamant defender of hydraulic fracturing to unlock oil and gas from hard rocks in Louisiana, Oklahoma, Pennsylvania and Texas.After leaving Chesapeake, he was a co-founder of American Energy Partners, which sought to spread the fracking revolution not only around the country but across Latin America and Australia.Mr. McClendon’s interests were broad, including part-ownership of the Thunder and a winery in Bordeaux, France, and a $12 million antique map collection.“Aubrey was a renaissance man, a man for all seasons,” Frank Keating, a former governor of Oklahoma, said in his tribute. Mr. Keating noted Mr. McClendon’s philanthropy, citing his support of museums, theaters, the Boy Scouts and the United Way.A smaller public memorial was held early Saturday along Oklahoma City’s riverfront, in a recreation area Mr. McClendon helped develop.Almost every top executive of Oklahoma’s oil industry gathered at the church on Monday, mixing with many of Mr. McClendon’s former employees at Chesapeake, the company that helped restore Oklahoma as a center of the global oil and natural gas business.Mr. McClendon’s son Will said in his tribute that descriptions of Mr. McClendon’s character as reckless were accurate. He recalled how Mr. McClendon set his pants on fire at his wife, Katie’s, 50th birthday party, “literally.”“He was courageous, bold and daring,” Will McClendon said. “He was definitely not a Google maps kind of guy.”Advertisement