AdvertisementSupported byBy Liz MoyerWall Street bonuses are down for the second straight year, and recent market volatility and cutbacks suggest that 2016 is shaping up to be a difficult year, according to the New York State comptroller.The average bonus paid in the securities industry fell 9 percent, to $146,200, last year, while the bonus pool for employees who work in New York City shrank 6 percent, to $25 billion.The finance industry is a crucial component of the state’s annual tax revenue, contributing about 17.5 percent of the total last year. Wall Street’s health reverberates throughout the city and state economies; profits are on the line for luxury retailers, restaurants, real estate firms and even auto dealers.Already New York State has cut its forecast for this year’s bonus pool for finance and insurance jobs in the state, now predicting a 2.5 percent drop.Securities industry profit fell 10.5 percent last year, to $14.3 billion, the lowest since 2011.Thomas P. DiNapoli, the state comptroller, said recent job gains might not be sustainable, given the early weakness in the financial markets and increasing provisions for bad loans to energy sector companies. “Both the state and city budgets depend heavily on the securities industry, and lower profits could mean fewer industry jobs and less tax revenue,” he said.A number of banks have been cutting jobs in trading as markets have become volatile, and pay trends reflect the relative strength of individual businesses. Incentive pay fell 10 to 20 percent for fixed-income division employees last year, according to estimates from Johnson Associates, and pay for equities employees rose as much as 10 percent, for example.Wall Street has also been adjusting to new regulations that force it to take on less risk, eating into profit margins.Mr. DiNapoli has released the numbers each year as lawmakers in the state capital take up budgeting for the next fiscal year. For every job on Wall Street, two are created elsewhere in the economy, according to the comptroller’s office. The average salary, including bonuses, for securities industry employees in New York City rose 14 percent in 2014 to $404,800, which is a record. Data for 2015 is not yet available.The numbers, based on personal income tax withholding data, provide a snapshot of trends affecting Wall Street during the heart of its traditional bonus payout season, which runs from December through March. The securities industry accounted for 22 percent of private sector wages paid in New York City in 2014 even though it made up just 5 percent of private sector jobs.Over all, employment in the industry ticked up 2.7 percent last year, to 172,400, the second-consecutive year of growth and the highest number of employed people since the financial crisis, despite the fact that Wall Street as an industry is still 8 percent smaller than before 2008.The estimates do not distinguish between cash bonuses and stock-based awards that vest over multiple years. The numbers reflect cash bonuses and deferred compensation for which taxes have been withheld; they do not include stock options.The size of the average bonus had been on the rise in 2012 and 2013 before dropping 6 percent in 2014 and again last year. Still, they are far lower than the recent peak of $191,360 in 2006.OpinionMaureen SherryAdvertisement