By HIROKO TABUCHINOV. 11, 2015
Terry Lundgren, Macy's chairman and chief executive, breaks down the retailer's quarterly results, which beat on earnings but came in light on revenues.A slump in tourist spending and warmer weather hit Macy’s business in the third quarter, driving sales lower and prompting the department store chain to lower its guidance for the year.And in a message that will send a chill through the retail industry ahead of the holiday season, Macy’s said it would have to mark down inventory to make way for new styles. If others chains follow, the holiday season could be highly discount-driven, pressuring retailers’ margins.Sales at Macy’s stores open a year or longer fell 3.6 percent during the quarter, the retailer said. It lowered its full-year guidance on earnings per share to $4.20 to $4.30, from $4.70 to $4.80.Macy’s also announced that, after careful study, it would not spin off any properties into an investment fund to tap its real estate holdings, a move some investors had urged the retailer to take.Advertisement“We’re clearly disappointed,” Terry J. Lundgren, Macy’s chief executive, said on a call with investors. “We believe the retail industry is going through a tough period. We seem to experience something like this every five to seven years or so.”Karen M. Hoguet, Macy’s chief financial officer, said that Macy’s had seen a “significant decline” in international tourist sales, as the United States dollar remained strong. The number of transactions, a proxy for foot traffic, fell more than 3 percent. The warm weather did not help, she said, and items like coats, sweaters and boots were not selling well. Digital sales growth remained strong, she said.AdvertisementMr. Lundgren said Macy’s would focus on strengthening its digital offerings, especially on mobile devices, and improving the store experience and its same-day deliveries and pick-up-in-store services — “whatever the customer wants,” he said.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.