AdvertisementSupported byBy Katie ThomasIn a deal that could change the way some companies market their drugs, the Food and Drug Administration has agreed to allow a pharmaceutical company to promote a drug for a use that the agency has not approved, the company said on Tuesday.The agreement settles a legal case between the agency and the company, Amarin, a small drug maker that sued the F.D.A. last year for the right to promote its only product, Vascepa, to a broader range of patients. In August, a federal district judge in Manhattan ruled that the F.D.A. could not prohibit Amarin from using truthful information to promote its drug, even for unapproved uses, because doing so would violate the company’s right to free speech.The final settlement is still subject to approval by the court.The agency on Tuesday downplayed the implications of the deal. In a statement, it said that the settlement applied only to the Amarin case and that its position on whether companies have a constitutional right to provide truthful information about off-label uses had not changed.But some legal and drug-safety experts said the settlement could encourage other companies to seek similar arrangements and, ultimately, have profound implications for how drug makers sell their products.“This really sends a signal to other companies that if you want to engage in off-label promotion, you can negotiate with the F.D.A.,” said Dr. Michael Carome, director of health research at Public Citizen, a consumer advocacy group in Washington.“Ultimately, that’s taking us down a dangerous pathway.”While doctors may prescribe drugs in nearly any way they see fit, the F.D.A. has long argued that drug makers cannot promote their products for unapproved uses. Pharmaceutical companies have paid billions of dollars in fines in recent years after being accused of marketing drugs for off-label uses.The pharmaceutical industry has held that it should have the right to share information about its products, provided that the information is not misleading.In 2012, the agency permitted Amarin to begin selling Vascepa to people with extremely high levels of triglycerides, a kind of fat in the blood that has been linked to heart disease. After the ruling in August, Amarin said it would also begin promoting Vascepa, a prescription omega-3 fatty acid that is derived from fish, to people with slightly lower levels of triglycerides, a use the F.D.A. had previously denied.The company has said that the F.D.A. denied its request because, even though a clinical trial showed Vascepa reduced triglycerides, the drug had not been proved to reduce the risk of heart disease. A clinical trial evaluating the impact of Vascepa on heart disease is underway.Alan Bennett, a lawyer who represents the Medical Information Working Group, a coalition of drug and device companies that want the F.D.A. to expand their ability to talk about their products, said more companies may now approach the agency seeking similar deals.“My guess is they don’t want more of these cases, so my guess is they will be more flexible than they have in the past in permitting it,” Mr. Bennett said.Amarin said in a statement that truthful information ultimately served the public good. “This settlement serves the public interest by supporting informed medical decisions for tens of millions of patients with persistent high triglycerides,” said John F. Thero, Amarin’s president and chief executive.Under the settlement, Amarin would have to submit proposed marketing materials to the agency, which could then object if it felt the information was untrue or misleading. If the two parties could not agree, a federal judge would sort it out.Leaving such decisions to a judge, not the F.D.A., concerned Dr. Joshua M. Sharfstein, a former principal deputy commissioner at the F.D.A. who is now an associate dean at the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health.“The courts are at the precipice of taking over a fundamental F.D.A. function of calling balls and strikes in the drug market about what’s truthful and not misleading,” Dr. Sharfstein said.Mr. Bennett said he agreed that the F.D.A., not the judiciary, was best able to evaluate information about drugs. But he called on the agency to re-evaluate its position. “The F.D.A. has promised to take a look at these policies and try to bring them into alignment with the First Amendment,” Mr. Bennett said.Advertisement