AdvertisementSupported byBy Liz MoyerAn unregistered investment adviser with a criminal past and an interest in the wine business is facing fraud charges by the Securities and Exchange Commission, which has accused him of going to extraordinary lengths to hide his past from investors and make his firm appear legitimate.The S.E.C. says the Florida-based adviser, Steven Zoernack, 53, used fake identities to communicate with investors and make his firm look larger. Those efforts included creating an imaginary employee named Amanda Sutton who held the title “investor relations professional,” the commission said.Mr. Zoernack, whose past includes two felony fraud convictions, a bankruptcy filing, financial judgments and liens against him, is also accused of hiring a company to spruce up his Internet presence with misleading information about his success as an investor and philanthropist, with the goal of burying negative information about him that could come up in random online searches.Through his firm, EquityStar Capital Management, Mr. Zoernack sold $5.6 million in stakes of two private investment funds to more than 40 investors in 20 states and abroad, the S.E.C. said on Tuesday. Mr. Zoernack then secretly withdrew $1 million and did not tell the investors, according to the commission.He and EquityStar gave false information about the funds to the fund research firm Morningstar to elevate their profile, the commission said.“Steven Zoernack deceived investors by spreading false and misleading fund information while doing everything possible to bury his criminal history and troubling financial record,” said Antonia Chion, associate director of enforcement at the S.E.C.Mr. Zoernack could not be reached. The civil charges will be heard by an administrative law judge and could result in fines.Mr. Zoernack’s personal blog and social media accounts, and news and opinion articles that purport to be about him and his investing activities, portray a person who has been active in the markets since the early 1980s.A profile on Linkedin lists former employers that are no longer in business, including Bear Stearns, Refco and Lehman Brothers. An online profile at CrunchBase says Mr. Zoernack correctly predicted a spike in coffee prices in 1985 and an oil price of $100 a barrel in 2008. It also says he originated commercial real estate-backed bonds at Sun Credit and helped pioneer the creation of derivatives based on crude oil, heating oil and gasoline futures while at Bear Stearns.The profiles say he now works with African governments on a good-will fund. One profile says his extensive community volunteer work has included teaching religion to children and serving as a commissioner of Little League Baseball. Another blog says he has been a judge in swimming and diving events at the Special Olympics.On a blog, he describes EquityStar as a firm that oversees alternative investments that produce reliable returns in up and down markets, raising a $2 billion fund with investments from individuals with at least $1 million to invest and institutions with at least $5 million.His latest project is called Pelican Hill Vineyards LLC, a real estate investment concern that says its goal is to find underperforming vineyards, improve them and then sell them “at substantial profits,” aiming for annual returns of 25 percent to 75 percent.Mr. Zoernack’s online profile said he attended Fordham University and Boston University, where he played lacrosse. His Twitter account recently reposted suggestions for pairing Girl Scout cookies with wines.Advertisement