AdvertisementSupported byBy John KoblinThe FX show “The People v. O.J. Simpson: American Crime Story” has explored issues of race, celebrity and the 24-hour news cycle. On Tuesday night, in the sixth episode, “Marcia, Marcia, Marcia,” the series examines gender discrimination, and the withering scrutiny that the prosecutor Marcia Clark faced during the trial.Earlier this year, I spoke to Sarah Paulson about her surprisingly sympathetic performance of Ms. Clark, and about Tuesday night’s episode specifically. Here are the highlights, which have been edited and condensed for clarity.I have this strange feeling of guilt. I was only 19 at the time, but my 41-year-old self feels guilt that I, as a woman, and more women during the time of the trial, did not rally around her more. The idea that a woman who was very strong, who wore maybe shorter skirts than people thought was appropriate, had a bad haircut, didn’t wear a lot of makeup, looked a little tired because she was raising a 3- and 5-year-old and was going through a divorce and was trying the trial of the century, should be taken to task for her lack of concealer and her bad haircut? As a woman, to think that she would be scrutinized and persecuted like that, it was like a witch trial.The big thing for me was how wrong I was about her. It’s not even thoughts I formulated on my own. I allowed myself to believe what was told to me. I thought, “I don’t like her hair, she does seem awfully tough, why doesn’t she smile more?” I had a 19-year-old’s brain, so I’ll cut myself a little bit of slack. But anyone who was 30 or 40 or 50, I don’t understand why they weren’t protecting her more as one of their own and to say: Let’s not talk about what she’s wearing.People weren’t talking about her skill in the courtroom. That was ancillary to the bigger conversation about her: her looks.I don’t think women saw her as one of them. She’s the kind of woman nobody wants to be: hard, strident, aggressive, ambitious. All those negative words. Why does ambition have to be a negative word? It’s never a negative word when associated with a man.I think all she was doing was her job. Marcia didn’t want to change her clothes. She was instructed to. She was told to. At a certain point you go, “I guess if this is going to help a guilty man be sentenced appropriately, I guess I’ll do it.”I remember when we shot that, I remember walking in, not having a plan what I was going to do. I walked in thinking I looked pretty good. And then Judge Ito says, “Welcome, Ms. Clark, I think,” and there was this tittering of laughter behind me and from the defense table. All of these men. And I burst into tears. I could feel the temperature in my neck rising, I could feel the color change in my face. I remember thinking,“I don’t know how she did this.”It was one of those rare things that happens where sometimes you’ve gone enough in that person that you would have had the same reaction that they had. I couldn’t have planned that as an actress in a conscious or cognitive way that’s like: “Now you should cry here.” It’s just what I felt. It was a combination of what I felt as Marcia playing it, and as a woman, I felt incredibly exposed. It was like standing in a room full of strangers with no clothes on. It was very upsetting.We had shot a lot of that episode already. That episode was full of one pummel after another that she had to endure.I emailed her. I told her,“I can’t even tell you how much I respect how you handled yourself during all this. You were being pushed and pulled by so many people to be so many people. Anybody but you. What a horrible idea that for the first time in your life you are thrust onto a national stage, and you’re told: ‘This? The way you look, the way you are, the way you present, we don’t like it.’ ”All you’re trying to do was to put a man who you believe viciously murdered two people — one of them he was beating for years and years with no repercussions — and put your feet on the ground every day while raising a 3- and a 5-year-old? And going through a divorce. It made my head spin. The fact she was able to do that was unbelievable.I think I might have cried a little. She was perfectly punctual. Her voice was a few octave voices higher than the footage I watched because she finally quit smoking. It’s a very surreal thing to immerse yourself in this world where there is so much archival footage to draw upon. I could watch her facial expression, her reactions to things and I could imagine what she must have been thinking. I could see when she took a breath, I could see when she moved her hand.It was so odd to do so much research, and then I was sitting with her and I could actually talk to her. We had dinner for four hours.Advertisement