AdvertisementSupported byBy Ravi SomaiyaOne of the more surreal First Amendment trials in American history started this week in Florida. The wrestler Hulk Hogan, whose real name is Terry Bollea, is demanding a $100 million settlement from Gawker, the news website, over an excerpt from a video it published, of Mr. Bollea having sex with the wife of a friend, a radio shock jock known as Bubba the Love Sponge.He argues that Gawker violated his privacy in publishing the excerpt. And that is where, unexpectedly, we veer into a legal, moral and philosophical question that involves the very nature of who we are, or at least who Mr. Bollea actually is.Part of Mr. Bollea’s testimony has been positively Cartesian. It has rested on when exactly he is Mr. Bollea, a 62-year-old man who by his own admission has trouble making friends, and when he is Hulk Hogan, the wrestling champion, in which guise, he testified Monday, he has claimed to have “body-slammed Moby Dick and pulled a bumper off a Cadillac.”Mr. Bollea, who has appeared in court in a black version of his signature bandanna, his mustache apparently trimmed for the occasion, says that the video was filmed by Bubba the Love Sponge (who has legally changed his name from Todd Clem) without his knowledge, and that he has not seen it. That would seem to be an important element in his claim that his privacy was violated.He has made public statements that run counter to that position. But he says that he did so as Hulk Hogan, in which guise he often struck fictional poses and did not tell the truth.Gawker has also argued that Mr. Bollea had frequently publicly discussed his sex life with Howard Stern, among others, and that the clip it used is newsworthy.Mr. Bollea — and you may see a pattern emerging here — argues that he did not. It was Hulk Hogan who said such things. Hulk Hogan, he said by way of example, is better endowed than Mr. Bollea.The trial continues, and you can read dispatches from my colleague Nick Madigan, who is in court in Florida. Here’s an excerpt from his article today:He acknowledged that a celebrity must put up with certain pressures and scrutiny that most people don’t experience. “I’m kind of concerned about Hulk Hogan’s privacy, but you kind of give it away,” he said. “But in the privacy of your own home, no one invades my privacy.”And here is another exchange, reported by The Associated Press, which gives a flavor of the proceedings on Tuesday.An attorney for Gawker questioned Hogan about inconsistencies in his testimony and media interviews. Hogan testified that he didn’t watch the video when he discovered its existence; during a media interview he said he did. And Hogan said he didn’t know he was being videoed when he had sex with Heather Clem. But in media interviews in 2012, Hogan said he asked Bubba Clem if he was being filmed.[Hogan] chalked up the inconsistencies to being shellshocked by the tape and because he routinely put himself in his wrestling character.“I was probably in the Hulk Hogan mode,” Hogan said. “It gives you artistic ability, to be a character.”In interviews Tuesday, two philosophy professors at New York University (who have not studied the case) expressed bemusement at Mr. Bollea’s statements. Hartry Field said that the claim seemed ludicrous, but that he had little to add as a philosopher. His colleague Ned Block, also a professor of psychology, suggested that there might be some legal precedent for those who say that they have multiple personas. “The question I would ask,” he said, speaking of Mr. Bollea, “is how different he is in real life from Hulk Hogan.”Advertisement