 GREG BEATOOCT. 2, 2015
Click on a search box at Netflix, and you can search on titles, people, and genres. With Hulu, your choices are titles and people. With HBO Now, you can search on titles, and that’s it. If you’re looking for something more specific, like scenes from “The Sopranos” that depict Tony eating dessert, fuhgeddaboutit. You’ve got to try YouTube for that.At least for now.“We think search is a critical component of any video service, and our programming in particular is rich in opportunities to offer many different kinds of search,” said Diane Tryneski, HBO’s executive vice president for technology and chief digital officer. “When we’re producing a program, we create so much information even before a single frame is shot. Location, cast, crew, script, scenery, props. There’s so much rich metadata, and you never know what one individual user is going to find interesting.”In time, Ms. Tryneski suggested, you’ll be able to search on “hug it out” and jump to the exact instance in “Entourage” when the agent Ari Gold first uttered that phrase. Or maybe you’ll be able to get a list of links to every scene in “The Sopranos” that takes place in Silvio Dante’s strip club, the Bada Bing. But not yet.HBO Now became available only in April, and its search functionality is still rudimentary. While other subscription video-on-demand sites like Netflix and Hulu have been around for years, their search functionality remains relatively limited, too.AdvertisementEntering even the simplest search queries via a TV remote control can be a painstaking task – so that may partially explain why streaming video services pay relatively little attention to search.AdvertisementBut devices like Google’s Chromecast make search input easier by letting you do it on your smartphone. And voice-activated search, including the new Siri functionality Apple has added to its Apple TV device, is becoming commoner too.Siri will broaden video search in some compelling ways. According to Variety, it will allow you to search for, say, an episode of a TV show that features a specific guest star, or only the James Bond movies that star Sean Connery. But these features currently work only for content that appears in the iTunes Store; you won’t be able to conduct such searches on Netflix or HBO Now.But even as input challenges get solved, video search will continue to face the same challenge that text-based search does: How do you deliver relevant results when the data sets being searched are so large, especially when viewers don’t know exactly what they’re looking for?“People will type very broad queries like ‘funny videos,’” said Cristos Goodrow, YouTube’s engineering director. “What do you show them? Stand-up acts, pranks, late-night shows? There’s a wide variety of what people consider funny.”To deliver relevant choices as quickly as possible, most streaming-video platforms emphasize recommendation systems over traditional search. As they learn what sorts of content you’re interested in, and compare your choices and responses with those of other users with similar viewing patterns, they can begin to understand your preferences and predict what you’ll find appealing.Giving users what they want before they even know to ask for it is a pragmatic approach to online abundance.In 2013, Netflix told Wired that 75 percent of its viewer activity was driven by recommendation rather than search. (Netflix declined to comment for this article.) Mr. Goodrow said recommendations drove the majority of viewership at YouTube, as well.AdvertisementWhile recommendation systems are powered by sophisticated algorithms, they also rely on a very 20th-century broadcast dynamic: encouraging passive viewers to sit back, relax and enjoy the show.But what about viewers who do have a fairly specific notion of what they’re looking for? The holy grail of video search is not just to return links to videos that contain the contents sought, but to link directly to the spot in the video where that content exists.
        Articles, graphics and multimedia on the changing nature of how and what we watch.None of the major subscription video-on-demand sites offer such functionality, for the moment. YouTube is further along in this regard — it lets you search for the closed captions of videos that include them. If you know how to use a special syntax while performing such searches — for example, “search term, cc” — any links that YouTube returns will give you the option of starting the video at the approximate moment when the phrase you are searching for occurs, rather than at the beginning.This is how all video search should work, said Roger Macdonald, director of the television archive at Internet Archive, a nonprofit organization in San Francisco that maintains digital collections of many kinds of media.“In the modern world, there’s no way that someone would hand you a book and say, ‘Find me all the mentions of Alexander the Great in this,’” he said. “That’s an absurd notion.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.At the Internet Archive, one collection that Mr. Macdonald oversees holds more than 700,000 episodes of television news programs that have aired in the United States since 2009. The collection uses the closed captions that TV broadcasters produce to comply with Federal Communications Commission regulations to produce an index of time-coded text that users can search for specific words and phrases.So you can type in “Donald Trump” and see which news programs have mentioned him most over the last six years. And because the archive divides each episode in its collection into a series of one-minute clips, depicted as thumbnail images, you can quickly jump to the approximate place in a video where a mention occurs.This kind of pinpointed approach has value in a news context, where people are most likely to be looking for specific content, like a presidential candidate’s statements on immigration. But in an era of obsessive fandom and big data, shouldn’t such specificity extend to entertainment platforms, too — especially on subscription sites where flexibility and better service are parts of what you’re paying for?Why can’t you search for, say, movies from the 1970s that involve at least three car chases and six explosions? Or click on Carrie Bradshaw’s dress in any given “Sex and the City” scene and learn who designed it?“That’s where we’re heading,” said Ms. Tryneski of HBO. “The systems we’re creating now are going to make all the information we capture more readily accessible to users, who’ll be able to connect that information in unexpected and delightful ways. What is today TV on the Internet is going to evolve into a much deeper experience.”A version of this article appears in print on October 5, 2015, on Page F6 of the New York edition with the headline: Searching for That Scene.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.