AdvertisementSupported byBy Jonathan KandellJohn H. Gutfreund, whose aggressive leadership of Salomon Brothers and extravagant lifestyle personified the meteoric rise and fall of Wall Street moguls in the heady 1980s, died on Wednesday in Manhattan. He was 86.His son J. P. Gutfreund confirmed the death, at New York Presbyterian-Cornell Hospital, saying the cause was pneumonia.As chairman and chief executive of Salomon, the giant investment firm, Mr. Gutfreund (pronounced GOOD-friend) was called “the king of Wall Street” for having transformed his company into one of the world’s largest securities traders. He was hailed as one of Wall Street’s most brilliant and innovative players.Under his guidance, Salomon became the leading dealer in United States Treasury bonds, the predominant underwriter of corporate securities and a pioneer in turning ordinary home mortgages into tradeable securities.But his Wall Street career abruptly ended in 1991, when he was forced to resign after Salomon became embroiled in a major scandal involving illegal bids by the firm for Treasury bonds.For much of the previous decade, his name had appeared as much in the society columns as it had on the financial pages. He and his second wife, Susan Gutfreund, drew breathless coverage for the lavish sums they spent to refurbish their Manhattan apartment and Paris townhouse, to rent a British castle and a French museum for parties, and to finance weekend trips to Europe on the supersonic Concorde for shopping sprees.Women’s Wear Daily regularly referred to the voluble Mrs. Gutfreund as “Social Susie” and to her dour-looking husband as “Solemn John.”At work, Mr. Gutfreund, a short, stocky balding man, was known for a gruff demeanor, foul language and an ever-lit cigar — fitting the stereotypical image of securities traders who made their fortunes shouting orders and cursing at one another across the trading floor. His advice to novice traders — to wake up each morning “ready to bite the ass off a bear” — became a Wall Street dictum.Mr. Gutfreund liked to roam Salomon Brothers’ cavernous trading room firing questions at startled employees on their bond deals, especially those that were souring.“An eerie sixth sense guided him to wherever a crisis was unfolding,” Michael Lewis wrote in “Liar’s Poker,” a 1989 best seller about the author’s experience as a young bond trader at Salomon. “Gutfreund seemed able to smell money being lost,” he wrote, adding, “He was the last person a nerve-racked trader wanted to see.”Once his 12-hour workday was over, though, Mr. Gutfreund shed the blunt, coarse manner. Wearing large, owlish eyeglasses, he was a smartly tailored dresser who affected a near-British accent as he spoke wistfully of his decision earlier in life to forgo a career as a literature professor.Invited to join numerous blue-blood charities, he opted for a lower-profile appointment to the board of the Montefiore Medical Center in the Bronx, where he occasionally volunteered to prepare meals and wash dishes. He was content to show up regularly at black-tie charity fund-raisers.The Gutfreunds’ social life received far more press coverage than their acts of social conscience. In one instance they were sued for hoisting a giant Christmas tree into their Manhattan apartment using a crane placed on the terrace of a penthouse without the tenants’ permission. In Britain they rented Blenheim Palace, the Churchill family’s ancestral home outside Oxford, to host a party with several hundred guests.For Mr. Gutfreund’s 60th birthday, his wife threw a bash at the Musée Carnavalet in Paris and bought two seats on the Concorde so that the cake and its baker could be flown over from New York.But only two years later, Mr. Gutfreund’s business reputation and social standing were in tatters. He seemed powerless to control infighting at Salomon, which led to the departure of talented senior executives. Other Wall Street firms outdistanced Salomon after its profits declined and its costs spun out of control.Mr. Gutfreund barely managed to ward off an attempt by a corporate raider to take over Salomon. And then he was driven from Wall Street by scandal, after he and other Salomon executives failed to report illegal bids in the Treasury securities market. He settled potential charges of fraud by paying a fine and agreeing never to manage another securities firm.“No apologies to anybody,” he told Salomon’s stunned managing directors in announcing his resignation in August 1991. “What happened, happened.”John Halle Gutfreund was born in Manhattan on Sept. 14, 1929, to Manuel and Mary Gutfreund. His father, originally a butcher, became a meat wholesaler and distributor and was able to move his family to affluent Scarsdale in Westchester County. John attended Lawrenceville, the boarding school in New Jersey, and then Oberlin College in Ohio, where he majored in English. Drafted into the Army, Mr. Gutfreund served in the Korean War.Returning to civilian life, he briefly considered pursuing a scholar’s career in literature but in the end opted for finance and joined Salomon Brothers, recruited by William R. Salomon, a family acquaintance whose father had helped found the firm and who became a managing partner.Mr. Gutfreund started in 1953 as a $45-a-week trainee on the municipal bond desk. In 1958, he married Joyce Low, daughter of a Wall Street financier, and they had three sons. By 1963, Mr. Gutfreund had become Salomon’s youngest nonfamily partner.In those days, Salomon, despite its more than 50-year existence, was little known outside of Wall Street because its clients were in the wholesale trade — banks, insurance companies and pension funds for whom Salomon acted as a broker, buying and selling stocks and bonds. Investment firms at the time had none of the cachet they would later acquire. In the 1960s, more than half of Salomon’s partners did not have college degrees.But by the time Mr. Gutfreund became managing partner in 1978 on Mr. Salomon’s retirement, investment firms were attracting the brightest university graduates with bountiful salaries.The money earned by senior Wall Street managers could be astronomical for their day, as Mr. Gutfreund demonstrated in 1981, when he sold Salomon Brothers to Phibro Corporation, a $26-billion-a-year commodity merchant. The sale, for $483 million, brought Salomon partners an average of $7.8 million.Mr. Gutfreund made more than $35 million and earned $3 million more in annual salary as chief executive of Salomon Brothers, which became the financial subsidiary of the new parent company, Phibro Salomon. At the time, that was a whopping compensation package for a Wall Street executive.The Phibro deal was initially hailed as pathbreaking. “I think the combined Phibro-Salomon operation may well develop new ways of financing and innovative financial instruments,” said Felix G. Rohatyn, a partner at Lazard Frères & Company, in a 1981 interview with The New York Times. And Phibro was considered the dominant partner, with a greater capacity to generate profits.But both views soon proved mistaken. The falling prices of world commodities cut into Phibro’s profits, while soaring stock prices and bond sales earned huge commissions for Salomon. Then, in 1984, Mr. Gutfreund carried out a stunning executive suite coup by persuading the Phibro-Salomon board to name him chief executive of the company in place of David Tendler, who as chairman of Phibro had made the deal to buy Salomon. Phibro became a financial albatross, and Phibro-Salomon was renamed Salomon Inc. a few years later.By 1985, Mr. Gutfreund was at the top of the financial world. Business Week labeled him the “king of Wall Street.” American consumers, corporations and governments, from municipal to federal, were borrowing enormous quantities of money, causing an explosive growth in bonds. And no Wall Street firm knew more about the valuation, trading and sale of bonds than Salomon.Salomon’s competitive advantage over rivals was demonstrated by its early dominance in mortgage securities. Mortgages had never been considered tradeable securities until Mr. Gutfreund appointed a young Salomon executive, Lewis Ranieri, as head trader of a new mortgage security department — Wall Street’s first — in 1978. Under Mr. Ranieri, Salomon began buying home loans and repackaging them as bonds backed with government guarantees.Mr. Gutfreund, who lived in Manhattan, married Susan Kaposta in 1981; both of their first marriages had ended in divorce. She survives him. Besides his son J. P., from his second marriage, he is also survived by three other sons, Nicholas, Owen and Joshua, from his first marriage; and four grandchildren.As Mr. Gutfreund rose on Wall Street, so did his profile in New York society. Susan Gutfreund was an inveterate party-giver, an enthusiastic antiques collector and a lover of high fashion. Friends quoted her as lamenting, “It’s so expensive being rich.”The couple’s growing reputation for private extravagance soon fed rumors that Mr. Gutfreund was uncharacteristically failing to rein in spending at Salomon Brothers.“When I made John heir-apparent, he was the most conservative person in the partnership, no question,” William Salomon told The Times in 1988. He added, “If you turned in an expense account, and you had taken a client to Caravelle for dinner or something, John would ask you if it was really necessary. I thought that was a good example for the boys.”For some Wall Street observers, ballooning expense accounts were only a small symptom of a wider problem at Salomon. “At times it was as if we had no management at all,” Mr. Lewis wrote in “Liar’s Poker.” “No one put a stop to the infighting; no one gave us a sense of direction.”Salomon’s top economic guru, Henry Kaufman, left the firm, and soon so did Mr. Ranieri, the master of mortgage bonds. Dozens of young, talented Salomon traders were being wooed away by Merrill Lynch, Goldman Sachs, Morgan Stanley and other rival firms.Salomon and Mr. Gutfreund seemed to have lost their knack for innovations. At Drexel Burnham, a bright young executive named Michael Milken pioneered and dominated the extremely profitable market in junk bonds — high-risk bonds issued by companies with low credit ratings. Salomon also fell behind Drexel Burnham and other firms brokering the lucrative boom in leveraged buyouts and hostile corporate takeovers. Then the bond market crashed in the spring of 1987, leaving Salomon reeling and vulnerable.That same year, Ronald O. Perelman, the chairman of the cosmetics company Revlon and a notorious corporate raider, purchased a large stake in Salomon and tried to buy enough additional shares to take over the firm. Desperately searching for a white knight to foil the Perelman bid, Mr. Gutfreund  enlisted Warren E. Buffett, Wall Street’s most fabled investor, who had a reputation for holding on to shares for many years and for not interfering with the management of firms in which he invested.The strategy worked, and Mr. Perelman beat a hasty retreat. But Mr. Buffett drove a hard bargain: His investment firm, Berkshire Hathaway, bought $700 million of convertible preferred stock — equivalent to 9 percent of Salomon’s common shares if Mr. Buffett chose to convert his holdings. And he was given two seats on Salomon’s board. At the time, the deal amounted to buying Salomon stock at a large discount.For the next few years, Mr. Gutfreund seemed to steady Salomon’s keel. Though the firm failed to achieve the growth levels of the first half of the 1980s, it managed to bounce back from the bond and stock market crashes of 1987. But then, in 1991, an unforeseen and badly managed episode involving the purchase of Treasury bonds spelled doom for Mr. Gutfreund and almost sank Salomon.According to government regulations, no single purchaser could bid more than 35 percent of the Treasury bonds up for sale at an auction. The limit was designed to prevent a single company from cornering the market for a Treasury bond. An investment firm was allowed to exceed this percentage, however, if it was acting as a broker for customers.Paul W. Mozer, Salomon’s chief government bond trader, far exceeded the 35 percent limit in a February 1991 auction of Treasury bonds, and compounded the illegality of this action by putting in bids in the name of customers who had never asked to purchase the bonds.Although Mr. Gutfreund and other Salomon executives were told of Mr. Mozer’s transgression, they did not report it to the federal government for four months. When the government was finally informed, Salomon admitted that it had purchased substantially more than the 35 percent limit in several other Treasury auctions.Mr. Mozer was dismissed and spent four months in prison on criminal charges before settling a civil suit with the federal government in which he agreed to pay a $1.1 million fine and accepted a permanent ban from the securities industry.Traders and analysts on Wall Street feared the scandal would discredit the American securities market worldwide and raise the government’s cost of financing its debt.“The way our business operates is because everybody is completely honest,” an unnamed senior Wall Street executive with a background in the Treasury securities market told The Times in 1991. ”You transfer billions of dollars on a phone call, my word to your word. And these people lied.”Mr. Gutfreund resigned as chairman and chief executive of Salomon, as did the firm’s president, Thomas W. Strauss, and the vice chairman, John W. Meriwether.With fears rising that the government might shut down Salomon, the firm’s board invited Mr. Buffett, a man with a sterling reputation both in the financial community and among government regulators, to become chairman and chief executive on an interim basis. Mr. Buffett quickly agreed to cooperate with government investigators.In May 1992, Salomon paid $290 million in fines to the government, acknowledged that it had on occasion submitted bogus bids to buy more Treasury securities than regulations allowed, and admitted that its senior executives, including Mr. Gutfreund, had known about the fraudulent bids but had failed to make them public or report them to government officials.Mr. Gutfreund’s troubles were not over. In settling government charges against him, he agreed never again to run a securities firm and to pay a $100,000 fine. For years he battled a $300 million suit filed by private lawyers on behalf of Salomon shareholders who felt that the bidding scandal had caused the value of their stock to decline. Mr. Gutfreund spent more than $5 million of his own money on legal fees trying to get Salomon to pay him more than $15 million, which he insisted the firm owed him in retirement and option plans.“No one understands why Salomon is continuing with this vendetta,” Mr. Gutfreund said in a 1994 interview. “Salomon has shown no caring for me in any way.”But an arbitration proceeding ruled entirely in Salomon’s favor, apparently accepting the firm’s contentions that it had almost perished as a result of Mr. Gutfreund’s actions, that he had deceived Salomon’s board and that he should have been fired for cause, thus making him ineligible for the compensation he was claiming.Salomon Brothers was acquired in 1998 by Citigroup and five years later ceased to exist under its own name.In a 1998 interview with The Times, Mr. Gutfreund seemed reconciled to his fall from grace. His legal problems — which he said had cost him more than $11 million — were behind him, and he was running his own small investment consulting firm.“What I have learned, or at least belatedly remembered, is that there is the possibility of a satisfying life that is broader than the Street,” he said. “I never thought of myself as a king. People really want you to be their deity. They forget the fact that you are a person who has feelings and doubts.”Advertisement