AdvertisementSupported byBy Jad MouawadThe head of Volkswagen’s American operations, a central figure in the carmaker’s effort to repair relations with dealers and customers after an emissions scandal, unexpectedly stepped down on Wednesday.The sudden departure of the executive, Michael Horn, adds to the strategic uncertainty for Volkswagen, particularly in the United States, where sales have been plummeting and dealers have been grumbling.After being named to the top spot in the United States two years ago, Mr. Horn played a crucial role in rebuilding Volkswagen’s relationship with its dealership network, gaining the support of the sales force on the ground. Car dealers in the United States had long complained about the lack of support they received from the company’s managers in Germany.The fraud further tested the relationship, with Volkswagen admitting that 11 million diesel cars worldwide contained a so-called cheat device that effectively lowered emissions when the exhaust was being tested. Mr. Horn tried to soothe American dealers, offering to reimburse them for the cost of holding onto diesel cars and providing extra incentives for selling gasoline-powered vehicles.Now, dealers are wondering about the direction of management. Alan Brown, who is the chairman of the Volkswagen National Dealer Advisory Council and runs two Volkswagen dealerships in Texas, said Mr. Horn’s departure was a serious blow.“We are troubled watching the mismanagement of this scandal from Germany, and how it may impact the ultimate decisions by the authorities in the United States,” the Volkswagen dealers association said in a statement. “This change in management can only serve to put the company at more risk, not less.”Volkswagen admitted that 11 million of its vehicles were equipped with software that was used to cheat on emissions tests. This is how the technology works and what it now means for vehicle owners.The departure of Mr. Horn is the latest in a string of executive changes at Volkswagen since the scandal. The company’s chief executive resigned last year. A newly named head of North American operations left shortly after that group was reorganized.The departure of Mr. Horn, which the company said was reached by “mutual agreement,” is effective immediately. The company offered few details, except to say that Mr. Horn was leaving to pursue other opportunities.Mr. Horn will be replaced by Hinrich J. Woebcken, who was recently named head of the North American region and chairman of Volkswagen Group of America.“The Volkswagen leadership hammer continues to fall,” said Akshay Anand, an analyst at Kelley Blue Book, who noted that Mr. Horn had many allies among Volkswagen’s dealers in the United States. “It will be interesting to see if Woebcken can continue that, and more importantly, if he can help VW navigate through its crisis.”In the early days of the emissions scandal, Mr. Horn was the company’s public face, repeatedly apologizing to customers and testifying before Congress about the problem. Shortly after Volkswagen admitted the fraud, Mr. Horn said at a congressional hearing that the company was “working tirelessly to develop remedies” for the affected vehicles.Months later, Volkswagen has still not come up with a recall plan that would fix the problem and satisfy the Environmental Protection Agency, which regulates vehicle emissions in the United States. Investigators in the United States and Europe are also trying to answer basic questions about the fraud and who was responsible.Volkswagen has said the fraud was limited to a small group of people. But prosecutors in Germany said on Tuesday that they had expanded their investigation, raising the number of suspects to 17, from six. (While German privacy rules do not allow suspects to be named, they do not include current or former members of the company’s management board, according to a spokesman for the prosecutor’s office.)Company executives knew about the potential emissions problems more than a year before Volkswagen publicly admitted the fraud to regulators. But in talks with American regulators the carmaker initially denied the existence of a cheat device.In testimony in October, Mr. Horn said he knew of a potential emissions problem in the spring of 2014. At the time, he said he was told that the company’s engineers were working to resolve the problem.Mr. Horn, 54, who has worked for more than 25 years at Volkswagen, took the top job in North America in January 2014. Before that, he was the company’s global head of after sales.In the United States, he worked to mend relations between the company and its dealer network, which had become increasingly tense.Until Mr. Horn was appointed, dealers complained that their voices were not being heard by the leadership in Germany. They warned that the overly ambitious goal of selling 800,000 cars by 2018 could not be met because Volkswagen’s lineup was not suited to the American market.To help assuage those concerns, Volkswagen said that it would produce at its plant in Chattanooga, Tenn., a new midsize sport utility vehicle aimed at American consumers. The new vehicle, expected to be ready this year, is part of a $600 million investment in its sole American factory.In a statement, the chief executive of the Volkswagen brand, Herbert Diess, said, “During his time in the U.S., Michael Horn built up a strong relationship with our national dealer body and showed exemplary leadership during difficult times for the brand.”After the fraud, Mr. Horn managed to maintain the strong support of the dealers, even as the company scrambled to do damage control. In a letter to dealers, he stressed the company’s commitment to the sales force. The company also guaranteed bonuses to dealers who sold cars in the last half of 2015.Mr. Brown, of the dealer council, said last year that unless Mr. Horn was directly implicated in the fraud, his removal “would be nothing short of catastrophic to our market.”Advertisement