
Breakingviews By                     
GINA CHON

MARCH 9, 2016
America’s financial technology industry has exploded in recent years, but regulators have not kept pace.This is partly because of the country’s outdated patchwork of state rules. Britain and other countries are further ahead in addressing this emerging sector in a fresh way. Creating a modern, federal agency to oversee these companies is a priority for United States policy makers.Many of the new “fintech” firms fall under the categories of money transmitters or consumer lenders, businesses that require licenses from nearly 50 states. Each state has different standards, not to mention regulatory examiners with varying degrees of sophistication.That means the 165-year-old Western Union is regulated the same way that a Bitcoin-based transfer start-up with fewer than 50 employees might be. For freshly minted companies, state compliance can be prohibitive, costing more than $1 million annually.AdvertisementMarketplace lenders that provide direct loans are also under state jurisdiction. Take SoFi, a San Francisco start-up, which makes loans. The company, which is led by Mike Cagney, a former Wells Fargo banker, and has raised $1 billion, has 18 state licenses for consumer lending and nearly 20 more for mortgages.The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, which was established after the 2008 financial crisis, is the federal watchdog looking out for fintech customers, a critical role in a landscape where algorithms have replaced credit scores to determine borrowing.AdvertisementBut the agency’s mandate is limited and does not address risks to the broader financial system. The industry is not large enough to raise those concerns, but it could in the future.Yet it is not yet clear who at the federal level has jurisdiction. Regulators need to figure this out fast, and account for the different business models many of these companies have from traditional banks.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency is looking at ways to evaluate some of the new products. The Federal Reserve could be ideal as it can see the interconnectivity between fintech and the banking industry to assess risks. Banks are working with some of these start-ups and buying their loans.Other countries have already moved forward. This year, Britain established a start-up unit to help firms thinking of becoming banks, and later will accept proposals for the “regulatory sandbox” program in which companies can test products.Eventually, an international framework will be needed because many of these enterprises encompass global, borderless businesses. The industry is quickly evolving, and regulators need to innovate, too.Gina Chon is Washington columnist at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »