

      By NOAM SCHEIBER

MARCH 11, 2016

President Obama is expected to soon nominate a candidate to fill the seat on the Supreme Court long occupied by Justice Antonin Scalia. Senate Republicans have vowed to block anyone the president names. Here are the leading contenders, with a snapshot of what we know about their views on business-related legal issues. Authored an opinion upholding a Labor Department rule that extended minimum wage and overtime protections to homecare workers, which was widely hailed by labor unions. On the other hand, a stint in the solicitor general’s office during George W. Bush’s presidency, as well cases in private practice representing Jeffrey Skilling, the former Enron chief executive, and Exxon Mobil on allegations of human rights violations in Indonesia, suggest that he is no anti-business agitator. He co-wrote a 2009 law review article arguing that there was too little evidence to conclude that the Roberts court was unusually pro-business. Has served on the D.C. Circuit since 1997 and frequently upheld National Labor Relations Board decisions that employers violated workers’ labor rights. But, as Scotusblog suggests, this may be more a function of his general deference to federal agencies than any broader suspicion of business. He wrote a 1987 law review article that argued against revising federal antitrust doctrine to make it easier to strike down state regulations. Spent more than a decade as an appellate lawyer representing corporate giants like Verizon, Shell Oil and Coca-Cola. In 2014, he ruled in favor of a retailer in a case involving allegations of unpaid overtime wages. The ruling required workers to pursue these claims through individual arbitration rather than as a class action in court, according to the blog OnLabor.Spent several years in the solicitor general’s office under Presidents Bill Clinton and George W. Bush, then went into private practice at a large firm that frequently represents corporations, before being appointed to the federal bench. OnLabor notes that she has written several opinions siding with employees in cases against employers. Before being appointed to the federal bench she was of counsel at a private law firm. She also served as a federal public defender in the District of Columbia between 2005 and 2007, and on the United States Sentencing Commission from 2010 to 2014.Worked in the Office of the Federal Public Defender in Iowa for roughly 20 years. As a federal judge, according to SCOTUSblog, she has mostly made her mark on questions of criminal law, and repeatedly weighed in against the death penalty. Advertisement