

      By BROOKS BARNES

UPDATED March 20, 2016

By BROOKS BARNES Photographs by EMILY BERLSix years ago, when Universal Parks & Resorts opened the Wizarding World of Harry Potter in Florida, the initial experience was less than magical. It was a sweltering June day. The main attraction, a simulated broom ride, proved a little too rambunctious, leaving entire families with motion sickness. At one point, the line to get into Hogsmeade village was nine hours long.Nine.Now comes the cross-country expansion. Universal Studios Hollywood will unveil its own Wizarding World on April 7. Although the Potter movie series ended in 2011, calling into question continuing interest in the boy wizard, analysts expect the Hollywood park’s overall attendance to increase immediately by more than 20 percent. The addition may give Universal Parks & Resorts an earnings lift of as much as $100 million in 2017.The good news for visitors: Universal seems determined to make this introduction smoother. It chose a quieter time of year for the unveiling (spring instead of summer). Management started letting in small numbers of people in February for what it has called “technical rehearsals.” Universal introduced a demand-based ticket pricing system designed to prevent overcrowding. And it tweaked the Hogsmeade blueprints to add capacity.Here’s a peek inside the new and improved Wizarding World West.  In J.K. Rowling’s “Harry Potter” books and the resulting movies, wizards do not choose their wands; the wands choose them. At Ms. Rowling’s insistence, the Orlando version of Ollivander’s wand shop, where the theatrical choosing happens, thwarted theme park design protocols and was built ridiculously tiny – just as it was in the films. But people routinely ended up waiting more than an hour to get inside, so the California version is twice as big. Will less cramped quarters prompt shoppers to spend more freely? For enthusiastic shoppers, Universal will offer simple, stylized wands for $39.99. But the park really wants to sell visitors a $47.95 “interactive” version that can be used to activate sensors – err, perform magic – throughout Hogsmeade village. There are 11 spots in the new Wizarding World where the high-end wands can set off surprises (animatronic figures in a window display, for instance).The original Wizarding World did not offer these experiences. Alan Gilmore, an art director for the “Harry Potter” films who has helped Universal build the related attractions, likened the tweaks to improving a recipe. “It’s like being able to come back and cook a meal again – more salt this time,” he said during a preopening tour.In terms of acreage, the new Wizarding World, which cost $275 million to build, is roughly half as large as the original, mostly because it has only one outdoor roller coaster instead of two. (The California park is making do without the Dragon Challenge, a Florida coaster that got worldwide attention in 2011 when a freak accident resulted in a serious eye injury for a rider.) But California has a leg up on Florida when it comes to Hogwarts Castle. The towering stone structure, which is the centerpiece of both Wizarding Worlds, will probably strike visitors as a bit more grand in California. As visitors climb into the castle’s center – where the 3-D broom ride, Harry Potter and the Forbidden Journey, is located – they have a stunning view (on a clear day) of the surrounding San Gabriel Mountains, which adds to the immersion. The view in Florida is of … Orlando. Not by New York standards, but perhaps for a theme park. Wizarding World’s signature Three Broomsticks restaurant offers an “eclectic British menu,” which means things like bangers (squishy sausages, like the ones Hagrid keeps in his coat), shepherd’s pie and an item called beef, lamb & Guinness stew. New to the menu in California – perhaps to satisfy visitors who want more typical theme park fare – is something called the Great Feast, which comes with chicken, ribs, corn on the cob and potatoes. As ever, visitors will be pushed to buy Butterbeer, a slightly fizzy, enormously sweet nonalcoholic concoction. Just don’t chug a full mug before that broom flight. Advertisement