By KATIE THOMASMARCH 9, 2016
Valeant Pharmaceuticals, which has been under scrutiny for its drug-pricing practices, said on Wednesday that it was adding three new members to its board, including one from Pershing Square Capital Management, a major company shareholder.Valeant is trying to reassure investors after a rocky period for the once-hot company. Its business practices, including buying old drugs and raising their prices, have been questioned by Congress and investigated by federal law enforcement agencies.Investors were newly shaken last week after Valeant abruptly canceled its fourth-quarter earnings call and financial guidance for 2016 and disclosed that it was being investigated by the Securities and Exchange Commission. The news came just as Valeant’s chief executive, J. Michael Pearson, was returning from a two-month medical leave.The new board members are Stephen Fraidin, vice chairman of Pershing; Fred Eshelman, a longtime pharmaceutical executive; and Thomas W. Ross Sr., a former president of the University of North Carolina.The addition of Mr. Fraidin to the board further cements the company’s ties to Pershing, a hedge fund that is Valeant’s third-largest owner and has lost billions over the last year as the company’s stock has tumbled.AdvertisementWilliam A. Ackman, Pershing’s chief executive, has vigorously defended Valeant as recently as Tuesday, when he called the company a “very valuable asset” at a conference for investors. At the same event, however, Mr. Ackman said that the company would need to be sold or to bring in new management if it did not stabilize soon.AdvertisementValeant’s stock lost two-thirds of its value in the fall after some investors began questioning its accounting practices and its ability to pay more than $30 billion in debt. In addition to drawing scrutiny for raising drug prices, Valeant was also forced to cut ties with a mail-order pharmacy, Philidor, which it used to help it get around efforts of pharmacies and insurance companies to substitute cheaper generics for some of the company’s costly drugs.Then, in December, Mr. Pearson went on medical leave after he was rushed to the hospital for what the company later described as severe pneumonia. He returned on Feb. 28, and has told analysts that he decided to cancel the company’s the earnings call and financial guidance because he needed to re-familiarize himself with the business.The company has since said it will announce its earnings on March 15.The company also said on Wednesday that another board member, Dr. Anders Lonner, had stepped down. “I continue to believe in the future of Valeant, but this position requires more time than I can provide at this time,” Dr. Lonner said in a statement.A version of this article appears in print on March 10, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Valeant Takes Step to Soothe Investors.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.