By BROOKS BARNESMARCH 10, 2016
LOS ANGELES — The Hollywood publicity and marketing agency PMK-BNC absorbed the clients and principals of a smaller competitor on Thursday, sending a ripple through a corner of moviedom that has been relatively quiet of late.Cindi Berger, chief executive of PMK-BNC, said that two well-known publicists, Joy Fehily and Michael Donkis, who ran a boutique agency called Prime since 2009, would fold their operations into her company. The move will bring PMK-BNC such major clients as Robert Downey Jr., Seth MacFarlane, Aaron Sorkin and the directors Christopher McQuarrie, Phil Lord and Christopher Miller.Ms. Fehily and Mr. Donkis, who will become executive vice presidents, will oversee a new division called entertainment strategy and development. That could mean setting up foundations for celebrities or working to match stars with brands — Pepsi, Audi and Samsung are PMK-BNC clients — for promotional campaigns. A half-dozen junior Prime publicists will also now work for PMK-BNC.In a statement, Ms. Berger said the former Prime staff would bring her company “tremendous thought-leadership and gravitas.”AdvertisementAfter several years of upheaval — PMK and BNC had a tumultuous merger in 2010, and the blue-chip firm 42West experienced a schism in 2011 — Hollywood’s publicity landscape has recently been relatively stable.But that business is changing. No longer is it just about the dark art of placing an article in Vanity Fair, escorting a star down a red carpet or trying to dodge tabloid gossip. Celebrity publicists now must contend with a volatile, web-driven, 24-hour media culture — on a global scale — that has forced them to become less the cautious gatekeepers and more the frenetic multitaskers.AdvertisementIn addition, smaller firms are having a more difficult time offering the necessary services. PMK-BNC, which is part of the Interpublic Group of advertising and communications agencies, has a robust analytics division, for instance, that helps its publicists figure out how to capitalize on social media networks and understand how fan bases overlap with the advertising goals of consumer product companies.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.