By REUTERSMARCH 10, 2016
The number of Americans filing for unemployment benefits has reached its lowest level since October, suggesting sustained strength in the labor market.The Labor Department said on Thursday that initial claims for state unemployment benefits declined 18,000 to a seasonally adjusted 259,000 for the week that ended March 5.“The labor market continues to be the light shining through the foggy state of the global economy,” said Jim Baird, chief investment officer at Plante Moran Financial Advisors in Kalamazoo, Mich.In a separate report on Thursday, the Federal Reserve said rising stock prices and home values had pushed the net worth of United States households higher in the fourth quarter, a sign that families, particularly wealthy ones, were on solid footing before a sell-off in stocks roiled global markets this year.AdvertisementThe increase added $1.64 trillion to the total wealth of American families, putting it at $86.8 trillion, the report showed.
            Weekly number of people who have filed for unemployment benefits for the first time.        400,0004-week moving average300 2001000ONDJFMARCH 10, 2016
Growth in United States consumer spending accelerated last year as the jobless rate fell and wage increases picked up, but the outlook has been clouded this year by worries over the health of the global economy.AdvertisementThursday’s data on net worth suggests the solidifying financial footing would help people weather falling prices for their financial assets.Jobless claims are being watched for signs of labor market weakness after the recent sell-off in stocks. But so far, the labor market seems to be healthy. Nonfarm payrolls increased by 242,000 jobs in February, and the unemployment rate held at an eight-year low of 4.9 percent.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Recession fears have also been soothed by strong consumer spending at the start of the year, as well as signs of some stabilization in the troubled manufacturing sector. A tightening labor market and firming inflation could encourage the Federal Reserve to continue gradually raising interest rates this year.“A data-dependent Fed should be focused on these developments,” said John Ryding, chief economist at RDQ Economics in New York. The Fed is, however, not expected to raise borrowing costs at its meeting next week.Jobless claims have now been below 300,000, a figure associated with healthy labor market conditions, for a year — the longest run since the early 1970s. The four-week moving average of claims, considered a better measure of labor market trends as it irons out week-to-week volatility, fell 2,500, to 267,500 last week, the lowest since late October.The claims report showed the number of people still receiving benefits after an initial week of aid dropped 32,000, to 2.23 million in the week that ended Feb. 27. The four-week average of the so-called continuing claims fell 4,500, to 2.25 million.A version of this article appears in print on March 11, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Low Jobless Claims Suggest Strength in Labor Market.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.