

      By JONAH ENGEL BROMWICH

MARCH 11, 2016

Once, he was the “Most Interesting Man in the World.” Now, he’s just a man.So it goes for Jonathan Goldsmith, 77, the actor who played the smooth-talking, silver-bearded pitchman for Dos Equis, the Mexican beer. Mr. Goldsmith, who took the role in 2006, now joins the ranks of those who once stood for something — Old Spice, PCs, Macs, Dells, Men’s Warehouse, Subway — but have since been cut off from their fans and television face time, deposed and brandless.Many pitchmen and women live out their tenure with dignity, and go on to other things, as Mr. Goldsmith is likely to do. Others have rockier endings. Here are some of the more notable spokesmen and spokeswomen who have since moved on.Mr. Goldsmith’s first appearance was preceded by the emergence of the “Chuck Norris Facts” meme years earlier, in which lists of superlative but false traits and feats were attributed to the “Walker, Texas Ranger” actor. An example: “When Alexander Graham Bell invented the telephone, he had three missed calls from Chuck Norris.”A similar ethos was channeled into the ad campaign featuring Mr. Goldsmith, in which an authoritative voice-over (provided by Will Lyman of “Frontline”) listed outlandish facts about the Most Interesting Man in the World. According to a report from the financial news outlet 24/7 Wall Street, Dos Equis’ status as the fastest-growing beer brand in the United States between 2008 and 2013 was largely attributable to the campaign.These Apple ads, which had their premiere in 2006 and ran through 2009, were more blatant than most in suggesting that the two pitchmen involved — played by the actors Justin Long and John Hodgman — were the living embodiment of the products they represented. Mr. Long, playing the Mac character, was hip, wry and friendly, especially when compared with Mr. Hodgman’s character, a stodgy, out-of-touch snob who inevitably found himself on the losing end of any comparison.By the year the “Get a Mac” campaign concluded, Apple had more than doubled its share of the computer desktop market. Mr. Long and Mr. Hodgman, who contributes to The Times Magazine, both went on to continue their successful acting careers.Benjamin Curtis played Steven in these ads from 2000 to 2003. It was a predecessor of Mr. Long’s character: a young, computer-hawking slacker. His enthusiastic catchphrase, “Dude, you’re getting a Dell!” was a staple of the ads, and his affable character — mischievous but, ultimately, harmless — was someone you would not be shocked to find smoking a joint in a parking lot somewhere.Mr. Curtis’s tenure as the Dell Dude ended shortly after he was arrested and accused of buying a bag of marijuana. Company officials had already started to phase the character out, according to the fact-checking website Snopes, but Mr. Curtis was eventually fired.An equally ubiquitous catchphrase was spoken by the anonymous Test Man, who checked whether Verizon’s mobile service was up to snuff as he roamed the country. Test Man, played by the actor Paul Marcarelli, began his run in November 2001, and after nine years in the role, was notified by email that his services would no longer be required, according to a 2011 profile in The Atlantic.Verizon had kept Mr. Marcarelli on something of a tight leash, even attempting to keep his name a secret. After the job was over, he was able to recover his own identity, writing and co-producing an independent film, “The Green.” He had to ditch his favored glasses, however, which made him too recognizable to fans on the street.Esurance’s pitchwoman for this campaign, which started in 2004, was animated, but that made did not make her pink hair and skintight catsuit any less appealing to the 18-to-24-year-old single male viewers she was designed to attract. Six years later, the company, hoping to attract a wider demographic, started to phase the character out. It did not help that fans online had begun to take imaginative license with the character’s image and backstory, demonstrating that the company’s marketing strategy had perhaps succeeded a little too well. Taking the reins from the actress Catherine Zeta-Jones, the Canadian model and actress Carly Foulkes began appearing in commercials for the telecommunications company in 2010. Initially a bubbly, sundress-wearing presence in ads, Ms. Foulkes’s image was recast in 2012 as a no-nonsense biker chick who thrilled to speed, helping to promote the company’s revamped wireless infrastructure. She continued to appear in spots until late 2013 — despite rumors that year that she had been dropped — but the company eventually moved on to other ad campaigns, including several associated with its “uncarrier” message that was more in line with the aggressive changes it hoped to bring to the industry.Arguably the most famous of the former pitchmen in recent memory, Jared Fogle, the former Subway sandwich shop spokesman, was sentenced in November to more than 15 years of prison after he pleaded guilty to engaging in sex acts with minors and distributing child pornography. Mr. Fogle first appeared on behalf of the sandwich chain in 2000, after losing 245 pounds by eating its food, which he promoted as a healthful alternative to the greasy offerings at other fast-food chains. Mr. Fogle appeared in Subway commercials for more than a decade — they officially suspended ties in July — though he was not always the central focus of its ad campaigns. He was initially a boon to the company, which grew quickly after its first ad featuring Mr. Fogle, but his crimes have significantly affected the chain’s reputation, a marketing report found. Advertisement