AdvertisementSupported byBy Matthew Goldstein and Alexandra StevensonThe hedge fund titan Larry Robbins did something out of character last year. He apologized to investors for losing their money and pledged to “right the ship as quickly as possible.” Then he solicited more money from them, raising $1 billion for a new fund and promised to waive the fees.But he keeps on losing money.Over the first two months of this year, his $9.2 billion Glenview Capital Management’s flagship portfolio lost 15 percent. The new fund — called GCM Equity Partners — is down 5.2 percent. Even worse, the Glenview Capital Opportunity fund, a $1.7 billion portfolio that uses leverage or borrowed money to enhance its bets, has lost 22.4 percent through the end of February.Mr. Robbins is not the only one. William A. Ackman, another big-name investor, is also nursing double-digit losses this year.If last year was a tough one for the swing-for-the-fences hedge fund managers who became synonymous with moneymaking in years past, the first few months of 2016 are looking just as bad.These losses have become harder for impatient investors to stomach following big losses last year.The University of California’s endowment fund, for example, said on Thursday that it would cut the number of hedge funds it invests in to about 10 from 32, as part of an effort to simplify its hedge fund investments.Now some brand-name managers who have recorded big losses for many months are facing pressure from investors to redeem their money — something that could lead them to sell their holdings in stocks in order to come up with the necessary cash.But the continued underperformance from the industry has also raised a broader question from investors like pension funds: What are they getting in return for the hefty fees they pay?In the first three months of this year, investors are expected to withdraw $25 billion from hedge funds, according to a Goldman Sachs Prime Brokerage Services survey of hedge fund investors representing about $425 billion in investments. Of those investors who planned to redeem money, however, more than three-quarters said they would reinvest the money in other hedge funds.“I think they are getting the benefit of the doubt,” Dean Backer, global head of sales and capital introduction at Goldman Sachs, said of many of the biggest hedge fund managers, owing to their historical performance. “I’m not sure people know — if they took money out of hedge funds— where they would put it,” he added.Some well-known firms that bucked the negative trend in 2015 are getting punished this year. The Marcato International Fund, run by Mick McGuire, a former protégé of Mr. Ackman, was down 12.8 percent as of the end of February. Citadel’s Kensington fund, run by the billionaire Kenneth C. Griffin, had lost 6.2 percent as of the end of February. SkyBridge Capital, a fund of hedge funds run by Anthony Scaramucci, pulled $1 billion in the fourth quarter from hedge funds that focus on event-driven strategies led by John A. Paulson, Daniel Loeb and Barry Rosenstein, taking action ahead of turbulent performance from all three firms this year.Solomon Kumin’s Folger Hill Asset Management is still struggling to gain traction some two years after it opened for business. The firm is down about 10 percent for the year. Mr. Kumin, who was the chief operating officer for Steven A. Cohen’s former multibillion-dollar hedge fund, SAC Capital Advisors, lost 3 percent last year.Maybe one of the biggest surprise losers is Blackstone’s Senfina Advisors, a $2 billion fund the private equity firm started in 2014 that allocates money to several equity trading teams. The fund is down about 15 percent for the year after posting a 20 percent gain in 2015.Some of the declines can be attributed to the underwhelming performance of a basket of 50 stocks that Goldman Sachs says hedge funds like most. The basket — which includes Allergan, Amazon, Apple, Citigroup, Valeant and Teva — was down 5.6 percent for the year as of March 4.Meanwhile, the broadest measure of hedge fund performance, the HFRI Fund Weighted Composite Index, was down about 2.6 percent for the year at the end of February, matching the 2.6 percent decline in the S.&P. 500-stock index as of the close of trading on Thursday.Both Mr. Robbins and Mr. Ackman then are consistently faring worse than their peers when it comes to placing bets on stocks.For Mr. Robbins, positions in Monsanto, Cigna, the Laboratory Corporation of America and Teva Pharmaceutical Industries have caused investors a headache. For Mr. Ackman, big bets on Valeant, Platform Specialty Products and the Howard Hughes Corporation have driven losses.And Mr. Ackman’s firm continues to be bedeviled by its longstanding bearish bet against the shares of Herbalife, which have risen a little more than 3 percent this year.It’s not all red ink in the nearly $3 trillion hedge fund universe.David Einhorn’s Greenlight Capital is up 3.3 percent after losing 20.4 percent last year. Horseman Capital Management, a firm based in London and run by John Horseman, is up 9.7 percent this year, after posting gains of 20.4 percent in 2015.One of this year’s early big winners is Boaz Weinstein and his Saba Capital Management. Mr. Weinstein, a one-time star credit trader at Deutsche Bank, has seen his share of ups and downs — assets at his fund fell to $1.9 billion from a peak of nearly $6 billion in 2012. But the firm now appears to be on the upswing.Saba Capital, which focuses mostly on investments in credit, reported a 3.4 percent gain in its main fund last year. As of the beginning of March, the fund was up a little more than 14 percent — making it one of the top-performing hedge funds tracked by HSBC. A major driver of the firm’s returns this year is a bet on volatility in Asian markets in both Japan and China, where the swings in stock prices have been far greater than in the United States.Despite the poor returns and hand-wringing from investors in certain funds, many of this year’s worst-performing managers will be fine, as evidenced by their hobbies — from real estate to art, and even horses.Mr. Robbins recently bought a Manhattan penthouse on the Upper East Side for $37.9 million. Mr. Griffin paid $500 million for two pieces of iconic modern art.As for Mr. Kumin, while things may have gotten off to a slow start on Wall Street, he has enjoyed some good fortune on the racetrack. A horse racing organization recently named Mr. Kumin “new owner of the year” because of the success of two horses he owns.Advertisement