AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressA lawsuit brought by a hedge fund owner who claimed that an F.B.I. raid had violated his civil rights and forced him to close his business may proceed to determine whether evidence will support his “grave allegations,” a judge said on Thursday.Judge William H. Pauley III of United States District Court in Manhattan freed lawyers to learn more to support David Ganek’s claim that the raid in November 2010 of the New York offices of Level Global Investors as part of a federal crackdown on insider trading resulted from deliberate misrepresentations.In a lawsuit seeking unspecified damages, Mr. Ganek asserts that fabricated evidence led a magistrate to issue a warrant approving the raid, which with the government’s heavy-handed tactics led to the closure of Level Global in February 2011. The company, which was based in Greenwich, Conn., had more than $4 billion in assets under management.“These are grave allegations,” the judge wrote. He said letting lawyers assemble more evidence would help determine whether the government’s actions had resulted from “a simple misunderstanding or whether something more troubling was afoot.”A prosecutor’s spokesman declined to comment on Thursday. In a statement, Mr. Ganek called the ruling a “tremendous victory.”“This is the first step towards holding the government accountable despite the fact that conventional wisdom has been the government can’t be held accountable for troubling conduct,” he said.Anna Benvenutti Hoffmann, a lawyer for Mr. Ganek, said, “We are confident that the facts will demonstrate that this was no misunderstanding but rather that it was something far more nefarious.”Judge Pauley noted that the raids of Mr. Ganek’s hedge fund and others “sent shock waves through Wall Street” as investment bankers and traders were indicted and multibillion-dollar businesses were shuttered. The Securities and Exchange Commission also brought many civil cases.“But five years later, a different picture has emerged,” the judge wrote, recalling that a Manhattan federal appeals court has rejected the government theory used in some of the cases.“Criminal convictions were vacated, and indictments dismissed,” Judge Pauley said. “And in a nearly unprecedented role-reversal, the S.E.C. agreed to disgorge monies it collected in connection with consent judgments against various hedge funds, including Level Global.”Advertisement