AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Antony CurrieJohn H. Gutfreund is taking an old Wall Street model to the grave.Mr. Gutfreund, the boss at Salomon Brothers in the 1980s, died on Wednesday at age 86. His tenure signaled the vanguard of investment banks moving from partnerships into trading powerhouses – and eventually into scandal.In many respects, Mr. Gutfreund — immortalized in Michael Lewis’s “Liar’s Poker” — helped lay the groundwork for the excesses that took the industry to the brink of disaster almost two decades after he was forced out. But Mr. Gutfreund’s era was one in which bankers could only put their own firms and personal wealth, rather than the global economic system, at risk.Mr. Gutfreund (pronounced “GOOD-friend”) started to shake up the firm and its industry within three years of taking the helm in 1978. He did so by selling it to the Phibro Corporation in a deal that prompted William Salomon, who had handpicked Mr. Gutfreund as his successor, to lament that his “materialism is disgraceful.”One of the deal’s effects was that a major Wall Street bank became publicly traded for the first time – and it transferred the bulk of the risk away from employees to shareholders. That helped spur even more risk-taking, a recurring theme of the next quarter-century on Wall Street. Salomon was, under Mr. Gutfreund’s leadership, regarded as the industry’s cutting edge.The sale to Phibro also spawned another Wall Street staple: boardroom coups. By 1984, Mr. Gutfreund had wrested control back from his erstwhile allies at Phibro. Within three years, problems hit several securities firms as junk bond bets soured. Unlike in 2008, though, private capital alone came to the rescue, rather than a taxpayer bailout; in Salomon’s case, from Warren E. Buffett.That’s largely because securities firms, unlike the banks they eventually became, were smaller, less complex and less interconnected than their contemporary incarnations. Even the rogue trader scandal in 1991 that almost wrecked Salomon did not have enough power to do more than rattle rivals. It did, though, effectively end Mr. Gutfreund’s career. And unlike latter-day peers, he was sent packing without a golden handshake and with a ban from running a securities firm without previous approval from regulators.In retrospect, that lends his kind of risk-taking a degree of perverse charm compared to the economy-busting mega banks amassed within a few years of his departure, when Salomon was acquired by the behemoth that became Citigroup. In that regard, Mr. Gutfreund will be missed.Antony Currie is an associate editor at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.Advertisement