AdvertisementSupported byBy Alexandra StevensonBridgewater Associates, the world’s biggest hedge fund, has hired a former senior Apple executive to be a co-chief executive.Jon Rubinstein, who worked closely with Steven P. Jobs for many years and earned the nickname “the Podfather” for his work leading Apple’s iPod team, will join the $154 billion Bridgewater in May.At that time, Greg Jensen, who is co-chief executive and co-chief investment officer, will step away from his role as co-chief executive to focus on overseeing the firm’s investment strategies.The news was disclosed in a letter to investors on Thursday. Speculation has been rising about a struggle for power between Bridgewater’s billionaire founder, Ray Dalio, and Mr. Jensen, after a report in The Wall Street Journal described a rivalry between Mr. Dalio and Mr. Jensen as being so tense that the two had to call on senior employees and Bridgewater stakeholders to assess each man’s conduct.The two executives denied that there was any rift, but Mr. Dalio said that Mr. Jensen had too much on his plate in balancing two senior executive roles. Bridgewater addressed the matter again on Thursday, saying, “It is probably too much for the C.I.O.s to also serve as C.E.O.s.”The firm added that “because technology is so important to us, we wanted one of our co-C.E.O.s to be very strong in that area.”Mr. Rubinstein, 59, has expertise in hardware engineering and hand-held devices, having run hardware engineering at NeXT and then at Apple. He was also senior vice president for product innovation at Hewlett-Packard.Another Bridgewater executive, Craig Mundie, who also has a background in technology, introduced Mr. Rubinstein to executives at Bridgewater several months ago, according to a person with direct knowledge of the firm who spoke on the condition of anonymity. Mr. Mundie, who is a co-executive chairman, was head of research and strategy at Microsoft, a company he spent 22 years with before joining Bridgewater two years ago.Mr. Rubinstein’s appointment is unusual. In recent years, a steady flow of prominent Wall Street executives have left the financial world for the tech industry. The reverse has been less common. Anthony J. Noto, a former banker at Goldman Sachs, was hired by Twitter in 2014, for example. And last year, Ruth Porat jumped from Morgan Stanley to Google.Bridgewater said technology was important for its goal to build “systemized decision-making.”The appointment is part of a 10-year transition at Bridgewater as the firm prepares for the eventuality that Mr. Dalio, who is 66 years old, will one day step down. The management committee will now have seven members, including Eileen Murray and Mr. Rubinstein as co-chief executives, as well as three co-chief investment officers, Mr. Dalio, Mr. Jensen and Robert Prince. Bridgewater has described it as “a planful transition from a founder-led boutique to a professionally managed institution.”Even so, the question of who will replace Mr. Dalio at the helm remains unanswered. For years, Mr. Jensen, who is 42, was seen as the heir apparent to Mr. Dalio. The question of succession is important to investors in firms like Bridgewater where the founder is so closely identified with its success.In a second letter to investors titled “Our challenges with the media,” Bridgewater expressed frustration at coverage of the firm, its succession plans and its unusual culture. Mr. Dalio, who founded Bridgewater in 1975, wrote a book of principles over 100 pages long, which includes one that he has called “radical transparency.” That involves encouraging employees not to say anything about someone else in private that they would not say in public to the person’s face.“We are now in the awkward position of having some in the media mischaracterize what we are doing and what we are thinking,” the letter read.Advertisement