
Deal Professor By                     
STEVEN DAVIDOFF SOLOMON

MARCH 10, 2016
Energy Transfer Equity’s acquisition of a rival pipeline company, Williams Companies, has turned into a nightmare as troubles in the energy industry worsen.The risks around the deal have increased. Energy Transfer’s stock has plummeted, and executives at the company are searching for a way out.Energy Transfer has only itself to blame, but how can it escape its troublesome deal?Let’s start with the simple fact that Energy Transfer is not actually acquiring Williams. Instead, a newly created affiliate, Energy Transfer Corporation, is making the acquisition.As part of the acquisition, Energy Transfer will pay up to $6 billion in cash and the remainder of the deal consideration in stock of the new affiliate. In return for paying this amount, the affiliate will acquire Williams and contribute all of Williams’s assets and liabilities to Energy Transfer in exchange for stock in Energy Transfer. As a result, Williams’s shareholders will own stock in a publicly traded entity –Transfer Corporation — whose only asset is Energy Transfer stock.AdvertisementEven though the only asset of the Transfer Corporation will be Energy Transfer stock, there are bound to be trading price divergences between the price of Transfer Corporation and Energy Transfer stock. Energy Transfer has committed to equalize the price of the two stocks only for two years after completion of the deal.AdvertisementThe deal will also leave Energy Transfer at the center of an orbit of six publicly traded companies — different pipelines that Energy Transfer manages.Our columnist Andrew Ross Sorkin and his Times colleagues help you make sense of major business and policy headlines — and the power-brokers who shape them.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.This is a Frankenstein creature created only for tax purposes. It should not exist and makes everything that much more complicated.There is no doubt Energy Transfer is good at tax planning, but these sort of machinations are locking the company into the transaction.The transaction was structured as a stock-and-cash deal, with Energy Transfer issuing out only about 19 percent of its outstanding stock. Cash was used to pay up for the rest of the consideration in the transaction. That cash is a problem now because borrowing that sum in a down market will leave Energy Transfer overleveraged.Without a shareholder vote, Energy Transfer’s shareholders cannot veto the deal no matter how much they may want to.Furthermore, in strategic transactions, as opposed to private equity transactions, there is no “out” that allows the acquirer to simply terminate the deal.Before the financial crisis, provisions in private equity deals sometimes permitted an acquirer to terminate the transaction and pay a reverse termination fee of about 3 percent of the transaction value. After the financial crisis, that practice changed. As a result, a private equity acquirer could typically terminate a deal only if financing became unavailable, and it had to pay a reverse termination fee of about 6 percent of deal value.But that was for private equity deals. In strategic deals, the acquirer has no way to back out unless it has a shareholder vote or specifically negotiates a termination right.AdvertisementUnfortunately for Energy Transfer, it has no vote and it did not negotiate special rights to terminate its agreement with Williams.Energy Transfer also negotiated no other possible protections from a steep decline in its stock price and the industry in general. And so the deal — whether or not it gets financing — is legally required to close. If Energy Transfer breaches, then under the agreement it can be sued in a Delaware court for so-called specific performance, forcing Energy Transfer to complete the transaction.There are signs of a rift between Williams and Energy Transfer. Energy Transfer completed an offering of preferred securities to its inside executives on Wednesday. The offering was made to lessen the debt load. But Williams refused to give its consent for its audited financials to be used in the exchange, so Energy Transfer could not register the securities with the Securities and Exchange Commission so that they could be freely tradeable.One option for Energy Transfer to back out would be if a tax opinion cannot be delivered, but that does not seem a problem.And the company could in theory invoke the material adverse change clause in its agreement. This clause allows Energy Transfer to terminate the deal on a material adverse change to Williams.
                Over the last two and a half years, the oil industry experienced its deepest downturn since at least the 1990s.            But to be a material adverse change, or MAC, under Delaware law, the bad events to Williams must be long term and significant and generally affect Williams in ways the rest of the oil industry is unaffected.Such a claim would be hard to prove given the near depression in the oil industry today. Indeed, the Delaware courts, where such a claim would be litigated, have never found a reason for the material adverse change clause to be set off.AdvertisementStill, anyone who thinks this is an airtight agreement did not go through the financial crisis.Remember the battle between Genesco and Finish Line? In that case, the minnow Finish Line tried to acquire Genesco, the whale. They, too, had an airtight agreement. The problem was that the acquisition would have rendered Finish Line insolvent. Rather than fight it out in litigation and bankruptcy, Genesco and Finish Line settled.Similarly in Dow Chemical’s acquisition of Rohm & Haas, Dow also had an airtight agreement that it renegotiated. In that deal, Dow argued that specific performance could not be granted because it was an equitable remedy that would render Dow virtually insolvent and cause it harm. Instead, Dow would have to pay damages, but these were nominal because the shareholders were not part of the merger agreement. I was skeptical of this argument at the time, but still Dow was able to postpone the acquisition and  renegotiated the deal.And then there was Huntsman and Hexion Specialty Chemicals, which had a similar agreement. Hexion, which was represented by Wachtell, Lipton, Rosen & Katz (Energy Transfer’s law firm), tried to use litigation claiming a MAC to terminate the deal.The lessons from these deals is this: Just because the deal appears to be airtight does not mean it will not be renogtiated. Energy Transfer can use litigation or the threat thereof to try to do this. Because Williams’s shareholders will own part of the combined company at some point, this will make more sense as Energy Transfer’s situation becomes worse.Either way, don’t shed any tears for Energy Transfer. It got itself into this mess in the first place.An earlier version of this column referred incorrectly to a stock exchange rule that requires a shareholder vote if more than 20 percent of a company’s shares are issued in a transaction. The rule does not apply to partnerships like Energy Transfer; the company’s planned acquisition of the Williams Companies was structured to include cash and stock for other reasons.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »