AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Swaha Pattanaik and Neil UnmackMario Draghi has rediscovered his mojo.Mr. Draghi, the president of the European Central Bank, may have underwhelmed investors in December, but he bounced back on Thursday by announcing an aggressive package of quantitative easing measures that incited a big market rally. The problem: He may be encouraging excessive risk-taking without being able to increase inflation.Stock and bond prices shot up while credit indexes tightened sharply after Mr. Draghi increased the value of monthly European Central Bank asset purchases by one-third to 80 billion euros. He also said nonbank investment-grade corporate bonds would qualify for the buying program, which aims to spur economic activity by cutting borrowing costs. He also unveiled plans for new four-year loans for banks. These could carry interest rates as low as the deposit rate, which was cut by 10 basis points to minus 0.4 percent.The plan to buy corporate bonds is a radical departure for a central bank that was far more conservative than its peers during the financial crisis. But there are also several sleights of hand.First, although bonds issued by banks still do not qualify for purchases by the central bank, Mr. Draghi is helping them by indirectly cutting their funding costs. As yields on other corporate debt fall as a result of the bank’s buying, investors will turn to bank debt and subordinated bonds. Second, negative rates for long-term loans would mean the central bank effectively pays banks to borrow.This would mitigate any damage done to bank margins by the more-negative deposit rate. No wonder the Euro Stoxx Banks index rose 4.9 percent, outperforming the wider market, and the iTraxx Senior Financials index tightened 10 basis points, to 87 basis points.But all this light and joy cannot distract from a couple of rather big clouds. Given that eurozone inflation has failed to respond much to past easing, it is unclear whether Mr. Draghi’s new measures can spur consumer prices. Worse, the central bank chief just gave investors a new reason to disregard fundamentals when buying corporate bonds.When the central bank’s easing party finally ends, the excessive risk-taking it is encouraging could leave an even bigger hangover.Swaha Pattanaik is a markets columnist and Neil Unmack is a columnist at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.Advertisement