By SYDNEY EMBERMARCH 10, 2016
During presidential election years, Americans of varying political persuasions often contemplate moving to Canada. Google queries for Canada spike. Conversations between friends turn to preferred Canadian destinations.This year, Canada is playing along. A website for Cape Breton Island in Nova Scotia, called “Cape Breton if Donald Trump Wins,” popped up in recent weeks and has attracted significant attention. The site even has information on immigration and housing.Now, an advertising agency, Critical Mass, part of the advertising giant Omnicom, is looking to capitalize on the quadrennial interest. On Monday, the agency, which was founded in 1996 in Calgary, put up the website movetocanadaeh.com.On the surface, the website seems like a joke. “Make Canada Even Greater,” the introductory text reads, in a nod to a certain politician’s campaign slogan. Symbols of Canada are everywhere — a moose, maple syrup, the Canadian flag, a hockey player in a jersey with a maple leaf. There’s even a section on “what to expect from your new home” (“Canada is big,” “High poutine diets”).Advertisement“It’s where the zeitgeist is going,” said Dianne Wilkins, the chief executive of Critical Mass. “We’re in a unique place to comment on and participate in this public half-comedy, half-serious discussion that’s going on out there.”AdvertisementBut beneath the goofy website is a more serious goal: talent acquisition. Critical Mass, now a global digital agency whose clients include Nissan and Citi, is looking to hire roughly 30 people to work in its Calgary and Toronto offices.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The campaign, while timely, also speaks to an underlying fear in the ad industry that talent may be slipping away. For many years, creative types who also wanted a job that paid the bills — and made their parents proud — went to advertising agencies. But competition for creative talent is much fiercer today, and agencies are seeing people go instead to companies like Facebook and Google.Critical Mass says the website is already proving successful. Traffic from the site has increased page views on its Toronto careers site by 2,310 percent and on its Calgary careers site by 244 percent, it says. Traffic to the agency’s website has increased 50 percent.The website may be slightly silly, but it could also offend particularly patriotic Americans. It is also trying to capitalize on a cultural moment, which means it could feel stale once the moment passes. And because the campaign is geared more toward the advertising industry than the general public, it might not garner widespread attention.Ms. Wilkins said an employee on the agency’s marketing team in Chicago had the initial idea last week after seeing a BuzzFeed post about moving to Canada after the election. By Monday, the site was live, a stunningly fast turnaround for an industry that seems at times as if it wants to debate and tweak everything ad infinitum.How did Critical Mass get the site up and running so quickly? “We’re our own client,” Ms. Wilkins said, “which helps.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.