AdvertisementSupported byBy John KoblinFor the better part of the 16 years it has been on the air, “Survivor” hasn’t really been about actually surviving.The CBS reality show, which features more than a dozen contestants vying for $1 million in a remote jungle, has mostly been about strategy, gamesmanship and athletic achievement. Sure, the conditions can be dreadful, and yes, people are somewhat regularly evacuated out of the game, but no one’s life ever really appeared to be at risk.Well, until Wednesday night.In the most recent episode of “Survivor,” three contestants collapsed in the Cambodian sun, and one had to be rushed to a hospital.For several minutes of the episode, one contestant, Caleb, was lying on his back, his face beet red, gasping for air. The on-site doctor told him to “stay with us.”It was genuinely terrifying television.Jeff Probst, the host of the show and an executive producer, said that the temperature was well over 100 degrees on the day the episode was shot last spring, but that having three contestants collapse was unprecedented.“We’ve shot 32 seasons over 16 years, and those shoot days equate to three-and-a-half years of nonstop shooting in the jungle, and nothing like this has ever happened,” he said in an interview Thursday.For more than 40 minutes, the contestants dug through sand, looking for bags, in a challenge. The scene that played out on television was true chaos: One by one, three contestants fell to the ground.Caleb was the third to collapse, and when that happened, Mr. Probst asked for members of the crew to help in what was suddenly developing into a medical emergency. Boom microphones were on screen. Crew members were running, gathering ice, water bottles, umbrellas and fans. Mr. Probst said more than 70 crew members rushed to the scene.“Sometimes in medical evacuations, you might see a cameraman in a shot but that’s it,” he said. “This was a definite ‘break the fourth wall’ where you don’t pay any attention to where the cameras are. The story, while it’s also important, was such a second-class consideration.”Mr. Probst said that the three contestants all had heat exhaustion, and that Caleb’s condition was “very serious.”“It’s easy to say, you guys would love the drama,” he said. “But the truth is, I’m much, much happier when we haven’t had any interaction with our medical department.”In 2009, another contestant, Russell, collapsed to the ground in an episode that Mr. Probst had previously called the scariest he had witnessed as host.In a conversation I had with Mr. Probst last year — for an article about the surprising stability of “Survivor,” which remains the most-viewed show in its time slot — he said that the incident with Russell was so terrifying that he was ready to quit the show.“It definitely rocked my world,” Mr. Probst told me then. “I was holding his head when his eyes were rolling to the back of his head. And I said: ‘Man, maybe I’ve lost my way here for a second. I need to get out and let someone else carry this show.’ ”When I read the quotation back to Mr. Probst on Thursday, he said that the incident with Caleb was even scarier, but he didn’t feel the same way this time.Even though the situation was more severe, “I felt even more in control, and more importantly I knew our team was well prepared,” he said.The show has a medical team on site at all times, and Mr. Probst noted that Caleb was evacuated by helicopter 22 minutes after he collapsed.He also said that, in retrospect, he would have made the challenge easier on the contestants. But still, he said, “that’s only in hindsight.” He added, “If we make ‘Survivor’ a show nobody is ever going to sweat,” then that defeats its purpose.And though Mr. Probst was reluctant to reveal plot lines for this season, which runs through May, he did concede this was a particularly punishing season.“This won’t be the last evacuation,” he said.Advertisement