By LIZ MOYERMARCH 10, 2016
Lawyers for dozens of former Credit Suisse brokers have appealed to the brokerage industry’s main regulator to step into a fight over millions of dollars of accumulated bonus payments the brokers say the bank owes them.The lawyers have an issue with where their arguments will be heard.Credit Suisse shut its private bank division last year, striking an agreement for its nearly 270 advisers to move their business to Wells Fargo. But many of those advisers, who had been with Credit Suisse and predecessor companies for decades, jumped to UBS, Morgan Stanley or other big banks instead. More than 90 went to UBS.Because they did not go to Wells Fargo, Credit Suisse says, they voluntarily resigned, forfeiting their right to collect any accumulated deferred compensation — which for some brokers added up to millions of dollars.Ordinarily, brokers could take their claims to arbitration through the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority, or Finra, which regulates the brokerage industry. But Credit Suisse requires claims to go through either the American Arbitration Association, or JAMS, once known as the Judicial Arbitration and Mediation Service, instead of Finra.AdvertisementLawyers for the brokers say that is a violation of Finra’s policies, and they are trying to get the regulator to weigh in on the issue.Advertisement“Finra not only can but should resolve intra-industry disputes,” the lawyers argue in a letter this week to the Finra chairman, Richard G. Ketchum, and others at the agency. They called the dispute resolution policy at Credit Suisse a “blatant and egregious” violation of Finra rules, which require arbitration at Finra if a dispute is between brokerage firms or firms and brokers.“Finra must act on its own behalf to continue functioning as a credible regulator,” according to the letter, which was signed by nine lawyers who represent the former Credit Suisse brokers, several of whom are in the middle of the arbitration process over their departures from the bank last fall.A Finra spokeswoman said, “While I cannot comment on the specifics, I can say that we are reviewing the issues raised.”It is the latest twist in the battle over the deferred compensation that began in October, when Credit Suisse announced the plans to move the business to Wells Fargo, setting off a mad scramble for the exits.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The lawyers for the former Credit Suisse brokers say Finra arbitrations are more advantageous because more information is known about the arbitrators, many of whom are retired industry professionals, and monetary awards are publicly available.Already Credit Suisse has moved to block two Finra arbitration claims filed by former brokers in Miami, both of whom left in December to join UBS. The two are former relationship managers in Credit Suisse’s private bank.However, Credit Suisse can point to a recent victory in court, in which the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit said companies could waive Finra arbitration in favor of other arbitration venues.Credit Suisse itself filed a Finra arbitration claim against UBS in December, accusing its Swiss rival of raiding staff. That dispute has not been settled.AdvertisementA Credit Suisse spokeswoman declined to comment. UBS said in a statement that it “believes the claims are without merit given Credit Suisse’s decision to exit its U.S. private banking business. We intend to aggressively defend against them in the arbitration.”Deferred compensation for brokers is the industry standard, intended to act as a set of golden handcuffs to keep top producing employees from jumping to rivals, said Danny Sarch, an executive recruiter who helped move some of the Credit Suisse brokers to other companies.Leaving a company would put that pay in jeopardy, but “I don’t know of a circumstance where the firm abandons the business and doesn’t pay,” he said. “There’s nothing voluntary about these plans.”A version of this article appears in print on March 11, 2016, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Ex-Credit Suisse Brokers Seek Regulator’s Help in Fight Over Deferred Compensation.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.