AdvertisementSupported byBy Vindu Goel and Michael J. de la MercedSAN FRANCISCO — Yahoo has a dual personality these days.One is Yahoo the battered Internet giant that is up for sale, with dozens of potential bidders looking to pick up all or parts of the company on the cheap.The other is Yahoo the independent company that is carrying out yet another strategic turnaround plan as if the auction process does not exist.Both Yahoos made an appearance on Thursday and showed just how hard it is for the two to coexist.The company appointed two new directors to its board: Catherine J. Friedman, a former investment banker at Morgan Stanley, and Eric K. Brandt, the former chief financial officer of the chip maker Broadcom.They will fill seats that were most recently held by Max Levchin, the tech entrepreneur, and Charles R. Schwab, the founder of the brokerage firm that bears his name. Both men had stepped down from the board in recent months.The decision to bring Ms. Friedman and Mr. Brandt on board comes a little more than two weeks before the March 26 deadline for shareholders to nominate their own director candidates.Choosing directors without consulting the activist hedge fund Starboard Value most likely signals Yahoo’s decision to hold firm against the investor. Starboard has been searingly critical of the management and strategy of Yahoo’s chief executive, Marissa Mayer, and it has threatened to propose a rival slate of directors to shareholders if the board does not follow its recommendations.While the Wall Street and boardroom maneuvering dominates the headlines, Yahoo leaders say they still have to run the company as best they can under the new plan unveiled by Ms. Mayer last month.They note there’s no guarantee that any deal will occur. And even if a transaction to sell all or most of the company’s operations is reached, it could be many months before it is consummated as Yahoo and its lawyers tease apart a complex corporate structure that includes its web portal and mobile apps, its Tumblr unit, its Gemini advertising platform and its multibillion-dollar stakes in Alibaba Group and Yahoo Japan.So at the same time Yahoo was introducing its new directors, it announced something that many of its billion or so active users will care much more about: It will live-stream some National Hockey League games free on Yahoo Sports, starting with Friday’s contest between the Philadelphia Flyers and the Tampa Bay Lightning.“We’re continuing to operate the business and execute on the plan that has been laid out publicly,” said Ian Weingarten, Yahoo’s senior vice president for corporate development and partnerships, in an interview. “With sports being an anchor property for us, we are continuing to look to enhance that content.”While some parts of the company, like its digital magazines and its video portal, have been gutted under Ms. Mayer’s new strategy, Yahoo Sports is adding new features and services.In addition to the N.H.L. games, Yahoo will continue streaming one Major League Baseball game a day when the current season begins and is also streaming Professional Golf Association tournaments, Mr. Weingarten said. For both baseball and hockey, the company will also offer “condensed games,” recapping the highlights of each match in 10 to 18 minutes of video.Last week, Yahoo added a new site dedicated to e-sports, the popular pastime in which people gather online to watch top video game players compete against each other.Yahoo may also bid this month for streaming rights to the National Football League’s Thursday games. (Mr. Weingarten declined to comment on that prospect.)All of this new content is expensive, and it will be supported primarily by digital advertising, an area where Yahoo has been losing ground to competitors.And none of the effort might matter much in the end, if the company ends up sold or carved into pieces.Under pressure from Starboard and other investors, Yahoo abandoned a plan to spin out its stake in Alibaba, the Chinese e-commerce giant, because of questions about whether that transaction would incur huge taxes.Starboard has since demanded significant shifts in Yahoo’s course — including selling the company’s mainstay Internet business — and threatened to wage a proxy fight for control of Yahoo’s board if that does not happen.The struggling technology company has already hired advisers to explore a potential sale.Bringing in Ms. Friedman, who previously led Morgan Stanley’s West Coast health care banking practice, and Mr. Brandt, who helped work on Broadcom’s sale to Avago for $37 billion last year, was meant, in part, to show that Yahoo’s board is serious about weighing a sale, according to a person briefed on the matter.“Eric and Cathy are both highly respected, experienced practitioners in their fields, and we welcome them to Yahoo’s board of directors,” Maynard Webb Jr., Yahoo’s chairman, said in a statement. “Today we are at an important juncture in Yahoo’s transformation, as we execute on our refined strategy and explore strategic alternatives for the company.”A representative for Starboard did not respond to requests for comment on Thursday.Bankers for Yahoo have already been canvassing a wide range of potential suitors for its core Internet business, from companies like Verizon to private equity firms, people briefed on that process have said.Mr. Weingarten, who heads Yahoo’s team of deal makers, said that he was getting lots of questions from current and potential partners about Yahoo’s future. He answers as best he can and returns to the matters at hand.“There is obviously a lot of media and speculation around Yahoo,” he said. “But we’re focused on continuing to operate the business.”Advertisement