AdvertisementSupported byBy Alexandra AlterFor decades, Harper Lee’s “To Kill a Mockingbird” has been a staple in schools across the country, sparking countless classroom discussions about complex issues like race and social justice. But its long legacy in classrooms could be threatened by a recent decision to discontinue a popular paperback edition.Late last month, booksellers were informed that the mass market edition of the book, the most popular format with students and schools, will be discontinued in late April.A spokeswoman for the Hachette Book Group, which publishes the edition through its Grand Central Publishing imprint, confirmed the news, which was first reported by The New Republic.The mass market edition costs $8.99, and schools typically get a discount for buying in bulk. More than 20 million copies have been sold.The edition has been published by Hachette for 40 years. HarperCollins will continue to publish the more expensive trade paperback edition of “To Kill a Mockingbird,” at $14.99 to $16.99, as well as hardcover and e-book editions. The book was first published in hardback in 1960.According to the email message Hachette sent to booksellers, the license for the mass market edition expired and was not renewed because of “the wishes of the author.” An attachment that accompanied the email said that “there will no longer be a mass market edition of ‘To Kill a Mockingbird’ available from any publisher in the U.S. as per the wishes of the author’s estate.”“The disappearance of the iconic mass market edition is very disappointing to us, especially as we understand this could force a difficult situation for schools and teachers with tight budgets who cannot afford the larger, higher-priced paperback edition that will remain in the market,” a Hachette representative said in the email sent to booksellers, which was obtained by The New York Times. Hachette will not be able to sell the edition after April 25, the email said.It is possible, though, that the estate may relicense the mass market rights for a new advance, most likely with HarperCollins, which published Ms. Lee’s second book, “Go Set a Watchman,” last year.Questions immediately arose about why Ms. Lee, who died less than a month ago at 89, might have wanted to discontinue an edition that was popular with students.Claudia Durst Johnson, the author of “Understanding To Kill a Mockingbird” and a friend of Ms. Lee’s since the 1980s, said the loss of the cheaper edition could undermine the critical role that the novel has played in classrooms.“This book is a standard in our schools, which are struggling financially now,” Ms. Johnson wrote in an email message. She wrote that in her view it made no sense for Ms. Lee’s estate to drop the edition to “make money at the expense of school children’s access to this classic.’’Advertisement