By MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDMARCH 11, 2016
SAN FRANCISCO — While activist battles at other technology companies appear to be heating up, what looked like a potential fight brewing at Autodesk has instead ended quietly.The design software maker said on Friday that it had settled with two activist hedge funds, Sachem Head Capital Management and Eminence Capital, that together held more than 10 percent of the company’s shares.Under the terms of the agreement, Autodesk will add three new directors: Scott Ferguson, the managing partner of Sachem Head; Richard S. Hill, the chairman of Tessera Technologies; and Jeff Clarke, the chief executive of Kodak. Though the board will initially expand to 13 with the new members, it will shrink to 11 after the company’s annual meeting, when two current directors will stand down.Shares of Autodesk closed up 1.2 percent on Friday, at $56.61.Friday’s announcement is the latest instance of a company choosing to settle with activist investors looking to shake up its plans rather than wage potentially long and costly battles.AdvertisementOnly two weeks ago, Autodesk appeared ready to fight Sachem Head and Eminence. During the company’s earnings call on Feb. 25, the software maker’s chief executive, Carl Bass, compared the two hedge funds to callers on sports-radio talk shows.AdvertisementFrom a transcript of the call provided by Standard & Poor’s Capital IQ:As a matter of fact, if you turn on sports radio or political-talk radio, on sports radio, you can hear thousands of people who know what the coach or general manager or the owner should have done differently. And I’m worried about that [indiscernible]. I watched the game last night, I had a million ideas of what the coach should do, but I didn’t actually have to do the job.On Friday, however, Crawford W. Beveridge, non-executive chairman of the board, struck a more conciliatory tone toward his new fellow directors.“We welcome Scott, Rick and Jeff to the board, who bring considerable expertise in technology, finance and governance for the benefit of the company and its shareholders,” Mr. Beveridge said.When Sachem Head first emerged as an investor in Autodesk last November, the hedge fund disclosed wanting to discuss financial matters like costs. Now Mr. Ferguson, a protégé of veteran activist William A. Ackman, will have some say as a member of the board’s compensation and human resources committee.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Hill will serve on the corporate governance and nominating committee, while Mr. Clarke will join the audit committee.“The actions taken by the company are evidence that there is a strong alignment between the current board and shareholders on a path forward that will drive long-term shareholder value,” Mr. Ferguson said in a statement.Ricky Sandler, Eminence’s chief executive, added: “We are pleased to have reached a constructive agreement with the board and are confident that the addition of these directors will help create significant value for all shareholders. As committed long-term investors, we strongly support Autodesk’s business model transition and move to the cloud.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.