AdvertisementSupported byApplied ScienceBy Phyllis KorkkiLaura Doering was at a rest stop in Panama about five years ago, waiting for her bus to refuel, when she saw six vendors clustered together selling almost exactly the same snacks. She wondered: Why doesn’t anyone sell something different?Then a Fulbright scholar doing research for her Ph.D. in sociology and business administration, she knew that novel ideas had the most potential for growth. Her curiosity that day over the lack of innovation at those food stalls later led her to extensively explore the relationship between poverty and entrepreneurship.Ms. Doering is now an assistant professor of strategic management at the Rotman School of Management at the University of Toronto. In interviews with 41 people in Panama, all of them low-income entrepreneurs, she found that the group possessed many creative business ideas. But, they told her, they had often been blocked as they tried to move from idea creation to revenue generation.The problem, Professor Doering explains, is that it takes time for consumers to become familiar with new products and services even if these services are only marginally different. And the Panamanian entrepreneurs had wanted to start a business quickly, during a financial crisis. Unlike someone with substantial savings or outside financing, they didn’t have the luxury of waiting for the consumer tide to turn. They also didn’t have time to test and tweak their ideas before introducing them to the market. That was probably one reason the snacks had been so similar at the rest stop, Professor Doering realized.“Ultimately, poverty limits entrepreneurs’ capacity to profit from the creativity they bring to the marketplace,” Professor Doering wrote in a forthcoming paper, which includes both interview and survey results, for the journal Sociology of Development. Her findings help explain why “economic mobility via self-employment proves elusive for the poor,” she wrote. And yet “self-employment offers a useful alternative to wage labor, as many poor individuals face labor market discrimination and have difficulty finding formal employment.”Her conclusions, she says, have implications both in the developing world and in developed countries like the United States. In fact, in some ways, Panama offers an ideal situation for entrepreneurs because financial and regulatory barriers to starting a business are relatively low.Professor Doering would like to see government agencies or foundations set up business incubators for poor entrepreneurs, who would receive cash grants for living expenses while building their businesses with the help of teachers and mentors.Such incubators would probably be more expensive than programs like the Grameen Bank, which offers small loans to entrepreneurs. But Professor Doering maintains that in the long run, this assistance could help reduce long-term poverty by lowering one of its intractable barriers.Advertisement