AdvertisementSupported byBy Noam ScheiberWASHINGTON — The Supreme Court vacancy created by the death of Justice Antonin Scalia highlights a growing rift between the country and the nation’s highest court on questions of economic power and support for big business.And that gap, legal experts say, is unlikely to be significantly narrowed by the kind of justice President Obama — or the next president, Democrat or Republican — is expected to nominate.Americans have grown substantially more populist in their outlook over the last 15 years, according to some measures of public opinion, like whether they are satisfied with “the size and influence of major corporations,” and whether the government should “redistribute wealth by heavy taxes on the rich.” Indeed, if the presidential primaries are any indication, there is perhaps no more potent force in American politics today than economic populism.At the same time, some argue that the Supreme Court under Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr. has become perhaps the most business-friendly court in recent history. A 2013 study by Lee Epstein of Washington University in St. Louis, William M. Landes of the University of Chicago Law School and Judge Richard A. Posner of the federal appeals court in Chicago ranked justices according to their rulings in cases involving business. The findings, which Ms. Epstein and Mr. Landes updated through the 2014-15 term for this article, show that six of the 10 most business-friendly justices since 1946 sat on the Supreme Court at the time of Justice Scalia’s death.President Obama has given little indication that he is likely to reverse this trend. Both of his previous nominees, Sonia Sotomayor and Elena Kagan, have been relative moderates on matters involving business, despite some progressive opinions in specific cases.“They are not Hugo Black or William Douglas or Earl Warren,” said Arthur R. Miller of the New York University School of Law, who has written about the court’s friendliness toward business, referring to three prominent liberal justices.A variety of factors can help explain the demise of economic populism on the Supreme Court, where it once had a solid constituency. In recent decades, business interests, led by the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, have played a much more active role in the confirmation battles over Supreme Court justices.There is also the increasing partisanship of the United States Senate, which can prompt a Democratic president to select more moderate nominees in the hope of winning Republican votes.Most important, however, may be a broad pro-business consensus within the upper ranks of the legal profession, one that has been more than two generations in the making.Paradoxically, the evolution may have its roots in the Democratic Party. The early 20th-century approach closely associated with Supreme Court Justice Louis Brandeis saw big business as a political problem, not just an economic one. Big business, the thinking went, was incompatible with democracy both because of its ability to influence public officials and because of the power that big business had over the lives of ordinary citizens.By the 1970s, however, leading Democratic intellectuals like John Kenneth Galbraith were arguing that a frontal attack on big business was passé and that the government’s focus should be maximizing economic growth instead. These intellectuals proposed that liberals should make their peace with large corporations and simply oversee them as if they were giant utility companies.In his 1973 book “Economics and the Public Purpose,” Mr. Galbraith argues “that antitrust is largely irrational,” said Barry C. Lynn, who runs the Open Markets program at New America. “That we need to concentrate things, put experts in control of them.”The movement essentially stripped considerations of political power from regulation of corporations, and made it more of a technocratic exercise. This set the stage for a second critical development: the conservative assault on regulation, most famously from the law and economics movement associated with the University of Chicago.That group of scholars and lawyers argued, with empirical precision, that antitrust enforcement, as well as a variety of safety and environmental regulations, often did more harm than good, and that free markets were better at promoting growth.“That’s the one-two punch,” said K. Sabeel Rahman, a professor at Brooklyn Law School who studies the intersection of economic regulations and politics. “You move to a technocratic view, then ‘law and economics’ uses those technocratic arguments against you.”The empty seat left by Justice Antonin Scalia’s death leaves the court with two basic options for cases left on the docket this term if the justices are deadlocked at 4 to 4.These tectonic shifts in legal thinking have clearly shaped the federal courts. In the late 1990s, for example, the Supreme Court ruled that a manufacturer’s setting a maximum resale price for a retailer was not automatically an antitrust violation, overturning a longstanding precedent.Under Chief Justice Roberts, the court has ruled that companies can be exempt from antitrust legislation if they are already regulated by a government agency, like the Securities and Exchange Commission, even if that agency does not directly address collusive conduct.The Roberts court has also issued landmark rulings making it much more difficult for plaintiffs to win class-action certification in cases against businesses. Without this, many people simply do not pursue cases, because the potential damages awarded to any single plaintiff frequently would not cover litigation costs.The current court has also made it more difficult for workers and consumers to litigate cases in court, upholding contracts that require plaintiffs to turn instead to informal dispute-resolution settings known as arbitration, where awards tend to be smaller. The contracts often require “individual arbitration,” meaning plaintiffs cannot band together in this setting either.Mark Tushnet, a left-of-center professor of constitutional law at Harvard Law School and the author of “In the Balance: Law and Politics on the Roberts Court,” says that while big businesses frequently lose individual cases before the court, these are “in some sense discrete problems.”By contrast, the arbitration and class-action decisions “end up regulating a large swath of litigation,” he said. “Lots of lawsuits are affected by the outcome and they are affected in a pro-business way.”Right-of-center constitutional scholars agree that these decisions benefit business, though some argue that their chief function is to close off new opportunities for litigation rather than existing ones. “They are largely status quo decisions,” said Jonathan H. Adler, a professor at Case Western Reserve University School of Law and the editor of the forthcoming book “Business and the Roberts Court.” “It’s hard to bring these class-action suits, but it’s always been hard.”Mr. Adler added that some of the prominent anti-business rulings by the Roberts court would have even wider-ranging effects.Perhaps most indicative of the shift in the legal landscape is the assent of many justices appointed by Democrats.In some areas, like antitrust, the shift rightward has often been uncontroversial, with many of the liberal justices frequently signing on. The 1997 ruling on resale price ceilings was unanimous, while a 2007 ruling on antitrust immunity was 7-1, with Justice Stephen G. Breyer writing the majority opinion.“It’s not just the conservatives,” said Richard Brunell, vice president and general counsel of the American Antitrust Institute. “It was Breyer who was leading that charge.”Democratic appointees to the court have reliably dissented on the most sweeping pro-business decisions in areas like class actions and arbitration. But they have frequently taken pro-business positions in other rulings.Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg voted with the conservative majority in two rulings in the late 1990s that, according to Mr. Miller, the N.Y.U. professor, “clearly signaled the containment of the class action by the court.”In 2011, Justice Sotomayor joined the conservative majority in striking down a law that denied companies access to pharmacy records about prescriptions, on the grounds that it violated the companies’ First Amendment rights. The following year, Justices Breyer, Kagan and Sotomayor voted with the conservatives in an arbitration decision.Liberals with a more populist view say this progression from a more business-friendly consensus on antitrust to a more business-friendly legal climate in general is not surprising.“If you can depoliticize antitrust,” said Zephyr Teachout, a professor at the Fordham University School of Law who is running for Congress in New York, “you can depoliticize anything.”OpinionLinda GreenhouseAdvertisement