By SAM ROBERTSMARCH 12, 2016
Lawrence Van Gelder, who worked in the newsrooms of five New York City newspapers over 55 years, most of them as a critic, columnist and editor at The New York Times, died on Friday at his home in Manhattan. He was 83.His daughter Miranda Van Gelder said the cause was leiomyosarcoma, a rare cancer.Mr. Van Gelder was only 15 when he first sought a job in journalism: as a copy boy at The Times. The Times told him he was too young.He went on to graduate from Columbia College and later from Columbia Law School but held on to his early ambition, choosing newspapers over the law at a time when the city supported more than half a dozen.He joined the tabloid paper The Daily Mirror as a reporter in 1955 and worked there until it went out of business in 1963. Then, as a rewrite man, he moved to The New York World-Telegram and Sun and then worked for its short-lived successor, The World Journal Tribune, the product of its merger with two other papers, which ceased publication in 1967.AdvertisementAfter a brief stint at The Daily News, he finally made it to The Times when it hired him at 34. He would accumulate more than 5,200 bylines as a reporter, film critic and obituary writer and would also work as an editor on the culture and metropolitan desks. He retired in 2010.Lawrence Ralph Van Gelder was born in New York City on Feb. 17, 1933, to Joseph Van Gelder, a court reporter, and the former Claire de Hirsch Goldberg. He graduated from the Horace Mann School in the Bronx before attending Columbia.AdvertisementHis marriage to the journalist Lindsy Van Gelder ended in divorce. In addition to his daughter Miranda, he is survived by another daughter, Sadie Van Gelder; his partner, Ursula Koch-Sotiropoulos, and her son, Andreas; and two grandchildren.A version of this article appears in print on March 12, 2016, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: Lawrence Van Gelder, Newsman of New York and The Times, 83.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.