
Breakingviews By                     
KEVIN ALLISON

MARCH 11, 2016
A possible deal with a gas pipeline company is signaling a thaw in mergers and acquisitions in the energy market.The TransCanada Corporation is in talks with an American peer, the Columbia Pipeline Group, two people told Reuters on Thursday. Both companies are among the better-positioned players in an industry where falling oil and gas prices have raised fears about a looming wave of energy bankruptcies. Higher prices for crude oil could smooth the way for similar deals among industry survivors.
                Over the last two and a half years, the oil industry experienced its deepest downturn since at least the 1990s.            Oil and natural-gas prices have plummeted 60 percent since mid-2014. That has left bankers salivating at the prospect of a wave of deal making. But an expected flood turned out to be more of a trickle last year as global oil and gas deals fell 11 percent in what was otherwise a record year for takeovers. Bankers at the IHS CERAWeek energy conference in Houston last month blamed high debt levels and valuations that were still too high relative to expected crude prices for the lack of activity.TransCanada’s Keystone XL pipeline plan was denied by the Obama administration last year. Another big project intended to ferry oil from Alberta and Saskatchewan to Canada’s east coast has also become snarled in problems. These developments may have led executives to decide that the company would be better off trying to buy pipelines in addition to building them. Still, steady revenue from the company’s sprawling network of regulated energy infrastructure puts it in a relatively good position in the recent industry slump.Like many American peers, Columbia has been under pressure as investors worry about whether the companies that produce the gas that goes into its pipes will stay afloat. Even if it has to renegotiate some contracts, though, its financial position looks sound. Columbia ended 2015 with $2.9 billion of liquidity after tapping investors for $1.4 billion of equity in December. Shares of the company and a related master limited partnership have held up well since then, suggesting that shareholders are confident that executives can keep increasing dividends while investing $1.4 billion to $1.6 billion in various projects this year.Whether or not TransCanada and Columbia can consummate a deal, that they are talking at all suggests that spirits may be reviving. If the 40 percent rally in crude oil prices in recent weeks holds, it could coax other energy survivors out of their hiding places.Kevin Allison is a columnist at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »