AdvertisementSupported byBy Alexandra StevensonRalph S. Larsen, who as chief executive of Johnson & Johnson oversaw a series of acquisitions that turned the company into a multinational giant, died on Wednesday at his home in Naples, Fla. He was 77.His son, Garret, confirmed the death. The cause was cardiac arrest, according to a statement from the family.Mr. Larsen, who rose to chairman and chief executive, began his career at Johnson & Johnson as a manufacturing trainee in 1962. “I had a knack for mechanical things and a knack for people, so it seemed like a good starting job,” he told The New York Times in 1988.Mr. Larsen became chairman and chief executive in 1989, succeeding James E. Burke, who had overseen a vast expansion of the company. Mr. Larsen kept the momentum going. In 13 years at the helm, he expanded Johnson & Johnson’s offerings in consumer products, drugs and medical devices through the acquisitions of Neutrogena, Kodak’s clinical diagnostics business, Cordis and Centocor.He also expanded the company’s footprint to include Russia and Eastern Europe. During his tenure as chairman, Johnson & Johnson’s market value rose to $182 billion from $14 billion.Mr. Larsen was born on Nov. 18, 1938, in Brooklyn, to Andrew and Gurine Larsen. He served in the Navy from 1956 to 1958 before enrolling in Hofstra University, where he earned a business degree in 1962.Rising through the ranks at Johnson & Johnson’s consumer and hospital supply divisions, he gained a reputation as someone who could tackle difficult tasks such as consolidating the company’s distribution systems in California and making an ancient Chicago plant profitable.In 1979, Mr. Larsen was part of a team that helped turn the painkiller Tylenol into a blockbuster drug. At the time, it was being promoted only to doctors, and its annual sales were $70 million. A decade later, sales had reached $500 million.Mr. Larsen left Johnson & Johnson in 1981 when he was hired as president of consumer products at Becton Dickinson, a medical technology company. But he returned in 1983 to run a subsidiary that manufactured the fabric used for bandages.In 1998, dozens of federal agents raided the headquarters of Johnson & Johnson’s LifeScan unit after it failed to notify the Food and Drug Administration of a software glitch in a diabetes diagnostic device that it made.LifeScan pleaded guilty to criminal charges in 2000 and agreed to pay $60 million in fines for selling defective monitoring devices. The company said that while no one at LifeScan had intentionally engaged in wrongdoing, the device was deficient. Johnson & Johnson said that it had not properly notified the government and that it had been slow to fix the problem.“Mistakes and misjudgments were made,” Mr. Larsen wrote in a statement of apology at the time. He retired in 2002. He served on the board of directors at Xerox, the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, AT&T, AT&T Wireless and General Electric. After Mr. Larsen’s death, Jeffrey R. Immelt, chief executive of General Electric, praised him as “a key adviser to me and many leaders at G.E.”In addition to his son, Mr. Larsen is survived by his wife, Dorothy Zeitfuss, whom he married in 1961; two daughters, Karen Verblaauw and Kristen Dries; and seven grandchildren.Advertisement