

Michael Beschloss


HISTORYSOURCE
MARCH 11, 2016
In retrospect, it seems clear that Ronald and Nancy Reagan were not only one of the great married couples of American history, but also one of its great career partnerships. By the time she became first lady, Nancy Reagan had grown immensely from the new wife of March 1952 who was trying to help her 41-year-old bridegroom onto his feet as he reeled from professional setbacks.Their nuptials coincided with a moment of historic upheaval in the business of American entertainment. Television was ascendant, threatening the Hollywood star-making model. Nancy Reagan provided comfort and guidance while her new husband navigated this change.During a conversation with Mrs. Reagan in 2011, I asked about her wedding in California. I recalled that their best man and maid of honor (the only guests) had been the actor William Holden and his wife, Ardis.“Yes,” Mrs. Reagan said, “the Holdens were having a fight that day, and they weren’t speaking to each other, but that didn’t spoil the ceremony for Ronnie and me.”AdvertisementThe suave, well-tailored Holden was on a roll, whatever his marital problems. He had recently starred in the classic “Sunset Boulevard” (1950) and would go on to become one of the decade’s top box-office draws.By contrast, Ronald Reagan was sinking. His first wife, Jane Wyman, had abruptly left him. His Hollywood career had peaked in 1942 with “Kings Row,” in which his character’s legs are needlessly amputated by a cruel surgeon and he famously wakes up and cries, “Where’s the rest of me?” The dramatic requirements were much less demanding nine years later, when he starred with a chimpanzee in the less-than-distinguished “Bedtime for Bonzo.”As Reagan later put it, “Nancy came along and saved my soul.” She had met Reagan in 1949 over dinner at La Rue’s on the Sunset Strip. He was president of the Screen Actors Guild, and she was ostensibly seeking his counsel on how to escape being confused with another Nancy Davis accused of being a Communist sympathizer. Once they became a couple, she restored Reagan’s self-confidence and, as was the case throughout their married life, gave him shrewd tactical advice. One Hollywood wag later said that had Nancy married him earlier, he would have won an Academy Award.They had both had difficult childhoods. Reagan’s father, Jack, was loving but erratic and had a drinking problem. Nancy had endured an absent father and actress mother, Edie, whom she dearly loved but who was often performing in distant theaters.Reagan was inclined to respond to emotional traumas with denial and by romanticizing his life, which, from Nancy’s point of view, left him dangerously vulnerable to exploitation. The hurts of her upbringing had made her far more pessimistic, and she was always listening for the canary in the coal mine. As a result, she was acutely sensitive to how the more cunning and rough-edged denizens of Hollywood might help or hinder her husband’s cause. For Reagan’s part, his natural sunniness helped ease her abiding anxiety and her oftentimes bleak view of the world.AdvertisementAs Nancy recalled in her 1989 memoir “My Turn,” when they got married, Reagan “wasn’t getting any good picture offers” and “we quickly found ourselves in debt.” He refused a suggestion by one of his agents to host a Las Vegas show featuring a stripper, but to make ends meet (by then, the Reagans had a baby daughter, Patti), he reluctantly appeared at the Last Frontier Hotel, on the Vegas Strip, delivering comedy routines and performing skits with the well-known Continentals singing quartet.One routine required him to wear an apron hawking Pabst Blue Ribbon beer and make jokes, adopting some kind of European accent, about underwear. Nancy wrote, “If ever there was a time when my husband needed me, it was then.” Night after night, she was there in his nightclub audience.Nancy never forgot “that terrible year” of flirtation with oblivion. Reagan had refused to consider casting his lot with the new world of television, accepting advice that appearing regularly on a medium for which fans did not have to pay would cheapen his image and prevent him from rebounding in motion pictures. He had limited himself to guest appearances. But then, in 1954, came an offer to host CBS’s Sunday-night anthology program “General Electric Theater” at a starting annual salary of $125,000 (roughly $1.1 million today), which made his choice easy. Reagan’s move into TV came just before the crumbling of the big-Hollywood-studio system that had once ensured his success. In the absence of G.E.’s blockbuster invitation, the 43-year-old Reagan probably would have waited in vain, like many of his peers, for better movie offers.It is unlikely that Reagan would have gotten the “G.E. Theater” job without Nancy. The sponsor wanted a host who would also be a company spokesman, and Reagan’s articulate, photogenic new wife, a former MGM contract player, was a large part of his appeal. After getting her start with some aid from family friends like Spencer Tracy and the actor Walter Huston, she had acted on Broadway and starred with James Whitmore in “The Next Voice You Hear…” (1950).But by her account, her supreme aspiration was always to be married. After her marriage, she appeared in three more films, including “Hellcats of the Navy” (1957), in which she joined her husband. She also acted in several episodes of “G.E. Theater” and appeared in ads depicting the Reagan family’s new “all-electric home,” in Pacific Palisades, Calif., equipped to the gills with G.E. appliances.By 1956, “G.E. Theater” was the third-most-popular American TV show, with 25 million weekly viewers. TV Guide said in 1958 that Reagan had become a “living TV symbol as vividly distinct in viewers’ minds” as G.E.’s initials on its products. Using a weekly TV program to build a large national fan base ultimately provided an inestimable head start when, in the 1960s, Ronald Reagan made his next career leap, into politics (just as Donald Trump has shown this year).During a conversation in 2006, when I noted Mrs. Reagan’s importance during his presidency, she demurred, saying, “No, give all the credit to Ronnie!” But now that she is gone, as new documents are opened and associates speak more freely, history is likely to learn more and more about the often backstage moments in which she strengthened his presidency.As for William Holden, while Reagan ascended to become governor of California and finally president, his old friend, who lacked the two Reagans’ ability to adapt to changed professional environments, fell off the box-office charts. Holden’s last major film was “Network” (1976), in which he played an aging TV news executive who could not cope with the unnerving ways his business was changing. In 1981, the hard-drinking Holden stayed away from Reagan’s inaugural gala, for fear of embarrassing his old friend. By then, Holden was long divorced, and that November, after striking his head on a night stand in his apartment, he died alone.An article last Sunday about Nancy Reagan’s salutary effect on Ronald Reagan’s acting career misstated the profession of a Hollywood personality who aided the young Nancy Davis early in her acting career. Walter Huston was an actor, not a director.MICHAEL BESCHLOSS, a presidential historian, is the author of nine books.A version of this article appears in print on March 13, 2016, on Page BU1 of the New York edition with the headline: Career Coach Who Became a First Lady.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »