AdvertisementSupported byLettersTo the Editor:Re “A Slowdown That Silicon Valley Doesn’t Believe,” by Tyler Cowen (Economic View, March 6), about the effects of technology on productivity:Productivity is output divided by cost to produce said output. Technology is supposed to increase productivity, not reduce it, and yet evidence points to lower productivity. Why?GPS has reduced to mere memories both getting lost on road trips and paper maps. Drivers and passengers use their time more productively but consume less gasoline and no paper maps at all. Technology serves to reduce gross domestic product.People work from home in ever larger numbers and they become more productive individuals but with less gasoline consumed, less wear on shoes, reduced need for business attire and smaller dry-cleaning bills. The impact on G.D.P. growth is negative.How many gadgets have cellphones replaced? Alarm clocks, document scanners, smart (gasoline saving) maps, kitchen timers and flashlights exist on phones so there is no need to ever buy another. Cellphones make people more efficient, and every efficiency reduces G.D.P. growth.Technology is cheaper every day and exerting ever stronger downward pressure on G.D.P. growth. Individuals are more efficient but in ways that either do not appear in G.D.P. or serve to slow G.D.P. growth.Ernest BattifaranoNew York, March 7To the Editor:Tyler Cowen writes that tech luminaries believe a growing productivity gap since 2005 must mean economic statistics do not show the true contribution of free services such as Facebook and Google that have become ubiquitous since that time. Yet we know that multitasking reduces productivity.Sorry, just checking Facebook. You won’t believe what Donald Trump just did. What was I saying?Oh, right. Maybe the faltering economic statistics do indeed reflect the contribution of “free” online services.Joshua AdlerRye, N.H., March 6The writer was chief speechwriter for the Treasury Department from 2002 to 2003 and is founding C.E.O. of Sourcewater.Letters for Sunday Business may be sent to sunbiz@nytimes.com.Advertisement