

      By EMILY STEEL

UPDATED March 14, 2016

A looming power struggle. A salacious court battle. A shareholder suit. A 45 percent drop in the share price over the last year. Viacom has had no shortage of strife in recent months. But the entertainment company’s annual meeting on Monday was an exception. The Viacom shareholders that hold voting stock in the company overwhelmingly voted to re-elect the company’s 11 directors, according to Jeremy Zweig, a Viacom spokesman.Despite the turmoil at Viacom, it was inevitable that all the directors would keep their jobs — largely because the company is controlled by the mogul Sumner M. Redstone. In addition, a “substantial majority of votes not affiliated” with Mr. Redstone’s holdings voted for the directors, Mr. Zweig said.Shareholders also voted to reject a proposal that would have eliminated the structure that gives some stock more voting power than other stock. The meeting lasted about 40 minutes. Mr. Redstone holds about 80 percent of the voting stock in Viacom through the private movie theater chain National Amusements.“There is nothing you can do,” said Mario Gabelli, whose investment firm, Gamco, is the second-largest voting shareholder in Viacom. “It is moot.”That didn’t stop Institutional Shareholder Services, the proxy advisory firm, from recommending that shareholders withhold votes for six of the company’s directors, largely because of concerns over executive compensation and risk of poor oversight of Viacom by the directors. The total pay for Philippe P. Dauman, Viacom’s chief executive, increased 22 percent, to $54 million, during the 2015 fiscal year that ended last Sept. 30. During that period, Viacom’s total revenue declined 4 percent, while profit was down 20 percent. Institutional Shareholder Services also expressed concerns about the number of directors — even those classified as independent — that have ties to Viacom or the Redstone family. On a scale of one to 10, with 10 indicating a higher risk of flawed governance, the advisory firm gave Viacom a 10.“These ties, along with ongoing concerns over executive compensation and independent oversight at Viacom, call in to question the board’s willingness to represent the interests of minority shareholders going forward,” the advisory firm said in its report.Mr. Zweig, the Viacom spokesman, said the company disagreed with that analysis, stating it included inaccuracies. “The Viacom board pays great attention to its governance and its responsibility to all stockholders,” he said.Below is a look at the power brokers on Viacom’s board, the value of their ownership stake in the company and their relationship to Mr. Redstone:Board tenure: 29 years Ownership: $1.72 billion Total annual compensation: $2 million Status: Not independent The stature of Mr. Redstone, 92, is obvious — he is the controlling stockholder and managed Viacom for many years. But he stepped down from his role as executive chairman in February, in the face of questions from shareholders about his health and competency. Board tenure: 29 years Ownership: $219.1 million Total annual compensation: $54.2 million Status: Not independent Mr. Dauman, 62, has been chief executive since 2006 and, according to Viacom, has an “in-depth understanding of our industry and his relationships in the business community.” He has had an exceptionally close relationship to Mr. Redstone since working for him as a young corporate lawyer, a tie that critics say has made Mr. Dauman reluctant to institute the changes necessary to compete in a shifting media environment. Board tenure: 22 years  Ownership: $3,095,538 Total annual compensation:  $374,965  Status: Not independent Persuaded by her father to join him in the entertainment business, Ms. Redstone, 61, has “extensive experience in and understanding of” the industry, Viacom says. She is also a director of National Amusements and a member of the trust that will determine Mr. Redstone’s holdings after his death. She, however, opposes the current Viacom leadership.  Board tenure: 22 years Ownership: $3,291,827 Total annual compensation:  $338,626  Status: Independent Mr. Salerno is chairman of Viacom’s compensation committee, which critics and some investors say has been too generous to executives as the company has struggled. Mr. Salerno is also a director of CBS. I.S.S. has recommended withholding votes for Mr. Salerno. Board tenure: 9 years Ownership: $1,225,805 Total annual compensation: $342,178  Status: Independent Viacom has cited Ms. McGarvie for her financial expertise and her “talent as a consultant and her international experience.” Like Mr. Salerno, she is also a member of the compensation committee. I.S.S. has recommended withholding votes for Ms. McGarvie. Board tenure: 3 yearsOwnership: $308,134.15 Total annual compensation: $293,100 Status: Independent Viacom says Ms. Norville is being renominated because of her “independence, her critical thinking and her extensive experience in the media industry.” Her show, though, is produced by CBS, and Mr. Redstone also controls CBS. She is a member of the compensation committee. I.S.S. has recommended withholding votes for Ms. Norville.Board tenure: 12 years Ownership: $1,875,255 Total annual compensation: $312,259  Status: Independent Mr. Phillips is being nominated because of “his knowledge of technology issues and his familiarity with issues facing media, new media and intellectual property-driven companies,” Viacom says. He is also a member of the compensation committee that has drawn scrutiny. I.S.S. has recommended withholding votes for Mr. Phillips. Board tenure: 29 years Ownership: $4,541,624  Total annual compensation: $316,071  Status: Independent Viacom has cited Mr. Schwartz’s “experience in governance matters, his skills as an attorney and adviser, and his background in academics.” He is also a member of the compensation committee and was dean of the law school at Boston University when Mr. Redstone taught a class on entertainment law there.  I.S.S. has recommended withholding votes for Mr. Schwartz. Board tenure: 29 years Ownership: $3,558,321 Total annual compensation: $395,068  Status: Not independent Mr. Abrams also has “extensive knowledge of and history with Viacom,” according to Viacom, which also cited his understanding of issues facing media and entertainment companies. He is the longtime personal attorney for Mr. Redstone, a director of National Amusements and a member of the trust that will determine Mr. Redstone’s holdings after his death. Board tenure: 10 years Ownership: $204,573,200 Total annual compensation: $29.4 million  Status: Not independent Mr. Dooley’s qualifications include extensive operational experience, Viacom says, pointing out that he has also served as chief administrative officer and chief financial officer, in addition to his current role. He started at Viacom in 1980 and has been part of Mr. Redstone’s inner circle since the media mogul took over the company in 1987. Board tenure: 3 years  Ownership: $242,244 Total annual compensation: $293,055  Status: Independent Ms. Falcone Sorrell is being renominated because of her critical thinking and also in part because of her independence, Viacom says. Critics point out that she is married to Sir Martin Sorrell, chief executive of WPP, the world’s largest advertising company, which does business with Viacom. I.S.S. has recommended withholding votes for Ms. Sorrell. Notes: Ownership shows the estimated dollar value of director’s share ownership at the end of the 2015 fiscal year in September. The figures were calculated by Equilar, the executive compensation analytics company.  The median ownership value for S&P 500 directors in the most recently reported fiscal year end was $2.3 million. Compensation is for the fiscal 2015 year, according to proxy filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission. Board tenure includes time on the board of directors of Viacom before the company split from CBS in 2006. Advertisement