AdvertisementSupported byTV TransformedBy Steve LohrDollars follow eyeballs. This bedrock principle of media advertising is working against the television industry today, as new viewing patterns challenge old ways of doing business.The most recent evidence surfaced in August, when one major media company after another reported weaker television advertising revenue. The shares of the companies, including Disney, 21st Century Fox, Viacom and CBS, suffered as Wall Street saw a warning sign that Madison Avenue has recognized for some time.“The traditional TV model is breaking apart,” said Laura Desmond, chief executive of Starcom MediaVest, one of the world’s largest ad-buying companies. “It’s both a crisis and a huge opportunity.”The peril and promise are byproducts of television’s truly becoming a digital medium. Internet services like Netflix and YouTube deliver video programming to screens large and small, in living rooms and on smartphones — and it is sent “over the top,” in industry jargon, via the Internet, sidestepping the TV industry’s accustomed control point, the set-top box. In addition, digital recording services, now offered by cable and satellite TV operators, allow programs to be recorded for later viewing.The TV market is fracturing and becoming less predictable, undermining the main appeal of traditional TV to advertisers: its ability to deliver mass-market audiences.Yet as TV embraces digital technology, it opens the door to targeting television ads as never before, much as is done with advertising on the web today.That helps explain the surge in digital video advertising on Google’s YouTube, Facebook and streaming services like Hulu, where the rules of Internet targeting apply. Those online video ads are only a tenth of the television ad market of $70 billion a year, but they are projected to grow 21 percent a year, according to Forrester Research. By contrast, advertising on cable and broadcast television is expected to inch ahead at 1 percent annually.Until recently, TV audience information used by advertisers has come mainly from samples of viewers and surveys, conducted by Nielsen and other market research companies. The monitoring made possible by digital technology can be far more detailed — down to the household level — not only covering what is being watched but, when combined with other data sources, also predicting behavior and buying habits.“The Internet was an example of what can be done, but now it is going to TV as well,” said Shereta Williams, president of Videa, an advertising technology start-up owned by the Cox Media Group.The technology for digital TV is still in its early stages. The TV industry wants to be able to target ads to households and individuals, as on the web, but without losing control of its distribution network and business.The set-top box has long been TV’s technical gateway, and that technology is receiving a digital upgrade to give set-top boxes Internet-style targeting capabilities. Today, including satellite TV and cable providers, nearly 40 million set-top boxes are “household addressable,” representing about a third of American households.For advertisers, this should mean more productive ads and the ability to scientifically test their effectiveness. Last year, Starcom MediaVest did an addressable TV ad campaign for Honda’s Acura TLX luxury sedan. The firm combined anonymized sales data and other data to choose 1.7 million households to show Acura ads. Those households’ rate of buying the cars was more than 60 percent higher than that of a demographically similar control group who were not shown the ads.With advanced software and data-mining technology, the potential for tailoring ads can be quite refined. So, for example, two households in New York, living in next-door apartments, could watch, say, “The Good Wife,” and see different ads. In one apartment, a couple who contribute to environmental causes and have no children could be shown an ad for a compact car. In the other apartment, a couple with two children and a weekend home might be shown an ad for a sport utility vehicle.The future of TV advertising may be more like web advertising, but it will not be a rerun, analysts and industry executives insist. On the web, some newspaper and magazine publishers have built sizable digital ad businesses. But it has proved to be a winner-take-most marketplace, with the biggest winners being the Internet ad giants Google and Facebook.“TV will take on some of the characteristics of Internet advertising in terms of targeting and relying on data to predict who is behind the screen,” said James Nail, an analyst at Forrester Research. “But video sellers have greater power to dictate how the new technology rolls out.”On traditional television, major consumer product and brand advertisers want their ads to be shown alongside high-quality video programming, mainly the sitcoms and dramas the medium is known for, say the analysts and executives. It is the kind of video environment, they say, that delivers the sight, sound and emotion that drive decision-making.“Premium content is scarce, and scarcity creates a huge difference between TV and the Internet,” said Scott Ferber, chief executive of Videology, an ad tech start-up.The big media companies have used that scarcity to deflect competition in the past. In 2012, Google shut down its Google TV Ads unit after it made little headway in trying to adapt its Internet marketplace model to selling television ads. The TV networks and local stations, analysts say, refused to put the ad inventory they hold for marketers on the Google marketplace.Today, Google is pursuing a vision of Internet-style ad delivery — called programmatic TV — but with a modified approach, portraying itself as a tools maker to assist content providers and marketers.Google’s role, said Rany Ng, director of product management for video ads, is to “bring data-driven buying and automation to how television and video advertising is bought.”In recent years, video ad tech start-ups have proliferated, typically specializing in working with the big media companies or ad buyers. They provide software expertise and consulting services and often match buyers and sellers.“This is so central to the creators’ and marketers’ strategy. They are going to want to be in greater control over time,” said Bill Day, chief executive of Tremor Video, an ad technology start-up.For finely tailored ads, data is crucial. So data brokers and data-analysis companies, including Acxiom, Experian and Dunnhumby, are also suppliers to the emerging industry of digital TV.Acxiom, for example, has demographic, shopping and lifestyle information on every American household. Rick Erwin, its general manager of audience solutions, views digital TV as another market for its targeting services, which are used in direct mail, telemarketing, email and online ads.“Whenever a medium becomes addressable at the household level, we’re the data fuel,” he said.For advertisers, the long-term goal is to be able to reach ideal customers for their products, on any screen. The potential, said Mr. Nail of Forrester, is for a TV viewing experience less cluttered with irrelevant ads and “dramatically improved results for TV advertisers.”But predicting the winners in the high-stakes, high-tech migration to digital TV, analysts and executives agree, is uncertain. Ms. Desmond of Starcom MediaVest, for example, expects a wrenching consolidation in the media business over the next three years or so. The only three sure survivors, she said, are Disney, 21st Century Fox and Comcast NBCUniversal. Smaller players will most likely be bought up.The acquirers, Ms. Desmond said, may well include the Internet powerhouses, like Google and Facebook.Even those who insist the TV market is unique have their qualms. “It should be different,” Mr. Ferber of Videology said, “but these digital companies are so huge and so powerful, they are going to be hard to resist.”Advertisement