By THE NEW YORK TIMESMARCH 13, 2016
A looming power struggle. A salacious court battle. A shareholder suit. A 45 percent drop in the share price over the last year. Viacom has had no shortage of strife but the entertainment company’s annual meeting on Monday is expected to be an exception. That’s when Viacom shareholders will vote on whether to re-elect the company’s 11 directors. Despite the turmoil at Viacom, it is a foregone conclusion that all the directors will keep their jobs. And if last year’s meeting is any indication, the meeting will be short: Last year’s lasted only about 15 minutes. —Emily SteelThe “interactive” tech-focused week of South by Southwest, the digital media conference held annually in Austin, Tex., will continue into the early part of this week. Closing sessions include Steve Chen, a co-founder of YouTube; Biz Stone, a Twitter co-founder; and The New York Times’s tech columnist Farhad Manjoo in conversation with Stewart Butterfield, chief executive of Slack, the richly valued enterprise-collaboration software company. The music portion of the festival begins on Tuesday and will include established and up-and-coming acts from around the world. —Mike IsaacDriverless cars are the focus of a Senate hearing on Tuesday on the opportunities of and potential concerns about autonomous vehicles. The Committee on Commerce, Science and Transportation will hear from several commercial leaders in the field, including Google X’s director of self- driving cars, Chris Urmson; Mike Ableson, a G.M. vice president; and Joseph Okpaku, a Lyft vice president. Mary Louise Cummings, the director of the Humans and Autonomy Lab at Duke University, will also testify. The afternoon hearing will “explore the appropriate role of government in promoting innovation including removing unnecessary hurdles,” the committee said in a release. —Cecilia KangRetail sales for February, due from the Department of Commerce on Tuesday, are expected to show a slight slowdown in spending. That headline sales figure was probably hurt by lower automobile sales and cheaper gas prices, which translate to lower receipts at the pump, economists say. Excluding spending on autos and gas, spending probably logged modest gains, after a 0.6 percent jump in January.AdvertisementOverall, the sales figures will probably show that consumer confidence in the economy remained robust amid a tightening job market and a rise in wages over the period. —Hiroko TabuchiAdvertisementThis is a week of central bankers’ meetings, starting with the Bank of Japan on Tuesday. The bank is not expected to make a change in interest rates after taking the aggressive step in January of cutting rates below zero to stimulate an economy long in the economic doldrums. On Wednesday, Federal Reserve officials will announce their decision. They are also not expected to make any changes.But with the American economy steadily growing, the trajectory of interest rates in the United States is up, and the Fed may indicate when it will follow up on its last rate increase in December.And on Thursday, the Bank of England is also expected to keep its benchmark rate unchanged. The rate there has been at a record low of 0.5 percent since March 2009. —Phyllis MessingerPlease verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.On Wednesday, at 8:30 a.m., the Labor Department will report the latest data on consumer prices in February. As anyone who has filled up their tank recently knows, gas prices are down, and lower energy costs are expected to result in a 0.2 percentage point drop in the Consumer Price Index for last month.Stripping out volatile food and energy prices, however, the C.P.I. is expected to rise by 0.2 percentage point. Either way, the data is expected to suggest inflation remains tame, with a year-over-year rise in the core C.P.I. of just over 2 percent.—Nelson D. SchwartzLufthansa is expected to report higher profits for 2015 on Thursday, bolstered by fuel-cost savings as oil prices fell. But the German flag carrier continues to face a long list of serious challenges, including heightened competition on both short- and long-haul routes and tense relations with labor unions as it restructures and places more emphasis on Eurowings, a low-cost subsidiary. —Nicola ClarkThe financial crisis of 2008 and a string of scandals at large banks since then have revealed the challenges of regulating giant financial institutions. On Friday, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Wall Street’s primary regulator, is scheduled to hold an invitation-only conference that will focus on efforts to supervise large and complex banks. The New York Fed was criticized for failing to spot the risks in the banking system before the financial crisis.Since then, though, the New York Fed’s president, William C. Dudley, has tried to overhaul the regulator’s supervisory division and he has called on bankers to clean up the ethical culture of their firms. Mr. Dudley will give opening remarks and senior regulators from the United States and Europe will contribute to panel discussions. Up for discussion are subjects like the costs of regulation and the effectiveness of supervision.—Peter EavisSix former employees of Barclays and Deutsche Bank are expected back in court in London on Friday ahead of their trial next year on criminal charges that they conspired to manipulate the euro interbank offered rate, a benchmark interest rate known as Euribor. —Chad BrayA version of this article appears in print on March 14, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Self-Driving Cars, Wall St. Oversight and Tech at SXSW.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.