
Corner Office By                     
 ADAM BRYANT
 
MARCH 11, 2016
This interview with Anthony Foxx, United States transportation secretary, was conducted and condensed by Adam Bryant.Q. Tell me about your early years.A. I grew up in Charlotte, N.C. The year I was born, the school system had just been through a major desegregation case that legitimized busing as a means of implementing Brown v. Board of Education. Charlotte was a bit of a test bed for busing, and it was very successful for my years through the school system.I was the first person in my family to go to integrated schools, and that was a formative experience for me because it really showed me on a daily basis that I wasn’t better than anybody, but I certainly wasn’t any lesser than another person, either.My family unit was my mom, who was 19 when I was born. My father wasn’t in the picture. My grandparents and my mom basically raised me. But my mom interrupted college to give birth, then went back to school, got her master’s degree and then did a variety of jobs around the country. I stayed in Charlotte with my grandparents, and they were like parents to me, as well.AdvertisementThey were both former teachers, and the type of teachers who would spend extra time with students after school helping them. And so my days after school were filled with them asking me how I was doing on my homework. And if I wasn’t doing particularly well, I got the help I needed. So there was a lot of reinforcement of education.Were there signs of leadership abilities at a young age?I was one of the younger kids in my cohort of buddies in the neighborhood, so there was a fair amount of razzing me for most of that time. But I think there were some signs of leadership in cross-country running. I wasn’t the fastest on the team, but I was always someone who urged those who were fast to move faster, and I helped people stay focused and get through some difficult practices.How have your mother and your grandparents influenced your leadership style?My mom’s just mentally tough. She’s got all kinds of reasons to be a little dour or make excuses, but she never does. You just get up every day, and you hack it out.My grandfather was the politician of the family. He had been a principal in the old segregated school system and always had to go to the white school board to ask for resources. He had to have good relationships with pretty much everyone across the community and found ways to advocate for the things he needed.When he retired, he got very involved in politics and believed that politics could make a difference in people’s lives, and I probably got some of that from him. My grandmother was the heart, and always cared for people.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Any favorite family expressions?My grandfather had a distaste for what he called foolishness. Anytime someone would abuse the role they had for personal gain, he would describe that as foolishness. There’s a lot of foolishness in politics most of the time, and so he was often using that word.AdvertisementHow would you describe your leadership style today?I would say that it’s part dictator and part Montessori. I’m very clear on what the direction is, and many times I’m most attracted to things that appear to be immovable objects, and difficult to accomplish. So when I say, “Let’s go charge the hill,” a lot of times the troops might say, “We’ve tried to charge that hill before and failed, so we’re not really interested in going up that hill.” I have to do a lot to get people to buy into the direction, but I’m very, very clear on what it is.The Montessori part of it is that I care less about the methods and means by which we get it done. The way I think about it is that if you are someone who works with me, you’re also a leader. I expect you to be a leader, and I understand that you have to use your natural abilities differently than I use mine. Part of my job is to help build other leaders.How do you hire?What I’m trying to understand is whether the person, if things get really tough, is going to stay in there or fall apart. I’d rather hire somebody who’s maybe not a genius, but they will dig in on any assignment. I’d rather have resilience than almost any other quality. Competence is obviously critical, but a lot of people who are really smart actually end up walking away from some pretty tough assignments because they’re worried about whether they can do them or not.What career and life advice do you give to young people?I tell them that doing well in school is the baseline, and that you have to take good care of yourself and make sure that you’re an interesting person, because that helps you as a leader.I was talking to a group of kids recently at Fayetteville State University in North Carolina, and one of the kids asked me this brilliant question. He said that a lot of kids grow up in circumstances that are really tough, and the question was, should they be able to use their background as an excuse for not making it?I responded that it’s a tough question because if I say yes, then what that does is deny that individual the room to make a choice for themselves to surmount their background. If I say no, that means that maybe I don’t give enough credence to what someone’s individual circumstances are.The way I looked at it as a kid was that I had a lot of disadvantages. Statistically I’m not supposed to make it, but if I’m going to go down, I’m going to go down swinging. I think the key is that you’ve got to have a little fight in you. And you’ve got to be very clear about who you are. And once you know that, you have to be willing to live by that.Each week, Adam Bryant talks with top executives about leadership. Follow him on Twitter: @nytcorneroffice. This interview has been edited for space and clarity.A version of this interview appears in print on March 13, 2016, on Page BU2 of the New York edition with the headline: Grit Goes Further Than Genius.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »