By MICHAEL CIEPLY and BROOKS BARNESMARCH 13, 2016
LOS ANGELES — The next marquee event at Hollywood’s film academy: “Identity Crisis — Part 2.”On Tuesday, the 51-member governing board of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences, which normally convenes at night, will meet in a rare morning session. And high on the agenda, it is expected, will be the assessment of an Oscar show whose ratings tumbled as its host, Chris Rock, dealt bluntly with the racial politics engulfing the organization.About 34.4 million people watched the show on Feb. 28, close to a record low. The number of viewers ages 18 to 49, a demographic that advertisers pay a premium to reach, was believed to be the lowest on record, though the Oscar show remains the most watched among entertainment prize ceremonies.The annual review will take place against an increasingly messy backdrop.In an unusual step, the academy has asked ABC to begin negotiating a renewal of the network’s 10-year agreement to air the Oscars, which does not expire until 2020. The move was described by people briefed on the situation, who requested anonymity because of confidentiality strictures, as an effort to guarantee future revenue as the historically cash-rich academy confronts the unaccustomed demands of its planned museum and $350 million in new borrowing that will be used to support it.AdvertisementBut ABC, frustrated by the academy’s bureaucracy and concerned about declining ratings, has asked for more control of the show. (In another disruption, the academy’s chief marketing officer, Christina Kounelias, quit on Thursday to take a marketing position at Participant Media.)At the same time, academy governors on Tuesday will again wrestle with deep changes to the organization’s membership and core mechanisms, as promised at an emergency session in late January, when the current crisis — occasionally verging on what seemed like a nervous breakdown — began in earnest.To bolster diversity in the makeup and governance of the academy, which includes about 7,000 film professionals, a large majority of whom are male and most of whom are white, the board then said it would add three members to be appointed, not elected. The goal is to increase the representation of women and ethnic minorities.But some of the emergency changes ran afoul of the academy’s own bylaws. On Tuesday, the governors are expected to implement the diversity changes with a formal revision of the bylaws.The new vote will follow a storm of criticism from academy members who objected to the speed and secrecy of the board’s earlier action, which came on the heels of the Jan. 14 announcement of the Oscar nominations, with their all-white acting lineup. It also follows fierce resistance to an accompanying plan that would purge the awards voting rolls of older, inactive members.AdvertisementSome governors are now expected to propose a softening of the so-called activity requirement, perhaps by granting lifetime voting privileges to those who have worked in each of three decades, starting from their first film credit, rather than from the date of their academy admission, as currently planned.While that change seems minute, it might allow hundreds of members to sidestep the planned purge. But it might also make it harder for academy officials to meet their goal of doubling the number of female and nonwhite members in five years.The academy is reviewing the possible effect of such an adjustment. It is also studying a system that would give its branch committees — such as the actors or directors groups — some flexibility in counting credits, people briefed on the matter said.An academy spokeswoman declined to discuss its deliberations.But confusion, discord and considerable anger will probably remain part of the group’s new normal, at least until the next awards season rolls around, regardless of what happens at the meeting.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The rancor is a particular challenge for Cheryl Boone Isaacs, the academy’s president, who in the coming months has the option of standing for one more term, her fourth, as president, and for Dawn Hudson, its paid chief executive, whose three-year contract was renewed in 2014 after a contentious board fight.While the two have worked largely in harness through the diversity crisis, they are divided by personal style, institutional loyalties and designated functions.Ms. Isaacs, a former publicity executive for Paramount and New Line, is described by those who have worked closely with her as conservative by nature and deeply loyal both to academy traditions and to the sometimes invisible craftspeople — effects and design artists and such — who were instrumental in her election.Ms. Hudson, who joined the academy after serving as the executive director of Film Independent, a small art film organization, is said to be less patient with the academy’s old ways, more closely aligned with high-profile actors and filmmakers, and eager to break down a seeming cronyism that has contributed to its white, male makeup.Ms. Isaacs, like other recent academy presidents, has been increasingly involved in day-to-day operations of the organization. Ms. Hudson, at the same time, has not been shy about voicing strategic aims and concerns. In a January interview with the Hollywood Reporter, in which she spoke jointly with Ms. Isaacs and bizarrely claimed that the changes had been well received, Ms. Hudson questioned whether older academy members were sufficiently attuned to racial and gender issues.Advertisement“Look, some of these things are generational, they just are,” she said.For Ms. Isaacs, Ms. Hudson and their many colleagues, the challenge will be to maintain consensus as the academy works through issues that may further alter the identity of the institution and its awards ceremony.In preliminary talks with ABC, for instance, the network has asked for more control over the content and promotion of the annual Oscar broadcast. One likely pool of resistance to any such network request: Those craft voters who elected Ms. Isaacs. They are wary of any move that might edge their categories out of a broadcast that almost everyone agrees is too long.As it confronts its identity issues, the academy will most likely also bump into another uncomfortable question: Might its new “global campaign” to recruit new members actually tighten the squeeze on African-Americans?Already, two-thirds of the Oscars awarded on last month’s show — including most of the six awards for the Australian-made “Mad Max: Fury Road” — went to artists from outside the United States. That contrasts sharply with the 1970s and ’80s, when Americans dominated the awards, and a path opened for African-Americans including Whoopi Goldberg, Oprah Winfrey and Margaret Avery.To navigate those challenges will test the strength of any alignment between Ms. Hudson and Ms. Isaacs. They have been seeking common purpose at least since a conciliatory lunch that followed Ms. Hudson’s contract renewal, which for a time Ms. Isaacs had opposed.“So weird,” Ms. Hudson wrote of her post-renewal session with Ms. Isaacs, in a May 9, 2014, email to the academy governor, and a supporter, Amy Pascal. “I truly had love in my heart, and took her hand and said, ‘Let’s forget everything behind us and move forward.’ ”A version of this article appears in print on March 14, 2016, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Backdrop Gets Messier for Academy Leaders.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.