MARCH 13, 2016
The Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.32 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.50 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.28 percent.The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week:Florida Department of Transportation, $106.2 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Florida Department of Transportation, $161.8 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Aiken County Consolidated School District, S.C., $75 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.AdvertisementDover, N.H., $73.9 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Hawaii, $500 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.AdvertisementHoward County, Md., $136 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Wilson County, Tenn., $55.3 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Frederick, Md., $56.3 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Nevada System of Higher Education, $59.6 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.California Statewide Communities Development Authority, $55.9 million of hospital revenue refinancing bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.California Health Facilities Financing Authority, $165.3 million revenue refinancing bonds. Bank of America.Charleston, S.C., $100 million of water and sewer system revenue refinancing bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Connecticut, $550 million of general obligation bonds. Ramirez.El Monte Union High School District, Calif., $55 million of general obligation bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Finney County Unified School District, Kan., $63.8 million of general obligation bonds. Piper Jaffray.AdvertisementGrossmont Union High School District, Calif., $50 million of general obligation bonds. Stifel Nicolaus.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Halifax Health Medical Center, Fla., $160 million revenue refinancing and improvement bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Lackawanna County, Pa., $70.3 million of general obligation bonds. Boenning & Scattergood.Lancaster County Hospital Authority, $175 million of University of Pennsylvania Health System revenue refinancing bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Nashville Health and Education Facilities Board, $780 million of revenue bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Nebraska Investment Finance Authority, $90 million of single-family housing revenue bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.New Mexico Mortgage Finance Authority, $63 million of single-family mortgage program bonds. Piper Jaffray.New York City Transitional Finance Authority, $750 million of building aid revenue bonds. Ramirez.North Carolina, $129.7 million of water and sewer system revenue refinancing bonds. Robert Baird.Ohlone Community College District, Calif., $89 million of general obligation bonds. Piper Jaffray.Oregon, $83 million of general obligation bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Santa Clara Valley Water District, Calif., $130.3 million of water system revenue refinancing bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.AdvertisementSanta Clara Valley Water District, Calif., $154.9 million of water utility system improvement revenue bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Tucson, Ariz., $70.7 million of water system revenue refinancing bonds. Stifel Nicolaus.New River Valley Regional Jail Authority, Va., $50 million of revenue refinancing bonds. Raymond James.Westchester County Local Development Corporation, N.Y., $284.3 of medical center obligated revenue bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Wisconsin, $98.2 million of clean water refinancing bonds. Jefferies.A version of this schedule appears in print on March 14, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Treasury Auctions Set for This Week.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.