AdvertisementSupported byBy John KoblinLast week, FX announced that it had picked up “Trust,” a new limited series from Danny Boyle, the acclaimed director of “Slumdog Millionaire” and “Steve Jobs.” The 10-episode season will be about the kidnapping of the oil fortune heir John Paul Getty III.This is just the latest limited series in the FX lineup. The cable channel is now showing “American Crime Story,” about the O. J. Simpson trial, and it broadcasts other anthologies like “American Horror Story” and “Fargo,” which change characters, story lines and settings from season to season (the next season of “American Crime Story” will be about Hurricane Katrina).On ABC, the anthology show “American Crime” completed its second season on Wednesday night, and Fox already announced that it would bring back its anthology series “Scream Queens” for a second season.I recently spoke with FX’s chief executive, John Landgraf, and Ryan Murphy, an executive producer of “American Crime Story,” “American Horror Story” and “Scream Queens,” about why they think this form of television works and why we’re going to see many more limited series.Mr. Landgraf points back to television before “The Sopranos.”It was a time when the television business model dictated that producers needed to create 22 episodes a year. If the series had few continuing story lines, all the better, since that meant it would repeat better. And to get a series to syndication, it had to reach at least 100 episodes.“What you were saying to artists was: Come up with the best show you can, given those requirements,” Mr. Landgraf said. “And that basically eliminated the potential existence of virtually every great show that’s been made since ‘The Sopranos.’ ”“The Sopranos” had its premiere in 1999, and the golden age of television started in earnest. The show’s story lines were dark and developed over numerous episodes, and the series spawned a new type of business model for television.“But then that becomes its own orthodoxy,” Mr. Landgraf said. “Now, we make serialized shows. They have to be 13 episodes or 10 episodes a season. And if you don’t have at least five seasons, we can’t sell them. Six seasons is better. So now instead of making 22 episodes and 100 episodes, we’re trying to make 91 episodes over seven years. And, by the way, it should be dark, it should be serialized, it should have an antihero. Now you’re telling artists: Write the best show you can given these restrictions.”After Mr. Murphy pitched “American Horror Story” several years ago, Mr. Landgraf had a revelation.“The innovation isn’t the 13-episode, seven-year show,” Mr. Landgraf said. “The innovation is fit the business model to the artist, not the artist to the business model.”Mr. Murphy said that making contained, 10-episode seasons with different casts has significantly expanded the talent available to him. John Travolta stars on this season of “American Crime Story,” and Mr. Murphy got him to sign on because it wasn’t an exhaustive commitment.“You’re never going to get Jessica Lange or John Travolta or Kathy Bates to sign on the dotted line to give you seven years of their life doing the same character,” he said. “I don’t think that they’re interested in that. By doing these one-year talent deals, you’re allowing talent that wasn’t interested in television before to become part of it. Like Matthew McConaughey on ‘True Detective.’ ”There were 412 scripted series in all television last year, a record-breaker. This year, there might be even more. The number of shows — and the nickname for it, “peak TV” — set off a monthslong conversation in the industry about whether there was simply too much television.Mr. Murphy says these types of series provide an antidote to that.“There is so much content out there and, for me, I don’t know that I have the time that I used to have to dedicate myself to slavish viewing of a seven-year show,” he said. “What I like about this is it’s 10 or 12 episodes and you’re off to another story. This story has a beginning, middle and end, and this form of storytelling more and more reflects the world we’re living in. We live in an A.D.D. world.”Advertisement