AdvertisementSupported byBy Sam RobertsRena Wolner, a former contracts department assistant who became president of three mass-market paperback publishing companies, died on Saturday in Boca Raton, Fla. She was 70.The cause was lung cancer, her sister, Paula Levin, said.An acolyte of the paperback pioneer Oscar Dystel, who rescued Bantam Books from the brink of collapse, Ms. Wolner became president and publisher of Berkley, Pocket and Avon Books — the only woman to run three of the industry’s leading mass-market companies.At Berkley, she and the company’s hardcover partner, G.P. Putnam’s Sons, and its editor in chief Phyllis Grann were in the vanguard in forging combined deals for hardcover and paperback rights with authors like Tom Clancy, William Gibson, Frank Herbert, Dean Koontz, Nora Roberts and John Sandford.Penguin Random House, in a statement about her death, called her “indispensable in the making of Bantam and Berkley as publishing powerhouses.”Rena Meryl Tannenbaum was born in Boston on Feb. 22, 1945. Her father, Samuel, owned a window-washing business. Her mother was the former Gertrude Leaman.Her marriage to Eric Wolner ended in divorce. Besides her sister, she leaves no immediate survivors.After graduating from the University of Bridgeport in Connecticut in 1967, Ms. Wolner joined the contracts department at Bantam, where she worked with Mr. Dystel and became associate publisher.A decade later, she was hired as vice president and publisher of the Berkley Publishing Corporation. She was named president in 1984. The next year she was briefly president of Pocket Books before becoming president of Avon, where she remained until 1988.She later worked as a consultant to Ms. Grann, by then the chief executive at the Putnam Berkley Publishing Group, and retired from publishing in 1994.At Berkley, the strategy of the new parent company, MCA Inc., was for Putnam to publish fewer but more prominent and profitable books in hardcover in coordination with a subsequent paperback marketing blitz.The goal of Stanley Newman, an MCA executive, “was to have two separate entities totally dependent on each other,” Ms. Grann told New York magazine in 2002. In 1978, he introduced her to Ms. Wolner, Ms. Grann recalled, “Then, he said, ‘You ladies had better get along. Otherwise, you’re both fired.’”“She always knew what titles to get behind,” Ms. Grann recalled on Tuesday. “It was an instinct.”Among them was the best-selling “The One Minute Manager” in 1983.Ms. Wolner also believed that consumers could tell a paperback book by its cover, which she described to The New York Times in 1982 as “the most important tool a mass-market publisher has for selling to both the trade and the consumer.”“I estimate that we have four seconds to grab somebody,” she said.Advertisement