
Global Manager By                     
NAZANIN LANKARANI

MARCH 13, 2016
Christiane Fischer  is president and chief executive of AXA Art Americas, a New York-based subsidiary of AXA Art Versicherung, a global specialty art and collectibles insurance company with headquarters in Cologne, Germany.Q. What were the early influences in your life?A. I was born and raised in Holzappel, a small town of about 1,400 people, near Frankfurt. My father was an engineer and my mother, a homemaker. She was also a passionate gardener who raised us on homegrown vegetables. Both my parents were athletic and coached track in high school. For years, I competed as a runner. I was lazy in practice but always raced to win. Running made me a self-driven person. But it also made me understand two things; that in a relay race, every runner plays a critical part and that it is important to listen to the coach.Q. Did you have a clear career path in mind? A. Not really. When I was younger, I wanted to be an animal behavior researcher, but being highly allergic, I had to reconsider. After high school I attended a three-year vocational program in Germany and obtained a language degree.At 23, I visited New York and fell in love with the city. I thought its pace and energy suited me and decided to move. My parents worried that I would become a statistic here. But I was determined to be successful. So I took a job with Daimler-Benz in New York and enrolled in evening classes at New York University to earn a bachelor’s degree in economics. I had to give up those classes when my first daughter was born.AdvertisementIn 2000, I joined AXA Art as director of marketing. Two years later, I became chief operating officer. In 2004, I became chief executive and president in 2006.AdvertisementQ. How did you reach the top so quickly at AXA Art?A. Frankly, I did not know very much about insurance at first but I learned on the job. It turned out to be a great fit. When the opportunity to join AXA Art came up, it was the chance to match my business background to my passion for art. Art was always a big part of my life. There were others at AXA Art who understood art and could engage in an “artistic dialogue” with our clients, mostly collectors and galleries, but they needed someone who could also run a business. I was not an art academic by any means, but I brought an understanding of the bottom line to the job.At age 50, I am in a good place.Q. Your first year as chief executive, you faced a “trial by fire” or rather “by flood” when Hurricane Katrina hit the United States. A. I was away on vacation with my family when the levies broke in New Orleans. I immediately drove back 120 miles to New York. In the car, I assessed our exposure with my team. We needed helicopters and generators. Our biggest exposure was the New Orleans Museum with a potential loss of $200 million, mostly artworks stored in a basement with no working pumps. I authorized our team to buy amphibious vehicles, hire helicopters and send a group of former law enforcement officers to enter the museum. They shot the locks to get in and moved the art out.There was no time to call headquarters to clear the unusual expenditures. We were caught in a race against time to protect our clients against flooding, mold and looting. I had to make an executive decision on the spot. When a press headline said: “AXA has sent troops to New Orleans,” I thought, that is the end of my job. By being proactive, in retrospect, we limited our losses significantly.Q. What did that experience teach you?A. Insurance companies are very rigorous about protocol. From Katrina, I learned that there were times when it was important to be proactive. That is precisely what we did when Hurricane Sandy hit New York in 2012. We probably had the biggest risk of any insurer in the Chelsea area, where the art galleries were located.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.We responded early by calling every client, urging them to gear up quickly and move everything to higher ground. It is amazing how people will ignore weather forecasts but listen when their insurer calls.I probably shouldn’t say this as C.E.O. of an insurance company, but when disaster hits, I am not one to say, “Where is my rule book?” I say, “Let’s do what needs to be done and deal with the consequences later.” Don’t get me wrong; I am a good corporate citizen. But with Katrina, I completely ignored protocol and went with gut instinct. At first, I was severely criticized. After the fact, I became a hero. Of course, if I had made the wrong call, I would have been fired. But that is how it goes in life.Q. How many people do you manage today?A. My responsibilities cover the United States, Canada, Mexico and Brazil. I manage a team of 45. I am also part of the global leadership team at AXA, the executive committee that runs the business globally in 27 countries. I am good at bringing together people from different backgrounds and cultures. It is a part of my skill set.AdvertisementQ. What set of skills does it take to manage people across cultures?A. Listening and having an open mind are crucial. Those skills help you to understand how others operate and what they consider important. With an open mind, you can be flexible and build trust. Only then can you direct people in reaching goals.Q. What is your leadership style?A. I see my job as a mixture of coach and commander in chief which, I admit, is a very American term. At the end of the day, I am the one making the decisions. I try to be a good coach and get the best performance out of my team. I am a high-energy person and I have been told not to impose my own pace on others. I have had to learn, for instance, not to send too many emails over the weekend.Q. What is the best advice you have received?A. This may sound cheeky, but it is true. It was a message in a fortune cookie: “If you don’t try, you will not lose but you will never succeed.” I carry that message in my wallet. The fear of failure has never stopped me from trying.Q. What would you tell a young person starting out?A. Many people, especially women, ask me how I got to be where I am today. There is always a bit of luck involved, being at the right time in the right place.I tell my three daughters — two in college and one in high school — that even if you are starting in the copy room, you must work hard, give it your best, and put in a lot of time. Don’t just do good work, do great work.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »