
Advertising By                     
 ALINA TUGEND
 
MARCH 13, 2016
The actors in “Game of Thrones,” the epic fantasy series featuring story lines about civil war and banishment, are using the enormous popularity of their HBO series to raise money for real-life victims of conflict and exile.Beginning Monday, public service announcements and videos featuring the show’s actors will appear urging support for the International Rescue Committee, a humanitarian relief organization that aids refugees. The ads will appear online exclusively, including on the charity’s microsite, YouTube and social media platforms.The campaign will run through the series’s sixth season, which begins April 24, with the goal of raising $1 million. The organization is tapping into a significant audience: The trailer for the coming season of “Game of Thrones” was viewed 32 million times within 24 hours of being posted online on Tuesday.The campaign will also run on the fund-raising platform Omaze.com, where, for a minimum $10 donation to the International Rescue Committee, donors can enter to win two tickets to the season premiere. Other items, such as T-shirts, will be available for certain donation amounts.AdvertisementThe strategies of tapping stars, raffling off celebrity-related experiences and targeting ads at specific groups reflect the current direction of cause-related advertising — and the ways that nonprofit groups try to differentiate their causes from others vying for attention.Advertisement“It brings a fictional story of displacement and conflict to a real-life one and hopes viewers will be prompted to donate,” said Katherina Rosqueta, executive director of the Center for High Impact Philanthropy at the University of Pennsylvania. “And it’s bringing the cause to the audience, rather than the audience to the cause.”The first public service announcement is straightforward: It shows actors from the series speaking individually, starting with Lena Headey (who plays Cersei Lannister). She says directly to the camera, “Mass exodus: Millions on the move, escaping war, famine and destruction.”“This is no fiction,” DeObia Oparei (Areo Hotah) says next. “No fantasy.” Others chime in: “Sixty million people are displaced worldwide.” “Real people, now on the most dangerous journey of all.” They note that in Syria alone, half the population has fled their homes. The actors then talk about the work of the International Rescue Committee and urge viewers to “rise up” and donate with the tag line “Rescue has no boundaries.”The organization and the show were a good fit for several reasons, said David Miliband, president and chief executive of the International Rescue Committee. Many of the actors are European and feel a close connection to the refugee crisis; the series is also filmed throughout Europe.It also helped that Mr. Miliband and Richard Plepler, chairman and chief executive of HBO, know each other.“When I heard of the challenges of the I.R.C., I had lunch with him and told him that we’re here to help,” Mr. Plepler said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.HBO’s creative services team filmed the public service announcement, and Omaze also plans to release three videos for its site that will take a lighter tone: The first is called “Swords vs. Metal Bands.” The campaign will include another public service announcement and related content later in the season, to be released on social media and the International Rescue Committee’s website.Cause-marketing can backfire, however. When KFC partnered with the Susan G. Komen Foundation, which raises money for breast cancer research, the company was criticized for “pinkwashing” because eating deep-fried chicken can contribute to obesity, and obesity has been linked to an increased risk of breast cancer in postmenopausal women.AdvertisementEven Toms, the shoe company known for its involvement in good causes, received pushback on its “One for One” campaign — donating a pair of shoes to children around the world for every pair bought. Critics said such donations could undercut local shoe sellers, and make people reliant on outside aid.Steve McKee, president of the ad agency McKee, Wallwork and Company, who has written about cause-related advertising, emphasized that he was not familiar with the “Game of Thrones” campaign, but noted that “if the cause is controversial in any way — if there are two legitimate sides to the issue — you’re really playing with fire. The trust you build with some may be lost with others.”The first “Game of Thrones” public service announcement avoids politics; it mentions, for example, the thousands of refugees granted safe haven in the United States, but not the debate about whether countries, including the United States, are accepting enough or too many refugees.The show is also known for its depiction of violence, and some might wonder if it is the right vehicle to comment about the effects of real-life violence.Mr. Plepler, the HBO chairman, dismissed such a concern.“Anyone who draws the connection between fantasy and the tragedy befalling the world is straining credulity,” he said. “We’re calling attention to a global tragedy. The first step is to get people in a crowded world to pay attention, and it sometimes helps to have celebrities raise the issue.”And it is the opportunity to mingle with a favorite celebrity, or the cast of a favorite show, that brings in the money. Ryan Cummins, a co-founder of Omaze — which receives 20 percent of all net donations — says an average fund-raiser on its site pulls in from $250,000 to $1 million. For its campaign with the Disney and Lucasfilm charity Star Wars: Force for Change, the prize was an appearance in “Star Wars: The Force Awakens.” It raised over $4.2 million.Such games and giveaways can seem out of place when juxtaposed with the very serious needs being addressed, said Alexandra Budabin, an adjunct professor of political science at the University of Dayton who studies the intersection of celebrities and humanitarian work. But, she added, if the popularity of “Game of Thrones” could be translated into humanitarian help, then “it does seem like in this case everyone wins. All’s fair in trying to raise money, and trying to educate a population who might not otherwise be educated about this issue.”A version of this article appears in print on March 14, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Tapping ‘Thrones’ to Highlight Real-Life Conflict.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »