AdvertisementSupported byBy Elizabeth OlsonThe American Bar Association’s accrediting body put law schools on notice Monday that it intended to tighten a rule that sets a deadline for graduates to pass state bar exams — a near-universal requirement for becoming a practicing lawyer.The new measure would clarify the existing deadline that 75 percent of students pass within two years. Bar passage rates have been falling noticeably across the country.At issue for the schools is their accreditation by the association. The theory behind the rule, which is one factor in accreditation, is that schools should be accepting students who are likely to have the qualifications to become practicing lawyers. Proponents of the change say that schools exploit students when they accept those who — based on admissions tests and other measurements — have a small chance of succeeding.Although the current rule was intended to require passage of the bar in two years, the language is fuzzy and full of loopholes that effectively give schools as long as five years to meet the goal.The change would eliminate more than 700 words of explanation from the rule as it stands now, and leave a single sentence.The vagueness in the existing rule has allowed most schools to avoid being held accountable, although at least two, both in California, were placed on probation for low bar passage rates. The probation of each has since been lifted. Accreditation of two other California schools was temporarily withdrawn, in part because of bar passage issues.The revision, proposed by the association’s Section of Legal Education and Admission to the Bar, is subject to a hearing and a comment period. Approval by the full A.B.A. would most likely come in February 2017. Some schools are expected to push back against the effort to place a firm lid on student outcomes, especially if they have elected to admit students with less traditional qualifications.Bar exam passage rates have been dropping in big states including California, New York, Florida and New Jersey. Georgia, Pennsylvania and the District of Columbia also were stung by lower passage rates after the July 2015 exam. The bar exam is also given in February, but most graduates take it the summer after their graduation from law school.The bar passage rate in California, for example, sank last year to its lowest point since 1986. In New York, the overall passage rate for test takers last July was at its lowest point since 2004. Florida’s rate also dropped slightly, although other big states like New Jersey had steady overall passage rates.Entering the legal profession means measuring up to tough standards, but the numerical qualifications, like admissions test scores and grade point averages, of students have declined, and fewer people are applying to law school. The number of applicants last year fell to 54,130 compared with just under 88,000 five years earlier, according to the Law School Admissions Council, which tracks the data.Advertisement