AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael M. GrynbaumAs a proudly renegade voice of the populist right, Breitbart News has long delighted in bedeviling liberals and establishment Republicans alike, emerging in recent years as one of the nation’s leading conservative media outlets.But in an ironic twist, Breitbart, a news and opinion website that welcomed the rise of Donald J. Trump as an outsider candidate, is now facing a problem similar to the one roiling the Republican Party it likes to torment: a scathing internal dispute, with Mr. Trump at its center.Several top executives and journalists at the site have resigned in the last week, saying the organization has turned into a shill for the Trump campaign and failed to support Michelle Fields, a Breitbart reporter who accused Mr. Trump’s campaign manager, Corey Lewandowski, of grabbing and shoving her at a Florida rally last week.Ms. Fields reported the episode to the police, and a journalist for The Washington Post, Ben Terris, identified Mr. Lewandowski as the person who grabbed her. The Trump campaign has denied Ms. Fields’s account, and Breitbart, after initially requesting an apology, later published an article casting doubt on whether Mr. Lewandowski was involved.In a telephone interview, Ms. Fields, who also resigned on Monday, said that she “felt like my employer was working with the Trump campaign to assassinate my character.”“They were more interested in protecting Trump and coordinating with him on a message than they were about finding out the truth,” said Ms. Fields, who is 28. Messages left with Breitbart executives on Monday were not answered, and the site’s spokesman was among the employees who quit.The uproar entwines the growing concerns about violence at Mr. Trump’s rallies — protesters have been attacked, and reporters  ejected — with the squabbling that has erupted among right-leaning media organizations over Mr. Trump’s improbable political rise.It also offers a glimpse into the growing pains at Breitbart, which began as a cousin of the Drudge Report and has expanded into a broader, if still ideologically driven, news operation with journalists in London, Los Angeles and on the campaign trail.The present site retains the tabloid-style, shoot-from-the-hip mentality of its outspoken founder, Andrew Breitbart, who died in 2012. But employees who left in recent days said that Breitbart’s unabashed embrace of Mr. Trump, particularly at the seeming expense of its own reporter, struck them as a betrayal of its mission.The site’s ethos, said Kurt Bardella, the spokesman who resigned, had been that “everyone should unilaterally be held accountable — whether it be Donald Trump or someone else.”Mr. Bardella acknowledged that the site’s readership had substantial overlap with Mr. Trump’s base of supporters, saying, “Anyone who reads Breitbart is fundamentally generally angry at the Washington establishment.”But he said that Ms. Fields was not treated as a team player. Or, as Ben Shapiro, another editor who resigned on Monday, put it, “You don’t throw your own campaign reporter under the bus to satisfy the whims of a political campaign.”Some staff members at Breitbart disputed that characterization of events, although none agreed to be cited by name.Briefly on Monday, the site published what appeared to be a facetious column that mocked Mr. Shapiro for resigning and compared him to a snake. The column was later taken down, and a Breitbart executive, Joel B. Pollak, apologized.Mr. Trump’s rise in the presidential race has paralleled a significant growth in Breitbart’s readership: The site’s traffic rose 120 percent, to about 14 million unique monthly visitors, from January 2014 to last January, according to data from comScore. Traffic to The Daily Caller, a conservative site more closely associated with the party establishment, dipped 3 percent in the same period.Ms. Fields, in the interview, said she had been happy at her job since starting in November. “People would ask me, ‘How do you work at Breitbart, oh my goodness?’ ” she recalled. “But I enjoyed it. I liked my co-workers. I didn’t cover Trump. I didn’t have to sit there and write all these pro-Trump pieces.”Ms. Fields said she believed superiors questioned her account in exchange for more access to Mr. Trump. She said she had stopped reading posts about herself on social media, citing threatening messages from Trump supporters, including accusations that she had falsified a photograph of a bruise on her arm.“I’m in a tough spot,” Ms. Fields said. “If I go to the police, people say I’m taking advantage, I’m a crybaby.” She added, “Anything I do, it seems like it is the wrong decision.”Her next move, she says, is uncertain, although she said she would like to continue covering the presidential race. But, she added, “Not the Trump campaign.”Ravi Somaiya contributed reporting.Advertisement