By LIZ MOYERNOV. 12, 2015
Citigroup, as it begins to retool its retail operations and tries to revamp its image in the United States, is borrowing ideas from its overseas branches.The bank has begun a rollout of a futuristic “smart branch” model in Manhattan that jettisons the usual branch features in favor of digital services that are more in keeping with the atmosphere of an Apple store. It already has 100 such locations in Europe, Asia and Latin America.It is simultaneously introducing another concept to the United States that it has used successfully abroad: a luxury suite where customers of its Citigold service can drink a free cappuccino, use free office and conferencing space for personal or business meetings and meet with a Citi financial adviser.“We wanted different ways of interacting with customers,” Jonathan Larsen, Citigroup’s global head of retail banking and mortgages, said in a recent interview.AdvertisementThe retail bank, Citibank, is rethinking its branch presence in the United States, closing its remaining 17 branches in Boston after a decade of trying to build up there. It has also retreated from Texas and Philadelphia in the last two years.AdvertisementCitibank is now focused on New York, Washington, Miami, Chicago, San Francisco and Southern California, places where the bank can intersect with traveling international clients.It has cut 13 percent of its North American branches since last year. Revenue from retail banking fell 5 percent in the third quarter from the quarter a year ago.Citibank certainly isn’t the only bank to rejuvenate its branches after years of driving customers to online and mobile banking. Branch traffic is down among the affluent, says one bank consultant, Charles Wendel, and competitors are pushing in.The new, futuristic locations are smaller and offer more in the way of technology as a way to lure in the more tech-adherent and affluent client.“The people who go to the branches are the ‘wrong’ types of people,” Mr. Wendel said, “not the ones with $200,000 balances in the bank.”City National Bank, which serves the wealthy and is known as the banker to Hollywood and Broadway, has also been trying to raise its profile in New York.The Los Angeles-based bank — which Royal Bank of Canada acquired for $5.4 billion this year — has opened new high-tech branches, one directly across the street from Citigroup’s headquarters on Park Avenue. City National’s branches were designed by Bohlin Cywinski Jackson, based in Wilkes-Barre, Pa., which has done work for Apple.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A Citi rival, JPMorgan Chase, has also been changing its branches, installing kiosklike devices with bigger screens and more functions than a typical automated teller machine would have.AdvertisementThe real benefit is the real estate savings. The Citi “smart branch” that recently opened in Midtown Manhattan covers 7,452 square feet, including 3,491 for the branch on the ground floor and 3,961 in the upstairs Citigold lounge.The total is just one-third the size of a former Citi branch that used to be across the street from the new location. Some smart branch locations abroad have just 750 square feet of space, Mr. Larsen said.Citi hired the New York design firm Eight Inc., which also works with Apple as well as Virgin Atlantic and Tesla. The design eliminates desks, “bandit barriers” — bullet-resistant glass meant to protect tellers — paper transaction forms and other staples of typical branch lobbies.Branch staff members roam around carrying iPads and direct visitors to a circular “workbench” in the middle of the space, where employees and visitors sit side by side and do transactions on desktop computers or mobile devices.The teller window is now just for large withdrawals, foreign currency exchange and official checks.The idea was not to copy Apple, but to “rethink the branch process,” Mr. Larsen said, adding that the idea was to make the experience less sales-oriented and more collaborative.“I didn’t want the branches to be places where clients wait in a queue,” he said.Citigold customers — who typically have at least $50,000 on deposit or in retirement accounts or have various other relationships with Citi — can visit the upstairs Citigold center, which has couches and coffee table books and is designed as a place for customers to relax or meet with a Citi financial adviser.Mr. Larsen said the idea was popular in Asia, where he is based, and the current Manhattan Citigold location gets a lot of foot traffic from Japanese clients who are traveling on business. Citigold centers are set to open in Miami and Los Angeles in the coming months.“If you’re going to have a high-touch business, you should make it as attractive as you can,” said Michael Mayo, an analyst who follows Citi at CLSA.The Manhattan location will ultimately be staffed with about 60 financial advisers. Citi is in the hiring and licensing process now, Mr. Larsen said.A version of this article appears in print on November 13, 2015, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: Citigroup Imports a Branch Style From Operations Abroad.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.