AdvertisementSupported byBy Barry MeierLloyd S. Shapley, who shared the 2012 Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Science for work on game theory that has been used to study subjects as diverse as matching couples and allocating costs, died on Saturday in Tucson. He was 92. He broke a hip several weeks ago, his son Peter said in confirming the death.Dr. Shapley, a mathematician and emeritus professor at U.C.L.A., was considered one of the fathers of game theory, which tries to explain the choices that competitors make in situations that require strategic thinking. The “Shapley value,” named for him, is a concept through which the benefits of cooperation can be proportionally divided among participants based on their relative contribution.He was a close friend and mentor to John Forbes Nash Jr., a mathematician and Nobel laureate who had schizophrenia. Sylvia Nasar, a former reporter for The New York Times, devoted a chapter in her 1998 biography of Mr. Nash, “A Beautiful Mind,” to the men’s friendship. (The book was adapted for a 2001 film.)Ms. Nasar said the book’s title was suggested by a remark by Dr. Shapley. “He was obnoxious,” Ms. Nasar quoted him as saying about Nash. “What redeemed him was a keen, beautiful, logical mind.”Born in Cambridge, Mass., on June 2, 1923, Lloyd Stowell Shapley was one of five children of Martha and Harlow Shapley, a noted astronomer at Harvard University. He was studying mathematics at Harvard when World War II started, and left to join the Army Air Corps. He was assigned to a weather station at a secret air base in western China that also intercepted broadcasts. There he earned a Bronze Star for deciphering a Soviet weather code. After the war, he earned degrees from Harvard and Princeton University.In a 1962 paper he co-wrote, Dr. Shapley explained how individuals, like those seeking a partner, could be placed in a stable relationship even if they disagreed about the qualities that made a perfect match. His ideas laid the groundwork for the development of other matching systems, like ones involving kidney donors and recipients.He worked at the RAND Corporation before joining the University of California, Los Angeles, in 1981. “Dr. Shapley was one of the giants of game theory,” Gene Block, the chancellor of U.C.L.A., said in a statement.Dr. Shapley and Alvin E. Roth, a Harvard professor, received the Nobel Prize in 2012 in recognition of their work on market design and matching theory. While they did not work together, Professor Roth applied Dr. Shapley’s ideas to practical problems.In announcing the award, the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences described their work as addressing a central economic problem: how to match different agents as well as possible. “For example,” the citation said, “students have to be matched with schools, and donors of human organs with patients in need of a transplant.”Dr. Shapley expressed surprise when told about the economics award. “I’m a mathematician, I’m not an economist,” he said. Researchers at Carnegie Mellon University recently developed a website called Spliddit, which uses the Shapley value concept to help people divide the costs of shared rents or cab rides equitably.Besides his son Peter, Dr. Shapley is survived by another son, Christopher, and two grandchildren. His wife of 42 years, Marian, died in 1997.Advertisement