By MARTHA C. WHITEMARCH 14, 2016
Passengers aren’t the only ones frustrated by airplane Wi-Fi’s high cost, slow speed and balky connections.A legal skirmish between American Airlines and the Wi-Fi provider Gogo broke out last month, highlighting the increased friction. American cited a clause in its contract with Gogo that permits it to end the agreement if a competing Wi-Fi provider offers a deal that Gogo cannot match. It said ViaSat, a Gogo rival, made such an offer.American later dropped its legal action after Gogo said it would submit a competing proposal.“We know in-flight connectivity is something our customers want and need,” said Casey Norton, a spokesman for American Airlines. “They expect a living-room type of experience.”But there could be more to the dispute than just the quality of Wi-Fi service. Analysts point out that either switching vendors or renegotiating the terms of its contract could yield financial benefits for American, too.AdvertisementIn the end, industry experts say the arms race for Internet connectivity at 35,000 feet is likely to lead to faster connections that cost less.AdvertisementThis would be welcome news to travelers frustrated with paying high prices for inconsistent service.“You have no other choice,” said Theresa Clement, a contractor and host of the blog MyFixItUpLife.com. She travels frequently for work and said she found the price not always reflective of the quality of the service.“It seems like the prices have gone up,” she said. “I don’t find that it’s faster, I don’t find that it’s more consistently working.”A Gogo spokesman, Steve Nolan, said the average cost paid by a Gogo user was $13, but the cost of staying connected for a cross-country flight can be nearly $40.Ms. Clement said she felt obligated to pay for Wi-Fi even though it sometimes cut out or was slowed by an overload of users.“It is frustrating when you have to keep hitting refresh, especially when you have a client that’s waiting for something from you,” she said.“It’s that combination of a service that’s not terribly good combined with pricing many people find outrageous,” said Tim Farrar, a satellite and telecommunications analyst at Telecom, Media and Finance Associates. “That backlash is starting to make airlines like American sit up and say, hold on a minute.”To alleviate complaints like those of Ms. Clement, airlines are shifting to newer, satellite-based Wi-Fi connections that promise higher speeds and a more consistent signal.Advertisement“What people are looking for is to get the kind of broadband connectivity on the uplink that they have on the ground, and that’s becoming very demanding,” said Hans Weber, president and owner of Tecop International Inc., an aviation consulting firm.For a number of years, passengers, airlines and Internet providers like Gogo were in a sort of standoff. Airlines did not want to invest in the technology if few travelers were going to use Wi-Fi. Travelers were loath to pay a high price for spotty service, but providers needed a critical mass of users before costs could come down.“Not enough people are willing to pay the hefty fees, especially if it doesn’t work,” Mr. Weber said. “This is the chicken and the egg.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But that is changing. Much as home computer users moved from dial-up to DSL, and cable lines to fiber, in-flight Wi-Fi is undergoing a similar evolution, with ground-to-air transmission that uses cellular towers being supplanted by newer satellite transmission that promises more capacity and faster speeds.There are different types of connections, each with its advantages and drawbacks. But all would let more passengers on a flight go online and stay online, and most likely for a better price.“Alternative service providers are offering faster, more reliable and less expensive satellite-based Wi-Fi services to airlines like United, Southwest, JetBlue and Virgin America,” American said in its complaint.Charles Leocha, chairman of Travelers United, a consumer advocacy group, argued that it was disingenuous for American to put customers at the center of its legal stance.“It sounds like a commercial dispute and American is using consumers as a pawn,” he said. He suggested that the airline was having buyer’s remorse over its contract with Gogo and was using customer service as a pretext to get out of it.American’s complaint had referred specifically to Gogo service on about 200 of American’s older 737s.AdvertisementGogo is putting in place more advanced satellite technology, known as 2Ku, on planes now. Mr. Nolan, the company spokesman, said the new technology would help ease airwaves congestion and address some pricing concerns.“It’s going to be cheaper no matter what with 2Ku,” he said.In the last month, Gogo also announced deals with the satellite operators SES and Intelsat to buy large amounts of capacity on new satellites scheduled to be launched in the future.“This deal will dramatically increase bandwidth and drive overall costs per bit down by orders of magnitude,” Gogo’s chief technology officer, Anand Chari, said in a statement about the deal with SES last month.In the view of Mr. Farrar at Telecom, Media and Finance Associates, any contract termination or renegotiation resulting from American’s legal action would ultimately bring lower prices for travelers.Gogo offers its airline customers either retail or wholesale pricing. Under the retail pricing model used by American, Gogo charges passengers directly and pays a 20 percent commission to the airline. If American switched to a wholesale pricing plan either with Gogo or ViaSat, under which the airline would resell service to passengers, it could make more money without charging passengers more, Mr. Farrar said.“The landscape is changing here,” said John Thomas, head of the global aviation practice for L.E.K. Consulting. “Clearly, American doesn’t have that level of pricing flexibility.”Industry observers frequently point to JetBlue, which has upended the model by making basic Wi-Fi free, with a higher tier available for a fee for those who want to use services that require more bandwidth, like streaming movies.“The technology is really young and really immature, and hasn’t sorted itself out,” Mr. Weber of Tecop International said. “It’s still up in the air.”A version of this article appears in print on March 15, 2016, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: American Airlines Doesn’t Care for Its Wi-Fi, Either.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.