AdvertisementSupported byWhite Collar WatchBy Peter J. HenningThe Roman poet Juvenal posed the question “quis custodiet ipsos custodes?” or “who will guard the guards themselves?” That issue surfaced last week as part of a lawsuit filed by a hedge fund owner against a number of F.B.I. agents and federal prosecutors in Manhattan, including the United States attorney in Manhattan, Preet Bharara, accusing them of making deliberate misrepresentations in an affidavit used to obtain a search warrant in an insider trading case that ended up putting the hedge fund out of business.Prosecutors in the United States have broad discretion in deciding how to obtain evidence of possible misconduct, and the targets of an investigation have few tools to combat instances in which that authority may have been misused. A decision by Judge William H. Pauley III of the Federal District Court in Manhattan that allows the case to move forward signals that the government needs to tread carefully when it investigates white-collar crime because the notoriety surrounding an investigation, even if charges are never filed, can have a devastating impact.The lawsuit arises from a search at the offices of Level Global Investors, a hedge fund in New York, by federal agents on Nov. 22, 2010, as part of the Justice Department’s broad insider trading investigation that resulted in numerous convictions. The F.B.I. got the warrant based on an affidavit, later obtained by The New York Times, stating that David Ganek and Anthony Chiasson, the founders of the firm, received information they knew came from insiders at companies and then traded on it.The negative publicity surrounding the search, including photographs published in The Wall Street Journal showing agents removing files from Level Global’s offices, caused significant concerns among its clients. When a representative of the firm met with two prosecutors a month later to discuss the harm caused by the publicity, they responded that the impact of the search “had been carefully considered at the highest levels” of the Justice Department.A few weeks after that first meeting, Mr. Ganek’s lawyer appealed to Mr. Bharara to publicly clarify that Mr. Ganek was not a target of the investigation because of the possibility that the fund would have to close, but the request was denied. The firm announced it was shutting down on Feb. 11, 2011.Mr. Ganek was never accused of a crime, but Mr. Chiasson was later prosecuted for insider trading. His conviction was reversed and the charges dismissed in December 2014 when a federal appeals court found that the government failed to prove he knew that a benefit had been provided to the source of the information.During Mr. Chiasson’s trial, it came out that the statement in the search warrant affidavit about Mr. Ganek’s knowledge regarding the source of the inside information was false. A Level Global analyst who cooperated in the case testified that he never implicated Mr. Ganek, and one of the F.B.I. agents who interviewed the analyst said in court that the statement in the affidavit was false.Mr. Ganek’s lawsuit contends his constitutional rights were violated because the agents and prosecutors deliberately used false information to obtain the warrant, resulting in Level Global’s closure. The defendants are the agents and prosecutors involved in the case, and a number of supervisors in the United States attorney’s office and F.B.I., including Mr. Bharara.Mr. Ganek claims that they failed to take any action even though they were aware of the misstatements in the affidavit, based at least in part on the response that the impact of the search had been carefully considered by the leadership of the office.The Justice Department asked Judge Pauley to dismiss the claim based on the doctrine of qualified immunity, which protects officials from liability for mistaken judgments about the lawfulness of their conduct. To overcome this immunity, Mr. Ganek would have to show that their conduct violated a clearly established constitutional right that a reasonable person would have been aware of at the time.The United States attorney in Manhattan oversaw a sweeping crackdown on insider trading in the hedge fund industry, but a federal appeals court upended the campaign.Although qualified immunity presents a substantial barrier to winning the case, it is still at an early stage, with the government asking for dismissal based only on the failure of the complaint to provide enough information to show that a violation of Mr. Ganek’s rights might have occurred.The Supreme Court’s opinion in Ashcroft v. Iqbal says that a court can allow a case like this to proceed at this point as long as the claim “is plausible on its face,” which means “more than a sheer possibility that a defendant has acted unlawfully.”Judge Pauley was required to accept everything in the complaint as true in deciding the government’s request for dismissal, and found that the “allegations include specific facts establishing the plausibility of the supervisor defendants’ involvement prior to the raid, including admissions by certain defendants that the raid’s consequences ‘had been carefully considered at the highest levels.’ ”Because the lawsuit is still at a preliminary stage, he concluded that “discovery is now appropriate to ascertain whether this case is about a simple misunderstanding or whether something more troubling was afoot.”Does that mean Mr. Bharara and other senior prosecutors from the United States attorney’s office will be deposed in short order?Despite Judge Pauley’s decision, the answer may well be not any time soon, if ever. The Justice Department can appeal his ruling permitting the case to proceed, which would delay depositions and other discovery for a year or more, and perhaps could even result in dismissal of the complaint.The usual rule in civil litigation is that decisions on discovery and other preliminary matters cannot be appealed until there is a final judgment in the case because it is not a good use of judicial resources to allow for piecemeal challenges to rulings. But when there is a legal question about the application of qualified immunity, that decision can be taken to a higher court immediately. Justice Department lawyers are sure to frame their argument as one about whether Judge Pauley correctly applied the law rather than as a factual dispute about what happened, something that generally cannot be appealed.Mr. Ganek’s lawsuit illustrates just how difficult it is to hold prosecutors and investigators accountable for their conduct during an investigation.If criminal charges are filed, a defendant can challenge a violation of the Constitution by asking for the suppression of evidence or even dismissal of the case. If a defendant is exonerated of the charges, a statute called the Hyde Amendment authorizes a lawsuit against the Justice Department for payment of at least a portion of the lawyer’s fees paid to defend that case. The court can grant an award only if the government’s conduct was “vexatious, frivolous, or in bad faith,” which are difficult to establish but at least can be a basis for identifying misconduct in pursuing a case.If prosecutors do not file charges, as happened with Mr. Ganek, then there is no evidence to suppress and the Hyde Amendment is inapplicable. So the only option is to file a claim for damages for violating an individual’s constitutional rights, but then the officials can interpose the protections of qualified immunity to block the lawsuit from proceeding.It turns out there are not many ways to guard the guardians, beyond relying on the structures set up in a prosecutor’s office to ensure that governmental authority is not misused.Mr. Ganek may have gotten further than many defendants, but whether there will be full discovery of how the search warrant came to be issued that spelled the end for Level Global remains an open question.Advertisement