

      By BEN SISARIO

UPDATED March 18, 2016

 In the old days, you never knew which CDs the record store would have in stock. That limitation of physical media was supposed to be solved by digital. Back in the 1990s, technology evangelists and music fans alike began to talk about a “celestial jukebox” — a utopian ideal in which every song ever recorded would be available at a click. In reality, even a celestial jukebox has gaps. Or more precisely, numerous jukeboxes have come along – iTunes, Pandora, Spotify, SoundCloud, YouTube – and each service has had gaps in its repertoire. And those gaps have been growing bigger and more complicated as artists have wielded more power in withholding their music from one outlet or another. This week, it emerged that Jay Z had removed some of his albums from a number of major online outlets like Spotify and Apple, in favor of Tidal, the streaming service that he bought a year ago for $56 million. That may help Tidal attract more paying subscribers, but it can be frustrating for consumers that no single outlet has everything. Here is a sampling of some other major artists whose music has accounted for some of the gaps in the streaming world.In the most prominent example of the conflict between artists and streaming services, Ms. Swift removed all her music from Spotify in November 2014, just after she put out her album “1989.” She criticized Spotify’s business model, in particular its insistence that music should be available on both its free and paid versions. (Spotify has not budged from that model.) She later struck a deal to put the album in Apple Music, which has no free version, although new customers can sample it for three months without paying a fee.“This Is What the Truth Feels Like,” Gwen Stefani’s first solo album in a decade, was released on Friday, and it is available widely on streaming services – except for Spotify. It is the latest high-profile record to be withheld from Spotify because the service does not let artists and their labels restrict their music only to paying subscribers.“Will she or won’t she stream?” That was one of the big guessing games in the music industry last year as Adele prepared to release her latest album, “25.” Along with Ms. Swift, Adele is viewed as one of the very few stars who can generate the kind of blockbuster sales that allow her to consider bypassing streaming. She released two singles on streaming outlets but not the full album. So far “25” has sold more than 15 million copies around the world.In one of the more fascinating experiments in online music, Mr. West released his latest album, “The Life of Pablo,” only on Tidal, the service in which he is a partner. He also said that the album was still unfinished (even after its release) and that “My album will never never never be on Apple. And it will never be for sale.” Industry observers were skeptical of those claims, but after a month Tidal is still the only way to hear the album – aside from pirated copies, that is. Lately, Tidal has notified new customers that it is extending their 30-day trials because “Kanye West continues to deliver new music exclusively to Tidal.”These three acts are some of the biggest successes of Apple Music, the Spotify competitor that Apple introduced last year. Apple has pursued various kinds of exclusive arrangements with artists, including “windowed” releases: limited periods when Apple is the only source for an album, song or video before it becomes available elsewhere. The rappers Drake and Future have followed this model several times, including on their joint mixtape “What a Time to Be Alive.” Recently the band the 1975 withheld its new album from Spotify but promoted it through an exclusive concert video with Apple; it went straight to No. 1. These artists, all partners in Tidal, have released new music in ways that favor the service. Last month Beyoncé released the video “Formation” through Tidal, a day before performing the song at the Super Bowl. In December, Coldplay withheld “A Head Full of Dreams” from Spotify, and in January, Rihanna released “Anti” first only through Tidal; in both cases, their first-week chart positions suffered.One of the artists most willing to experiment with the digital marketplace, Prince has made songs available exclusively on Spotify, and then, days later, withdrawn his catalog from that service. He has released protest songs on SoundCloud — a free platform popular with dance D.J.s — and then pulled them down. He has allowed his catalog to remain on Tidal, but then last week used that platform in an unusual way by offering a single track for sale as a download. What will he try next?As widespread as streaming has become, some artists and record labels avoid it entirely, for various reasons. Neil Young, who has his own high-fidelity download service, Pono, pulled his albums from streaming services, saying that the format  “is the worst audio in history.” Thom Yorke and Joanna Newsom have also expressed strong feelings about the business model. Garth Brooks, Tool, Bob Seger and King Crimson are also largely absent from streaming, although since the Beatles — the bellwether of every new music format — joined late last year, the number of big holdouts will probably dwindle. Many artists and labels in niche genres like jazz and classical music have long been debating economic fairness of streaming for music that depends on smaller audiences. ECM, a renowned jazz and new-music label, is one of the many whose huge catalog is unavailable for streaming. Advertisement