By LIZ MOYERMARCH 15, 2016
The New York Stock Exchange has completed an overhaul of its regulatory functions, naming Anthony J. Albanese, the former acting New York state financial industry regulator, as its chief regulatory officer.Mr. Albanese stepped down as acting superintendent for the New York Department of Financial Services at the end of last year after six months on the job, and after two years as chief of staff to former superintendent Benjamin Lawsky. Before that he was a partner specializing in securities litigation at the law firm Weil Gotshal & Manges.Rapidly evolving electronic trading, spurred by new regulations a decade ago, has created a dizzying array of markets and alternative trading sites, and major exchanges themselves have combined to form huge market conglomerates.The New York Stock Exchange is owned by Intercontinental Exchange, or ICE, which began as an alternative energy futures exchange in the early 2000s and now operates 23 regulated stock and futures exchanges as well as clearinghouses. ICE is considering making a competing bid to buy the London Stock Exchange, which is in the midst of merger talks with Deutsche Börse.AdvertisementICE announced plans to buy the New York Exchange in 2012, months after a merger between the Big Board and Deutsche Börse fell apart after European regulators blocked it.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The New York Exchange has spent two years moving regulatory oversight of its equity and options markets to an internal group, from the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority, the brokerage industry regulator.At the Big Board, Mr. Albanese will oversee regulatory compliance for companies that list on the exchange as well as the internal regulatory affairs groups. He is succeeding Mary Brienza, who has plans to retire from the exchange in June.AdvertisementThe New York Exchange also promoted John Tuttle to global head of listings from chief of staff. He will oversee the group that works with the exchange’s 2,400 listed companies.An earlier version of this article misstated Mr. Albanese’s tenure as chief of staff to Mr. Lawsky. He was chief of staff for two years, not four.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.