AdvertisementSupported byFair GameBy Gretchen MorgensonAs investors dumped shares of the beleaguered Valeant Pharmaceuticals International on Tuesday, erasing more than $11 billion from its market value, the company’s previously large crowd of believers was becoming vanishingly thin.One who remains is William A. Ackman, the billionaire hedge fund manager who oversees Pershing Square Capital Management.Despite suffering an apparent one-day loss of more than $750 million in his fund’s already devastated stake in Valeant, Mr. Ackman told his investors in a letter on Tuesday: “We continue to believe that the value of the underlying business franchises that comprise Valeant are worth multiples of the current market price.”After Mr. Ackman made his letter public, Valeant’s stock fell further.What is Valeant’s collection of businesses worth? That question has emerged as critical to the company’s future, given that its stock market value of $11.4 billion after the close of business on Tuesday was less than half of the $31 billion in debt the company carries.Mr. Ackman has suggested that the company could sell some of the companies it has acquired to raise cash. But some analysts have their doubts.“I’m not sure that the businesses are worth the debt,” said Michael Krensavage, a veteran health care analyst who now runs Krensavage Asset Management and has placed negative bets on Valeant.“The value of the assets depended in part on Valeant’s ability to take price increases and get insurers to pay for these overpriced drugs. The assumptions they made when they acquired these businesses no longer apply.”Laurie Little, a senior vice president for investor relations at Valeant, said the company “has a long track record of financial discipline when pursuing acquisitions.”Valeant, under fire for jacking up the prices of drugs it purchases from other companies, now says it is changing its business model.In a two-hour conference call on Tuesday with analysts and investors, the company provided its unaudited fourth-quarter results and 2016 projections. In a multimedia presentation, Valeant said that it had canceled “almost all planned price increases.”In addition, the company has said that it will no longer use acquisitions to fuel its growth. Instead, it is increasing its research and development spending, making it more like many of its pharmaceutical company peers.To some degree this position was forced on Valeant, as investors in the high-yield debt markets have become far less accommodating to the company than before.The problem for investors trying to assess the value of Valeant’s businesses is that its heavy reliance on acquisitions makes the company’s true cash flows that much harder to fathom. Valeant’s preferred measure of cash flow is not based on generally accepted accounting principles, so it is not reliable.But whatever the specifics, the expensive acquisitions Valeant has made are probably valued on its books at or near the prices paid for them. And in many cases, analysts say, those prices were far higher than the businesses were worth.“Valeant has never bought high-quality assets,” said Vicki Bryan, a high-yield analyst at Gimme Credit, an independent credit research firm. “They were able to pay high multiples, more than a company is worth, because the high-yield market was so agreeable.”Consider Valeant’s purchase of Sprout Pharmaceuticals for $1 billion in October. The maker of a female libido drug, Addyi, that has largely failed to attract users, Sprout has fallen far short of its promise. One of the factors contributing to Valeant’s reduced revenue expectations for 2016 was underperformance in its women’s health business, the company said.Valeant’s $8.7 billion purchase of Bausch & Lomb in 2013 is another example. Ms. Bryan said that between declining sales and legal issues surrounding some of its products, Bausch & Lomb was “really struggling.”The company’s $10 billion purchase in February 2015 of Salix, known for Xifaxan, a drug for the treatment of irritable bowel syndrome, also appears to be in question. Valeant said that “more modest growth in Salix” was a reason for its lower revenue forecasts for 2016.Ms. Little of Valeant disputed Ms. Bryan’s views. “Bausch & Lomb was acquired in 2013 and has consistently delivered strong organic growth,” she said, adding that Salix “was acquired just under one year ago, and Xifaxan is on track to be Valeant’s first $1 billion product.” She also said that the company had no plans for major divestments.Jublia, a product for toenail fungus, was once considered a big drug for Valeant. In the company’s presentation to investors on Tuesday, though, Valeant said Jublia’s fourth-quarter 2015 sales had fallen 36 percent from the quarter before. Nor did Jublia make it onto Valeant’s most recent list of drugs with a double-digit growth potential over the next three years.Valeant investors are learning an age-old market lesson the hard way: A company’s assets may shrink but its debt doesn’t. And as Ms. Bryan noted, Valeant’s debt load puts it in a class by itself among major pharmaceutical companies.“Valeant overpaid for assets based on overzealous projections,” Ms. Bryan said. “Anything it wants to sell is worth substantially less than the asset value on the books. We’re in store for a substantial round of potential impairment charges at the company.”Advertisement