AdvertisementSupported byBy Vinod SreeharshaRIO DE JANEIRO — FleetCor Technologies has agreed to acquire the Brazilian electronic toll payments company Serviços e Tecnologia de Pagamentos for $1.05 billion.Executives with the American company, which is known for fleet cards and other fuel and special-payment products and services, said in a conference call on Tuesday that they were impressed by the way the Brazilian company, known as STP, has weathered Brazil’s prolonged recession.“STP has continued to perform through difficult times,” said Ronald Clarke, FleetCor’s chairman and chief executive. He noted that the company expanded revenue 15 percent, to about $186 million last year, despite trying circumstances. Brazil’s overall economy in 2015 plunged by 3.8 percent, its worst performance since 1990.Then this January, STP increased revenue by 13 percent when compared with the same month one year earlier, the executive said. He said he expected that to continue. “We’re confident we see the potential to double STP earnings over the next three to four years.”STP, based in São Paulo, is an electronic toll payments company that processes more than 800 million transactions annually and uses the brand name Sem Parar. It is also expanding into parking garages and fuel payments and has an agreement with Shell, another reason FleetCor was attracted to the deal.It was also drawn to the country’s attractive work force payment business, the executive said.Fleet management continues to grow here. In January, Edenred of France said it would form a joint venture with Embratec of Brazil. Last October Itau Unibanco acquired a 50 percent share in ConectCar.The agreed-upon price disclosed today values STP at 11.5 times 2015 earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, adjusted for one-time items, FleetCor said in a presentation to investors. It acquired STP from a shareholder group including CCR, Arteris, and Raízen Combustiveis.The purchase was denominated in reais, with an expected closing price of approximately 4.2 billion reais, or about $1.05 billion, it estimated. FleetCor said that it would pay for the transaction with a combination of cash and debt. It expects the deal, which requires regulatory approval, to close in the third quarter of this year.STP’s chief executive and much of its management team are expected to stay on.Advertisement