AdvertisementSupported byBy Liz MoyerHow bad was the first-quarter market swoon? Ask the Jefferies Group’s chief executive, Richard B. Handler.The Wall Street investment bank, a unit of the Leucadia National Corporation, reported a $166.7 million loss for its first fiscal quarter, which ended in February, as tumultuous markets slammed equity and fixed-income trading, junk bonds and leveraged lending. Investors drained money out of the market on fears of economic growth and China’s stability, and companies put a stop to capital-raising, forcing Jefferies to pull back until the markets recovered.“We are humbled,” Mr. Handler said of the quarter.Jefferies is often viewed as a barometer of Wall Street, as its fiscal quarters end a month before its rivals’, so its earnings reports tend to foretell trends for the industry.In recent weeks, executives from JPMorgan Chase and Citigroup have also talked about rocky trading that will very likely hurt their first-quarter results.Jefferies reined in its capital during the quarter.“As we have done through many other turbulent periods in our history, we reduced our already smaller balance sheet to continue to reduce risk during this difficult period,” Mr. Handler said.Early signs in the second quarter point toward a rebound. “It appears markets have not only stabilized but aggressively snapped back,” he said.Whereas Jefferies suffered in the previous quarters from fixed-income trading and energy-market exposure, this time around, its equities business struggled.The quarter’s loss compares with a profit of $12.5 million in the first quarter a year earlier. Over all, revenue fell 49 percent, to $299 million. Sales and trading revenue fell 82 percent, to $58.5 million, and investment banking revenue dropped 15 percent, to $230.9 million.Jefferies wrote down the value of two large blocks of stock it holds, including a $37 million markdown in its holdings of KCG Holdings. Jefferies acquired the stake four years ago, when it helped rescue the trading firm the Knight Capital Group, which later merged with the high-frequency trading firm Getco to form KCG.Jefferies also wrote down the value of two loans on the books of its lending joint venture with Mass Mutual by $38 million. The write-downs contributed to the sharp decline in its equity business line, but the company points out that those unrealized losses have begun to regain value in the second quarter.In investment banking, deals that were lined up for completion early in the year were delayed, particularly new stock offerings and leveraged finance transactions. The company said its second quarter backlog was “solid.”In the fourth quarter, Jefferies was plagued with a difficult bond market that sent its fixed-income trading results plunging 83 percent. The company spent a good deal of time last year shedding its exposure to distressed energy trading, and it agreed to sell its Bache commodities unit to Société Générale of France.Advertisement