
Breakingviews By                     
ROBERT CYRAN

MARCH 15, 2016
“They're better off dead than alive,” said Joshua M. Brown, a financial adviser at Ritholtz Wealth Management, on the drug maker's debt load.Valeant Pharmaceuticals International is playing chicken with a death spiral.The company’s failure to file audited results has started a countdown to default that vaporized more than 40 percent of its market value in early trading on Tuesday. Executives are mulling selling assets. But with so many questions about its financials unanswered, Valeant’s outlook is bleak.It is never good when the conversation on a company’s earnings conference call focuses on its liquidity and ability to meet debt obligations. The now $12.5 billion company has about $30 billion of debt, thanks to a string of acquisitions; with more than $1 billion of cash on hand, executives argue that it can meet its remaining scheduled debt and interest payments this year.That becomes irrelevant if it cannot produce audited results within 60 days, as investors can then demand that Valeant repay a chunk of its debt. The company says it is trying to file as fast as it can.There are more than a few other discordant notes, however. The bullish case for Valeant always centered on its ability to throw off lots of cash. Yet that ability is shrinking. The company’s chief executive, J. Michael Pearson, back in charge after a couple of months of sick leave, thinks it will produce about $5.7 billion of adjusted earnings before interest, taxes depreciation and amortization, or Ebitda, this year, almost a fifth lower than its previous estimate. Moreover, the company wants to patch up its balance sheet, but it now thinks it will pay down only about $1.7 billion of debt this year, compared with its previous estimate of more than $2 billion, and it had already drawn down $1.5 billion by the end of December – about double what it tapped just three months earlier.Investors were already skeptical about Valeant’s adjustments to the financial figures it trumpeted. They were more so on Tuesday. Valeant’s news release stated that adjusted earnings for the next four quarters would be around $6.2 billion to $6.6 billion. On the conference call, though, Mr. Pearson had to admit that the company expected only around $6 billion and had to defend against an analyst’s accusation that the company had deliberately puffed up the numbers.Valeant’s old mergers and acquisitions business model is dead, customers are demanding big price cuts or not reimbursing various medicines, and the company cannot file audited financial statements. It is impossible for an outsider to know exactly what is happening within the company – or if it can avoid falling to its doom.Robert Cyran is a columnist for Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »