AdvertisementSupported byBy Liz MoyerIf Steven Rattner wants to return to investment banking, the Securities and Exchange Commission has cleared the way for him.Mr. Rattner, a prominent financier who led the Obama administration’s auto industry overhaul, can associate with the investment banking division of Guggenheim Partners, the S.E.C. said in an order dated Monday.Mr. Rattner was barred from certain Wall Street jobs for two years in 2010 after settling civil charges stemming from an investigation into kickbacks involving the New York State Common Retirement Fund while he was an executive at his private equity firm, the Quadrangle Group. He did not admit or deny wrongdoing.For the last few years, Mr. Rattner has been the chairman of Willett Advisors, which manages the personal fortune of the billionaire Michael R. Bloomberg as well as that of the Bloomberg Family Foundation. That position was not covered by the S.E.C. ban.Until his regulatory troubles involving the pension plan began a decade ago, Mr. Rattner was viewed as a star banker and adviser to powerful media and communications companies. Before helping to found Quadrangle, he was an executive at Morgan Stanley, Lazard Frères & Company and Lehman Brothers. He began his career as a reporter for The New York Times.Mr. Rattner did not appear inclined to take up the offer to affiliate himself with Guggenheim, a firm led by Mark R. Walter, who is also the managing partner of Guggenheim Baseball Management, one of the owners of the Los Angeles Dodgers, and Alan Schwartz, the former head of Bear Stearns.In a statement, a spokesman for Mr. Rattner said: “Should he choose in the future, this enables Steve to engage in investment banking activities. He anticipates remaining fully committed to his position as chairman of Willett Advisors L.L.C.”A spokesman for Guggenheim declined to comment.Mr. Rattner’s request to return to Wall Street was made in 2013. The S.E.C. just got around to approving that on Monday.Were he still interested in the job, Mr. Rattner would be working with Guggenheim Securities as an investment banking representative in its New York office, again focusing on media industry clients, according to the S.E.C.’s order. His pay would be a portion of the net fees connected with any transaction he originated for Guggenheim or those in which he participated.The S.E.C.’s order placed a number of conditions on a potential association of Mr. Rattner with Guggenheim. It names Richard Osler, senior managing director, as his supervisor.As part of the agreement, Mr. Rattner would be required to meet with Guggenheim’s compliance department every two months to discuss his work with the firm and his meetings outside the office. He would not maintain customer accounts or create transaction documents, nor would he solicit or manage funds from public pensions.Also, he would not have contact with retail customers, according to the order.Guggenheim’s investment banking division has focused on advising companies in the technology, media, telecommunications, health care and consumer retail industries but has been hiring and expanding. It recently opened a San Francisco office. Last year, it hired Jim Schaefer from the Blackstone Group to build its energy and power advisory practice.Advertisement