By MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDMARCH 15, 2016
SAN FRANCISCO — Even as Silicon Valley worries about falling start-up valuations and whether companies can go public, one of the most prominent venture capital firms here has reloaded its war chest for more investment opportunities.Accel plans to announce on Tuesday that it has raised roughly $2 billion for its two newest investment funds: about $500 million for a classic venture capital fund and about $1.5 billion for a vehicle earmarked for later-stage “growth” investments.The new fund-raising effort comes about two years after Accel raised its last venture and growth funds, which together amounted to just under $1.5 billion.Since then, the fervor that greeted the minting of each new unicorn — start-ups valued by investors at $1 billion or more — has given way to some fear about the future. Some start-ups have seen their valuations shrink in new financing rounds, while public technology companies have suffered turmoil in the stock markets.AdvertisementBut Accel executives say that they are still prepared to pour money into start-ups, especially because they are looking at the long term. The potential of smartphones, ever-advancing computing power and other technologies will continue to lead to new companies worth backing.Advertisement“In a market where there is some trepidation, we’re open for business and investing,” said Andrew Braccia, a partner at Accel who has invested in the likes of Slack, the popular collaboration software maker.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Accel has had several notable successes over the last two years. Atlassian, a corporate collaboration software company, went public in December at a valuation of about $4.4 billion. Lynda.com, an online learning company, sold itself to LinkedIn for about $1.5 billion. And Google’s Nest Labs bought Dropcam, the maker of home-monitoring cameras, for $555 million in 2014.Some of its other investments, like the file-sharing giant Dropbox, have aroused skepticism about their long-term growth prospects.But Accel executives said that they had been preparing their companies for any downturn over the last two years, and are optimistic about what lies ahead for current investments and future ones.Moreover, the venture firm said that it intended to stick with its usual plan of being one of the first institutional investors in a company. Such a strategy tends to reap the highest returns for investors.A version of this article appears in print on March 16, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Business Briefing; Accel Raises $2 Billion for New Investment Funds.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.