AdvertisementSupported byBy Emily SteelCBS Corporation announced on Tuesday that it was putting its radio business on the block, as the media company aims to streamline its business to focus on its broadcast network, the premium channel Showtime and digital.Leslie Moonves, the chief executive of CBS, said that the company was looking at a number of strategic options but provided few other details. Speaking at the company’s investor meeting in New York, he compared the development to CBS’s move two years ago to separate its billboard business in an effort to “unlock shareholder value.”CBS owns 117 radio stations in 26 markets, which it estimates reach 70 million people in the United States each week. Mr. Moonves has been suggesting for years that he was willing to reduce the company’s holdings in radio. CBS has disposed of a number of stations already, such as through a deal with the Beasley Broadcasting Group in 2014 in which CBS traded 14 of its stations for five of Beasley’s.But Mr. Moonves’s comments on Tuesday were his strongest on the subject so far, and reflect the challenges in the traditional radio business as it tries to compete with online services like Pandora and Spotify. Analysts said that CBS was just making official what it had been trying to do with its radio group for a while. The question really is, Who would buy traditional radio assets today?CBS said that revenue in its radio group was down 5 percent in the fourth quarter of 2015, because of “continued softness in the radio advertising marketplace and lower political advertising.”CBS also reported an impairment charge of $484 million last year to reduce the value of F.C.C. radio licenses.Revenue in the company’s local broadcasting group, which also includes its TV stations, totaled $719 million in the fourth quarter of 2015, down 9 percent from $785 million during the same period the previous year.CBS executives said that pursuing a sale of its radio holdings would help the company to shift its business away from the less-predictable advertising sales to the more-predictable revenue sources, such as subscription fees.CBS also outlined a four-point plan for growth that executives predicted would deliver an additional $3.75 billion annually in incremental revenues over the next five years. One pillar for growth is a boost in so-called retrans and reverse compensation revenues that traditional and digital distributors pay to CBS to include the content in its offerings. The goal to generate an additional $2.5 billion a year in those revenues is a continuation of a long push by CBS to get paid for its programming in the same way that cable networks are paid.Another area for growth, CBS executive said, is to land an additional $800 million a year from its streaming outlets, about half from Showtime’s digital network and half from CBS’s stand-alone streaming network. To reach that goal, Showtime and CBS each would need to recruit about four million subscribers in five years.CBS also expects to continue to build its international distribution business, selling about $2.3 billion in annual content sales. The fourth opportunity is so-called skinny bundles offered by cable, satellite and digital distributors that feature fewer networks. CBS executives said that they expected that selling CBS to those new TV packages should add an $200 million in annual revenues, because the value of its content increases when the number of options gets smaller.Mr. Moonves called the numbers “both eye-popping but we think conservative.”Ben Sisario contributed reporting.Advertisement