By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMARCH 16, 2016
WASHINGTON — A Senate panel advanced an aviation policy bill Wednesday after a partisan fight over whether airlines gouge consumers with fees for basic services like checked bags, seat assignments and ticket changes.The Senate Commerce Committee approved by voice vote a bill to continue the Federal Aviation Administration’s authority to operate through Oct. 1, 2017. That authority is set to expire on March 31.The committee’s Democrats, led by Senator Edward J. Markey of Massachusetts, tried to add a provision to the bill that would prohibit airlines from setting unreasonable fees. The amendment failed on a party-line tie vote.Consumers are being “gouged” by excessive fees, but they must pay them to get to their destination, Senator Markey said.AdvertisementRepublicans said the fees provision would be burdensome for airlines and that market forces should be allowed to determine fees. “No one here can argue fees aren’t unpopular,” said John Thune, chairman of the committee. “However, it’s not up to the federal government to determine when fees are unreasonable.” That should be determined by consumers through comparison-shopping, he said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Senator Thune said that the bill already included several consumer provisions, including a requirement that the Transportation Department standardize the way fees are disclosed so that passengers can more easily assess the full cost of flights.AdvertisementAirlines also would be required to refund fees for services bought but not received by passengers. Examples would include seat assignments that turn out to be unavailable, or early boarding that is not provided.Market forces are working in some cases because airlines like Southwest attract customers by not charging fees, said Senator Claire McCaskill, Democrat of Missouri. “The airlines need to take notice that the flying public is really upset here,” she said.Nicholas E. Calio, president of Airlines for America, a trade association for major airlines, has criticized the unreasonable-fee provisions as “taking steps backward toward reregulation” of the industry.A version of this article appears in print on March 17, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Senate Panel Backs F.A.A. Authority, but Not Curb on Fees.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.