AdvertisementSupported byBy Alexandra Stevenson and Matthew GoldsteinWilliam A. Ackman’s hedge fund is selling a big stake in a stock — but it’s not the one that has cost his fund billions of dollars.On Wednesday, Pershing Square Capital Management, Mr. Ackman’s $12 billion hedge fund, sold 20 million shares in the food and beverage company Mondelez International.“We are reducing the position size for portfolio management purposes only,” Mr. Ackman said in a letter sent to investors. After the sale, Pershing Square will have a 5.6 percent stake, he said.A day earlier, Valeant, in which Pershing Square has a 9 percent stake, announced that it would not be able to file its annual financial statement in time and warned that it could default on some of its debt as a result. The shares halved in value after the news, putting pressure on Mr. Ackman.Shares of Mondelez have lost about 7 percent this year, but that is much less than the 67 percent plunge so far this year in shares of Valeant. The stock sale was negotiated by Citigroup and Credit Suisse. The shares were priced Wednesday evening, and the sale is expected to net $840 million.Valeant has been one of Pershing Square’s worst performing stocks in recent years.Pershing Square Holdings, a publicly traded vehicle set up by Mr. Ackman, said on Wednesday that it was down 26.4 percent for the year as of March 15.Mr. Ackman has been a strong advocate for Valeant, first teaming up with the company in a joint takeover attempt for Allergan, the maker of Botox, in 2014, and then buying Valeant’s shares in 2015.In recent months, however, Valeant has come under pressure for its pricing strategies, and is facing shareholder lawsuits in both the United States and Canada. It has also become a target for Hillary Clinton on the campaign trail. She has vowed to go after the company over its pricing strategies if elected president.Last week, Steve Fraidin, Pershing Square’s vice chairman, joined the board of Valeant and on Tuesday Mr. Ackman sought to reassure his investors that things were under control.“We are going to take a much more proactive role,” Mr. Ackman said in a letter to his investors.Advertisement