AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy George HayInvestors buy only half of the logic of splicing together the London Stock Exchange and the Deutsche Börse.The two European exchanges announced on Wednesday that their proposed merger would create 450 million euros in annual cost synergies, in three years’ time. The market has factored this in, but little more.Since Feb. 23, when the deal was announced, L.S.E. shares have risen 14 percent from their three-month average of 25.30 pounds. Deutsche Börse’s are up 4 percent from 57.74, the sterling value of its undisturbed share price average at the current exchange rate. Collectively, that’s a premium of £1.7 billion.The newly revealed cost synergies are worth about the same. Turn them from euros into pounds, tax them at 25 percent, and then discount them back at an assumed 8 percent cost of capital to reflect that they do not appear for three years. Stripping out a €600 million charge to achieve the savings implies a gain of £1.6 billion.If that was all the merger offered, it would be wide open to a rival approach from an American rival, the Intercontinental Exchange, which is already sniffing around.But the London Stock Exchange and the Deutsche Börse are confident they can generate revenue synergies, too – from incentivizing higher volumes through their LCH.Clearnet and Eurex clearing houses. The theory is that “cross-margining” kicks in, and clients can put up less collateral if they deal with a combined exchange than they would today.Imagine the two exchanges could produce the equivalent of 11 percent of the L.S.E.’s revenue – an average of the last 10 years of exchange mergers, according to Credit Suisse. Apply that to the £1.6 billion top line analysts expect for the L.S.E. in 2017, then tax, capitalize and discount it, and there could be a hidden £1.1 billion of value.One worry might be that regulators or competition authorities may intervene. Another is that customers could claw those gains back for themselves. The fact is that investors do not seem to buy this half of the story. In order for the deal to go smoothly, they probably need to.George Hay is a columnist at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.Advertisement