AdvertisementSupported byStreet SceneBy William D. CohanPerhaps trying to burnish his legacy on financial reform, President Obama has recently trumpeted his signature steps to transform Wall Street in the years since the financial crisis that confronted him as he began his term eight years ago.But there are reasons to doubt that his efforts will have the profound effect he hopes they will.After a March 7 meeting at the White House with the top Wall Street regulators, including Janet L. Yellen, the chairwoman of the Federal Reserve, Mr. Obama praised the Dodd-Frank reform law, the Volcker Rule that seeks to prevent proprietary trading and the creation of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, which is intended to make the world as safe from bad mortgages as it is from bad toasters.“I want to emphasize this because it is popular in the media, in political discourse — both on the left and the right — to suggest that the crisis happened and nothing changed,” he said sternly.“That is not true. Let me repeat that. In fact, we went at financial regulation very hard to guard against another era of ‘too big to fail’ and some of the systemic disruptions that occurred because of lax regulation. It has helped us crack down on irresponsible behavior.”He spoke about how the big banks had collectively raised $700 billion more capital, how there were now mechanisms for “orderly unwinding” banks that get into financial trouble without having to bail them out and how financial derivatives were in the process of being more heavily regulated. He painted a pretty rosy picture of how extensively things have changed on Wall Street and in Washington to try to prevent the kind of financial meltdown we endured.The problem is that regulation alone will not change the bad behavior that occasionally breaks out into the open on Wall Street and often leads to disasters on Main Street.Wall Street is not like other industries. As repulsive as it is that executives at Volkswagen sought to evade United States’ emission standards, that deceit is not likely to bring down the world’s economy.But when things go wrong on Wall Street, the consequences can be devastating for the rest of us. On Wall Street, contagion is a real problem. That is why it is not enough to require banks to hold more capital or to have them reduce the amount of risky assets they have leveraged on their balance sheets or to prevent them from making the kinds of proprietary bets that sometimes go awry.Two things still need to change on Wall Street for there to be meaningful reform. First, the culture of what constitutes success inside a Wall Street firm – who gets promoted and put in charge and for what reasons — needs to change. Second, the compensation system needs a total revamp so that bankers, traders and executives are no longer rewarded for taking big risks with other people’s money, putting themselves in a position to win big if their risk-taking pays off but not to be held accountable if things go wrong.The good news, if there is any, is that some lip service has been paid to trying to change Wall Street’s culture. Twice in the last two years, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York has held closed-door meetings and seminars with many of the leaders of Wall Street companies to convey to them that Wall Street’s behavior must change or change will be imposed upon it.In a speech at the bank in October 2014, William C. Dudley, its president, said that culture “relates to what should I do, and not to what can I do.” He said it fell to top executives to fix the broken culture, and fast: “Senior leaders need to hold up a mirror to their own behavior and critically examine behavioral norms at their firm.” He’s right, of course, but let’s be honest, not much has changed on the culture front on Wall Street.Even less has changed about the compensation system on Wall Street. People are rewarded for closing deals, underwriting stocks and bonds, securitizing mortgages, car loans and credit-card receivables, and trading with counterparties. They are rewarded for putting together the people who have capital with the people who want capital. That is a hugely important function, assuming we like capitalism and want it to keep functioning properly.But too often on Wall Street, the enduring lust by bankers, traders and executives for big annual bonuses results in behavior that benefits them at our expense. Notwithstanding talk of clawbacks and lower overall pay, the compensation system on Wall Street remains untouched after the crisis. That means that the very system that regulates what people do every day on Wall Street remains the same.To his credit, President Obama recognized at the White House meeting on March 7 that the compensation system on Wall Street remains broken.“We still have work to do to complete regulations related to executive compensation to make sure that individuals who are working in these financial institutions are less incentivized to take big, reckless risks that could end up harming our financial sector over all,” he said.He’s right about that. And that’s one of the reasons I lament his departure from the Oval Office next January: There’s virtually no chance that either Donald Trump or Hillary Clinton will touch this subject.William D. Cohan is a former senior mergers and acquisitions banker who has written three books about Wall Street. His latest book is “The Price of Silence: The Duke Lacrosse Scandal, the Power of the Elite, and the Corruption of Our Great Universities.”OpinionThe Editorial BoardAdvertisement