AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Jennifer SabaThe exit of CBS from the radio business looks in tune with the times. CBS, a $24 billion broadcaster, is considering a sale of its 117 stations in the United States, just as the Internet streaming service Pandora may be on the block. Both moves could make sense, given stiff competition from the likes of Spotify, waning advertising and other industry disruption. The trick will be to find buyers.The company’s chief executive, Leslie Moonves, said on Tuesday that CBS was exploring “strategic options” for its clutch of AM/FM stations. A sale or other separation could generate up to $1.9 billion in gross proceeds, according to Jefferies, the investment bank.The urge to deal is understandable. Industry revenue has declined as advertisers have embraced other media to reach customers. Last year, radio ad sales dropped 2 percent, while revenue in the struggling newspaper business actually rose 7 percent, according to Standard Media Index.Streaming services are capturing more listeners, too. Spotify and Apple allow people to pick songs and listen to them commercial-free. That’s a double whammy for terrestrial radio stations.Not everything is upbeat in the digital-streaming world, however. Pandora cannot grow overseas, because it lacks licenses to play music outside the United States. That seems to be driving its possible sale. Spotify is raising money and could be interested in Pandora’s more than 80 million listeners and powerful sales force. Long-shot buyers could include the likes of Google or Amazon.A sale is not the only option for CBS. It could split off the division, much as Time Warner did with AOL, Time Warner Cable and Time Inc. CBS itself put its outdoor business into a separately traded real estate investment trust in 2014.Possible buyers for the radio arm include iHeartMedia and Cumulus Media, although both are mired in debt. Alternatively, the division could, as a separate business, buy assets of those two troubled companies. Either way, the broadcaster seems to have a playlist to choose from.Jennifer Saba is a columnist for Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.Advertisement