AdvertisementSupported byBy Sarah MaxNearly every week, all around the world, wealthy people, self-made business owners and senior executives in a range of industries gather at private clubs, cultural centers or five-star hotels for free, invitation-only angel investing “boot camps” intended to help them size up fledgling business ideas and the people behind them.The events are organized by Angel Labs, a global angel investor academy based in San Francisco whose mission is to widen the influence of angel investing, a field in which the relatively affluent put money into start-ups, usually in the tech industry.“There is a huge interest in angel investing, but many of these people feel left out of what’s happening in Silicon Valley,” said Tugce Ergul, a co-founder of Angel Labs. “Most of our attendees have never invested in early-stage companies, but they are accomplished businesspeople who have a lot to offer entrepreneurs.”Since it started in early 2014, Angel Labs has organized workshops in more than 38 countries, in places like Brunei and Uruguay. While its initial focus was on emerging markets, the group has staged events throughout Europe and, more recently, in the United States. All told, more than 3,500 people have participated in Angel Labs’ flagship one-day workshop, and many have gone on to form angel investing groups and to help organize events in their regions.“Investing at this stage is quite different from buying a mature company. You have to be able to evaluate a lot of things, including the founders, and there is a lot of risk,” said Adi Sariaatmadja, who is head of digital and new media for Emtek, a publicly traded media company in Indonesia that was founded by his father. He attended an event organized by Angel Labs in Bali in September 2014 to get firsthand knowledge of how to evaluate deals and founders who have ideas that meld with Emtek’s interest in mobile and digital technology.Though Mr. Sariaatmadja, 30, has a degree in finance and worked in private equity before joining his family’s company, he said that angel investing required a different approach. In Bali, he and about 40 other attendees learned the basics of angel investing and then broke into small groups to go through case studies. The day concluded with actual start-ups pitching their ideas. After experienced angels questioned the company founders, “we, the audience, got to ask questions and challenge those guys, like on the television show ‘Shark Tank,’ ” said Mr. Sariaatmadja, who has since attended two other angel investing events.The idea for Angel Labs came about after Ms. Ergul and her partners in a Silicon Valley seed-stage investment fund, Startup Labs, traveled to dozens of countries looking for investment ideas. “We found bright entrepreneurs working on innovative technology, but our model was to co-invest with local investors, and in many cases, there were none,” said Ms. Ergul, who was raised in Turkey, studied finance at Paris-Sorbonne University and worked in investment banking before moving into early-stage investing. The problem was not a lack of interest, a dearth of capital or capable business executives, she said, but “a lack of understanding about how to value these deals and add value beyond just the cash.”Once the Startup Labs fund was fully invested, Ms. Ergul and her colleagues mapped out a strategy to identify would-be angel investors around the world, find local sponsors and demystify angel investing. Today, Ms. Ergul and her four partners have expanded their offerings to include private gatherings, multiday programs and a monthly digital digest started in May.To cover costs — which include a fee paid to Angel Labs for orchestrating the event — and tap into local expertise, Angel Labs teams up with banks, development organizations, government offices and many other groups interested in promoting entrepreneurship.“We have a strong entrepreneurial community, but we’re not as good in financing these companies,” said Mariano Mayer, the general director of entrepreneurship for the city of Buenos Aires, which hosted its first Angel Labs event late last year. Roughly 150 attendees gathered at the city’s General San Martín Cultural Center. Angel Labs is developing five-day boot camps in other cities in Argentina for 2016.Like many places around the world, Argentina hopes that by supporting entrepreneurs, it can help diversify an economy that is largely dependent on natural resources. No doubt angel investing is trendy right now, Mr. Mayer said, but it can have a real impact. “We need entrepreneurs, and they need financing from locals,” he said. “Working on educating angels is a big piece of the puzzle.”Angel Labs is not the only group focusing on international angel investors. In March, the Global Entrepreneurship Network started its own angel investing initiative, the Global Business Angels Network, and it is organizing angel investing meetings around the globe.“Access to capital in most of these places is challenging, but it’s getting better,” said Dave McClure, the founding partner of 500 Startups, a global seed-stage venture capital fund and accelerator that has invested in more than 1,000 companies in over 50 countries. Boot camps and meetings help raise awareness, but increasing investment in start-ups will require a real culture of early-stage investing.“It isn’t just a lack of expertise, but a lack of willingness to jump in,” Mr. McClure said. “Deals take longer” outside Silicon Valley, “and investors want more control,” he said. That can sometimes work against fledgling companies.“Risk aversion is an education,” said Andy Chung, who is leading international expansion efforts for AngelList, an online service that lets accredited investors find and co-invest in deals led by experienced angels. AngelList is currently focused on investors in the United States and Britain, but Mr. Chung said investors from other countries had found their way to the site, which has about 50,000 accredited investors globally.For new angel investors, the learning curve can be steep, which is why experienced angels lead the charge. New investors typically “don’t understand what it means to invest in early-stage technology, even in developed markets like the U.K. and Australia,” Mr. Chung said. Even so, “you’re seeing a lot of these markets starting to catch up.”It will most likely take more than a one-day workshop to create the kind of Silicon Valley culture that these groups want to emulate. “Investing in entrepreneurs is still a new phenomenon,” said Marcus Dantus, head of Latin America for Angel Labs and director of Startup México. “People here invest in traditional businesses, like real estate, and are not as tolerant of failure, which is accepted in Silicon Valley but has a stigma in Latin America.” Another challenge: “Exit strategies are hard to come by,” Mr. Dantus said. “It’s difficult to do an I.P.O., and there isn’t a lot of activity in mergers and acquisitions.”Yet “in the last five years, there has been a big change in Mexico and all over the world,” he said. “In 2008, there were two venture capital funds here in Mexico, and now there are nearly 50.” Angel Labs has organized five events throughout Mexico, attracting investors from a wide range of backgrounds, including cattle ranchers and real estate tycoons. “Ten years ago, if you were to approach somebody with the idea of an angel club, they would think you are a crazy guy,” Mr. Dantus said. “Now that entrepreneurship is so fashionable, people want to get involved, but they don’t know how.”By giving investors a crash course in angel investing and, more important, connecting them with others interested in making investments, Angel Labs thinks it can nudge people to become involved and, in many cases, form their own investing clubs. Angel Labs has helped start a dozen new investor networks, Ms. Ergul said, and has supported more than 40 existing groups.Many Angel Labs participants say the thrill of taking an active role in the process, and not just a desire for returns, is at the root of their interest in early-stage investing. Some could simply write a check to a venture capital fund or hire advisers to size up deals on their behalf, but they prefer a more hands-on approach.“For many of these investors, they want to be part of the process, to feel the pleasure of creating something new,” said Recep Bildik, private market director at the Borsa Istanbul, which hosted a 70-person event organized by Angel Labs last January and has a second one planned for early 2016. “That may be more valuable than the return they’re expecting.”Advertisement