AdvertisementSupported byBy Stephen CastleLONDON — In a budget meant to appeal to voters before a looming referendum, Britain’s chancellor of the Exchequer, George Osborne, on Wednesday mainly offered tax breaks, while warning the public against the risks of opting to quit the European Union.Despite a worsening economic outlook and a downward revision of growth forecasts, Mr. Osborne postponed billions of pounds of further reductions in public spending that he would need to keep his budget plans on track, while offering some significant tax cuts for individuals and businesses.The most controversial item was a new tax on sugary soft drinks, a measure meant to combat childhood obesity. The leader of a soft-drink industry trade group dismissed the tax as “absurd.”Over all, though, Mr. Osborne’s budget statement seemed intended to avoid antagonizing key groups of voters before the June 23 referendum on whether Britain should remain in the 28-nation European Union or leave it in a so-called Brexit.Mr. Osborne, who like Prime Minister David Cameron, favors staying in the European Union, warned of economic instability if Britain votes for Brexit.“Britain will be stronger, safer and better off inside a reformed European Union,” Mr. Osborne said in Parliament, adding that “we should not put at risk all the hard work that the British people have done to make our country strong again.”He added that turbulent financial markets, low productivity in Western nations and a weak outlook for the global economy made for “a dangerous cocktail of risks.”The budget is expected to be approved by Parliament, coming as it does from the treasury chief of the controlling Conservative Party.The most unexpected initiative was the sugar tax on the soft-drink industry. This would apply, starting in April 2018, to drinks with a total sugar content above 5 grams per 100 milliliters, with a higher rate for beverages with more than 8 grams per 100 milliliters. Milk-based drinks and fruit juices would be exempt.“Five-year-old children are consuming their body weight in sugar every year,” Mr. Osborne told lawmakers, adding that “one of the biggest contributors to childhood obesity is sugary drinks.”The plan to target soft drinks, but not other products with a high sugar content, was derided as “simply absurd” by Gavin Partington, director general of the British Soft Drinks Association, which says it represents a range of British manufacturers, importers and suppliers.“We are extremely disappointed by the government’s decision to hit the only category in the food and drink sector which has consistently reduced sugar intake in recent years — down 13.6 percent since 2012,” Mr. Partington said in a statement.Mr. Osborne’s budget also announced moves to close tax loopholes, including one in which foreign suppliers use sites like eBay and Amazon to sell goods without paying Britain’s sales tax, known as the value added tax.The budget was more benign than might normally be expected at this point in the political cycle, given the state of the economy. After last May’s general election victory for the Conservatives, led by Mr. Cameron, right now might typically be the time for aggressive economic discipline, leaving years for voters to forget any financial pain before they choose a new government.Britain’s economic picture has worsened in recent months. Official growth forecasts for 2016 were revised downward on Wednesday, to 2 percent, compared with the 2.4 percent predicted earlier.For next year, the growth forecast was trimmed to 2.2 percent, down from 2.5 percent previously.The revised projections are based on the assumption that Britain stays in the European Union. The Office for Budget Responsibility, whose job it is to provide an independent analysis of public finances, had warned of “an extended period of uncertainty” about Britain’s relationship with the bloc if there was a vote to leave, Mr. Osborne said. That comment prompted protests from opponents of European Union membership that Mr. Osborne had quoted selectively from the report.Despite slower than expected growth, corporate tax rates will be cut to 17 percent by 2020.The amount that people can earn without paying taxes will rise, as will the earnings threshold that they need to cross before moving into a higher tax bracket.There were also tax concessions for the struggling North Sea oil and gas industry and a freeze on taxes on fuel and many types of alcohol. The capital gains tax would be cut to 20 percent, from 28 percent.Mr. Osborne missed one objective by failing to ensure that government debt would fall this year as a proportion of the country’s gross domestic product.Jeremy Corbyn, leader of the opposition Labour Party, said on Wednesday that the budget had “unfairness at its very core” and that Mr. Osborne had “failed on the budget deficit, failed on debt, failed on investment, failed on productivity, failed on the trade deficit.”Postponing further public spending cuts of 3.5 billion pounds, or $4.9 billion, until the fiscal period 2019-2020, Mr. Osborne remains on track to hit his target of a surplus by the end of the decade.But in aiming to meet this objective “without squeezing the economy harder now, Mr. Osborne has backloaded the fiscal pain,” Ian Stewart, chief economist at Deloitte, the business advisory firm, said in a statement. As a result, Mr. Stewart said, the government would need to find spending cuts of £8 billion in 2019-20.“Mr. Osborne is hoping that, in the run-up to the next general election, the U.K. will be better placed to cope with the squeeze needed to wipe out the deficit,’’ Mr. Stewart said.“Hitting the government’s most important and most cherished fiscal target,” he added, “will need hard slog and luck.”Advertisement