AdvertisementSupported byBy Katie ThomasDr. Gary Goldstein, a Florida internist, knew something was wrong with a blood-testing device in his office when, all of a sudden, it began giving out odd results.The device, an INRatio monitor by Alere, is crucial to helping doctors manage patients on warfarin, a blood-thinning drug. When he checked the INRatio’s results against those from an outside laboratory and found they did not match, he got worried and called Alere. Then, he said, after sensing a lack of interest from the company, he filed a report about the event with the Food and Drug Administration.“I don’t do them regularly,” Dr. Goldstein said. “But this was a potential harm to patients.”Dr. Goldstein was not alone. Since the INRatio and a later model, the INRatio2, were cleared for use in 2002, the F.D.A. has received more than 9,000 reports of malfunctions with the products, and more than 1,400 reports of injuries, according to an analysis in December by the Public Citizen Health Research Group, a consumer organization. Reports of injuries associated with the INRatio devices are far higher than similar products on the market, a review of F.D.A. records shows.The device’s problems also led last fall to a new analysis of a large drug trial that relied on the INRatio to monitor patients.These reports, in addition to a series of F.D.A. warning letters and recalls, have raised questions among doctors and public health experts about why the device remains on the market. Neither the F.D.A. nor Alere have yet said publicly that the device appears to malfunction.“It very well may be an unsafe device,” said Dr. Robert G. Hauser, a retired cardiologist and an advocate for improved safety of medical devices. “I think the F.D.A. has to look at this device very seriously, and ask whether it’s a safe device and should be used by patients for this purpose.”The device is almost certainly going to be a topic of debate on Friday, when the F.D.A. is holding a workshop about the accuracy of it and similar devices. Although the agency has not singled out the INRatio device by name, the Alere product is the only device that has come under recent scrutiny for its accuracy, and the workshop was announced after concerns were raised.Jackie Lustig, a spokeswoman for Alere, declined to answer any questions about the INRatio.A spokesman for the F.D.A. said Alere had informed the agency that it was working on an improvement to the device. “We cannot share more details,” the spokesman, Eric Pahon, said.The INRatio and other similar devices measure the blood’s clotting ability and have been welcomed by many doctors and their patients who take the drug warfarin, a blood-thinning drug that requires careful monitoring. Instead of sending blood samples to an outside laboratory, doctors can learn with the prick of a finger if warfarin is working properly.The stakes are high: Too little warfarin and patients could suffer a stroke, but too much and they could bleed to death.“It’s not like checking cholesterol,” said Doug Patterson, the chief executive of CoaguSense, which makes the Coag-Sense, a competing device. “Too much or too little, and you can end up with trouble.”Public records show that problems began to arise with the INRatio only a few years after it went on the market. In 2005 and 2006, the F.D.A. issued two warning letters to HemoSense, the device’s maker at the time. The letters argued that the company had failed to act on complaints that the devices were giving erroneous results.In 2007, doctors at a clinic in London tested five of the point-of-care testing devices then on the market and concluded that the INRatio performed the worst, departing the most significantly from central laboratory results compared with its competitors on a number of measures.The F.D.A. was receiving thousands of reports of malfunctions and injuries. The INRatio was associated with 1,451 injury reports, according to an analysis of adverse-event reports to the F.D.A. By contrast, CoaguChek, the market leader that is made by Roche, logged 95 injury reports over the same period.Such reports are voluntarily submitted to the F.D.A. and can contain errors because they are not independently verified. Still, the difference between the products was significant, said Dr. Sidney M. Wolfe, founder and senior adviser to the Public Citizen Health Research Group. The group wrote the F.D.A. in December to raise concerns about the device.Once a product is on the market, the F.D.A. is supposed to keep track of reports of problems with devices and inspects companies to ensure that they are manufacturing high-quality products. It can issue warning letters, as it did in the case of the INRatio, and it can also pressure companies to recall their products or issue restrictions for how the device can be used.But some, including Dr. Wolfe, have criticized the agency for not properly monitoring devices once they arrive on the market and say they are too slow to take action.“What would it take for this device to be taken off the market?” Dr. Wolfe said in an interview.Mr. Pahon, the F.D.A. spokesman, said the intent of Friday’s workshop was to gather just such information. “We will certainly take that input into serious consideration as we move forward with any regulatory approach,” he said.Dr. Wolfe’s December letter laid out several alarming examples of patients who experienced serious bleeding — including from the nose, gums and rectum — after they said they received an erroneous result from the INRatio device.In 2014, a year after Dr. Goldstein complained to Alere, the company announced it was recalling the strips for its INRatio2 device because they were providing erroneous readings. The company switched patients and doctors to its earlier system, the INRatio.Later that year, Alere issued a new warning about that product, saying that customers of both the INRatio and INRatio2 should stop using the products if they had certain medical conditions, including the flu or other infections and chronic diseases like rheumatoid arthritis.Then, last fall, new questions arose about the device after it was discovered that the INRatio was used in a large clinical trial that led to the approval of the drug Xarelto, an alternative to warfarin.A comparison of the blood samples of more than 5,000 patients in that trial found that, 35 percent of the time, the INRatio readings differed from a central laboratory test result in a way that was clinically significant. Johnson & Johnson, which sells Xarelto, said it had turned over the data from the trial to Alere.The Xarelto trial, known as Rocket AF, was led by Dr. Robert M. Califf, who is now the head of the F.D.A.Eric Rosenberg, a retired lawyer, has been using an INRatio device for years. Every three months, he said, he checks his blood with an outside laboratory to ensure the device is working properly.The reading is slightly higher than the lab result, but he said it’s reliable enough. “I’ve been pleased with it,” said Mr. Rosenberg, 67, who lives in Mamaroneck, N.Y.But given recent news about the device, he said he was considering switching to a competitor.“I am concerned now that I’ve read more about the possibility that there is less accuracy,” he said.Advertisement