AdvertisementSupported byBy Chad BrayLONDON — The London Stock Exchange Group and the Deutsche Börse said on Wednesday that they had agreed to merge in an all-stock deal that they hoped would create a European champion in a rapidly consolidating industry.The transaction would unite two of the biggest European exchange operators and would create one better able to compete globally for stock listings, as a provider of clearing services and a purveyor of market data.“The combined group will be well placed to adapt to industry and regulatory dynamics and able to compete globally,” Carsten Kengeter, the Deutsche Börse chief executive, said on Wednesday. “The combination enables Europe to maintain and enhance its capital markets infrastructure long term, invest in state-of-the-art infrastructure and build global connectivity.”Yet there may be challenges ahead.Intercontinental Exchange, the owner of the New York Stock Exchange, has said it is considering a rival offer for the London Stock Exchange. The CME Group — which operates the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, the Chicago Board of Trade and the New York Mercantile Exchange — and Hong Kong Exchanges and Clearing could also enter the fray.Any buyer would face regulatory hurdles, which come at a politically charged time for London and Europe, as Britons prepare to vote in June on whether to leave the European Union.The London Stock Exchange and Deutsche Börse have said that an exit by Britain would not change the deal but that it could “well affect the volume or nature” of business carried out by the combined company.In any case, the merger would allow London, which has served as a financial gateway to Europe, to maintain economic ties to the Continent. The combined company would be based in Britain and would have headquarters in London and Frankfurt, the home of the Deutsche Börse.Mr. Kengeter, who was named Deutsche Börse’s chief executive in 2015, would run the combined company, and after completion of the merger, Xavier Rolet would step down as chief executive of the London Stock Exchange and serve as an adviser for up to one year.A former Goldman Sachs banker, Mr. Kengeter, 48, served as co-chief and later chairman and chief of the Swiss company UBS’s investment bank from 2009 to 2012. He also ran UBS’s noncore division before leaving in 2013.Several scandals marred UBS during his tenure at the investment bank. Kweku M. Adoboli, a trader in the London office, was accused of unauthorized trading that led to a $2.3 billion loss for the bank. Mr. Adoboli was found guilty of fraud in 2012 and sentenced to seven years in prison.Mr. Kengeter also headed the investment bank when UBS became embroiled in an industrywide investigation into manipulation of important benchmark interest rate known as Libor, or the London interbank offered rate. UBS eventually agreed to pay $1.5 billion in fines as part of a settlement with British and American authorities. And a former UBS trader based in Tokyo, Tom Hayes, was convicted in Britain in August of conspiring to manipulate Libor.The board of the combined company would have equal representation from both exchanges, and Donald Brydon, the London Stock Exchange chairman, would be its chairman.Shares of the London Stock Exchange, which have surged in the weeks since the companies confirmed they were in talks, closed down 0.6 percent on Wednesday, while shares of Deutsche Börse ended virtually unchanged.Four years ago, Deutsche Börse abandoned plans to merge with the parent of the New York Stock Exchange because European antitrust regulators had threatened to block the deal. This is the third attempt to combine the London Stock Exchange and the Deutsche Börse since 2000.The companies said on Wednesday that they expected to achieve 450 million euros, or about $500 million, in annual cost savings after the deal.“The real issue is achieving scale to compete on a global scale against already consolidated opponents,” said John Colley, a professor at Warwick Business School, in Britain. “Europe needs a strong champion to compete against the U.S. exchanges and Hong Kong.”Under the terms of the deal with Deutsche Börse, shareholders in the London Stock Exchange would receive 0.4421 of a new share in the combined company for every share of the London Stock Exchange. Their counterparts at Deutsche Börse would receive one share of the new company for each of their shares, giving them a 54.4 percent stake in the united company.The transaction is expected to close by the end of this year or during the first quarter of 2017.The London Stock Exchange was advised by Barclays, Goldman Sachs, JPMorgan Chase, Robey Warshaw, RBC Capital Markets, Société Générale and UBS. Deutsche Börse was advised by Bank of America Merrill Lynch, Deutsche Bank, HSBC and Perella Weinberg Partners.Advertisement