AdvertisementSupported byBy Liz MoyerAnother former employee of a Federal Reserve Bank has admitted walking off with confidential documents.On Thursday, a former senior analyst at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago pleaded guilty in federal court to one count of misdemeanor theft for taking 35 confidential financial documents from the bank as he was leaving it for a new job.The documents including financial data and information about the health of various financial institutions in the United States, according to the plea agreement for Jeffrey Cho, 35, who faces a maximum sentence of one year in federal prison. His sentencing is scheduled for June.Prosecutors said Mr. Cho took the documents home even though he knew he was not permitted to do so. They also said he initially denied taking them, under F.B.I. questioning. He later admitted he had taken them home and shredded most of them after the first F.B.I. interview last June.“He has accepted responsibility and wants to move forward,” said Damon Cheronis, Mr. Cho’s lawyer.According to his plea agreement, Mr. Cho worked at the Chicago Fed from March 2011 to May 2015. He had access to financial data and information related to the bank’s responsibility for assessing and monitoring the health of certain financial institutions.A spokesman for the Chicago Fed, Daniel Wassmann, said: “We are grateful for the quick and thorough work of the F.B.I. and the U.S. attorney’s office that led to a successful and timely prosecution of Mr. Cho.”On Wednesday, a former employee of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was sentenced to one year of probation for leaking confidential Fed information to his former boss, who had left the Fed for a job at Goldman Sachs.The ex-New York Fed employee, Jason Gross, admitted last year that he gave information from the Fed about a midsize bank to his former boss, who had joined a group at Goldman that was advising that bank.Both men were fired from their jobs. Mr. Gross also has to pay a $2,000 fine and serve 200 hours of community service. Goldman Sachs paid a $50 million fine last fall to the New York Department of Financial Services.In Mr. Cho’s case, he took the documents when he was in discussions with a company about a job. Mr. Cho took the documents home both before and after he accepted the job offer in May.He also admitted in the plea agreement that he printed confidential Fed documents in March 2015, while he was interviewing for a position with another company. Those documents were also related to the health of certain financial institutions in the United States, prosecutors said.Advertisement