By PETER EAVISMARCH 17, 2016
Thomas C. Baxter Jr., a long-serving Federal Reserve lawyer who helped shape Wall Street bailouts during the financial crisis of 2008, is retiring from his post at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.Mr. Baxter, who is 61 and has worked at the New York Fed for 36 years, plans to leave in September, the regulator said in a statement. He has served as the New York Fed’s general counsel, one of the most powerful jobs in the financial regulatory world, since 1995.“Tom’s intellect, work ethic and devotion to the Federal Reserve and its people are among the many qualities that distinguish his long and outstanding service,” William C. Dudley, president of the New York Fed, said in a statement. “Tom demonstrated a passion for the law and for the mission of the Fed during his tenure, and has nurtured and educated a generation of central bank lawyers.”The Fed did not announce a replacement for Mr. Baxter, saying it would immediately begin a search for his successor.AdvertisementIn recent years, Mr. Baxter guided the New York Fed’s team that suggested enforcement actions against banks that had fallen afoul of bank secrecy and money laundering laws. He also led the New York Fed’s contributions to the rescue and recovery efforts at ground zero after the Sept. 11 attacks, the Fed said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But it was in the 2008 financial crisis that Mr. Baxter played a particularly influential role, though in the shadows.AdvertisementAs confidence in Wall Street firms started to crumble in 2008, the New York Fed, then led by Timothy F. Geithner, who later became secretary of the Treasury Department, decided to provide emergency loans to ailing banks.While the Fed had substantial leeway to lend in a crisis, the Fed’s lawyers still needed to find legally ingenious ways to distribute the loans. In his 2014 book on the crisis, “Stress Test,” Mr. Geithner wrote of Mr. Baxter, “Many lawyers look for reasons to say no; Baxter was creative and intrepid about finding ways we could act.”One example was the loan from the New York Fed that underpinned JPMorgan Chase’s purchase of Bear Stearns in March 2008. In the negotiations with JPMorgan, Jamie Dimon, the bank’s chief executive, unleashed a tirade on Mr. Baxter, prompting him to hang up on Mr. Dimon, according to Mr. Geithner’s book. “Jamie apologized to Tom, and we were able to resume the negotiations,” Mr. Geithner wrote.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.