By SYDNEY EMBERMARCH 17, 2016
Gustavo Martinez, the chief executive of the advertising agency J. Walter Thompson, who was accused last week of racist and sexist behavior in a lawsuit that raised questions about the culture of Madison Avenue, has resigned.“By mutual agreement, Martinez has resigned in the best interest of the J. Walter Thompson Company,” WPP, the agency’s parent company, said in a statement on Thursday. Mr. Martinez, who had been at the helm of J. Walter Thompson since January 2015, will be succeeded by Tamara Ingram, WPP’s chief client team officer.A week earlier, WPP sent an internal memo to executives saying that, since Feb. 25, the company’s lawyers had been conducting an inquiry into the accusations against Mr. Martinez and had “found nothing, as yet, to substantiate these charges.”Martin Sorrell, chief executive of WPP, sent a separate memo to executives this week that said WPP was bringing in an outside law firm to conduct an independent investigation into the accusations.AdvertisementMr. Martinez has denied the accusations against him.In the lawsuit, filed last Thursday in federal court in New York, Erin Johnson, the chief communications officer at J. Walter Thompson, said Mr. Martinez had subjected employees “to an unending stream of racist and sexist comments as well as unwanted touching and other unlawful conduct.”The suit, which names J. Walter Thompson, WPP and Mr. Martinez as defendants, contends that Mr. Martinez made offensive comments about Jews and African-Americans and that he has “made numerous comments about rape.” The suit also contends that Mr. Martinez has, on multiple occasions, “grabbed Johnson by the throat and by the back of her neck.”AdvertisementMs. Johnson said in the filing that she was placed on paid leave in February after her lawyer sent a letter to the defendants claiming she had been “subjected to unlawful discrimination and retaliation.”Ms. Johnson said she had complained repeatedly about Mr. Martinez’s behavior to executives at J. Walter Thompson and WPP. In an amended filing on Monday, Ms. Johnson contends that J. Walter Thompson and WPP failed “for the many months that they were on notice” to investigate accusations against Mr. Martinez. She also included an image of a disc that she said contained a video recording of a meeting in May 2015 during which Mr. Martinez made some of his remarks. Lawyers for WPP filed a letter to the judge on Thursday objecting to Ms. Johnson’s request to submit the video, saying it contained information that was “highly confidential and proprietary” to J. Walter Thompson.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Anne Vladeck, a lawyer for Ms. Johnson, declined to comment.Ms. Johnson started her career working in the publicity department at the entertainment company Miramax. After working at various ad agencies, she joined J. Walter Thompson in 2005 as a corporate communications director in New York and was promoted to chief communications officer in 2009.Mr. Martinez joined J. Walter Thompson, whose clients include Macy’s and Kimberly-Clark, in 2014 as its global president. He was born in Argentina but grew up primarily in Spain, and before coming to J. Walter Thompson he held senior positions at McCann Worldgroup and Ogilvy & Mather.J. Walter Thompson is an iconic advertising agency with big-name clients, but it has struggled to stay as relevant in recent years.In a 2013 press release announcing Mr. Martinez would join J. Walter Thompson, Bob Jeffrey, then the agency’s chief executive, said: “He is passionate about the business, devoted to clients and understands that the key asset of the business is the caring, nurturing and understanding of its people. Gustavo Martinez is the future of J.W.T.”A version of this article appears in print on March 18, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Ad Agency Chief Resigns After a Bias Suit Is Filed.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.