By LESLIE PICKERMARCH 17, 2016
NEW ORLEANS — As shareholder activism continues to escalate, some deal makers at a conference in New Orleans have been focused on cracks that they think are beginning to show.The 28th Tulane Corporate Law Institute — an annual gathering of mergers and acquisitions advisers — took place days after the shares of Valeant Pharmaceuticals International, a significant holding for several activist hedge funds, plummeted.In a speech on Thursday, Roger C. Altman, a founder and the executive chairman of the investment bank Evercore, focused on the rise of activists — and the challenges they have faced recently.“Some of the biggest activists have had setbacks,” he said, referring to William A. Ackman’s hedge fund, Pershing Square Capital Management, which has been buffeted by its Valeant stake.AdvertisementBut Mr. Altman cautioned that the underperformance would have to continue for “quite some time” for the activists’ funds to be weakened. He said that if investors took more money out of these funds, they would have to sell some of their holdings.AdvertisementOn Wednesday, Mr. Ackman sold 20 million shares of the food and beverage company Mondelez International.In remarks about his predictions for 2016, however, Mr. Altman said that activism would “continue at extremely high levels.” Of the campaigns waged, when it was possible to discern the agenda of the activist, they achieved a 75 percent success rate, he said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Companies are settling with activists more frequently — avoiding the often long, drawn-out battles of years past, he said. In Mr. Altman’s opinion, the settlement rate is too high.“We’ve moved into a board mentality where boards are generally risk-averse and boards seem less inclined to strongly resist,” he said. “The activists have, as you can see, the upper hand, and they have a strong hand.”A major change that has helped strengthen activists’ hands was the improvement of their relationship with long-only fund managers. Mutual funds, like T. Rowe Price, Fidelity Investments and Wellington Management, have supported activists’ agendas, either openly or behind the scenes, he said.Evercore does not represent activists, only companies responding to them, Mr. Altman said.After a record year for mergers and acquisitions, Mr. Altman was optimistic that volumes would remain healthy. Despite recent volatility and quieter activity, he said that there would not be a “major slowdown or weakness.”Of course, he urged the audience to take his prognostications with a “grain of salt.”“No one would have predicted this level of shareholder activism, not even five years ago,” he said.A version of this article appears in print on March 18, 2016, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Despite Setbacks, Shareholder Activists Have Upper Hand, an Executive Says.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.