By LIZ MOYERNOV. 12, 2015
Massachusetts’ securities regulator is taking aim at an affiliate of American Realty Capital, accusing it of faking proxy votes for a September shareholder meeting that was crucial to the planned $378 million sale of American Realty businesses to the private equity giant Apollo Global Management.Apollo’s purchase of a 60 percent stake in a new company that was to be formed with $19 billion of American Realty Capital assets collapsed this week, dealing another blow to the real estate mogul Nicholas Schorsch, who resigned as chairman of American Realty Capital Properties last year amid accounting issues.In an administrative complaint filed on Thursday, William F. Galvin, the state’s securities regulator, said employees of Realty Capital Securities, a broker-dealer subsidiary of RCS Capital, impersonated shareholders and submitted false votes for a special meeting in September that was a prerequisite to the Apollo transaction.The special meeting was for the Business Development Corporation of America, a real estate investment business sponsored by American Realty Capital. RCS Capital was founded by Mr. Schorsch and others.AdvertisementMr. Galvin also said brokerage employees faked votes at the annual meeting in June for the Business Development Corporation of America.AdvertisementMr. Schorsch is the former chairman and chief operating officer of the Business Development Corporation of America.Mr. Galvin is seeking to revoke Realty Capital’s broker-dealer registration in the state. In a detailed administrative case filed on Thursday, he outlined how brokerage employees were pressured to solicit votes for the meetings.The employees were told they were at risk of termination if they didn’t participate in proxy calls, Mr. Galvin’s suit says.Those who refused to participate in the proxy calls were told they would “get a call” from Michael Weil, the chairman of Realty Capital Securities and president and chief operating officer of American Realty Capital.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The September votes were a crucial step in the consummation of the Apollo transaction, Mr. Galvin said.A spokesman for Apollo declined to comment on the suit.In a statement, Realty Capital Securities said: “RCS Capital is aware of the Massachusetts Securities Division’s investigation and is fully cooperating with all relevant agencies. RCS Capital has received the complaint and is currently reviewing it. At this time, the company has no further comment.”Mr. Galvin said in a statement, “Any registered entity whose supervision and oversight is so lax as to allow fabricated proxy votes should not be doing business with the Commonwealth.”The regulator said he was tipped off by an employee of Realty Capital Securities, who showed how RCS employees pretended to be shareholders and cast proxy votes in favor of management proposals.AdvertisementThe investigation indicates RCS employees fabricated numerous shareholder proxy votes in a number of American Realty Capital entities, he said.In August, Apollo announced a plan to purchase a majority of a new company, AR Global Investments, which included the continuing asset management business of AR Capital. The deal included the purchase of part of Realty Capital Securities, which specializes in selling non-traded real estate investment trusts and other alternative investments.After the collapse of the larger transaction, Apollo said it did agree to buy the wholesale brokerage business of Realty Capital Securities for a reduced price of $6 million from the original $25 million deal price.The deal for American Realty Capital businesses would have more than doubled Apollo’s real estate assets under management.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.