AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael J. de la MercedNEW ORLEANS — What is the Tulane Corporate Law Institute, the mergers and acquisitions conference here, without some memorable comments from Leo E. Strine Jr.?Nursing what he jokingly described as a hangover — followed by a short lesson on why one does not order “black and tans” at an Irish pub — Mr. Strine, the chief justice of Delaware’s Supreme Court, spoke freely about big mergers, activist investors and a few other things that crossed his mind.Where to begin? In no particular order:• Mr. Strine isn’t a big fan of the pending merger-and-breakup of Dow Chemical and his state’s hometown corporate champion, DuPont. Initially he avoided naming names, before eventually calling out E. I. du Pont de Nemours and Company outright.The idea of putting two companies together, only to split them into three soon after, appeared baffling to him. Moreover, he repeatedly lamented the fate of workers in Delaware who would probably suffer and lose jobs, thanks to what he described as the legions of M.B.A.-holders who concocted the transaction.“It’s affecting my community profoundly,” he said.• Corporate boards changing their strategies once an activist investor shows up have engendered a certain cynicism within the jurist. Once a hedge fund shows up threatening to run a board fight, directors often announce new initiatives that just happened to be “in the pipeline.” (Others on the panel, including Faiza Saeed, a partner at the law firm Cravath, Swaine & Moore, and Keith Pagnani, a partner at Sullivan & Cromwell, protested that sometimes it is actually true.)“It appears to me that there’s never a target that sticks to its pre-existing business plan,” Mr. Strine said. “People running a company ought to be regularly and deeply looking at their business plan.”What that meant, in Mr. Strine’s words, was being aware of the importance of a company’s “secret sauce.” While the judge doesn’t happen to know exactly what is in KFC’s secret spice blend, he admitted, he knows how vital it is to the chain’s chicken. (We sort of follow this line of thinking.)Roger Altman, a co-founder of the investment bank Evercore Partners, agreed.“Once an activist shows up, it’s too late to put up sunnier forecasts,” he said on the panel. “It’s amazing: ‘It was all in the pipeline,’ when you’re fundamentally changing your business strategy.”That said, Mr. Altman added that sometimes companies agreed to settlements that changed business plans for the worse in order to forestall even poorer plans put forth by activists.• On a related topic, Mr. Strine contended that some in the deal industry have “hyper-fetishized” the pure independence of corporate directors. Companies must strike a balance between individuals who aren’t beholden to management with people who have experience.• On the topic of banker conflicts — essentially boiled down to when bankers work for one company, having previously done another assignment for a competitor — Mr. Strine espoused a relatively sanguine view. First, Ms. Saeed repeated a now-infamous aphorism from Rob Kindler, the global head of mergers and acquisitions at Morgan Stanley, from the conference some years ago: “We’re all conflicted. Get over it.”Mr. Strine acknowledged that while some banks have committed egregious violations, for the most part companies want advisers who know their industries inside and out.“In most situations, you’d want an adviser who has worked with most people in the industry,” he said.That said, Mr. Altman couldn’t help but make a plug for banks like his that work solely on defending companies against activists, as opposed to big names that both advise clients against such hedge funds and service those funds in other ways.Why would anyone ever hire an adviser to defend against Activist X, he asked, when that bank is an important prime broker for Activist X?• Mr. Strine took aim at league tables, the ranking of deal advisers that sometimes frustrates rain makers.“Bankers pretend they don’t care about league tables,” he said. “But they do.”• And the Delaware judge is not looking for a position in a Trump administration. Just so you know.Advertisement