AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Dominic ElliottIt has been five months since Tidjane Thiam set out his strategy for Credit Suisse in a 69-page presentation. Since then, shareholders have seen a negative 42 percent return – worse than the returns at all of the bank’s European rivals, and twice as bad as those at its Swiss peer UBS.Mr. Thiam’s grand plan was to double pretax profit in Asia from 2014 levels and in some areas of wealth management. Events have overtaken him. It is time for what in bankspeak is known as a strategic acceleration.Mr. Thiam gave himself three years to reach his goals. Two of them look unattainable. In the wealth management division, pretax profit shrank 42 percent in 2015, so it now has to treble its pretax profit in three years to meet his target. Wealth management brings its own peculiar, unforeseeable risks. A lawsuit filed on Tuesday is at least the second to seek damages over claims that Credit Suisse failed to prevent a former employee from laundering money.Asia, too, is a tough choice of strategic focus. Even leaving aside the slowdown in China, UBS already has double the investment banking market share of its Swiss rival and more than a quarter more Asian wealth advisers than Credit Suisse is aiming for by 2018, notes Macquarie.Mr. Thiam could help himself out with some simplicity. He does not like return-on-equity targets, but an overall group pretax profit target would still be more helpful than the individual divisional ones he has now. If this were set at 6.5 billion Swiss francs ($6.6 billion) for 2018, then Credit Suisse still might be able to make an 11 percent return on equity – which is what analysts forecast for UBS.Or he could cut more deeply in investment banking. Mr. Thiam envisages risk-weighted assets for his trading and corporate finance businesses growing more than a quarter by 2018. Cut them by a fifth instead, and that 11 percent return on equity could come in three years on a lesser 6.1 billion Swiss francs in group pretax profit.Mr. Thiam, who has not run a bank before, was a high-risk choice for chief executive. In his last job, running the insurer Prudential, one of his first moves was a bold albeit failed bid for its Asian rival AIA that, in light of AIA’s subsequent strong performance, looks smart. The most decisive thing about his time at Credit Suisse so far is the fall in its shares. Mr. Thiam’s revamp needs a do-over.Dominic Elliott is a columnist at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.Advertisement