AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Richard BealesIt’s rare that a big nonfinancial company arranges its own debt – and $75 billion worth is a first. That, though, is what Anheuser-Busch InBev has done with the five-part loan package backing its deal to buy SABMiller for more than $100 billion, which was formally announced on Wednesday.It’s another string to the ambitious brewer’s bow. Self-arranging such a loan deal, topping Verizon Communications’ deal to borrow about $60 billion two years ago, requires the experience and resources to corral multiple lenders. Even allowing for the existing relationships that the $196 billion Anheuser-Busch InBev has with the likes of Santander and Bank of America and the allure of big debt-raising, that must have been akin to herding cats.The total size of the loans would have put Anheuser-Busch InBev at No. 18 among global loan arrangers in 2014, according to league tables compiled by Thomson Reuters — right in bulge-bracket investment bank territory, just a few billion dollars behind Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley.That is hardly what the company, led by Carlos Brito, is aiming for, but it does underline the sheer scale of the financing – even if the announced sale of SABMiller’s 58 percent stake in the MillerCoors joint venture for $12 billion will help pay off a $10 billion portion of the new borrowing in short order.What Mr. Brito and his colleagues do care about, though, is being as parsimonious as possible with expenses across the board. The fees being paid to participating lenders are not disclosed, but the league-table data on company rankings suggests that arranger banks collect around 0.4 percent of loan proceeds on average. That would suggest that Anheuser-Busch InBev is avoiding about $300 million of outlays.That’s a rough estimate and it’s small in the context of the enormous agglomeration of Anheuser-Busch InBev and SABMiller. But every little bit helps – and it’s enough to burnish Mr. Brito’s cost-cutting credentials that much more.Richard Beales is assistant editor for Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com. Advertisement