
Fair Game By                     
 GRETCHEN MORGENSON
 
MARCH 18, 2016
File this column under: Why It Pays to Read the Footnotes.On Tuesday, Longbow Research, an independent institutional research and brokerage firm with offices in New York, San Francisco and Independence, Ohio, published a report recommending that its clients buy shares in Tempur Sealy International, the mattress maker.That’s not unusual. Wall Street research analysts put out buy recommendations every day. Probably too often, in fact.But Longbow’s report was atypical in one way: Mark Rupe, the analyst who wrote it, recently left Tempur Sealy as head of its investor relations unit. Investors didn’t learn that, though, unless they read a disclosure on the penultimate page of the 17-page report, which said that Mr. Rupe or a member of his family owned stock and options in Tempur Sealy.The amount of the holding wasn’t disclosed, but it appears to have resulted from Mr. Rupe’s employment at the bedding maker. The report also noted that Mr. Rupe stood to receive additional incentive compensation from Tempur Sealy over the next two years if the company met certain performance hurdles.AdvertisementSo, an analyst who is supposed to offer unbiased opinions on a company owns a position in it that could benefit from his bullishness. What gives?AdvertisementThis is just the kind of conflict of interest that brought the wrath of regulators down on Wall Street research a dozen or so years ago. Except in those days, analysts’ conflicts weren’t disclosed. At least close readers of the Tempur Sealy report were armed with the information and could base their decisions on it.Still, it’s hard to imagine that Mr. Rupe’s stake in Tempur Sealy and his close relationship with the company won’t color his view. The question is, why would Longbow, a firm that appears to pride itself on independent research, want to open itself up to this kind of criticism?I tried to ask this of David MacGregor, Longbow’s chief executive and research director. Neither he nor Mr. Rupe responded to my emails seeking comment.Longbow was founded in 2003 just after disturbing conflicts of interest among analysts at big Wall Street firms came to light. Among other things, analysts were speaking ill of companies privately while recommending their shares to the public. Or they were quietly selling shares of the same stocks they were peddling to clients.After these ugly revelations, regulators sued 10 big firms, barred two previously famous analysts from working on Wall Street and wrote new rules to prevent hidden conflicts from tainting research reports.Among the new rules were those requiring analysts to tell clients if they were recommending a company when their Wall Street firms also provided other services, such as investment banking.They also had to disclose any ownership of stocks they were covering, as Mr. Rupe did in his report on Tempur Sealy.AdvertisementMr. Rupe had worked as an analyst at Longbow before. His first stint began in March 2008, according to his LinkedIn page, and extended through 2011. He covered the mattress maker then, according to an archived transcript of a 2008 earnings call. He joined Tempur in January 2012.In recent years Tempur Sealy has struggled. Some of its problems stemmed from the Tempur-Pedic acquisition of Sealy in 2013.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Last spring, the company became enmeshed in a boardroom drama. Three directors targeted for removal from the board by H Partners Management, an activist hedge fund, lost re-election and resigned. One of them was Mark Sarvary, Tempur Sealy’s chief executive.Scott L. Thompson replaced him as C.E.O. at Tempur in September. And in his buy recommendation, Mr. Rupe of Longbow praised Mr. Thompson, calling him “a proven independent thinker” with a return-on-investment discipline “that is sharp and very distinct.”Mr. Rupe also noted in his report that he was starting to cover two Tempur competitors, Mattress Firm Holding a specialty retailer, and Select Comfort, a maker of air beds. Mr. Rupe assigned both of those companies’ stocks a neutral rating.In addition to lauding Mr. Thompson’s skills, Mr. Rupe’s report played down the threat from a raft of successful online mattress sellers that other industry analysts see as potentially damaging to Tempur Sealy’s business. These e-commerce companies are gaining a foothold in the higher end of the mattress market, and some analysts think their growth will rise significantly in coming years.Tempur’s stock was trading at around $60 when Mr. Rupe’s report came out. His 12-month target price of $77 is on the high side compared with other analysts who follow the mattress maker. Only two of the seven price targets assigned by analysts covering Tempur Sealy exceed Mr. Rupe’s.Initially, Mr. Rupe’s report didn’t do much to help Tempur’s shares, which drifted down 0.4 percent after the report came out on Tuesday. But in trading the following day, Tempur stock raced ahead 5.5 percent on news that Mr. Thompson, the new chief executive, had been buying shares. On Friday, the stock was at $63.17 in early trading.The purchases, part of a matching program where Tempur contributes a restricted stock unit for each share Mr. Thompson buys, occurred on March 11 and 14, but the public filings detailing it didn’t emerge until after the close of trading March 15.Obviously Mr. Rupe has a deep and abiding knowledge of the mattress business, gained during his years at Tempur Sealy. With this expertise, he could definitely produce astute analysis on the company and other industry players.AdvertisementBut his early work indicates that he prefers cheerleading for the company. And cheerleaders are a dime a dozen on Wall Street.A version of this article appears in print on March 20, 2016, on Page BU1 of the New York edition with the headline: Bullishness That Comes With a Catch.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »