AdvertisementSupported byThe Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.30 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.44 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.27 percent.The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week:Florida Department of Transportation, $106.2 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Florida Department of Transportation, $161.8 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.California State Public Works Board, $56.2 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Utah State Building Ownership Authority, $87.2 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Bayonne, N.J., $73.6 million of general improvement refinancing and school refinancing bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Boston Medical Center, $75 million of taxable revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.Broward County School Board, Fla., $215 million of certificates of participation. J.P. Morgan Securities.Chandler Unified School District, Ariz., $60 million of school improvement bonds. Stifel Nicolaus.DeKalb County, Ga., $145 million of general obligation bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Denver, $353 million of tax revenue refinancing bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Eastern Municipal Water District, Calif., $50 million of refinancing water and sewer revenue bonds. Stifel Nicolaus.Energy Northwest, Wash., $497 million of revenue refinancing bonds. Bank of America.Florida Housing Finance Corporation, $59.5 million of homeowner mortgage revenue bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Houston, $582 million of public improvement refinancing bonds. Loop Capital Markets.Illinois Finance Authority, $70.2 million of DePaul University revenue bonds. Goldman Sachs.Kaufman Independent School District, Tex., $54.8 million of unlimited tax school building bonds. Raymond James.Kentucky Turnpike Authority, $219.2 million of economic development road revenue refinancing bonds. Morgan Stanley.Kern County Water Agency, Calif., $84.8 million of water revenue refinancing bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Marysville, Ohio, $66.7 million of wastewater treatment system revenue refinancing bonds. William Blair.Marysville Public Schools District, Mich., $69.9 million of refinancing bonds. Stifel Nicolaus.Mesa, Ariz., $139.6 million of utility revenue refinancing bonds. J.P. Morgan Securities.New Jersey, $141 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.New Jersey Building Authority, $96 million of building revenue and refinancing bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Ohio, $80 million of capital facilities lease appropriation bonds. Hilltop Securities.Ohlone Community College District, Calif., $136 million of general obligation bonds. Piper Jaffray.University of Oklahoma, $75.2 million of general revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.Pennsylvania Housing Finance Agency, $162 million of single-family mortgage revenue bonds. J.P. Morgan Securities.Saginaw Valley State University, Mich., $60.8 million of general revenue and refinancing bonds. Barclays Capital.San Jacinto Community College, Tex., $179 million of limited tax general obligation bonds. J.P. Morgan Securities.Southern California Public Power Authority, $80 million of debt securities. Citigroup Global Markets.Texas A&M University System, $92.6 million of revenue financing system bonds. Raymond James.Texas A&M University System, $325.7 million of revenue financing system bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Truckee Meadows Water Authority, Nev., $126.4 million of water revenue refinancing bonds. Morgan Stanley.Wisconsin Housing and Economic Development Authority, $180.3 million of homeownership revenue bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Advertisement