By THE NEW YORK TIMESMARCH 20, 2016
More than two dozen European countries will ask the Supreme Court on Monday to let them sue in an American court. They said R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company participated in an international money laundering scheme, using drug money to buy tobacco, in violation of the federal Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act, or RICO.The question for the justices, who are generally skeptical of suits based on activities outside the United States, is whether RICO applies to conduct abroad. Seven justices will hear the case, as Justice Sonia Sotomayor is recused. —Adam LiptakSix former bank employees are expected back in court in London on Monday ahead of their trial next month on criminal charges that they conspired to manipulate the London interbank offered rate, a global benchmark interest rate. —Chad BrayApple and the Justice Department will meet in Federal District Court in the central district of California on Tuesday to hash out whether the company should weaken its security features so the government can break into an iPhone used by a gunman in the San Bernardino mass shooting last year.AdvertisementMagistrate Judge Sheri Pym will preside over the popular hearing in a case that has divided the country and become a flashpoint in the debate over the trade-offs between personal rights to privacy and the needs of law enforcement. The hearing comes a day after the company is expected to unveil smaller versions of its iPhone and iPad Pro.  —Katie BennerAdvertisementDebt-burdened Puerto Rico will be up against investors at the Supreme Court on Tuesday. The island says it urgently needs to restructure its $72 billion in debt but cannot, because Chapter 9 of the bankruptcy code — the chapter for insolvent local governments — specifically bars Puerto Rico.It tried writing its own bankruptcy law, but ran afoul of another rule: Only Congress can enact bankruptcy laws. The island won an expedited review by the Supreme Court, arguing that its very future is in doubt and that Congress cannot possibly have intended to lock it out of bankruptcy court. But lawyers for investment firms said that was precisely what the bankruptcy code does. —Mary Williams WalshThe annual Boao Forum in China this week will attract the likes of the Alibaba Group’s chairman, Jack Ma, and the basketball star Yao Ming. But all eyes will be on Premier Li Keqiang, left, whom many investors are looking to for assurances that the Chinese government can avoid a hard economic landing.Mr. Li said this month that China could solve its overcapacity problem in the steel and coal industries without resorting to huge layoffs. But economists have expressed skepticism, and investors will be looking for details on the government’s plan to reduce inefficiencies at state-owned enterprises, as well its efforts to ensure stability in unruly stock markets. —Javier C. HernándezAutomakers will take the wraps off a number of new vehicles, particularly luxury models, at media previews starting Wednesday for the annual New York International Auto Show. With sales of new cars, trucks and utility vehicles on pace for another record year in the United States, manufacturers are accelerating their introduction of new models to tap into the strong consumer demand.A variety of electric and hybrid cars, including Toyota’s latest version of its top-selling Prius line, will be on display. Other carmakers are bolstering their luxury brands with new entries, including Ford’s Lincoln division and Honda’s Acura unit. —Bill VlasicPlease verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.On Thursday, at 8:30 a.m., the Commerce Department will report the latest data on durable goods orders in February. After durable goods orders made a big jump in January, economists believed they would show a 3.3 percent drop for the month of February.But that is the overall headline figure, which includes aircraft deliveries that can be volatile. Core durable goods orders are thought to have been flat last month, reflecting steady consumer demand for products including appliances and automobiles. If orders rose, it could be another sign that the economy is stronger than many experts thought earlier this year. —Nelson D. SchwartzA federal judge overseeing lawsuits against Volkswagen will hold a hearing on Thursday at Federal District Court in San Francisco to discuss the status of settlement talks, as well as the carmaker’s attempts to fix nearly 600,000 diesels that are polluting much more than allowed.AdvertisementJudge Charles R. Breyer told Volkswagen last month to present a plan at the hearing to bring the cars into compliance. But it appears that the company, which has admitted that the vehicles were equipped with software that was used to cheat emissions tests, has not yet been able to find a technical solution that would satisfy regulators. —Jack EwingA version of this article appears in print on March 21, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Apple iPhone Hearing, VW Diesel Update and Luxury Cars.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.