

 Andrew Ross Sorkin
 

DEALBOOK
MARCH 21, 2016
After reaping the best returns of any hedge fund manager in 2014, Bill Ackman appeared on the cover of Bloomberg Markets magazine, grinning, with the headline, “How Do You Like Bill Ackman Now?”Well, these days, about 47 percent less.That is the amount Mr. Ackman’s funds are down from their highs as he miscalculated, several times over, his investment in Valeant Pharmaceuticals, which has turned into an unmitigated disaster.On Monday, Valeant said it would restate its earnings, asked a former chief financial officer to resign from the board over “improper conduct” and pushed its chief executive, J. Michael Pearson, to step down. And Mr. Ackman, who made his name — and billions — spotting financial fraud but missed any signs of chicanery at Valeant, joined the board, hoping to salvage his investment, which had fallen 86 percent in the last year.With the hedge fund “It Boy” dethroned, the schadenfreude on Wall Street is thick.Mr. Ackman has earned his reputation as an elite investor by making big, concentrated bets. He has had huge wins, like a 77-fold return in the mall owner General Growth Properties and successful activist campaigns like a recent one in Canadian Pacific railroad. But he has also become a lightning rod over failed investments like those in the retailer J. C. Penney and his long fight, thus far unsuccessful, to bring down the supplements maker Herbalife.AdvertisementNow, deep in the red, Mr. Ackman will have to generate returns between 50 percent and about 70 percent in his various funds to earn a performance fee, typically 20 percent of the profits that account for most of a hedge fund manager’s compensation. This will take a near miracle — or a very long time. The preternaturally optimistic Mr. Ackman thinks that he can save Valeant and that he will recover.AdvertisementBut here’s the conundrum: Mr. Ackman’s pain is not just his own.The damage wrought by Mr. Ackman’s wrong-way bet has had a cascade effect across Wall Street, not just for those who followed Mr. Ackman into Valeant, but everyone who threw their lot in with his fund, Pershing Square Capital Management. Mr. Ackman is causing agita across the globe.There is Deutsche Bank’s London office, which helped underwrite a public offering for Mr. Ackman’s funds in 2014. Pershing’s fund opened at $25 a share; it now trades at $13.18.Then there is UBS, which also led Mr. Ackman’s offerings. One of Mr. Ackman’s friends is Mark Axelowitz, a managing director of UBS Private Wealth, which hosts an annual charity event with Mr. Ackman. Mr. Axelowitz and the firm put some of their clients into Pershing.Those two banks, by the way, received about $100 million in fees for their work on the Pershing initial public offering.At the time of the I.P.O., the famous Rothschild Bank and its wealth management unit bought $274 million worth of Pershing stock on behalf of its clients. A unit of Qatar’s investment fund also took a $141 million stake. The Blackstone Group bought into the offering and worked as an adviser to Pershing.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Even Mr. Ackman’s former nemesis Carl Icahn has taken a hit via his stake in the insurance giant American International Group, which has a stake in Mr. Ackman’s fund. Mr. Icahn received an A.I.G. board seat after pressing the insurer to break itself up. A.I.G. has announced plans to reduce its exposure to hedge funds, slashing its $11 billion investment in half. It remains unclear whether Mr. Ackman’s fund is among those it plans to eliminate. (How A.I.G. — which was bailed out by the federal government in 2008 — ever wound up with such concentration in risky hedge funds is a question for another day.)But it’s not just wealthy investors who have been burned by Mr. Ackman. Several public pension funds that manage money for teachers, police and firefighters, including some from New Jersey and Massachusetts, have stakes in Pershing Square. They are counting their losses at a time when many pension funds are re-evaluating whether they should be in hedge funds in the first place.Then there are eyebrows being raised in New York real estate circles. Last year, Mr. Ackman, with the Georgetown Company, agreed to buy 787 11th Avenue, where he plans to move Pershing Square. He is expected to build a tennis court on the roof. Mr. Ackman is an avid tennis player.While nobody has said the development is in jeopardy, some real estate agents have already begun speculating about the future of the project. There is gossip over whether he will have to take a loss on a $91.5 million apartment he bought in One57 overlooking Central Park that he said he purchased as an investment in the hope of selling for a profit. And now, luxury Manhattan real estate appears to have peaked.AdvertisementMr. Ackman sees his putrid performance as a blip. He has privately told some colleagues that he believes he can get back to even within a year. But he may have to turn it around sooner — May is the next window for investors to ask Mr. Ackman for their money back.The DealBook column on Tuesday, about a shake-up at Valeant Pharmaceuticals International, misstated an action taken on Monday by Valeant. The company asked a director to resign, not its chief financial officer. It did not force the resignation of the director, Howard B. Schiller, who is its former chief financial officer and onetime interim chief executive. (Mr. Schiller has declined to resign.)A version of this article appears in print on March 22, 2016, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Many Burned by Ackman’s Bold Bet.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »