AdvertisementSupported byBy Alexandra Stevenson and Matthew GoldsteinThe longtime Wall Street trader Leon G. Cooperman is preparing for a showdown with regulators.Mr. Cooperman and his $5.2 billion hedge fund Omega Advisors received a notice from the Securities and Exchange Commission on March 14 outlining the possibility that they could face enforcement action over trading violations, the hedge fund manager told investors on Monday.In a letter to investors, Mr. Cooperman said the trading involved a single security in July 2010 and a possible third party. Omega had been invested in the security since 2007, he said. Mr. Cooperman, 72, did not identify the stock in the letter, but later said that it was Atlas Pipeline.A billionaire, Mr. Cooperman is known for his outspoken views and is often a guest on business news television. The investigation into his firm may signal that regulators have not given up on pursuing improper trading cases against the nearly $3 trillion hedge fund industry despite an unfavorable federal appellate court ruling more than a year ago.Late Monday afternoon, Mr. Cooperman held a conference call with investors to discuss the Wells notice from the S.E.C., and vigorously defended himself and his firm.“We care about our reputation, and I am not going to let these guys change my legacy,” he told investors during the 15-minute call.“I don’t believe the government investigation will have an impact,” said Mr. Cooperman, who added that he was called to testify before the regulator over a week ago. “If I were to reach a contrary conclusion, I would close up shop and give you back your money.”In the letter, Mr. Cooperman said, “We are disappointed with the staff’s current position and the issuance of the Wells notice.”Lately, Omega has been reporting weaker performance. The last year has been a tough one for Omega investors. In 2015, its Omega Overseas Partners fund lost 10.4 percent.This year, the firm is down 6 percent. Around 28 percent of the firm’s total assets are owned by employees, Mr. Cooperman said in a phone interview on Monday.The son of a plumber, Mr. Cooperman grew up in the South Bronx. He got his first break on Wall Street at Goldman Sachs, where he stayed for a quarter of a century. Mr. Cooperman began his hedge fund, Omega, in 1991.Mr. Cooperman has topped the best-paid hedge fund manager list over many years. In 2013, he took home $825 million, according to Institutional Investors’ annual list of the richest fund managers.Last year, he failed to make the list because he lost money. He and his wife, Toby, have pledged to give away at least half of their fortune through the Giving Pledge, an initiative started by Bill Gates and Warren E. Buffett.Trading activity in securities was the focus of another subpoena that Omega received from the S.E.C.’s division of enforcement in 2011.The firm responded to the regulator in 2012 and then didn’t hear anything for three years, Mr. Cooperman said. The Wells notice also includes federal securities filings that the S.E.C. has said were not timely, he added.Mr. Cooperman has contacted some of the same lawyers from the firm Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton & Garrison who represented Steven A. Cohen in his long battle with securities regulators and federal prosecutors over allegations of insider trading at his former hedge fund, SAC Capital Advisors.The investigation of Mr. Cohen’s firm ended with his former firm pleading guilty to securities fraud violations and paying $1.8 billion in penalties to prosecutors and regulators.This year, Mr. Cohen reached a settlement with the S.E.C. in a failure-to-supervise administrative action that barred him from the securities industry for two years but did not require him to pay any monetary penalty.Advertisement