By NOAH SMITH and RAVI SOMAIYAMARCH 21, 2016
SANTA ANA, Calif. — Last week, Tribune Publishing won an auction for a coveted asset — Freedom Communications, the parent company of The Orange County Register and The Press-Enterprise of Riverside, Calif. On Monday, however, the company could only watch as the sale of Freedom to Digital First Media was approved by a judge.Tribune Publishing, which also owns The Los Angeles Times, The San Diego Union-Tribune and The Chicago Tribune, had a $56 million bid for Freedom accepted before the Justice Department stepped in to object to the deal, arguing that it would result in a newspaper monopoly in Southern California. The move was followed by a temporary restraining order on Friday.Because Freedom Communications is in bankruptcy proceedings and will run out of operating capital by the end of the month, the company applied to be allowed to name Digital First Media as the successful bidder. Its offer was about $52 million.“The Tribune bid was more money to our constituents, but we have to work with what is achievable and what is not, within the time frame,” said Robert J. Feinstein of the law firm Pachulski Stang Ziehl & Jones, which works for the committee representing the creditors of Freedom Communications.AdvertisementTribune Publishing did not raise any objections at Monday’s hearing, but Jeremy Rosenthal, a lawyer for the company, called the Justice Department’s assessment of the state of competition in the newspaper industry “antiquated and unrealistic.”AdvertisementThe government had failed to take into account, Mr. Rosenthal said, the fact that the media landscape had fundamentally changed. The web and social media, not The Los Angeles Times, were the main alternatives to the local papers for those seeking news, he said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We are confident that we would prevail at a trial on the merits, but due to the exigencies of these cases and the dire financial condition of the debtors, we do not have that time,” Mr. Rosenthal said.William J. Kolasky, a lawyer for Digital First Media, said that the action by the Justice Department was unusual because, in his experience, lawyers most often consult with the government at earlier stages of a bankruptcy sale.Digital First Media also owns other California newspapers, including The Los Angeles Daily News and The San Jose Mercury News, as well as The Denver Post.The decision is a blow for Tribune Publishing, which has long been in turmoil and recently made sweeping executive changes, including replacing its chief executive. The plan to purchase Freedom Communications had been meant to spread the company’s reach in California and increase operating efficiencies.Noah Smith reported from Santa Ana, Calif., and Ravi Somaiya from New York.A version of this article appears in print on March 22, 2016, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Digital First Wins Orange County Register.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.