AdvertisementSupported byBy Leslie PickerThe media mogul John C. Malone is never one to shy away from complicated deals. Two announcements from his companies on Thursday — involving tracking stocks, spinoffs and tax efficiencies – exemplify how he can spin an intricate web of investments.Mr. Malone’s Liberty Interactive Corporation, known for its digital commerce businesses, said in a statement that it would spin off two units in its Liberty Ventures Group. One of them will consist of the CommerceHub, which provides technology services to e-commerce merchants, and the other will be Liberty Expedia Holdings, which will include the company’s 18 percent stake in the travel-booking site Expedia and Bodybuilding.com, a fitness site.In a separate statement, the Liberty Media Corporation also said it planned to reclassify its common stock into three tracking stocks.The first will be the Liberty Braves Group, which owns the Atlanta Braves baseball team and related assets. Another tracking stock will be for the Liberty Sirius Group, which includes the satellite radio provider Sirius XM Holdings. The Liberty Media Group will get the remainder of Liberty’s investments, such as its stakes in Live Nation Entertainment, Time Warner and Viacom.The Liberty Media Group will also have about a 20 percent interest in Liberty Braves.The motivation behind the spinoff announced on Thursday was to help “unlock value” for Liberty Ventures shareholders, according to Gregory B. Maffei, president and chief executive of Liberty Interactive. The transaction, advised by JPMorgan Chase, is expected to be tax-free to stockholders.Mr. Maffei said in the statement that the purpose behind the three tracking stocks was to “highlight each tracking stock group’s operations, and the financial performance of its attributed assets, provide greater investor choice, and enable targeted capital raising while maintaining an optimal capital structure for Liberty.”Mr. Malone, who serves as chairman of both Liberty Media and Liberty Interactive, has built an empire by investing in technology, media and telecommunications companies, or outright acquiring them. Two days ago, Mr. Malone’s Liberty Global and Discovery Communications, where he is the biggest shareholder, said they had each acquired a 3.4 percent stake in Lions Gate Entertainment.He also helped coordinate Charter Communications’ acquisition of both Time Warner Cable and Bright House Networks this year.Advertisement