AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Robert CyranValeant Pharmaceuticals International is running the risk of an Enron or WorldCom endgame.The struggling drug maker has uncovered accounting impropriety, it said on Monday. It is replacing its chief executive, J. Michael Pearson, but Howard B. Schiller, the company’s former chief financial officer, has refused to quit as a director. The board, the numbers and the strategy are fractured. Add some $30 billion of debt, and Valeant could easily crumble.The investor William A. Ackman will join Valeant’s board. His hedge fund, Pershing Square Capital Management, which owns about 9 percent of Valeant’s stock, now has two directors. Another activist hedge fund, ValueAct Capital, also has a nominee on the board. Mr. Schiller will still be there, too. The company pointed the finger at him for “improper conduct” in Monday’s release. Mr. Schiller said in a statement he had done nothing wrong. The mixture looks toxic.The company’s failure to file audited 2015 financial statements on time may put it in default and potentially force it to repay slugs of debt – something it might struggle to do. Raising new cash would be a challenge even without the other clouds hanging over the company now that its market capitalization has tumbled to a level under one-third of its debt load.The company’s latest update also criticized “the tone at the top of the organization” as a contributing factor, presumably referring to Mr. Pearson. And 2014 numbers are in question, too. It takes a leap of faith to believe that further problems will not emerge and that the figures can be corrected and cleared by its auditor, PricewaterhouseCoopers, in short order. Even figuring out which Valeant executives should sign off may be difficult.Valeant’s indebtedness stems from the serial acquisition of sometimes mediocre assets at inflated prices, partly in a quest by senior executives to achieve aggressive targets – at any cost, it now seems. If anything, Valeant will have to sell assets to reduce debt. The famous collapses of Enron and WorldCom involved similar failures aggravated by heavy borrowing. To be clear, Valeant has not been charged with fraud. Even so, it’s in a fight for survival.Advertisement