By BEN SISARIOMARCH 21, 2016
What makes a No. 1 album?For decades, there was just one factor: how many copies of a full record were sold. But in late 2014, Billboard and Nielsen, which supplies the magazine with its data, changed the formula to better reflect how the online music market has evolved. In addition to sales of full releases, the chart now accounts for how many times the songs from each album were downloaded or streamed in a given week.That comparison can sometimes reveal big disparities in the market, and this week’s chart is a particularly stark illustration of the difference between the chart’s old method and the new.The No. 1 album on the Billboard 200, the magazine’s main album chart — and still the music industry’s most important scorecard — is Rihanna’s “Anti” (Roc Nation), which returns to the top spot after six weeks. But it has a dubious distinction. With just 17,000 copies sold in the United States last week, “Anti” had by far the lowest sales of a full album to reach No. 1 since at least 1991, when Billboard began incorporating reliable data from retailers. Through album sales alone, “Anti” would rate only No. 10.By contrast, “Hymns That Are Important to Us” (Gaither) by the country duo Joey & Rory — a married couple, whose member Joey Feek died on March 4 after a public battle with cancer — sold 44,000 copies last week, beating everybody else (even Adele) by a comfortable margin. Yet “Hymns” is only No. 4.AdvertisementThe difference is in the songs. Tracks from “Anti” — particularly “Work,” a No. 1 hit for five weeks now — were streamed 36.4 million times and downloaded 131,000 times last week, in both measurements much more than any other album, pushing it far ahead on the chart and giving “Anti” 54,000 “album equivalent units.” The tracks on “Hymns,” on the other hand, had just 90,000 streams and fewer than 2,000 downloads, giving the album only 45,000 equivalents (and that’s rounding up).Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Silvio Pietroluongo, Billboard’s vice president of charts and data development, said that the magazine does count “Hymns” as the week’s best seller in its weekly album sales chart, but that the Billboard 200 measures a broader kind of engagement. “The chart is reflective of what the true popular albums are in this country,” he said.Billboard’s chart changes lately have had their critics, who argue that, among other things, the magazine’s rules on free music are contradictory. When Rihanna’s “Anti” came out in January, Billboard did not count a million copies that had been given away through a sponsorship with Samsung. But week after week, it counts millions of free streams from Spotify. This week, some of those free streams may have actually helped push Rihanna to No. 1.AdvertisementAlso on this week’s chart, Adele’s “25” (XL/Columbia) is No. 2, Justin Bieber’s “Purpose” (RBMG/Def Jam) is No. 3 and last week’s top release, Kendrick Lamar’s “untitled unmastered.” (TDE/Aftermath/Interscope), fell to No. 5.A version of this article appears in print on March 22, 2016, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline: Rihanna Is Back Atop Billboard Chart.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.