AdvertisementSupported byIn DebtBy Stephen J. LubbenSeveral years ago I wrote an article predicting that the growth of credit default swaps would make it increasingly difficult to restructure distressed companies. The drama surrounding a Norwegian paper maker shows that, if anything, I understated the potential problem.Norske Skog, which describes itself as multinational “manufacturers of lightweight, coated and uncoated newsprint and magazine paper,” is in the midst of an exchange offer. In that respect, it is like many other companies, although Norske Skog is the rare one that is not in the oil and gas sector.The company agreed on the terms of the exchange with Blackstone’s GSO Capital Partners unit and Cyrus Capital Partners LP, both of which hold some of its unsecured bonds as well as a good bit of its equity. Under the exchange offer, certain bondholders scheduled to be repaid this year and next are being asked to accept a motley package of securities, including new debt secured by some European assets, in place of their current bonds.Certain secured bondholders sued to block the exchange offer, arguing that it was not permitted by the contract under which they purchased the bonds — known as an indenture. A state court temporarily blocked the offer. After the case moved to federal court, the judge there said the exchange offer was probably impermissible under the indenture, but he refused to block it. In short, the judge was saying that any violation of the indenture could be rectified by the payment of money damages or other remedies after the fact. That is a somewhat dicey proposition when we are talking about a distressed company, but the federal court suggested these sorts of things are better addressed by bankruptcy judges.Covenant Review, the bond research organization, has since come out with a report arguing that the judge was wrong on the first point. It said the bond indenture allowed the exchange offer to include the new secured bonds. I have not seen the report, but I know who wins the fight between a research firm and a federal judge. Nonetheless, Covenant Review’s entry into the fray certainly does not make this jumble any clearer.At the same time, it has also been said that various parties in this battle have either bought or sold credit default swap contracts on Norske Skog. As a result, their incentives for supporting or opposing the exchange offer might be somewhat less than clear, since the presence of the derivatives means that they are no longer acting as “pure bondholders.” Funds that have sold swap contracts would want to avoid a restructuring until those contracts expire, whereas funds that bought the swap contracts would want to trigger them sooner rather than later.At least one fund involved in the exchange offer denied that it lacked proper incentives, although its letter was carefully phrased. That certainly suggests there are credit default swap contracts lurking out there.Despite the financial crisis, and the significant changes created by the Dodd-Frank financial reform act with regard to the regulation of the over-the-counter swap market — which includes credit default swaps — the role of the swap contracts in financial distress remains largely beyond the pale. Nobody really knows where any bondholder’s interest lies these days, and that means that workouts are inherently more complex.OpinionThe Editorial BoardAdvertisement