AdvertisementSupported byWhite Collar WatchBy Peter J. HenningParents are known at times to deliver an ultimatum to a recalcitrant child by saying, “Do this, or else!” The question is what that the frequently undelivered punishment may actually be.When a case is in court, the judge can hold a party in contempt as the “or else” for refusing to comply with an order. But how far can a court go in imposing sanctions for contempt?That question may arise for Carl Ferrer, the chief executive of Backpage.com, an advertising website that has been identified for its connections to possible sex trafficking. Mr. Ferrer is in a fight with the Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations for not complying with a subpoena.It may also become an issue for Apple if a judge orders it to help unlock the iPhone used by one of the shooters in the terrorist attack in San Bernardino last December. The company may be willing to defy the order, and even if it wants to comply, there is a chance that its engineers would refuse to provide that assistance, as The New York Times reported, perhaps making compliance impossible.In Mr. Ferrer’s case, the Senate voted 96-0 to pass a resolution on Thursday authorizing its legal counsel to file an action in the Federal District Court in Washington to hold him in civil contempt for refusing to turn over corporate records about the company’s advertising review procedures and appear before the subcommittee to testify last November. The company’s lawyer issued a statement that it “looks forward to a proper consideration of the important First Amendment constitutional issues by the judiciary – the branch of government charged with protecting the constitutional rights of all Americans.”A judge’s power to punish someone for misconduct that takes place inside the courtroom is broad, as any fan of the movie “My Cousin Vinny” will recall when the protagonist is summarily ordered to jail for his antics. For conduct outside the judge’s presence, the power to impose a penalty is more limited, and depends on whether it is intended to punish the person, which would be a criminal case, or coerce compliance with an order, which is civil.That distinction is crucial because if the contempt is deemed criminal, then the person receives the usual array of constitutional protections afforded in any prosecution, such as a right to a jury trial and the requirement that guilt be proven beyond a reasonable doubt, before any punishment can be imposed.Civil contempt, on the other hand, entails fewer procedural requirements, so that a judge can sanction a person who refuses to comply without undertaking a full-scale trial. That can result in being incarcerated for an extended period, with no finding of guilt.The reason for allowing an expedited process for civil contempt is that the contemnor, as the person in violation of the order is called, is said to “hold the key to the jail cell” by deciding whether to comply, so it is considered remedial rather than punitive. Witnesses who have spent months behind bars for refusing to testify before a grand jury include Greg Anderson, the personal trainer for the home run leader Barry Bonds, and Susan McDougal, a friend of President Clinton who participated in the Whitewater investment.The Senate chose to use its authority to seek a civil contempt against Mr. Ferrer because that gives it greater control over the case, and an increased likelihood of actually securing the documents and testimony the subcommittee seeks.If the Senate wanted to pursue a criminal contempt, it would have to refer the case to the Justice Department to decide whether to prosecute, something that has not happened in recent cases. Federal prosecutors did not act in response to referrals regarding Lois Lerner, a former I.R.S. official involved in claims of scrutinizing the tax-exempt status of conservative political organizations, and former Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr., for refusing to disclose internal documents related to the botched gun-smuggling investigation known as Operation Fast and Furious.Backpage.com asserts that the First Amendment protects it from having to submit all the documents subpoenaed by the subcommittee because it engages in advertising, which is a category of commercial speech. Mr. Ferrer may be willing to defy a court order to vindicate the principle of free speech, as other journalists have done.That could mean a trip to jail for contempt, however, because federal courts generally do not recognize the First Amendment as a basis to resist a subpoena. The length of any incarceration could be considerable, as happened in one case when an investment manager spent more than seven years in jail for refusing to comply with a court order in a civil securities fraud case.Apple is scheduled to be in court on Tuesday to challenge an order that it help unlock the iPhone. If it loses the fight, the question is whether the company will decide to be held in contempt to uphold its position that cooperating would create a dangerous precedent.In its most recent brief filed last week in the Federal District Court for the Central District of California, the company argued that “the government seeks to commandeer Apple to design, create, test and validate a new operating system that does not exist, and that Apple believes – with overwhelming support from the technology community and security experts – is too dangerous to create.” That does not indicate any willingness to do the government’s bidding, even if the judge tells Apple to do so.Whether the company’s engineers, responsible for creating the high level of encryption in its devices, would be willing to design the workaround that would unlock the phone could present an additional hurdle to compliance. If they will not, then the company may have no choice but to defy an order. Then the court would have to decide whether Apple can be held responsible for the conduct of its employees.Unlike an individual who can be sent to jail, if Apple were it to be held in civil contempt, it would face only a fine. Coming up with a monetary penalty large enough to have any real impact on a company as big and profitable as Apple could be difficult to achieve.In 2015, Apple reported net income of more than $53 billion. So a penalty of $10 million a day for the next year would take away only about 7 percent of its annual profit, an amount the company may be willing to pay to advance its position regarding the privacy of customer data. And any penalty might be tax deductible as a business expense.A large fine like that would be much more likely to fall in the criminal rather than civil contempt category, requiring a full-scale trial to establish that Apple should be punished, rather than taking the more expedited civil route. In United Mine Workers v. Bagwell, the Supreme Court found that a $52 million fine assessed against a union for violating an injunction related to a strike constituted a criminal sanction, so there are limits on how much the court can assess against Apple as part of a civil contempt.Whatever the merits of the Justice Department’s argument to unlock the iPhone, there will be an issue about whether the court can effectively coerce Apple into providing the assistance demanded.It may be that there is no effective “or else” when taking on the world’s most valuable company, especially one that is willing to take a defiant position that enhances its popularity.Advertisement