By LESLIE PICKERMARCH 21, 2016
Marriott International sweetened its bid for Starwood Hotels and Resorts Worldwide with more cash, greater synergies and a higher breakup fee. That still may not be enough to deter the Anbang Insurance Group of China and its co-investors from making a counteroffer — yet again.Anbang, with the New York private equity firm J. C. Flowers and the China-based Primavera Capital, swooped in with a bid for Starwood last week, as the hotel operator was finishing the deal it signed with Marriott in November. That set Marriott in motion, with a new offer disclosed on Monday.“The proposal we signed last night is not as good for us as the deal we signed and announced in November,” said Arne Sorenson, president and chief executive of Marriott, in an interview with CNBC on Monday. “The deal we got in November, in retrospect, maybe was just too good a deal.”Starwood deemed Marriott’s new proposal as superior to the one brought last week by a consortium led by Anbang. Shareholders would receive $21 a share in cash and 0.80 share of Marriott for each share of Starwood, valuing Starwood at $79.53 a share, or $13.6 billion, as of the market close on Friday.AdvertisementIn the agreement that Marriott reached with Starwood in November, Starwood shareholders were to receive 0.92 share of Marriott stock as well as $2 in cash a share. Based on Friday’s close, that initial offer would have been worth $11.7 billion, or 16 percent lower.AdvertisementLast week’s offer by the Chinese consortium of $78 a share, would be worth about $13.2 billion.Marriott’s proposed deal may not be on the table for long. The Chinese insurer and its co-investors may come back with another offer, analysts say, as they seek to diversify outside of China by buying assets in the United States. Morningstar said Anbang and its private equity partners would have to offer around $86 a share to be competitive with Marriott’s latest proposal.The structure of the new bid does not do much to deter a rival suitor, analysts said. Starwood agreed to increase the value of the breakup fee payable to Marriott to only $450 million from the $400 million from the original agreement. Starwood also agreed to reimburse Marriott for its financing-related costs, up to $18 million.“The breakup fee leaves the door open,” said Dan Wasiolek, an analyst at Morningstar, in a phone interview. “Starwood, that’s what they have to do on behalf of their shareholders, is leave the door open the best they can until the process is complete.”On CNBC, Mr. Sorenson said that he did not tell Starwood that Monday’s offer was the final one. But Marriott does not have much room to stretch.It is unable to offer much more cash because it wants to keep its investment-grade rating, said Mr. Wasiolek of Morningstar. It can increase its bid a little bit, but it is going to have to come from equity, he said. This is close to the final offer, he said.“We’re in overtime in the March Madness competition here for the Starwood title, with a minute or two left on the clock,” Mr. Wasiolek said.A representative for the Chinese consortium declined to comment on Marriott’s revised bid.Shares of Starwood gained 4.5 percent on Wednesday to $84.19. Marriott shares declined 1.2 percent to $72.30.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Traders are accounting for the additional value Starwood shareholders will receive from the previously announced spinoff of its time share business, which is to be merged with the Interval Leisure Group. That deal is worth about $5.83 a Starwood share, based on Friday’s close. Accounting for both the spinoff and the Marriott offer, Starwood shareholders would be looking at a value of $85.36.AdvertisementA combination of Marriott and Starwood, whose brands include Westin and Sheraton, would create the largest hotel company in the world, with more than 5,500 owned or franchised hotels and 1.1 million rooms around the world. The deal is expected to be neutral to adjusted earnings per share in 2017 and 2018.Over the weekend, Starwood signed up to manage two hotels in Cuba, becoming the first American company to do so in more 50 years. Mr. Sorenson was also in Cuba on Monday, alongside President Obama on his historic visit. It was there that he took the conference call with analysts to discuss the deal on Monday, and was met with a unique set of technical difficulties, as the line kept cutting out.Marriott is the best long-term partner for Starwood, Harry C. Curtis, an analyst at Nomura, wrote in a note on Monday. If they go through with the transaction, the combined company will have the “largest hotel platform, which should help it capture more market share, as loyalty program conscious travelers are drawn to the most flexible and broadest system,” he said.Marriott said that it expected to achieve $250 million in annual cost savings two years after closing, compared with the $200 million in savings it had estimated in the original merger agreement.The combination of Marriott and Starwood has received the major regulatory approvals, but the companies must still obtain shareholder approvals. If the companies receive enough votes, they expect the deal to close in the middle of this year. Starwood shareholders would own about 34 percent of the combined company.Lazard and Citigroup are providing financial advice to Starwood, while Deutsche Bank is advising Marriott. Cravath, Swaine & Moore is providing legal advice to Starwood, while Gibson, Dunn & Crutcher is advising Marriott.A version of this article appears in print on March 22, 2016, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Marriott Raises Its Bid for Starwood to Woo It From Chinese Investors.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.