By KATIE THOMAS and ANDREW POLLACKMARCH 21, 2016
As recently as last summer, J. Michael Pearson styled himself as a brash and bold executive with a new way of thriving in pharmaceuticals: buying other companies, slashing costs and sharply raising prices on undervalued drugs.The strategy had worked for years, as Valeant Pharmaceuticals, the company he ran, became an investor favorite. But by the end of 2015, Mr. Pearson and his company’s strategy were emblematic, on Capitol Hill and elsewhere, of high drug prices and the pharmaceutical industry’s worst impulses.On Monday, Mr. Pearson as a symbol of innovation hit a dead end, as Valeant said that he would step down as chief executive, a stunning fall from grace that could reverberate throughout the industry.The announcement was one in a series of changes made by the company, which faces a growing list of questions from both investors and regulators.AdvertisementThe company said that the activist investor William A. Ackman, the billionaire whose Pershing Square Capital Management is Valeant’s second-biggest shareholder, would join the board. In addition, Valeant said it would restate some of its earnings and asked Howard B. Schiller, a former chief financial officer, to resign from the board, accusing him of “improper conduct.”Advertisement“It’s a soap opera,” said David Maris, an analyst for Wells Fargo. “Here you have something that’s unfolding at an incredible velocity. And you have very colorful characters.”The company’s board pulled few punches about the motivations behind the moves.“I am confident that the company will be able to rebuild its reputation and thrive under new leadership,” Robert Ingram, the board chairman, said in a statement.Success may be difficult, though, since the company no longer has the money for acquisitions and has sworn off big price increases on drugs in response to public outrage. Now, some analysts suggest dismantling the empire assembled by Mr. Pearson, which stretches from contact lenses to a drug for toenail fungus.“The best thing for this company might be to sell the parts to the people who most value them,” said Erik Gordon, a business professor at the University of Michigan.Last summer, news that Mr. Pearson, 56, was stepping down would have been virtually unthinkable. The company’s stock then traded at around $250 a share, more than 18 times the price when he took over in 2008. Financial analysts encouraged more drug companies to follow Valeant’s path.Mr. Pearson started by buying small companies that few had ever heard of. His confidence, and his targets, grew over time to include bigger names like Bausch & Lomb and Salix Pharmaceuticals.After buying the companies, he would often slash their staffs and research budgets, and frequently raise the price of their drugs.AdvertisementThe blunt Mr. Pearson often said that doing one’s own research was inefficient and risky and that Valeant had an obligation to shareholders to wring the maximum profit out of each drug. If “products are sort of mispriced and there’s an opportunity, we will act appropriately in terms of doing what I assume our shareholders would like us to do,” he told analysts in a conference call last April.“He made the modern Valeant,” Mr. Maris of Wells Fargo said. “Mike was the reason for owning Valeant.”On Monday, though, the stock rose more than 7 percent.Congress and federal authorities are investigating Valeant’s drug-pricing policies as well as its ties to a mail-order pharmacy, Philidor, which it used to get around efforts of pharmacies and insurance companies to substitute cheaper generics for some of the company’s costly drugs. Valeant is also struggling to handle more than $30 billion in debt.Hillary Clinton criticized the company in a campaign ad this year. Research-oriented pharmaceutical companies have scrambled to distance themselves from Valeant, but have not been entirely successful.“We never considered Valeant to be operating in a way that was consistent with the biopharma model,” Dr. Ron Cohen, chief executive of Acorda Therapeutics and chairman of the Biotechnology Innovation Organization, said on Monday.The attention to drug prices set off by Valeant has scared investors away from pharmaceutical companies in general, he said, but also prompted an “urgent self-examination” by the industry and serious discussions with others about pricing.Mr. Pearson brought an unusual résumé to the company. He arrived at Valeant in 2008 from the consulting firm McKinsey & Company, having spent decades advising drug makers as the head of the firm’s pharmaceutical practice. He often advised them to do what he ended up doing at Valeant.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In December, with the company already in a tailspin, Mr. Pearson took a medical leave for what Valeant said was severe pneumonia. He returned three weeks ago, with the company in even worse shape. He will remain at the company until a successor is chosen.“While I regret the controversies that have adversely impacted our business over the past several months,” Mr. Pearson said on Monday, “I know that Valeant is a strong and resilient company, and I am committed to doing everything I can to ensure a smooth transition to new leadership.”AdvertisementOn Monday, the company addressed some of the questions about its financial reporting. It placed some of the blame for the bad information on “improper conduct” by its former chief financial officer, Mr. Schiller, who also served as interim chief executive this year when Mr. Pearson was on medical leave.The company said it had asked Mr. Schiller to resign from the board; Mr. Schiller has declined to do so. The company’s former corporate controller has also been placed on administrative leave, the company said.Mr. Schiller, in a statement issued Monday by the law firm Winston & Strawn, said that he had declined to resign because he had done nothing wrong.“At no time did I engage in any improper conduct that relates to any restatement of revenue the company is considering,” he said, also denying that he had given the board or auditors incorrect information.Monday’s shake-up also appeared to be a move by Mr. Ackman, one of Wall Street’s most prominent players, to rescue what has been a disastrous investment for Pershing Square, with a loss of more than $1 billion, at least on paper.Mr. Ackman has generally been a vocal supporter of both Valeant and Mr. Pearson, and even conducted a nearly four-hour-long webcast in October to defend the company as concerns about its relationship with Philidor grew.Valeant previously estimated that $58 million in sales of drugs through Philidor should not have been recognized in the second half of 2014. Those sales were booked when Valeant sold the drugs to Philidor, as a drug company would do in selling to an unrelated wholesaler or pharmacy.In December 2014, Valeant paid $100 million for an option to acquire Philidor with no additional payment. At that point, it switched to booking the revenue only when Philidor sold the drugs to patients, as a company would do for a consolidated subsidiary.AdvertisementBut evidence has emerged that the relationship between Valeant and Philidor was extremely close even before the option agreement was signed, suggesting that sales should not have been booked when the drugs went to Philidor.In Monday’s announcement, Valeant reaffirmed the $58 million figure but gave some new figures for the impact on earnings.The company made clear on Monday that financial incentives played a major role.“The company has determined that the tone at the top of the organization and the performance-based environment at the company, where challenging targets were set and achieving those targets was a key performance expectation, may have been contributing factors resulting in the company’s improper revenue recognition,” it said.William Furniss, a former executive at Bausch & Lomb, the eye care company that was acquired by Valeant in 2013, said there were many lessons to be taken from Valeant’s woes.“There’s all kinds of books that are going to be written on this,” he said.A version of this article appears in print on March 22, 2016, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Shake-Up at Valeant Signals End of an Era.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.