AdvertisementSupported byBy Leslie PickerThe data and analytics providers IHS and Markit have agreed to combine in an all-stock transaction that will take IHS, which is based in Colorado, to London.IHS’s shareholders will own 57 percent of the combined company — to be known as IHS Markit — and Markit’s shareholders will own the remaining 43 percent, according to a news release on Monday. IHS Markit would have more than 50,000 customers.“This transformational merger brings together two information-rich companies to create a powerful provider of unique business intelligence, data and analytics to a broad and complementary customer base,” Jerre Stead, the IHS chairman and chief executive, said in the statement. “IHS Markit and its shareholders will benefit from enhanced product innovation to deliver strong returns across economic cycles.”Technically, the deal is a tax inversion, where an American company merges with a foreign one to lower its tax bill. However, IHS’s tax rate may not change much; it was about 20.5 percent for the year through November, and the combined company is expecting a tax rate in the low- to mid-20 percent range, according to the statement.IHS provides research and analytics to businesses and customers in the energy, transportation and technology, media and telecommunications industries. Challenges facing the energy sector, as declines in commodities prices have caused distress and bankruptcies, cut into IHS’s revenue in 2015. Nonsubscription revenue declined 27 percent, according to the company’s most recent filing. Merging with Markit, which focuses largely on the financial industry, would help IHS diversify away from energy.IHS was founded in 1959 as Information Handling Services to provide information for aerospace engineers through microfilm databases. The company grew and diversified through a series of acquisitions to become the largest commercial producer of microfilm products by 1988. It began moving its databases online in 1995 and expanded into consulting and government markets.Markit was founded 13 years ago to provide prices for credit default swaps, and it quickly garnered investments from financial firms such as JPMorgan Chase and Bank of America. The company provides pricing information on many different types of securities, as well as processes derivatives, foreign exchange and syndicated loans. Markit also creates software to help customers calculate risk.Mr. Stead was the chief executive of IHS from 2006 to 2013 and returned in June as chief executive after the resignation of Scott Key.Mr. Stead said on a conference call Monday that he began speaking with Lance Uggla, the chairman and chief executive of Markit, around the time of Markit’s $1.3 billion initial public offering in June 2014. The two met for breakfast in December for a serious discussion about what a combination of their two companies might look like. Those talks continued through the holidays and eventually reached the deal that was announced on Monday.Shares of IHS traded up 6.8 percent Monday morning, and shares of Markit rose 9.9 percent.Shareholders in IHS, which has its headquarters in Englewood, Colo., will receive 3.5566 shares of IHS Markit for each share of common stock they own. Based on Friday’s closing prices, that implies $31.13 a share of Markit, a 5.6 percent premium. The acquisition values Markit at $5.5 billion, based on 176.8 million shares outstanding.Mr. Stead will become the chairman and chief executive of IHS Markit. Mr. Uggla will be the president and a board member. Once Mr. Stead retires, on Dec. 31, 2017, Mr. Uggla will assume the roles of chairman and chief executive at IHS Markit.The board of directors will have 11 members, of which six are designated by IHS and the rest by Markit.IHS Markit will conduct a $1 billion share repurchase program in 2017, as well as in 2018. IHS Markit will have $800 million in free cash flow and about $3.3 billion in annual revenue.“The combination will enhance cash flow and enable stronger returns of capital to shareholders,” Mr. Uggla said in the statement.The companies expect to have $125 million in cost reductions by the end of 2019, through areas like technology and real estate. The transaction will be immediately accretive to earnings, the companies said, and is expected to close during the second half of the year.IHS’s lead financial adviser was M. Klein & Company, along with Goldman Sachs. Markit’s financial adviser was JPMorgan. Weil, Gotshal & Manges provided legal advice to IHS, while Davis Polk & Wardwell gave legal counsel to Markit.Advertisement