By JASON LANGE | REUTERSMARCH 21, 2016
WASHINGTON —  Confronted with a plunge in its stock markets last year, China’s central bank swiftly reached out to the United States Federal Reserve, asking it to share its playbook from dealing with Wall Street’s “Black Monday” crash of 1987.The request came in a July 27 email from an official at the People’s Bank of China, the central bank, with a subject line: “Your urgent assistance is greatly appreciated!”In the email to a senior Fed staffer, the Chinese bank’s New York-based chief representative for the Americas, Song Xiangyan, pointed to the day’s 8.5 percent drop in Chinese stocks and said, “My Governor would like to draw from your good experience.”It is not known whether the People’s Bank of China had contacted the Fed to deal with previous incidents of market turmoil. The Chinese central bank and the Fed had no comment when reached by Reuters.AdvertisementIn a Reuters analysis last year, Fed insiders, former Fed employees and economists said that there was no official hotline between the Chinese central bank and the Fed, and that the Chinese were often reluctant to engage at international meetings.AdvertisementThe Chinese market crash led to steep declines across global financial markets, and within a few hours the Fed sent China’s central bank a trove of publicly available documents detailing the Fed’s actions in 1987.Fed policy makers started their previously scheduled two-day policy meeting the next day and took note of China’s stock sell-off, according the meeting’s minutes. Several policy makers said a Chinese economic slowdown could weigh on America.Financial market contagion from China was one of the reasons cited by the Fed in September when it put off a rate increase that many analysts had expected, a sign of how important China has become both as an industrial powerhouse and as a financial market.The email exchange, which Reuters obtained through a Freedom of Information Act request, shows how alarmed Beijing has become over the deepening financial turmoil and offers a rare insight into one of the least understood major central banks.The exchange also shows that although the two central banks have a collegial relationship, they might not share secrets even during a crisis.“Could you please inform us ASAP about the major measures you took at the time,” Mr. Song asked Steven Kamin, the director of the Fed’s International Finance Division, in the July 27 email.The message registered in Mr. Kamin’s account just after 11 a.m. in Washington. Mr. Kamin quickly replied from his BlackBerry: “We’ll try to get you something soon.”AdvertisementWhat followed five hours later was a 259-word summary of how the Fed worked to calm markets and prevent a recession after the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index tumbled 20 percent on Oct. 19, 1987.Mr. Kamin also sent notes to guide Chinese officials through the many dozens of pages of Fed transcripts, statements and reports that were attached to the email.All of the attached documents had long been available on the Fed’s website, and it is unclear whether they played a role in shaping Beijing’s actions.Mr. Kamin’s documents detail how the Fed began issuing statements the day after the Black Monday market crash, pledging to supply markets with plenty of cash so they could function.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.By the time Mr. Song wrote to Mr. Kamin, China had spent more than a month fighting a stock market slide, and many of the actions taken by the People’s Bank of China and other Chinese authorities shared the contours of the Fed’s 1987 game plan.China’s central bank had cut interest rates on June 27 in similar fashion to the Fed’s swift move to ease short-term rates in 1987.Mr. Song told Mr. Kamin that the Chinese central bank was particularly interested in the details of the Fed’s use of repurchase agreements to temporarily inject cash into the American banking system in 1987.The People’s Bank of China had increased cash injections in June and accelerated repurchase agreements in August as stocks continued to slide. The bank also eased policy on Aug. 11 by allowing a 2 percent devaluation in the renminbi.As Mr. Song and Mr. Kamin exchanged messages on July 27 and 28, other Chinese authorities were busy trying to contain the crash.AdvertisementThe July 27 plunge in the Shanghai composite index was the biggest one-day fall since 2007. The Chinese market had lost nearly a third of its value over six weeks.China’s securities regulator said on July 27 it was prepared to buy shares to stabilize the stock market and that authorities would deal severely with anyone making “malicious” bets that stocks would fall.In 1987, the Fed contacted banks directly and encouraged them to meet “legitimate funding needs” of their customers, according to Mr. Kamin’s email to Mr. Song.In addition to its pledges and cajoling, the Fed in 1987 eased collateral restrictions on Wall Street and tried to calm markets by intervening in trading earlier than normal. The United States economy continued to grow until a recession in 1990.The Chinese central bank does not have as free a hand to conduct policy as does the Fed, which answers to Congress but operates independently from the administration.The Chinese central bank’s governor, Zhou Xiaochuan, implements policies ultimately decided by political leaders in Beijing and lacks the authority to lead debate or shed light on decision-making.China’s vice finance minister told Reuters last year that Chinese supervisors needed to learn from countries like the United States.Premier Li Keqiang said last month that China’s regulators did not respond sufficiently but that China had fended off risks to the system.United States central bankers say their relative transparency helps their effectiveness and legitimacy, but open records laws also make Fed officials cautious about their communications, much of which must be made public when requested. Stanley Fischer, the Fed’s current vice chairman, has said that transparency makes it harder for policy makers to have informal discussions.AdvertisementMr. Kamin pointed out in his email that everything he was sending was publicly available.“I hope this is helpful,” he said.A version of this article appears in print on March 22, 2016, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.