AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben ProtessA former Goldman Sachs banker who pleaded guilty to taking confidential documents from a source inside the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was sentenced to probation on Tuesday, bringing to a close an episode that embarrassed the bank and the New York Fed alike.The banker, Rohit Bansal, was facing up to a year in prison after pleading guilty last year to a misdemeanor. Instead, Judge Gabriel W. Gorenstein of Federal District Court in Manhattan sentenced him to two years’ probation, 300 hours of community service and a $5,000 fine.“Rohit is pleased with the sentence and looks forward to putting this behind him and moving on with his life,” his lawyer, Scott Morvillo, said in a statement.In some ways, Goldman got the worst end of the deal. Under a settlement with New York State’s financial regulator, Goldman paid $50 million and faced new restrictions on how it handles sensitive regulatory information. The settlement with the Department of Financial Services also forced Goldman to take the rare step of acknowledging that it failed to “effectively supervise its employee.”The episode illustrated the blurred lines between Goldman and the New York Fed and raised new questions about Wall Street’s so-called revolving door.Before joining Goldman in 2014, Mr. Bansal spent several years as a regulator at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. Despite the appearance of a conflict, Mr. Bansal’s boss at Goldman assigned him to advise one of the banks he previously regulated.Soon after, Mr. Bansal received confidential government information about that bank from Jason Gross, who was still working at the New York Fed. That leak, which prosecutors described as a theft, provided Goldman a window into the Fed’s private insights about the bank.Goldman declined to comment on Tuesday, though it has previously emphasized that Mr. Bansal worked for the firm for less than three months, and that the bank “immediately began an investigation and notified the appropriate regulators” once it detected the leak. The bank, a spokesman said last year, “reviewed our policies regarding hiring from governmental institutions” and has “implemented changes to make them appropriately robust.”Preet Bharara, the United States attorney in Manhattan, filed criminal charges against both men. But following the precedent of past Fed leak cases, he agreed to charge them with misdemeanors rather than felonies.Last week, Mr. Gross was sentenced to one year of probation and 200 hours of community service, and he received a $2,000 fine.Mr. Morvillo and Savannah Stevenson, lawyers for Mr. Bansal, argued that he too should avoid prison time, in part because he “immediately accepted responsibility for his conduct and attempted to cooperate” with the government’s investigation. Their submissions to the judge included letters from a New Jersey State senator and a New York City councilman.They also noted that Mr. Bansal, a former Boy Scout, is active in the March of Dimes and other charitable initiatives.“Rohit has continued to dedicate himself to significant civic and philanthropic endeavors — volunteer activities that he has taken part in from an early age,” the lawyers said.Advertisement