By ALEXANDRA ALTERMARCH 22, 2016
Like most comedians, Kevin Hart takes a confessional tone in his stand-up. He has made intimate and often uncomfortable jokes about his father’s cocaine addiction, his mother’s death from cancer, his marriage and divorce, and his experience being a parent.Writing a memoir, then, isn’t too much of a leap. Next year, Mr. Hart will publish his memoir, “From the Hart,” with 37 Ink, an Atria Publishing Group imprint. The book will explore Mr. Hart’s childhood in Philadelphia with a drug-addicted father, and the struggles he faced when he first tried to break into stand-up.“My kids know I’m a big deal. They’re very aware. I let them know every day, I say, ‘Look, daddy’s a big deal,’” Mr. Hart said in a statement. “Now I’ll have a book out to prove it.”If Mr. Hart’s book sales follow the same trajectory as the rest of his career, his publisher stands to make a lot of money. He sells out arenas on his comedy tours, and he has performed for as many as 50,000 fans. His “What Now” tour grossed more than $100 million globally. Mr. Hart’s profile is also rising in Hollywood. This year, Universal Pictures will release a feature version of his comedy tour “What Now,” and Mr. Hart will appear in two other films, the comedy “Central Intelligence,” alongside Dwayne Johnson, and the animated film “The Secret Life of Pets.”Mr. Hart is the latest comedian to land a book deal in what has become a pitched battle among publishers for memoirs and autobiographies from prominent comics, following blockbuster sales for books by Tina Fey, Amy Poehler and Mindy Kaling, among others. This summer, Gallery Books will publish Amy Schumer’s memoir, “The Girl With the Lower Back Tattoo,” and Ecco will release Tig Notaro’s memoir “I’m Just a Person.”Dawn Davis, the vice president and publisher of 37 Ink, acquired world rights to Mr. Hart’s book, which is scheduled to be published on Father’s Day in 2017. Audible acquired rights to the audiobook, which Mr. Hart will narrate.An earlier version of this article, using information from a publicist, misspelled part of the title of Kevin Hart’s coming memoir. It is “From the Hart,” not “Heart.”A version of this article appears in print on March 24, 2016, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline: A Kevin Hart Memoir.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.