AdvertisementSupported byEconomic SceneBy Eduardo PorterShould the government push poor people to marry?The urge to do so has a long pedigree, dating perhaps as far back as 1965. When serving as a Labor Department official in the Johnson administration, Daniel Patrick Moynihan — who was later a top adviser to President Richard M. Nixon and ultimately one of the most influential Democrats in Congress as a senator from New York — argued that the surge in African-American families headed by single mothers was condemning many black children to fail in school and in life.Promoting marriage and two-parent families was part of President Bill Clinton’s welfare overhaul of 1996. His successor, George W. Bush, offered up a Healthy Marriage Initiative. The Obama administration policy quiver included marriage promotion, too.And today, when almost 40 percent of new mothers are unmarried, when one in five white children, one in four Hispanics and one in two blacks live without a father at home, fixing the American family has again acquired urgency across the political spectrum.“Marriage matters,” proclaimed a report published in December by scholars on the left and right discussing strategies to combat poverty. “Marital commitment remains the principal foundation upon which most Americans can build a stable and secure family.”And yet, after all those efforts to strengthen the bonds between mothers and fathers, husbands and wives, it is hard to resist the conclusion that much of this is misdirected, a waste of resources and time.Births out of wedlock can be sharply reduced by providing young women with access to sex education and long-term contraception, so they might delay having children until they feel ready. And instead of trying hopelessly to reconstitute the conventional family of yore, why not devote resources to improving the welfare of the families as they are?There’s no question that children generally do worse in single-parent families. They engage more in risky behavior. They drop out of high school and are more likely to end up in the criminal justice system. Research by Raj Chetty of Stanford and others have found that boys living in poor single-mother homes are particularly disadvantaged later in life.And yet despite years of research to identify how changes in family structure hurt children, there is much less agreement on the “why.”Children living with a single parent tend to do worse in life than those who grow up in a stable two-parent family. The United States has one of the highest percentage of children living without a father among advanced countries, as well as one of the highest shares of children living in poverty.Selection is clearly at work: Single mothers and the fathers of their children are generally less educated than married parents. They tend to have lesser-paying jobs and more mental health issues. They would have a tough time raising children in a healthy environment even if they stayed together.“Family disruption is not a random event,” wrote Sara McLanahan of Princeton, Laura Tach of Cornell and Daniel Schneider of the University of California, Berkeley, in a study assessing efforts to disentangle the effect of selection from that of family structure. “The characteristics that cause father absence are likely to affect child well-being through other pathways.”Then, of course, there is the issue of resources. Families headed by single mothers are poorer.Studies in Britain suggest that children in single-parent homes suffer because they are poor, or because of the shortcomings of their parents — not because their parents do not live together.Given the evidence, marriage promotion might even backfire. Encouraging a mother to stay with a father who deals in drugs, can’t hold a job and beats her can actually lead to worse problems for the children, according to Sara R. Jaffee of the University of Pennsylvania.But the strongest case against a policy to deliver strong marriages and stable families is that the government has no clue how to do that.Remember the Healthy Marriage Initiative? When MDRC, the policy evaluation organization, performed a careful evaluation of its program of marriage education for low-income married couples who had or were expecting children, it had to conclude that it “did not lead more couples to stay together.”Similarly, researchers at the National Center for Family and Marriage Research at Bowling Green State University in Ohio concluded in 2014 that there was little to show for the $600 million spent on the Healthy Marriage Initiative since 2001. Notably, the divorce rate had not budged and the marriage rate continued to decline.There is good reason to believe that it was the demise of the solid blue-collar job — squeezed out by globalization and technological change — that played the principal role in putting an end to the stable working-class family. Perhaps men with poor job prospects feel unprepared to marry. Perhaps women will not marry men who cannot provide.What seems clear is that we don’t know how to undo that dynamic. Most efforts to improve the job prospects of less-educated men do little to increase their chances of marrying.Isabel Sawhill of the Brookings Institution suggests we accept that the government cannot bring the stable two-parent family back. What it can do is encourage more responsible parenthood.Six out of 10 children born to single mothers under the age of 30 are unplanned, Ms. Sawhill notes. They come too soon, when mothers have not finished school, before they have a good job. Offering young women access to effective long-term contraception, research shows, would allow them to delay motherhood until they really want it.This sounds like a sensible approach. But there are other options to improve the lot of American families and children. We just have to look around.Marriage is increasingly unpopular around the industrialized world. Births out of wedlock have surged across the board. Yet somehow families in other rich countries have avoided the depth of dysfunction of their American peers. This is not a result of policies encouraging marriage. Rather, it is a result of policies aimed at increasing families’ and children’s well-being.In France, though marriage declined sharply over the last two decades, fewer French children than American children are overweight. Fewer French teenagers commit suicide. Far fewer French children live in poverty.Part of this might be because of cultural differences. Cohabitation out of wedlock is more stable in France. Even though fewer French children than American children live with two married parents, more live with their mothers and fathers.But culture cannot explain America’s deficits away. It is critical to keep in mind the role of the French welfare state in fostering this stability.The French government devotes about 3 percent of its total economic activity to what the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development calls family benefits. That is four times the share spent in the United States. Government transfers have typically reduced the child poverty rate to under 10 percent, according to O.E.C.D. figures. In the United States, they shave it by only a few percentage points.The point is, families at the bottom end of French society, and their children, did a better job of overcoming the economic transformations that shook the industrialized world over the last quarter-century because France’s welfare state did not let them fall that far.And when families did split up, the state doubled down: 36 percent of French children living with a nonworking single parent are poor. That sounds like a lot, but in the United States, according to O.E.C.D. statistics, it is 92 percent.If we are making policy for the sake of the children, it’s not hard to figure out who made the better call.Email: eporter@nytimes.com; Twitter: @portereduardoAdvertisement