AdvertisementSupported byBy Emily SteelViacom  reported on Thursday that its total revenue declined more than expected, by 5 percent, to $3.8 billion for the quarter that ended in September, dragged down by persistent weakness in TV advertising sales and a lackluster film slate.Domestic advertising revenue at Viacom’s television network group, which includes MTV, Nickelodeon and Comedy Central, tumbled 7 percent during the quarter, reflecting ratings declines in traditional television.Ratings across Viacom’s roster of networks declined an estimated 13 percent during the quarter, according to one analyst’s estimates based on Nielsen data. Yet ratings at some of the company’s networks — including Nickelodeon, VH1 and BET — have started to improve recently, which executives said should translate to improved advertising sales in the coming year.The broader television industry is facing major questions about how the business will adjust to a digital future. Fears of cord-cutting combined with sharp ratings declines and a weak advertising market have stoked concerns. Last week, shares in media companies plunged sharply after Time Warner reduced its profit expectations for the coming year and 21st Century Fox missed expectations for quarterly revenue.Philippe P. Dauman, chief executive of Viacom, said in a conference call on Thursday that Viacom was one of the “early birds” in experiencing that digital disruption because its television networks attract younger audiences.“That transition has now taken hold across the industry, creating disruption, but also spurring action and real momentum towards solution,” he said.Viacom shares increased about 2 percent in midday trading on Thursday.Mr. Dauman said that Viacom was trying to position itself for long-term success by trying to measure and sell the audience that watches its programs across digital outlets, not just television. It is also investing in new technology-driven advertising solutions and increasing the output of original programing.He noted that the advertising results for the quarter represented a sequential improvement from the previous quarter, when domestic advertising sales declined 9 percent, and he said that the company expected continued improvement in domestic advertising sales in the current quarter and coming year.Offsetting advertising declines in the media networks group for the quarter was a 10 percent increase in affiliate fees. As a result, total revenue in the media networks group increased 5 percent to nearly $2.8 billion.Revenue in Viacom’s filmed entertainment group tumbled 24 percent to $1 billion. Theatrical revenue declined 20 percent, as the release of the action films “Mission: Impossible — Rogue Nation,” starring Tom Cruise, and “Terminator: Genisys” faced a tough comparison to the box-office success of “Transformers: Age of Extinction” in the same period last year.Home entertainment revenue declined 54 percent. There were no releases in the quarter; last year, releases in the quarter included “Noah” and “Transformers: Age of Extinction.”Mr. Dauman pledged to increase Paramount’s output to a full 15-film slate in the coming fiscal year.Viacom’s net earnings for the quarter increased to $884 million, or $2.21 a share. That was up from $732 million, or $1.72 a share, in the same period last year. Excluding a tax benefit and other items, adjusted net earnings declined to $614 million, or $1.54 per share.Advertisement