AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Antony CurrieThe CIT Group has taken a late grip on John Thain’s pay.The company, a $7 billion lender, docked the 2015 bonus of Mr. Thain, its departing chief executive, by 30 percent because he did not successfully integrate OneWest, the California bank CIT bought last year for $3.4 billion, into the company. It’s a rare and welcome financial penalty for poor merger execution.Mr. Thain did not get the management teams and cultures to mesh quickly enough, CIT said in a filing on Thursday. The takeover received regulatory approval only toward the end of July but it was announced a year earlier, which should have given the chief executive plenty of time to get his ducks in a row.The knock contrasts with the treatment of executives at BB&T, another acquisitive bank. Its top five executives shared a $2.5 million bonus for consummating the $2.5 billion takeover of Susquehanna Bancshares last year and to “incentivize a successful integration.” Closing a deal is only the beginning. CIT’s approach, tying incentives to the actual achievement of the promised benefits of a merger, is the right one.CIT’s directors have not always kept such a careful eye on pay. They were less disciplined, for example, about Mr. Thain’s retirement pot: In December, the company changed the rules on its definition of “retirement” to allow him to keep more of the stock he has been awarded that is scheduled to vest after he leaves. That could much more than offset the dent in his bonus.Even so, it looks as though the parameters CIT’s board set for Mr. Thain gave it sensible ways to help match his pay with performance, both quantitative and qualitative. The perils of too much focus on quantitative measures are clear from Valeant Pharmaceuticals International. The company’s accounting mess has brought a share-price collapse and management turmoil. The company suggested on Monday that aggressive targets might have been a contributing factor to what it called “improper revenue recognition.”Even when a merger is sensible, making it work is a crucial part of the job for a company’s leaders. Others could usefully follow CIT’s example and ensure that deal execution factors into top executives’ pay.Antony Currie is an associate editor at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.Advertisement