AdvertisementSupported byBy Sydney EmberMIAMI BEACH — The advertising industry gathered here this week at a South Beach hotel expecting to grapple with the big questions that threaten its future in a rapidly changing media landscape.Instead, the dominant conference topic was about an issue that has dogged the industry for decades: sexism in the workplace. And two of advertising’s most powerful men found themselves on opposite sides in their assessments of how big the problem continues to be.Two weeks ago, the chief communications officer for the J. Walter Thompson agency filed a lawsuit accusing its chief executive of sexist and racist behaviors, raising new questions about gender discrimination and diversity in the industry.When asked about the lawsuit during a discussion on Tuesday, Maurice Levy, the head of the industry giant Publicis, said the accusations in the lawsuit were “a one-man mistake” and not indicative of a wider problem. On Wednesday, however, Martin Sorrell of WPP, which owns J. Walter Thompson, sounded a much different note.“There is a problem,” Mr. Sorrell said by video conference. “Maurice has a habit of ignoring the facts,” he added when asked about Mr. Levy’s comments.It was a public reflection of what many had been saying privately throughout the week. Half a century removed from the era portrayed in “Mad Men,” the industry’s trouble with gender and racial diversity has once again been thrust into the foreground.“We need to do more to promote gender equality, so the agency environment is safe, fair and something we can all be proud of,” said Nancy Hill, president and chief executive of the 4A’s, the industry trade group that hosted the conference. “Unfortunately, the alleged behavior does happen. And it happens more frequently than we think,” she added.While there are more women in advertising than in previous decades, including some in the executive ranks, the industry is still dominated by white men. There has been talk within advertising for years about improving gender and racial diversity. But more pressing challenges stemming from a widespread shift in how people consume media have dominated industry discussions lately.The lawsuit, however — filed by Erin Johnson, J. Walter Thompson’s chief communications officer, against the agency’s chief executive, Gustavo Martinez, who resigned last week — forced the industry to publicly confront the implications of the accusations.Ms. Johnson contended that Mr. Martinez subjected employees “to an unending stream of racist and sexist comments as well as unwanted touching and other unlawful conduct,” made “numerous comments about rape” and, on multiple occasions, “grabbed Johnson by the throat and by the back of her neck.”During panels and cocktail hours here, dinners and private discussions, conversations turned to gender and racial inequality. There was disbelief that the behavior described in the lawsuit could still occur in 2016.When speaking on stage, women urged the industry to address gender and racial inequality head-on. Ms. Hill said change had to start “at the top” and that men had to be a part of the conversation. “In fact, you have to start the conversation,” she said. “You have to listen to what your employees are saying. You have to believe that if they don’t look like you, they likely don’t feel or think like you.”While Mr. Sorrell said there was less gender bias at the junior level and mid-management levels, he also said that the percentage of women and other groups, including people who are gay, lesbian and transgender, at the senior level was “unacceptably low.”Wendy Clark, a top advertising executive who has worked at Coca-Cola and is now chief executive of the agency DDB North America, said the industry had to “stay restless on this discussion” and could not allow it to become part of the conversation only when something went wrong.Ms. Hill said that “every woman has at least one story” about sexism in the ad industry. She said men called her “ ‘young girl’ all the time” even though she has been working in advertising since the 1980s. In the 1990s, she said, a client suggested the only reason she had his business was because he wanted to sleep with her.Marian Salzman, the chief executive of the public relations agency Havas PR North America who also started working in the industry in the 1980s, remembered a man once told her, using crude language, not to wear Uggs boots because they were unflattering. She said she also overlooked many comments that were, in retrospect, inappropriate. She said she worried that she had not been sensitive enough to other women who had complained of inappropriate behavior, and felt she owed them an apology. “I didn’t have my antenna up,” she said.So while gasps and cheers erupted from the audience when Mr. Sorrell called out Mr. Levy’s assessment on the industry’s gender bias, their debate also subtly underscored the broader issue: It was white male executives whose comments got the most attention.Advertisement