By ALEXANDRA STEVENSONMARCH 23, 2016
For investors in William A. Ackman’s Pershing Square Capital Management, the recent ride down continues to be hair-raising.The billionaire has been fighting to turn things around for his hedge fund, which has lost billions of dollars in recent months. Pershing Square Holdings, the publicly listed entity of his firm, reported on Wednesday a year-to-date loss of 25.2 percent as of March 22.The majority of the losses stem from his very public all-in bet on Valeant Pharmaceuticals International, whose shares have been battered even with an uptick this week. So far this year, shares of Valeant are down 67 percent.Mr. Ackman’s investors have seen Valeant sink deeper into a crisis mode with a steady flow of news about a federal investigation, concern over its procedures for booking revenues, shareholder lawsuits and most recently, the disclosure that the drug company will be not be able to file its annual financial statement in time and could default on some of its $30 billion in debt. Mr. Ackman has been steadfast in his commitment to Valeant, buying more shares even as they have plunged further.AdvertisementThis week, he took one further step by joining the board of Valeant. His firm now has two representatives on the board. He has sold part of his stake in Mondelez — which until recently was his best-performing investment this year — in part to free up cash as his firm falls further into the red.AdvertisementMost investors, however, have yet to withdraw their money from Pershing Square. Around 2 percent of the firm’s $12 billion in assets were redeemed from the fund on Feb. 15, Mr. Ackman has said publicly.Investors will have another opportunity to take money out in May.Even if investors decide to leave Pershing Square, it is a long and unwieldy process because of the firm’s redemption restrictions. It can take as long as two years to get everything out of the firm. Some investors also lock up their money for intervals of one or two years. By publicly listing a hedge fund vehicle in 2014, Mr. Ackman has also secured around $3 billion in permanent capital that is not going anywhere.As for the lucrative fees that hedge fund managers get from investors for making them money, Mr. Ackman did not receive a performance fee last year and may not be able to collect one this year, based on his performance so far. These fees are based on what is called a high-water mark, which is based on the net asset value a share of $26.37 that Pershing Square Holdings reached on Dec. 31, 2014. That net asset value a share is currently $15.69.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.While the focus has been on Mr. Ackman, he is not the only investor taking heat for the bullish call on Valeant. John A. Paulson, the billionaire founder of Paulson & Company, held a conference call last Thursday to deal with investor concerns about his 13.2 million-share position in the struggling pharmaceutical company. Paulson Partners Enhanced, a fund that holds Valeant shares, is down 15.9 percent so far this year.On the call, Mr. Paulson defended his own position in Valeant. He told investors that while it could take a few years for Valeant’s share price to gain ground, he had no plans to sell his holdings. Mr. Paulson, who made billions of dollars betting against the housing market in the United States, also told his investors that he had no plans to buy more Valeant stock.But he added that if had not already bought Valeant stock he would consider buying now that the company’s share price is hovering around $30 a share. On Wednesday, the stock closed up 4.8 percent, to $33.43.One year ago, the stock was trading at $200 a share.Meanwhile, Valeant’s biggest shareholder, Ruane, Cunniff & Goldfarb, announced on Wednesday that Robert Goldfarb, its chief executive, would retire following the steep losses from Valeant.“While we have beaten the market over the past decade, through the end of 2015, our investment in Valeant has diminished a record that we have built over two generations and in which we take great pride,” the firm told investors in an emailed statement.Matthew Goldstein contributed reporting.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.