By MATTHEW GOLDSTEINMARCH 23, 2016
Joshua B. Newman, the serial fitness entrepreneur with the knack for self-promotion, is now a felon.Mr. Newman, 36, pleaded guilty in Federal District Court in Newark on Wednesday to one count of wire fraud in a scheme that authorities said bilked at least 30 investors out of about $3.1 million.The guilty plea stands in stark contrast to the portrait Mr. Newman had painted of himself as a successful investor, film producer and promoter of several CrossFit training centers in the metropolitan New York area.But Mr. Newman’s career, which he started while he was still a student at Yale, was checkered by a long list of debts and unpaid judgments to friends and acquaintances.Mr. Newman’s personal website still highlights quotations from a number of publications that have written favorably about him. The website also mentions a new online fitness training program that he recently began, even as he was negotiating a plea deal with federal prosecutors.AdvertisementProsecutors working for Paul Fishman, the United States attorney for New Jersey, said Mr. Newman’s financial troubles began after a start-up film production company he ran, Cyan Pictures, began to falter in 2011. Authorities said that beginning in 2012, Mr. Newman started making misrepresentations to investors to solicit money for various business ventures, including several CrossFit training facilities.AdvertisementCrossFit is a popular, intensive training program.Mr. Newman is not affiliated with CrossFit Inc., a fitness consulting firm based in Washington. Centers using the CrossFit brand name are independently run.At one time, Mr. Newman was a co-founder of one of the larger independently owned CrossFit centers in Manhattan.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The criminal information that Mr. Newman pleaded guilty to charged him with misleading investors to raise money for two training operations in the New York and New Jersey area, as well raising money for a professional fitness training league. Prosecutors said the scheme to defraud investors began in 2012 and continued up until April 2015, a month before agents with the Federal Bureau of Investigation arrested Mr. Newman.Mr. Newman is scheduled to be sentenced on July 19. The maximum sentence for a wire fraud conviction is 20 years in federal prison.The plea agreement signed by Mr. Newman, however, notes that he cooperated with prosecutors during the investigation and has agreed to make restitution to all of his victims. The agreement said prosecutors would recommend that the judge consider those factors in determining the appropriate sentence.But the plea deal also notes that Mr. Newman and prosecutors remain at odds over the number of victims. While authorities contend more than 10 people and possibly as many as 30 were defrauded by Mr. Newman, he maintains there were fewer than 10 victims.Mr. Newman’s lawyer, Priya Chaudhry, could not be immediately reached for comment.A version of this article appears in print on March 24, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Fitness Entrepreneur Pleads Guilty in $3.1 Million Wire Fraud Case.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.