
Breakingviews By                     
GEORGE HAY

MARCH 23, 2016
Credit Suisse is closer to making acceptable returns for shareholders — but it has taken too long a road to get there.The Swiss bank said on Wednesday that it would add an extra 800 million Swiss francs ($821 million) to what it expects to lop off its cost base by 2018 and shrink its investment bank further. The bank’s chief executive, Tidjane Thiam, could have done so five months ago, and without the embarrassing goofs that have arisen along the way.Investors now have light at the end of a tunnel from which the bank should emerge in 2018. If it can cut its costs to its new target of 18 billion francs ($18.5 billion) by then, it should get near 4.5 billion francs in earnings. That assumes bad debts stay steady, the tax rate is 30 percent, and Credit Suisse hits the 24.7 billion francs in revenue forecast by Thomson Reuters Eikon for that date.Factor in the 14.6 billion francs ($15 billion) that is now being cut from the investment bank compared with year-end, and the company as a whole should have risk-weighted assets of around 300 billion francs. Against that it would need to hold around 39 billion francs in equity to hit its 2018 capital targets. The earnings it should make by 2018 should get it to a just-about-adequate return in excess of 11 percent.It’s good that Mr. Thiam has bitten the bullet. But considering that his grand strategy was unveiled in October, he has done it late. Fixed-income revenue was down 61 percent year-on-year in the fourth quarter, and first-quarter trading revenue is now expected to be down 40 to 45 percent compared with the same period in 2015. Rotten market conditions didn’t help, but illiquid assets that Credit Suisse remained in helped push the investment bank to almost $1 billion of losses.Mr. Thiam said that he was not aware of the extent of the illiquid positions in October. His last job running the British insurer Prudential also started with some wobbles from which he subsequently more than recovered. This new strategy leaves the distinct impression that the bank is heading in the right direction, but from the back foot.George Hay is European financial editor at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »