
Deal Professor By                     
STEVEN DAVIDOFF SOLOMON

MARCH 23, 2016
Howard B. Schiller, the former chief financial officer and a current board member of Valeant Pharmaceuticals International, refuses to leave quietly, and a quirk in the laws makes it likely that he will be around a bit longer.Valeant’s board has accused him of “improper conduct” related to a pending Valeant accounting restatement. Mr. Schiller has stood his ground. He has not only denied the charges but has refused to resign from the Valeant board.It makes for an uncomfortable situation at the struggling drug maker. But Valeant is stuck.As you may recall, Valeant got a head start as part of the first wave of tax inversion deals in 2010, moving its place of incorporation from Delaware to British Columbia, Canada, through a merger with a rival drug maker. At the time, shareholders seemingly cheered this move to lower the company’s taxes. This advantage allowed Valeant to engage in a robust acquisitions strategy that doubled its size.Unfortunately, shareholders did not appreciate that they were buying into a different governance system. In some respects, this is a not a significant issue for Valeant. The Canadian system is broadly more shareholder-friendly than the American one, limiting takeover defenses such as the poison pill, for example.AdvertisementThe Canadian system is also broadly similar to the United States in terms of fiduciary duties, though the potential for liability is a bit broader.Although the law is more favorable to shareholders, its foreignness will make it a bit more difficult for Valeant’s mostly American shareholders to navigate this morass. And it will mean that the litigation over Valeant’s mess is not likely to focus on whether the board breached its fiduciary duties. There is just not the system for shareholder litigation in Canada that we have here (make your own judgments on that one).AdvertisementInstead, you will get regular stock-drop securities lawsuits. The irony, of course, is that the hedge funds that now have Valeant board seats, ValueAct Capital and Pershing Square Capital Management, will now be some of the biggest possible beneficiaries of this litigation (which, if they win, will be paid in part by the company, highlighting the sometime absurdity of securities litigation).One thing that is broadly similar between Canada and the United States is the process for removing directors. For companies incorporated in Delaware (where most public American companies are incorporated), a director on a nonstaggered board can be removed at any time with or without cause. But only the shareholders can effect a removal. They must act at either the annual meeting or, if permitted, at a special meeting or by written consent.There is the possibility of a court doing this, but Valeant would have to show that Mr. Schiller posed an immediate danger to the company by remaining a director.The rule is similar in Canada. A Valeant director can be removed only by shareholders either acting at the annual meeting or by special resolution.And so Valeant is stuck, at least until its next annual meeting, which is likely to be in May.Mr. Schiller is acting in his best interests. By staying, he has a bargaining chip with the board. He will want to make sure that Valeant honors the arrangements to defend him in litigation.It is not going to be easy for him, however. Mr. Schiller (and Valeant’s now departing chief executive, J. Michael Pearson) may face pay clawback actions. Valeant has a policy that looks back three years for clawbacks if “the company materially restates or adjusts its financial statements.” Under the policy, Valeant is required to show that the executive’s “knowing or intentional fraudulent or illegal misconduct is the basis, at least partially, for the restatement.” This is a high hurdle, but one that Valeant may at least try to clear to show it is looking to penalize Mr. Schiller, particularly in light of Valeant’s statement that there was “improper conduct.”AdvertisementThere also is the possibility of a clawback by the Securities and Exchange Commission. There are two sets of federal clawback rules, those in the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, which look back one year, and those in the Dodd-Frank Act, which go back three years and cover a broader array of misstatements. In either case, the clawback applies only to incentive pay that is related to the accounting misstatement. The S.E.C. has yet to adopt the Dodd-Frank rules and so would have to act under the Sarbanes-Oxley ones . Nonetheless, the S.E.C. can still bring its own suit for accounting fraud beyond the clawback issue.It all means that Mr. Schiller will be busy.Valeant’s board will try to function as best as it can. It is an odd board – it now has three hedge fund representatives on it, and the rest are primarily finance types. It is hard not to see them focusing on some financial solution to Valeant’s mess, including a breakup.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.All eyes are focused on whether Valeant will file its audited financial statements in time to prevent a default on its debt. These types of defaults happen (not often, but often enough). You typically just get the debt holders to waive the default for a fee. This is likely to happen here, but things are so tumultuous for Valeant, anything is possible.One of Valeant’s hedge fund directors is a top corporate lawyer, Stephen Fraidin, formerly a partner at Kirkland & Ellis and now at Pershing Square as vice chairman. Valeant will need him to deal with all its problems, including Mr. Schiller. For most decisions, the board will probably form a special committee that excludes Mr. Schiller. And then when nominations come for the next election in May, he will be excluded.Still, it is going to be a long few months.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »