
In Debt By                     
STEPHEN J. LUBBEN

NOV. 12, 2015
The ratings agency Fitch downgraded the Chesapeake Energy Corporation’s issuer default rating last week to BB- from BB. At the same time, Fitch upgraded the rating on the company’s bank loan to BB+ from BB.The downgrade is easily explained, given that the energy industry has been rocked by a steep slide in oil and natural gas prices. In announcing the downgrade, Fitch said the move reflected its “expectation that Chesapeake’s cash flow, liquidity, and leverage profiles will be notably weaker than previously forecast due to persistently low oil and gas price realizations and heightened future reliance on asset sales to fund cash flow gaps.”But what about the upgrade in the bank loan? That seems a bit confusing. How can one company be downgraded and upgraded at the same time?The credit line was first obtained less than a year ago, when Chesapeake announced it as “a new five-year, $4.0 billion senior unsecured revolving credit facility.” But in late September, the unsecured loan became a secured loan.AdvertisementThat bumped the loan up to a higher priority in the capital structure, meaning that the bank lenders will get paid before Chesapeake’s bondholders in the event of a bankruptcy or other restructuring of the company’s debt. That explains Fitch’s decision to upgrade this specific piece of debt, while at the same time downgrading the broader company.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In a report issued this week, Fitch noted that senior secured loans have an average return in bankruptcy of 80 percent, which of course means that many loans offer a much better return than that. It is the reality of modern corporate finance that distressed companies often enter bankruptcy with all of their assets pledged to senior lenders, who then tend to do quite well in the bankruptcy case, while unsecured creditors barely obtain anything.AdvertisementLet’s be clear: There is no indication that Chesapeake is headed for bankruptcy. And I’m sure Chesapeake’s communications department would like to underline that several times.Instead, Fitch’s rating actions simply illustrate how it happens that many companies enter bankruptcy with the capital structures we now see; it is the result of a structural change that happens well before bankruptcy is ever mentioned.And Fitch’s simultaneous moves to both raise and lower the credit ratings illustrate how much this is something of a zero-sum game. The liquidity a borrower gets from its bank lenders comes at the cost of greater risk to the junior creditors.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »