
Deal Professor By                     
STEVEN DAVIDOFF SOLOMON

MARCH 24, 2016
Starboard Value’s announcement that it has nominated a full slate of directors to replace the Yahoo board means one thing: The race is on to sell Yahoo. The only question now is whether it happens before or after Yahoo’s annual meeting.Starboard has acted forcefully, putting up a slate to replace every single director. Typically, hedge funds nominate only a short slate — two or three directors — but given the state of Yahoo, this was not an option.For good measure, Starboard issued a letter that said mean things about the Yahoo board. For example, Starboard said it was “extremely disappointed with Yahoo’s dismal financial performance, poor management execution, egregious compensation and hiring practices, and general lack of accountability and oversight by the board.”But really, after all these years of investors, competitors and commentators treating Yahoo as a football to kick around, aren’t we all at this point?AdvertisementTo be fair, the company is trying. It is adding new two new board members, embarking on new businesses and trying to give the chief executive, Marissa Mayer, room to succeed on her changing business plans, but patience has certainly worn thin.AdvertisementThe comparison will be drawn between Starboard’s contest at Darden Restaurants and this one. In that contest Starboard proposed replacing the entire Darden board after the board voted to sell the Red Lobster chain against the wishes of Starboard and other hedge funds that wanted to spin the company off with the Olive Garden chain.Shareholder vengeance was swift. Darden’s chief executive, Clarence Otis Jr., was ousted and the entire board was replaced. Olive Garden, it should be noted, has had a nice turnaround since then — there is gold in those breadsticks.)But it’s not quite the same situation. There you had an entrenched, longtime, imperious C.E.O. who did not seem to be paying much attention to the core business and seemed more focused on drawing a big salary. Darden appeared to make no attempt to even speak with shareholders (at least with those from outside the company). The fight at Darden was over how to break up the company, but for Yahoo it is simply about the sale process.Here, Ms. Mayer is certainly listening, and though her salary is big she is certainly working hard to effect a turnaround. The problem is that she may be a great product engineer, but that hasn’t produced success at Yahoo, at least not yet. Time has run out, though. It ran out when Yahoo itself changed its mind about its direction and decided to start a full sale process. At the time, Yahoo left open the option of being independent.But the directors’ nominations by Starboard cement Yahoo’s fate. Now, there is little doubt that Yahoo will be sold.Yahoo’s board is likely to be unseated in any contest. Indeed, one suspects that the reason the talks broke down is that Starboard, knowing its good hand, demanded that a majority of the board go.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.So this is all coming down to whether the board can cut a deal before a shareholder meeting, which will most likely occur sometime in June.(You may recall, however, that Yahoo postponed its meeting in 2008 when it was faced with a hostile bid by Microsoft, so it may try to buy a month or two by setting the meeting in July or August. At this point, why not? It is likely to lose the proxy contest anyway.)AdvertisementIt’s a silly situation. You have Yahoo directors trying to run an auction and reach a deal before they are thrown out. You have a hedge fund racing to unseat the board so it can cut the same deal. What is separating the two is that one group, the hedge fund investors, doesn’t trust the other, Yahoo’s current directors, to cut a good deal. In Darden’s case, the argument was about what assets to sell and to whom.It’s not surprising — Yahoo’s board has had a trust problem for years, one aggravated by perceived misdeeds over its possible sale to Microsoft eight years ago. When Yahoo announced the change in its spinoff plans, I thought that would buy the company another year or so — Yahoo had listened to shareholders after all.But I underestimated the trust issue. And now that trust problem is hurting the company big time. The chatter among many industry participants is that Yahoo is not taking the sale process seriously. This is of course just gossip and should be dismissed, but it illustrates the level of distrust in the market.Still, this is something that should be settled, perhaps with Starboard getting some participation in the buyout process. Certainly, the three different investment banks Yahoo hired to run its sale process can help.But as with many things in the world, just because the path is easy and visible, doesn’t mean it will be taken. Yahoo the company remains a pawn in its battle.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »