AdvertisementSupported byBy Chad Bray and Liz MoyerA thirst for revenue “at all costs” drove traders at Credit Suisse to take large, risky positions, catching top executives off guard and forcing them to accelerate cost-cutting over the next three years, the bank’s chief executive said on Wednesday.Credit Suisse is also planning to shrink its investment bank further. The steps announced on Wednesday are part of an effort by the chief executive, Tidjane Thiam, to turn around the Swiss banking giant in a difficult market.Trading conditions have been particularly unfavorable over the last few months and did not improve much in the first quarter, as markets around the world reeled. Credit Suisse, which has large operations in New York and London, said part of the problem in its trading results was “outsized” positions in risky and hard-to-sell securities.During a conference call with analysts on Wednesday, Mr. Thiam said the size of the positions on the bank’s trading book “was a surprise for a number of people and was not a widely known fact.” Top executives, including himself, became aware of them only in January, months after they first outlined a plan to refocus the company on less volatile businesses.“It’s unfortunate. And I think it’s also indicative of an attitude to risk that has to change,” he said in the call Wednesday, adding that “there have been consequences.”But he said top executives were “confident that, going forward, there are no issues of that nature remaining in the portfolio that are not identified.”At a conference later Wednesday in Zurich, Mr. Thiam said that traders did not act improperly, but that the limits on the positions kept being raised over time.The bank, based in Zurich, said it planned to eliminate 2,000 jobs in the trading arm of its investment bank as part of 6,000 job cuts across the company. It also said it would exit some businesses.The lender employed about 48,000 people worldwide at the end of last year.Credit Suisse said on Wednesday that it expected trading revenue to be down as much as 45 percent in the first quarter, compared with the same period last year. The bank also said that it expected further write-downs of $346 million related to the business in the first quarter.Referring to the trading arm of its investment bank, Mr. Thiam said in a news release that “the combination of a high and inflexible cost base, exposure to illiquid inventory in fixed-income, historically low levels of client activity and challenging market conditions has led to disappointing financial results.”“In this context, we have taken immediate action to reduce outsized positions in activities not consistent with our new strategy and systematically reduced our exposures,” he added.The bank’s holdings of American collateralized loan obligations, which are bundles of loans, ballooned to $840 million as of the end of the fourth quarter, and its holdings of distressed credits were $2.87 billion.Since then, Credit Suisse has cut its holdings of collateralized loan obligations by 70 percent and its holdings of distressed credits by 28 percent. It wrote down another $64 million related to reducing its stakes in collateralized loan obligations and $99 million related to distressed credit in the first quarter.In an interview with Bloomberg television on Wednesday, Mr. Thiam said the problems in the investment bank were connected to the pursuit of revenue “at all costs.”He said the positions in question generated a lot of revenue for the group, so the traders were reluctant to cut them. The bank previously reduced its holdings of the same type of securities, but the positions were increased again “without the understanding of many key decision makers,” he said.“If your costs are too high, and you’re not bringing them down, you will lead a revenue-driven strategy,” he said in the interview.Credit Suisse also said that it would reduce its so-called risk-weighted assets in the global markets business to $60 billion by the end of this year, from its original target of $83 billion to $85 billion.Banks in Europe and the United States, where Credit Suisse has a presence, have been trying to make their trading operations smaller and more focused, in part because of new regulations that make it more expensive to be in certain types of businesses.“You can’t underestimate the effect of the regulatory environment,” said Spencer Mindlin, an analyst at the data and research firm the Aite Group. “All the banks are feeling the pressure on costs, and the regulators are really pushing them.”Mr. Thiam, the former chief executive of the British insurer Prudential, joined Credit Suisse in July. A few months later, he unveiled an ambitious plan to overhaul the lender by shrinking its investment bank and placing greater emphasis on its wealth management business, particularly in Asia and in other emerging markets.But turbulent markets have weighed on Credit Suisse’s results, sending the bank last year to its first annual loss since 2008.On Wednesday, Mr. Thiam said that the Swiss bank was aiming for overall cost cuts of 4.3 billion Swiss francs, or about $4.4 billion, by the end of 2018, up from the target of 3.5 billion francs that was announced as part of its strategic plan in October.The lender expects to reduce costs by about 1.7 billion francs this year, Mr. Thiam said. The bank has already made about 2,800 of the expected 6,000 job cuts.Credit Suisse also said it planned to exit several businesses that were not part of its new strategy, including distressed debt and trading of European securitized products.Bonuses in the bank’s trading division were cut 35 percent, and about one-third of the employees in the group did not get any bonus. Mr. Thiam said he asked Credit Suisse to cut his bonus 40 percent. Executive compensation for last year will be disclosed by the bank on Thursday.Credit Suisse is also lowering the amount of compensation that can be deferred in any given year.“Our efforts aim at putting Credit Suisse in a position to generate capital and grow profitably in the medium and long term,” Mr. Thiam said. “The measures we are taking to strengthen our capital base and reduce our operating costs will improve our resilience and flexibility.”Advertisement