
Breakingviews By                     
JENNIFER SABA

MARCH 24, 2016
Starboard Value is going nuclear.Starboard, an activist hedge fund, wants to replace all of Yahoo’s directors with its handpicked slate. The fund, which is run by Jeffrey Smith, is correct that the Internet company’s performance has been dismal under its chief executive, Marissa Mayer. But failure to secure control of the board could hobble Starboard’s attempt to force Yahoo to focus on selling its core Internet and advertising business.Mr. Smith’s firm deserves credit for backing its bark with bite. The investor holds almost 2 percent of Yahoo and has been highly critical of company blunders like its $1 billion acquisition of Tumblr in 2013, which amounted to little more than a huge write-down.It doesn’t help that Yahoo’s market share in its main business, advertising, keeps slipping. Yahoo’s total digital ad revenue is forecast to drop nearly 14 percent, to $2.8 billion this year, according to the research firm eMarketer. Its share of search and display is set to drop below 2 percent worldwide.Ms. Mayer has thrown together a spaghetti bowl of options and strategies to try to fix the company. These include a possible sale of its Internet and ad business, selling its assets in Yahoo Japan, and a road map that seems to be going nowhere to fix the struggling company.AdvertisementGranted, she was handed a difficult task that none of her predecessors were able to manage. And shareholders haven’t exactly suffered since Ms. Mayer took the helm in 2012: The total return on the stock is nearly 120 percent, according to Thomson Reuters data. That’s because of the rise in Yahoo’s Alibaba stake, which now accounts for most of Yahoo’s market value.Starboard may be so emboldened to replace the Yahoo board because it succeeded with a similar strike against Darden Restaurants. But that was a much smaller company and the activist had a bigger stake.AdvertisementMs. Mayer is a beneficiary of an earlier activist attack on Yahoo. The proxy fight that Daniel Loeb’s Third Point hedge fund began in 2012 ended up installing her as boss — after the fund targeted just four board seats. Starboard may discover that a more focused aim works better.Jennifer Saba is a columnist for Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »