By ALEXANDRA STEVENSONMARCH 24, 2016
The United States government has weighed in on the legal battle between Argentina and a group of New York hedge funds, lending its support to the struggling country and dealing a setback to the investors.In a “friend of the court” or amicus curiae, brief filed on Wednesday at the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in New York, the Justice Department said it supported an American federal judge’s decision to lift an injunction that had prevented Argentina from raising new money in the bond markets or paying its creditors.After his recent visit to Cuba, President Obama traveled to Buenos Aires, where he held high-level talks with Argentina’s president, Mauricio Macri — the first in 20 years between leaders of the two countries.“The United States has significant foreign policy interests in support of a swift resolution of this long-running litigation,” the Justice Department said in the brief.AdvertisementIt is a move that will increase the pressure on a group of holdout bondholders that refused to take part in two debt restructurings by Argentina after it defaulted on $100 billion of debt in 2001. The appeals court has often deferred to opinions of the American government.AdvertisementOn Feb. 28, Argentina agreed to pay $4.65 billion to four hedge funds in a deal that looked poised to end a 12-year battle that began when the hedge funds sued Argentina, seeking full repayment of their defaulted bonds. The funds, led by Paul E. Singer’s firm, NML Capital, were the last group of major investors to reach an agreement.But that was not the end. NML Capital objected to a Feb. 19 ruling by Judge Thomas P. Griesa of Federal District Court for the Southern District of New York that would lift the injunction, which had locked Argentina out of international markets. Judge Griesa set the condition that Argentina must repeal laws that prevented it from making payments to the holdout investors and make full payments to the bondholders that settled by Feb. 29.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Argentina requested that the injunction be lifted after it made an offer to pay $6.5 billion to settle lawsuits from other holdout bondholders on Feb. 5.Complicating matters, there is another group of bondholders not included in the $4.65 billion deal between Argentina and the four hedge funds who have argued that they will get far worse terms if they agree to Argentina’s $6.5 billion proposal.NML Capital appealed Judge Griesa’s ruling, and the matter has since been held up because the appeals court stayed the ruling.In Argentina, the newly elected president, Mr. Macri, has been working to repair relations with the international financial world, which has largely shunned Argentina for more than a decade. The lower house of Argentina’s legislature has approved the holdout debt deals, and the bill is being weighed by the Senate, which is expected to vote by March 30.Since the inauguration of Mr. Macri in December, “Argentina has taken significant steps to normalize its relations with its creditors,” the United States said in the brief, adding that the lifting of the injunction is “in the public interest.”A spokesman for NML Capital declined to comment.A version of this article appears in print on March 25, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: In Blow to Hedge Funds, U.S. Sides With Argentina on Debt.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.