AdvertisementSupported byBy Emily SteelApple’s ambitions to go head to head with Netflix and create its own lineup of exclusive movies and TV shows has long been the subject of much chatter and speculation.But its first original TV project — a nonscripted series about apps — might sound more like a marketing campaign than a blockbuster production.Apple announced on Thursday that it was working with the entertainer Will.i.am and two veteran TV executives, Ben Silverman and Howard T. Owens, on a new show that will spotlight the app economy.“One of the things with the app store that was always great about it was the great ideas that people had to build things and create things,” Eddy Cue, Apple’s senior vice president of Internet software and services, said in an interview.Details about the production are scant, and it was unclear how directly the show would promote or refer to Apple’s own app store. Executives declined to discuss specifics, such as financing, title, timeline, storylines, episode length or how people will watch the show.The series represents Apple’s first original effort outside the music category, where it has released programming such as Taylor Swift’s 1989 world tour, a docu-series with Vice about the local music scene and exclusive video interviews with artists like Adele.Mr. Cue said that the new series did not signal a broader ambition by the company to greatly bolster its presence in original productions and streaming video. Last year, Apple was rumored to be exploring options for original programing and held talks with a number of big TV companies about offering a streaming television service.“This doesn’t mean that we are going into a huge amount of movie production or TV production or anything like that,” Mr. Cue said. He added that the company would continue to explore exclusive projects similar to the series about apps or its push into music programming.The new app show came about after Mr. Silverman brought the idea to Apple. Mr. Silverman, who is an executive producer of the TV series “Jane the Virgin,” “Marco Polo” and “Flaked,” worked with Mr. Cue nearly a decade ago when he was an executive producer of  “The Office,” which was made available on iTunes.“We thought it was perfectly tailored for Apple,” Mr. Cue said.Advertisement