AdvertisementSupported byBy Chad BrayLONDON — Tidjane Thiam, the new chief executive of Credit Suisse, was paid 4.57 million Swiss francs, or about $4.7 million, in his first six months on the job as he undertook an ambitious plan to turn around the Swiss banking giant.As part of its annual report on Thursday, Credit Suisse said that Mr. Thiam, who joined the bank in July, received a salary of 1.58 million francs and so-called variable compensation, or a bonus, of 2.86 million francs in cash and deferred shares. The shares will vest in three years. He also got a small amount for pensions and other benefits.Mr. Thiam asked that his bonus for the year be reduced by 40 percent, reflecting the company’s weaker financial performance, the lender said.As a result of turbulent markets in the fourth quarter and heavy restructuring costs, Credit Suisse last year fell to its first annual loss since 2008.Mr. Thiam also received a replacement reward of shares to compensate him for pay he gave up by leaving the British insurer Prudential, where he was chief executive. As of March 17, those shares were worth about 9.6 million francs.By comparison, Sergio P. Ermotti, the UBS chief executive, saw his compensation increase 28 percent as the Swiss bank more than doubled its annual profit in 2015. He received total compensation of 14.3 million francs last year.Over all, the bonus pool at Credit Suisse declined 11 percent, to 2.92 billion francs, in 2015.Mr. Thiam is seeking to reshape Credit Suisse, which is based in Zurich, by shrinking its investment bank and placing greater emphasis on its wealth management business, particularly in Asia and in other emerging markets.On Wednesday, Mr. Thiam said that executives had been caught off guard by the size of large, risky positions taken in its trading business, forcing them to accelerate the bank’s cost-cutting drive and to further shrink the investment bank.As part of those efforts, the bank said it would cut about 2,000 jobs from its trading arm and would exit additional business lines.Credit Suisse has already made 2,800 of 6,000 expected job cuts across the company. The lender employed about 48,000 people worldwide at the end of last year.Advertisement