By LESLIE PICKERMARCH 24, 2016
TiVo, the digital video recorder company that popularized the DVR and revolutionized “time shifting” and fast-forwarding through advertising, is in advanced negotiations to be sold to Rovi, according to people briefed on the talks.The deal would merge TiVo and Rovi, which is one of the largest owners of patents for digital entertainment devices. Shareholders of TiVo would receive a combination of cash and stock, these people said, though the exact price was still being negotiated. After the deal, shareholders of TiVo, which has a market value of $750 million, would probably own about 30 percent of the combined company, these people said. Rovi’s market value is about $1.7 billion.The transaction would end the independence of TiVo, a perennial takeover target whose suitors were said to have included Apple, Google and Microsoft.Rovi, a lesser-known company, may win the prize that is TiVo as a result of an activist investor, Glenn W. Welling of Engaged Capital. Mr. Welling successfully won two seats on the board of Rovi last year. Since then, he pushed the company to re-evaluate its strategy and pressed it to seek a merger with TiVo, these people said.AdvertisementA spokesman for TiVo declined to comment; a spokeswoman for Rovi did not respond to a request seeking comment after business hours. Mr. Welling’s spokesman said he was unavailable.AdvertisementPeople briefed on the talks warned that the negotiations were at a sensitive stage and that it was still possible a deal could falter.TiVo’s shares rose more than 23 percent on the report, while Rovi’s stock fell 1.3 percent on Thursday.Rovi was formed after Macrovision acquired Gemstar, which made interactive program guides that help consumers navigate shows on television, and renamed the company in 2009. Those guides, which are used by about 18 million TV subscribers worldwide, made up slightly less than half of Rovi’s $526 million in revenue last year; the rest was derived from licensing intellectual property. Rovi had traditionally counted TiVo as a top competitor.Together, the two companies have more than 6,000 issued or pending patents, which have become a critical defense for them against larger tech and media giants.TiVo is suing Samsung for patent infringement of its DVRs. To date, TiVo has received cash and future revenue of about $1.6 billion from this type of litigation, the company said in a filing this week.Rovi, on the other hand, lost to Netflix in a highly public lawsuit over five patents related to over-the-top video, which sent the stock plummeting last July.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.TiVo rose to prominence in the early 2000s, with its name becoming synonymous with the act of recording live television and watching it later. The number of stand-alone devices peaked at the end of 2007, when 1.74 million units represented 6 percent of the DVR market share, according to the Leichtman Research Group, which focuses on media data.But TiVo’s dominance in DVR did not last long. Satellite and cable providers soon incorporated DVR capabilities as an option for their subscribers, and it became less popular to buy the TiVo stand-alone device. As a result, TiVo partnered with service providers, such as DirectTV, for additional sources of revenue. The rise of digital media companies like Netflix and Hulu have become yet another source of competition for TiVo.AdvertisementToday, TiVo’s market share remains below 2 percent, Leichtman’s data showed.“They set the fuse to DVR but in many ways, they were not the beneficiaries of it,” said Bruce Leichtman, principal analyst at Leichtman Research. “Consumers made their decision; they saw this as a feature but not as a product.”Rovi’s shares have soared more recently after the company renewed several large licensing deals, but TiVo’s has gone in the other direction. TiVo is trading at half the level it was in August, largely because of investor concerns about competition.TiVo is in the process of searching for a new chief executive, which appears to have been a catalyst for Mr. Welling and Rovi to pursue the deal. Tivo’s 11-year chief executive, Thomas S. Rogers, stepped down from the post in November while remaining as nonexecutive chairman. The company’s chief financial officer, Naveen Chopra, is acting as the company’s chief executive on an interim basis.Mr. Welling had started Engaged in 2012 after working under Ralph V. Whitworth at Relational Investors, until that fund was wound down earlier in the year. Rovi caught Mr. Welling’s eye shortly after he founded Engaged, building up his stake and then starting a proxy fight a year ago for director seats and strategic changes. He now owns a 2.7 percent of Rovi, or 2.25 million shares, according to data from S&P Capital IQ.Engaged focuses on medium-size companies with market valuations below $8 billion, and has focused on a range of companies, including the smoothie retailer Jamba and Outerwall, which owns RedBox, an inexpensive DVD rental provider.A version of this article appears in print on March 25, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: TiVo Is Said to Be in Merger Talks With Rovi, to Form a Patent Powerhouse.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.