
Another View By                     
JASON N. ADER and


ERIC JACKSON

MARCH 24, 2016
Jason N. Ader is the chief executive and Eric Jackson the managing director of SpringOwl Asset Management.We were surprised to learn that two Senate Democrats – Tammy Baldwin of Wisconsin and Jeff Merkley of Oregon – have introduced a bill that would restrict shareholder rights. The bill was co-sponsored by Senators Elizabeth Warren and Bernie Sanders. Would these same Democrats favor restricting voter rights to make it more difficult for voters to express their views? Then why restrict shareholder rights?The bill seeks to shorten the number of days to two from 10 that shareholders have to disclose that they have bought more than 5 percent of a company, force shareholders to disclose derivatives and short positions they hold in a company, as well as redefine the rules about who has taken a 5 percent stake in a company to prevent “wolf pack” investing, which occurs when a lead fund tips off others that a disclosure is about to be made, giving them the opportunity to buy the same stock before the 10-day window is up.The bill is misguided. Its backers are unwittingly supporting entrenched and underperforming managers to restrict shareholders from having the right to oust them.AdvertisementSenator Baldwin took inspiration for this bill from an example of so-called shareholder short-termism when Starboard Value said in 2011 that the Wisconsin-based Wasau Paper should focus on its tissue paper business instead of its free-sheet printing paper business. Starboard made its case for change, arguing that the world was moving away from free-sheet printing paper and toward tissue paper. Essentially, Starboard said Wasau should focus more on its most profitable business and take resources from businesses where it was losing money. Wasau Paper argued that it should focus on both.AdvertisementEventually, Wasau Paper decided to close a money-losing free-sheet printing paper plant in Brokaw, Wisc. One hundred jobs were lost. Local tax revenue was lost. It hurt that town’s economy. Hence, the name of this bill is the Brokaw Act.But let’s examine the facts here.Was Starboard wrong?No. A Wasau Paper competitor, Verso Paper, has maintained a focus on free-sheet printing. Verso just went into bankruptcy for the second time. The tissue paper-focused competitor Kimberley Clark, however, appears to be thriving. It’s stock price has increased more than 110 percent over the last five years.Was Starboard a “short-term” investor?No. Starboard held its Wasau Paper stake for more than four years until Wasau Paper agreed to be acquired by SCA in October. That’s hardly “short-term game playing,” as Senator Merkley called it.Did it act in a “wolf pack” with other investors?No.Do Senators Sanders and Warren favor companies running unprofitable lines of business until the entire company goes into bankruptcy and all jobs across the company are lost?Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.If Brokaw had a large plant that made fax machines, no political bill would help save those jobs when the world stopped using fax machines. If a shareholder speaks up and suggests that management stop investing in fax machines, management should listen.Finally, let’s consider who the major investors in these kinds of funds are.They are teacher and police officer pension funds, municipal retirement systems, private pensions of large companies with thousands of employees and endowment funds of major academic systems.Are these pensioners, these former teachers, police officers and government workers trying to sell America short? Hardly. They simply want the pension that they are entitled to. This requires that their assets be invested profitably in profitable companies. If activist funds make wise investments, those pensioners will be well served. If they don’t, those pensioners’ representatives will invest their assets with funds that make wiser investments.Other shareholders do not have to listen to the views of one shareholder. May the best ideas rise to the top, whether they come from management or shareholders. But this bill allows management to ignore the voice of shareholders. That hurts pensioners and shareholders and makes American businesses weaker compared with competitors around the world.AdvertisementOur company, SpringOwl Asset Management, has run successful shareholder campaigns for change at midsize companies like IGT and BWIN.party and large companies like Yahoo and Viacom.In all four of these situations, when we spoke up and demanded changes from underperforming management, we were inundated with support from employees at each company. They thanked us for criticizing their bosses because they realized that their best hope to keep their jobs was that their company be run properly and competently by better management. We received calls and letters from shareholders thanking us for getting involved, giving them a collective voice, representing their interests — all things generally viewed as positives in any other situation.Shareholders do not cause bad management, just as voters do not cause bad politicians.The Democratic senators have put forward a bill that will keep poorly performing managers in power for longer while they drive American businesses into the ground. That’s not what American democracy and capitalism are about.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »