AdvertisementSupported byBy ReutersWASHINGTON (Reuters) — Economic growth in the United States slowed in the fourth quarter, but not as sharply as previously estimated, with fairly strong consumer spending offsetting the drag from efforts by businesses to reduce inventory.Gross domestic product increased at a 1.4 percent annual rate, higher than the previously reported 1 percent pace, the Commerce Department said on Friday in its third estimate of the nation’s output.G.D.P. growth was initially estimated to have risen at only a 0.7 percent rate but was later revised upward. The economy grew at a rate of 2 percent in the third quarter and expanded 2.4 percent for all of 2015.The upward revision reflected a stronger pace of consumer spending than previously estimated.Consumer spending, which accounts for more than two-thirds of economic activity, rose at a 2.4 percent pace and not the 2 percent rate reported last month. More consumption of services than previously estimated accounted for the revision.The fairly solid pace of consumer spending underscores the economy’s underlying strength and should further allay fears of a recession, which had led to a huge stock market sell-off early this year.Spending is being supported by a tightening labor market, which is steadily lifting wages, and rising house prices. Gasoline prices around $2 a gallon are also helping to underpin household discretionary spending.A moderately growing economy, combined with a strong jobs market and firming inflation, probably keeps the Federal Reserve on a path to gradually raise interest rates this year.Inventory investment was revised lower in the fourth quarter. Still, inventories remain high relative to domestic demand.Businesses accumulated $78.3 billion worth of inventory rather than the $81.7 billion reported last month. As a result, inventories subtracted 0.22 percentage point from G.D.P. growth instead of the previously reported 0.14 percentage point.Estimates for G.D.P. for the first quarter, which will end March 31, are around a 1.5 percent rate. But with the inventory pile still large and shipments of capital goods ordered by businesses weak in January and February, the economy could slip.There was some bad news in the latest report: Corporate profits fell for a second straight quarter as a strong dollar and cheap oil undercut the earnings of multinational companies.Profits after tax — after adjusting for inventory values and capital consumption — declined at an annual rate of 8.4 percent. It was the biggest drop since the first quarter of 2014.Profits from current production fell $159.6 billion, coming on the heels of a drop of $33 billion in the third quarter.For all of 2015, profits dropped 5.1 percent, the largest decline since 2008, after slipping 0.6 percent in 2014.Part of the drop in profits in the fourth quarter was a result of a $20.8 billion transfer payment related to the BP oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico in 2010.Profits from the rest of the world decreased $6.5 billion in the final three months of 2015 after sliding $23.1 billion in the third quarter.Manufacturing profits declined $139.2 billion during the last quarter after decreasing by $4.1 billion in the July-September period. Profits in the petroleum and coal products sector tumbled $124.3 billion after rising $7 billion in the third quarter.Advertisement