AdvertisementSupported byBy Emily SteelPeter Liguori, the longtime television executive, was appointed the new chief executive of the Tribune Company in 2013, just two and a half weeks after the newspaper and TV company emerged from an agonizing four-year bankruptcy process.Mr. Liguori swiftly moved to spin off the publishing business and rebrand the company — now called Tribune Media — as a kind of 167-year old start-up focused on television. His strategy is built on three pillars: local television, data and the conversion of WGN America, a onetime superstation, into a national entertainment network.To that end, Tribune struck a $2.7 billion deal in 2013 to buy 19 television stations, making it the largest station owner in the country, and in 2014 it closed a $170 million deal for the entertainment data service Gracenote. WGN America now is in about 80 million homes and has invested in four original scripted series that have helped build audiences for the network: “Salem,” “Outsiders,” “Underground” and the now-canceled “Manhattan.”Yet the company’s share price has plunged about 45 percent over the last year as fears loomed about the fate of the media business. And Mr. Liguori recently disclosed that Tribune had hired financial advisers to explore strategic partnerships or the potential sale of the company.Mr. Liguori discussed the transformation of Tribune and the broader media industry during a recent interview in his New York office, decorated with a photograph of Mike Tyson, a picture of the laundry business he ran at Yale and a coloring book with a box of Crayolas.Here are excerpts from that conversation:After the publishing side of the business was spun off, one of the top strategies was to focus on original programming at WGN America. Why?Originals are important because they brand your network. There is no tagline, there is no marketing campaign that will ever work for a network that is as good as showing your performance.The story lines of WGNA’s four original programs span the Salem witch trials (“Salem’’), the secret race to build the world’s first atomic bomb (“Manhattan’’), a clan of outsiders living off the grid in Appalachia (“Outsiders’’) and a group of slaves escaping a Georgia plantation (“Underground”). Why these stories today?We want to go after American themes. Now, there is a marketer’s reason for that, and that is, especially when you are our size, especially when you are trying to make a mark, you want to make sure that you are targeting the biggest cross section of people to go after.The number of scripted shows available is expected to pass 400 this year. Is there too much TV?There is too much mediocre TV, but there is never enough quality TV.The “Underground” premiere ranked as the most-watched program in nearly 18 years on WGN America, with 5.7 million total viewers across the week. How did you attract such a large audience?We did screenings in black universities, megachurches and with the White House. We screened in certain museums. The most important thing that we needed to get going on the show was word of mouth and the approval of unbiased audiences, not a professional audience, not Hollywood premieres, not New York premieres, but premieres in Middle America.You recently announced that Tribune had hired financial advisers and is exploring a possible sale or strategic partnership for some or all of the company’s assets to “unlock value.” What’s the latest?Look, it is our job every day to maximize the value of the assets. It’s early on in the process. There is no preconceived notions as to where it ends.Why now?The board and management was just looking at this wide discrepancy between the value that we saw in this company and the performance we’ve shown and where the street was looking at us.We know this company is running well, and I think that at that moment in time when we made the announcement, there was a frustration with that discrepancy. I think this brings our assets into focus, it brings what we are doing into focus, and it kind of creates a process by which we think that value should get recognized.Tribune’s stock has declined about 45 percent in the last year, amid broader fears about the role of traditional TV in a digital world. Major concerns include sharp ratings declines, a weak ad market and so-called cord cutting. What is the role for traditional television in a digital world?First, I would clearly categorize a lot of it as overreaction. Let’s just deal with the facts. At the end of the year, cord cutting was less than 1 percent versus the year before. So if you have 99.5 percent or 99.4 percent of people staying with cable, it is pretty slow erosion. Two, when you look at what is going on with ratings, clearly ratings are changing.The businesses which are currently more vulnerable are the mature ones that have ‘been there, done that,’ whereas when you look at where we are, we are outsiders. In the first quarter, our ratings were up over 40 percent, so our trajectory is much higher.Is Netflix killing TV?No. No. No. Absolutely not. In some ways, maybe, it is growing TV.You look at their top shows, and the top ones will get between three and six million views over the course of 30 days. “Outsiders” and “Underground” did between 5.5 and 5.7 million viewers in seven days [on traditional television.] God only knows what happens when someone decides to binge. So here we are, a nascent network, going toe-to-toe with the biggest show, the biggest behemoth, and we’re able to get somewhat equal viewership. I think that says if you continue to put on provocative programming, broadcast and cable television will be quite healthy.Did you just call Netflix the biggest behemoth? That’s interesting because until only recently, they were considered an upstart. I used that in quotes. Everyone is looking for a boogeyman in the media environment, and I just think we all need to stick to our knitting.On your watch, Tribune has made a big push into the data business. What is the power of that data?Without giving away too many trade secrets,the questions before everyone are: Is music a frontier for television? How do you get sports information out there in an effective, compelling manner? How do you create rock-solid, predictive recommendations?What will the television business look like in five years?I am so not a prognosticator, but so what I will do to answer your question and avoid prognosticating, I will go back to a turn of phrase which hasn’t been used in a while: You will be able to watch what you want to watch, when you want to watch it, where you want to watch it. With all that being said, and “Underground” proved it, it will still be a part of you that wants that shared experience.Advertisement