By BRETT COLEMARCH 27, 2016
SYDNEY, Australia — Ben Gray, the co-head of TPG Capital in Asia, will leave the American private equity firm amid reports that he is setting up his own Australia-focused investment firm.Mr. Gray’s departure from TPG, set for the end of this year, will leave Timothy Dattels, a former Goldman Sachs partner, as sole head of TPG in Asia.TPG said it had hired Joel Thickins as its new country head of Australia. Mr. Thickins worked for eight years at the Australian private equity firm CHAMP.“Joel is a proven deal originator with significant experience executing large cross-border transactions,” Mr. Dattels said in a statement. “We have a strong track record in Australia, and I am confident that Joel will continue to build upon it.”AdvertisementStill, American private equity giants like TPG, Apollo Global Management, the Blackstone Group and Carlyle Group have found it challenging to source Australian deals that meet their usual investment threshold of $1 billion. Moreover, Australian boardrooms remain suspicious of leveraged buyout proposals.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Since 2000 Apollo, Blackstone, Carlyle and TPG have made 22 private equity investments worth $14.22 billion, according to Dealogic data. TPG has accounted for 29 percent of these deals or transactions, worth $6.28 billion, says Dealogic.Mr. Gray joined TPG in 2004. In an interview last year, he said the firm had invested $2 billion of equity in Australia since 2004. TPG’s internal rate of return for its Australian investments was 60 percent, according to Mr. Gray.AdvertisementThe Australian Financial Review earlier reported TPG’s hiring of Joel Thickins and Mr. Gray’s plans to establish his own Australian-focused private equity firm. Mr. Gray did not return calls seeking comment.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.