By THE NEW YORK TIMESMARCH 27, 2016
On Monday at 8:30 a.m., the Commerce Department will report new data on personal consumption and income for February. Economists expect a small increase of 0.1 percent in both income and spending, in line with other muted economic data reported recently.In addition, both categories showed big increases in January, so some slowing could be in store. On the other hand, if consumption proved healthier, that would be a good sign for overall economic growth in the first quarter, which ends on Thursday. —Nelson D. SchwartzJanet L. Yellen, the Federal Reserve chairwoman, said this month that a rocky start to the year had not significantly changed the Fed’s economic outlook. But it has convinced Fed officials that it probably makes sense to raise the Fed’s benchmark interest rate more slowly. She will have a chance to elaborate on Tuesday, when she addresses the Economic Club of New York.It will be Ms. Yellen’s first speech of 2016, though she has shared her views at a pair of congressional hearings and at a news conference after the Fed’s March meeting. The Fed left rates unchanged in March. Analysts and investors generally expect that the Fed won’t move at its next meeting, in April, but that it may decide to raise rates in June. —Binyamin AppelbaumChina’s slowing economy and concerns over rising bad debt levels will be in sharp focus this week as the country’s biggest state-owned banks report their results. After a decade in which China’s five biggest banks enjoyed average annual profit growth of 25 percent, analysts now expect them to report a collective 0.3 percent decline in profit for 2015, according to a Bloomberg survey.AdvertisementAnalysts have raised questions about whether China’s huge and growing pile of corporate debt could pose risks to the banking system as profits evaporate and producers struggle with rampant overcapacity in industries like coal and steel. —Neil GoughPlease verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The chairwoman of the Securities and Exchange Commission, Mary Jo White, is expected to speak at Stanford on Thursday about protecting investors in companies that have yet to go public. The speech, to be delivered in the heart of Silicon Valley, comes as some once-revered start-ups are starting to fall to earth. Ms. White is expected to touch on how much these typically opaque companies disclose to their investors and how these shareholders can be harmed after artificially lofty valuations drop. —Michael J. de la MercedOn Friday at 8:30 a.m., the Labor Department will report the latest data on hiring and unemployment in March. Economists are looking for payrolls to have increased by 210,000, with the unemployment rate remaining unchanged at 4.9 percent. Just as noteworthy as the jobs numbers will be the data for the change in average hourly earnings.AdvertisementExperts are expecting to see a 0.3 percentage point rise for the month, which would confirm that pay is slowly beginning to rise for most workers as the job market improves and the unemployment rate declines. While 210,000 represents a slight decline from the 242,000 jump in payrolls in February, anything over 200,000 suggests solid hiring despite other economic data that has been more mixed in recent months. —Nelson D. SchwartzA version of this article appears in print on March 28, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Gains in the U.S. and Concerns in China.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.