MARCH 27, 2016
The Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Thursday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.29 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.45 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.25 percent.The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week:Florida Department of Transportation, $161.8 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Central Florida Expressway Authority, $154.7 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Michigan, $87.2 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Oklahoma City, $77.5 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.AdvertisementPalm Beach County, Fla., $126.7 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Virginia Public School Authority, $148.9 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.AdvertisementAnne Arundel County, Md., $239.7 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Suffolk, N.Y., $85.1 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Long Beach, Calif., Unified School District, $145.3 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.California State University, $1.4 billion university system revenue bonds. Barclays Capital.Fairfax County, Va., $131.9 million sewer revenue refinancing bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Hawaii, $325 million of refinancing general obligation bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Houston Independent School District, $683.6 million of limited tax schoolhouse and refinancing bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Kentucky Economic Development Authority, $65.5 million of health care facilities revenue refinancing bonds. Ziegler.Orlando, Fla., $86.4 million of capital improvement revenue bonds. Stifel Nicolaus.Palmdale, Calif., $71.1 million of water district revenue refinancing bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Pennsylvania Higher Educational Facilities Authority, $160 million of University of Pennsylvania debt securities. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Pennsylvania Turnpike Commission, $204.7 million subordinate revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.San Francisco, $85.3 million of tax allocation refinancing bonds. Stifel Nicolaus.Tampa, Fla., $200 million of health system revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.University of Minnesota, $123.2 million of general obligation bonds. Barclays Capital.AdvertisementWestchester County, N.Y., $110 million general obligation refinancing bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.A version of this article appears in print on March 28, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Treasury Auctions Set for This Week.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.