AdvertisementSupported byBy Keith BradsherInternational Monetary Fund staff members recommended Friday that China’s renminbi be included in the fund’s benchmark basket of currencies, a big step forward for the country’s long campaign to turn its currency into one of the pillars of international finance. Christine Lagarde, the managing director of the I.M.F., said that the fund’s executive board would decide on Nov. 30 whether to add the renminbi to the fund’s unit of accounting, which would clear the way for central banks to hold more of it in their reserves. Ms. Lagarde said that she personally supported the renminbi’s inclusion, and noted that the staff’s report on Friday showed that the Chinese government had addressed all of the remaining issues that the staff had identified in July.China’s leadership has turned the renminbi’s inclusion in the I.M.F.’s unit of financial measurement, known as special drawing rights, into one of the highest priorities for its next five-year plan, which starts on Jan. 1. If the I.M.F. board approves the renminbi’s inclusion — and the support of the fund’s staff and managing director makes that much more likely — then the renminbi could join the special drawing rights as soon as Sept. 30.The dollar, the euro, the Japanese yen and the British pound are the four reserve currencies already used to calculate the value of special drawing rights.While inclusion of the renminbi has been a big political goal for the Chinese government, and particularly for China’s central bank, economists debate the actual financial and economic importance of the move.Eswar Prasad, a former chief of the I.M.F.’s China division who is now the Tolani Senior Professor of Trade Policy at Cornell University, said that the fund’s decision could affect global capital flows in the years to come and validated China’s many financial reforms in recent years.“China’s currency is now at the threshold of becoming a significant global reserve currency both in principle and in practice,” Mr. Prasad said. Other economists are more skeptical. Kevin Lai, the chief economist for Asia except Japan in the Hong Kong office of Daiwa Capital Markets, questioned whether the world’s central banks would now reorganize their foreign exchange reserves.Commodity-exporting countries like Russia, Saudi Arabia and Malaysia that had been buying a lot of foreign currency in recent years when prices were high for oil, iron ore and other natural resources are now spending significant chunks of their reserves to cover their spending while these prices are low. “They are having a fire in their own houses, they are running down their reserves, they won’t have time to think” about reallocating reserves toward renminbi, Mr. Lai said at a news conference in Hong Kong this week.While China still has some controls on the movement of large sums of money in and out of the country, an I.M.F. staff report on Friday evening said that a crucial test had been met for inclusion in the special drawing rights: whether the renminbi had become “freely usable.” Leading member countries of the I.M.F., including the United States, have voiced cautious support in recent months for the renminbi’s inclusion after Beijing took a series of measures, like the currency policy change, to make the renminbi more “freely usable.”“As we have previously stated, we intend to support the renminbi’s inclusion in the special drawing rights basket provided the currency meets the International Monetary Fund’s existing criteria,” the United States Treasury said in a statement on Friday evening. “We will review the I.M.F.’s paper in that light.”Advertisement