By BEN SISARIOMARCH 28, 2016
Pandora Media became a powerhouse in online music primarily by doing one thing: tailoring song after song to the tastes of its listeners, along with the occasional ad. For a decade, it worked well, as Pandora came to dominate Internet radio.But with its stock price suffering, and as competitors like Spotify and Apple Music transform the streaming music market around it, Pandora has come under increasing pressure to adapt. In recent months Pandora has unveiled ambitious changes to its service, and also weighed whether to sell itself.On Monday Pandora threw Wall Street another curveball by replacing its chief executive, who had held the job for less than three years, with one of the company’s founders.Brian P. McAndrews, an online advertising executive who joined Pandora in September 2013 as chairman and chief executive, has left the company, and is being replaced as chief executive by Tim Westergren, a co-founder of Pandora and its former chief strategy officer.AdvertisementThe return of Mr. Westergren, who has been serving in a board position, signals that this is a critical juncture for Pandora as it tries to restore the growth of its early years. After climbing rapidly, its number of monthly users fell to 81.1 million at the end of 2015, from 81.5 million a year before. Its stock has fallen by about 75 percent since its peak in early 2014.But Mr. Westergren’s appointment as chief executive struck some analysts as a positive development for a company that is trying to regain its footing and change its image on Wall Street and within the music industry.Advertisement“This is front and center about a company that wants to change its mojo,” said Barton Crockett, an analyst with FBR Capital Markets. “They have an inspirational founder who has been very prominent within Pandora, and representing Pandora to artists, and is now stepping up to take over the whole operation.”To revitalize itself, Pandora plans to move toward an on-demand streaming model that would put it in direct competition with Spotify, Apple, Google, Amazon and others in an increasingly crowded online music market. Pandora views the scale it has already built as a big advantage in this field, calling itself “the world’s most powerful music discovery platform.”On Monday the company said it remained committed to that plan, which took shape under Mr. McAndrews, who is also a director of The New York Times Company.“We are pursuing a once-in-a-generation opportunity to create a massive, vibrant music marketplace,” Mr. Westergren said in a statement. “We have the audience, the technology infrastructure, the monetization engine and, most importantly, the right team with the passion and commitment to do it.”Pandora’s stock price fell 12 percent on Monday in response to the news, closing at $9.60.It was unclear what effect the executive change might have on the company’s explorations of a sale. Last month, it emerged that Pandora had retained Morgan Stanley to advise it on strategic plans for its business. The company has not commented on those plans, but last week its stock rose briefly on the news that it had appointed to its board Anthony J. Vinciquerra, a senior adviser to the Texas Pacific Group, the private investment firm, and a former chief executive of the Fox Networks Group. Given Mr. Vinciquerra’s experience, some analysts viewed his arrival as a sign that a sale or merger might be close.Another critical question for Pandora is how quickly it can complete new music licensing deals. For its radio service, Pandora licenses recordings through a government-backed system that sets standard rates. But last year it paid $75 million for the assets of Rdio, a struggling Spotify competitor, and to restart that service it would need special deals negotiated directly with record companies.AdvertisementMr. Westergren may be able to improve those talks, which began under Mr. McAndrews late last year and so far have not been fruitful, according to music executives who have been involved with them.Pandora’s competition in moving into the on-demand streaming world is formidable. Spotify has been operating in this area since 2008, and now has 30 million paying customers around the world. Apple, which entered the subscription streaming business last year, has 11 million. A majority of Pandora’s customers listen free, with ads, but the company also has about four million subscribers who pay $5 a month to eliminate ads and get higher-quality audio.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Along with Pandora’s $450 million purchase of Ticketfly, an online ticketing company, its move into on-demand streaming is part of its new business plan, which it hopes will nearly quadruple its revenue in the next four years, to $4 billion. In 2015, Pandora had $1.16 billion in revenue, up 26.4 percent from the year before, but its net loss also grew to $169.7 million, from $30.4 million in 2014.Mr. Westergren, a former musician who helped develop the company’s “music genome project” — a system for categorizing songs and the basis for how Pandora chooses what songs to play for its customers — was chief executive from 2002 to 2004, in the days when the company was known as Savage Beast Technologies. Pandora was introduced in 2005, and the company went public in 2011.Along with Mr. McAndrews’s departure, the company announced that Michael S. Herring, its chief financial officer, would also take on Mr. McAndrews’s role as president; Sara Clemens was named chief operating officer; and Christopher Phillips would be chief product officer. James Feuille, an independent board member, took over as chairman.A version of this article appears in print on March 29, 2016, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Pandora Aims for a Reinvention.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.