By PETER EAVISMARCH 28, 2016
Valeant Pharmaceuticals International’s accounting confession may have sounded like a rounding error.The embattled drug company said last week that it had wrongly booked $58 million of revenue, a relatively small sum compared with its nearly $10 billion in annual sales.But investors had more cause for concern over the accuracy of the financial statements. Valeant said a special committee it had formed determined that “certain other accounting issues required review.” The company also said two senior accountants had acted improperly.The accounting admission may leave a persistent cloud over Valeant for another reason: It lends credibility to those who have long criticized Valeant’s books. These critics have produced analyses that suggest that Valeant’s accounting could be flawed in several other ways.AdvertisementAccounting is not, of course, the sole reason for Valeant’s recent decline.When Valeant was the toast of Wall Street and ballooning in size, it relied on potentially unsustainable approaches. One was raising drug prices by large amounts, but that has now run into staunch political opposition. Valeant’s eye-popping revenue growth also came from an acquisition binge that was financed by the $30 billion of debt that is now straining the company’s balance sheet. These challenges go a long way toward explaining why the company recently cut its financial targets for 2016 and why its stock has plunged.AdvertisementYet Valeant’s accounting is likely to remain at the heart of the debate about the company’s fate. The skeptics say aggressive accounting was central to Valeant’s strategy, giving the company a misleading appearance of strength as it grew.“Any and all methods were used to get reported sales up, including customer-burning price increases, channel-stuffing and hyperaggressive accounting,” John Hempton, a hedge fund manager who has written about Valeant on his blog, said in an email. “Soon, sustainable sales and cash flow will be revealed — and they are unlikely to be enough to service over $30 billion in debt.”Laurie W. Little, an investor relations representative at Valeant, said the company’s projected financial performance should enable it to stay in line with its debt agreements this year.Accusations of channel-stuffing, the term used by Mr. Hempton, have often been directed at Valeant, in part because it is a practice that has afflicted the pharmaceutical industry over the years.A channel-stuffing company may try to bolster revenue artificially by granting unsustainable or improper inducements to wholesalers and customers to get them to take its products. And a channel-stuffing company may also book revenue by transferring goods to an entity that is not totally separate.In explaining its recent revenue restatement, for instance, Valeant said it should not have booked some sales when it transferred products to a distributor called Philidor Rx Services, whose murky ties to Valeant were examined by the Southern Investigative Reporting Foundation, which reports on financial issues.But even before the Philidor revelations, large and sudden increases in sales of certain products raised suspicions about channel-stuffing.AdvertisementIn the middle of 2014, for instance, Valeant posted large increases in sales for some products sold by Bausch & Lomb, the eye-care company that Valeant bought in 2013. Critics at the time wondered whether Valeant wanted to highlight strong gains at Bausch & Lomb because its acquisition strategy was coming under attack by Allergan, which was fiercely resisting an acquisition attempt by Valeant. In the fourth quarter of 2014, the sales gains in some Bausch & Lomb products were lower.One warning sign was that Valeant’s profits were unimpressive under generally accepted accounting principles, the standard bookkeeping that all public companies must use. Instead, it emphasized earnings measures that left out hundreds of millions of dollars of costs, including expenses related to integrating its acquisitions.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.When such acquisition costs are consistently high, investors may worry that costs relating to a company’s regular operations are somehow being included in the acquisition expenses to make operating earnings look stronger than they are.Perhaps in recognition of investors’ concerns about the high level of acquisition integration costs, Valeant told investors in July 2014 that such expenses would be below $70 million in the third quarter of 2014, roughly half the $143 million recorded for such expenses in the second quarter of 2014. They did fall below $70 million, coming in at $63 million. But a Valeant filing later indicated that the target was met by changing where $20 million of restructuring expenses were booked in the income statement.Ms. Little of Valeant said in an email that these expenses, which related to stock options, were “more appropriately classified” in a different part of the income statement, and the company has kept them there since.A heavy acquisitions strategy can also generate concerns about a practice known as spring-loading. When one company acquires another, there is usually period of several weeks between the announcement of the deal and the actual date at which the acquired company becomes part of the acquirer. In that interim, the acquirer may find a way to book a higher level of costs and lower revenue at the company being acquired.This process, which takes place before the acquired company’s financial statements merge with those of the acquirer, is intended to suppress the profitability of the firm being bought, solely for the interim period. Once part of the acquirer, the costs and revenue of the acquired firm return to more normal levels, enabling its profit to surge once it can benefit the bottom line of the acquirer.Valeant’s skeptics wondered whether this happened with Bausch & Lomb. In a special proxy filing, Valeant included an income statement for Bausch & Lomb for the period between the end of the second quarter of 2013, Bausch & Lomb’s last full quarter as an independent firm, and Aug. 4, 2013, the day before Valeant acquired Bausch & Lomb.In the interim, Bausch & Lomb’s revenue, expressed on a per-day basis to make it comparable, was 16 percent lower than in the first half of 2013, and then from Aug. 4, 2013, until Sept. 30, 2013, revenue surged to a per-day level that was higher than in the interim and in the first half of that year. Also, some costs rose, on a per-day basis, in the interim from the first half of 2013.AdvertisementFor most of its growth period, Valeant has been led by J. Michael Pearson, who is now leaving, and Howard B. Schiller, the former chief financial officer. Valeant’s board has asked Mr. Schiller to resign, but he has not done so. He said in a statement last week that he did not do anything improper in relation to the planned earnings restatement. And he added in the statement that he was told that Valeant’s external auditors had reviewed certain transactions with Philidor.The auditor, PricewaterhouseCoopers, or PwC, will now play an even more crucial role in determining Valeant’s standing. After missing a deadline for filing its annual report for 2015, Valeant said it was working to get the report out by April 29. PwC, however, may take more time to sign off on the financial statements, causing Valeant to miss its new projected filing date.Regulators may now also take a close look at Valeant’s accounting. The company said last month that the Securities and Exchange Commission was investigating.A version of this article appears in print on March 29, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Valeant’s Small Accounting Error Is a Warning Sign to Investors of Bigger Problems.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.