
White Collar Watch By                     
PETER J. HENNING

MARCH 28, 2016
The old saying “when it rains, it pours” would seem to apply to Valeant Pharmaceuticals International as it deals with a torrent of government investigations and private lawsuits.The costs of defending itself, along with multiple directors and executives who will be the focus of the inquiries, will escalate over the next few months, taking an even bigger bite out of the company’s bottom line.With multiple investigations into the company, it will be difficult to shake off the bad publicity that has caused the share price to drop precipitously over the last few months. The question may well devolve into whether Valeant can survive everything being thrown at it.Last week, it removed its chief executive, J. Michael Pearson, and appointed William A. Ackman, who is the company’s second-largest shareholder through his hedge fund firm, Pershing Square Capital Management, as the newest director.AdvertisementThese changes come after the company disclosed in late February that it was being investigated by the Securities and Exchange Commission over potential accounting problems related to its relationship with the mail-order pharmacy Philidor Rx Services, which it controlled. Valeant disclosed in a securities filing that the restatement involved some $58 million in revenue that was improperly included in its 2014 financial statements.AdvertisementFor a company reporting billions of dollars in sales, that amounts to hardly more than a drop in the bucket. But as the S.E.C. has learned over the years, accounting problems are rarely limited to a single transaction, so it can be expected to undertake a thorough review of Valeant’s financial statements to see whether there are more questionable entries in the corporate books.The company sought to portray itself to the regulator as cooperative by accusing its former chief financial officer, Howard B. Schiller, and former corporate controller of engaging in “improper conduct” that led to incorrect information being given to Valeant’s directors and outside auditors. This reflects a recent push by regulators and prosecutors to get companies to disclose who is responsible for misconduct, rather than just taking the blame at the corporate level while individuals avoid liability.Valeant’s finger-pointing drew a quick response from Mr. Schiller. He issued a statement through his lawyers asserting that “at no time did I engage in any improper conduct that relates to any restatement of revenue the company is considering.”More important for Valeant, Mr. Schiller has refused to relinquish his position on the company’s board, which gives him a front-row seat to observe how it responds to the investigations. As Steven Davidoff Solomon, the Deal Professor, has pointed out, Valeant has few options to remove Mr. Schiller before its next annual meeting, which means he could be around for another couple of months.Under the company’s articles of incorporation, it also must foot the bills for Mr. Schiller’s lawyers related to any investigation or proceeding. That could result in further litigation if Valeant decides to fight him by not paying those costs, something companies have been known to do when they believe a former executive was the cause of the problem.Whether Mr. Schiller might be willing to cooperate with the accounting investigation raises an interesting question. The securities laws governing corporate accounting can be pursued both in civil and criminal proceedings, so the potential for a prosecution has to be considered in any response to the S.E.C.It would not be surprising if prosecutors were looking over the agency’s shoulder to see whether the case might develop into a criminal prosecution, so Mr. Schiller’s lawyers will need to be careful about disclosing information that may implicate him in any misconduct.AdvertisementAs the Justice Department learned when pursuing accounting fraud cases at companies like Enron and WorldCom years ago, a cooperative chief financial officer can be a gold mine of information because that is often the person who knows where the financial bodies are buried. So Mr. Schiller is likely to be a key player as the investigation of Valeant’s accounting unfolds.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Justice Department is also looking at Valeant’s drug pricing practices, with The New York Times reporting that grand jury subpoenas were issued by federal prosecutors in Massachusetts and Manhattan last year. The United States attorney’s office in Boston has brought a number of prominent health care fraud cases, including a settlement in October with Millennium Laboratories that resulted in a $256 million payment, while the office in Manhattan is well known for its aggressive approach to white-collar crime investigations.Adding to Valeant’s tally sheet of investigations is another Justice Department inquiry into the company’s Bausch & Lomb unit for possible health care fraud related to surgical products. There is also an S.E.C. investigation into statements made by Salix Pharmaceuticals in 2014 about its inventory levels, a year before Valeant acquired it.As if that weren’t enough, there are a number of private securities fraud lawsuits filed against the company and its directors for the drop in its stock price. The suits claim the company failed to properly disclose developments in its operations and the accounting problems it has identified. These types of cases are typical whenever a company undergoes a significant decline in value, especially if it discloses any misconduct, and will require Valeant to pay more for lawyers to fight them.Another lawsuit that continues to bedevil Valeant and Mr. Ackman is one claiming that they engaged in insider trading when Pershing Square bought a large stake in Allergan before Valeant’s tender offer for the company in 2014. The case was brought by “contemporaneous traders” who sold their shares as Pershing Square was accumulating a 9.7 percent stake in Allergan to support Valeant’s attempt to acquire the company, losing out on the premium price when the offer was announced and Allergan’s stock shot up.Reuters reported that a federal judge rejected a defense motion to dismiss the case last November, allowing it to move forward with discovery. Both Mr. Ackman and Valeant’s senior management are sure to be subjected to depositions along with having to produce a large volume of documents, further driving up the legal fees they will have to pay.Mr. Ackman’s presence on Valeant’s board could cause him a problem if he wants to sell down his stake in the company — or perhaps even increase it, unlikely as that might seem at the moment. He will receive a sheaf of material nonpublic information about the company’s operations and plans for trying to rebuild itself, or seek to buyer for some or all of the businesses it acquired over the last few years.In a letter to the company dated March 22, Mr. Ackman agreed that he and Pershing Square employees would maintain the confidentiality of Valeant’s information and refrain from any trading that might violate United States or Canadian securities laws — the company is chartered in British Columbia. Although the letter states that his hedge fund will refrain from trading only during blackout periods imposed on all directors and employees before the disclosure of important information, any trading by Mr. Ackman is sure to draw scrutiny, and perhaps a lawsuit, because of the possibility that he was privy to material nonpublic information.That could effectively lock Pershing Square into its investment in Valeant until Mr. Ackman leaves the board, negotiates a sale or comes up with some other exit strategy. As of the date of his letter to Valeant, Pershing Square reported a year-to-date loss of 25.2 percent, according to The New York Times, so investors may not be patient waiting for the turnaround of an investment that the firm cannot unload.The torrent of investigations is sure to be a distraction for Valeant’s management and board, including Mr. Ackman. Any one of the inquiries could put the company in jeopardy if prosecutors or the S.E.C. were to seek a substantial penalty, which may cause shareholders to take flight even more than they have.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »