
Breakingviews By                     
JENNIFER SABA

MARCH 28, 2016
Pandora sent a bad signal Monday when it said Brian McAndrews, its chief executive, had been replaced by Tim Westergren, its co-founder, in a worrisome sign amid news that the streaming-music service might be for sale. Technology companies that turn back to their creators later in life also have a mixed track record.The $2.5 billion company emphasized that management remains 100 percent committed to its growth strategy. That should send antennas up. If that is the case, shaking up the executive suite is an odd decision. Maybe it means there is dissension in the ranks about whether to look for a buyer. That could explain the 12 percent fall in the stock price by midafternoon Monday.Either way, the current plan isn’t working. The number of Pandora listeners has stalled at about 80 million, and prospects for expansion are dim. Because streaming is radiolike, the company can use music licensing rates set by Congress. Those only apply domestically, however, and international expansion may be costly.Instead, Pandora must negotiate directly with record labels. A deal with Sony/ATV Music Publishing is a good start. Spotify, however, already has users globally. It also just initiated one of its most comprehensive marketing efforts. Apple, meanwhile, is a deep-pocketed rival trying to build a competing service that caters to its hundreds of millions of device owners.AdvertisementMr. Westergren, a musician himself who was primarily an evangelist for Pandora’s Music Genome Project, may be able to speak the language of artists and labels more clearly. The company calls him a former band member and composer “personally committed to advancing the careers of working musicians.”Even so, starting a new venture and steering a more mature one require different skills. Steve Jobs managed both when he returned to Apple. Jerry Yang, on the other hand, had a troubled second stint at Yahoo that included rejecting a $45 billion takeover bid from Microsoft in 2008 that led the Internet company into years of strategic disarray. The jury is still out for troubled Twitter and co-creator Jack Dorsey, who was recently brought back as chief executive.AdvertisementIt’s not obvious how Mr. Westergren can or will turn around Pandora. For shareholders, it may just be the same old song.Jennifer Saba is a columnist for Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »