By BINYAMIN APPELBAUMMARCH 29, 2016
WASHINGTON — The United States is in the midst of one of the longest economic expansions in its history. Even American factories have lately added hundreds of thousands of jobs.Meanwhile, the rest of the world is stumbling. Even China.Yet at perhaps the least likely moment in the last several decades, misgivings about globalization are playing a starring role in the presidential election. Why now?Anger about unbalanced trade has helped to fuel the rise of Donald J. Trump, the Republican front-runner, and the success of Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont in his bid for the Democratic nomination. The manifest anger also has pushed their principal rivals, Republican Senator Ted Cruz and the Democratic front-runner, Hillary Clinton, to toughen their own trade rhetoric.It is a situation that has surprised many experts because polls show voters’ concern about the overall health of the American economy has declined significantly in recent years.AdvertisementYet many Americans are just taking stock of the transformations wrought by global trade. In two dozen conversations with voters across the country, only two said they had heard of the proposed new trade deal, the Trans-Pacific Partnership, involving the United States and a host of Pacific Rim nations.AdvertisementInstead, the concerns they expressed were about changes in their own lives and communities over the last couple of decades.“When we first did that big trade agreement I thought it was a good idea, but now I’m getting a little more conservative about it,” said Phyllis Arthur, a 74-year-old Republican from Walnut Creek, Calif. “I think we’re being overwhelmed by the goods coming in. That’s practically all that’s available in the stores.”Kevin White, a 47-year-old Democrat from Dayton, Ohio, said it was hard to find a job. He used to work at a hospital; now he gets federal disability payments.“The jobs went overseas,” lamented Mr. White. “Then people couldn’t afford their mortgages and we had a crash and nobody was able to buy anything.”Douglas Irwin, an economist at Dartmouth College who studies trade, said the impact of China’s economic rise had become more visible in recent years, even though the worst effects of its rise may already be in the past.Between 2000 and 2011, imports from China grew to equal 2.6 percent of American economic output, up from around 1 percent. That “unprecedented shock” was much larger than that from the increase in Japanese imports in the 1980s or Mexican imports in the 1990s, Mr. Irwin said. China’s rise, fueled in part by currency manipulation to make its exports cheaper, played a key role in the loss of roughly five million American manufacturing jobs.Those losses, however, were offset and obscured during the housing boom by a rise in construction jobs. Now, both the factory jobs and the construction jobs have gone away.AdvertisementRationally, said Mr. Irwin, “It’s too late to get upset about China.”The United States is no longer losing factory jobs. It has added 600,000 over the last five years. Beijing is no longer suppressing its currency; it’s now trying to prop up the value.Politically, however, it appears that the moment is perfectly ripe.Ahead of another Rust Belt primary next Tuesday in Wisconsin, Mr. Trump is pressing for “fair trade” with foreign countries, while Mr. Cruz has adopted similar language. “We’re going to see millions and millions of new high paying jobs,” Mr. Cruz told a crowd at an Oshkosh plastics factory on Monday, “coming back to America, coming back from China, coming back from Mexico.”Personalities also appear to be playing a role. Mr. Trump has proved an unusually effective spokesman for concerns among Republican voters. “You look at those empty factories all over the place, and nobody hits that message better than me,” he said after winning the Republican primary in Michigan this month.Mr. Sanders has connected with a Democratic base whose support for President Obama may have damped longstanding concerns about trade.Mr. Trump and Mr. Sanders have also succeeded in focusing anger on trade as an explanation for broader economic problems afflicting many Americans. Trade flows make up a small part of America’s economic activity. The primary explanations for the stagnation of middle-class incomes are necessarily domestic.“They are following in the footsteps of politicians of all stripes who have found it convenient to blame the boogeyman of unfair trade for domestic economic problems,” said Eswar Prasad, a Cornell economist. “Tough talk on trade is an easy way to distract attention from taking on difficult domestic challenges.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mainstream economists regard the evidence as unequivocal that trade has produced significant benefits for the American economy and the average household.Yet much of the American public has long been skeptical. A recent New York Times/CBS News poll found that 61 percent of respondents favored more trade restrictions to protect domestic industry, just as a majority of respondents has favored increased restrictions in every such poll since 1988.Charles Shank began to change his mind about foreign trade in the early 2000s as he carried the pieces of Pennsylvania factories south to the Mexican border to be reassembled there.AdvertisementMr. Shank, then working as a truck driver, supported the expansion of trade with Mexico and Canada. A registered Republican, Mr. Shank said he subscribed to the party’s position that trade deals would open new markets for American companies.But Mr. Shank, now retired, said the politicians made a mistake. He said he planned to vote in Pennsylvania’s coming presidential primary for a candidate who would “go back and renegotiate” better deals with the nation’s trading partners.“I think our trade deals were good ideas with good intentions, but I don’t think it had enough controls to protect the United States,” said Mr. Shank, 65. “The fact that the factories are leaving, there’s something wrong with that whole system right there.”At the same time, Mr. Shank has personally benefited from globalization. He spent years driving imported goods to market. Trade reduced the price of his television and his clothing and increased the variety of food available at the local grocery store.Like many Americans, Mr. Shank said he would still rather pay more for American goods. A recent Bloomberg poll conducted by Selzer & Company found just 13 percent of respondents said they wanted goods at the lowest price, while 82 percent of respondents said they wanted goods made in America.But do they?Mr. Shank said he has always driven Dodge trucks.He paused.“Actually,” he said, “this year, I bought a Mazda.”Economists and politicians understated the costs of globalization, which tend to be more concentrated than the benefits. Everyone gets a discount; some people lose their jobs. Moreover, the United States has lagged significantly behind other developed countries in providing support for those left behind.Linda Young lost a good job in 1998 when Munekata America, which made plastic cases for televisions and other electronics, closed its factory in Dalton, Ga., because most of the companies it served had moved to Mexico. Ms. Young worked until the factory’s final day, packing equipment so it, too, could be shipped to Mexico.AdvertisementMs. Young, 62, ran a restaurant for a few years. She now cares for her grandchildren.Her children have navigated globalization with greater success. Her son works for an electric motor company that once served the carpet factories that dominated Dalton but now focuses on construction equipment. Her son-in-law lost his job at one of those carpet plants last year, after 26 years, but, a few months later, he found work at the new Volkswagen plant in nearby Chattanooga, Tenn.Ms. Young said she knew globalization had improved the lives of millions around the world. But she was thinking about Dalton’s decline when she decided to vote for Mr. Trump in Georgia’s Republican primary.“I don’t see their future being better than mine,” Ms. Young said of her grandchildren. “I understand we have to help others, but I think we should be a little more astute about helping ourselves.”Giovanni Russonello contributed research.Follow The New York Times’s politics and Washington coverage on Facebook and Twitter, and sign up for the First Draft politics newsletter.A version of this article appears in print on March 30, 2016, on Page A1 of the New York edition with the headline: Long-Simmering Anger About Trade Is Boiling Over for Voters.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »