
Deal Professor By                     
STEVEN DAVIDOFF SOLOMON

MARCH 29, 2016
Whether experiencing schadenfreude or finding insight, many think they know what is responsible for the turmoil at Valeant Pharmaceuticals International as it falls from a darling of Wall Street to its punching bag.Commentators and analysts have drawn lessons, but few of them are convincing and many seem similar to the kinds of snap judgments that led to this mess.Let’s review the various explanations for Valeant’s woes:This argument contends that Valeant is a house of cards waiting to be brought down by an inevitable accounting scandal. When the debate over Valeant’s accounting of its ties with the mail-order pharmacy Philidor Rx Services first began to rage, a report last October by the short seller Citron Research fanned the flames by comparing Valeant to Enron.The Valeant-as-Enron theory was given a boost after Valeant failed to file its annual report on time because of an accounting restatement and after the board accused the company’s former chief financial officer, Howard B. Schiller, of engaging in “improper conduct.” For his part, Mr. Schiller says he has done nothing wrong.AdvertisementThe Enron theory is seductive, but Valeant is a real operating business that by all accounts is profitable. Unlike Enron, Valeant is not using accounting to cover up huge and unsustainable losses. Indeed, so far the accounting restatements have amounted to only $58 million worth of revenue. And while there may be more accounting restatements on the horizon, there is no indication of outright fraud.This view has gained traction in recent weeks. Valeant’s chief executive, J. Michael Pearson, is a former consultant at McKinsey, having spent 23 years there. And he apparently surrounded himself with former McKinsey people on his team.So did Valeant’s problems arise from a McKinsey-driven ethos devoted to driving shareholder value through financial machinations? Arguably, in the name of these McKinsey principles, Valeant was moved to Canada, shut down large portions of its research and development operations and became a vacuum swallowing up other pharmaceutical companies, all key to its growth strategy.The McKinsey theory has surface appeal — after all, it is easy to make fun of consultants and their PowerPoint presentations. But McKinsey executives have also been at the forefront of arguments about long-term shareholder value and more disciplined acquisition policies. Elsewhere, McKinsey has formed an entire initiative on investing in long-term capital.For good or bad, McKinsey advises thousands of companies, including many drug companies that do not engage in Valeant’s business strategy.AdvertisementThis argument asserts that Valeant’s business choices are coming home to roost. Valeant built itself on spending a reduced amount on research and development. Instead, it paid to acquire drugs and in some cases built profits by raising prices. This business strategy created its downfall — by failing to focus on developing drugs, Valeant left itself exposed to failure.The foundation of this theory is the nonsensical notion that research and development can never be bad. Many drug companies, however, have been unable to capitalize on billions of dollars in research and development and are now resorting to purchases. Gilead Sciences, for example, made itself into a $100 billion company largely through the acquisition of a hepatitis C drug.Shareholder activists are currently taking aim at technology companies for excessive spending on research and development without results. Not focusing on R.&D. was part of Valeant’s business model, but that was not necessarily a problem in today’s world. Indeed it made economic sense for Valeant. The company focused on sales and pricing — something at which it excelled, at least for a while — while others did the development.This view, made popular amid the uproar over Martin Shkreli, has a feel-good nature to it. Proponents of this theory focus on the fact that part of Valeant’s business strategy was to buy drugs and sharply raise the prices. Now, with congressional scrutiny and other attacks, Valeant has backed away from this approach. The halt to this pricing strategy would seem to explain Valeant’s decline.The first problem with this theory is that we don’t have transparency around Valeant’s pricing, or indeed that of any pharmaceutical company. Valeant’s headline price increases were most likely fought by insurers, and the actual increases were no doubt reduced in those battles.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.It is clear that to the extent Valeant’s expansion strategy relied on increasing prices, that is no longer a viable road to growth. But that does not mean there should be a sudden collapse of Valeant. After all, the drugs in its current stable of products are priced where they are and still sell.In this scenario, the blame lies with the shareholder activist fund ValueAct, which partly created the modern-day Valeant. ValueAct arranged for the hiring of Mr. Pearson and participated in creating a compensation package, which, including his stock and options, was worth at one point as much as $3 billion.ValueAct also pressed Valeant to focus on cutting research and development (something that the fund also pushed at Microsoft) and use acquisitions as a substitute. For a time, this was an extraordinarily successful strategy. Even now, ValueAct is still in the black on the Valeant investment.The problem with targeting ValueAct is that this explains the business strategy, but it does not help us understand what went wrong.AdvertisementThere is certainly blame all around for the hedge funds that bid up Valeant’s stock price. The Sequoia Fund, for example, inexplicably put more than a quarter of its portfolio into Valeant. (In a you-can’t-make-this-up sidelight, Sequoia’s chairman is Roger Lowenstein, the author of “When Genius Failed,” about the collapse of Long-Term Capital Management.)These investors should have known better than to chase returns, but this again has nothing to do with Valeant’s business.It is clear there are problems at Valeant, but if Wall Street built Valeant, it is now running away from it. And the velocity of the turnaround has distorted all views of the company. It has created a volatility untethered by reality. In the Wall Street worldview, Valeant is worth either zero or it is worth $100 a share.But Valeant is a real company. It does not make sense for a company with earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, or Ebitda, of about $5 billion a year to be worth only $9 billion. A rival drug company, Allergan, for example, with Ebitda of $7 billion a year and $40 billion of debt, is worth $110 billion.To be sure, Valeant has about $30 billion in debt upon which it might technically default if it cannot file its annual financial statement by April 29. But such a situation is not that uncommon. Companies typically pay a fee to the banks and get a waiver from the debtholders.There is no doubt that Valeant has taken a major hit. The crisis has crushed its previous business model of raising prices and making acquisitions. This has left it a company in transition. Valeant may still take some wrong steps, but wherever it goes from here, one can’t ignore the business it already has — with billions of dollars in earnings.The intrinsic worth of that business remains essentially the same. It is the company that is suffering from a crisis of confidence. The flight by Wall Street shut down Valeant’s old business growth model, not its business.But understanding requires thinking that is a bit too clear-eyed for Wall Street, which when things go bad, prefers the worst. And sometimes it creates a self-fulfilling frenzy. Remember the financial crisis, after all.A version of this article appears in print on March 30, 2016, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Explaining Valeant: The Main Theories.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »