AdvertisementSupported byBy Binyamin AppelbaumJanet L. Yellen, the Federal Reserve chairwoman, said on Tuesday that the United States economy remained on track despite a rough start to the year because the drag from weak growth in other countries was being offset by lower borrowing costs.Ms. Yellen told the Economic Club of New York that the economy “had proven remarkably resilient,” and that the Fed expected better days ahead. She said the Fed still intended to pursue a careful, patient course toward higher interest rates as the economy improved.The cautious tone of her remarks, however, suggested no rate increase was likely at the Fed’s next meeting, in April, shifting the eyes of Fed watchers to its subsequent meeting in June.“I consider it appropriate for the committee to proceed cautiously in adjusting policy,” Ms. Yellen said.Stocks jumped and bond yields fell in the moments after the publication of Ms. Yellen’s remarks, part of a now-familiar pattern in which markets celebrate signs of economic softness and Fed restraint because that means interest rates will stay lower for longer.“The Fed chair is clearly in no hurry to undertake the next rate hike, in spite of the generally firmer tone of U.S. domestic data in recent weeks,” Krishna Guha, head of the global policy and central bank strategy team at Evercore ISI, wrote in a note to clients. He said the remarks underscored that Ms. Yellen would rather move too slowly to raise interest rates and rein in the economy than too quickly.The Fed, which raised its benchmark rate in December for the first time since the financial crisis, continues to debate the timing of a second increase.The Fed’s policy-making committee indicated after its most recent meeting, this month, that it now expected to raise rates by about half a percentage point this year.That was half as much as the Fed had predicted at the beginning of the year.Ms. Yellen attributed the deceleration on Tuesday to a judgment by Fed officials that somewhat lower rates were necessary to maintain steady growth.“The committee in March did rethink to some extent the policy path that is appropriate to achieve an essentially unchanged outlook,” Ms. Yellen said.She described a dynamic in which slower growth in other nations, which tends to drag on domestic growth, had been offset by a loosening of financial conditions.That is the way monetary policy is supposed to work — markets anticipated the Fed’s reaction to a weaker economic outlook, providing a jolt of stimulus before the Fed even had a chance to speak. The Fed then confirmed the market’s expectations by announcing after its March policy meeting that it expected to raise its benchmark interest rate more slowly.Ms. Yellen said the reaction showed that markets have internalized the Fed’s mantra that its management of interest rates is “data dependent,” meaning the Fed’s predictions about the likely path of interest rates are contingent on the economy’s actual performance.“This mechanism serves as an important ‘automatic stabilizer’ for the economy,” she said.While the Fed’s assessment of the economy’s anticipated performance remains unchanged, Ms. Yellen said officials now saw more risks to that outlook.Alongside the direct effects of slower global growth, she said she remained concerned about sluggish inflation and about the deterioration of inflation expectations.The Fed’s preferred measure of inflation rose by 1.7 percent through the 12 months that ended in January, a stronger pace than it managed the previous year. But Ms. Yellen said it was “too early to tell if this recent faster pace will prove durable.”Indeed, Fed officials predicted in March that inflation would subside somewhat in the coming months, attributing the higher readings in the latest inflation survey to unusual jumps in the price of some kinds of goods, most notably clothing.The Fed regards the stability of inflation expectations as a mainstay of effective monetary policy. It wants inflation to be 2 percent a year and it wants people to believe inflation will be 2 percent a year, because expectations help to determine actual inflation.Market-based measures of inflation expectations, however, are running well below 2 percent, while some survey-based measures also have drifted lower.Ms. Yellen acknowledged these trends, a change from last year when Fed officials were largely dismissive. But she said the significance was “far from conclusive.”Fed officials continue to regard the decline in market-based measures as a result of pressures unrelated to expectations about inflation. And Ms. Yellen said that survey-based measures historically had fallen hand-in-hand with oil prices.“Taken together, these results suggest that my baseline assumption of stable expectations is still justified,” she said.“Nevertheless, the decline in some indicators has heightened the risk that this judgment could be wrong,” she added. “If so, the return to 2 percent inflation could take longer than expected and might require a more accommodative stance of monetary policy.”Advertisement