AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben ProtessA senior federal prosecutor who led one of the few criminal cases against Wall Street executives in the aftermath of the financial crisis announced on Tuesday that he was stepping down from his role in the government.James G. McGovern, the head of the criminal division at the United States attorney’s office in Brooklyn, said he would join the law firm Hogan Lovells in its New York office. As a partner at the firm, Mr. McGovern will defend white-collar criminal cases and conduct internal investigations, he said.Mr. McGovern’s move comes as the United States attorney’s office in Brooklyn, once overshadowed by its Manhattan counterpart, has raised its profile in a big way. In recent months, the office has announced several headline-grabbing cases, including the case against the former pharmaceutical executive Martin Shkreli and the bribery charges against top leaders of FIFA, soccer’s multibillion-dollar governing global body. The former leader of the Brooklyn office, Loretta Lynch, is now the United States attorney general.“I feel like I’m leaving the office in the finest form it’s ever been in,” Mr. McGovern, whose last day was Monday, said in an interview. “Our office is in Brooklyn, but we’re covering the world."His departure will cap a 16-year career as a federal prosecutor, 11 of them in Brooklyn and the rest in Washington. In Brooklyn, Mr. McGovern handled a wide range of white-collar cases, perhaps the biggest of which came in the wake of the 2008 financial crisis, when prosecutors accused two Bear Stearns hedge fund managers of lying to investors.Mr. McGovern did not oversee the investigation, but when two of his colleagues left the office, he was selected to lead the trial.It was expected that the trial would be the first of several aimed at Wall Street executives, but instead it was the last. A jury acquitted both men in 2009, a setback that seemed to have a chilling effect on the government’s remaining crisis-era investigations.Mr. McGovern, a graduate of Catholic University’s law school who also spent time as a local prosecutor in Staten Island and Manhattan, focused much of his career on violent crime. In 2013, he secured a death sentence for Ronell Wilson, who was convicted of killing two New York Police Department detectives. It was the first such sentence imposed in New York in over 50 years, though a judge recently reversed that decision because Mr. Wilson was considered to be intellectually disabled.At Hogan Lovells, where Ms. Lynch was previously a partner, Mr. McGovern is expected to stick to white-collar cases, particularly those related to foreign bribery. He will join the firm’s “global bribery and corruption task force.”“With an impressive track record and strong relationships with high-level government officials throughout the country, he is an ideal addition to our white-collar practice in New York,” Oliver J. Armas, managing partner of the firm’s New York office, said in a statement.Advertisement