By LIZ MOYERMARCH 29, 2016
Despite a turbulent market and dwindling investor appetite for stakes in private start-ups, the robo-adviser firm Betterment has received $100 million from venture capital investors, pushing its valuation to $700 million, nearly double its value this time last year.The Swedish investment firm Kinnevik led the investment round, which also included the previous investors — Bessemer Venture Partners, Menlo Ventures, Anthemis Group and Francisco Partners.Betterment says it will use the money to increase product development and expand its business. It is its largest investment round yet.So-called robo-advisers, which offer retail investors low-cost portfolios of exchange traded funds through digital rather than human interaction, have boomed in the past few years and attracted the attention of established financial firms, some of which have scrambled to develop their own offerings and some of which have decided to acquire companies in the sector.AdvertisementInterest in the growing robo-industry is rising even as venture capital investment activity is cooling off, as investors consider whether they paid too much for stakes in some start-ups, like the messaging app Snapchat and the cloud-storage company Dropbox.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Betterment, based in New York, had a $60 million investment round in February 2015, valuing it at $450 million. One of its earlier investors was Northwestern Mutual, a Milwaukee-based insurer that acquired the digital financial planning site LearnVest last year.Wealthfront, a San Francisco rival to Betterment, has attracted investments from Greylock Partners and Marc Andreessen, the Netscape founder and Facebook board member, among others. Motif Investing, a digital brokerage, has received investments from J. P. Morgan Chase, Goldman Sachs and Ignition Partners.AdvertisementThe asset manager BlackRock acquired another robo-firm, FutureAdvisor, last year.Betterment has $3.9 billion in assets under management, up from just over $1.1 billion at the end of 2014. It offers accounts to retail investors and to independent advisers who want to give their clients a digital offering. It recently rolled out a program for small company retirement accounts.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.