By BILL VLASICMARCH 30, 2016
General Motors won a second consecutive case in litigation over its defective ignition switches, when a New York jury on Wednesday found that a faulty switch was not responsible for a 2014 accident that injured two people.The jury in the United States District Court in Manhattan returned the verdict after G.M. had argued during a two-week trial that the crash in New Orleans was caused by icy road conditions.While the jury found that the vehicle in the case, a Saturn Sky, was dangerous to drive because of its defective switch, it found no evidence that the accident was caused by ignition failure.The case is one of six so-called bellwether trials being conducted to resolve a variety of legal claims against G.M., which two years ago recalled about 2.6 million vehicles equipped with ignition switches that could suddenly cut engine power and disable airbags.AdvertisementAll of these cases were consolidated in New York for the bellwether purposes, and the first was dismissed in January because of accusations that the plaintiff had given misleading testimony about his health and financial situation.AdvertisementG.M. said that the verdict on Wednesday reflected evidence that the accident was caused by severe weather, and not ignition problems.“The jurors studied the merits of the case and saw the truth,” the company said in a statement. “This was a very minor accident that had absolutely nothing to do with the car’s ignition switch.”A lawyer for the plaintiffs, Randall Jackson, objected to the outcome.“We definitely disagree with the overall verdict,” he said in comments reported by The Associated Press. “But we’re pleased with the findings that the jury made with regard to the fact that our client’s car was unreasonably dangerous.”G.M. said the bellwether trials covered most of the 235 injury and wrongful death cases that are pending in state and federal courts against the company. The next case is scheduled to go to trial in May.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The litigation represents the last phase of G.M.’s efforts to move past the worst safety crisis in its history.After admitting in early 2014 that it had failed for a decade to fix millions of small cars with faulty ignition switches, the company fired 15 employees, overhauled its engineering operations, and ultimately recalled about 30 million vehicles for various defects.Since then, the company has paid about $600 million in compensation to settle 399 ignition-switch claims, including 124 death cases.It also announced a settlement of $275 million covering an additional 1,385 death and injury cases, and a $300 million payment to settle a class-action suit by shareholders.AdvertisementLast year, the automaker agreed to pay $900 million to settle a criminal investigation conducted by the Justice Department. G.M. also agreed to fines imposed by the Transportation Department, as well as long-term monitoring of its safety practices by government regulators.The ignition-switch crisis also led to changes in regulatory procedures at the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, which had failed to act on reports of accidents involving G.M. vehicles equipped with defective switches.This year, the agency reached an agreement with 18 major automakers, including G.M., to collectively analyze and share recall and safety data.A version of this article appears in print on March 31, 2016, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Jury Clears G.M. Switch of Fault in ’14 Car Crash.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.