
Deal Professor By                     
STEVEN DAVIDOFF SOLOMON

MARCH 30, 2016
Among the many issues Starwood Hotels & Resorts faces in negotiating a deal with Anbang Insurance Group, the secretive Chinese insurance giant, is a stark one: Any deal Starwood negotiates may not be worth the paper it is printed on.The enforcement problem may arise because Anbang is based in China. If the Anbang-led consortium wins its bidding contest against Marriott International and enters into an agreement to acquire Starwood, that agreement will become the main way Starwood would force Anbang to complete the transaction if financing issues or any others come up. As with any agreement, if one party fails to honor the terms, Starwood would have to sue Anbang to enforce the deal.This is where the problem arises.If Starwood won a lawsuit in the United States, it would have to enforce the judgment in China, where Anbang and its assets are. Good luck with that.China is notorious for its weak rule of law, and whether or not a Chinese court would actually enforce a United States judgment against Anbang is unknown.AdvertisementThis is a good lesson for anyone dealing with companies outside the United States: Having a great claim is meaningless unless you have a pocket to get money from.AdvertisementThere are ways that American companies try to get around this issue. One method is for companies to agree that any dispute will be arbitrated. Enforcement of arbitration awards is typically easier because many countries are parties to the 1958 United Nations Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards, known as the New York Convention. This treaty requires any country that is a party to it to honor an arbitration award and enforce it without trying the case again in court.The treaty is viewed as a more certain way to enforce foreign judgments. Because of this, many deals with companies located in countries with weak rule of law use arbitration. Most cross-border deals with Russian companies, for example, are subject to arbitration in case of dispute rather than litigation in Russia itself.China is a party to this treaty, so many agreements with Chinese companies contain arbitration provisions. But there is a common belief that Chinese courts will not enforce these awards. And in any event, the idea of going through arbitration and then trying to enforce a $14 billion deal in a Chinese court is ludicrous. Starwood can’t wait the years this would take.So, Starwood’s lawyers are assuming that Starwood will really have no recourse in China to enforce its agreement if Anbang decides to breach it.All is not lost, however. Starwood’s lawyers will look for Anbang to put up collateral — mainly American assets. These will secure any judgment so that Starwood would not have to turn to China.The problem is that Anbang has limited assets in the United States. It owns the Waldorf Astoria, which it bought for $1.95 billion, and has agreed to buy Strategic Hotels and Resorts from Blackstone for $6.5 billion. But these assets are not enough. In both cases, Anbang most likely borrowed heavily to acquire them and they will not be available to meet the full purchase price for Starwood.This leaves the last option. Starwood’s lawyers will have to look for a deposit or a letter of credit. It is also possible to get commitments from Anbang’s owners, though the problem is that they are unknown and are also very likely abroad.The gold standard for dealing with this issue along these lines is the Smithfield deal. In that acquisition, Smithfield Foods was bought by Shuanghui International Holdings, a Chinese company with no assets in the United States.AdvertisementIn that case, Smithfield’s only remedy if the transaction failed was to collect a termination fee of up to $275 million, about 5 percent of the transaction value. Shuanghui funded this termination fee by putting it in escrow. Smithfield preserved the possibility of suing Shuanghui if it willfully breached the agreement, but the parties knew that this action would not go anywhere.But in a hostile bidding war a 5 percent deposit is weak brew. So this deal may set a new standard for how targets deal with the completion risk from Chinese bidders. Perhaps there will be a “super escrow” here of multiple billions. And it may be funded by letters of credit or financing letters instead of cash deposits.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Starwood should fight hard on this issue, though, because of the regulatory issues.The China risk on this transaction goes beyond the enforcement of the agreement. Approval of Chinese regulators is required for this deal and there are signs that the government may not approve, since the amount will exceed 15 percent of Anbang’s assets, the limit on insurers’ foreign investment under Chinese rules.That’s the talk at least. The Chinese regulatory process is a bit opaque.But remember what is driving this deal? Anbang is willing to pay so much in order to arbitrage the Chinese currency, the renminbi. Anbang knows that the renminbi might go down, and is desperate to get its money out and convert it to dollars. Indeed, Anbang appears partly built on a currency play. Many Chinese citizens buy its high-yielding life insurance products because that allows for the conversion of renminbi into dollars. Perhaps the Chinese government may be more forgiving to Anbang, as this conversion may benefit the company if there is indeed further renminbi devaluation.But who knows? And that creates regulatory risk No. 1 for Starwood.Then there is the issue of national security approval in the United States by the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States, or Cfius, a committee of various federal agencies charged with reviewing foreign takeovers for national security purposes.A hotel acquisition does not on its face raise national security issues. Cfius, however, does review how close Starwood’s hotels are to national security facilities. It has previously blocked investments in a wind farm and a gold mining company by Chinese companies because these properties were located too close to military facilities.Cfius will almost certainly not block the Starwood deal, but it may require divestments of hotels, like Starwood properties near the White House. This analysis will take a while since Starwood has about 1,300 properties. But this will only delay, not hold up, a deal.The final risk to this transaction is financing. Anbang will be looking to borrow billions to finance the deal with its partners J. C. Flowers & Company and Primavera Capital. But financing can fall through, particularly in today’s markets in the United States and China.AdvertisementAnd so, the questions really are whether Starwood will take the risk here, and how the lawyers deal with it. There are no complete solutions — Starwood is unlikely to be able to get an agreement that it can enforce or collect the full acquisition price if Anbang walks away.Because of this risk, Marriott’s bid is likely to be a better one even if Anbang is willing to pay more. This is because the bird in the hand of Marriott is a better bet.We learned this lesson in the financial crisis. Then, the chemical maker Huntsman terminated a deal with Basell to accept a higher offer from Hexion, but one with greater antitrust risk. The risk proved not to be worth it, as Hexion was unable to finance the deal and walked, paying Huntsman a fraction of what it lost.But if Starwood chooses Anbang, how it deals with these issues will very likely be the template for how American acquisition targets deal with Chinese issues going forward. After all, if Anbang can convert renminbi at inflated prices to pay inflated values for American properties, why can’t other Chinese buyers?Many here in the United States are worrying about a whole different risk in this transaction. Which one will better honor those Starwood points: Marriott or Anbang?We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »