AdvertisementSupported byBy Daniel VictorA German historian said in new research that The Associated Press, the international news organization based in New York, formally cooperated with Nazi Germany in the 1930s, including the employment of a photographer who worked for a Nazi propaganda division.The research by Harriet Scharnberg, of Martin Luther University, argued that The A.P. was complicit in allowing the Nazis to “portray a war of extermination as a conventional war.” Her research was reported Wednesday in The Guardian.The Nazi regime cracked down on local and international press with a restrictive law in 1933, but The A.P. was able to report in Germany until 1941, when the United States joined the war. In a statement, The A.P. said that until Ms. Scharnberg’s research, it “had no knowledge of any accusation that material may have been directly produced and selected by Nazi propaganda ministries.”“A.P. rejects the suggestion that it collaborated with the Nazi regime at any time,” the company said. “Rather, The A.P. was subjected to pressure from the Nazi regime from the period of Hitler’s coming to power in 1932 until the A.P.’s expulsion from Germany in 1941. A.P. staff resisted the pressure while doing its best to gather accurate, vital and objective news for the world in a dark and dangerous time.”The A.P. said Ms. Scharnberg’s research addressed a German photo agency subsidiary of A.P. Britain. The photographer, Franz Roth, was part of the S.S. propaganda division whose photographs were personally chosen by Adolf Hitler, The Guardian reported.The A.P. removed his photos from its website after Ms. Scharnberg’s research was published, according to The Guardian.The A.P. is reviewing any photos credited to Mr. Roth in light of Ms. Scharnberg’s “new-to-us reference to him,” Paul Colford, an A.P. spokesman, said in an email.“A.P. archivists were unfamiliar with Franz Roth and his activities before and during World War II,” Mr. Colford said, adding that the archivists assisted Ms. Scharnberg in her research. “We have no record of him at all.”Mr. Colford said The A.P. does not have personnel records of German employees during the 1930s. The records were most likely destroyed by the Russian military during an assault on Berlin, he said.Photos that came from the Nazi government were labeled in captions or photo credits, The A.P. said. U.S. newspapers would use their own editorial judgment to decide whether or not to publish the images.“Images of that time from Germany had legitimate news value as editors and the public needed to learn more about the Nazis,” The A.P. said.It could not immediately be determined if The New York Times used any of Mr. Roth’s photos because the newspaper did not publish photographers’ names in photo credits in the 1930s. The Times had two correspondents in Berlin until 1941, when Germany expelled all American journalists after Pearl Harbor.In 1939, Louis P. Lochner, the A.P. bureau chief, won the Pulitzer Prize for his reporting on the Nazi regime. The A.P. said he resisted pressure to fire Jewish employees and eventually arranged for them to have A.P. jobs outside Germany, perhaps saving their lives.Advertisement