By REUTERSNOV. 13, 2015
WASHINGTON —  Retail sales rose less than expected in October, hindered by a surprise decline in automobile purchases.The October results suggest a developing slowdown in consumer spending that could temper expectations of a strong pickup in fourth-quarter economic growth.Other data on Friday showed a second monthly decline in producer prices as the cost of services fell. Still, the soft inflation and signs of slowing consumer spending are unlikely to deter the Federal Reserve from raising interest rates next month, economists said.“The weak reports will provide some cause for caution at the Fed, and while they are unlikely to change the prevailing bias for a December ‘liftoff,’ they could add to the case for a shallower tightening path thereafter,” said Millan Mulraine, deputy chief economist at TD Securities in New York.AdvertisementThe Commerce Department said retail sales edged up 0.1 percent last month after being unchanged in September and August. Economists had forecast a 0.3 percent increase.AdvertisementSales at auto dealerships fell 0.5 percent last month after rising 1.4 percent in September. The decline was surprising because automakers reported strong sales for October. Economists said heavy discounting to attract buyers probably caused the discrepancy. A 0.9 percent drop in the value of sales at service stations, which reflected lower gasoline prices, also helped to restrain retail sales last month.
            Total retail and food services sales, seasonally adjusted.        AUG.Unch.SEPT.Unch.OCT.+0.1%$450billion400350300’14’15NOV. 13, 2015
Retail sales excluding automobiles, gasoline, building materials and food services rose 0.2 percent after a 0.1 percent gain in September. These so-called core retail sales correspond most closely with the consumer spending component of gross domestic product.The lackluster report suggests that the savings from cheaper gasoline were used to pay rent, which increased substantially in the last year.Barclays trimmed its fourth-quarter gross domestic product estimate by one-tenth of a percentage point to a 2.4 percent annual rate. The weak October retail sales also could raise concerns about the holiday shopping season. But economists are optimistic of sturdy consumer spending for the rest of the year, as faster job growth and low inflation increase disposable income.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.That view was supported by the University of Michigan’s consumer sentiment index, which rose to 93.1 in early November from 90.0 in October.The survey showed improvement in buying plans for large discretionary purchases, especially vehicles. Lower-income households also were upbeat about their prospects this month.“The rise in confidence to the level last seen in July might ease a few concerns at the Fed about slowing growth in recent months,” said John Ryding, chief economist at RDQ Economics in New York.The Labor Department’s Producer Price Index fell 0.4 percent last month after dropping 0.5 percent in September. In the 12 months through October, the index fell 1.6 percent. The decline was the largest since the revamped series started in 2009 and followed a 1.1 percent drop in September. Economic growth slowed to a 1.5 percent rate in the third quarter as businesses worked through an inventory glut and energy companies continued to cut spending in response to lower oil prices.But a separate report from the Commerce Department suggested that the drag on third-quarter growth from inventories was probably not as large as initially thought. Retail inventories excluding autos, which go into the G.D.P. calculation, increased 0.5 percent in September after a similar rise in August.A version of this article appears in print on November 14, 2015, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Auto Sales Dip, Hurting Overall Spending .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.