By REUTERSNOV. 13, 2015
BERLIN — Economic growth in the eurozone slowed unexpectedly in the third quarter, as weaker foreign trade held back Germany and France, the region’s two biggest economies, while much of the rest of the bloc underperformed.The economy of the 19-member eurozone grew 0.3 percent in the third quarter, slowing a touch from 0.4 percent in the prior quarter, according to Eurostat, trade bloc’s statistics office. The figures reinforced expectations that the European Central Bank would expand its monetary stimulus next month.“The eurozone recovery is continuing, but it seems like driving with the handbrake on,” said Peter Vanden Houte, an ING economist. “We believe that the E.C.B. has actually already made up its mind and that today’s figures are not strong enough to deter them from going ahead with the intended easing.”On Thursday, the central bank’s president, Mario Draghi, underlined the bank’s readiness to extend money-printing, warning that inflation, a key measure of economic health, was flagging. The bank’s next policy meeting is set for Dec. 3.AdvertisementHighlighting the weak price pressures in much of the eurozone, figures from Spain showed inflation there actually fell 0.7 percent year-on-year in October.AdvertisementBut Spain’s economic growth was otherwise a rare bright spot in the eurozone, expanding by a healthy 0.8 percent. Its recovery, however, is failing to bridge a growing gulf between rich and poor, adding to problems in its already-strained social security system.The eurozone’s two leaders, Germany and France, each grew by 0.3 percent in the third quarter. But their advances were held back by foreign trade, as exports suffered from a slowdown in emerging markets.French exports fell 0.6 percent after growing 1.9 percent in the prior quarter, the statistics office Insee said. Growth in both France and Germany was buoyed by domestic demand, with gains in consumer spending supporting the expansion.Economists said, however, that relying on consumer spending alone to drive growth is risky, especially if domestic investment does not pick up to help offset soft exports.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“It is fair to say that consumers probably saved the day for the eurozone economy in the third quarter,” Mr. Vanden Houte said, adding that falling energy prices and declining unemployment have most likely increased disposable income. But he warned, “the boost from the recent fall in energy prices will gradually peter out over the coming quarters.”Underlining the risks to relying on consumer spending for growth, a survey by the market research group Deloitte showed families across Europe looked set to spend slightly less on average this Christmas, with austerity-hit Greece and Russia showing the steepest declines.British, French, German and Spanish consumers were among those expected to spend more, the survey showed. The overall decline, however, would be at a much slower pace than last year, signaling some improvement in sentiment.On the northern rim of the eurozone, Finland’s economy contracted 0.6 percent in the third quarter, putting the country on track for its fourth consecutive year of contraction.AdvertisementLabeled “the sick man of Europe” by its own finance minister, Finland has yet to return to 2008 output levels because of a string of internal and external setbacks, including the decline of Nokia’s phone business and a recession in neighboring Russia.Italy, the eurozone’s third biggest economy, grew 0.2 percent on the quarter — short of expectations for a 0.3 percent expansion. The Netherlands grew only 0.1 percent against expectations of 0.3 percent. Portugal did not grow at all.Greece’s battered economy contracted again, this time by 0.5 percent, as capital controls hit business.“It is currently hard to see eurozone growth stepping up a gear,” said Howard Archer, economist at IHS Global Insight.A version of this article appears in print on November 14, 2015, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Eurozone Economy Loses Momentum in Third Quarter.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.