AdvertisementSupported byBy Brooks BarnesLOS ANGELES — Peter Chernin, who has made a career of beating Hollywood at its own game, is moving deeper into a crowded corner of the entertainment industry: streaming services.Mr. Chernin and AT&T unveiled plans on Wednesday to turn their jointly owned Fullscreen, a YouTube-based video supplier, into a subscription-based streaming service. For $5 a month, the Fullscreen channel will offer 800 hours of advertising-free programming, including new scripted and unscripted series and episodes of throwback television shows like “Dawson’s Creek” and “Saved by the Bell.”The service, which will be available worldwide and have a user interface designed for viewers to interact with one another in real time, will debut on April 26. It will focus on what is sometimes called the “social-first generation,” or people 13 to 30 years old who spend significant time on social networks like Snapchat and Instagram.“There are a lot of broad-based SVOD services,” Mr. Chernin said by telephone, referring to streaming video on demand, “but none that target this audience — it’s one of the great white spaces out there.”Although Mr. Chernin’s company already operates several niche streaming services, including the anime-focused Crunchyroll, Fullscreen is more akin to the cable television networks of the past: MTV for the social media age.Referencing his extensive experience in traditional television — he helped build the Fox network in the late 1980s and introduce the Fox News Channel in the 1990s — Mr. Chernin added: “I certainly see this as a better opportunity than creating the fourth broadcast network or yet another cable channel. People thought we were out of our minds.”Still, Internet-based streaming services have proliferated in recent years. To some extent at least, Fullscreen will be battling the likes of Netflix, HBO Now, Hulu Plus, Go90 from Verizon and NBCUniversal’s digital comedy service, Seeso — not to mention YouTube Red, an ad-free paid video and music offering, and a profusion of free online video.Mr. Chernin, whose company, the Chernin Group, has been behind films like “Dawn of the Planet of the Apes” and “Spy,” said he believed that the “liveliness” of Fullscreen’s programming, which will be updated daily, and its “extremely rich” user interface, would make the service stand out from the pack. “It needs to feel like a destination, and it will,” he said. Mr. Chernin declined to say how much money the long-in-the-works service cost to create.The participation of AT&T also gives Fullscreen a formidable lift. The communications giant will support the service with a major marketing campaign, including promotion of Fullscreen to its mobile and broadband customers. “We look at this as a fundamental and crucial building block as we transition to a premier mobile entertainment company,” said David Christopher, AT&T’s chief marketing officer.The Fullscreen service will heavily feature Internet personalities like Grace Helbig, who has 2.9 million followers on YouTube and will be a co-star in a remake of the 1970s-era “Electra Woman & Dyna Girl.” Other new series will include “Filthy Preppy Teen$,” which essentially needs no further description; a docu-series called “My Selfie Life,” which will deal with topics like gender transition; and “Shane and Friends,” a comedic series starring Shane Dawson.“These are creators who have already used the social web to develop an audience, which is now eager to see them do more,” said George Strompolos, Fullscreen’s chief executive.Mr. Strompolos founded Fullscreen in 2011 as a type of agency, production company and incubator for YouTube stars, or “video creators.” The company now has a roster of 75,000 of them. Their video output generates five billion views across the web each month, Mr. Strompolos said. Otter Media, a company created by Mr. Chernin and AT&T and funded with $500 million to invest in video services, bought Fullscreen in 2014.The arrival of Fullscreen’s subscription offering reflects the way that this corner of digital media is trying to mature into more meaningful businesses.AwesomenessTV, which started as a collection of YouTube channels aimed at teenage girls, now has merchandising, TV and film divisions and is majority owned by DreamWorks Animation. And Disney is trying to turn its Maker Studios, a YouTube-based network that has struggled with management upheaval, into a supplier and distributor of Disney-themed short-form content.“With this step,” Mr. Strompolos said, “Fullscreen is becoming a true brand.”Advertisement