AdvertisementSupported byBy Chad BrayLONDON — Swedbank said on Wednesday that it would reverse course and replace its chairman, Anders Sundstrom, after he lost the support of institutional investors, making him the latest official to leave the bank, which has been grappling with a corporate governance scandal.The move follows the ouster last month of Michael Wolf, the Swedish lender’s chief executive, who has been referred to financial prosecutors on suspicion of violating market abuse laws.The nominating committee of the bank’s board of directors said last month that it intended to nominate Mr. Sundstrom, chairman since 2013, for re-election to that post at its annual meeting in April.But on Wednesday, Swedbank, based in Stockholm, said that further discussions with institutional shareholders showed that Mr. Sundstrom did not have the backing required to be nominated for another term.“We regret that Anders Sundstrom does not have the support that the Nomination Committee has aimed at, but we want to emphasize that Anders Sundstrom has been of crucial importance for Swedbank’s positive development ever since he first was elected to the board,” Lennart Anderberg, the chairman of the committee, said in a news release.Instead, the committee will propose that Lars Idermark, deputy chairman of the company and a board member since 2010, serve as chairman until its annual meeting next year. The committee noted that Mr. Idermark had “broad support” among Swedish institutional shareholders.Mr. Wolf, who was chief executive for seven years, faced criticism in the Swedish news media for his handling of a scandal involving real estate deals and for potential conflicts of interest by two senior managers, one of whom has since left the bank. The company said last week that its chief financial officer, Goran Bronner would leave the bank this year.The Financial Supervisory Authority of Sweden opened an investigation into the potential conflicts of interest last year.Swedbank said last month it had submitted a report to the financial authority that had been referred to the Economic Crime Authority, which will decide whether to pursue a criminal inquiry. Such agencies generally do not comment on the status of investigations.“The reason for this is that the bank has identified transactions which ‘may be assumed’ to constitute a criminal offense,” the bank said in a news release in February.At the time, Mr. Sundstrom had said that the board sought Mr. Wolf’s departure primarily because of a need for a change in leadership, but he had also acknowledged that the investigation played a role.Mr. Wolf has denied any wrongdoing.Advertisement