By BEN SISARIOMARCH 29, 2016
Two weeks after signing its final licensing deal with a major record company, the online music service SoundCloud has introduced its long-awaited subscription plan. The new program gives customers access to a much wider range of music than is available on competing services like Spotify and Apple, and it offers artists and their labels the promise of royalties.Under the plan, SoundCloud will operate on two levels. The free version will let people listen to 100 million songs, many of which are uploaded directly by artists or selected for promotion by their labels. Customers who pay $10 a month to the new subscription version, called SoundCloud Go, will have access to all those songs as well as to millions more from those labels’ catalogs. They will also have the ability to eliminate ads and save songs to their phone to listen to them offline. The service will have more than 125 million songs, the company said.One example of how the new two-tiered system will work is Adele, whose music is released through Sony in the United States. Free users will be able to hear a few of her singles as well as 30-second samples of the rest of her catalog; subscribers can listen to all of her songs.The new service, introduced on Tuesday, will at first be available only in the United States, but it will be expanding around the world this year, according to the company.The change is a significant departure for SoundCloud and gives it an unusual place in the already crowded market of online music services. Since it was introduced in 2008, SoundCloud has become popular with artists and listeners by setting itself up as a “YouTube for music,” with a huge variety of songs uploaded directly by artists and easily accessible through a free and elegantly designed online platform.AdvertisementIt has been particularly popular with dance D.J.s and rappers, who often post new tracks, remixes and mash-ups. It has attracted 175 million regular users, according to the company.AdvertisementBut the site drew the ire of the major record labels because none of its material was licensed and therefore paid no royalties. SoundCloud, which is based in Berlin, was also facing growing losses by providing a free service, with hosting fees and a small amount of advertising as its only sources of revenue. In 2014, the last year for which it has reported its accounts, the company had $19.5 million in revenue but it had a net loss of almost $44 million.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Since 2014, SoundCloud has signed licensing deals with the major record companies, as well as independents, which give the company access to those labels’ catalogs and allow it to sell subscriptions.The music industry is keen to promote paid-streaming services, which pay much more in royalties than free versions. Streaming generates about 34 percent of the recording industry’s revenue in the United States, more than any other source. According to the Recording Industry Association of America, about 13 million people in the United States were paying for music subscriptions by the end of last year.SoundCloud’s size may be at an advantage as it seeks new subscribers. But its many competitors that sell paid subscriptions to streaming music include not only Spotify, Apple, Tidal and Rhapsody but also the likes of YouTube, Amazon and SiriusXM, which have variations on the streaming model and wide audiences.A version of this article appears in print on March 31, 2016, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: Licensing in Place, SoundCloud Starts Subscription Plan and Takes On Big Rivals.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.