AdvertisementSupported byBy Nelson D. Schwartz and Neil IrwinAfter years of economic desperation, American workers are finally regaining some of the ground they lost in the last decade’s recession and the pallid recovery that followed.Companies have been hiring in recent months at a pace not seen before in this century. Wages are rising faster than inflation. Joblessness is hovering near the low levels last reached in 2007 before the economy’s downturn.And perhaps most significantly, the army of unemployed people who gave up and dropped out of the job market is not only looking for work, but actually finding it.The 215,000 jump in payrolls in March reported by the Labor Department on Friday capped the best two-year period for hiring since the late 1990s, while the proportion of Americans in the labor force — which had been on a downward trajectory since 2001 and an even steeper slide since 2008 — hit a two-year high.“It’s really a best-case scenario,” said Michelle Meyer, deputy head of United States economics at Bank of America Merrill Lynch. “I was particularly encouraged by the pickup in labor force participation.”The underlying strength apparent in the report for March reinforces growing evidence that the economy, despite a host of remaining ills, is now consistently moving in the right direction.“This is close to a Goldilocks scenario,” said Scott Clemons, chief investment strategist at Brown Brothers Harriman. He noted that hiring and wage gains were healthy in March, but not so robust as to ignite inflation fears and tempt the Federal Reserve to move more quickly to raise rates and temper growth.To be sure, the damage from the financial crisis and the severe recession it spawned is still not fully healed. Even with improvement of the past six months, the proportion of Americans in the labor force remains significantly below where it was when the recession began at the end of 2007.“The labor force in the last few months has seen significant gains,” said Claire McKenna, senior policy analyst with the National Employment Law Project, an advocacy group for lower-wage workers. “Things are moving in the right direction, but very slowly.”At the same time, while some of the highest-paid employees on Wall Street and at many leading companies have enjoyed big jumps in compensation, most workers have experienced only very modest wage gains, heightening worries about income inequality.The American economy still faces fundamental headwinds that are not likely to abate soon — like a persistent trade gap, low productivity and the long-term erosion of factory jobs that provide an economic lifeline to workers without a college degree.In fact, the manufacturing sector was one of the few weak spots in the economy last month, losing 29,000 jobs.But companies in the business of providing health care, leisure and hospitality and retailing each gained more than 40,000 jobs in March. And two very different sectors that pay well — construction as well as professional and business services — both added more than 30,000 jobs.The overall unemployment rate rose to 5 percent last month, compared with 4.9 percent in February. But even that was a positive indication, analysts said, since it was the uptick in new entrants to the labor force that mostly accounted for the rise rather than job losses.If anything, Friday’s report portrays an economy gradually returning to a more normal trajectory, while so far avoiding the bubblelike excesses that prevailed in the late 1990s and just before the Great Recession in December 2007.“The last two years have been the best since 1998 and 1999, and that’s saying a lot,” said Nariman Behravesh, chief economist at IHS, a research and consulting firm. “Those were boom years that we look back on very fondly, so to have that level of job growth again is pretty remarkable.”As a result, the economic backdrop of the presidential campaign is also starting to shift. Democrats note that unemployment has fallen sharply since President Obama took office; the jobless rate stood at 7.8 percent in January 2009.Cities like Denver; San Jose, Calif.; and Austin, Tex., are now among those with the best-performing labor markets, while places like Las Vegas, Chicago and Detroit remain laggards.Republicans have been citing stagnant wage growth, as well as the exit of many workers from the labor force in recent years. On the campaign trail, they also contend that Mr. Obama’s stewardship of the economy has hobbled businesses in a web of excessive regulations.But the steady expansion of the work force and the signs that a tightening labor market is finally translating into wage gains could ease some of the economic anxiety that has marked the primary season for Republican and Democratic candidates alike.While some big companies have announced layoffs in recent months facing worries on Wall Street about profit margins, smaller firms are picking up the slack, especially in the technology sector.“If you’re a start-up, you’re either growing or dying and we’ve been growing,” said Adam M. Ochstein, the founder of the Chicago-based StratEx, which provides software that enables companies to automate human resources departments and cut down on paperwork.StratEx hired two workers in March and plans to hire eight this month, bringing its overall work force to just over 80.To lure software developers with three to five years under their belt, Mr. Ochstein has to pay about $100,000 a year. New hires for StratEx’s help desk, who have been working for the same amount of time, command less than half that annually.Until recently, the proportion of Americans either employed or actively looking for a job was falling. But it appears to have bottomed out at 62.4 percent in September 2015. The 63 percent participation rate is now back to where it was in February 2014.Although it has been a modest improvement, it was enough to draw the attention of Janet L. Yellen, the Fed chairwoman. She termed the increase in participation “heartening” at a news conference last month.“Wages and participation are where the rubber meets the road,” said Michael Gapen, chief United States economist at Barclays. “We will take our cue about the overall strength of the economy based on that.”Mr. Gapen, like many on Wall Street, urged the Fed to let the good times roll.“Ms. Yellen is likely to see the March report as evidence that the Fed’s policies are working and that their accommodative policies are helping to heal the labor market,” he said. “So why push rates higher and potentially choke off that process?”Advertisement