By MICHAEL CIEPLYMARCH 31, 2016
LOS ANGELES — The debate over race in Hollywood edged its way into the legal system by way of a judge’s order.The case was filed by the music executive Gerald E. Heller, who is alleging that the makers of “Straight Outta Compton” defamed him and infringed his rights.Mr. Heller may now get his day in court, after a ruling issued on Wednesday by Judge Michael W. Fitzgerald, of the United States District Court for the Central District of California in Los Angeles.Mr. Heller, who was once in business with N.W.A., the rap group at the center of the film, is arguing in a lawsuit filed last fall that Paul Giamatti’s portrayal of him as a sleazy, exploitive music manager violated his rights and impaired his livelihood.AdvertisementNBCUniversal, parent of Universal Pictures, which distributed “Straight Outta Compton,” has joined various writers and producers, including Dr. Dre and Ice Cube, in opposing the suit.The suit survived a motion to dismiss filed by the defendants after the judge allowed Mr. Heller to file an amended complaint.In his ruling, Judge Fitzgerald noted that Mr. Heller’s dealings with N.W.A. were a legitimate topic of public interest. As a result, Mr. Heller is part of the exploding social debate over diversity, the judge wrote.“An older, white man with extensive experience in the music business is contrasted with young black men who feel underpaid, undervalued and exploited,” he ruled.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Such issues, he added, “permeate our society, including the entertainment sector, as shown by the recent #OscarsSoWhite controversy, which itself arose in part because of the film,” which was largely snubbed in the most recent Academy Award nominations.Because Mr. Heller, known as Jerry, figures in that broad debate, the judge reasoned, some of his claims may be barred in California by a measure called the Strategic Lawsuit Against Public Participation, or Anti-SLAPP, law. The law protects activity that involves rights of petition and free speech.AdvertisementMr. Heller will still be allowed to file an amended complaint to prove that specific elements of the film were defamatory. But he will also have to overcome a precedent from the 1990s, in which, as Judge Fitzgerald noted, the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit in San Francisco surmised that viewers have learned not to take docudramas too seriously.“To the contrary,” the appeals court wrote, “most of them are aware by now that parts of such programs are more fiction than fact.”“Straight Outta Compton,” which was released last August, continues to create many legal dramas of its own in three Los Angeles courtrooms.Aside from the suit before Judge Fitzgerald, one involves a case filed in state civil court, in which the family of Terry Carter sued those involved with the film over his death near the set of a Compton promotional shoot for the movie.A criminal case has been filed  against Marion Knight Jr., known as Suge, who was also portrayed in the film. He is accused of murdering Mr. Carter by running over him with a truck.A version of this article appears in print on April 1, 2016, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: Judge Says a ‘Straight Outta Compton’ Suit Can Proceed.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.