
Breakingviews By                     
KATE DUGUID

MARCH 31, 2016
Students deserve debt relief, but the truth should come first.Some 250,000 additional Corinthian Colleges graduates are eligible to have their government loans forgiven after the defunct for-profit institution lied about their employment prospects. And a Thomas Jefferson School of Law graduate lost her fraud case against the school for promoting questionable job-placement data. Strict disclosure rules for all schools would be better than lawsuits and government aid as a way to ensure educator honesty.Corinthian students heard some whoppers. The school boasted that nearly all graduates of its vocational programs got jobs when almost none did. Students who enrolled in its ultrasound, X-ray or radiology technician departments in California were not told until later that the programs never existed.The school received swift punishment for its fibs last year, when federal officials cut off funding and hastened Corinthian’s demise. Thomas Jefferson Law School, based in San Diego, fared much better. A California jury last week rejected claims made by a graduate, Anna Alaburda, that the institution misled her by not limiting its employment statistics to positions in the legal industry, as most other law schools do.Both situations highlight the need for strong national standards on job-placement reports. The federal government has plenty of incentive to create them. The Corinthian debacle alone could cost it as much as $3.5 billion in uncollected loans. What’s more, 2,500 students from other schools have filed claims of being misled about their employment prospects, according to a report prepared for the Department of Education.AdvertisementAs it stands, the standards vary widely from state to state. Federal and state officials did cooperate successfully over Corinthian, running a monthslong investigation that discovered fraud at 91 of the college’s campuses.But the process is unnecessarily complex. To forgive loans, federal officials must usually find a violation of state reporting laws. If no such laws exist, or they are too lax to cover fraud, some other grounds for debt relief need to be identified. If a school goes out of business, as Corinthian did, that can qualify.AdvertisementThe Education Department recently established employment-reporting requirements that for-profit schools must follow. But at this point, the rules are too loose to be effective. Strict national standards are overdue for students and taxpayers alike.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »