

      By CHRISTINE HAUSER

UPDATED March 31, 2016

We’re The New York Times, and we hate fun. Just kidding! But we are here to warn you not to fall for April Fools’ Day pranks. You’re welcome.
We’re The New York Times, and we hate fun. Just kidding! But we are here to warn you not to fall for April Fools’ Day pranks. You’re welcome.April Fools’ Day can be dangerous professionally to people like journalists and stockbrokers who trade in facts. It is a day when the Internet, already rife with rumor, becomes an even more fertile breeding ground for hoaxes. Many have become so wary of tricks that they just want to take a break from social media until it’s over. In 2013, The Times did a roundup of big companies and their jokes. No, Sony did not launch a line of electronics for pets. And there is no such thing as Vimeow, a Vimeo service dedicated to cat videos.Financial traders must be extra careful when reacting to new-product announcements by companies that list their shares. Take this press release by Tesla on April 1 last year, introducing a line of watches called the Model W. “It is infinitely adjustable, able to tell the time no matter where you are on Earth. Japan, Timbuktu, California, anywhere! This will change your life. Reality as you know it will never be the same,” the release said. It was a gem of a claim that should have sent up a clear red flag. But apparently, many who trade on the markets failed to click past the headline: “Announcing the Tesla Model W.” In the first minute following the announcement, Tesla’s stock jumped, CNBC reported. Nearly 400,000 shares traded in that time, the heaviest one minute of trading volume since the opening 60 seconds on Feb. 12, Fortune reported. Journalists also fell for it and then issued retractions, including one by Reuters. Beware the prankster Richard Branson. One of the most prolific and high-profile April Fools’ Day pranksters, Mr. Branson, the founder of Virgin Group, describes himself as a “tie-loathing adventurer” and “troublemaker” on his Twitter profile. Among his April Fool’s Day antics: claims that his Virgin USA company was moving to Branson, Mo., and that his airline would introduce glass-bottomed planes. Be wary of his announcements this week. Quartz published a guide to his pranks. Some news outlets often trade in their credibility for a laugh, and it does not always end well. For years, National Public Radio has cultivated a history of April Fools’ jokes, some of which have backfired. A report that a new surgical procedure enabling theater-goers to watch 3-D movies without the bulky glasses generated protests from listeners. There was also the story that the Reagan administration had at one time decided to sell Arizona to Canada. “Some people believed that,” said Daniel Zwerdling, a guest host on NPR.Two radio hosts with Gator Country 101.9, a country music station in South Florida, were suspended from their jobs after they joked on April 1, 2013, that “dihydrogen monoxide” was coming out of household faucets. Worried residents called the local Lee County utilities company, saying they had heard their water was not safe, The News-Press website reported, when in fact it was just the usual combination of hydrogen and oxygen. Tony Renda, general manager at the music station, said the two were “messing with one of the big three: food, water or shelter. They just went too far.”  Police departments are particularly stressed on April Fools’ Day. Last year, a young man called the police in Savannah, Tenn., and said he had taken his mother and sister hostage, knifed his father and had a shotgun and an M-16. When heavily armed teams of officers arrived at the address, they discovered the actual residents asleep.  “I wake up to them coming into my bedroom shining lights in my eyes. And I didn’t know what was going on,” said Brent Taylor, a victim of the prank called “swatting,” told a local station, News Channel 3. Other jokes that became police-blotter material include a man in Maine who liked to dress up as Batman and who was arrested after he posted on Facebook that he would blow up a hospital unless he was paid $1 million, and a woman who told her sister she had killed her husband and needed help burying him. “The next thing I knew, there was law everywhere,” the woman, Susan Hudson, told WKPT 19 in Kingsport, Tenn. “The response was excellent.”  In 2013, Tori Wheeler, who was 18, told her boyfriend, Derek Bauer, that she was pregnant as a joke. Mr. Bauer reacted angrily, the Wagoner County sheriff’s office said, according to a report by NewsOn6.com in Oklahoma. Ms. Wheeler then threatened him with a knife, perhaps another attempt at humor. When Mr. Bauer called the police, Ms. Wheeler lost her temper and cut him on the neck, the sheriff’s office said. He needed seven stitches and also had two bite marks, apparently from the fight with his girlfriend, according to the arrest report. Politicians and sports figures have been known to take advantage of their high profiles with April humor. Mark Cuban, the owner of the Dallas Mavericks, once staged an elaborate hoax in front of thousands of fans at the city’s American Airlines Center. In 2003, Mr. Cuban hired an actor dressed as a referee who came onto the court during a timeout.Mr. Cuban yelled at the “referee” and then shoved him. As it escalated, Mr. Cuban had trouble keeping a straight face, but Del Harris, then an assistant coach, tried to intervene. Here is the video.“We did it, and I remember thinking, I hope this doesn’t crater,” Mr. Cuban told The Dallas Morning News. “When I stood up and there was the first shove, I could hear the whole place gasp. Then we went at it and I could hear everybody going nuts. Then I started laughing and blew it.”The vice president of the United States, Joseph R. Biden Jr., said he braces himself every April Fools’ Day because a tradition of pranks runs in the family. His wife, Jill, is especially creative, Mr. Biden said, adding that she once surprised him by hiding in an overhead baggage compartment on Air Force Two. “What I worry about when I wake up on April Fool’s Day is ‘what in the hell is Jill going to do this time?’ ” he said in an interview in 2014 with the television show host Rachael Ray. At CERN, the Geneva-based European Organization for Nuclear Research, physicists and engineers are usually hard at work probing the structure of the universe. But last year on April Fools’ Day, CERN wrote an elaborate press statement saying its researchers had discovered evidence of “The Force” and were using it to reshelve library books and reheat coffee, and were hoping to harness it to “fly around.” The aspiring Jedis of the world rejoiced.  On April 2, CERN issued a semi-retraction. “Enjoy our April fool?” it said. “But seriously folks, this week CERN is busy with restarting the Large Hadron Collider. ”  John Oliver, the host of “Last Week Tonight” on HBO, has been an outspoken opponent of what he described as April Fools’ Day’s low-bar comedy. In this 2015 bit, he told his audience that the day had been invented by President Franklin D. Roosevelt in 1934 to raise national morale during the Great Depression. “April Fool! That’s not true at all! I made it up,” he then said gleefully. “Isn’t betrayal fun? That felt bad, didn’t it?!”“We don’t need a special holiday to disappoint our loved ones,” Mr. Oliver added. (In fact, there are numerous theories about how and where the annual day of pranks started.)Mr. Oliver then enlisted his audience in a communal and (warning) vulgar pledge to avoid pranking on April 1. But that was last year. Let’s see how many people stick to it this year. Alain Delaquérière contributed research.Advertisement