
Book Entry By                     
JONATHAN A. KNEE

APRIL 1, 2016
The emergence of the Internet and various forms of digital production and distribution have had a profound and well-documented impact on the media business.In the news sector, an area of high relevance for the strength of democratic institutions, the changes have been particularly significant. The source and nature of these shifts have been the subjects of continuing discussion.The main structural development has been the reduction in fixed-cost investment required to get into the news business. In 1982, a billion-dollar investment from Gannett was required to bring USA Today to sustainability – and no similar feat was ever tried again. By contrast, The Huffington Post, BuzzFeed, Vox, Politico, Quartz, Business Insider, Mail Online, Slate and the dozens of other digital news franchises begun in the last decade collectively required significantly less capital.What’s more, the low cost of digital communications has eased the ability of journalists to gain access to and analyze vast troves of information. Contrast the pains that Daniel Ellsberg had to go to in order to make a few photocopies of the Pentagon Papers with the ease with which Edward Snowden downloaded an estimated 1.5 million documents.AdvertisementOf course, the reduction of barriers to entry in the news business had a tangible cost to those who had benefited from the barriers. Incumbent local news monopolies, which still account for most domestic newspaper circulation, once enjoyed upward of 40 percent profit margins. Although they remain more lucrative than many media businesses like movies, music and books, their profitability has been slashed in half or more. Some marginal newspapers have shut down or reduced their frequency of distribution. And even the strongest franchises have reduced the magnitude of their commitment to investigative journalism as profit margins have been squeezed.The shift in the news sector has its share of winners and losers, but a fair-minded person is likely to conclude that the net impact on the public has been positive – there is vastly more information available, it is easier to reach and there are a multiplicity of new distribution outlets.Julia Cagé, a French economics professor and author of “Saving the Media: Capitalism, Crowdfunding, and Democracy” (Harvard/Belknap), sees no such nuance in the current state of affairs and could not disagree more.AdvertisementAccording to Professor Cagé, the news media faces an existential “crisis” that has “grown radically worse in recent years.” Furthermore, the failure to act, she argues, threatens to undermine our participatory democracy, by letting news become a mere “toy” for “billionaires in search of influence,” “a playground for entrepreneurs in search of entertainment” or “a hunting ground for speculators in search of lucrative deals.”Her conclusion is that the only way “to continue to produce free, high-quality, unbiased information in a variety of forms to ensure that it is accessible to all who want it” is to transfer ownership to an entirely new corporate form —which she called a nonprofit media organization – in which employees, managers and readers share governance responsibility.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.It would be easy to dismiss “Saving the Media” as the anachronistic musings of a European socialist with little application to the American context. For instance, Professor Cagé reviews a wide range of newspaper subsidy programs in force in Europe and concludes with a call for a simplified and enhanced system in which subsidies are doled out in proportion to circulation. It is safe to say that Washington will not be cutting Gannett – the highly profitable circulation leader — a check any time soon.Professor Cagé’s over-the-top hyperbole and frequent misstatement of fact also lend themselves to caricature. For instance, she cites the Koch Brothers as the “most striking example” of her assertion that “it is no accident that the same people are often both large political contributors and major media investors.” Whatever one thinks of the Kochs, they have not to date invested in any media properties.The underlying arguments of Professor Cagé, however, have found a surprising level of sympathy in the United States. The idea that not only is there a news crisis, but that there is a need for government to remedy the impact of the Internet, is widespread. Both the Federal Communications Commission and the Federal Trade Commission have held multiple hearings on suggestive topics like “How Will Journalism Survive the Internet Age?” And The Wall Street Journal has published commentary by the financier Steven Rattner echoing Professor Cagé’s argument that some form of nonprofit organization is needed to protect our democracy.Even if one accepted that there is a news “crisis,” as many apparently suppose, the creation of nonprofit media organizations would not provide a solution for two reasons. First, for all the complex detail on how employees and readers would get disproportionally large voting rights as compared with larger investors, almost nothing is said about how governance would actually work to ensure high quality and independence. The book is silent about precisely how a board of directors would be organized and what role it would play.There is reason to be concerned that this vagueness around journalistic and management decision-making indicates that life under the envisioned political collective of various constituencies may not be as utopian as portrayed.A small scandal erupted last year in France around the publication of “Saving the Media.” Professor Cagé, it turns out, is married to Thomas Piketty, the world-famous author of the 2013 best seller, “Capital in the 21st Century.” Mr. Piketty wrote a rave review of his wife’s book in Libération, the leading left-leaning newspaper in France. Mr. Piketty, however, refused to disclose his familial connection in his generous appraisal even after being requested to do so.The second problem with nonprofit media organizations is the mistaken notion that because the “investment is irrevocable,” it is “hence permanent.” As many nonprofit organizations have learned the hard way, nothing is permanent without a continuous source of funding. The fact that the money that has come in cannot come out does not help once there is no more money. Indeed, the convoluted management and governance structure proposed by Professor Cagé seems intended to ensure that new capital will be both needed and unlikely to be attracted.Those who bemoan the decline of “quality” journalism sometimes seem to use this ambiguous term to signal a discomfort with just how diverse and uncontrollable the viewpoints now available have become. This might explain Professor Cagé’s nostalgia for an era in which far fewer, although much more profitable, news outlets with more homogeneous sensibilities predominated.An earlier version of this column misidentified a quote from the French newspaper Libération on the back cover of Julia Cagé’s book, “Saving the Media: Capitalism, Crowdfunding, and Democracy,” published by Harvard University Press. The quote was from an interview with Professor Cagé in the newspaper, not from the review by Thomas Piketty, her husband.Jonathan A. Knee is Professor of Professional Practice at Columbia Business School and a Senior Advisor at Evercore Partners.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »