AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Gina ChonAlternative lenders are bracing for a regulatory onslaught.The online lender Avant said on Friday that it had appointed to its board Sheila C. Bair, a former chairwoman of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. Plenty of financial tech companies have tapped Wall Street executives to bolster business: SoFi recently brought on Anshu Jain, the former Deutsche Bank co-chief executive, as an adviser. But Avant is the first to snare a watchdog. It makes sense as alternative lenders in particular face growing pressure.As yet, these companies account for less than 5 percent of the markets they operate in, according to Jefferies. But they are growing rapidly. Avant has originated more than $3 billion in loans since it started in 2012. The publicly traded Lending Club has hit $16 billion in nine years – but half of that was last year.One concern that regulators have is pricing. Many borrowers using these new companies find it difficult to get a loan from a traditional bank or want to refinance expensive debt like that from credit cards. As a result, interest rates can be high. Avant, founded by a former payday lender, charges 9.95 percent to 36 percent.It’s a similar story at rivals. Such rates can be justified, but they also raise fears of exploitation, and play into another fear: rising loan defaults.In addition, none of these lenders has experienced a time of rising interest rates. Several have hired seasoned veterans to help. But regulators ought still to ensure that risk processes are up to snuff.Watchdogs are taking their time, though, in part because none has a clear mandate to regulate so-called fintech firms. But they are becoming more active. On Thursday, for example, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency published a first stab at a framework for overseeing the sector.Hiring a former watchdog is no guarantee of a smooth relationship with regulators, of course. Ms. Bair was on the board of Banco Santander when it failed the Federal Reserve’s stress test two years in a row. She resigned from the bank last year. But the more insight these new lenders have into Washington’s ways, the better.Gina Chon is Washington columnist at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.Advertisement