By SAM ROBERTSAPRIL 2, 2016
Bill Green, who as the ombudsman for The Washington Post in 1981 delivered a blistering verdict on journalistic lapses in response to a Post article about an 8-year-old heroin addict that was debunked the day after it won a Pulitzer Prize, died on Monday in Durham, N.C. He was 91.The cause was complications from surgery, his daughter Audrey Green said.Mr. Green, a former small-town journalist, was a respected public affairs expert teaching at Duke University when The Post asked him to take a year’s sabbatical to be its independent watchdog. He was just weeks into the job on Sept. 28, 1980, when The Post published “Jimmy’s World,” a profile of a young Washington addict by a 26-year-old reporter, Janet Cooke. The article went on to win the 1981 Pulitzer Prize for feature writing.Soon afterward, skepticism about the veracity of the article began to mount. City officials and others questioned whether “Jimmy” actually existed.Ms. Cooke eventually confessed to an editor that “Jimmy” was a fabrication. She had heard rumors about a young heroin addict in Southeast Washington, she said, but had never found him and so concocted a composite of several characters she had met during her reporting. No supervisor had asked her for “Jimmy’s” real identity. She also confessed that she had faked her résumé.AdvertisementThe Pulitzer board withdrew the prize. Ms. Cooke resigned and publicly apologized “to my newspaper, my profession, the Pulitzer board and all seekers of the truth.” And Ben Bradlee, the Post’s executive editor, invited Mr. Green to investigate why editors had overlooked warning signs and how the newsroom could guard against another such embarrassing fraud.AdvertisementHis inquiry led to an unflinching 18,000-word indictment that began on the front page of The Post on April 19, 1981. While accepting some of the blame himself for not responding to earlier doubts about the article, he bemoaned the fact that “the jugular of journalism lay exposed, the faith an editor has to place in a reporter.”In his 1995 memoir, “A Good Life,” Mr. Bradlee praised Mr. Green as “one wise and fair sumbitch, as the locals say,” and echoed Mr. Green’s caveat about an individual’s character flaws.“One conclusion I reached,” Mr. Bradlee said, “is you cannot legislate, you cannot make a rule that is going to prevent, preserve you, save you from a pathological liar.”Mr. Green observed that in its eagerness to hire more women and members of minority groups, The Post had never verified the résumé of Ms. Cooke, who is black.“Race may have played some role,” he wrote, “but professional pride and human decency were deeply involved in this story, and that has not a diddle to do with race.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He also emphasized that The Post did not invent Janet Cooke. Rather, he wrote, “Given its competitive nature, it may very well have unwittingly encouraged her success and thereby hastened her failure.” Quoting a reporter, he wrote that “here was an aberration that grew in fertile ground.”Editors, Mr. Green said, had committed a “journalistic felony” by insufficiently vetting Ms. Cooke’s reporting.“If the reporter can’t support the integrity of his or her story by revealing the name to his or her editor, the story shouldn’t be published,” he concluded. “And if that safeguard prevents some news stories from appearing, so be it.”AdvertisementWilliam Lester Green was born in Asheville, N.C., on Nov. 11, 1924. His father, Washington, was a farmer and operated a seed store. His mother was the former Lillian LaRue.After flying reconnaissance missions for the Army Air Forces in Italy during World War II, he graduated from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill in 1949. He was the first member of his family to earn a college degree. He then worked for local newspapers.He was a spokesman for the United States Information Agency and NASA before becoming director of university relations at Duke under Terry Sanford, a former governor, in 1970. He also taught there and established a visiting journalist program.He retired from Duke as a vice president in 1986, worked on Mr. Sanford’s successful campaign for the United States Senate and was his senior assistant when Mr. Sanford was a senator.In addition to his daughter Audrey, Mr. Green is survived by his wife, the former Viola Isabel Yates; four other children, Claudia, Erick and Bryan Green and Lisa Kelley; two brothers, Warren and Ronald; a sister, Zelma Williams; eight grandchildren; and seven great-grandchildren.A version of this article appears in print on April 3, 2016, on Page A26 of the New York edition with the headline: Bill Green, 91, Who Dissected Scandal at Washington Post.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.