By MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDAPRIL 3, 2016
In a move unusual for the highest echelons of American corporate law, one of Wall Street’s top deal makers is defecting to a rival after a 25-year career at the white-shoe law firm Cravath, Swaine and Moore.Scott A. Barshay, who has hundreds of mergers under his belt, is moving to Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton & Garrison, the firm announced on Sunday. Mr. Barshay, it said, will become its global head of mergers and acquisitions.The defection is a big loss for Cravath, whose nearly two-century history includes representing Samuel Morse, Thomas Edison and J.P. Morgan.And it is a bold bid by Paul, Weiss to bolster its mergers team and add another top-flight legal practice to a stable that already includes corporate litigation and white-collar defense. The firm is already known as a favored defender of big banks like Citigroup.Advertisement“It’s a fabulous opportunity for Paul, Weiss,” Brad S. Karp, Paul, Weiss’s chairman, said in an interview. Referring to his new colleague, he added, “He’s one of the nation’s leading M.&A. lawyers, if not the leading M.&A. lawyer.”AdvertisementThe path that led to the poaching of Mr. Barshay, known as a “lateral hire” in the legal industry, began months ago when he worked with Paul, Weiss on defending Xerox against the billionaire activist investor Carl C. Icahn, who was trying to disrupt the company’s strategy.During those negotiating sessions, Mr. Karp and Robert Schumer, the head of Paul, Weiss’s corporate department, raised the possibility of hiring Mr. Barshay, and courted him over meals at Le Bernardin, the Michelin-starred restaurant favored by the three — and conveniently located between the Midtown Manhattan offices of Cravath and Paul, Weiss.Though Mr. Barshay had never thought of leaving his longtime legal home, he said in an interview, the chance to join Paul, Weiss proved too enticing.“This was such an amazing opportunity for me and for our clients that I couldn’t say no,” Mr. Barshay said. “Joining Paul, Weiss was like getting an invitation to join the dream team.”Leaving Cravath, which on Sunday confirmed Mr. Barshay’s resignation, is no small deal. With 442 lawyers, the firm is relatively small compared with behemoths like Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom. But it has had a long run as one of the best-regarded mergers practices in the country, advising blue-chip companies on takeovers and helping defend them against shareholder activists like Mr. Icahn.Cravath ranked second among law firms in terms of deals announced last year, working on 97 transactions worth $926.5 billion, according to data from Thomson Reuters. That put the firm just behind Skadden and ahead of rivals like Sullivan & Cromwell and Wachtell, Lipton, Rosen & Katz.The firm is one of the most profitable in the country, earning nearly $3.4 million per partner in 2014, according to The American Lawyer.AdvertisementMr. Barshay has driven much of Cravath’s deal volume. Last year alone, he counseled Anheuser-Busch InBev in its $106 billion purchase of its fellow beer giant SABMiller, and H. J. Heinz and the investment firm 3G Capital on their $40 billion-plus takeover of Kraft. His mainstay clients include IBM and Barnes & Noble.Cravath’s other deals partners, led by Faiza J. Saeed and Robert I. Townsend III, continue to work on other major takeover matters, including Yahoo’s potential sale of itself, Cigna’s planned $48 billion sale to Anthem and Mylan’s proposed $7.2 billion takeover of its fellow drug maker Meda.In all, Cravath has about 50 partners in its corporate department, which handles deal work.“Cravath will continue to be an M.&A. powerhouse, given its depth of talent, great clients and unique franchise,” said Robert A. Kindler, vice chairman of mergers and acquisitions and global head of mergers and acquisitions at Morgan Stanley.Unlike many law firms, Cravath is known for a “lockstep” system in which partners are paid based on seniority rather than the amount of business that they bring in. Other firms, including Paul, Weiss, tend to link pay more with performance.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Barshay, like nearly every Cravath partner, started at the firm and has worked nowhere else. He joined in 1991 after graduating from Columbia Law School and made partner in 1998.The firm has lost top stars over the years, but usually those partners made career changes. Mr. Kindler and James Woolery became senior investment bankers, though Mr. Woolery briefly returned to practicing law at Cadwalader, Wickersham & Taft.Julie Spellman Sweet left to join Accenture as its general counsel, while Ronald Cami jumped to the investment firm TPG.Over the last decade, only a few Cravath partners before Mr. Barshay, including W. Clayton Johnson and Sarkis Jebejian, moved directly to competing law firms.Now, Mr. Barshay will join those ranks in going to Paul, Weiss, a firm roughly twice as big as the one he is leaving. The 141-year-old New York firm has long been known for both its litigation practice — Mr. Karp’s specialty — and its corporate practice, led by Mr. Schumer, the brother of Senator Charles Schumer.AdvertisementSuch has been the strength of Paul, Weiss’s practice that it has grown its revenue and profit over 20 consecutive years, according to Mr. Karp.Paul, Weiss ranked 19th in the mergers league tables, working on 142 deals announced last year that were worth $309.3 billion. Its list of assignments includes Time Warner Cable’s pending $67 billion sale to Charter Communications and Apollo Global Management’s $6.9 billion takeover of ADT, the security systems provider.Its profitability was even higher than Cravath’s in 2014, according to The American Lawyer, at $3.8 million per partner.But Mr. Karp said that building a truly elite law firm requires top teams in four disciplines: mergers, private equity, litigation and white-collar defense.“We believe, especially with Scott’s addition, that we are the only firm that has market-leading practices in all those areas,” Mr. Karp said.At Paul, Weiss, Mr. Barshay will work alongside Mr. Schumer, who will remain head of the firm’s corporate department. Mr. Schumer said that bringing in his new colleague would mean little change to his own practice.“Scott and I have worked together over the years,” Mr. Schumer said. “I thought this was the perfect addition.”Still, adding Mr. Barshay, a staunch opponent of activist shareholders, will bring at least one change to Paul, Weiss’s legal practice. Though the law firm has mostly represented corporate clients, it has counseled some activists like the hedge fund Elliott Management in their campaigns against companies.Mr. Karp said that the firm would now cease all work representing those investors.“We have been very select in the activists we represent,” he said. “Given this opportunity, we think this is the better way to go.”A version of this article appears in print on April 4, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Cravath Partner Makes a Move to Paul, Weiss.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.