By ROBERT FRANKAPRIL 2, 2016
From the outside, the Premier Cru wine store in Berkeley, Calif., looked like a traditional, upscale wine seller. The 29,000-square-foot store was lined with tapestries, wood shelves and a “rare wine room” stocked with trophy Bordeaux and Burgundies.Yet Premier Cru didn’t just sell wine off the shelves. According to court documents, it built a global, multimillion-dollar trading empire selling futures contracts for French wine to thousands of rich collectors and investors over the Internet. Now investigators and customers are looking into whether Premier Cru’s futures business was also used to fund the largest-ever Ponzi scheme in the wine world — with some of the biggest victims coming from China.In January, facing mounting lawsuits from customers, Premier Cru filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy liquidation. The company listed $70 million in debt and only $7 million in assets. Along with more than 9,000 victims, the crash of Premier Cru has left a trail of questions: What happened to the more than $60 million in customer payments? How did a 35-year-old wine store that became a favorite of the rich suddenly go bust? And how did so many smart collectors get bilked out of millions?The F.B.I. announced last month that it had started an investigation into “claims of a Ponzi scheme” involving Premier Cru. The agency said that “due to the wide scope and high number of complaints” against the company, it had established a special email address for victims: premiercru.complaints@ic.fbi.gov.AdvertisementPremier Cru’s co-founder and owner, John Fox, could not be reached for comment. His bankruptcy and criminal-defense lawyers declined to comment.AdvertisementMr. Fox has invoked his Fifth Amendment right in declining to provide financial details on his bankruptcy or the case, according to lawyers. Creditors are seeking his 2016 Corvette and his 2014 Ferrari as part of the bankruptcy.In a Sunday Business column last June that focused on complaints about the company, Mr. Fox said that some customers had unrealistic expectations about how quickly futures wine could be delivered.“A few of our old-time customers are used to waiting,” Mr. Fox said at the time. “They know they’ll get their wine. But customers that have come around in the last six to seven years, because we have good wines at the right price, they are not used to waiting extended periods.”The list of Premier Cru’s victims reads like a who’s who of wealthy wine collectors — from the billionaire Jeff Greene to top financiers on Wall Street and in Silicon Valley. Arthur Patterson, the tech venture capitalist of Accel Partners, was owed $836,000 by Premier Cru, according to court filings. Adebayo Ogunlesi, the Goldman Sachs board member and chairman of Global Infrastructure Partners, spent over $470,000 with Premier Cru.Of course, few will have sympathy for wealthy oenophiles crying over their spilled Margaux. Yet the victims also include teachers, doctors, accountants and wine store workers who used their savings to buy special-occasion wines with Premier Cru.“Sure it hurts,” said Ned Valois, a retired Florida policeman who may have lost $800 to Premier Cru. “I got suckered into it by the prices. They seemed too good to be true, and they were.”Premier Cru’s collapse has sent a chill through the broader wine and collectibles market. As wine, art, classic cars and other collectibles have soared in value and transformed from status trophies into financial investments, they have also become more prone to fraud. Although fake vintage wine has dogged the industry for years, there are signs that wine fraud has reached a new “financialized” stage, where millions of dollars are lost without a single bottle changing hands.AdvertisementPremier Cru started out as a low-price wine shop for high-income collectors. Founded in 1980 by Mr. Fox and other partners, it outgrew its store in Emeryville, Calif., and in 2011 opened its gigantic emporium on University Avenue in Berkeley.Clients said Mr. Fox was the driving force behind Premier Cru. Tall, businesslike and better known for his taste in fast cars than fine wine, Mr. Fox often dealt with Premier Cru’s biggest clients and orders. Much of Premier Cru’s business came online. Clients say wine buyers often search the Internet for the best prices for top wines, and Premier Cru often undercut its competitors by 15 to 20 percent — significant savings for wines that may sell for more than $1,000 a bottle.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In the 2000s, Premier Cru started expanding its business of selling wine futures, according to clients. Futures allow customers to pay for wine (usually Bordeaux or Burgundy) while it is still in the barrel but is not yet bottled or sold in retail outlets. The wine is delivered more than a year later. If a wine increases in value while it’s aging, the buyer gets the wine at a discount. Some buyers can also use futures to buy wine they can later flip for a profit, making futures more like a financial investment.Thomas Boothe, a lawyer in Portland, Ore., started buying wine and futures from Premier Cru in the late 1980s, he said. He talked with Mr. Fox several times over the years.“He was pretty formal, not someone you would chat about family or wine with,” Mr. Boothe said. While Mr. Boothe’s shipments would sometimes be delayed, Premier Cru largely delivered as promised — until about 2010, he said. The delays and excuses kept building until April 2015 when, Mr. Boothe said, Premier Cru owed him more than $161,000 for wine that was never delivered. His orders included a $9,600 bottle of Romanée-Conti and $2,700 bottles of Pétrus.When Mr. Boothe called the store to complain, he said Mr. Fox offered various excuses, such as computer errors, shipping snags and problems with a wine merchant in France. Mr. Boothe filed suit in January. Like many lawsuits filed by customers against Premier Cru, Mr. Boothe’s has been stayed by the bankruptcy. Mr. Boothe said his credit card company has reimbursed him for all but $50,000 or $60,000 of his claims.In 2010 and 2011, prices for many Bordeaux wines fell as Chinese buyers started turning to Burgundy. The value of some Bordeaux wines fell more than 40 percent below their original futures price. As the values fell, Premier Cru’s prices went from “simply low to irrationally low,” according to Mr. Boothe.For instance, clients say Premier Cru was selling bottles of 1996 Lafite Rothschild for $600, even though they normally sell for $1,000 or more.“At that point the alarm bells should have sounded,” Mr. Boothe said.When Brad Karp, a New Mexico real estate developer, started buying wine from Premier Cru, he was happy with the initial deliveries. But then he started buying Burgundy and Bordeaux futures purely as financial investments.Advertisement“I wanted a different risk profile from stocks,” he said. “So I started allocating capital toward wine futures.”By 2015 he was owed $712,000 by Premier Cru, he said. Some of the wine he bought was later delivered and his credit-card company refunded some of his payments. Yet Mr. Karp estimates he is still owed about $300,000.“I don’t expect to see that money or wine again,” he said.Some of biggest victims appear to be from China. Lawrence Wai-Mun Hui of Hong Kong spent about $981,000 for wine from Premier Cru that was never delivered, according to a court documents. A collector named Amanda Gong in Harbin, China, is owed $669,000, while a Chinese wine collector and investor named Bo Feng is claiming losses of $660,000, according to filings.So far, the bankruptcy trustee and investigators have not been able to find out how Mr. Fox or his partners spent or lost the money. Mr. Fox filed for Chapter 7 personal bankruptcy in February claiming assets of less than $50,000 and debts of $50 million to $100 million. He sold his home in Alamo, Calif., in January for about $3 million and is now renting, according to lawyers involved in the case.Mr. Boothe said Mr. Fox complained to him of health problems in one of their last conversations, late last year.“He had back issues, and he said the stress was getting to him,” Mr. Boothe said.An article last Sunday about Premier Cru, a Berkeley, Calif., wine store that is under investigation on suspicion of running a Ponzi scheme on futures contracts for French wines, erroneously included one person among the creditors or customers of the store. William Koch, of Medford, Ore., was in that group; William I. Koch, the Palm Beach, Fla., billionaire, was not.ROBERT FRANK is CNBC wealth editor and the author of “Richistan.”A version of this article appears in print on April 3, 2016, on Page BU4 of the New York edition with the headline: The Bottom of the Barrel for Wine Investors.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.