By IAN AUSTENAPRIL 1, 2016
OTTAWA — BlackBerry’s attempt to revive its once-mighty smartphone business by using Google’s Android operating system is off to a disappointing start.BlackBerry said on Friday that despite the move, it sold just 600,000 phones during its most recent quarter, which ended Feb. 29, a drop of about 100,000 phones from the previous quarter.It did not say how many of those phones were the new Android model, known as Priv. But during a conference call with analysts, John S. Chen, the chairman and chief executive of BlackBerry, acknowledged that Priv did not sell as well as he had hoped.Mr. Chen said that Priv sales suffered because of general slowness in sales of expensive phones, as well as delays in getting wireless carriers and stores to sell it. As he had done in the past, Mr. Chen vowed to stop making phones, the product that came to define the company, if that part of the business remained unprofitable.AdvertisementBut Mr. Chen said that for now, at least, he remained confident that BlackBerry could find a way to continue making phones without losing money on them.Advertisement“I still believe we have a shot at it,” Mr. Chen said during a conference call with analysts. “Hopefully I’m not naïve.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The announcement about phone sales came as the company reported a drop in revenue for both the quarter and the year, and a loss for both periods.Driven in part by the acquisition of a competitor, Good Technology, BlackBerry said its software revenue rose 113 percent in the year. But over all, annual revenue for the smartphone maker declined by one-third to $2.16 billion, and its net loss fell by a similar ratio, to $208 million.As Mr. Chen looks for answers on the phone side of the business, he has staked BlackBerry’s future on selling software and services that allow businesses and governments to control their employees’ smartphones and tablets and also increase their security.QNX, a branch of the company based in Ottawa, is trying to expand its business with about 250 automakers and auto-related companies. QNX produces operating systems and supplies them with software for things like in-car entertainment systems. Some parts of that business are facing new competition from Google and Apple.In the final quarter of the fiscal year, revenue at BlackBerry fell to $464 million, from $548 million in the quarter the previous year. The quarterly loss of $238 million was up from $89 million in the previous quarter, and included a $127 million write-down in the value of assets.A version of this article appears in print on April 2, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: With a Focus on Android, BlackBerry Falls Short.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.