This corner of the book world is red hot and among the most innovative, with e-books and apps, and it needs a steady stream of fresh-faced cover models.By LAURA M. HOLSONMARCH 30, 2016
SANTA CRUZ, Calif. — Jason Aaron Baca is good-looking, not handsome like the Ryans (Gosling and Reynolds) or rugged like Daniel Craig, who is fetching in a tailored Tom Ford suit. But when Mr. Baca, 42, slipped on a pair of dark aviator glasses recently, he looked remarkably like Tom Cruise in “Top Gun.”He was dressed for work in a khaki military jumpsuit. And even though it was barely noon, he had already stopped by the gym to make sure his biceps and legs looked combat-strong. His assignment: To be a military helicopter pilot saved in a crash by a female rescuer with whom he once had a torrid affair. Now that they’re reunited, their passions have flared.Mr. Baca is a cover model for romance novels. He has been on nearly 500 book covers, by his own account — one of scores of men like him vying to be heroic heartthrobs. Not since the flaxen-haired Fabio Lanzoni dominated drugstore book racks in the 1980s and 1990s, with his lion’s mane and bulging biceps, have cover models been in such demand.“Look at me like you are really mad at me,” cooed Portia Shao, his photographer that day. “Show me your good side.”After a few more clicks of the shutter, he and Ms. Shao paused to examine his work on a 2-by-4-foot television screen. “It looks good because it has everything,” Mr. Baca said. The smoldering gaze. A glimpse of his six-pack abs. Mr. Baca had even thrust his pelvis forward, a trick he learned to make his stomach appear flatter and ensure the ladies looked, well, you know, there.AdvertisementRomance writers and publishers, as it happens, are among publishing’s most innovative participants. They were early to digital serialization. Booksellers, too, now crowdsource ideas to find fresh writers. And if you want to explore a virtual relationship, you can try a romance-novel app.AdvertisementHow hot are romance novels? Over all, annual sales totaled $1.08 billion in 2013, according to the Romance Writers of America, which tracks sales. And their popularity is expected to grow. Last year Scribd, an e-book subscription service, sharply reduced the number of romance and erotica novels it offered because it couldn’t afford to keep up with readers’ appetites. (Scribd pays publishers every time a book is read and loses money if a book is too popular.)Despite the perception that blockbusters like “Fifty Shades of Grey” drive sales, self-publishing has proved a boon for this particular genre. E-books make up nearly 40 percent of all purchases, according to the writers group. And there are categories for every reader’s taste, among them, adventure, Christian, multicultural, L.G.B.T. and paranormal.Enter Mr. Baca. Authors and publishers require a revolving door of new faces, which, while hard to estimate, tally somewhere in the hundreds each year.“I never thought I would say this,” said Liz Pelletier, the chief executive of the romance novel company Entangled Publishing. “But I am so tired of looking at men’s abs. I don’t know if these ones are sexier than those other ones.”“It used to be that everyone wanted Fabio,” she added. Today, though, individualism prevails. “Readers don’t want every book to have the same face.”It was January and Ms. Pelletier was bemoaning how tough the search for a perfect cover model can be. Entangled Publishing is five years old, one of the newer entrants to an industry whose identity is synonymous with Harlequin, the Canadian publisher, which in the early 1950s started publishing chaste romance stories set in hospitals and medical offices.Harlequin reached its zenith in the United States in the 1970s when reader appetite shifted to more sexually explicit fare, known as “bodice rippers” or “sweet and savages.”AdvertisementSexy still sells. At Brazen, Entangled’s more risqué fiction line, Ms. Pelletier said book covers with male models sold three times as much as with a woman alone. And for new authors in particular, “the cover is really critical,” said Dianne Moggy, vice president for romance fiction at Harlequin.
            Creating the cover for the romance anthology “Saved by a Seal” was a careful calculation of what to include, and what to leave out. The Amazon Kindle edition of the anthology went on sale for 99 cents in February.        The authors wanted the model, Jason Aaron Baca, to look dangerous, but not threatening.  Models rarely crouch, but even a subtle difference can make a cover stand out from the rest. The pose is meant to convey hiding and anticipation, cues to a romantic novel. Eileen Nauman, who uses the pen name Lindsay McKenna, wanted the cover to be red, to grab attention. Red, she said, signaled action, sexuality, aggression and strength. Chris Keniston, another author, feared that red might cue a thriller, not a romantic novel. Blue won the day, but both authors were concerned that their hero looked too remote  — a little like a blue marble statue, and not good for connecting with readers. Ms. Keniston was also distracted by the placement of the model's toes underneath the cover title.In the final version, the model's foot is gone and he is flesh-colored. Dog tags have been added to underscore that the heroes in the anthology are military men. The design has been simplified and the phrase “Proceeds Benefit America's Vet Dogs” is gone.  MARCH 30, 2016
Unlike the Fabio era, when covers were painted by hand, today they are more assembly line than art. Consider Daemon Black, a space alien with dark curls and emerald green eyes who is the hero of Entangled’s Lux series, written by the New York Times best-selling author Jennifer L. Armentrout. In 2011, Pepe Toth saw a photograph of himself and his then model girlfriend, Sztella Tziotziosz, on the cover of “Obsidian,” the first in the Lux series, published that December.Mr. Toth, 26, then living in his native Hungary, had been transformed into Daemon Black without his knowledge. “I thought, what kind of book is this?” he said in a recent interview.Mr. Toth, a professional soccer player, learned that Ms. Armentrout had used a stock photo taken from a shoot he and his girlfriend had done three years earlier in Budapest. So, he emailed the author. “I’m the guy on your book,” he said he wrote. Ms. Armentrout invited him to visit the United States.In June 2012, Mr. Toth and his girlfriend flew to Atlanta after Entangled organized “#DaemonInvasion,” a promotion for Lux fans. “When I landed, I said to Jennifer, ‘I don’t know you,’” he recalled. “She said, ‘But you have a lot of fans.’”He and his girlfriend filmed trailers to promote the series and accompanied the writer on a book tour. At the FoxTale Book Shoppe in Woodstock, Ga., one afternoon, Mr. Toth found himself surrounded by almost 50 cheering women. “People called out to me, ‘Oh, Daemon is here!’” he said. One woman started crying. “She didn’t want to step up to have a book signed because she was so happy,” he said. “It was really weird.”Today, he posts book signings on his Twitter account, @Daemon_Black, and he reads excerpts on YouTube. And when Entangled considered dropping him from the cover after he split up with his girlfriend, Ms. Pelletier said, “There was a revolt from readers.”Now Mr. Toth is featured alone.If covers were hand-painted in acrylic back in the Fabio era, the tool of the trade today is Photoshop. Heads are cut off midface if a model is overexposed. Parts of different photos can be pieced together like a Picasso portrait. Toes, too, are deleted if they clash with the book’s title.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.For Mr. Baca’s helicopter-pilot shoot in Santa Cruz, Eileen Nauman, a writer better known by her pseudonym, Lindsay McKenna, emailed a series of guidelines. She wanted to see him looking alert, with a “slight, playful, teasing smile” and, she wrote, with his “flight suit open to sternum, showing off your great body, but nothing too flagrant or obvious.”Advertisement“The cover of an e-book is the size of a postage stamp,” she said. “Everyone has about three seconds to peruse, and the first hook is going to be that cover.”Few romance models, if any, make enough money to eke out a living. Mr. Baca, for example, works at the Housing Authority of the Santa Clara County, Calif., as a customer-service clerk. And although he has an agent, he said he earned only $20,000 in his best year. This, despite the fact that he is a tireless self-promoter who fancies himself the next Fabio. Industry executives say it will be difficult to topple the king. “Nobody did it better than Fabio,” said Allison Kelley, executive director of the romance writers group. “He really did create the brand.”Mr. Baca’s dream had always been to be on the cover of Playgirl. In his 2004 book, “Journey of a Male Model,” Mr. Baca wrote that a Seattle photographer once shot him nude for a possible Playgirl spread. Instead, those photos landed on the cover of gay men’s magazines under a pseudonym. Mr. Baca said he did not know then to secure the rights to his photographs. (For the curious, he finally made Playgirl in 2004.) And he maintains he doesn’t do it for the money. Instead, cover modeling gives him a taste of fame in an otherwise low-key life. “Nobody else knows this secret life,” he said. “They just think I’m Jason.”For more than a decade, Jimmy Thomas, a fitness model with the swarthy physique of a gladiator or lusty pirate, has been a romance cover model and estimates he has been on thousands of covers. In 2008, he decided to start his own full-service stock-image website, called Romance Novel Covers, which he hoped would become a clearinghouse for not only his own photographs but also those of other models.Given the interest in romance, the idea seemed like a good one. But as self-publishing took off, a wave of new models stepped in, and the price of stock images plummeted. At the same time, self-published authors couldn’t afford the prices paid by established companies.Today, a stock image of Mr. Thomas for an online book sells for about $10. A premade cover costs $45. Special orders tally about $300.“My stock site basically pays my bills,” said Mr. Thomas, who is 45.In 2013, with his photo business slowing, Mr. Thomas had a new idea: start his own convention. Fan conventions have long been a prized source of revenue for publishers, the granddaddy hosted by RT Book Reviews, a magazine for and by romance-book lovers who want to connect with authors. Conventions attract a steamy knot of admiring fans, and they want to meet the models. Next month, at the RT Booklovers Convention in Las Vegas, activities include “America’s Next Top Cover Model” and “Kickass Cowboys, Cops & Kisses,” where fans can take photos with their favorite models.Mr. Thomas’s more practical approach plays up sessions like taxes and self-publishing, and he concedes it hasn’t actually taken off. But he knows his audience. This year, he has added a cover model search and “The World’s Best Male Exotic Dancer Competition.”A version of this article appears in print on April 3, 2016, on Page BU1 of the New York edition with the headline: Sexy Sells, but It Doesn’t Always Pay.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »