AdvertisementSupported byMediatorBy Jim RutenbergThe brand-new Gawker Media offices in downtown Manhattan are the bomb, as in great. They’re all glass and steel, clean lines and modern fixtures. They were paid for in secrets, exposed with a joyful ferocity that enriched Gawker’s founders and helped redefine how far our reality-TV culture could go to satisfy its appetite for gossip and news about the famous, the powerful and, increasingly, just the mildly interesting.I visited those offices last week in part to find out whether the $140 million in civil awards against Gawker, for showing a private sex tape starring the retired wrestler Hulk Hogan, would be its undoing. But I was after a bigger question: Have we finally found the bottom, or more generously, the limit? After decades of journalistic scandal-mongering, each more intrusive than the last — and then juiced by the Internet — was the jury in Florida that ruled so decisively against Gawker speaking for the entire culture in saying, “Enough”?I do not come at the question from the monastery. I’ve at times been part of the pack, especially during the early part of my career, which included gossip-writing stints at The New York Post and The Daily News.My Daily News bosses once dispatched me to the Los Angeles home of Dr. Paul Crane, the obstetrician tending to the mother of Michael Jackson’s children, to find out whether his famous patient’s first baby was made the old-fashioned way. I showed up at the house on the day of his daughter’s bat mitzvah. (Sorry, Dr. Crane!) John F. Kennedy Jr. once caught a colleague and me crouching behind a car while spying on his new bride, Carolyn Bessette Kennedy, as she ate breakfast at a neighborhood cafe. Give her a break, he pleaded, she was new to all this. (We called our editors from a pay phone, certain they would allow us to heed the request. “Get back out there,” came the reply.)That was all before technology made it easy for a guy named Bubba the Love Sponge to invite his friend Hulk Hogan (real name, Terry Bollea) to have sex with the woman who was then his wife, and to record it so that it finds its way to a popular website, where it could be viewed by millions of visitors and instantly shared with millions more. The jurors believed Mr. Bollea’s testimony that he did not know he was being recorded, and that Gawker violated his privacy rights.They also found it infuriating. The $115 million in compensatory damages was $15 million more than Mr. Bollea had asked for.As one juror said on “Good Morning America”: “We drew a line.”For Gawker, whose parent company has a net worth of roughly $250 million, it was less a line than a hangman’s noose. Still, the mood at the offices last week seemed unbowed.Gawker was preparing to file papers on Monday seeking to have the jury’s verdict thrown out or the award reduced. It will argue that Mr. Bollea did not prove his right to privacy trumped Gawker’s right to cover him aggressively as a world-famous former wrestler who has spoken freely about his sexual adventures.“The public figure can’t just say, ‘I control this conversation,’” Heather Dietrick, Gawker’s president and general counsel, told me. “He’s out there talking about details of his sex life,” she said, continuing to give very specific details — anatomical and otherwise — about what she had in mind.Not necessarily the stuff to inspire future applicants to the Columbia School of Journalism. And Ms. Dietrick acknowledges the story is “not the Pentagon Papers.” But it comports with Gawker’s longtime drive to be, as its founder, Nick Denton, says, “Uncompromised and uncompromising” in unearthing whatever might drive reader interest, intrigue, truth and web traffic.Interestingly, one of Gawker Media’s first big hits was a Paris Hilton sex video, which ran on its Fleshbot site in 2003. (Mr. Denton sold Fleshbot in 2012.) Far from threatening to bring the house down, it helped solidify Mr. Denton’s company as a real web player. The tape fit with Gawker’s sensibility — punching up at the arrogance of wealth and celebrity (in this case an heiress who was famously famous for being famous) in the media pirate’s tradition of its forebears at Spy magazine.But Spy, as its co-founder Kurt Andersen pointed out to me, was not in the constant-search-for-clicks business. And as Gawker’s web traffic grew, it got into trouble when it seemed to be meanly punching down, exposing secrets about people who were not so obviously newsworthy. There was the post last summer, for instance, about a relatively unknown married male media executive and his alleged attempt to pay for sex with a male escort. It drew indignant howls, and Gawker retracted the piece.Then there was the decision by Deadspin, a Gawker-owned site, to show a random video in 2010 of an inebriated female college student having sex in a bathroom stall. At trial, Hulk Hogan’s lawyers presented emails of the woman’s desperate entreaties to take it down and Deadspin’s lighthearted refusal. “These things do pass,” the former Deadspin and Gawker editor, A. J. Daulerio, told her. “Keep your head up.” It did not play well with the jury, nor did his reason for later changing his mind: “It was possibly rape.”Suddenly, it was not just the fabulously famous — Michael Jackson and John F. Kennedy Jr. — whose lives we were being invited to peer into; it was people just like us. At the same time, as social media made us stars of our own movies, people like us could increasingly relate to the perils of public exposure once known only by the famous.Mr. Denton told me that this phenomenon played a part in the outcome of the trial. He pointed to a moment when a potential juror described being moved to ask a friend to remove an unflattering photo of her from a Facebook post. Social media, he said, made the jury pool “more sympathetic to the celebrity publicity machine,” which makes similar requests.This is all part of the Internet self-correction that my colleague John Herrman wrote about a couple of weeks ago, how the public is recoiling from the web’s raunchiest offerings. Mr. Denton more or less subscribes to that theory, which is why he recently vowed to make his sites “10 to 15 percent nicer.”But it only goes so far. Two of his staff members, Tom Scocca, executive features editor of Gawker, and Emma Carmichael, editor in chief of Jezebel, told me sometimes truth and justice lie in the muck. An item about old accusations of sexual misconduct against Bill Cosby, for instance, helped start the re-examination of his treatment of women that led to criminal charges. Deadspin’s use of a photo purporting to be a sexted shot of Brett Favre’s penis broke open broader sexual harassment allegations against him and his team.Such high-minded arguments can be a thin veil when attached to the journalism of exposed genitalia. As Mr. Bollea’s lawyer, Charles Harder, argued to me in an interview last week, if there was one thing the founders didn’t have in mind when they wrote the First Amendment, it was “uncensored sex tapes and secretly filmed private conversations in a bedroom.”Mr. Harder is using Gawker’s own mantra about transparency against it — saying he will collect his client’s due by unmasking a “shroud of secrecy” around Gawker’s financial structure. That structure, he says, allows Gawker to divert millions in profits to Kinja, its sister company in Hungary, which runs Gawker’s technology platform.Ms. Dietrick of Gawker countered by saying that there was nothing unusual about Gawker’s corporate setup and that the company’s appeal would preclude any payments related to Mr. Bollea’s jury award. Gawker’s ability to survive intact depends on whether she is right.Now, the bigger question: Has our culture reached its limit with the invasive and the tawdry?Maybe. But I’m left with a new question: Is that because we’ve become more decorous toward our public figures? Or does it all seem much creepier when, increasingly, we are the public figures?Advertisement