

      By EMILY STEEL

APRIL 3, 2016

Over the years, some of Hollywood’s blockbuster stories — think “Argo,” “Eat Pray Love” and “Brokeback Mountain” — were ideas that leapt from the pages of Vogue, Vanity Fair, the New Yorker and other Condé Nast magazines to the screen.Yet the publishing house often received little credit, let alone profits, for discovering those vibrant accounts and bringing them into the public sphere.The company set out to capture some of those profits when it started the Condé Nast Entertainment group in 2011, led by longtime TV executive Dawn Ostroff. The goal: to develop, produce and distribute original TV, film and digital projects, based on the brands in the building and articles from the archives. The development came at a particularly crucial time, as print media faced a dire outlook that forced Condé Nast to cut costs and to shutter magazines.The plan faced much resistance within its creative ranks. Some writers and staff members were angry that the business model cut them out of royalties they might have earned for their work. Others were skeptical whether any of the projects would actually be developed.But the company pushed forward. Today, more than four years after its start, Condé Nast Entertainment boasts five alternative television series in production or on air, 10 TV pilots and projects sold to networks, 24 film projects set up at studios or with financiers, and two films to be released this year. The company also has a first-look deal for scripted television with 20th Century Fox, a streaming video service and a virtual reality project in the works.“A lot of the walls are coming down,” Ms. Ostroff said. “We’re starting to see content migrate from platform to platform. We’re seeing people make content about a subject in different ways for each of the platforms.”Here’s a look at some of the latest projects out of Condé Nast Entertainment and how they fit into the broader strategy for the group:Synopsis: Based on a GQ article, this film tells the story of the Granite Mountain Hotshots firefighters who battled a wildfire to save an Arizona town. Nineteen firefighters died. FORMAT: The full-length feature film has attracted prominent Hollywood talent including the actor Josh Brolin and the director Joseph Kosinski (“Tron: Legacy,” “Oblivion”). It will start production in June; budget is expected to be about $50 million to $60 million. Response: To be determined.    SYNOPSIS: The only documentary on Condé Nast’s slate, this film follows the making of the annual Metropolitan Museum Costume Institute exhibition and the Met Gala. Anna Wintour, Vogue’s editor in chief, plays a prominent role. Format: Documentary for theatrical release; it will be distributed domestically by Magnolia Pictures and internationally by Elle Driver. Response: The documentary is expected to open the 2016 Tribeca Film Festival, which will be its world premiere.    Synopsis: The new series brings The New Yorker to life with documentaries, scripted short films, comedy, poetry, animation and cartoons. Two episodes were released each week starting in February. Format: TV series available on Amazon Prime. Episodes are about 30 minutes long. The series was produced and directed by Alex Gibney (“Going Clear”). Response: 6.1/10 IMDB, 86% Rotten Tomatoes. The Atlantic called the series “an uneven but intriguing mix of investigative journalism and whimsical storytelling.” Amazon has yet to renew the show for a second season. Synopsis: A 2015 GQ article called “Make it Reign,” about the influence wielded by an Atlanta strip club over the music industry, led to the idea for this scripted television series. Response: The pilot has been sold to AMC and a script has been ordered. Synopsis: The idea developed out of a real-life “Sex in the City”-esque columnist who wrote for the New Yorker in the 1920s. Her column was titled “When Nights Are Bold,” and she signed it Lipstick. Response: A TV pilot was sold to Freeform, the network formerly called ABC Family.    Synopsis: This raw and emotional nonscripted relationship show portrays couples who are together, or who haven’t been together for a long time. The format has them asking each other burning questions, akin to the filter of Glamour magazine. Format: Digital video, about six to eight minutes long. Distributed on Glamour’s website, YouTube and Condé Nast’s “The Scene” online outlet. “{The And}” is owned and produced by the creative studio the Skin Deep.Response: The first season’s nine episodes attracted more than 26 million views. Recognized with an Emmy award.    Synopsis: The rapper 2 Chainz decides whether the world’s most expensive luxury goods are worth it. Think of it as a contemporary version of “Lifestyles of the Rich and Famous.” Format: The online digital video appears on GQ’s website, YouTube and The Scene. Response: 117 million views. Synopsis: A special gene gives the dynastic Ashland family the ability to become invisible and accumulate vast power and wealth, yet the power has faded over generations. An addition to the family attracts publicity and risks exposing the family secret. Format: A fictional series to be shown on Samsung Gear, Jaunt and other virtual reality devices. Response: Condé Nast recruited the director Doug Liman (“The Bourne Identity,” “Suits”). Public reaction to be determined. Advertisement