By EMILY STEELAPRIL 4, 2016
And then there was Starz.The hot and crowded market of subscription streaming services will get yet another entrant on Tuesday when Starz, the premium TV network, plans to introduce a stand-alone app available on Apple and Google devices.Aimed at the 20 million homes that pay for broadband but not the full cable TV bundle, the new service, which costs $9 a month, will offer Starz original series like “Outlander” and “Power,” as well as thousands of TV episodes and movies, including Disney’s blockbuster “Star Wars: The Force Awakens” later this year.The development puts a renewed spotlight on Starz, which has surpassed its rival Showtime to become the second-largest premium TV network in the country behind HBO. Now it is seeking to expand its footprint even more by making the network available outside the traditional pay TV model, as HBO has with HBO Now, and other media companies have with similar services.At the same time, Starz has been the subject of on-again-off-again merger and acquisition chatter since 2013, when it spun off from the billionaire John C. Malone’s Liberty Media. Mr. Malone, known for his deal making, has spoken publicly about what he sees as the need for consolidation of what he calls “free radicals” in the media industry.AdvertisementCreating a stand-alone streaming service has been a long time in the making for Chris Albrecht, who took over as chief executive of Starz in January 2010.AdvertisementPreviously, Mr. Albrecht was the chief executive of HBO, where he helped assemble a slate of signature series like “The Sopranos,” “The Wire” and “Sex and the City.” During that time, he said, he started exploring the idea of creating a “lighter” service that HBO could sell directly to consumers, outside traditional cable or satellite packages.“I like to think it was because I was really smart,” he said, but he instead credited people he hired “who knew about the space and thought about the way people are going to consume content.”They said, “This is something that we should be doing and we should be first,” he recalled.“Other companies that are out there might not now exist if we had done that then,” he added, hinting at the rise of Netflix and of Amazon’s streaming service.In 2007, Mr. Albrecht was forced out at HBO. When he arrived at Starz, about three years later, the idea to start a streaming service was shelved. At the time, the company was owned by Liberty Media.Starz had only just started experimenting with original programming, with projects like “Party Down” and “Spartacus.” The flagship network at the time counted about 17 million subscribers and had struck a programming deal with Netflix that Mr. Albrecht described as an “albatross around our neck.” That deal “did a great job in helping launch Netflix,” he said.The company has changed significantly since then. In 2013, Starz was spun off from Liberty into an independent, publicly traded company. It has also raised its profile with critically acclaimed programs like “Outlander,” based on the best-selling novel about a World War II-era British Army nurse, and “Power,” produced by the rapper Curtis Jackson, better known as 50 Cent, about a New York nightclub owner and drug kingpin.Starz now has about 23.6 million subscribers, according to SNL Kagan, slightly ahead of Showtime’s 23.4 million. HBO, the leading premium channel, has 32.5 million subscribers. Those figures do not include subscribers to their streaming services.AdvertisementAmy Yong, a media analyst with Macquarie, said subscriber numbers were growing for Starz largely because cable and satellite companies get big incentives to sell its subscriptions.Starz is estimated to capture about $4 a subscriber, with the rest of the subscription fee going to cable and satellite companies.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“They are happy to be partners with cable companies,” Ms. Yong said, at a time when many media companies find themselves in heated disputes with cable operators over rights fees.Total revenues for the company increased 2 percent in 2015 to $1.7 billion, with net income down 12 percent to $237 million, primarily because of increased programming and marketing costs. Analysts expect the expiration of a programming deal with Disney to deliver cost savings in the future.Despite the strides Starz has made, it still suffers a perception problem compared with HBO and Showtime, whose shows — like “Game of Thrones” and “Homeland” — can become part of the cultural conversation. “Everyone knows and recognizes HBO, and consumers can rattle off the last couple of shows on that network,” Ms. Yong said. “Starz still hasn’t found that voice with the consumer. They don’t have any recognizable hits, but they are getting there.”Chris Albrecht, the chief executive of Starz, discussed the company's new streaming app and how it fits into the new ecosystem for media consumption.In February, the entertainment company Lionsgate said in a regulatory filing that it had taken a stake in Starz and intended to explore a potential acquisition of the company. Yet a deal has failed to materialize. That, combined with broader anxiety about the role of traditional media in a digital world, has led the company’s stock price to plunge about 23 percent so far this year.“It is like they tied one of their legs to ours, tied an anchor around the other leg and threw the anchor off the boat,” Mr. Albrecht said.“It was certainly distressing to see that and not a lot of fun since then,” he added. “We can show the ways that we can continue to evolve through the lines of business that we have, as well as creating new ones. We’re going to show a company that is worth investing in.”One major focus is the new app, which offers downloads of most content and allows four people to stream simultaneously. People who already subscribe to Starz through a traditional pay TV provider also will be able to use the app, which initially will be available on Apple and Google devices, with other future partners expected.AdvertisementIn a statement, an Apple spokeswoman said, “As we’ve said, the future of TV is apps, and STARZ is another incredible example of iOS and Apple TV customers being able to watch the shows they love on their favorite devices.”Starz original series attract viewers who are more racially diverse and have lower average incomes than audiences of other premium TV networks, according to Nielsen data provided by the network. Mr. Albrecht said that the new app was meant for viewers who are likely to be interested in the network’s original programming but are priced out of higher-cost premium TV networks.Typically, cable and satellite providers sell premium networks like HBO, Showtime and Starz on top of subscriptions to standard cable bundles.“There is an opportunity to differentiate ourselves to a group of consumers that would likely be customers of Starz if they could access it,” Mr. Albrecht said. “Premiums are stuck on top as a cherry last to be added, first to come off.”Indeed, Starz will have much differentiating to do. The debut of the network’s app comes nearly a year after HBO introduced its $15-a-month HBO Now streaming service to much fanfare. Soon after, Showtime unveiled a similar service for $11 a month. All the while, digital competitors like Netflix, Amazon and Hulu have greatly expanded their offerings.A version of this article appears in print on April 5, 2016, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Starz Sets Its Sights Beyond the Bundle.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.