AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben ProtessMarshall L. Miller, a former high-ranking Justice Department official who handled a number of prominent Wall Street prosecutions, has joined Wachtell, Lipton, Rosen & Katz as a white-collar defense lawyer, the firm said in a statement on Monday.Mr. Miller, who last year stepped down from his role as the No. 2 official in the Justice Department’s criminal division in Washington, will be of counsel to the firm in its New York office.“We are excited to have Marshall join the firm’s litigation department, augmenting our white-collar, regulatory and cybersecurity practice,” the statement said.Mr. Miller is arriving in the defense bar — after an approximately 14-year prosecutorial career and a few stints as a law professor — as banks and other financial institutions are facing a cascade of regulatory scrutiny.Wachtell Lipton, like many firms that cater to Wall Street clients, can compete for these headline-grabbing cases by hiring some of the same prosecutors who investigated the banks. John F. Savarese and David B. Anders, two of the firm’s well-known white-collar partners, were both federal prosecutors in Manhattan before joining the firm.Mr. Miller, who was a senior federal prosecutor in Brooklyn before joining the criminal division in Washington, oversaw some major government corporate investigations. On the Wall Street front, Mr. Miller helped handle the guilty pleas of several banks — JPMorgan Chase and Barclays among them — that were accused of manipulating the price of foreign currencies. And in Brooklyn, Mr. Miller supervised the corruption investigation into FIFA, soccer’s global governing body.Mr. Miller, who earned his undergraduate and law degrees from Yale University, was most recently a senior fellow at the Program on Corporate Compliance and Enforcement at the New York University School of Law.He was also a longtime aide to Loretta E. Lynch, the attorney general. When he left the Justice Department last summer, Ms. Lynch issued a statement calling Mr. Miller “an outstanding attorney, a remarkable public servant and an unwavering advocate for the principles of justice.”Advertisement