By LESLIE PICKER and MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDAPRIL 4, 2016
The Treasury Department took new steps on Monday to further curtail a popular type of merger in which an American company buys a foreign counterpart, then moves abroad to lower its tax bill.The new rules, announced in conjunction with the Internal Revenue Service, take particular aim at foreign companies that have completed multiple deals with American companies in a short period, what the regulator calls “serial inverters.”In pushing the new rules, its third effort in recent years, the Obama administration appears to have raised concern about the fate of the biggest inversion, Pfizer’s $150 billion takeover of Allergan, a Dublin-based drug maker.The rules would apply to that inversion and any transactions that close after Monday.Shares in Allergan tumbled 21 percent in after-hours trading following the Treasury announcement.Our columnist Andrew Ross Sorkin and his Times colleagues help you make sense of major business and policy headlines — and the power-brokers who shape them.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We are conducting a review of the U.S. Department of Treasury’s actions announced today,” Pfizer and Allergan said in a joint statement on Monday. “Prior to completing the review, we won’t speculate on any potential impact.”AdvertisementThe rules do not end there. The Treasury Department also took aim at another feature of these so-called corporate inversion transactions: complicated internal loans that effectively move profits of United States-based businesses overseas. This tactic, known as earnings stripping, involves the American subsidiary borrowing from the parent company and using the interest payments on the loans to offset earnings — a cost that is not reflected on financial statements but lowers the tax bill.AdvertisementMonday’s rules classify this intra-company transaction as if it were stock-based instead of debt, eliminating the interest deduction for the American subsidiary. This change applies not just to inversions but to any foreign company that has acquired an American entity and used this technique to achieve lower taxes.Yet even by the Treasury Department’s own admission, the latest rules will not be enough to completely halt the flow of companies seeking to renounce their American citizenship, just as the two previous rule changes did not. Such a move would be possible only with an overhaul of the tax rules by Congress, which few believe will happen soon.“These actions took away some of the economic benefits of inverting and helped slow the pace of these transactions, but we know companies will continue to seek new and creative ways to relocate their tax residence to avoid paying taxes here at home,” Jacob J. Lew, the Treasury secretary, said in a statement.Until Congress acts, Treasury has continued to take smaller steps to reduce the financial attractiveness of inversion transactions.The Treasury Department first issued rules to curb inversions in September 2014, and tougher ones in November. The latest required shareholders in the American company to own less than 60 percent of the combined entity for the deal to go through. However, foreign companies have continued to acquire American ones to bulk up their size and achieve these larger inversion deals.Monday’s rules would clamp down on serial acquirers, including inverted companies who then purchase a number of United States-based targets. The new regulations would essentially disregard the value of American businesses acquired over the last three years. Allergan, for example, may be considered a serial inverter because the Dublin-based Actavis acquired Allergan in 2015, taking the Irish domicile, and then turned around and signed a deal with Pfizer.Congress introduced the Stop Corporate Earnings Stripping Act in February, a bill sponsored by Representative Sander Levin, Democrat of Michigan, and Representative Chris Van Hollen, a Democrat from Maryland.Some legal specialists said that even the new earnings-stripping regulations will have a modest effect.Advertisement“There are already earnings stripping rules,” Sam Lichtman, a partner at the law firm Haynes & Boone, said in an interview. “This doesn’t really move the ball that much.”A version of this article appears in print on April 5, 2016, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: U.S. Moves to Thwart Mergers Done as Tax Dodge.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.