AdvertisementSupported byItinerariesBy Julie WeedMark P. Hertling, a retired three-star Army general, now gives speeches on corporate leadership. So when a friend suggested he try giving lectures to passengers on a cruise ship, it seemed like a good way for him and his wife to take an affordable vacation.But first he had to get through the interview. General Hertling filled out a questionnaire that he called “long and arduous.” The booking agency reviewed his Army career and his appearances on CNN. Finally, he was pressed on his personality. Did he enjoy meeting new people? Would he mind interacting with the passengers between lectures? Was he, in other words, an extrovert?“They asked if I’d be willing to mingle and do more than just giving speeches,” he said.In an age of social media and more demanding passengers, being a lecturer on a cruise line has moved beyond just giving a couple of talks in exchange for a discounted cabin.Today, cruise lines are becoming ever more selective about those they hire. And the subject areas are moving beyond personal motivation speeches and talks on finance; today, the topics include archaeology, geology, history and politics.“We get hundreds of applications each month and we need to see a video of the person presenting to a live audience, taking questions,” said Laura Flager, director of the outreach division of Compass Speakers and Entertainment, a provider of cruise line programming.Few make the cut, she said. Instead her team scours the Internet for interesting TED talks, newscasters, retiring ambassadors, professors and others who have the expertise, presentation skills and people skills the cruise lines look for.More than just offering a few lectures, speakers now are told to be ready for a diverse and well-read audience that wants to interact beyond the podium.Speakers unwilling to spend extra time with a guest who wants to socialize day or night won’t last long. “As soon as you step out of your stateroom, you are in the public eye,” Ms. Flager said.Kiki Hellman, who runs a biomedical consulting business in Clarksburg, Md., with her husband, Alfred Hellman, have taken about 60 cruises over the last 30 years to destinations on every continent. Passengers, Dr. Hellman said, are now more knowledgeable than ever about history, anthropology and archaeology — and expect more from lecturers.“They can get some very esoteric questions from the audience,” she said.New technology also places more demands on speakers. Lectures may be streamed to tablets or rebroadcast multiple times on the ship, so visual elements must be strong and the speakers’ presentation must translate well to broadcasting.“Passengers can walk out of my lecture or turn off the TV at any moment,” said John Rennie Short, a cruise lecturer on trips to destinations like Myanmar, “so it better be good.”Some passengers use their smartphones to fact-check a speaker if they think they hear something that seems amiss during a talk.While lecturers were encouraged in the past to socialize a bit with the guests, now it is required, said Douglas Gray, a Manhattan-based consultant. Passengers, he said, want authentic engagement with everyone on board, and that desire for accessibility and openness means that lecturers “stay after the talk and hang out with the participants.”“They exchange stories and experiences,” Mr. Gray said.Dr. Hellman said that getting to know the speakers was one of her favorite activities on a ship. She prefers cruises with smaller passenger lists, preferably with just a few hundred, so she can spend time with the experts.“There are so many ways to interact with them over a meal or tea,” she said. She and her husband have even invited speakers to meet them for ballroom dancing in the evening.Dr. Sandy Greer of Spokane, Wash., has taken cruises to Hawaii, Alaska and Mexico. He says he enjoys it most when the speaker “feels like another passenger, a member of our group.”Social media has changed the nature of the speaker’s job in another way, Ms. Flager said. The ubiquity of vacation selfies posted to Facebook and Instagram translates to a need for a camera-ready guest lecturer.“Their ratings often come down to 50 percent content and 50 percent social skills,” Ms. Flager said.While motivational speeches and financial talks have dwindled in popularity over the last five years, demand for anything related to the ship’s destination, whether it’s archaeology, geology, history, politics or culture, has grown, said Tim Castle, who runs a small agency for lecturers in New York and works with luxury cruise lines. The New York Times is among the companies that have worked with cruise lines to offer trips featuring journalists or other specialists as featured speakers.Ms. Flager said today’s traveler considered knowledge of the destination essential to enhance the trip ashore.And the requirements may become even more demanding soon, said Paul DiFilippi, director of enrichment programs at Sixth Star, which provides programs for cruise ships.“Cruise lines departing from new ports like China and Brazil have now started asking us for bilingual lecturers and native speakers,” he said.Advertisement