By REUTERSAPRIL 4, 2016
WASHINGTON — New orders for goods from United States factories fell in February, and business spending on capital goods was much weaker than initially thought, the Commerce Department said on Monday.New orders for manufactured goods declined 1.7 percent as demand fell broadly, reversing January’s downwardly revised 1.2 percent increase. Orders have declined in 14 of the last 19 months. They were previously reported to have increased 1.6 percent in January.The report added to weak consumer spending and trade data in suggesting economic growth moderated further at the turn of the year, after slowing to a 1.4 percent annualized pace in the fourth quarter. Estimates for first-quarter gross domestic product growth are currently below a 1 percent rate.Manufacturing, which accounts for about 12 percent of the domestic economy, has been pressured by a strong dollar and weak global demand, which have undermined exports of factory goods, as well as efforts by businesses to reduce an inventory overhang.AdvertisementThe sector has also been slammed by investment cuts by energy companies as they adjust to reduced profits from cheap oil.
            Manufacturers’ total new orders, seasonally adjusted.        NOV.–2.9%DEC.+1.2%JAN.–1.7%$500 billion480460440’14’15’16APRIL 4, 2016
But the worst of the factory slump appears to be over, with a survey last week showing manufacturing activity expanded in March for the first time in six months.AdvertisementAfter gaining about 20 percent versus the currencies of the United States’ main trading partners from June 2014 to December 2015, the dollar is flat on a trade-weighted basis this year. In addition, the slide in oil prices has slowed.In February, factory orders fell broadly, with orders for transportation equipment tumbling 6.2 percent. Orders for machinery dropped 3.4 percent, and bookings for electrical equipment, appliances and components decreased 3.6 percent.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Commerce Department also said orders for nonmilitary capital goods excluding aircraft, seen as a measure of business confidence and spending plans, — fell by 2.5 percent in February, steeper than the 1.8 percent drop reported last month.Shipments of these so-called core capital goods, which are used to calculate business equipment spending in the G.D.P. report, fell 1.7 percent in February, greater than the 1.1 percent previously reported.Inventories of factory goods dropped for an eighth straight month, suggesting factories were making progress in reducing the inventory glut. While that could support future manufacturing production, it suggests inventories will again be a drag on economic growth in the first quarter.The inventories-to-shipments ratio was 1.37 in February, unchanged from the previous month. Unfilled orders at factories fell 0.3 percent in February, and shipments of manufactured goods, which have declined in 10 of the last 11 months, fell 0.7 percent.A version of this list appears in print on April 5, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Business Briefing; Factory Goods Orders Fell 1.7% in February, Reversing a Gain.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.