AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael J. de la Merced and Chad BrayIn agreeing to buy Virgin America for $2.6 billion, Alaska Air Group is betting that the airline industry is so consolidated after years of mergers that what it needs is another takeover.The acquisition of Virgin America, the sleek but embattled young airline that sought to make flying across the United States stylish, would propel Alaska Airlines into the top five American carriers. The deal, announced on Monday, would also prove especially helpful in giving the older airline valuable space at major California airports and lucrative transcontinental routes.At the same time, Alaska Air must now be careful in how it integrates a brand beloved by its cadre of customers who adore its cheeky image, onboard Wi-Fi and soothing onboard purple lighting.For Alaska Air, buying Virgin America was in some ways a natural consequence of the successive mergers that have already concentrated domestic air travel in four primary airlines: American, Delta, United and Southwest. Together, they control roughly 85 percent of the country’s airline capacity.Putting together Alaska and Virgin America will not create a new airline that can stand toe-to-toe with those bigger companies. But it will create a tougher competitor for JetBlue, with which Alaska competed fiercely to win over the smaller airline, and which it will displace as the country’s fifth-biggest airline.“The goal is to be the premier airline on the West Coast,” Brad Tilden, Alaska Air’s chief executive, said in a telephone interview on Monday.The move was an ambitious one by Mr. Tilden, an Alaska veteran who became chief executive less than three years ago. Before Monday, the only major acquisition Alaska had made was buying the regional carrier Horizon Air 20 years ago.But to Mr. Tilden and his team, gaining additional scale was imperative. While Alaska has been lauded for its organic growth efforts, acquiring slots at desirable airports — particularly high-traffic ones like San Francisco International and Los Angeles International — has been challenging.At the same time, Alaska’s traditional hub of Seattle-Tacoma International Airport has been challenged in recent years by Delta. The bigger airline has sought to make Seattle’s airport, known as SeaTac, its own hub for Western flights.Alaska, meanwhile, has cleaned up its financial health. The company has an investment-grade credit rating — rare for an airline — and has more than $1.3 billion in cash on its balance sheet. So it was time to begin hunting.“We feel like we’ve done really well with the real estate we’ve had,” Mr. Tilden said. “What can we do to get bigger?”The search for an acquisition target began about 18 months ago, Mr. Tilden said. By last fall, Alaska contacted Virgin America about a potential combination, beginning an auction process for the smaller airline.Virgin America was an ideal takeover target. The company opened for business in 2007 as an additional lower-cost carrier with a higher level of service than that provided by the traditional airlines. It was the brainchild of Richard Branson, the British mogul behind the empire of brands that share the Virgin name.Since going public in late 2014, Virgin America has largely struggled, with its stock price essentially flat. Analysts have said that the company faced high costs and the pressures of being a low-cost airline whose services ran closer to premium level. Its recent turn to profitability was helped by the tumble in oil prices that also aided its competitors.Though JetBlue also competed fiercely, Alaska simply had more financial firepower. In the end, Alaska offered $57 a share — a knockout price, over 80 percent higher than where Virgin America’s stock had been trading before the news of its sale process emerged. Alaska insisted on signing the deal on Friday night to swiftly cut off the bidding contest.Including debt and aircraft operating leases, the Virgin America deal is valued at about $4 billion.The companies said they expected to achieve $225 million in annual cost savings following the merger, after incurring one-time integration costs of $300 million to $350 million. The combined airline would have annual revenue of more than $7 billion, the companies said.One potential challenge for Alaska and Virgin America is persuading government regulators to approve the deal.The Justice Department has begun to take a tougher approach toward airline mergers in recent years, including briefly suing to block the union of American and US Airways.But Mr. Tilden said that combining Alaska and Virgin would yield a stronger airline that could better compete against bigger rivals. And putting the two airlines together is meant to expand his company’s network — the two share little overlap in their routes — and not lead to higher prices.“What I will say is that this is a pro-consumer transaction,” he said. “Alaska and Virgin will be stronger together than on their own.”Investors in Virgin America appeared thrilled by news of the sale, pushing the company’s stock up nearly 42 percent to $55.11. Shareholders in Alaska, by contrast, were less enthusiastic, as that company’s stock fell 3.8 percent, to $78.93.But analysts appeared to believe in Mr. Tilden’s long-term planning.“ALK is paying a steep price for these assets, but we think it is worth the price,” Jim Corridore, an analyst with Standard & Poor’s Capital IQ, wrote in a research note on Monday, referring to Alaska’s ticker symbol.He added, “We think VA was a price disruptor in the industry, so we think we will see less discounting on those routes,” referring to Virgin America’s symbol.One prominent investor publicly professed some disappointment in Monday’s announcement: Mr. Branson himself. In a blog post, he lamented American regulations that prevented him from controlling more of Virgin America.“I would be lying if I didn’t admit sadness that our wonderful airline is merging with another,” he wrote. “There was sadly nothing I could do to stop it.”Leslie Picker and Jad Mouawad contributed reporting.Advertisement