By LESLIE PICKER and CHAD BRAYAPRIL 4, 2016
BATS Global Markets, the electronic exchange operator that tried to sell shares to the public four years ago, only to withdraw the offering after technical flaws halted trading, is at it again.The company on Monday began its so-called roadshow to test investor demand for its shares at various price levels. BATS’ shareholders, including Bank of America and the Knight Capital Group, plan to sell 11.2 million shares at $17 to $19 each, according to a securities filing on Monday.At the midpoint, the initial public offering would be about $202 million, twice the size of the attempted deal in 2012. The company, which is based in Lenexas, Kan., is seeking a valuation of about $1.7 billion. Like last time, BATS is listing its shares on its own exchange.The move is brave on two fronts. If the initial public offering is successful, it would be the first stock listed on the company’s exchange — an upstart created 11 years ago to take on the likes of the New York Stock Exchange and the Nasdaq Stock Market. Also, BATS is making its debut during one of the most difficult markets for initial public offerings in recent years, as investors have become choosier, often asking for lower pricing. In the first quarter, only nine companies debuted on United States exchanges, the lowest since 2009, according to data compiled by Dealogic.AdvertisementBut the stock-market volatility that has kept potential public offerings at bay can be helpful to exchange operators. BATS generates revenue through the amount of trading that takes place on its exchange. The company posted revenue of $1.78 billion in 2015, more than double what it made four years ago, and profit of $82 million.AdvertisementSince its founding, BATS has grown to capture 21 percent of the United States equity market and is the largest platform for exchange-traded funds and exchange-traded products, according to its filing.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The company first tried a public offering in March 2012. Shortly after its shares started trading, a series of technical problems caused BATS to halt its own stock. The embarrassing snafu forced BATS to cancel the orders and withdraw its public offering.BATS has gone through a series of changes since then. The company hired Chris Concannon, now the chief executive, from Virtu Financial, a high-frequency trading firm that conducted its own public offering last year. Joe Ratterman, one of BATS’ founders, became the company’s chairman in March 2015, when Mr. Concannon was promoted.The company has conducted several acquisitions over the last few years. In January 2014, it acquired Direct Edge, which operated securities exchanges and a broker dealer. In March 2015, BATS acquired Bats Hotspot from Knight Capital for its foreign exchange platform.Morgan Stanley and Citigroup are managing the stock offering. BATS will not receive any proceeds from the public offering. Only its institutional shareholders are selling.A version of this article appears in print on April 5, 2016, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: BATS Global Markets to Price Initial Public Offering Shares at $17 to $19.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.