

      By ALEXANDRA ALTER

APRIL 6, 2016

Celebrities used to just write their memoirs, or possibly a children’s book. Now some of them have much grander literary ambitions: They want their own publishing imprints. The latest star-turned-publisher is the actress, director and producer Lena Dunham. Ms. Dunham and her friend Jenni Konner, the show runner for “Girls,” announced on Wednesday that they are starting their own imprint, called Lenny, with Random House. The imprint, which launches next year, will focus on “exciting, emerging voices – in fiction and nonfiction,” according to a press release.It’s a logical extension of their joint newsletter and website, Lenny Letter, which publishes essays, opinion pieces, cultural criticism, advice and interviews (prominent contributors have included Jane Fonda, Sarah Silverman, Valerie Jarrett and, of course, Ms. Dunham).Ms. Dunham, whose collection of essays, “Not That Kind of Girl,” became a bestseller, is the latest celebrity to extend her brand to books. It is an eclectic group, including the chef Anthony Bourdain, the baseball star Derek Jeter and the actor Viggo Mortensen, whose imprint, Perceval Press, focuses on art, criticism and poetry. Below are a handful of new and forthcoming celebrity imprints. (Shockingly, the poet and novelist James Franco is not on the list.) The unfortunately named Goop Press grew out of Ms. Paltrow’s lifestyle website, goop.com, which dispenses health, beauty, fashion and wellness tips (and also sells stuff like a $1,995 argyle sweater). Goop Press will release four books a year, beginning this month with the super-busy Ms. Paltrow’s cookbook, “It’s All Easy: Delicious Weekday Recipes for the Super-Busy Home Cook.” If any celebrity can justify having her own imprint, it’s Oprah Winfrey. Ms. Winfrey has wielded enormous influence in the publishing world through her book club, which drove even obscure titles up the best-seller list with stunning speed and regularity. With her new imprint at Flatiron Books, Oprah will hand-pick and publish several nonfiction titles a year. The first book from Oprah’s imprint is already guaranteed to be a blockbuster: it’s her own memoir, “The Life You Want.” Johnny Depp, who’s known for playing a randy, drunken pirate, has made it known that his foray into publishing is more than a vanity project. He issued a solemn oath when he announced his grim-sounding literary imprint, Infinitum Nihil, in 2012. “I pledge, on behalf of Infinitum Nihil, that we will do our best to deliver publications worthy of peoples’ time, of peoples’ concern. Publications that might ordinarily never have breached the parapet,” he said in a statement. The results so far? Mr. Depp has published “House of Earth,” a previously unpublished novel set in Dust Bowl America, by the folk singer Woody Guthrie, who finished the book in the 1940s. (Mr. Depp co-wrote an introduction to the book with the historian Douglas Brinkley). The imprint will also release a memoir from the record producer Jack Douglas, according to The Hollywood Reporter. Why pay to option literary works when you can order up your own? Last month, Deadline reported that the writer-director Michael Mann (“Miami Vice,” “The Insider”) was creating his own imprint, with the goal of publishing books that could be developed into film and television projects. One of the projects in the pipeline: a prequel novel exploring the histories of the main characters from Mr. Mann’s 1995 film “Heat,” which starred Al Pacino as a homicide detective and Robert De Niro as a career criminal. Advertisement