By MICHAEL J. de la MERCED and LESLIE PICKERAPRIL 5, 2016
President Obama said a company that makes an inversion deal “sticks the rest of us with the tab, and it makes Americans feel like the deck is stacked against them.”Pfizer plans to abandon its $152 billion merger with Allergan — the largest deal yet aimed at helping an American company shed its United States corporate citizenship for a lower tax bill — just days after the Obama administration introduced new tax rules, a person briefed on the matter said late Tuesday.The two drug companies could announce their decision to terminate the deal as soon as Wednesday morning, according to this person, who was not authorized to speak publicly.The decision is a victory for the Obama administration, which introduced the initiatives as part of an effort to thwart the ability of companies to move income overseas, beyond the reach of the United States.The proposed regulations, announced on Monday by the Treasury Department, appeared specifically to target Pfizer and Allergan, which has its tax domicile in Ireland. Still, tax experts said that other transactions would also be affected.AdvertisementWhen Pfizer and Allergan announced their deal in November, they knew that the Obama administration would take aim at it. But the companies and their advisers were stunned when the Treasury Department took highly aggressive steps in removing many of the tax benefits of the merger.AdvertisementAdvisers for the two companies spent much of Tuesday weighing their options. But many analysts and legal experts concluded that fighting the Treasury Department would be costly, with little guarantee of success.In walking away from the planned transaction because of changes in tax rules, Pfizer would have to pay Allergan, the maker of Botox and other drugs, up to $400 million, according to the merger agreement between the two companies.CNBC earlier reported the decision to terminate the deal.Previous rule changes by the Treasury Department have killed some proposed inversions, like the drug maker AbbVie’s planned $54 billion takeover of its Irish counterpart Shire. But they had otherwise done little to stem a rising tide of American companies seeking foreign acquisitions to reduce their tax rates.The rules announced on Monday by the Treasury, however, were seen as much more aggressive and expansive, and they sent shock waves up and down Wall Street.Starting on Monday night, lawyers at big firms have been camped out in conference rooms studying how the new rules would affect their clients. While experts were still weighing the overall impact, so far they have suggested that the hundreds of pages’ worth of regulations would have an incredibly expansive reach and would even affect foreign companies with huge American operations, including the parent of Mercedes-Benz and Nestlé.“These rules are going to apply much more broadly than people had expected,” said Stephen L. Gordon, the head of the tax department at the law firm Cravath, Swaine & Moore.Chief among the targets of the Obama administration, however, has been corporate inversions, in which American companies buy foreign competitors and move their corporate homes overseas in an effort to pay fewer taxes in the United States. Some 40 companies have struck inversions over the past five years, according to data from Dealogic.AdvertisementPresident Obama said on Tuesday that the new rules would help prevent “one of the most insidious tax loopholes out there, fleeing the country just to get out of paying their taxes.”Still, even the new rules will not completely eliminate ways that companies can technically invert — one lawyer described tax avoidance as a game of Whac-a-Mole until Congress overhauls the overall tax code. But they signal the Obama administration’s intent to hit on corporate taxes as the issue has gained steam on the presidential campaign trail.Perhaps the most obvious symbol of that fight has been Pfizer, the blue-chip drug maker that produced painkillers during the Civil War and penicillin during World War II. Executives at the pharmaceutical maker have made no secret of their belief that renouncing its corporate citizenship and lowering its overall tax bill were their duty as stewards to shareholders.After trying and failing to buy British rival AstraZeneca two years ago, Pfizer finally found its ticket to an overseas corporate passport in Allergan, a drug maker based in Dublin but built in large part through acquisitions of American companies.Allergan began its inversion path in October 2013, when it was then known as Actavis, and bought Warner Chilcott for $8.5 billion, which enabled the combined company to move to Ireland. From there, Actavis acquired New York-based Forest Laboratories in July 2014 for $28 billion. The following year, Actavis took over the Botox maker Allergan for $70.5 billion, taking the latter’s name.By the time Allergan was ready to negotiate its biggest deal yet, it had a market cap of about $100 billion, making it a more fitting counterpart for Pfizer, under the rules from 2015. Though their planned deal is not technically an inversion, since it is Allergan that is the buyer in the transaction, the move would accomplish the same goal.It is that string of previous acquisitions that is a focal point of the new Treasury Department rules. The administration had a name for foreign companies that bulked up by buying American ones for tax advantages: “serial inverters.” The new rules aim to restrict them by disregarding the value of the American businesses acquired over the last three years.“It’s funny how the rules happen to almost fit perfectly with this deal,” said Kevin Kedra, an analyst at Gabelli & Company, referring to Pfizer and Allergan. “It would be easy to argue that’s not coincidence. I would think it certainly seems directed toward derailing this specific deal.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In response to the new rules, Allergan’s shares declined almost 15 percent on Tuesday, while. Pfizer’s shares gained about 2 percent.AdvertisementA Treasury spokeswoman said that the regulator declined to comment on specific deals and was addressing the issue more broadly.“It is important to note we are only aware of publicly available information and do not have any insights into specific transactions,” the spokeswoman said. “Our actions were based on our general understanding of abusive practices, not on any specific transaction.”There is perhaps less of a probability that Treasury’s new rules will derail any of the other six inversion deals that are still pending, according to analysts, including Canada-based Progressive Waste Solutions’ acquisition of Waste Connections and Johnson Controls’ merger with Irish-based Tyco.Shares in those four companies declined on Tuesday, largely on concerns about losing some of their tax benefits.Progressive Waste and Waste Connections said in a statement that it expected the new rules to have limited effect on the financial aspects of its merger and remained committed to the deal.And a spokesman for Johnson Controls said, “We’re reviewing the Treasury regulations, but we’re not going to speculate at this time what, if any, impact it will have on the proposed merger with Tyco.”In addition to targeting serial inverters, the Treasury Department also took aim at so-called earnings stripping. This technique is used not just by inverted companies but by many multinationals. It involves making the American subsidiary borrow from the foreign parent company. That gives the United States business interest payments they can deduct from earnings. Because the loan is within the company, the cost is not reflected on financial statements.Treasury’s way of clamping down on earnings stripping is to treat that debt as stock, effectively getting rid of the interest payments altogether. Without the interest payments, the United States subsidiaries would be taxed on the full basis of their United States earnings.AdvertisementThough Pfizer and Allergan’s deal was less affected by earnings stripping, the potential consequences of the new Treasury rules could go well beyond corporate inversions, according to tax experts.“To me, the earnings stripping part of this is quite clearly the most significant of the changes they’ve put out,” said Stephen E. Shay, a senior lecturer at Harvard Law School and former deputy assistant secretary for international tax affairs in the Treasury Department.Some analysts questioned whether the Treasury Department had the authority to enact its latest proposed rules. The administration drew in part upon an expansive reading of the tax code as the basis for the regulations, though a few experts called that move into question.“We are surprised, to say the least, that Treasury took the drastic step of proposing such a punitive rule, apparently without the authority to do so,” Robert Willens, an independent tax consultant, wrote in a note to clients on Tuesday.Still, any legal challenge to the Treasury Department’s new rules could potentially take years — with no guarantee of victory.“There are conceivably ways in which the deal could still happen if Pfizer and Allergan were to legally challenge these rules in court,” said Mr. Kedra at Gabelli. “Given the time and uncertainty of that process, it’s probably a low-probability event.”Michael D. Shear contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on April 6, 2016, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Pfizer and Allergan Said to End Merger as Tax Rules Tighten.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.