AdvertisementSupported byBy Bill VlasicDETROIT — Ford Motor said on Tuesday that it would build a new assembly plant for small cars in Mexico, continuing a trend of automakers increasing production there because of lower wages and favorable trade laws.Ford, the nation’s second-largest auto manufacturer, said it would invest $1.6 billion to construct a plant that will employ 2,800 workers and begin making vehicles by 2018.Several auto companies are expanding operations in Mexico, which has become a major auto manufacturing center. Last year Mexico produced 3.4 million vehicles, of which about 80 percent were exported to the United States and elsewhere.But Ford alone has been singled out for criticism by the Republican presidential candidate Donald J. Trump for its aggressive expansion in Mexico, which also includes new investments in factories that make engines and transmissions.Mr. Trump was quick to comment on Tuesday, saying in a statement that Ford’s plan to build a new factory was “an absolute disgrace.”While Mr. Trump has accused Ford of building up Mexican operations at the expense of American workers, the company has vigorously defended its global manufacturing strategy.Ford’s chief executive, Mark Fields, said recently that the automaker had invested $10 billion and added 25,000 jobs in the United States since the last recession. But the company is also intent on growing in Mexico, China and other countries.“At the end of the day we are a multinational company, and we will do what’s best for the business,” Mr. Fields said last month at the New York International Auto Show.The move announced on Tuesday was not unexpected. Ford had said last year that it would discontinue production in 2018 of its Focus compact car and C-Max hybrid at its assembly plant in Wayne, Mich.The company has since said that it will assign replacement models to the Wayne plant, possibly pickup trucks or sport utility vehicles.Ford said it would increase the profitability of its small cars by moving production to Mexico, where wages are less than half the top pay of $29 an hour earned by union workers in the United States.The United Automobile Workers union did not contest Ford’s Mexican plans during contract talks on a new labor agreement last year.Still, the union’s president, Dennis Williams, on Tuesday called Ford’s move troubling, and an example of how automakers are unfairly exploiting the North American Free Trade Agreement among the United States, Canada and Mexico.“Companies continue to run to low-wage countries and import back into the United States,” Mr. Williams said. “This is a broken system that needs to be fixed.”Ford is hardly alone in investing billions in Mexico, which has a number of free-trade agreements that make it an ideal hub for exporting new vehicles.Automakers like Toyota, Kia and the Audi luxury division of Volkswagen are also in the process of opening major new factories in Mexico.“All of the major automakers are flocking to Mexico because it has all these existing trade agreements with other countries,” said Bruce M. Belzowski, a managing director of the Transportation Research Institute at the University of Michigan.Mr. Trump had previously said he would try to stop American car companies from investing in Mexico by imposing a tariff on vehicles built there and imported into the United States.Mr. Fields, who has had one-on-one discussions with Mr. Trump on the issue, said it was unfair to suggest Ford had neglected American plants and jobs in its global plans.“We are very proud of what we do to contribute to economic development in the U.S.,” he said. “Eighty percent of our capital expenditures have been in the United States.”Automakers are grappling in general with where to build products that can earn the best return on their investments.The domestic automakers in particular — General Motors, Ford and Fiat Chrysler — are stepping up production of high-profit trucks and sport utility vehicles in the United States, partly to offset higher union wages.Fiat Chrysler, for example, recently idled one Michigan plant that builds its slow-selling Chrysler 200 sedan. The company is expected to convert the plant to truck or S.U.V. production to maximize its sales and profitability.“The United States is the best market for the high-profit models, so it makes sense to increase production here,” Mr. Belzowski said.At the same time, the production of small cars, which generally sell at lower prices than S.U.V.s or trucks, is gravitating to Mexico and other lower-wage nations.“This is the way the business is going,” he said.Advertisement