

 Eduardo Porter
 

ECONOMIC SCENE
APRIL 5, 2016
Donald Trump, no doubt, is the most confounding candidate produced by the American political system in decades. He offers enormous tax cuts, as any bona fide Republican candidate must. But he also wants to leave Social Security “as it is.”He says he hates Obamacare, but offers “concepts of Medicare” to care for “people that can’t take care of themselves.” He has gutted the standard Republican position that favors freer trade.The most surprising aspect about Mr. Trump’s solid appeal among Republican primary voters, though, may be what it says about the waning place of religion in American politics and the revival of a populism centered more on economic nationalism and white working-class discontent.“It is intriguing that we have some notable challenges to the political establishment that are not coming from a traditional American religious place but from a surprisingly secular tradition,” said David Voas, head of the social science department at University College London.AdvertisementIs this a sign that Americans are finally losing their religious spirit, following the longtime trend in other advanced nations? At the very least, it does suggest that Republicans’ longstanding strategy of building majorities for their anti-tax platform by appealing to working-class voters’ Christian morals has lost a lot of its power.AdvertisementDonald Trump is not just the least religious Republican in the field, he is perceived as less religious than Hillary Clinton or even Bernie Sanders, who clearly resembles a secular European social democrat.Given Mr. Trump’s serial marriages, the coarse sexual references and his multiple positions on abortion, it’s no surprise that fewer than half of Republicans view him as religious, according to a poll by the Pew Research Center this year.And still, his economic populism, reminiscent of the nationalist stance of European right-wingers like Silvio Berlusconi of Italy, has so far overpowered the openly devout message of Ted Cruz, the most deep-dyed conservative still in the race. Indeed, Mr. Trump has outflanked the standard bearers of the traditional religious right even among the most devout voters.Americans remain exceptionally religious, compared to people in other rich nations. American scholars argue this is largely because the sharp line between church and state in the United States fostered vibrant competition among different religious flavors, which kept the flame alive.But religion’s appeal has been eroding in the United States since the end of the 1980s, according to research by Michael Hout of New York University and Claude Fischer of the University of California, Berkeley. In 1987, only one in 14 American adults expressed no religious preference. By 2012, the share had increased to one in five.Scholars like Professor Voas argue Americans are undergoing a process similar to what has happened in Europe, where secular institutions took over many of the jobs once performed by the church. Professors Hout and Fischer argue, instead, that the erosion reflects the shocks and aftershocks from the 1960s: like churches’ censureship of premarital sex and young people’s growing acceptance of homosexuality.“Organized religion gained influence by espousing a conservative social agenda that led liberals and young people who already had weak attachment to organized religion to drop that identification,” they wrote. By 2012, 36 percent of liberals preferred no religion, compared to just 7 percent of conservatives.
            According to a poll conducted in January by the Pew Research Center, most respondents considered Donald J. Trump the least religious presidential candidate.        How religious do you think each candidate is?VERYRELIGIOUSNOTTOOSOMEWHATNOT AT ALLBen Carson35%3374Ted Cruz254075Marco Rubio164585Hillary Clinton10382222Bernie Sanders5341817Donald Trump5252237How religious do you think each candidate is?NOTTOOVERY RELIGIOUSSOMEWHATNOT AT ALLBen Carson35%3374Ted Cruz254075Marco Rubio164585Hillary Clinton10382222Bernie Sanders5341817Donald Trump5252237APRIL 5, 2016
Regardless of the deeper dynamics, Mr. Trump’s campaign poses a critical question: Is the alignment of interests on the right, entwining religious fervor with free market economics, fraying? If so, what will take its place?Advertisement“The notion that evangelical voters are nonresponsive to anything other than abortion and homosexuality overstates the power of religion on political choice,” said Nolan McCarty, professor of politics and public affairs at Princeton.Republicans’ longstanding strategy has been showing signs of wear for a while. By 2012, Professor Hout argued, it was clear that they “had pretty much gotten as much as they were going to get out of religion.” They couldn’t expand the base any further by appealing to devout Christians, he said, “because they had rounded them up already.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Still, it took Mr. Trump to identify the real Achilles’ heel in the Reagan coalition: an economic policy built around tax cuts for the wealthy that has failed to deliver the goods to the Republican base for far too long.While Mr. Trump’s economic proposals may not add up to a coherent agenda for most voters, it does suggest, said Kenneth Scheve, a professor of political science at Stanford, that “there is something wrong in the policy bundle Republicans have offered them over and over again.”Mr. Trump may not be able to ride his coalition to the White House (he has alienated too many women and Hispanics, among others). But he has probably changed American politics for good. And that calls for more policy experimentation to address directly the traumas of the working class.“I can’t see the rhetoric of small government go away,” Professor Scheve said. “But some Republicans might try including support for social insurance as a strategy.”He compared the position of contemporary Republicans to that of British Conservatives after their devastating political defeat at the end of World War II, when they accepted the legitimacy of a social safety net. “The Tories at some point said this is the way democratic capitalism works,” Professor Scheve said.Democrats, of course, have not been able to carry out an economic agenda that unites working-class whites with minority constituencies, either.AdvertisementAll that suggests that the 2016 election is emerging as one that potentially leads to a major realignment of political allegiances, much as the election of 1968 did. Then, Lyndon Johnson’s desegregation policies pushed Southern whites from the Democratic Party into the arms of Republicans, who built a long-lasting political coalition around resentment over the rise of racial and ethnic minorities.Mr. Trump’s naked appeal to those resentments is likely to come up short. So where will the next majority come from?“The new winning coalition is up for grabs,” Professor Hout said. It doesn’t seem to have a big place for religion, though.“They can’t win without them,” Professor Hout added, speaking of Republicans and their Christian supporters. “They just aren’t enough.”A version of this article appears in print on April 6, 2016, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Trump’s Rise Indicates Waning Role for Religion.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »