AdvertisementSupported byBy Emily SteelLawyers for the ailing media mogul Sumner M. Redstone have entered settlement talks over a lawsuit brought by a former companion who has challenged his mental capacity, according to three people with knowledge of the discussions.A settlement would prevent the salacious dispute from going to trial, which had been scheduled for May 6 in Los Angeles Superior Court. It also would prevent a judge from deciding on the competency of Mr. Redstone, which could have set off succession plans for his controlling stakes in Viacom and CBS.The legal battle had all the makings of a spectacle that both sides most likely want to avoid.On one side was Mr. Redstone, the onetime ruthless and colorful businessman who continues to hold a controlling stake in a $40 billion entertainment empire that includes Viacom and CBS. He has not been seen publicly since his 92nd birthday party last May and, although he was represented by a team of lawyers, did not make an appearance or any public declarations of his own during the course of the legal proceedings.On the other side was Manuela Herzer, Mr. Redstone’s former companion and romantic partner. She filed suit in November, claiming that Mr. Redstone was not mentally competent in October, when he removed her from a directive that would have given her supervision of his health care. It included several embarrassing details about what Ms. Herzer described as his sexual appetite, his incontinence and his demands to eat steak while on a feeding tube.She said she was concerned about his health and well-being, but lawyers for Mr. Redstone called the suit meritless and said Ms. Herzer was motivated by greed. On the same day that Mr. Redstone changed his health plan, he removed Ms. Herzer from his estate plan. He had planned to leave her $50 million and his $20 million Los Angeles mansion.Also swept into the drama were Mr. Redstone’s daughter, Shari Redstone, and Philippe P. Dauman, the chief executive of Viacom. Ms. Herzer claimed that Ms. Redstone unduly influenced her father. Mr. Dauman replaced Ms. Herzer as the person in charge of Mr. Redstone’s health care plan and had been scheduled to give a deposition in the case on Tuesday.While the judge overseeing the case said that medical records of Mr. Redstone were to remain confidential, any evidence introduced during the trial could have been made public.A settlement would allow the parties to avoid the public exposure and negotiate terms that could be mutually beneficial to both sides rather than leave the final determination of the case up to Judge David J. Cowan of the Los Angeles County Superior Court, who is overseeing the trial. No details of the negotiations were disclosed, but it is likely that a settlement will include money as well as plans for Mr. Redstone’s care.News emerged on Tuesday that Ms. Redstone was named to a directive that would put her in charge of her father’s health care, according to two people with knowledge of the situation. In turn, Mr. Dauman was removed from the position, according to these people. One person described it as a positive development for Mr. Dauman, who accepted the position only after being asked by Mr. Redstone.If a settlement is reached, the judge will still need to approve the terms, one person said. In a February ruling, Judge Cowan decided that the case would go to trial because of a “plethora of disputed factual issues” about Mr. Redstone’s mental capacity and medical care.At that time, the judge also raised concerns about who — if anyone — was looking after Mr. Redstone. He questioned whether the relationship between Mr. Redstone and his daughter was as smooth as she had described in a court filing. He also said that it was perplexing that Mr. Redstone had named Mr. Dauman as his health care agent rather than his own daughter.News of the settlement talks was first reported by The Wall Street Journal.Though the legal drama concerned Mr. Redstone’s private life, it put a sharp focus on succession planning and the broader fate of Viacom and CBS. In the face of questions over his mental capacity and concerns about corporate governance, Mr. Redstone stepped down as executive chairman of the two companies in February. He continues to control 80 percent of the voting stock in the two companies through his ownership of National Amusements, the theater chain started by his father. After his death, or if he is determined to be incompetent, that stake goes to a trust.Advertisement