AdvertisementSupported byBy Jack EwingFRANKFURT — The gap between rich and poor is feeding protectionist sentiment that could have “tragic” consequences for the global economy, Christine Lagarde, the managing director of the International Monetary Fund, said on Tuesday.Free trade pacts have been sharply criticized by Donald J. Trump and Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont, helping the candidates win presidential primaries in major states like Michigan.While Ms. Lagarde did not mention the American presidential campaign during a speech at Goethe University here, she said that a “yawning gap in individual fortunes” had fed perceptions “that the cards are stacked against the common man — and woman — in favor of elites.”She continued, “The temptation is to say, ‘Well why don’t we just look inward, why don’t we just hide behind our borders?’ ”But instead of protectionism, she said, “the answer to the reality of this interconnected world is not fragmentation, it is cooperation.”“History has told us — time and again — that any other route would be a tragic course,” Ms. Lagarde said.The I.M.F. chief also expressed concern that wealthier countries had not been able to compensate for slower economic growth in developing countries like China, and for sharp downturns in Brazil and Russia. As a result, she said, growth rates worldwide could become mediocre.The antidote to slow growth differs from country to country, Ms. Lagarde said. The United States, she said, should expand tax credits granted to lower-income workers, increase the federal minimum wage and offer more government benefits for families.In the eurozone, she said, countries should do more to train people for available jobs and to reduce unemployment, which is at 10.3 percent in the 19 countries that use the common currency.Countries that produce oil or other commodities should do more to diversify their economies, Ms. Lagarde said.“Overcoming the voices of despair and exclusion requires an alternative path,” she said, “one that leads to prospects for more employment, higher incomes and more secure lives.”Ms. Lagarde, who took just one question from the audience after the speech, did not address the increased tensions between the I.M.F. and Greece since last week, when a conversation between two officials at the organization was leaked. WikiLeaks published the transcript of a teleconference conversation in March between Poul Thomsen, the head of the I.M.F.’s European operations, and the I.M.F.’s Greek bailout monitor. In the transcript, Mr. Thomsen suggests that only a precipitous event, like imminent default, might push the Europeans to agree to more debt relief for Greece.Challenged by Alexis Tsipras, the Greek prime minister, to explain the I.M.F.’s position, Ms. Lagarde said in a letter to him on Sunday that “any speculation that I.M.F. staff would consider using a credit event as a negotiating tactic is simply nonsense.”Ms. Lagarde was scheduled to travel to Berlin later on Tuesday to meet Chancellor Angela Merkel. In Frankfurt, Ms. Lagarde praised Ms. Merkel’s leadership in coping with a flood of refugees from Syria.“I can see on a regular basis, firsthand, the respect that Germany has won around the world for its deeply humanistic approach to refugee issues,” Ms. Lagarde said. “History will remember.”Advertisement