By MARY WILLIAMS WALSHAPRIL 5, 2016
Puerto Rico took steps on Tuesday toward a unilateral moratorium on all government debt payments, rejecting efforts in Washington to allow it to restructure only under close federal supervision.The Puerto Rican Senate authorized a declaration of emergency and a debt moratorium at around 3 a.m., after hours of debate. The island’s House of Representatives was debating such a measure late Tuesday but had not yet voted. Any bill would need to be signed by the governor, Alejandro García Padilla.The sudden moves seemed likely to complicate efforts in Washington to enact a rescue package for Puerto Rico. The House Natural Resources Committee, which has been drafting the rescue in consultation with Democrats in Congress and the Treasury Department, said it still planned to issue an updated version on Wednesday, despite Puerto Rico’s action.The rescue involves sensitive constitutional issues, and the drafters have been trying to strike a balance between Democratic and Republican Party priorities. So far, the lawmakers in Congress have called for sending a federal oversight board to Puerto Rico, auditing all major branches of government there, promoting fiscal reforms and eventually providing certain restructuring tools that are normally available only in bankruptcy.AdvertisementOn Tuesday, Daniel Watson, a Treasury Department spokesman, said the agency continued to closely monitor the situation in Puerto Rico and was in contact with the government there. “The steps Puerto Rico is considering serve as yet another reminder that the commonwealth is in crisis and urgently needs the ability to comprehensively restructure its financial liabilities, along with independent oversight that respects the commonwealth’s self-governance,” the representative said.AdvertisementBut the oversight board, which may have seemed a reasonable requirement in Washington, has been seen on the island as an intolerable vestige of colonial rule. Puerto Rican legislative aides also said Congress was moving too slowly, forcing them to enact their own rescue before their economy deteriorated even further.In addition to halting debt payments, Puerto Rico’s lawmakers are acting to limit activities by the island’s Government Development Bank, a crucial part of the local financial system and a participant in virtually all government debt deals. They want to preserve the bank’s cash to finance essential public services.The Senate bill sets a “moratorium period” that would run until at least Jan. 31, 2017. It also creates a receivership for the Government Development Bank and carves off a “bridge bank” that would continue to honor certain claims during the moratorium.Bank creditors whose claims are not assumed by the bridge bank would be entitled only to the amounts they would receive if the Government Development Bank were liquidated, the Senate bill says.Groups representing some of Puerto Rico’s many bondholders expressed surprise at the call for a moratorium. Hector Negroni, a major bondholder at the investment fund Fundamental Credit Opportunities, said he had just landed on the island for scheduled debt negotiations when he heard.“I came down here to advance a dialogue for a consensual deal on the general obligation bonds,” he said. “I didn’t know about this. I got here and it happened.”Puerto Rico’s general obligation bonds are explicitly guaranteed by the island’s Constitution, and investors holding that type of debt say it would be unconstitutional for Puerto Rico to do anything but pay in full.AdvertisementAndrew Rosenberg, a lawyer representing holders of general obligation bonds, said he thought the moratorium had been deliberately timed to throw cold water on the bondholders’ negotiations. Even as lawmakers declared Tuesday afternoon that “Puerto Rico is not for sale” on the floor of the island’s House, Mr. Rosenberg was distributing the terms of his group’s proposal, which included halting principal repayments on $2 billion of bonds for five years.“While we would like to negotiate with the Puerto Rican government in private and in good faith,” he said, the debt moratorium had prompted him to reveal, in his view, what a good deal Puerto Rico was walking away from.The president of the Government Development Bank, Melba Acosta Febo, issued a statement rejecting the proposal Tuesday evening. She called it “exactly the type of ‘Wall Street’ solution that led us to the precipice we are now looking over,” because she said it would add debt and raise costs over the long term.Others with financial dealings in Puerto Rico said they were caught off guard and did not know how to respond. Some said they thought the legislation was intended not so much to trip up creditors or elicit offers as to pressure Washington to speed up its work on the federal rescue package.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Some said they continued to hope on Tuesday that Puerto Rico’s House might enact a narrower moratorium than its Senate had, perhaps excluding certain types of debt or agreeing to pay interest but not principal. But as the hours passed, their hopes were waning.For months Puerto Rico and its Government Development Bank have been meeting with the holders of the island’s $72 billion in debt, trying to interest some of them in a consensual debt restructuring. Parties to some of these discussions, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because the talks are private, said they became aware late last week that the development bank’s assets were being hastily transferred to other financial institutions, for reasons that were not explained.Rumors then began to fly on the island that the bank was about to be shut or privatized.A confidential regulatory review of the development bank last November found that it was insolvent and would have a $1.3 billion deficit by the end of June, which raised the prospect of dedicated funds being diverted to other purposes.The confidential review’s findings were cited by a federal judge’s ruling in a tax case in March, throwing the bank into a crisis just weeks ahead of a scheduled $422 million debt payment, due on May 1. The Senate bill on Tuesday said the bank had only $562 million in cash left.The turmoil at the bank threatened to spread quickly to other parts of Puerto Rico’s economy, which is already deeply distressed. Much larger debt payments, totaling about $2 billion, are due from other branches of the government on July 1.A version of this article appears in print on April 6, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Puerto Rico Senate Votes to Halt Payments on $72 Billion Debt.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.