By CHAD BRAYNOV. 13, 2015
LONDON —  British authorities said on Friday that they had begun criminal proceedings against 10 current and former employees of Barclays and Deutsche Bank, accusing them of manipulating a global benchmark interest rate.The accusations, made by the Serious Fraud Office, which investigates financial crime in Britain, are the first by the agency that relate to the euro interbank offered rate, or Euribor.The fraud office has charged more than a dozen people as part of a long-running investigation into the manipulation of the London interbank offered rate, a similar benchmark interest rate known as Libor.The Libor scandal has led to billions of dollars in fines and has rocked the reputations of some of the world’s biggest banks, including Barclays, the Royal Bank of Scotland, UBS and Deutsche Bank.AdvertisementBarclays and Deutsche Bank declined to comment on Friday.“The investigation continues,” the Serious Fraud Office said in a statement.AdvertisementThe individuals in the criminal proceedings brought by the Serious Fraud Office on Friday include Christian Bittar, a former senior trader at Deutsche Bank.This month, a London tribunal found that Mr. Bittar was improperly identified by the Financial Conduct Authority of Britain, another regulator, in its findings as part of a $2.5 billion settlement with Deutsche Bank in April over rate-rigging.Mr. Bittar, who lives in Singapore, was not mentioned by name, but he was identified as “Manager B” in those findings. He claimed that his identity could be determined based on the documents and that he should have had the right to challenge the findings before they were made public.He is one of several former bank employees who have challenged the Financial Conduct Authority’s method of identifying individuals in settlement documents related to the rate-rigging inquiries.Elizabeth Robertson, a lawyer for Mr. Bittar, said on Friday that he intended “to fully contest the criminal proceedings.”The defendants in the Euribor case are expected to make their first court appearance at Westminster Magistrates’ Court in London in January, the fraud office said in a news release.Until the defendants appear in court, the fraud office said, the agency will not be able to provide additional details about the accusations.AdvertisementTo set Libor, Euribor and other rates, banks submit the rates at which they are prepared to lend money to one another, on an unsecured basis, in various currencies and at varying maturities.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The other Deutsche Bank employees accused in the criminal case on Friday were rate submitters. They are Achim Kraemer, Andreas Hauschild, Joerg Vogt, Ardalan Gharagozlou and Kai-Uwe Kappauf.Mr. Hauschild “is not guilty of this offense and will vigorously contest these allegations at his forthcoming trial,” Andrew Katzan, his lawyer, said.A lawyer for Mr. Vogt declined to comment. Mr. Vogt is expected to leave the bank at the end of the year.A lawyer for Mr. Kappauf also declined to comment.Lawyers for the other Deutsche Bank employees did not immediately respond to requests for comment.The former Barclays employees are Philippe Moryoussef, a former senior trader; Carlo Palombo, a former trader; and Colin Bermingham and Sisse Bohart, both former rate submitters.Charles Kuhn, a lawyer for Mr. Moryoussef, said his client “is not guilty of this offense and will vigorously contest these allegations.”A lawyer for Mr. Palombo declined to comment, and lawyers for the other Barclays employees did not immediately respond to requests for comment.Since the first inquiry began seven years ago, the Libor scandal has engulfed some of the world’s largest banks and tarnished the reputations of many of Britain’s leading lenders.AdvertisementIn August, Tom Hayes, a former trader at Citigroup and UBS, became the first person to be convicted on criminal charges in Britain of conspiring to manipulate Libor. He was sentenced to 14 years in prison.Six former brokers at the British financial firms ICAP, RP Martin and the Tullett Prebon Group are on trial in London in the second criminal case in Britain related to the rate-rigging inquiry. A third criminal trial related to Libor is scheduled for next year in Britain.This month, two former traders at the Dutch bank Rabobank were convicted of criminal charges in the United States in the Libor investigation. They could face a decade or more in prison.A version of this article appears in print on November 14, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: British Authorities Accuse 10 of Rigging a Benchmark Interest Rate .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.