By LANDON THOMAS Jr.APRIL 6, 2016
The billionaire investor William A. Ackman defended his large holding in Valeant Pharmaceuticals International in a conference call on Wednesday, arguing that the stock was drastically undervalued after its sharp decline last quarter.Yet while he aggressively promoted the operational potential of the troubled drug company, he acknowledged that he had underestimated the political and regulatory complexities in making the initial investment and that the recent turmoil surrounding the company had had an effect on the reputation of his firm, Pershing Square Capital Management.“Anytime you have a large investment decline, by 80 percent — that is damaging to our track record as investors,” Mr. Ackman said.The initial stake in Valeant was passive, he noted. Now, with his joining the board, Pershing Square’s involvement will become active — in the style of a number of the fund’s activist-oriented positions, he said.Advertisement“It is a disastrous decline in value,” he said. “But there is enormous upside for us if the company recovers.”AdvertisementMr. Ackman’s main fund was down 25 percent this year through March, with most of the swoon driven by the collapse in Valeant’s stock. Pershing Square is one of the pharmaceutical company’s largest investors, holding a 9 percent stake.The terrible year comes on the back of a poor record in 2015, when Pershing Square’s main fund lost 20 percent. Like many hedge funds, Pershing Square imposes restrictions that make it difficult for investors to withdraw large amounts of cash in a rush. The company’s assets under management stand at around $11 billion.Mr. Ackman conceded during the call that Pershing had paid too much for its initial stake, missing how vulnerable the fast-growing company could be to broader political questions over how it priced its drugs.He also said that there would be some soul-searching within his company.“We have made a lot of mistakes in Valeant — there is a lot of learning here,” he said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The most pressing task, he said, was to restore confidence in the company’s accounting and governance practices. In that regard, finding a chief executive to succeed J. Michael Pearson would be a crucial step for the company. In March, Valeant announced a search for a chief executive and said Mr. Pearson would serve until a successor was appointed.Mr. Ackman said there was no shortage of qualified candidates, many of whom were attracted by Valeant’s potential as a turnaround story.“I think it’s a matter of weeks, not months, in terms of identifying new management,” he said.Valeant is not Mr. Ackman’s only troubled investment. Pershing has also made a large bet against Herbalife, the nutrition company that has attracted scrutiny from regulators, who accuse it of being a pyramid scheme. By shorting the stock, he would make money if the share price falls.The stock, however, has risen in recent months on expectations that regulators will not come down too hard on the company.Other stocks such as Mondelez, a snack and beverage company, and Canadian Pacific, the railroad company, have been only modest performers over the last quarter.A version of this article appears in print on April 7, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Business Briefing; Ackman Defends Holding in Beleaguered Valeant.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.