
Breakingviews By                     
ROBERT CYRAN

APRIL 6, 2016
Pfizer’s abandoned deal leaves all sides tainted.The United States Treasury looks bad for changing the rules on Monday to kill the $152 billion merger with Allergan. Lawmakers’ inaction encouraged such tax-driven transactions.But Pfizer and its chief executive, Ian C. Read, bear the most responsibility for wasting time and resources pushing an overpriced, risky deal.Treasury has now several times tried to close various loopholes that have allowed companies to change their home turf from the United States to countries with more favorable tax regimes. The standards announced on Monday directly aimed at Pfizer’s deal, as they disregard United States assets acquired in the last three years. That eliminates Allergan and its low Irish tax rate as a target. It is unclear if the Treasury Department has overstepped its authority. But rapidly shifting laws, especially when applied retroactively, are bad for business and legal authority.Lawmakers emerge covered in tar, too. They could have stopped inversions cold by adopting a territorial tax system. This would have stopped American companies having to pay an extra levy to Washington on cash earned overseas if local taxes are lower than the statutory rate in the United States. Their fecklessness encouraged Pfizer and other firms to pursue complicated deals where the main payoff is tax avoidance.AdvertisementMost of the finger-pointing should be directed at Pfizer and Mr. Read. This is the second failed mega-deal, after its pursuit of AstraZeneca fell apart in 2014. The Allergan combination was no slam dunk to start with. The net present value of the $2 billion in annual cuts that Mr. Read proclaimed the deal would generate, and the $1.2 billion or so of tax savings, struggled to match the premium offered last November.Perhaps Pfizer could have found more tax loopholes or costs to cut. But big pharmaceutical deals tend to promise much on paper and deliver little in reality. The minuscule $150 million Pfizer is paying as a fee to Allergan indicates that it knew the odds were high that the deal might be abandoned.AdvertisementEngaging in such a high-risk venture for little obvious benefit makes a good case for shareholders to question Mr. Read’s – and the board’s - decision making.Robert Cyran is a columnist for Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com. We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »