By REUTERSAPRIL 6, 2016
PARIS — Alexandre de Juniac, the chief executive of Air France-KLM, is stepping down to run the airline industry’s main trade group, the International Air Transport Association.No successor has yet been appointed, injecting a note of uncertainty into a company emerging from four years of restructuring amid tough competition from low-cost carriers and Persian Gulf rivals.Air France-KLM said on Tuesday in a statement that it would appoint headhunters to find a replacement, adding that Mr. de Juniac would take up his new post in Geneva by Aug. 1.Mr. de Juniac’s departure to replace the director general of the International Air Transport Association, Tony Tyler, who retires in June, was not widely expected.AdvertisementHe was given a new four-year mandate by the airline’s shareholders last May.Choosing a successor will be a politically delicate task for France’s Socialist government after recent unrest over job cuts. The government owns 17.6 percent of the airline group.AdvertisementMr. de Juniac, 53, joined Air France in 2011 from the French treasury, where he was the top aide to Christine Lagarde, the finance minister at the time and now the managing director of the International Monetary Fund.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He was credited with restructuring Air France-KLM without, for the most part, setting off a major conflict with the company’s powerful unions. But in 2014, plans to open bases for Transavia, a subsidiary airline, outside France led to a crippling 15-day pilot strike.The airline group’s shares fell 5.7 percent after the news was announced, to 7.70 euros, or $8.76, on Wednesday morning.The post at the International Air Transport Association will propel Mr. de Juniac into a new position as the airline industry’s chief diplomat, seeking to temper trade conflicts between Persian Gulf and Western carriers while leaning on governments worldwide to reduce regulation.Mr. de Juniac has until now been a vocal critic of Persian Gulf airlines that are steadily increasing their market share at the expense of European and other carriers.The International Air Transport Association, which represents about 260 carriers controlling 80 percent of the world’s airline industry, said Mr. de Juniac’s appointment would be confirmed at its annual meeting in Dublin in June.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.