By MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDAPRIL 7, 2016
Starboard Value, the hedge fund that has taken aim at Yahoo, has found another target for its brand of shareholder activism.The investment firm, based in New York, disclosed in a regulatory filing on Thursday that it planned to fight for a presence on the board of DepoMed, a specialty pharmaceutical company. The hedge fund said that it had built up a 9.8 percent stake in the drug maker.The pending proxy fight comes months after DepoMed, whose products treat pain and other conditions of the central nervous system, successfully beat back a $3 billion hostile takeover bid by an Irish rival, Horizon Pharma.Fighting off that unwanted offer involved a lengthy legal battle. DepoMed adopted an anti-takeover defense known as a poison pill, and Horizon dropped its takeover bid in November.AdvertisementShares in DepoMed have fallen since, closing on Thursday at $15, valuing the company at $973 million.AdvertisementNow the company has drawn the attention of Starboard, one of the most notable activist investors of recent years. Starboard successfully ousted the entire board of Olive Garden’s parent company, Darden Restaurants. And it is leading a campaign to unseat the directors of Yahoo after arguing for more than a year that the troubled Internet company has failed to find the right turnaround strategy.In describing why it was starting a board contest at DepoMed, Starboard said the company had shown itself to be unfriendly to shareholders, both in the way it fought off Horizon and in its proposed changes to its corporate governance policies.Starboard cites DepoMed’s effort to move its corporate home to Delaware from California. The proxy statement filed by the company earlier this week notes that the move will make it more difficult for shareholders to call special elections for their fellow investors.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In addition, Starboard notes, under its proposed new corporate bylaws, shareholders will need to own at least 25 percent of DepoMed’s shares before they can call a special meeting. The current threshold is 10 percent.Also, shareholders would not be able to call special elections to remove board members, according to Starboard’s reading of DepoMed’s proposed rule changes. Investors would effectively be blocked from trying to call such a meeting within 180 days of any annual meeting.“Given the apparent willingness of the current board members to take extraordinary action to entrench themselves, as exemplified by the reincorporation proposal, we have little choice at this time but to immediately commence the process to call a special meeting of shareholders in order to preserve our rights under California law and Depomed’s current bylaws,” Starboard wrote in a letter to DepoMed’s management that was reviewed by The New York Times.Starboard said it planned to field six candidates — five from the hedge fund, including Jeffrey Smith, the chief executive, and James Fogarty, the former chief executive of Orchard Brands.“We intend to continue our search for a slate of director candidates that will ensure an experienced, diverse, and independent board,” Starboard wrote in the letter. “However, we deemed it necessary to take this action to preserve our rights as shareholders, and to ensure compliance with Depomed’s current onerous bylaw requirements, so that management cannot further manipulate the bylaws prior to our ability to take action.”In a statement, DepoMed said it welcomed “open communications with its shareholders.” But it added that Starboard had “not attempted to hold any discussions.”AdvertisementA representative for Starboard declined to comment beyond the filing.Shares of DepoMed rose in after-hours trading to $16.25.A version of this article appears in print on April 8, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Starboard  Sets Sights  on Seats at DepoMed.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.