
Workspace Interview by                     
PATRICIA R. OLSEN

NOV. 14, 2015
The great outdoorsREI is 20 miles south of Seattle. A winding road off a highway leads to our 20-acre campus. I’m in the Anderson building, named for the REI founders. It has a ski-resort feel because of the big wooden beams and tall windows, and the fireplace in the center of the building.1. A stump’s second lifeI’ve tried to incorporate the outdoors into my office. When I accepted this position, I commissioned my stand-up desk from a 70-year-old craftsman I know in Colorado, where I have a home. We picked out a stump in his yard together, and he cut it and hand-finished it.2. Mind the gapMy conference table is a vertical cut from a tree native to Washington. I commissioned it from Urban Hardwoods in Seattle, which makes furniture from salvaged trees. There’s a large crack on one side, so anyone sitting on that side has to be careful not to lose something down the fissure.Two-wheeled commuteMost seasons, I bike 40 miles round trip to work at least once a week and perhaps three times a week in summer, if I don’t have an off-site meeting. We have a bike room where employees can hang their bikes and take a shower.Advertisement3. Ageless animalsI have several small stuffed animals on my bookcase that belonged to my children. The dog is from the time we read “Clifford the Big Red Dog” books, and the moose is from times in Colorado when we’d see bear, moose and elk. The books were important to them long ago, and they’re still important to me.AdvertisementWorking the floorI spend a ton of time in our stores with our associates, and I’ll put on a green vest like they do while I’m there. My first week on the job, I trained on a cash register, and in the shoe department in one store learning how to fit boots.4. Summit meetingsRandy King, superintendent of Mount Rainier National Park, gave me a replica of the United States Geological Survey benchmark medallion marking the summit of Mount Rainier after our July ascent. About 16 employees and I climbed 10,000 feet using ropes, with three or four people on each one. We slept on the snow and summited at 4:30 a.m. the third night. We’ve done fund-raising climbs like this for Mount Rainier National Park’s search-and-rescue program, collecting just under $250,000, and Randy was showing his appreciation.5. Fish storiesJim Gilmore, an artist my wife and I admire, did the bronze sculpture of the trout. My wife gave it to me as a reminder of the fly-fishing trips we took to Patagonia and New Zealand for two anniversaries.Chief bloggerI do my own blogging, mostly to our associates. I’m a huge fan of storytelling that lets employees know who we are. To that end, we decided that it would be more authentic for us to close all 143 of our stores this Black Friday. We believe Black Friday has become more about getting stuff than having experiences with your loved ones in the outdoors. I also participated in a Reddit Ask Me Anything. We actively seek open dialogue at REI, I believe in stepping up, listening to all sides and taking action. Transparent leadership is the only way to go in a transparent age.6. Breaking throughThe ice ax, one of ours from 30 years ago, is from an April fund-raiser we did for the Mountaineers organization in Seattle. It also represents REI’s story, which began with Mary and Lloyd Anderson searching for a high-quality and affordable ice ax in 1938. They were lusting after gear, so they formed REI as a consumer co-op with 21 mountain-climbing friends. We still have that business structure.Pocket-size courageI collect river rocks from places I’ve fished all over the world and have scattered them all around the office. If I’m talking in front of a big group and am nervous, I’ll put one in my pocket. They keep me grounded regarding what REI is all about and what the outdoors means to me.This interview has been condensed.A version of this article appears in print on November 15, 2015, on Page BU3 of the New York edition with the headline: If You Can’t Be Outside, Then Bring the Outside In.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »