AdvertisementSupported byBy Jack EwingFRANKFURT — With the eurozone economy still listless, despite the aggressive stimulus measures being taken by the European Central Bank, economists at a conference here on Thursday were full of advice on aggressive next steps.But top officials of the central bank pushed back against one of the most radical proposals: to print money and hand it out to citizens in an approach known as “helicopter money.”“It’s not on the table,” Peter Praet, a member of the E.C.B.’s executive board, said of the helicopter idea, so named because of the image of showering money on the populace from the sky. “It’s not even discussed informally,” he said at the conference.Still, the central bank acknowledged its deep concern about the risk that the eurozone’s economic doldrums, characterized by a worrisomely low rate of inflation, could devolve into outright deflation, a vicious circle of falling prices and demand that can undercut corporate profits and cause unemployment to soar.A growing number of economists argue that central banks must use radical measures — even helicopter money, largely a textbook notion — to prevent deflation from becoming entrenched in Europe.The central bank’s worries were evident in a summary published Thursday of deliberations by the central bank’s policy-making body, the Governing Council, at its meeting last month. Council members, the summary made clear, were alarmed that inflation showed a decline even without factoring in energy prices. Previously, they could attribute low inflation to the falling price of oil.“The decline recorded in February was a new element,” the summary said. Members of the council agreed that “euro area growth momentum would be slower and inflation lower for longer than previously anticipated.”Those concerns had prompted the central bank to undertake a series of measures, some unprecedented, intended to deliver a jolt to the eurozone economy and arrest a decline in consumer prices. The actions, announced on March 10, include printing money to buy bonds issued by corporations, and offering to pay banks to lend money to their customers.“We have a deflation risk,” Ignazio Visco, a council member and the governor of Italy’s central bank, said at the Frankfurt conference on Thursday.The event was a gathering of economists and other analysts who follow central banking, some of whom expressed doubts that the E.C.B.’s actions so far would be powerful enough to counteract the effects on the eurozone economy of a slowdown in global trade.The term helicopter money was coined in 1969 by the economist and Nobel laureate Milton Friedman, more as a thought experiment than as a serious policy proposal. The idea was that when conventional policy tools no longer worked, central banks could print bills and toss them from helicopters to eager citizens who would spend the money and stimulate the economy.Deflation sets in when falling prices prompt people to delay purchases because they expect prices to fall even further. Consumer spending and investment collapse, companies dismiss workers, and spending falls even further as people lose their jobs and incomes. Central bankers fear deflation because once it sets in, it is notoriously difficult to reverse.Helicopter money has long been seen as a hypothetical last resort. But the idea has been taken more seriously as inflation in the eurozone has remained stubbornly near zero. Inflation has been below 0.5 percent since July 2014 and was at negative levels in both February and March.The E.C.B. does not expect inflation to reach the bank’s official target of close to, but below, 2 percent until after 2018.“We face continued disinflationary forces,” Mario Draghi, the president of the E.C.B., said in the bank’s annual report, published on Thursday.But handing out free money would not be easy. The E.C.B. has no procedure for distributing cash fairly to the roughly 335 million people in the eurozone. One mechanism might be to give everyone a tax cut. But that is probably illegal under eurozone rules, which bar the bank from getting involved in member governments’ financing.Charles Bean, a professor at the London School of Economics, said at the Frankfurt conference that Britain, arguably, had already distributed helicopter money. The Bank of England has printed money to purchase government bonds, and the government in turn has made tax cuts.“People mistakenly think this is some magical policy that has not yet been tried,” Mr. Bean said. “In reality, it’s a mix” of policies.Some economists say that the E.C.B. has already introduced a form of helicopter money by deciding last month to offer interest-free funds to banks, on the condition that they lend the money to businesses and consumers. If banks meet certain lending benchmarks, they will get a bonus from the E.C.B. in addition to the interest-free funds. In effect, the commercial banks will be paid by the central bank to lend money.But central bank officials clearly do not want to raise expectations that they are about to start carpet-bombing the eurozone with freshly minted bills.Vítor Constâncio, the vice president of the central bank, also ruled out helicopter money during an appearance at the European Parliament on Thursday. He argued that actions already taken by the E.C.B., which include penalizing banks for hoarding cash, have been working.“Without these measures,” Mr. Constâncio said, “the euro area would have been in outright deflation last year.”Advertisement