By RAVI SOMAIYA and JOHN HERRMANAPRIL 7, 2016
The news website Mashable announced sweeping changes to its operations on Thursday, replacing its executive editor, Jim Roberts, and its chief revenue officer, Seth Rogin, and making a round of job cuts.In a memo to the staff, Mashable’s founder, Pete Cashmore, described a decision to “move away from covering world news and politics as stand-alone channels.” It will spend more time “focusing on our core coverage — technology, web culture, science, social media, entertainment, business and lifestyle, all told through the digital lens. We’ll also develop our real-time news coverage, keeping our audience up to date on breaking news and cultural trends being discussed on social networks.”The company declined to comment on the specifics of the cuts, but two people with knowledge of the shift, who spoke on condition of anonymity, suggested that the job losses would be to areas Mr. Cashmore described as declining in significance, world news and politics.Mr. Roberts, a former senior editor at The New York Times, did not immediately respond to a message seeking comment. He will be replaced by Greg Gittrich, formerly the chief content officer at Vocativ. Mr. Rogin will be replaced by Ed Wise, who had worked at the humor website and studio Funny or Die.Mashable employees had come to work on Thursday expecting to hear about their company’s plans for the future. The news and entertainment site had just raised $15 million — which included a deal to develop video production and technology with Time Warner’s Turner division — and an all-hands meeting had been scheduled. But the memo came before the meeting: “Today we must part ways with some of our colleagues,” Mr. Cashmore wrote.By early afternoon, as many as a dozen editorial employees had been terminated. Nadja Oertelt, a senior producer at the company, posted on Twitter, “I just got a call on a field shoot that I’m fired along with half the @mashable editorial staff.” Back at the New York City office, employees watched their group messaging app, Slack, to see who was still online and, presumably, employed.A version of this article appears in print on April 8, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Mashable Cuts Jobs in a Big Shift in Its News Coverage.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.