AdvertisementSupported byDeal ProfessorBy Steven Davidoff SolomonCorporate America fought the law and the law won.This is the clear conclusion looking at this week’s deal-killing actions. So far, the government has destroyed the $152 billion deal between Allergan and Pfizer by instituting stricter tax rules, sued to block the $35 billion Halliburton-Baker Hughes merger on antitrust grounds, and sued the $16 billion activist fund ValueAct Capital for failing to file an antitrust notification regarding its investments in Baker Hughes and Halliburton. The press described the ValueAct lawsuit in apocalyptic terms as a “lawsuit to define activism.”And it’s only Thursday.With the flurry of events there are always general lessons, and here are four.In today’s world, government action is going to come from the agencies, not from Congress. The agencies are increasingly aggressive in exercising power. This is the Treasury Department’s third set of rules aimed at curbing so-called inversions, where an American company merges with a foreign company and moves abroad to cut its tax bill. As the law professor Victor Fleischer noted, the Treasury’s rules may go too far, subjecting them to a possible legal challenge. But it doesn’t matter, since no one would delay a deal for the years necessary to challenge these regulations. Allergan and Pfizer waited less than 24 hours to end their carefully drawn deal after the announcement of Treasury’s actions.Action goes beyond inversions. The government’s suit against Baker Hughes and Halliburton, which comes while oil production is depressed, is yet another time when companies miscalculated the government’s willingness to intervene. And in the realm of national security, the interagency Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States has been actively challenging deals, putting a chill on the ardor of Chinese acquirers.In the future, whether it is tax, antitrust or national security, deal makers today will have to worry about the regulators acting alone, which may be enough to kill most deals whether or not the government wins. Mergers and acquisitions lawyers are about to be eclipsed by their regulatory colleagues, and those firms with the best antitrust and other regulatory practices will have an edge.Back in November I called the Pfizer-Allergan tie-up “silly.” The fact that the chief executive of Pfizer, Ian C. Read, actually believed the government would let this deal go through showed how divorced from reality executives can be. Mr. Read gets a raspberry for wasting everyone’s time and money. There is a silver lining, though. With the hundreds of millions of dollars saved on adviser fees, Pfizer can now use its cash to lobby Congress to reform our broken tax system.The government has shown its willingness to push back on both antitrust and national security grounds in almost every borderline case. Every deal maker has been on notice since the government killed the AT&T and T-Mobile deal  in 2011 despite AT&T having to pay a $4 billion breakup fee. Despite allowing some airline mergers to go through, the government has cast a wary eye on large mergers that shrink markets to a few players. Deal makers need to take this regulatory risk more seriously, particularly in today’s political environment — it’s not a time to say that we can announce a deal and bully the government to accept our position.The investment bankers and lawyers invented inversions and stoked the craze, killing it in their zeal to sell this lucrative concept. Bankers were a big loser this week.Are the advisers to blame for all of this? On one hand, they are merely advisers and recommending a course of action. It is the client who ultimately makes the decision. On the other hand, there is no doubt that while peddling this type of transaction the advisers knew of the serious risks of government backlash but did not back down as inversions caught on in corporate America.This is also true in the case of these antitrust-bending deals — surely the lawyers must have advised their clients of the real risks, and yet the clients plowed ahead. It all means that perhaps it is time for advisers to do some deep reflection on when and how to tell clients no.The ValueAct lawsuit was probably the most surprising of the three announcements this week. In general, any acquisition of more than $78.2 million is required to be reported before it occurs to the Federal Trade Commission or Justice Department under the Hart-Scott-Rodino Antitrust Improvements Act. This gives the government a 30-day period to review the transaction for antitrust purposes. Failure to file this notification could incur a penalty of up to $16,000 a day.There is an exception to this filing requirement, however, if the transaction is “solely for the purposes of investment.” The government has accused ValueAct of violating this standard since ValueAct intended to “obtain access to management, to learn information about the merger and the companies’ strategies in private conversations with senior executives, to influence those executives to improve the chances that the merger would be completed, and to influence other business decisions.”It’s hard to know what to make of these accusations. They look an awful lot like what any big shareholder does in the ordinary course of business, which is why there is talk of this suit chilling or even stopping some activism.But here’s the thing. The government’s complaint fails to mention that ValueAct did actually file a notification in November 2015 after its own evaluation led it to be more actively engaged and seek a board seat at Baker Hughes. At first glance, the government’s stance on what “solely for the purposes” means would prevent activists from presenting compensation proposals or discussing business strategy with management, which are different than seeking to push the company to do something. Ultimately, we need ValueAct’s side of the story to make any definitive assessment. It could all be just a product of the intense scrutiny that the Halliburton-Baker Hughes deal has received, and ValueAct is collateral damage.The suit won’t end shareholder activism, though it may push more activist funds to file notifications and pay the filing fee, which can be as much as $280,000, a nice revenue boon for the government. In other words, this is an important case, but it probably should not change what people are doing until we have a better view of the facts and more sober thinking.And that goes with the theme of this week. Deal makers finally got a sobriety check. The latest takeover boom is ending, thanks in part to United States regulators.Advertisement