By JONATHAN SOBLEAPRIL 7, 2016
TOKYO — The chairman of the Japanese conglomerate that owns the international convenience store chain 7-Eleven abruptly resigned on Thursday, after the company’s board sided with a subordinate in a succession dispute.The fight has been roiling the parent company, Seven & I Holdings, one of the world’s largest retail groups, which also has interests in supermarkets and department stores. It has put Seven & I Holdings in the cross hairs of a prominent American hedge fund, Third Point, which had criticized the chairman’s leadership.The chairman, Toshifumi Suzuki, 83, said he would step down from the position he has held since 2005, when he helped create Seven & I Holdings by engineering a merger between three large Japanese retailers. Mr. Suzuki has also served as chief executive.There was no immediate announcement on who would replace Mr. Suzuki.The catalyst for his resignation was a revolt by Seven & I’s board. Mr. Suzuki was seeking to remove Ryuichi Isaka, the president of the Japanese arm of 7-Eleven. Mr. Isaka, 58, leads Seven & I’s most profitable unit and is widely seen as a possible successor to Mr. Suzuki, who is in failing health.AdvertisementOn Thursday, the board rejected a proposal to remove Mr. Isaka. In response, Mr. Suzuki announced his intention to quit, saying at a news conference that he wanted to “take responsibility” for the failed attempt to oust Mr. Isaka.AdvertisementThe clash has exposed Mr. Suzuki to accusations of nepotism. According to reports in the Japanese news media, Mr. Suzuki was maneuvering to position his son to be his eventual successor, instead of Mr. Isaka.To that end, the reports said, he hoped to sideline Mr. Isaka and install a caretaker leader, who would ultimately hand the reins to the son, Yasuhiro, 51, a member of the Seven & I board and the group’s chief information officer.Mr. Suzuki denied that he was seeking to promote his son, saying that he was “stunned” to hear rumors that nepotism was behind his battle with Mr. Isaka. He said Mr. Isaka’s leadership skills were “insufficient” to lead Seven & I.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The convoluted and unusually public battle escalated in part because of Third Point, the hedge fund run by the billionaire investor Daniel S. Loeb. Last year, Mr. Loeb, who has made a career of buying stakes in companies and pushing them to change their management or strategy, bought an undisclosed number of shares in Seven & I.Mr. Loeb has publicly pushed for Mr. Isaka to be appointed to succeed Mr. Suzuki, and he has warned against creating a “dynasty” at Seven & I.In a letter to other Seven & I investors in October, Mr. Loeb wrote that the company should focus more of its resources on the convenience store division led by Mr. Isaka, which contributed more than 85 percent of the group’s 532 billion yen, or $4.9 billion, in operating profit last year. He urged the company to consider selling off its less lucrative supermarket arm.Paradoxically, it was Mr. Suzuki who nurtured the convenience store business and turned it into the backbone of Seven & I.After joining a five-store supermarket chain called Ito Yokado more than 50 years ago, Mr. Suzuki persuaded the company to license the American 7-Eleven brand and start a convenience store operation in Japan.Today, there are more than 50,000 convenience stores in Japan, including 18,000 7-Elevens. Ito Yokado, which became part of Seven & I in the 2005 merger, eventually bought out 7-Eleven’s American owners.A version of this article appears in print on April 8, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Chairman Leaves 7-Eleven Owner, Target of a Hedge Fund.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.