By TIM GRAYAPRIL 9, 2016
Over the last several years, growth stocks, like Amazon and Netflix, have brought much momentum to the market. But in the first quarter, those kinds of stocks lost some of their sizzle, as old-school dividend payers came back into favor.That is where three of the quarter’s top-performing mutual funds found some of their better stock picks.The Artisan Value fund does not always invest in dividend payers, but the stocks the managers prefer — those attached to companies with strong financials and sturdy businesses — do tend to pay dividends, said the co-manager George O. Sertl. The Artisan managers operate very much in the style of Warren E. Buffett, the country’s best-known value investor. They aim to buy stocks trading below their estimate of the fundamental value.Cheapness is not enough, though. A company must also have a durable, defensible business and a burly balance sheet. That is not to say they avoid wading into situations that some investors might consider scary. Part of their strategy is to hunt in sectors where “fear and anxiety” have depressed prices, Mr. Sertl said.
            How three of the top performers of the first quarter of 2016 fared against the market — and against their peer groups of funds.        Artisan Value Fund+12%+8+40–4S. & P. 500TOTAL RET.–8–12JFMFIRST-QUARTER RETURNSArtisan Value Fund+8.6%Large-cap value+1.4%SunAmerica Focused Dividend Strategy Portfolio+12%+8+40–4S. & P. 500TOTAL RET.–8–12JFMFIRST-QUARTER RETURNSSunAmerica Focused Dividend Strategy Portfolio+8.3%Large-cap value+1.4%Deutsche Croci Equity Dividend Fund+12%+8+40–4S. & P. 500TOTAL RET.–8–12JFMFIRST-QUARTER RETURNSDeutsche Croci Equity Dividend Fund+8.4%Large-cap value+1.4%SunAmerica FocusedDividend Strategy PortfolioDeutsche CrociEquity Dividend FundArtisan Value Fund+12%+12%+12%+8+8+8+4+4+4000–4–4–4S. & P. 500TOTAL RET.S. & P. 500TOTAL RET.S. & P. 500TOTAL RET.–8–8–8–12–12–12JFMJFMJFMFIRST-QUARTER RETURNSFIRST-QUARTER RETURNSFIRST-QUARTER RETURNSSunAmerica FocusedDividend Strategy PortfolioDeutsche CrociEquity Dividend FundArtisan Value Fund+8.6%+8.3%+8.4%Large-cap valueLarge-cap valueLarge-cap value+1.4%+1.4%+1.4%APRIL 9, 2016
Thus, a couple of years ago, they bought gold-mining stocks — a first for their 10-year-old fund. “Gold and gold stocks went into a horrific bear market, and that’s when we got involved,” he said. “Goldcorp peaked at $55 in 2011 and bottomed out in January at under $10.” The stock ended up being one of the fund’s better-performing holdings in the first quarter.AdvertisementA period of disfavor for media companies likewise drew the fund’s managers into CBS and Time Warner shares, which also have done well lately. Some consumers have been dropping cable TV in favor of online video streaming, and media companies have responded by offering “skinnier bundles” of services and channels, Mr. Sertl said. That could mean less revenue, which has prompted some investors to scurry away. But Mr. Sertl said he and his colleagues believed that companies with popular programming, like CBS’s sports broadcasts and the Time Warner division HBO, would continue to thrive.Advertisement“Some people say, ‘Content is king,’ and we believe that,” he said. “If you have good content, you’ll be able to monetize it.”The Artisan fund, whose investor shares have an expense ratio of 1 percent, returned 6.38 percent in the first quarter, compared with 1.35 percent for the S.&P. 500.As its name suggests, the SunAmerica Focused Dividend Strategy Portfolio explicitly targets dividends. It does so via a rules-based strategy that its managers follow strictly, said Tim Pettee, lead manager. The fund owns 30 stocks. They are the so-called Dogs of the Dow — the 10 constituents of that famed stock gauge with the highest dividend yields — plus 20 more stocks rated by the managers’ financial model as the best dividend payers in the Russell 1000 index. (For that second group, the fund excludes financial companies and utilities.)“I wish I could change the name of the Dogs of the Dow because these are not doggy companies — they’re high-quality American brands,” Mr. Pettee said. The fund’s holdings include such well-known names as Caterpillar, Gap, Staples and Walmart.The managers assemble the portfolio annually and replace a stock in the interim only if its yield falls below the median yield of the S.&P. 500 or if a company is taken over, Mr. Pettee said. Otherwise, they leave the holdings alone.“A big part of our success is the fact that we reconstitute the fund only once a year,” he said. “That cuts down on our opportunities to make mistakes.”The strategy has led to the fund owning an abundance of companies in traditional sectors like industrials and energy, and fewer in higher-flying ones like health care and information technology. But as tech companies mature, more of them are finding their way into the fund — and even more will most likely end up there in the future, Mr. Pettee said.Advertisement“Think about Apple,” he said. “It declared a dividend in 2012, so it’s now in my world. It didn’t score well in our model — the valuation was too rich — so it’s not in the portfolio. But I’m looking forward to the day when I own Apple as a Dog of the Dow.See how the largest, leading and lagging funds compare.Find funds by their type, performance, risk or expenses.For more fund information, search morningstar.com.“Microsoft was the Apple of the ’80s, and in 2013, we bought it as a Dog of the Dow.”The SunAmerica fund, whose A shares have an expense ratio of 1.07 percent, returned 6.29 percent in the first quarter.Strict screens also govern the way that the managers of the Deutsche Croci Equity Dividend fund select their holdings, said Di Q. Kumble, lead manager.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Croci (pronounced “croaky”) stands for “cash return on capital invested,” she said. That is a measure that Deutsche Asset Management, a division of Deutsche Bank, developed to compare stocks across industries and countries. It was conceived as an improvement over traditional measures like the price-to-earnings ratio, Ms. Kumble said.“Earnings are based on accounting numbers,” she said. But accounting rules can vary across industries and countries, making earnings and thus P/E ratios tough to compare. “With Croci, we make adjustments to transform accounting reports into economic values,” she said.The fund’s managers apply a series of screens to winnow their potential holdings from among large-cap domestic stocks.“We start with the S.&P. 500 and exclude financials and any stock that pays no dividend,” Ms. Kumble said. The managers then seek stocks with low financial leverage and low price volatility as well as above-average dividend yields and low prices based on their proprietary calculations. All of the stocks they buy are given an equal weight in the portfolio, and they are rebalanced and, as needed, replaced quarterly.The methodology produces a portfolio that can yield picks that might seem surprising when viewed via traditional metrics.Consider Exxon Mobil and Coca-Cola, Ms. Kumble said. Back in 2013, Coke had a price-to-earnings ratio of 19, while Exxon’s was 12. “So on the surface, Exxon was cheap,” she said. “But our Croci economic P/E was higher for Exxon Mobil than Coke. So our methodology said Coke was actually the cheaper stock.” The Croci approach made a number of adjustments, including, for example, counting Coke’s advertising and brand as assets, which differs from the traditional approach, Ms. Kumble said.Coke was also among the fund’s most recent reported holdings, though Exxon Mobil was not. Apple, too, was a holding.AdvertisementThe Deutsche fund, with a net expense ratio of 1.08 percent, returned 6.45 percent in the first quarter.A version of this article appears in print on April 10, 2016, on Page BU16 of the New York edition with the headline: Taking Shelter in Old-School Dividend Payers.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.