AdvertisementSupported byBy Chad BrayLONDON — The Bank of England said on Friday that its top insurance regulator had been named the next chief executive of the Prudential Regulation Authority, a financial regulator within the central bank.Sam Woods, the executive director of insurance, will succeed Andrew Bailey as the deputy governor for prudential regulation at the Bank of England and as the chief executive of the Prudential Regulation Authority on July 1. He will serve a five-year term.Mr. Bailey is scheduled to leave the Bank of England at the end of June and become the chief executive of the Financial Conduct Authority, another British financial regulator.In 2013, the responsibilities of the Financial Services Authority, then the primary financial regulator in Britain, were split between two agencies: the Prudential Regulation Authority and the Financial Conduct Authority.“Sam is a dedicated public servant, a forward-looking policy maker and a natural leader,” Mark Carney, the Bank of England governor, said in a statement. “His broad experience and personal qualities will be vital in building on Andrew Bailey’s extraordinary contributions since the creation of the P.R.A. in 2013.”Martin Wheatley, who had been the Financial Conduct Authority’s chief executive since its inception, stepped down last year.Mr. Woods joined the Financial Services Authority in 2011 and transferred to the Bank of England in 2013 when the Prudential Regulation Authority was created.In his role as executive director of insurance, Mr. Woods oversees the regulation of more than 600 life and general insurance firms in Britain. He previously served as director for financial stability strategy and risk and as a director overseeing supervision of domestic banks in Britain.Mr. Woods spent a decade in a variety of senior roles at Britain’s Treasury before joining the Financial Services Authority.“I am absolutely delighted and very honored to be taking on the deputy governor role,” Mr. Woods said. “The P.R.A. has made a strong start as a prudential regulator under Andrew Bailey’s leadership and I look forward to continuing our work.”Advertisement