AdvertisementSupported byEssayBy John SchwartzThose people over at the National Rifle Association have some great ideas.I am not praising them simply because they are heavily armed, though I can’t deny that could be a factor. Their firepower aside, they have embarked on a truly interesting project: Rewriting fairy tales. With guns.That’s right, my friends, Hansel and Gretel have a little friend. And now their stories have really happy endings.That gives me an idea for some stories of my own — fairy tales about money. But let’s not get ahead of ourselves.The editor’s note accompanying the first installment of the N.R.A.’s weaponized fables asks, “Have you ever wondered what those same fairy tales might sound like if the hapless Red Riding Hoods, Hansels and Gretels had been taught about gun safety and how to use firearms?”In the Second Amendment version of that classic story, the children — formerly sad-sack victims at the hands of those drippy Brothers Grimm — emerge victorious from the witch’s house. The Big Bad Wolf, that thug, gets scared off by Red Riding Hood and Granny, both of whom are handy with their firearms. Granny tells the wolf, in a voice that is probably supposed to sound like a female Clint Eastwood, “I don’t think I’ll be eaten today.” They tie the wolf up. “Oh, how he hated when families learned how to protect themselves,” the author, Amelia Hamilton, tells us.Nobody actually gets blown away in these stories — mayhem is averted, not committed, by an armed citizenry.Oh, you can get all liberal and say that these stories play down the risks of firearms. You might even say that if the wolf and the witch had guns of their own — say, rifles with sights — these would have been much shorter stories, with full bellies for the bad guys.Or you can just notice that the N.R.A.’s brainstorm isn’t that original. As Maria Tatar, a professor of professor of Germanic folklore and mythology at Harvard, pointed out in a recent blog post, James Thurber rewrote Riding Hood’s tale with a blast at the end: “So the little girl took an automatic out of her basket and shot the wolf dead.” Roald Dahl has Red not only kill the wolf with an expertly aimed head shot, but also ends up with a lovely wolf-skin coat.I got in touch with Professor Tatar, because how often do you get an excuse to talk with a professor of Germanic folklore and mythology? She said that one of the problems with these gun-toting, sanitized tales was that they missed the point of Grimm. Success in fairy tales, she explained, comes down to more than tight shot grouping. “They are very much about problem-solving, using your wits and courage to get out of trouble,” she said. “Unfortunately, because they take up very basic cultural contradictions and are supremely malleable, they can also be harnessed for almost any purpose. The Nazis recast Little Red Riding Hood as the innocent Aryan victim of a Jewish wolf.”Yikes.Still, these stories intrigued me. I, myself, have written things for money. I have even written books, which is, in my experience, the least fun you can have in your underwear. It seemed to me there might be an opportunity here for me to write things for money that serve a greater purpose — just like the N.R.A.So here is my brilliant plan: If we can update fairy tales for pedagogical purposes, why not use them to teach children the value of investing? Mutual funds might not be as fascinating to children as firearms, but I love a challenge. And my finances are certainly Grimm.I sought advice. I sent an email to Ms. Hamilton, who has a master’s degree in English and 18th-century history from the University of St. Andrews in Scotland. She responded, “I love the idea, but I’m not available for comment at this time.”So I struck out on my own and tried a couple of test runs.Take “Rumpelstiltskin,” that amazing tale of a poor miller’s daughter who is told to spin gold from straw and does so with the help of an imp who demands her firstborn child in return. This one is simple: Spinning straw into gold? That is what the commodities market does. Rumpelstiltskin is, basically, a broker (or, perhaps, a Gnome of Zurich), though his commission seems high. In my version of the old story, however, the girl puts aside a little of the gold from each batch for herself and builds a nice nest egg. When she defeats Rumpelstiltskin by saying his name aloud (an early example of poor brand management), she uses the money to build a college fund, using a tax-advantaged 529 account. She sends her child to a good school. He gets an M.B.A. Everybody wins. Except for Rumpelstiltskin, but he was mean.Cinderella? A fabulous example of outsourcing. Her animal friends did all the work. Or are they unpaid interns? Still working on this one.And we don’t need to confine ourselves to the Grimm stories. Aesop was full of financial wisdom. “The Ant and the Grasshopper” tells you what you need to know about saving for a rainy day. The goose that laid the golden egg? It’s all about not letting greed get the best of your investing strategy. Poor Aesop never heard of exchange-traded funds or currency swaps. A little updating will make these babies hum.And what about Hans Christian Andersen’s classic tale of the Little Match Girl? She is trying to sell matches on a frigid night, afraid to go home to her father who will beat her, and missing her grandmother, who had been kind. What if she simply had the foresight to put a little money away with each of the matches she sold? As financial experts tell us, anyone can save. “It didn’t take long for the little match girl to realize that even small investments in a no-load stock fund over time could bring financial security.” In the end, she gets a nice condo somewhere. It’s warm.The possibilities are endless. Business is, after all, built on fairy tales. What’s an S-1 filing for an initial public offering with the Securities and Exchange Commission, if not corporate storytelling? And look at Theranos, the health tech phenomenon whose blood tests from the prick of a finger are starting to look as if they have more to do with fantasy than reality. That could be a model for an updated Sleeping Beauty: Pricking her finger didn’t go well for her, either.Our politicians understand the ways that business really is a Grimm tale. If you listen to Bernie Sanders, big, bad Wall Street bankers are scarier than any wolf.I explained my bold new storytelling idea to Professor Tatar. She listened politely. And then she shocked me by saying … she liked it. “You can’t teach kids investing principles per se, but if you put it in a story, it becomes instructive in a way the dry, abstract stuff will not,” she said. “I trust you,” she said, “and think you would create a work that would do more good than harm.”That trust might be misplaced. Still, great things might await me. As Jack said after climbing the beanstalk: Show me the money.Advertisement