
Off the Shelf By                     
PAUL B. BROWN

APRIL 9, 2016
Personal finance advice is often so focused on making sure our assets are properly diversified, taking every deduction we are entitled to and keeping investment costs low that it is easy to forget one important fact: When it comes to securing your financial future, the better you manage your career, the more money you are likely to have.Two new books about handling your family’s finances stress that idea: The more money you make, the more you can save. Since raises are typically a percentage of what you currently earn, the higher the base, the greater the increase. Contributions that your employer makes to your retirement account are usually based on how much you put in. The higher your salary, the more you can invest. Your Social Security benefits are based on your earnings.All this seems obvious in retrospect, but as Kimberly Palmer points out in “Smart Mom, Rich Mom” (Amacom, $14.95), most people, including the mothers who are her focus, forget it. That’s why she advises that women who decide to stay home with their children continue to generate some income, not only to keep money coming in, but also to maximize Social Security benefits and create networking opportunities.This type of advice is the strongest part of her book, which will be available in May. Ms. Palmer, who until recently was senior money editor at U.S. News & World Report, devotes only a short chapter to investing. Instead, most of her time is spent urging mothers to prioritize their time when it comes to their family’s finances.AdvertisementFor example, while she is all in favor of saving money on purchases, Ms. Palmer adds: “There’s a dark side to penny-pinching. It keeps us focused on small, short-term savings instead of working on the far more significant strategies that can really build our family’s wealth. We get a rush from saving $5 at checkout, while leaving $500 on the table because we didn’t sign up for a flex-spending account at work to pay for child care expenses.”See how the largest, leading and lagging funds compare.Find funds by their type, performance, risk or expenses.For more fund information, search morningstar.com.Her general points — for example, that the spending and saving habits we develop in our 20s have a significant impact on our financial future — are solid. And she is occasionally very witty. “I sometimes spend my lunch break texting with my younger sister, urging her to skip the $50 massage and instead learn to relax in less expensive ways after a bad day, in between offering her dating advice and career guidance. I am a full-service sister.”Still, it would have been better if she had provided even more specific advice.Douglas P. McCormick does just that in “Family Inc.” (Wiley, $29.95), the better of the two books.AdvertisementMr. McCormick, a managing partner of the private equity firm HCI Equity Partners, which invests in companies that generate about $20 million to $200 million in revenue, specifies his focus in his book’s subtitle: “Using Business Principles to Maximize Your Family’s Wealth.”Where Ms. Palmer is supportive, Mr. McCormick is hard-nosed, perhaps fitting for a graduate of both West Point and Harvard Business School.In talking about his recommendations, Mr. McCormick assumes “you have the discipline and intellectual honesty to act rationally.” He adds, by way of example: “Many advisers suggest you pay off your mortgage as quickly as possible. On the contrary, I recommend you pay off real estate debt last, even after making other investments, given the relatively low after-tax cost of this debt. But this assumes you actually save and reinvest this increased cash flow and don’t blow it on a new flat screen or vacation.”If you own a home, having additional real estate investments, like shares of a real estate investment trust, or REIT, is not a good idea, he adds. But, he says, you probably want to own more international stocks.“Today U.S. equities represent about half the global economy, a percentage that has been consistently decreasing. Basing your equity allocations on relative global market capitalization values will ensure your allocations change with the changing dynamics” of the global economy.Conversely, he believes, you may have too much money in fixed-income investments. His recommendation, which strikes me as aggressive, is if you are three or more years away from retirement, you need to have only 36 months of total living expenses in bonds, Treasuries and money market funds. “So long as you are more than three years from retirement, there is no need for more fixed income exposure.” Everything else, he says, should be in stocks.And those stocks should be in index funds. Active investing “is analogous to the joke about how good the technology is on new airplanes these days,” he writes. “Instead of two pilots, these new airplanes require one pilot and one dog. The dog’s job is to bite the pilot if he tries to touch the controls. Many of us would be better off if we had a dog around to bite us when we are tempted to ‘actively manage’ our investments.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But for all that investing advice, Mr. McCormick devotes the first 50 pages of his book to the need to “maximize the value of your single biggest asset — your labor,” making points such as, “Investments in education are one of the surest ways to financial security and wealth creation.”Armed with that education, he adds, you want to “make career choices that extend your possibilities.” You want to gain skills in fields like finance or marketing that are transferable to other industries as opposed to learning everything about one industry that could end up being disrupted out of existence.The proven principles of personal investing are important. But if you want to have a secure financial future, it will certainly help if you manage your career well. Neither Mr. McCormick nor Ms. Palmer advises that you choose a career based solely on what it pays, but it is certainly one factor to keep in mind.A version of this article appears in print on April 10, 2016, on Page BU17 of the New York edition with the headline: Behind a Powerful Portfolio, a Successful Career.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »