AdvertisementSupported byBy Paul J. LimFor years, many investors have been pining for a rebound in emerging-market stocks, only to be frustrated by the slide in commodity prices, which still drive many developing economies.The situation appeared to improve in the first quarter.After surviving another scare in January, crude oil prices rebounded about 40 percent, pulling up other commodities and emerging-market equities. Since Jan. 20, shares of companies based in rapidly growing economies like Brazil, the Philippines and Thailand have soared more than 20 percent, double the gains of the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index of domestic equities during that time.Is the bear market in commodities and emerging-market stocks coming to an end?Not quite.Most economists say it could take years before a commodity “supercycle,” like the one that drove emerging-market stocks in the early 2000s, kicks in. Even if China, the world’s biggest consumer of industrial commodities, were to regain momentum — a big if — the global economy would still require years to work through excess capacity, many market strategists say.Although commodities continue to be a drag, there are signs of subtle changes that make emerging-market stocks more appealing — at least more so than a year ago.“Coming into the year, there was this attitude: ‘Why take on additional volatility with emerging-market stocks when you can get better returns for less volatility in the developed world?’” said Laurence Taylor, a portfolio specialist who works with global equities at T. Rowe Price.As it turned out, concerns about the slowing economy hit the developed markets harder than the developing world, as European stock funds lost 3.4 percent in the quarter versus a 4 percent average gain for diversified emerging market funds.“That, perhaps, would be a catalyst for people to reassess their emerging-world thesis,” Mr. Taylor said.So too would the surprising advances seen in many of the most worrisome economies — the so-called fragile five nations of Turkey, India, Indonesia, South Africa and Brazil — which have improved their budget deficits, balance of trade and inflation outlook, he added.And the Federal Reserve’s less aggressive stance on interest rates this year may reduce a major headwind for the emerging markets. At the end of last year, expectations were that the Fed would lift short-term interest rates four times in 2016, even as central banks abroad were still trying to stimulate growth.Because higher rates curb risk-taking and strengthen the dollar, this was expected to have a negative effect on emerging-market shares.Yet the Fed chose not to lift rates at its March meeting. And given the central bank’s more conservative expectations for economic growth this year, Fed officials are hinting that rates will be increased only two times this year.“The change in tone represents more synchronicity with central banks in Japan, Europe and around the world,” said Michael Kass, manager of the Baron Emerging Markets fund.That could represent an opportunity in the developing world, money managers say, though this risky asset would merit caution.Even assuming that emerging-market stocks will go back to being one of the best-performing asset classes, as was the case a decade ago, the countries that led the past rally might not lead a resurgence.Consider that the so-called BRIC countries — Brazil, Russia, India and China, which dominated emerging market funds a decade ago — gained more than 770 percent from 1999 through 2007. That’s more than double the returns for other emerging-market stocks. Yet since the financial crisis of 2008, BRIC stocks have lost a third of their value while the rest of the emerging markets have held their ground.Then there is a valuation problem. “You can put emerging-markets stocks into a couple of buckets,” said Jonas M. Krumplys, co-manager of the Ivy Emerging Markets Equity fund. In one bucket are the commodity-driven economies of Latin America and Russia. In the other bucket are stocks based in economies that are increasingly being driven by domestic growth and rising consumer spending. This includes markets like India, Indonesia, Mexico and the Philippines.The problem is, stocks in the latter bucket — which investors favor — are trading at price-to-earnings ratios that are typically 50 percent or greater than shares based in the commodity bucket.“In the aggregate, the emerging markets look cheap relative to history,” said Scott Crawshaw, co-manager of the Harding Loevner Emerging Markets Portfolio fund. “But higher-quality areas of the market are trading at very different valuations to those stocks that are more caught up in the commodities downdraft.”Some money managers say they are being very selective.Within that domestic growth-oriented bucket, for instance, “you’re trying to find the gems left behind,” said Charles Wilson, co-manager of the Thornburg Developing World fund.An example, he said, is Kweichow Moutai, a leading spirits maker, which produces a major brand of baijiu, a distilled Chinese liquor.“It’s one of the most well-known brands in general in China,” Mr. Wilson said. He notes that the company trades at a price-to-earnings ratio of just 15, based on this year’s estimated profits. “That’s five or six points cheaper compared to its European liquor peers,” he said. “And it has a 2.5 percent dividend yield.”Mr. Kass at Baron has also been looking for companies with domestic growth potential that are trading at attractive prices.He said he had been focusing on growth companies that were affected by — but not directly participating in — the commodities business.These are companies like BM&F Bovespa, the Brazilian stock and derivatives exchange. Because equity-trading volumes are affected by the health of Brazil’s commodity-driven economy, shares sank nearly 18 percent from November to January. But Mr. Kass said the company has a good balance sheet and attractive long-term growth prospects.And since late January, the stock has soared more than 50 percent.Arjun Divecha, who oversees emerging market equities at the asset management firm GMO, notes that even within faster-growing sectors in the developing world, like technology, there are still pockets of attractively priced stocks.“Chinese tech is all the Internet stuff, which is expensive,” Mr. Divecha said. “Taiwanese tech is filled with middlemen — suppliers who make parts and are cheaper.”An example is Hon Hai Precision Industry, also known as Foxconn, which manufactures component parts for information technology and wireless communications companies. Earnings per share at the company, based in Taipei, have climbed 15 percent a year for the last four years. Yet the stock trades at a price-to-earnings ratio of just 9, based on forecast profits.Yet another strategy is to seek out overlooked countries — and companies benefiting from domestic growth, rather than exports.For example, investors have identified plenty of economies helped by low commodity prices because those nations are net buyers of raw materials. This includes places like India and the Philippines.Yet also in that group is Thailand, which has been plagued by political instability, enduring a dozen coups since 1932 — the most recent one in 2014.“When you think of a place like Thailand, you think, ‘Oh man, another military coup,’” said Scott Klimo, co-manager of the Amana Developing World fund. “But the fact is, the country has been pretty well managed from a macro perspective.”One of his fund’s top holdings is Bangkok Dusit Medical Services, which operates hospitals in Thailand. Mr. Klimo said that roughly 75 percent of the company’s business was done with Thai residents, which means it reflects the health of the Thai economy, not global trade.At the same time, he said, “Household spending on health care is a fraction of what it is in other economies.” Such spending will increase as more families enter the middle class.Ultimately, that kind of demographic advantage has been fueling the developing-market theme for decades. And strategists say it will support an eventual rebound in emerging-market stocks, whenever that comes to pass.Advertisement