By CONRAD DE AENLLEAPRIL 9, 2016
The British are going! Maybe.A referendum to determine whether Britain will leave the European Union has been set for June 23. Until voters decide whether they would rather be in or out, investors will have to decide whether to be in or out of assets in Britain and other parts of Europe.Neither decision will be easy. The referendum outcome is a tossup in polls, and analysts are divided on whether the country would be better off in or out of the 28-nation bloc.As for the markets, British stocks have fallen in the last year, like those in many countries, and the currency, the pound, has declined against the dollar and euro. But both have been stable since Prime Minister David Cameron announced the referendum date in late February.Investment advisers warn that the strong possibility of a vote for a British exit, or “Brexit,” from the European Union and the potentially — but not necessarily — dire consequences for years to come have not been factored into prices. Even though the odds slightly favor remaining in the union, the advisers urge caution before investing in the country and region.Advertisement“If you thought that the vote was going to go in favor of Brexit, as a U.S. dollar investor, you would be most negative on domestic U.K. stocks,” said John C. Maxwell, manager of the Ivy International Core Equity fund. “But you wouldn’t be bullish on the rest of Europe, either,” he added. If the British voted to leave, “it would highlight the fragility of the European Union.”AdvertisementIt’s not as if Europeans need a reminder. For several years, until late last year, Greece teetered on the brink of insolvency, and the pros, cons and odds of a “Grexit” were parsed far and wide.The European Union probably could carry on without Greece, as some members of European officialdom made clear to the Greeks during negotiations on their debt. Whether the union would do as well without Britain is more questionable.“In a Brexit scenario, people would start thinking, ‘Who’s next?’ and they might worry about what would happen to the entire European project,” said Conor Muldoon, a portfolio manager at Causeway Capital Management.It’s difficult for investors in international stocks and bonds to prepare for the referendum because professionals have diverging opinions on the economic and political fallout of a pro-Brexit vote. Mr. Muldoon foresees a long, fairly benign aftermath in which “the E.U. and U.K. would negotiate favorable trade deals.”Instead of an amicable parting, Mark C. Dowding, co-head of investment-grade credit at BlueBay Asset Management, warned to expect “a real messy divorce.”“The ‘out’ people say there would be a smooth transition,” he said, “but despite a lot of history together, I could see a difficult situation with pain and losses on both sides.”A report by the French bank Société Générale predicted that a Brexit would take 0.5 percent to 1 percent a year off British economic growth for 10 years and result in an annual drop in exports of 2.5 percent. Britain’s economy grew 2.2 percent last year.Advertisement“It would be in the mutual interest of the U.K. and the rest of the E.U. to strike a reasonable second-best solution which would maintain access to much of the single market,” the report said. “But one should not forget the need to renegotiate the U.K.’s trade relationships with the major non-European countries, as well, in particular the U.S. and China. That could be a long and painful process, with the balance of power being tilted against the U.K.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.That prospect has made a further decline in the pound a rare Brexit forecast that is nearly universally held. A vote in favor of leaving the European Union would drive the pound below $1.30, Société Générale predicted, compared with $1.44 on March 31. It also would propel a decline in the euro to less than $1 from about $1.14, the bank said.A soft pound would depress the dollar value of British assets, but it may be possible to more than recoup the losses in certain types of stocks. Mr. Muldoon predicted that the falling pound “would act as a stabilizer to any economic deterioration.” Industries like tourism would improve as the weak currency drew visitors to Britain who otherwise might have traveled to the Continent, he said.Mr. Maxwell, though wary, pointed out that companies in the blue-chip FTSE 100 index derive 75 percent or more of their earnings from outside Britain. That would cushion the blow from a plunging pound. Shares of companies that could benefit from it by producing goods at home and selling them abroad might be worth an investment.See how the largest, leading and lagging funds compare.Find funds by their type, performance, risk or expenses.For more fund information, search morningstar.com.“Owning things with U.K. costs and foreign revenues is good, but there are not many of those,” he said, offering the beverage maker Diageo as one example.For all their concerns about the British economy, the strategists at Société Générale have a positive outlook over all for British stocks thanks to the expected further declines in the currency. Yet they caution that British banks would be especially hard-hit in a Brexit because competing financial centers on the Continent would take over many of their activities.Whatever their commercial prospects, Mr. Muldoon finds bank stocks worth a bet. They have been sold heavily, taking their prices to low multiples of earnings, he said.Another casualty of a Brexit, in the view of Société Générale, would be British bonds; their yields, the bank predicts, would rise relative to those of core European countries like Germany. Not that it would be much consolation to owners of British bonds, but Société Générale envisions yield spreads widening even further for bonds in the Continental European periphery, places like Italy and Spain with persistently shaky economies.David Zahn, head of European fixed-income at Franklin Templeton Investments, likewise expects “peripheral bonds to sell off quite considerably” as the markets “anticipate questions about whether Brexit sets a precedent for other countries to consider their future in the E.U.,” he said in a note to investors.AdvertisementThe potential fragility of much of Europe recalls that apocryphal weather report from the 1930s: “Fog in channel, Continent cut off.” The rest of Europe may need Britain more than Britain needs it.“People would have more confidence in the U.K. doing the right thing in the medium term than Italy or Spain” if the European Union began to fracture, Mr. Muldoon said. “The great thing about the U.K. is that it’s a proper economy, with diversified sources of industry. The market structure is very strong, and corporations are very shareholder-friendly. For all of Europe, the U.K. is closest to the American model of capitalism.”Britain may decide that it needs the European Union enough to want to stay put. If the vote goes that way, “We’d expect markets to calm down quite quickly,” Mr. Zahn said. “We’d also expect investments that had sold off could subsequently rally, and there could likely be some good opportunities to realize value.”With so much riding on an outcome so much in doubt, any investment decision involving Britain, Europe and even points beyond should be made with great care. If the British do decide that they’re going, “this will be negative for growth around the world,” Mr. Muldoon warned, and “we’re going to have volatility leading up to June 23. Given the uncertainty, you might want to invest elsewhere.”A version of this article appears in print on April 10, 2016, on Page BU14 of the New York edition with the headline: Warning Investors to Beware of the ‘Brexit’.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »