AdvertisementSupported byBy Carla FriedAt first glance, high-yield bond funds had a strong start to 2016 with a first-quarter gain of 2 percent. But if you were paying closer attention, the ride was anything but smooth.In the first six weeks of the year, the largest high-yield bond fund, BlackRock High Yield Bond, lost 4.6 percent, and the biggest exchange-traded fund, iShares iBoxx High Yield Corporate Bond, shed more than 5 percent. During that time, the Vanguard Total Bond Market index fund, the largest fund that sticks with stodgy Treasuries and other high-grade bonds, gained 2.4 percent.The steep losses through mid-February were the latest illustration that high-yield bonds are an unequivocal failure when it comes to delivering on the classic role of fixed-income investments: ballast that steadies your portfolio when stocks are off on one of their depressive jags. While it makes perfect sense to shun high-yield bonds — also known as junk bonds — for the part of your portfolio that you rely on for stability and predictability, completely swearing off junk could be a failure of portfolio imagination.Junk bonds can play a useful role, as part of the riskier, stock side of your portfolio. In that context, junk bonds are fairly reliable, delivering higher income than dividend-paying stocks. For example, the Vanguard High-Yield Corporate bond fund has a current yield near 6 percent, compared with 3.2 percent for the Vanguard High Dividend Yield index fund. The lofty income payouts of high-yield bonds have been the major driver of equitylike total returns over long stretches.From 1983 through the end of 2015, the 8.8 percent annualized return of an index of high-yield bonds captured 80 percent of the gain for the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index, with about half the volatility of the stock index. An analysis by AllianceBernstein found that if you kept 75 percent in stocks over that stretch and moved the other 25 percent into high-yield bonds, the 10.4 percent annualized return trailed the all-stock return by less than a half a percentage point, while clocking in with 16 percent less volatility than the all-stock portfolio.“There’s a pervasive attitude that high yield is scary, but that misses the big opportunity,” said Gershon Distenfeld, director of high yield at AllianceBernstein. “Used in place of stocks it dampens your volatility without costing you much in return.”And junk is one of the better value propositions among riskier asset classes these days. After a sharp sell-off throughout much of 2015, the yield on an index of high-yield bonds at the end of the first quarter was 8.4 percent, about two percentage points higher than a year ago. The total return for a traditional mutual fund or an E.T.F. is the sum of the income yield plus any changes in the underlying price of bonds in the portfolio. Higher yields provide more cushion against falling prices during market downturns. Starting from today’s higher yields, Payson Swaffield, chief income investment officer at Eaton Vance, thinks we are at the beginning of a new cycle of positive junk returns that could last a few years.One way to measure value is to compare interest payouts. The long-term trend is that junk yields are on average 5.25 percentage points higher than yields from Treasuries. Right now this so-called spread is seven percentage points, meaning investors are getting paid more than the historical norm to dip a toe into the junk bond market. Mr. Swaffield found that in the two dozen times since the late 1980s when the spread was that wide, the annualized total return for high yield over the next three years ranged from 8 to 16 percent.Even sticking to the low side of that analysis, junk looks attractive relative to stocks. More than seven years into this bull market, stocks are anything but cheap, especially the high-yielding dividend payers that income investors have flocked to in a world where quality bonds yield next to nothing, or less. The 19.2 price-earnings ratio for the iShares Select Dividend E.T.F. is about 20 percent higher than the long-term market norm. The higher the P/E ratio, the worse the value.Robust economic growth could in turn spur solid earnings growth, which would help stocks post strong returns from today’s lofty levels, but that isn’t expected. S&P Capital IQ, a research firm that serves the financial industry, projects that the S.&P. 500 will post 1 percent earnings growth this year.“An economy that feels like it is running through mud doesn’t look good for stocks at current valuations,” said Raymond Kennedy, a portfolio manager of the Hotchkis & Wiley High Yield fund. “But high yield can do well in a slow-growth economy.” As long as cash flow remains positive, high-yield issuers can make interest payments even if earnings growth slows to a crawl.Research Affiliates, a global asset allocation and investment company, forecasts that today’s high stock valuations and low growth expectations could translate into an inflation-adjusted 1.4 percent annualized return for the S.&P. 500 over the next 10 years. The expected return for junk bonds is 3.4 percent, the firm estimated. Investors may have begun to notice that mismatch; Morningstar reports that high-yield mutual funds and E.T.F.s had net inflows of $4 billion in February, the first positive month since October.While junk bonds are generally less volatile than stocks, don’t presume this will be a placid cruise.Defaults are always a front-and-center concern. In a recent analysis that made the case for junk being one of the better asset values in the market, Ben Inker, co-head of asset allocation at GMO, noted that the 4.6 percent average default rate for the bonds since 1988 ranges from a high of 15 percent to a low of less than 1 percent.Defaults are expected to rise this year from 2015’s 3.5 percent pace. Junk issues tied to energy, metals and mining represent about 18 percent of the value of outstanding junk debt. Mr. Swaffield of Eaton Vance said the entire junk market is currently trading at a level that prices in a default rate of about 18 percent — as if everything linked to the battered commodities market were doomed. Moody’s forecasts an overall default rate of 4.7 percent over the next 12 months, a bit lower than the 6 percent projected by Eaton Vance.With a hypothetical 6 percent default rate, the damage to a broad junk portfolio would be about 3.6 percentage points based on typical net losses on defaulted high-yield bonds. If you’re starting at a yield of 7 or 8 percent, a 3.6 percentage point cut still leaves you with a return of around 4 percent. And there’s the potential for actively managed funds backed by a team of credit analysts to sidestep some of the carnage. Last year as junk came under pressure from commodity-related defaults and investors running for the exits, two-thirds of actively managed junk funds did better than their benchmark index, according to S&P Dow Jones Indices.There’s also the “law of small numbers” to contend with, said Carl Kaufman, a manager of the Osterweis Strategic Income fund. “With growth already anemic, any disappointing news, no matter how small, will trigger an amazing amount of volatility,” he added.A shift in the trading mechanics of the junk market is also fueling volatility. The role of banks as middlemen in the bond market has diminished since the financial crisis. That has made bond trading a choppier endeavor. For example, after falling 4.5 percent in the first six weeks of this year, high-yield bonds then rallied to a near 7 percent gain over the next four weeks. “I’ve never seen whipping around like this,” said Mr. Kennedy, who has been running portfolios with high-yield bonds for 30 years. “Volatility is here to stay,” he said. “But if you’re willing to close your eyes for a few years you are going to do well.”Advertisement