AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben SisarioWith this year’s music festival season starting up, there is another jewel in the crown of Live Nation Entertainment, the company that has come to dominate live music through its concert and ticketing businesses. To its collection of top festivals like Lollapalooza, Electric Daisy Carnival and Bonnaroo, it has now added Governors Ball in New York.On Friday, Live Nation completed a deal to acquire a majority stake in Founders Entertainment, the parent company of Governors Ball, which was started in 2011 by a group of young promoters and has since beaten the odds by taking root in New York’s difficult market.This year’s Governors Ball will be held June 3 to 5 at Randalls Island with Kanye West, the Killers and the Strokes. For the annual event’s promoters, Live Nation’s backing will provide much-needed support in a fiercely competitive environment.Indeed, just seven weeks after Governors Ball, A.E.G. Live — the second-largest concert company and the force behind Coachella in California — is introducing its own New York music festival, also on Randalls Island, with LCD Soundsystem, Kendrick Lamar and Arcade Fire. It will be known as Panorama.The Live Nation deal follows months of lobbying in public and private, in which Founders trumpeted its indie bona fides and said that the arrival of A.E.G. had put its future in jeopardy.Live Nation and Founders did not disclose the terms of their deal, but Tom Russell and Jordan Wolowitz, Founders’ majority partners, said it would help them expand further in the region.They insisted that they would have been able to continue presenting Governors Ball on their own, but also acknowledged that Live Nation’s resources were essential for Founders to remain competitive and match the high costs of booking top talent for its events.“These events are so high-risk for us that if we were to launch a new event and it were to fail, it would cripple us,” said Mr. Russell, who, like Mr. Wolowitz, is 32. “By partnering up with a company that empowers entrepreneurs,” he said, Founders would “not have the fear that a new venture would really put us in the street.”The deal for Governors Ball follows a pattern for Live Nation, which in recent years has taken controlling stakes in a series of independent promoters around the country. In 2013, it bought half of Insomniac, the company behind Electric Daisy Carnival. In 2014, Live Nation made a deal with C3 Presents, which has Lollapalooza and Austin City Limits; last year, it acquired Bonnaroo.Michael Rapino, the chief executive of Live Nation, said that the high risks of establishing new festivals made it attractive to acquire proven entities.In New York, various companies — including Live Nation and A.E.G. — have tried and failed to establish festivals over the years, but among multiday pop festivals drawing a broad audience, only Governors Ball has had staying power, with 150,000 in attendance last year over three days.(Dance festivals, like Electric Daisy Carnival and Electric Zoo, which is owned by SFX Entertainment, have also been successful in New York.)“In the U.S., we were slow to evolve and build a festival capability,” Mr. Rapino said.But “even if these cannibalize an arena or amphitheater show, they are a very important, viable channel for artists to play,” he added. “We are going to make sure as the leader that we have a strong portfolio of festivals.”Festivals are a crucial part of Live Nation’s sponsorship and advertising operations, which last year reached $334 million in sales. That represented less than 5 percent of the company’s revenue of $7.2 billion, but it yielded far higher margins than Live Nation’s concert business, or ticket sales through its Ticketmaster subsidiary.Sponsorship deals represented about 40 percent of the company’s adjusted operating income. And festival sponsorships are its most lucrative kind, representing about $10 per attendee each day — a rate that the company says is about four times higher than what Live Nation is able to sell for regular concert tours.“Music in general is a tough industry to make money in,” said Amy Yong, a media analyst at Macquarie Securities. “Live Nation is aware of that. They let artists keep the vast majority of the economics, and monetize everything else through sponsorships.”One example of the changing nature of those deals is Live Nation’s partnership with Snapchat, the mobile messaging service whose popularity with young consumers has drawn a wave of interest from media companies.Last year, 10 of Live Nation’s festivals were promoted as part of Snapchat’s Live Stories, which collect video snippets from fans, interspersed with advertising. Those segments drew 60 million viewers, the companies said.(Coachella, perhaps the biggest festival attraction on Snapchat, had 40 million last year, according to a Twitter post from Snapchat’s chief executive, Evan Spiegel.)Live Nation has now renewed that partnership, covering 10 of its festivals in North America and Europe for multiple years. It will share advertising revenues with Snapchat, and while neither company would comment on the potential size of the deal, advertisers typically pay $100,000 or more to be part of a Live Story.Deals like those, and Live Nation’s development of festival apps, which track the movement of fans throughout an event and send targeted messages from advertisers, reflect the growing importance of technology on the concert business and its young clientele.“Ten years ago, it was all about putting up banners and ticket promotions,” said Russell Wallach, Live Nation’s president of North American sponsorships. “Now the brands push all the time. They want to be involved in new things.”By its own count, Live Nation controls or operates four of the top five pop festivals in North America, and 13 of the top 25 around the world. But Mr. Rapino said that it still had room to grow.“Our goal is to continue to be a global consolidator of the live music business,” Mr. Rapino said. “There are still a ton of great festivals, in a ton of markets, in a ton of cities that we would love to continue to build our portfolio on.”Advertisement