AdvertisementSupported byBy John KoblinThe American news media scrambled on Friday evening and early Saturday to cover the deadly attacks in Paris, an event unfolding thousands of miles away in multiple locations across a city gripped by terror and uncertainty.CNN dispatched members of its Paris bureau and mobilized its London bureau, while Fox News stayed on the air with Shepard Smith for many hours and MSNBC called on Brian Williams to fulfill his new duties as breaking news anchor.At CNN, news of the shooting interrupted Jake Tapper’s show, “The Lead,” which otherwise would have focused on the Republican presidential race, the Democratic debate on Saturday and the possible death of “Jihadi John,” the Islamic State’s notorious executioner.At a little after 4 p.m. Eastern time, it became apparent something significant was transpiring in Paris, with reports of shootings at several locations. At 4:24 p.m., CNN turned its coverage toward Paris and did not break away again.“We immediately started thinking about how to get there and get our coverage rolling,” said Michael Bass, executive vice president for programming at CNN. “It was considerably more serious than the first burst of information.”The network dispatched its Paris correspondent, Jim Bittermann, along with the few people it had in its Paris bureau and as many as it could from its London bureau, which is much bigger. Then it prepared to put several anchors on the air and began to organize travel plans for its staff members. Mr. Bass said that by Saturday afternoon, it would have as many as 70 people on the ground prepared to report from Paris.One producer, Pierre Buet, reported outside the Bataclan concert hall, about 40 or 50 yards away from the scene, while sitting in “the bushes,” he said.Mr. Bass said that it was CNN’s biggest reporting push for an international story since the attack at the offices of the French newspaper Charlie Hebdo in Paris in January. The network said it was sending Christiane Amanpour from London, Anderson Cooper from Los Angeles and Erin Burnett from New York to Paris.On MSNBC, Mr. Williams, who was stripped of his anchor duties at NBC’s “Nightly News” in February, oversaw his biggest story since returning to the air in September. The cable news network is counting on Mr. Williams to lead its new emphasis on breaking news, and he has been handling such coverage since his return, including Pope Francis’ trip to the United States that month, but this was by far his highest profile, and possibly most viewed, news event since his return.Rachel Maddow replaced Mr. Williams at 9 p.m. and praised him for his five hours of work, before he rejoined her on set an hour later. On Saturday morning, Matt Lauer and Savannah Guthrie in New York hosted a special edition of NBC’s “Today” show focused on the attacks.On Fox News, Mr. Smith led the duties, while the network rolled out video footage from Sky News (CNN drew much of its video coverage from an affiliate, the French channel BFMTV). Megyn Kelly assumed the anchor spot in the prime-time hours, and Geraldo Rivera had an emotional interview with his daughter Simone, who was attending a soccer match in the stadium that was one of the targets. Throughout the interview, which was conducted by telephone and where she described a chaotic scene within the stadium, he called her “honey.”“Do you want to come home, honey?” he asked.“I do, I want to come home,” she said, her voice cracking.“I want to come get you tomorrow,” he said.Fox News said that Rick Leventhal, Amy Kellogg and Greg Palkot would be reporting from Paris early Saturday.For news organizations, one difference between the Paris attacks and breaking stories like the racial unrest in Ferguson, Mo., or Baltimore was the ability to send out a wide team of reporters instantly. That was far more difficult in this case, as the organizations had to rely on foreign networks for video feeds in the early hours. Even showing messages from social media was difficult because many of the initial postings on Twitter and Facebook were in French.There was, however, an outpouring of support across social media almost immediately. Twitter quickly became a message board with information to help people get to safety in Paris; the hashtag #PorteOuverte — “Open Door” — became a vehicle for offering shelter to those in Paris who needed it. Facebook turned on its “Safety Check” tool so people could let friends and family know they were safe. On both Instagram and Twitter, users posted an image of the Eiffel Tower as a stand-in for a peace sign. The streaming service of the French broadcaster France 24 quickly became popular among social media users looking for web video access.In France, the front pages were united in stark declarations of horror. “Carnages à Paris,” said Libération. In Britain, newspapers also made repeated use of the words carnage, terror or massacre. The Sun, a tabloid known for its creative headlines, displayed the simple message “Massacre in Paris.” Der Spiegel, the German weekly, called Paris “the saddest city in Europe.”In Des Moines, CBS News executives said that the network was already reviewing its plans for the Democratic presidential debate that it was to broadcast on Saturday night. The debate was to cover a broad range of topics, but the executive editor of CBS News, Steve Capus, said in an interview on Friday that it would refocus its questions on the issues of terrorism and national security. There is “no question that the emphasis changes dramatically,” he said.CBS is also planning an hourlong special report Saturday night, just before the debate, focusing on the Paris attacks, Mr. Capus said.Emily Steel contributed reporting from Des Moines, Sydney Ember and Ravi Somaiya from New York, and Mark Scott from Rome.Advertisement