By THE NEW YORK TIMESAPRIL 10, 2016
This is what to expect from the week ahead:The International Monetary Fund will hold its annual spring meeting this week in Washington, D.C., an event that draws finance ministers, central bankers and international financiers from around the globe. One of the highlights will be Tuesday’s release of the organization’s updated forecasts on global growth.The fund’s managing director, Christine Lagarde, has already warned that the global recovery remains fragile and too slow. —Landon Thomas Jr.European privacy watchdogs will give their judgment on Wednesday about a new trans-Atlantic data agreement — known as the E.U.-U.S. Privacy Shield — that allows companies from Google to General Electric to move information between the two regions.Many of Europe’s regulators remain skeptical about the agreement, and if they rule that the deal does not meet Europe’s tough privacy standards, it may cause headaches for global companies when handling people’s personal information digitally. —Mark ScottAdvertisementLarge American banks will begin announcing their first-quarter results this week, and the numbers are expected to be disappointing. JPMorgan Chase will report its earnings on Wednesday, followed by Bank of America and Wells Fargo on Thursday and Citigroup on Friday.AdvertisementThe first quarter is typically the strongest for Wall Street as clients seek to redeploy their capital, but all of the banks are expected to be hit hard by a bad environment for trading and deal-making.Given the decline in oil prices, losses from loans made to energy companies will also be in the spotlight. Analysts will be seeking any indication that prospects have improved in recent weeks as market conditions have calmed down. —Nathaniel PopperUnited States retail sales figures for March, expected from the Department of Commerce on Wednesday, may be an indicator of whether consumers are finally feeling confident enough to bolster their spending. Despite a robust recovery in the jobs market and a brightening economic outlook, retail sales have so far stayed relatively flat, as households remain cautious, especially with spending on goods such as electronics and apparel.But a growing consumer confidence and the timing of Easter this year, which brought spring sales forward into late March, are likely to have translated into stronger numbers for the month. —Hiroko TabuchiPlease verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.On Wednesday, the House Committee on Natural Resources will hold a hearing on a bill to give Puerto Rico the legal tools to restructure its $72 billion of debt. A current draft would put the island under a federal oversight board and let it reduce its debts in a court proceeding similar to bankruptcy. (The bankruptcy code specifically excludes Puerto Rico.)The composition and powers of the oversight board, and certain details of the court proceeding, are up in the air, but committee members hope to resolve them on Wednesday, make final amendments on Thursday and send a finished bill to the floor of the House the next week. —Mary Williams WalshChina’s huge economy started the year with a whimper. The country is set to release a raft of economic data this week that is expected to show that growth continued to slow at a steady pace. On Wednesday, monthly trade statistics will probably reflect a continued weakening in global appetite for China’s exports, as well as sagging demand at home.On Friday, China will report economic growth for the first three months of the year that is forecast to come in at 6.7 percent — its weakest quarterly expansion since early 2009. But that would be down only slightly from 6.9 percent growth in 2015, and it would be in line with the government’s target for a 6.5 to 7 percent expansion in 2016. —Neil GoughAdvertisementThe Labor Department on Thursday will release the latest Consumer Price Index data. Wall Street expects the government to report that prices rose 0.2 percentage point in March, largely because of a jump in the price of gasoline, after several months of declines. The core C.P.I. index, which doesn’t include volatile food and energy prices, is expected to have risen by about 0.1 percentage point, a tame reading in terms of inflation and price pressures in the broader economy. —Nelson D. SchwartzOn Friday morning, the University of Michigan will release its initial estimate of consumer sentiment in April. Economists are expecting attitudes to remain at fairly optimistic levels, rising to about 92 from the March reading of 91. Wall Street’s rebound along with still-healthy hiring have helped to buoy the outlook of consumers, despite slow overall economic growth in the United States and volatility overseas. —Nelson D. SchwartzOfficials from major oil exporting countries, including Saudi Arabia and Russia, are expected to meet in Doha, Qatar, on Sunday to discuss a proposed freeze on output at current levels. The meeting will be watched closely for signs of whether the major producers can cooperate to bring balance back to the oversupplied market. Oil prices, which have recovered from their lows earlier this year, under $30 a barrel to about $40 a barrel for Brent crude, could come under pressure if the meeting ends in discord. —Stanley ReedA version of this article appears in print on April 11, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Trans-Atlantic Data Deal, and Oil Prices at Stake.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.