By NEAL E. BOUDETTEAPRIL 11, 2016
Tesla Motors said on Monday that it was recalling its Model X sport utility vehicles after testing revealed that the backs of the electric car’s third-row seats could give way in a crash.The voluntary action affects the 2,700 Model Xs built before March 26. Tesla said it discovered the problem while performing tests required by European safety regulators. The company said it had no reports of accidents related to the problem, and added that the vehicle had passed American crash tests.The recall comes in the face of an extraordinary response to the March 31 announcement of Tesla’s latest and most affordable electric car, the Model 3. With a starting price of $35,000, the Model 3 is intended to reach a larger range of car buyers than Tesla’s top seller, the Model S sedan, which costs around $75,000.The Model X, which can seat up to seven passengers, starts at about $80,000.Tesla, based in Palo Alto, Calif., has received over 325,000 $1,000 deposits for Model 3s, even though the car is not supposed to be available until the end of 2017.AdvertisementProducing that many cars will present a challenge for Tesla. Most conventional auto plants make around 200,000 cars a year.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Tesla is great at design and great at technology and marketing, but production has kind of been their Achilles’ heel,” said Jessica Caldwell, a senior analyst at Edmunds.com.AdvertisementIn a conference call on Monday, Jon McNeill, Tesla’s president for sales, service and delivery, said the Model X’s seat-back problem stemmed from a manufacturing defect in a part known as a recliner. While preparing to export the car to Europe, Tesla found the weight of a belted passenger thrown forward in a frontal crash could cause the seat back to break loose.Model X customers can keep driving their cars, but passengers should not sit in the third-row seats until they have been repaired at a Tesla service center, he said.Last year, Tesla recalled 90,000 Model S sedans to have their seatbelts checked for a defect.A version of this article appears in print on April 12, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Tesla Recall Is Ordered for S.U.V.s.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.