AdvertisementSupported byBy Noam ScheiberTwo unions representing roughly 36,000 Verizon workers in the eastern United States have set a strike deadline of Wednesday morning, saying they have made little progress with management in the more than eight months since their most recent contracts expired. The announcement sets up what would be one of the largest strikes in recent years.The unions, which represent customer service workers, installers, repairmen and other technicians for the company’s so-called wireline network, said on Monday that they had indicated they would meet Verizon more than halfway on its top priority, controlling health care costs. But they said Verizon had made few or no concessions on their biggest concern: protecting well-paying jobs and expanding the ranks of the workers who have them.“Our committee worked very hard to address all of the concerns they raised about limiting health care costs for the company, and we’ve been clear about our willingness to do so,” said Bob Master, assistant to the vice president of District 1 at the Communications Workers of America, one of the unions in the contract talks. “The reason we’re going on strike is that they failed to reciprocate on the issues that matter to us.”Verizon officials maintained that the changing competitive and technological landscape required a continual updating of the rules governing its work force. “We’re moving to a digital world,” said Marc Reed, Verizon’s chief administrative officer. “There are many things that were agreed to that made sense back in the Ma Bell era that are no longer tenable.”Verizon says that as more and more Americans give up landlines, it is only natural that phone service providers like Verizon will require fewer workers to operate and maintain them.In a release, Verizon said that its wireline business — its traditional landline phone service, as well as video and Internet offerings to homes and businesses, but not its wireless operation — generated about 29 percent of its revenue in 2015 but less than 7 percent of its operating income, suggesting that this business was not especially profitable. The company also said that the employees covered by the contracts currently being negotiated — over 99 percent of them in the wireline business — receive an average of $130,000 a year in wages and benefits.Mr. Reed and another Verizon official, Robert Mudge, the president of Verizon’s wireline network operations, expressed confidence that customers would experience no service disruption in the event of a strike. They said the company had begun training other personnel from among its total work force of more than 175,000 to perform the duties of the unionized workers.Most often, the duties will be performed by employees in the management ranks who supervise the workers going on strike. Mr. Mudge said the replacement workers would also include some information technology professionals, finance personnel and engineers. If the strike lasts beyond a few days or weeks, he said, it might be necessary to explore outside contracting arrangements.A strike in 2011 lasted two weeks before the two sides agreed to a new contract.The fate of Verizon’s call centers highlights some of the crucial divides between management and the unions. Verizon says that some of its call centers house only a handful of employees, and that it wants to be able to move the workers to other sites in the same broad geographic area. But the current contract prevents relocation exceeding 35 miles.“Those rules may have made sense 40 years ago,” Mr. Reed said. “Now they don’t.”The unions say that this ignores the underlying issue: One reason the volume of employees at certain call centers has fallen, Mr. Master said, is that the company outsources some of this work to contract workers in other countries like the Philippines and Mexico and to other parts of the United States. Verizon wants to increase the percentage of customer-service calls that can be routed to workers outside the region where the calls originate.One possible way for the company to expand its pool of well-paid jobs at a time when its traditional copper-line business is only marginally profitable and shrinking would be to expand its fiber-optic network, known as Fios, which can package together television, Internet and telephone service. But Verizon appears to have soured on a large-scale expansion of its Fios network.“We represent the people who install Fios, it’s the future of the business” said Mr. Master. “But they won’t build Fios in Buffalo, in Syracuse, in Albany.”Ian Olgeirson, an industry analyst with SNL Kagan, said Verizon had fulfilled is initial plan of laying fiber that could serve as many as 18 million homes, but hadn’t progressed much beyond that plan.“I think there was always an assumption they would go one step further and address more copper-based households that were not in that initial plan, and it doesn’t seem like there’s much appetite for that,” said Mr. Olgeirson. He cited as one cause the competition from streaming video online rather than paying for a bundled package that includes television.For his part, Mr. Mudge said: “We continue to invest in Fios. We’re putting as much investment in Fios today as we did in the previous five years.”Other issues at stake include how long a worker can be asked to temporarily work outside of his or her normal area — the company proposed up to two months, which the unions say is too long — and what the unions say are Verizon’s refusal to negotiate better wages or benefits for about 100 Verizon Wireless retail workers, who unionized in 2014Advertisement