AdvertisementSupported byBy Sam RobertsBruce B. Dayton, the last of the five brothers whose retailing empire included department stores, some of the nation’s first enclosed shopping malls and the Target discount chain, died on Friday at his home in Orono, Minn., near Minneapolis. He was 97.His death was confirmed by his son Mark, the governor of Minnesota and a former United States senator. Mr. Dayton inherited what became the Dayton-Hudson Corporation from his grandfather and father. Besides the department store chain Dayton’s and Target, the company also started the B. Dalton Bookseller chain.Praised for his financial acumen, Mr. Dayton graduated from selling shirts in the family’s Minneapolis department store immediately after World War II to company treasurer in 1946, when he was only 28. In 1969 he became chief executive, retaining the financial reins, and chairman.He gave up management of the company in 1977 and left the board in 1983.Dayton’s department stores were Midwest fixtures, immortalized in the opening credit sequence of the hit 1970s sitcom “The Mary Tyler Moore Show”: Ms. Moore was shown exuberantly tossing her tam-o’-shanter in the air outside the flagship store in Minneapolis. (The company’s department store division was later sold and became a branch of Macy’s.)The brothers were committed to donating 5 percent of the company’s pretax profits to charity. Bruce Dayton and his wife provided more than $80 million in capital, endowment and acquisition funds and more than 2,000 works of art to the Minneapolis Institute of Arts, now the Minneapolis Institute of Art. He served on the institute’s board for 73 years.A profile in The New York Times in 2009 identified him as “a dean of American corporate arts philanthropy” and said that museum directors called him “the ideal board member.”The Dayton family’s wealth helped catapult Mark Dayton into public office, enabling him to spend $25 million on his campaigns.George Draper Dayton, a transplanted New Yorker who planned to become a minister but found business more appealing, founded Dayton Dry Goods in 1902. His son, George Nelson Dayton, took over the business in 1923. He died in 1950 when he was 63 and Bruce, his second-oldest son, was 31.Bruce Bliss Dayton was born on Aug. 16, 1918, in Minneapolis to G. Nelson Dayton and the former Grace Bliss. He graduated from Yale University in 1940 and served in the Army.In addition to his son Mark, Mr. Dayton is survived by his wife, the former Ruth Stricker; three other children from his first marriage, to Gwendolen Brandt, Brandt, Lucy and Anne Dayton; two stepchildren, Kim Griffin and Mark Stricker; 11 grandchildren; and two great-grandchildren.In 1956, the Dayton brothers opened Southdale Center in Edina, Minn., which became a prototype for the suburban boom in enclosed shopping malls.They opened their first Target discount store in 1962 and the B. Dalton Bookseller chain four years later. It was later sold to Barnes & Noble. They merged with the J. L. Hudson Company of Detroit in 1969 to become the Dayton-Hudson Corporation. The company changed its name to Target in 2000. The brothers ran the company cooperatively. When Bruce Dayton ceded the title of chief executive to his brother Kenneth in the early 1970s, he did so, he said, because Kenneth was a better executive. “Titles were incidental,” he told The Minneapolis Star Tribune. “The only difference was that we used to meet in my office. Afterward, we met across the hall in his.”Advertisement