AdvertisementSupported byBy Raphael MinderMADRID — The Spanish lender CaixaBank is set to proceed with a takeover offer for BPI, a Portuguese bank, after reaching an 11th-hour agreement with an Angolan investor who had blocked its bid.BPI announced late on Sunday that a deal had been reached between its two main shareholders, CaixaBank and Isabel dos Santos, the daughter of Angola’s longstanding president, after a yearlong dispute.While details of the agreement were not disclosed, the two parties had previously said that they were negotiating a settlement under which CaixaBank would acquire Ms. dos Santos’s 18.6 percent stake in BPI and, in return, sell BPI’s Angolan bank, Banco de Fomento Angola, to her. She already owns 49.9 percent of Banco de Fomento Angola, indirectly through Unitel, an Angolan telecommunications company that she jointly owns with Sonangol, the Angolan state oil company.The deal was announced to stock market regulators just before a midnight Sunday deadline that had been set by the European Central Bank to force BPI either to reduce its exposure in Angola or to provision fully for the debt of Banco de Fomento Angola. Had it not met the deadline, BPI would have faced heavy fines for falling short of the European Central Bank’s new rules.In a short statement, BPI said the deal provided “a solution to the breach of the large exposures limit” set by the European Central Bank.In February 2015, CaixaBank, based in Barcelona, offered to buy BPI, in which it already had a stake of 44 percent, in a takeover offer that valued the Portuguese bank at about $2.4 billion. However, the offer was blocked by Ms. dos Santos, who said CaixaBank had undervalued BPI. She urged BPI to consider an alternative merger plan with another Portuguese bank. To block the Spanish bid, Ms. dos Santos vowed at the time to defend BPI rules that limit the voting rights of any individual shareholder to 20 percent of the share capital.BPI reported a profit last year of 236 million euros, or about $269 million, with a strong contribution from Banco de Fomento Angola. However, the fall in oil prices has been hitting the economy of oil-producing Angola, raising concerns over the level of provisions in its banking sector.Should CaixaBank now expand its presence in Portugal and complete its takeover of BPI, it could also position the Portuguese bank as a leading candidate to acquire Novo Banco, the Portuguese lender that was rescued from the collapse of Banco Espírito Santo.This year, Fernando Ulrich, the president of BPI, told a news conference that his bank would “examine the conditions” once Novo Banco was put back on sale. The Socialist government of Prime Minister António Costa, which came into office in late 2015, is hoping to sell Novo Banco after a failed auction last year under the previous, conservative administration.Advertisement