
Fair Game By                     
 GRETCHEN MORGENSON
 
NOV. 13, 2015
The investing world is riddled with conflicts of interest that can surprise even the most sophisticated investor. Learning that lesson the hard way are holders of an instrument issued in 2011 when Sanofi, the giant French pharmaceutical company, took over Genzyme, a biotech concern based in Cambridge, Mass.These instruments, known as contingent value rights, are popular among health care companies that do a lot of merging and acquiring. Contingent value rights entitle holders to future payments if the acquired company meets certain operational hurdles within a specified postmerger period. The payments are over and above what shareholders in the acquired company receive in the buyout.Pharmaceutical investors often demand contingent value rights from an acquirer when they believe a drug in their company’s pipeline will generate significant future earnings. Acquirers usually agree because it helps hold down the cost of a deal and spreads the risk.In 2011, Sanofi acquired Genzyme for $20 billion. At the time, Genzyme was conducting clinical trials of a promising multiple sclerosis treatment called Lemtrada.AdvertisementGenzyme’s shareholders didn’t think Sanofi’s $20 billion offer reflected Lemtrada’s upside. So Sanofi agreed to issue one contingent value right for every Genzyme share in the buyout. The rights gave their holders an additional $3.8 billion if Lemtrada cleared certain hurdles. These included gaining approval by the Food and Drug Administration by March 31, 2014, and reaching specific sales targets within certain time frames.AdvertisementAt the time of the merger, Genzyme estimated that each contingent value right was worth $5.58. It recommended shareholders approve the deal, and they did.Under the agreement, Sanofi would make “diligent efforts” to shepherd Lemtrada through the F.D.A. approval process and promote it as it would any drug. This set out a higher standard than Sanofi would have faced under an agreement to make only a “reasonable effort” with the drug.The agreement also required Sanofi to “ignore any cost of potential milestone payments in working to gain regulatory approval and commercialize Lemtrada,” according to a lawsuit filed on Nov. 9 in federal court in New York.Here is where the conflict comes in. During this period, Sanofi was developing its own multiple sclerosis drug, Aubagio, which would compete with Lemtrada.Sanofi, therefore, had a choice. It could do what it had promised Genzyme’s shareholders: work diligently to secure F.D.A. approval of Lemtrada and market the drug. But success in these efforts had a downside: the additional $3.8 billion in payments to Genzyme rights holders.Aubagio, by contrast, had no such downside. If Sanofi focused on developing and promoting Aubagio, it would generate profits that required no expensive payments to rights holders.Sanofi took the second tack, investors charged in the lawsuit. In the complaint, the American Stock Transfer & Trust Company, the trustee representing the Genzyme rights holders, contended that Sanofi failed to fulfill its obligations under the deal. As a result, investors have not received at least $708 million they were owed, the suit said.AdvertisementA Sanofi spokeswoman declined to comment, citing company practice when litigation is involved. But according to the complaint, Sanofi disclosed late last month that, based on sales trends, it did not expect Lemtrada to meet even the first sales milestone set out in the rights agreement. Nor did Lemtrada meet the F.D.A. approval deadline.The holders notified the trustee of a potential breach and an investigation ensued.The trustee’s complaint describes what appear to be two different paths taken by Sanofi in its development and marketing of Lemtrada and Aubagio.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.First, the lawsuit charged, Sanofi did not follow the F.D.A.’s clearly stated recommendation that Genzyme conduct a double-blind clinical trial with Lemtrada. In such a trial, neither the subjects nor the researchers would know whether Lemtrada, another drug or a placebo was being administered.Genzyme instead conducted a trial in which both subjects and researchers knew which treatment was being administered.In the summer of 2012, the company submitted its application for Lemtrada to the F.D.A. After some back and forth, the agency denied the application in December 2013. The F.D.A. said that Genzyme had not submitted sufficient “evidence from adequate and well-controlled studies” demonstrating that the drug’s benefits outweighed its adverse effects.Sanofi tried again, and the F.D.A. finally approved Lemtrada in November 2014. Not only was it more than seven months after the approval deadline specified in the rights agreement, but the approval itself was also problematic. Because Sanofi had not addressed the agency’s safety concerns about Lemtrada, it was approved only as a third-line therapy to be used after other treatments had failed. This limited Lemtrada’s sales potential, the trustee argued.The amount of time that it took Lemtrada to gain F.D.A. approval was unusual, the complaint noted. Among the 10 multiple sclerosis drugs with the highest sales in 2013, the F.D.A. approval process took an average of 13 months, far less than the 29 months it took for Lemtrada to be approved.Meanwhile, the price of the Genzyme contingent value rights was falling. In April 2011, right after the acquisition, the rights traded as high as $2.63. But they soon drifted lower, and as the F.D.A. approval deadline neared, they were trading under 50 cents. They now trade at 14 cents apiece.Aubagio’s path to market went much more smoothly. The complaint noted that it was approved by the F.D.A. in just over a year and that Sanofi created a sales force almost immediately. The company has also conducted more consumer marketing events for Aubagio than for Lemtrada, the complaint said.AdvertisementAfter one year on the market, Lemtrada had generated sales of 34 million euros ($36.8 million), the complaint said, one-fifth of the 166 million euros ($179.5 million) generated by Aubagio in its first year.The trustee declined to comment further on the case.But if Sanofi is found to have slow-walked the Lemtrada approval and marketing process to avoid a payout, the rights holders may not be the only ones hurt in the process.Around the world, some 2.3 million people are affected by multiple sclerosis; among them are patients who might have benefited from Lemtrada. They, too, may be considered victims.A version of this article appears in print on November 15, 2015, on Page BU1 of the New York edition with the headline: One Merger, Two Drugs, Millions Lost.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »