
Deal Professor By                     
STEVEN DAVIDOFF SOLOMON

APRIL 12, 2016
BlackRock, Vanguard and other big institutional investors own roughly 70 percent of the public stock market, according to some reports. People are starting to ask whether this allows companies — now having the same owners — to compete less and raise prices.In Senate testimony last month, the Justice Department’s antitrust chief, William J. Baer, said the department was investigating the potential antitrust implications of the rise of institutional shareholders. More specifically, he noted that institutional shareholders hold big minority stakes in many companies in the same industry.Take, for example, the airline industry. Across all of its funds, BlackRock held 8.3 percent of United, 6.6 percent of JetBlue, 4.7 percent of Delta and 4.5 percent of Southwest, as of March 31, 2013. Mr. Baer said the Justice Department was exploring whether such cross-ownership either explicitly or implicitly pushed companies to compete less.After all, if there is less competition in the airline industry and higher fares result, it will arguably benefit BlackRock over all, because it holds shares in not just one company but several in the industry. Less competition may mean higher costs for consumers but more profits for the airlines and BlackRock’s investors.AdvertisementAsked about the Justice Department investigation, a spokesman for BlackRock noted to Bloomberg last year that most of the asset manager’s funds were not actively managed and that “while we can’t comment on the D.O.J.’s investigation of the airline industry, we expect fair and ethical competition between the companies we invest in on behalf of our clients.”AdvertisementThe Justice Department’s investigation was spurred by a draft study published by José Azar and Isabel Tecu of the consulting firm Charles River Associates, along with Martin C. Schmalz of the University of Michigan business school. In that study, which looked at the airline industry from 2001 to 2013, the authors found that the higher the concentration of cross-ownership by institutional shareholders, the less competition and the higher fares that rose. The authors estimate that airfares rose by 3 to 5 percent on average because of this cross-shareholding.Let’s just stop here and note why this is interesting.These are not the typical antitrust violations where one company buys a rival and is able to squeeze out competition and raise prices. Instead, these institutional shareholder positions are minority holdings that are pervasive throughout the public stock market. If these holdings diminish competition and result in higher prices, it is an attack on the way shares are held. And it also means that the public is suffering under our capital markets arrangement.This is why the Justice Department’s interest is more than academic. It has the potential to be an attack on the entire system of mutual fund holdings.The study has fired up a wave of discussion. The authors replicated their approach by looking at banks with deposits and found similar effects.The paper on airline ownership is likely to spawn a whole field of study, and the authors deserve kudos, but it is important to put it in perspective.The problem is that the Justice Department will not find anything in its investigation because the study does not capture how shareholders interact with the companies they invest in, particularly those like BlackRock that are full of passive index funds.First, during the time of the airline study, the airline industry was undergoing sweeping consolidation, with bankruptcies and mergers galore. At the same time, shareholders were concentrating their holdings. The paper may just be finding a symptom of industry movement, with shareholders flocking to more concentrated industries but not causing them to be concentrated.AdvertisementTo address this question, the authors looked at the acquisition of Barclays Global Investors by BlackRock in 2009. Barclays held the iShares business with more than $1.5 trillion in assets under management; B.G.I. managed more than $1 trillion in assets. The authors found that this acquisition alone raised airline fares 0.6 percent on all routes as the holdings came together.The theory is that the holdings of the two fund managers combined were so large it gave them pricing power. But the authors do not report what Barclays and BlackRock held before or after the acquisition.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In response to an email inquiry, Mr. Azar provided the numbers they used for the four airlines they studied for this part of the test. Barclays held 2.2 percent of Delta, 4.6 percent of US Airways, 5.6 percent of AirTran and 4.1 percent of JetBlue. BlackRock held 1.5 percent of Delta, 1.2 percent of US Airways, 1.2 percent of AirTran and 1.3 percent of JetBlue.In the appendix, the authors illustrate this phenomenon by looking at the route from Rochester, N.Y., to West Palm Beach, Fla., flown by Jet Blue and AirTran.After the acquisition of B.G.I., BlackRock’s holdings in JetBlue increased to 5.4 percent and its holdings in AirTran rose to 6.9 percent, but did that result in less competition on a secondary route?It is hard to believe that these smaller changes in ownership at these four airlines among two asset managers actually led fares to rise across the board by such a large amount. Instead, the authors seem to be picking up large price rises on routes that had smaller carriers like AirTran and JetBlue. If a modest increase in holdings caused this type of reduction in competitiveness, we would expect to see this happen with other asset managers or acquisitions.And that’s the other problem with this cross-holding theory. It simply does not reflect how shareholders act and think in today’s environment.Even in an age of activist shareholders, institutional shareholders vote only on directors and “say on pay” advisory issues, as well as other corporate governance initiatives. How they vote is decided in an office that is usually separate from the fund managers.Institutional investors may engage with management on their business, but it is not extensive and it is done at the fund level, not globally from each asset manager.AdvertisementInstead, funds engage in quasi-passive governance, often herding toward activist investors that do not have these cross-holdings. BlackRock, which is known for not challenging management, just ran its first activist campaign in Hong Kong.It is hard to believe that these shareholders are influencing pricing at these smaller levels without engagement with the company.A counterexplanation is that management seems safe not to compete with all of this cross-ownership because it knows it will not be challenged. Yet, this seems to ignore another aspect of the story — growing consolidation and the natural tendency of some industries toward collusion.This does not mean that we should not do some hard thinking about what it means when a handful of shareholders own a majority of shares on the public markets, even though most of it is through passive index funds. Is that too much influence? What are the effects of this ownership?And it does not mean this is not an excellent paper — it is clearly picking up some effect of cross-ownership, but it is not certain yet what causes that effect.It could be that the Justice Department proves me wrong and finds extensive collusion between shareholders and airlines. But more likely, it will find that the opposite is true. Institutional investors do not necessarily push for less competition, but they do fulfill the conventional wisdom that shareholders do not do enough to challenge failing companies.Steven Davidoff Solomon is a professor of law at the University of California, Berkeley. His columns can be found at nytimes.com/dealbook. Follow @stevendavidoff on Twitter.A version of this article appears in print on April 13, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Rise of Giant Investors Raises Competition Questions.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »