AdvertisementSupported byIn DebtBy Stephen J. LubbenSection 165 of the Dodd-Frank Act requires large bank holding companies to submit “resolution plans” —popularly known as living wills — that show how these companies can be resolved if they fail in a bankruptcy court like every other business.On Wednesday, we learned that five of the biggest financial institutions were unable to meet this standard, as judged by both the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and the Federal Reserve. Two others were found to have failed by one of the regulators, but the other regulator had no serious objections to the proffered plans.In short, most of the American banks that submitted living wills last July have again failed to pass the test. The only one to pass in this round was Citigroup. And even it did not pass the test with flying colors.But the public has no real way of knowing why Citigroup passed, and the others all failed, because the public portion of the plans is so generic that only with a close reading can any differences be discerned. And even then it’s not clear if those distinctions are real or simply the result of too much time spent rereading a text for possible insights.There is a strong, usually unstated suspicion that drafting a truly credible living will is impossible under the current bankruptcy code, especially given that the rules, quite rightly, provide for no assumed public funding. In some sense, the financial industry has only itself to blame for the latter condition, because it successfully lobbied against a prefunded resolution fund in 2010 when Dodd-Frank was under consideration.In any event, if the suspicion is correct, what do we make of Citigroup, which has “passed” this round?Cynics, including many bankruptcy lawyers, will say that a plan that is credible to a banking regulator might not be credible to a bankruptcy lawyer, or more important, a bankruptcy judge.Fair enough. We really do not know where the F.D.I.C. and the Federal Reserve are getting their Chapter 11 advice. They clearly have lots of smart people working at those organizations, but they are not well known for reorganization experience, especially given that banks are expressly carved out of the bankruptcy code.But I think the focus on bankruptcy experience avoids a more serious issue. If indeed Citigroup has discovered the secret to a proper living will, shouldn’t that be shared with the broader universe of jumbo financial institutions?And shouldn’t it be shared with the broader market, so it can evaluate the regulators’ work? After all, the goal is to subject these big financial institutions to the same market discipline that all other companies face.Only then can we really say that we have ended “too big to fail.”Stephen J. Lubben holds the Harvey Washington Wiley Chair in corporate governance and business ethics at Seton Hall Law School and is an expert on bankruptcy.Advertisement