AdvertisementSupported byBy John KoblinIn early February, Stephen Colbert got a valuable piece of television real estate that no other late-night host had ever received: The post-Super Bowl slot, and the benefit of a lead-in from the biggest viewing audience of the year.It was five months after his ballyhooed debut on CBS as a replacement for David Letterman on “The Late Show.’’ More than 21 million viewers tuned in that Sunday night, nearly 10 times as many as Mr. Colbert’s usual audience.And though Mr. Colbert was said to be pleased with the performance, it barely made a dent in improving his standing among the late-night shows.Shortly after his Super Bowl show, according to two television executives with knowledge of the discussions, Leslie Moonves, the chief executive of CBS, began several private conversations with Mr. Colbert to express concerns about the direction of the show, and to address one glaring problem: “The Late Show” effectively had no showrunner — someone who serves essentially as a head coach for a show — other than Mr. Colbert himself.On Wednesday, CBS announced that Chris Licht, the producer behind the network’s surging morning show, would become an executive producer and showrunner for Mr. Colbert’s show.Mr. Moonves approached David Rhodes, the CBS News president, about a month ago to discuss the issue, said the executives with knowledge of the matter, who spoke only on the condition of anonymity. Last week, Mr. Colbert and Mr. Licht were reported to have had a long meeting, another executive said. It was that conversation, and a few more after it, that convinced Mr. Colbert that Mr. Licht was the right man for the job.It will be his job to help provide a shot in the arm to a show that trails Jimmy Fallon’s “The Tonight Show” by a wide margin and has been losing in recent weeks to ABC’s Jimmy Kimmel among the 18-to-49-year-old demographic important to advertisers.CBS reached this point after it became clear that the post-Super Bowl show was not providing the bump they were hoping for. Though he bested Mr. Kimmel in total viewers for the week of Feb. 8, Mr. Colbert trailed both Mr. Kimmel and Mr. Fallon among 18- to 49-year-olds, according to Nielsen.The trend has continued. Mr. Colbert has lost in the demographic to both Mr. Fallon and Mr. Kimmel six out of the last nine weeks, according to data from Nielsen.Still, for the season, with the aid of a strong early start, Mr. Colbert remains in second place. He trails Mr. Fallon by about 900,000 viewers with an average of 2.9 million viewers, but that’s stronger than Mr. Kimmel’s average of 2.4 million. Likewise, in the 18-to-49 age group, Mr. Fallon has a large lead in first, but Mr. Colbert is second.Mr. Colbert also has shown strong year-to-date returns versus David Letterman’s performance. Unlike Mr. Letterman’s show, Mr. Colbert’s show is also owned by CBS, which means they have the potential to be a far greater source of profit.Mr. Colbert has a tightknit staff, most of whom were brought over from his Comedy Central show, “The Colbert Report.” Tom Purcell, Meredith Bennett and Jon Stewart will all remain as executive producers.In Mr. Licht, CBS has found an executive producer who has proved successful with turnarounds. For years, the network tried to gain traction for its morning show, which has historically been an afterthought and long trailed “Good Morning America” and “Today.”And though it is still in third place, “CBS This Morning” under Mr. Licht has produced its highest ratings gains in years. Though many were skeptical that Charlie Rose and Gayle King would work as a team when they had their debut four years ago, Mr. Licht has been praised within the network for making it work.Earlier in his career, Mr. Licht was a founding executive producer on another morning show, MSNBC’s “Morning Joe.’’ Now, he’ll turn his attention to something he’s never worked on before: late-night TV.Advertisement