AdvertisementSupported byStreet SceneBy William D. CohanWithin weeks of the shocking collapse of Bear Stearns in March 2008, I started interviewing former executives of the firm to try to figure out what had just happened and why.One of those executives was Paul Friedman, a senior managing director who had been at the firm for 27 years and who oversaw Bear’s fixed-income repo desk. His job, especially in the last year or so of Bear’s existence, was to make sure the company could finance itself on a daily basis in the short-term debt markets. While Bear had about $18 billion in cash on its balance sheet, it needed more than $75 billion in cash on a daily basis to keep operating. For years, making sure that amount was on hand had been a perfunctory, check-the-box assignment.That all changed in the summer of 2007, when two Bear Stearns-related hedge funds collapsed and Bear liquidated them. Short-term lenders began to question the judgment of Bear’s management, and Mr. Friedman was on the front lines of gauging how the market viewed the firm as a credit risk. He quickly discovered, much to his dismay, that Bear had become a pariah.After the final Bear Stearns shareholder meeting, on May 29, 2008, Mr. Friedman told me, in no uncertain terms, that he believed the firm got what was coming to it. “We’re the bad guys,” he said. “We did this to ourselves. We put ourselves in a position where this could happen. It is our fault for allowing it to get this far, and for not taking any steps to do anything about it. It’s a classic case of mismanagement at the top. There’s just no question about it.”But times and perspectives change. When Mr. Friedman appeared before the government’s Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission two years later, Phil Angelides, the commission’s chairman, asked about his comments to me that Bear had been responsible for its own downfall. Much to my surprise, under oath and on national television, Mr. Friedman walked back the statement. After explaining to Mr. Angelides how shocking it was to watch the firm he had worked at for 27 years suddenly implode, he said, “I was angry. I was interviewed over a period when I was looking to find someone to blame. I lashed out.” He apologized and said he had been regretting what he told me two years earlier.But a batch of Bear-related emails from the crisis era that became public through a shareholder lawsuit and were sent to me by the investigative reporter Teri Buhl raise questions about which of Mr. Friedman’s statements more closely reflected the reality of what was going on at Bear Stearns.The emails show Mr. Friedman’s concern about the firm’s liquidity began in earnest in June 2007, just as the two hedge funds were being shuttered and as the firm was getting ready to announce its second-quarter earnings. They also show how sensitive Bear executives were to outside perceptions of the firm.On June 25, Timothy Greene, the co-head of fixed income at Bear, emailed Mr. Friedman about the dangers of traders using Bear’s balance sheet to trade for customers. “We are being very careful not to signal any hint of liquidity distress,” he wrote. Mr. Friedman wrote in reply, “We’re going to think how to craft the message in terms of getting rid of aged positions, paring down risk, etc., so as not to spook anyone.”When Standard & Poor’s, the rating agency, revised its outlook for Bear to negative, from stable, on Aug. 3, 2007, top Bear executives scrambled to put a good spin that, too. “We need to create more liquidity ASAP,” said Sam Molinaro, Bear’s chief financial officer, in an email to Michael Minikes, another senior Bear executive, that day.But liquidity remained a major problem. Banks were ending their “evergreen” financing arrangements with Bear, and Mr. Friedman doubted they would be available to the firm again unless they “have amnesia,” he wrote. On Aug. 20, Mr. Friedman wrote that since the S.&P. report, Bear had lost $14.5 billion in existing funding and had received only $2.7 billion from new sources. He noted that another $3.1 billion n funding was “already scheduled to be pulled” or was “at risk of leaving.” He expected another $1.9 billion in borrowings to be lost in the next week or two. There was also a “significant dispute” with State Street Bank over the valuation of the collateral backing its $1 billion loan to Bear, “and it’s clear that what they’d most like is to simply pull it.”On Dec. 3, 2007, Mr. Friedman noted in an email to executives in the fixed-income division that the firm was “starting to see some significant pullback in funding” and lost “close to $2 billion in cash” in one day. “It’s getting ugly out there,” he wrote.In a Dec. 15 memo to Thomas Marano, the other co-head of fixed income, Mr. Friedman said he worried that another $10 billion to $30 billion of short-term funding would be pulled if and when Moody’s Investors Service downgraded the firm as he expected it would (and which it did five days later). “We will also effectively be out of the derivatives business – equities, rates and credit – since we already have firms refusing our name and many more will refuse us then,” he wrote. “Either way, we’re dead, whether from lack of cash or lack of customers.”In the same email, Mr. Friedmann worried that Bear employees would soon recognize the reality that Bear might well be out of business. Faced with a lean year for compensation “and the prospect of effectively winding down the firm over the next quarter, how do they respond?” he asked, rhetorically. “I think we all know: Any that can find another place to work will do so. So we’ll be alive in the way that a patient on life support is alive, hoping for a miracle.”He then asked Mr. Marano why Bear’s executive committee had failed to understand the seriousness of the firm’s predicament. “Beats the hell out of me,” Mr. Friedman wrote. He added that Robert Upton, the treasurer, had spoken to Mr. Molinaro, the chief financial officer, a dozen times but had “been rebuffed.” Mr. Friedman wrote that he had spoken “over and over” with Steven Begleiter, the head of corporate strategy, “and been told that no one believes things are that urgent.” Mr. Friedman wondered if the executive committee was “confusing” raising new equity with having sufficient funding to run the business. “Raising new capital won’t fix the world around us,” he concluded in the email, just three months before the firm’s demise. “But the point that gets lost is that if we don’t do it we won’t be here when the world gets back to normal.”In the end, Bear’s top executives opted not to raise new equity. And the firm was no longer around when the world got back to normal.Advertisement