AdvertisementSupported byBy Alexandra StevensonWhen William A. Ackman announced his $1 billion bet against the nutritional supplements company Herbalife in 2013, the wager was surprising for its size.These days it seems a hedge fund bet needs to be worth a $1 billion or more to make the news. With more money than ever, activist investors have been busy generating headlines.Daniel S. Loeb staked $1 billion on Yum Brands in May. Jeffrey W. Ubben amassed a billion-dollar stake in American Express in August. On Monday, Nelson Peltz disclosed that his firm, Trian Fund Management, has a $2.5 billion position in General Electric.Such sums may seem breathtaking. But in an industry that has grown to more than $3 trillion, staking billion-dollar bets is quickly becoming the norm. In recent years, pension funds and other institutional investors have pumped tens of billions of dollars into the industry, and many hedge funds’ assets under management have ballooned, sometimes to double-digit billions.Activist hedge funds now manage more than $129 billion in assets, compared with just $29 billion 10 years ago, according to HFR, a company that tracks the industry.“This is an indication of bigger war chests that activists have accumulated as a result of overall asset growth,” said Alper Ince, a managing director at Paamco, a fund of hedge funds. “This also means they can deploy bigger amounts to go after larger market cap companies.”As hedge fund managers are betting on bigger companies, they also are playing down the activist label. Once called corporate raiders for building large stakes in companies to throw their weight around and push for changes, some activist investors now opt for a softer approach.When Mr. Loeb, known for writing sharply critical letters to corporate leaders, took his position in Yum, he told investors that the company was “on the road to recovery” after food safety scandals in China. Mr. Loeb also suggested several changes that Yum management could make, including raising more debt and changing the ownership structure. A week later, speaking at a hedge fund conference in Las Vegas, Mr. Loeb emphasized that his position was not an activist investment.In his bet on American Express, Mr. Ubben has yet to disclose whether he plans to wage an activist campaign. The bet is not the biggest for ValueAct Capital Management, his hedge fund. In April 2013, he took a $2 billion stake in Microsoft. Months later, Steven A. Ballmer announced he was stepping down as chief executive of Microsoft. A week later, Microsoft reached an agreement with ValueAct to include the hedge fund in business discussions with the board and management.Mr. Peltz, meanwhile, is said to have a longstanding relationship with Jeffrey R. Immelt, the chief executive of G.E. In an 81-page report, Mr. Peltz outlined a proposal for G.E. that included taking on more debt and returning nearly half of the company’s market value in share buybacks.To aspiring investors, such outsize bets might seem enviable. But to some insiders, there’s a catch.“You can no longer be looking at companies that are $1 billion in market capitalization if you need to be putting out a billion dollars per investment,” said Gregory P. Taxin, founder of the activist hedge fund Luma Asset Management said, referring to funds like Trian.“It’s a smaller universe of opportunities,” he added.Advertisement