AdvertisementSupported byBy Leslie PickerShares of BATS Global Markets began trading on Friday, claiming the title of the largest deal of the year so far, though the exchange operator’s biggest feat was avoiding technical problems like those that doomed its first attempt to go public four years ago.BATS’s stock gained 21 percent, to $23 at the close of trading in New York. The shares are listed on BATS’s own BZX Exchange, the first to do so since the company was founded 11 years ago as an alternative trading site to the New York Stock Exchange and Nasdaq Stock Market.The story is one of potential redemption for the exchange operator, which is based in Lenexa, Kan. Its first effort at an initial public offering of stock, in 2012, was marred by embarrassing trading hiccups in not just its own stock but in Apple’s as well. BATS withdrew its I.P.O. as a result of the software bug. The debacle challenged BATS’s reputation as an exchange operator, charged with the responsibility to ensure the swift and efficient trading of equities and other products.Since then, BATS has grown to become the second-largest exchange for equities in the United States by market share, according to its I.P.O. filing. The company generated $1.78 billion in revenue last year, more than double the amount from four years ago. Net income nearly quadrupled over that period.In addition, it aimed to correct the mistakes it suffered in 2012. BATS streamlined its servers and conducted 50,000 tests (testing at least once a day since December) for its auction system to be able to manage the volume.Investors seem impressed. BATS’s backers, a host of Wall Street companies including Bank of America and the Knight Capital Group, were able to sell $252.7 million worth of shares, yielding a market value of $1.8 billion. The company did not receive any of the proceeds from the initial offering.The exchange business is fiercely competitive and is undergoing consolidation, including the recent deal signed between Deutsche Börse and the London Stock Exchange Group.BATS bought Chi-X Europe in 2011, Direct Edge Holdings in January 2014 and Hotspot FX Holdings last year. These deals allowed the company to expand into Europe, build its exchange business and branch out into new products.Unlike the splashy first-day ceremonies for deals that list on the New York Stock Exchange or Nasdaq, BATS is taking a more demure approach to its offering.Chris Concannon, its chief executive, was in the Kansas City area for the opening, without TV cameras to showcase the ringing of a bell to open the market. Mr. Concannon joined BATS as president in December 2014, after spending five years at Virtu Financial, a high-frequency trading firm.BATS’s investors sold 13.3 million shares in the offering for $19 apiece. They increased the number of shares they intended to offer by 19 percent on Thursday.Morgan Stanley and Citigroup are managing the offering.Advertisement