
Breakingviews By                     
ANTONY CURRIE

APRIL 15, 2016
Mike Corbat, the chief executive of Citigroup, is entangled in a banking Catch-22. He aced the living will and stress tests. He has also helped form an efficient operation, as shown by the bank’s latest quarterly results. Returns remain subpar, however. Improving on them requires leaning on tax breaks. And doing that will depend on finding more profit in tough times.There is no mistaking the work Mr. Corbat has done to patch up Citi’s relationship with regulators, which was strained by a $45 billion taxpayer bailout during the financial crisis. Since then, Citi has twice failed the Federal Reserve’s annual exam on how the bank would perform in a hypothetical calamity.Last year, Citi passed with ease after Mr. Corbat invested $180 million to upgrade the bank’s processes. He even staked his job on the grades. This week, Citi was the only one of the eight largest American banks to get a thumbs-up from both the Fed and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation for its plan to dissolve in an orderly manner in a crisis.Earnings, however, remain elusive. In the first quarter, Citi earned $3.5 billion, equating to an annualized return on equity of just 6.4 percent. Mr. Corbat cannot cut a significant amount of costs any time soon because Citi is already one of the leaner banks in the business, spending $60 for every $100 of revenue.
                It is shaping up to be another grim year for the nation’s biggest banks. They were hit hard by a bad environment for trading and deal-making.            Its big impediment is a legacy of the crisis: tax breaks from all the losses Citi suffered. The bank currently has around $30 billion of capital tied up in these deferred tax assets. The only way to get rid of them is to earn money that can be applied against them.Had Citi been completely free of its deferred tax assets, annualized return on equity for the three months through March would have been around 7.5 percent — and for 2015, just shy of a theoretical 10 percent cost of capital.With earnings so low, however, getting rid of the deferred tax assets is a slow and painful process. Citi reduced the stockpile by almost $7 billion last year. With industry revenue in a rut because of low interest rates, volatile markets and nervous chief executives, there is little sign of improvement. And therein lies the catch.Antony Currie is an associate editor at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »