By CHAD BRAYAPRIL 15, 2016
Mitel Networks of Canada said on Friday that it had agreed to buy Polycom, a telecommunications and video conferencing equipment provider, for $1.8 billion in cash and stock.The agreement came six months after the activist hedge fund Elliott Management disclosed it had taken a 6.6 percent stake in Polycom and urged the two companies to consider a merger as part of a consolidation push in the telecom equipment sector. Elliott, a $27 billion hedge fund, owns 9.7 percent of Mitel and has a reputation for shaking up technology companies.Under the terms of the deal, Polycom investors would receive $3.12 in cash and 1.31 Mitel shares for each share of Polycom they own. The deal would value Polycom at $13.44 a share, based on Mitel’s closing price on Thursday.“Polycom is one of the most respected brands in the world and is synonymous with the high quality and innovative conference and video capabilities that are now the norm of everyday collaboration,” Richard D. McBee, Mitel’s chief executive, said in a news release. “The combined company will have the talent and technology needed to truly deliver integrated solutions to businesses and service providers across enterprise, mobile and cloud environments.”AdvertisementThe transaction is subject to shareholder and regulatory approval. It is expected to close in the third quarter.AdvertisementThe deal was unanimously approved by the boards of both companies, which are recommending that shareholders approve the transaction.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Elliott has agreed to vote its Mitel and Polycom shares in favor of the transaction.“The combination of Mitel and Polycom makes perfect strategic and financial sense,” Jesse Cohn, a senior portfolio manager at Elliott, said in a news release. “The combined business will have far greater scale than either company alone, the ability to deliver a full array of products to customers, and the means to invest behind product areas that will provide stability and growth for the future.”After the deal closes, Polycom shareholders will own about 60 percent of the combined company, and Mitel shareholders, the remaining 40 percent.The combined company will be based in Ottawa, with about 7,700 employees worldwide. It would have had pro forma sales of about $2.5 billion in 2015. The company will operate under the Mitel name, but maintain the Polycom brand.Mr. McBee will serve as chief executive of the combined company. Following closing, two Polycom directors would join Mitel’s board.Bank of America Merrill Lynch and the law firms Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton & Garrison and Osler, Hoskin & Harcourt are advising Mitel. Morgan Stanley and the law firm Wilson Sonsini Goodrich & Rosati are advising Polycom. The law firm Morrison & Foerster also advised Polycom’s board of directors.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.