AdvertisementSupported byBy Emily SteelDES MOINES — The news team at the station KCCI buzzed with nervous anticipation here at Drake University on Saturday night, less than two hours before the start of the Democratic candidates’ debate.It was the first presidential debate that KCCI, the local CBS affiliate, would help present in its 60-year history, and the atmosphere had shifted dramatically in the previous 24 hours — from one charged with excitement to a grave and somber tone following the deadly terror attacks in Paris.Behind a temporary stage erected for the event, KCCI’s news director, Dave Busiek, watched a live stream of CBS News coverage on his iPhone about the latest developments out of Paris. In a nearby workspace, the veteran anchor Kevin Cooney made final preparations for the questions he would pose later about national security as one of debate’s four moderators.Just after 6:15 p.m., cameras flashed on the KCCI anchors Stacey Horst and Steve Karlin, who stood on the stage and welcomed viewers to an area for the news media known as the spin room; they noted how the carnage in Paris would change the focus of the debate.“Our viewers are interested in that,” Mr. Busiek said. “That flows into what will be a very serious discussion with who could be the president of the United States.”Broadcasting from Iowa’s capital city to 434,500 TV households in the country’s 72nd largest television market, KCCI takes on outsize importance among the nation’s local television stations every four years. Iowans are the first in the nation to vote in presidential caucuses, setting the tone for the rest of the campaign season.As a result, presidential candidates devote significant face time to KCCI, the perennial market leader and one of 30 stations owned by Hearst, and its rival WHO-HD, the local NBC affiliate. And the stations respond in kind, adding more political coverage to the menu of news offerings. KCCI started its own Sunday morning half-hour interview program this fall called “Close Up,” which has featured interviews with presidential candidates from both parties. And WHO boasts that it televises 25 percent more news each week than other stations in the market, thanks in large part to a 4 p.m. newscast that presents a more in-depth look at news and politics. WHO also is hosting three special one-hour forums this week featuring the Republican presidential candidates Donald J. Trump, Ben Carson and Bobby Jindal. The stations also count on campaigns and interest groups to open their checkbooks in the months leading up to the caucuses and the general election. KCCI and its market rivals are likely to reap a disproportionate share of the $3.3 billion in political advertising dollars that analysts project will go to local television stations for 2016 races, particularly for pre-caucus spending.“Technically, the presidential election is a national election,” said Elizabeth Wilner, a senior vice president at Kantar Media/CMAG, a company that monitors political advertising. “But in reality it is a race that occurs in about 10 states. In 2012, seven states saw 84 percent of all local TV ad spend, and we expect that same dynamic again.”That swing in political ad spending is of huge importance to the big media conglomerates that own local television stations, particularly as other categories of advertisers shift a larger share of spending to digital outlets. “In political, TV is still king,” said Kip Cassino, executive vice president for research at Borrell Associates. Over the last several years, a wave of consolidation has swept across the industry with station owners trying to put themselves in the path of more political advertising dollars. In 2013, for instance, Tribune Company closed a $2.7 billion acquisition of Local TV Holdings that made it one of the country’s largest station owners; it added stations in 16 markets in the transaction, including WHO in Des Moines.Tribune is now expecting to gross about $200 million in political advertising sales in 2016, up 25 percent from adjusted revenues in 2012. “At this point, we’re calling for it to be strong, all signs are pointing to that,” Peter Liguori, chief executive of Tribune Media, said during a recent conference call, noting the company’s strength in swing states. In Des Moines, station executives said that the sales strategy boiled down to waiting for the phones to ring and the orders to come in. “We don’t have to actively go out,” said Dale R. Woods, general manager of WHO. “They are the ones who want to obtain our real estate.”And while ad orders have started trickling in, executives said that the deluge largely has yet to arrive, partly because of the large number of Republican candidates this year, which has prompted campaigns to hold back on paying for advertising as they wait for the field to narrow. The surprising success of Mr. Trump, who for the most part does not use advertising, has also affected how the candidates spend. “We’re in a decent position,” said Brian Sather, president and general manager of KCCI. “We’re open for business.” The stations also benefit from the rise of outside political action groups. While the stations are required by law to provide equal access to candidates and to charge them the lowest unit rates, there are no laws limiting what they can charge outside groups for commercial time. Analysts project a sharp increase in spending by these groups for 2016. “There is nothing stopping stations from charging groups five to six times as much — or even 10 times as much” as they charge candidates, Ms. Wilner of Kantar said. “Nobody weeps for the poor billionaire that has to pay 10 times as much as the candidate.”But the influx of campaign dollars creates a delicate situation for the stations, which have to juggle their limited supply of commercial time. High demand for political ads in the Des Moines market, particularly in the weeks leading up to the caucus, can put a squeeze on inventory and push out local businesses, such as car dealerships, that are the bread-and-butter advertisers year round.“It is a balancing act,” Mr. Sather said. “We try to do our best.” Mike Schreurs, chief executive of Strategic America, an advertising agency in West Des Moines, said that it is common for businesses to see as many as one out of four commercial spots bumped from local TV during the peak political season. They also might have to pay at least a 30 percent increase in the rates. “It takes the inventory away from smaller retailers and advertisers, not including the fact that it creates something of a toxic environment,” he said.Already, more than 35,000 commercials adding up to more than $22.5 million in spending have aired or are scheduled to air on Iowa television stations through Feb. 2, the day after the Iowa caucuses, according to an analysis of Federal Communications Commission records by The Des Moines Register. On KCCI alone, viewers will see more than 62 ads a day in the eight days leading up to the Iowa caucuses. And at WHO, Hillary Rodham Clinton’s campaign has booked a single spot for $5,800 to air during prime time Monday night. A spot airing during another time the same week cost $60.Back in the spin room after the debate on Saturday night, KCCI anchors wrapped up more than four hours of related coverage. During the coming 78 days leading to the Iowa caucus, the journalists plan to return to the air to cover the twists and turns of the campaign. But, for the moment, Mr. Karlin, one of the anchors, reflected on the Des Moines station’s moment in the national spotlight. “It’s really a privilege for a television station like us to be part of a debate like this,” he said. Advertisement