By JOHN MARKOFFAPRIL 18, 2016
Bill Campbell, one of the most influential background players in Silicon Valley, who was known as “coach” there for his work advising technology industry stars like Steve Jobs at Apple and Larry Page at Google, died on Monday at his home in Palo Alto, Calif. He was 75.His family said the cause was cancer.Mr. Campbell had exerted a strong influence on Apple and Google, two of the world’s most valuable companies, since the 1980s. Operating in a network of billionaire technology innovators, he was known for making informal but lasting personal connections that helped shape the industry.The term “coach” was a reference to his days coaching the Columbia University football team from 1974 to 1979 — he had also played for Columbia — but it applied as well to his business career.As recently as the end of March, John Doerr, one of the valley’s leading venture capitalists, publicly cited “Coach Bill Campbell’s” advice when Mr. Doerr announced that he would give up his executive role at Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers and become its first chairman.AdvertisementMr. Campbell was an Eastman Kodak executive in Europe when he was recruited to Silicon Valley in 1983 by Apple’s chief executive at the time, John Sculley. Mr. Sculley named him vice president of marketing. Mr. Campbell later played a significant role in Apple’s spectacular turnaround when Steve Jobs, who had been fired by Mr. Sculley, returned to the company in 1997. Apple went on to revamp its Mac computer line and introduce the iPod, iPhone and iPad.Mr. Campbell was an Apple director from 1997 until 2014.It was Mr. Doerr who brought Mr. Campbell to Google to serve as an informal adviser to the two founders, Mr. Page and Sergey Brin. Mr. Campbell was instrumental in the hiring of Eric Schmidt to be Google’s chief executive in August 2001.Strikingly, Mr. Campbell’s advisory role was often unpaid, at his insistence; he said he wanted to pay back what he felt was a debt to the nation’s technology region.At Google, for example, he helped shape its leadership for a generation or more but, except for a single stock grant, never had a formal financial relationship with the company, according to Mr. Schmidt, who is now Google’s chairman.“Google would not be the company it is today without the influence of Bill Campbell,” Mr. Schmidt said, “and my guess is Apple wouldn’t be, either.”AdvertisementMr. Campbell also worked early on with Jeff Bezos, the founder of Amazon, as well as Ben Horowitz and Marc Andreessen before they founded one of the country’s top venture capital firms, Andreessen Horowitz.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Campbell was deeply involved in Silicon Valley’s start-up culture as well. In 1987 he led a group of Apple executives in setting up a software subsidiary, Claris, with the ultimate goal of spinning the company off as a start-up. When Apple decided not to let Claris become a separate public company, many of the executives, including Mr. Campbell, left.He later became chief executive of Go Corporation, a pioneering tablet computer company that fought a long and ultimately unsuccessful battle with Microsoft. From 1994 until 1998 he was chief executive of Intuit, a personal finance software company.William Vincent Campbell Jr. was born on Aug. 31, 1940, and grew up in Homestead, Pa., near Pittsburgh. He excelled in football in high school.As a 165-pound linebacker, he was captain of Columbia’s football team when it shared the Ivy League championship in 1961, the program’s only Ivy title. After graduating in 1962 with a bachelor’s degree in economics, he went on to earn a master’s degree in economics as well and became an assistant coach. After six years as an assistant at Boston College, he returned to Columbia as head coach. While coaching he married Roberta Spagnola, an assistant dean. The marriage ended in divorce.Mr. Campbell ended his coaching career in 1979 with an overall record of 12-41-1. He then went to work for J. Walter Thompson, the advertising agency, before joining Kodak.In 2009, the National Football Foundation and College Hall of Fame announced that its annual award given to the top scholar-athlete would be renamed for Mr. Campbell.He was chairman of Columbia University’s board of trustees from 2005 to 2014 and donated $10 million to help fund the Campbell Sports Center on the university’s campus. As a philanthropist he also donated millions in support of education in the Pennsylvania steel country where he grew up.His survivors include his wife, Eileen Bocci Campbell; a daughter, Margaret; a son, Jim; and his stepchildren, Kevin, Matthew and Kate Bocci.Mr. Campbell was known for his informality. Randy Komisar, a partner at Kleiner Perkins who had been a young lawyer at Apple, recalled Mr. Campbell running down a hall one day and dragging him into a dark conference room to tell him he was starting the software company that would become Claris. Without saying anything about title or compensation, Mr. Campbell looked at him across the table and simply asked, “Are you in, or are you out?”An obituary last Tuesday about Bill Campbell, an adviser to executives in the technology industry, misstated his history with the tablet computer company Go Corporation. While he was a former chief executive of the company, he did not help found it.A version of this article appears in print on April 19, 2016, on Page A19 of the New York edition with the headline: Bill Campbell, Coach to Technology Stars (Often for No Compensation), Dies at 75.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.