AdvertisementSupported byThe Week AheadBy The New York TimesSeveral of the nation’s largest retailers are expected to report earnings this week, and their financial health will be closely watched after dismal numbers from two department store stalwarts — Macy’s and No (Friday)rdstrom — spooked investors last week.Third-quarter results will give a broader sense of the strength of consumer spending and of the wider economy, heading into the holiday season. Among those reporting are:■ Urban Outfitters (Monday)■ Walmart (Tuesday)■ The Home Depot (Tuesday)■ TJX (Tuesday)■ Target (Wednesday)■ Staples (Wednesday)■ Lowe’s (Wednesday)■ Best Buy (Thursday)■ Gap (Thursday)■ Foot Locker (Friday)■ Abercrombie & Fitch (Friday)Investors will be watching Walmart, in particular, for signs that its recent investments in higher wages and e-commerce have translated into stronger sales. —Hiroko TabuchiBrian D. Goldner, chief executive of the toymaker Hasbro, will outline the company’s plans at its annual shareholder meeting on Monday. Mr. Goldner will be joined by Hasbro’s chief financial officer, Deborah Thomas.Shares of Hasbro have risen nearly 40 percent in the last year, lifted in part by sales of “Star Wars” toys that have helped it gain ground on its larger rival, Mattel. —Rachel AbramsOn Tuesday, two government reports should provide an early indication of how the economy performed last month. The Consumer Price Index, released by the Labor Department, is expected to show a 0.2 percent increase. That would still be tame in terms of inflation, but it would reflect stabilizing gas prices and a rebound from a 0.2 percent drop in September.Industrial production, tracked by the Federal Reserve, is expected to be mixed. The overall number could be depressed because moderate temperatures around the country resulted in utilities producing less power, while oil and gas drilling has slackened after a plunge in energy prices. Factory activity may have rebounded after two months of declines. —Nelson D. SchwartzThe film “Star Wars: The Force Awakens” does not open in theaters until December, but the entertainment franchise will face an early test when Star Wars Battlefront, one of the most eagerly awaited games of the year, arrives on Tuesday.While “Star Wars” games have a checkered reputation for quality and sales, the new game, published by Electronic Arts, has created a buzz with its photorealistic graphics. The game allows players to engage in pivotal battle scenes depicted in the three original “Star Wars” movies.Electronic Arts, emboldened by demand for Star Wars Battlefront, recently bumped up its sales estimate for the game during its current fiscal year to 13 million units, from a previous estimate of 9 million to 10 million. —Nick WingfieldThe Federal Reserve is poised to raise rates at its final policy-making meeting of the year, in mid-December. That has been the clear message since the Federal Open Market Committee last met in October, and it is expected to be affirmed on Wednesday when the Fed releases an account of that meeting.The account may also include some discussion of the next question facing the Fed: How quickly to push rates upward once it gets started. —Binyamin AppelbaumIn one of the biggest tests of investor receptiveness to initial public offerings, two high-profile companies are due to start trading this week: the mobile payments start-up Square and Match Group, which owns several dating websites.Both are set to price shares in their I.P.O.s on Wednesday. At the midpoint of the range, each company is marketing to investors, Square would raise $324 million, while Match would generate $433 million. —Leslie PickerThe Prudential Regulation Authority and the Financial Conduct Authority are expected to release a joint report on Thursday on the collapse of the bank HBOS during the financial crisis. HBOS, Britain’s largest mortgage lender at that time, was taken over by Lloyds Banking Group in a merger orchestrated by the British government, which was later forced to bail out Lloyds. —Chad BrayMario Draghi, president of the European Central Bank, is scheduled to speak on Friday to an audience of bankers in Frankfurt. He is expected to encourage predictions that the central bank will step up measures to stimulate the eurozone economy when it meets next month.Growth in the region remains weak, while inflation, at zero, remains far from the central bank’s target of 2 percent. Mr. Draghi’s appearance is part of Euro Finance Week in Frankfurt, which begins on Monday and includes numerous panels and speakers on finance and banking topics. —Jack EwingThe Obama administration will host a daylong public forum on Friday to discuss escalating prescription drug prices. Recent abrupt and dramatic increases in the prices of some older drugs have spurred public outrage and attention from Congress. A poll by the Kaiser Family Foundation in October found that affordability of prescription drugs was the leading health care priority for consumers.At the forum, consumers, health care providers, manufacturers, health insurers and others will discuss how to keep drugs affordable while still providing drug companies the financial incentives to do research aimed at developing new treatments. The meeting will be held in Washington and streamed live online. —Andrew PollackAdvertisement