
Breakingviews By                     
ANTONY CURRIE

APRIL 18, 2016
Morgan Stanley is already waiting for this year’s Godot.The Wall Street firm earned $1.1 billion in the first three months of the year. That beat estimates, but it amounts to an annualized return on equity of just 6.2 percent. It’s well short of the 10 percent target that the bank’s chief executive, James P. Gorman, set long ago but still has not managed to hit with any full year’s earnings. Given the first-quarter showing, he’s unlikely to get there in 2016, either.The three months through March are usually the best of the year for investment banks. Morgan Stanley, for example, made almost a third of its net income in the same period last year. It’s usually when fixed-income trading performs well, too. The less that capital-intensive business brings in, the harder it is likely be to make up returns over the following nine months. Mr. Gorman’s traders pulled in just $839 million in the first quarter, a 59 percent drop from the same period a year earlier – and the weakest performance so far for any of the big banks.One lever Mr. Gorman hopes to pull is the return of more capital to shareholders. Morgan Stanley has, on paper, a surfeit of capital: Its Tier 1 common equity ratio of 14.5 percent is way above the 10 percent minimum it needs to hold by 2019.
                It is shaping up to be another grim year for the nation’s biggest banks. They were hit hard by a bad environment for trading and deal-making.            Even if the Federal Reserve were to let Mr. Gorman hand all the excess back to investors – and it’s that highly unlikely he would even ask – the bank’s annualized return on equity last quarter, at 8.4 percent, would have still fallen short of his goal.AdvertisementCutting costs would help but alone could not bridge the gap. Morgan Stanley let 1,200 employees go in December, yet results remain subpar.That puts the onus on growing the top line. Mr. Gorman sensibly expects the wealth management division to do the heavy lifting. It requires less capital than trading, so can deliver a bigger bang for the buck. Its pretax margin is decent, and its banking unit offers a way to lift income, especially as interest rates rise.AdvertisementThe trouble is, the Fed is taking its time raising rates, and tricky markets hurt wealth management as well as underwriting and trading. And the firm’s low and volatile trading results often more than offset any gains. All in, that leaves growth a long way off.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »