
Deal Professor By                     
STEVEN DAVIDOFF SOLOMON

APRIL 19, 2016
A group of Democratic senators, led by Chuck Schumer of New York, appears to be sacrificing its own regulators as it holds up confirmation of two nominees to the Securities and Exchange Commission over mandated political spending disclosures.That senators would hold up a nomination is no surprise, but this time it is an act rich with irony. The two  nominees, Hester Peirce and Lisa M. Fairfax, were cleared by these same Democratic senators after a revolt over the White House’s first proposed nominee, Keir D. Gumbs, a partner at the law firm Covington & Burling.Mr. Gumbs’s previous experience included six years at the S.E.C., in part as counsel to an S.E.C. commissioner. Unfortunately, Mr. Gumbs’s sin was that he was from “corporate America” because he represented such clients as the American Petroleum Institute. Senator Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts reportedly quashed his appointment on those grounds, protesting that it was time to put more independent-minded regulators on the commission. Never mind that there is an important distinction between lawyers representing clients and lawyers representing causes and that a lawyer is ethically obligated to represent a client regardless of personal opinion.Into this morass came Ms. Peirce and Ms. Fairfax. The S.E.C. has five commissioners, who are appointed by the president, but no more than three can belong to the same party. Ms. Peirce was a Republican nominee. She served on Senator Richard Shelby’s staff at the Senate Committee on Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs, which he heads and which oversees the S.E.C. For the last few years, Ms. Peirce has been an academic fellow at the Mercatus Center, a conservative-leaning institute at George Mason University. Needless to say, she is not from the corporate world.AdvertisementThe second nominee, Ms. Fairfax, was presumably vetted by Senator Warren and reportedly pushed forward by Senator Sherrod Brown, Democrat of Ohio. Ms. Fairfax is a professor at the George Washington University School of Law, and before that the University of Maryland School of Law. She is viewed by many as a perceptive and knowledgeable observer of our capital markets (full disclosure – as a law professor, I have regularly interacted with her).AdvertisementSo two academics without experience in the corporate world. Check.Let’s just stop here and agree that Senator Warren has a point: Our regulators should not be captive to the companies and industries they regulate. We should be wary of the encroachment of industry on regulator independence. But this does not mean that all people from the corporate world are the devil. Clearly, a careful mix would seem to be the best approach. There is value in having knowledge of the real world.Washington’s revolving door is a problem, and this applies equally to those who come from academia and those who come from industry. Senator Warren, for example, is a former academic and used her political positions as a springboard to the Senate – a sort of revolving door. Some sensible moderation is likely to be the best tonic to this problem.With two nominees vetted through Senator Warren and a balanced ticket of Republican and Democrat, one would have thought the confirmation hearings last month would go smoothly. Most of it was pretty routine in which senators asked about the academics’ writing from years ago.Then things went off the rails.Senator Schumer asked about disclosure of political donations. This has been a hot-button issue since the 2010 Supreme Court decision in the Citizens United case upheld the right of corporations, as associations of individuals, to make political donations freely.That ruling inspired shareholder advocates to press for mandates that corporations disclose their political spending so the shareholders could assess it and perhaps limit this activity.Disclosure mandates have sometimes involved pushing other agendas like income inequality (compensation ratio disclosure) or foreign policy (conflict minerals) onto public companies. But a disclosure mandate on political donations appears to make more sense in a post-Citizens United world. After all, if companies are acting on behalf of their stockholders in making these donations, they should let shareholders know about it.In an interview on Tuesday, Senator Schumer said, “If one feels that undisclosed special interest money cascading into our politics is one of the worst problems American faces, then this approach is very logical. This is not a judge, but a regulator, and the public has a right to know whether they would support moving forward with a rule that’s fundamental to our democracy.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Like all things, though, it is a bit more complicated. The S.E.C. ostensibly has been barred by Congress for a year from mandating this disclosure. There is also a real question about whether such personal donations would even be material, the requirement for the SEC to mandate disclosure without congressional action.AdvertisementLooming in the background are the federal courts, which have repeatedly struck down S.E.C. rules that have been imposed without an adequate basis. If the S.E.C. adopts a political donations disclosure rule, they are likely to ask about materiality. And remember, this rule will apply only to public companies, encouraging nonpublic ones to stay private.Still, 1.1 million people have petitioned the S.E.C. to adopt this rule, which means there is some popular support.During the confirmation hearing, Senator Schumer wanted to get the S.E.C. nominees to commit to adopting a rule requiring this disclosure, and he said that if they did not commit, he would hold up their nominations.Both nominees said they would take it under advisement, which is what they should have said, although with her background, Ms. Fairfax is likely to be a supporter of the rule.Four Democratic senators, including Senators Schumer and Warren, are protesting these nominees. The Republicans are no doubt fine with this state of affairs, because with only three sitting commissioners at the S.E.C., the Republican representative can just abstain from voting, leaving the agency in stasis.The four Senators cannot push through legislation to accomplish a political disclosure rule, so they are doing the only thing they can. They are holding up the S.E.C. nominees as leverage to get some progress on the rule. This is a direct message to Mary Jo White, chairwoman of the S.E.C., who has been holding off on acting on this rule.Nevertheless, the S.E.C. is left short-handed and deadlocked. No other nominee will make the pledge Senator Schumer wants because it would mean that any vote on the issue would be tainted.When I asked Senator Schumer about whether he would ultimately hold up the nominees over this issue, he responded, “We’ll cross that bridge if we come to it.”One the one hand this is just regular politics. Senator Schumer and his cohort are trying to counter Citizens United through some regular old Senate obstructionism. But on the other it is hard to see any S.E.C. nominee committing to more, at least publicly. And given Professor Fairfax’s writings, it is difficult to see her not supporting this rule. So we await for a logjam that should and must break to actually break.AdvertisementMeanwhile, the S.E.C., with all of its work to do regulating and policing our capital markets, will wait as it gets caught up in a meaningless and opaque political battle.A version of this article appears in print on April 20, 2016, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: S.E.C. in Stasis as Democrats Hold Up Obama Nominees.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »