AdvertisementSupported byThe Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.12 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.30 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.03 percent.The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week: MONDAYBurleigh County, N.D., $60 million of revenue bonds. Competitive. Florida Department of Environmental Protection, $90 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.TUESDAYBellevue School District, Wash., $87 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive. Maryland Water Quality Financing Administration, $180 million of revenue bonds. Competitive. Monmouth County, N.J., $92.2 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive. Omaha Metropolitan Utility District, $179.4 million of revenue bonds. Competitive. Richmond, Va., $61.7 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive. Virginia Housing Development Authority, $50 million of revenue bonds. Competitive. Wisconsin, $225 million of transportation revenue bonds. Competitive. WEDNESDAYMontgomery County, Md., $300 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.THURSDAYWestchester County, N.Y., $96.2 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.ONE DAY DURING THE WEEKBirmingham, Ala., $61.3 million of general obligation bonds. Loop Capital Markets. City of Industry, Calif., $345 million of sales tax revenue refinancing bonds. Stifel Nicolaus. Connecticut, $650 million of general obligation bonds. Barclays Capital.Dallas, $197.1 million of general obligation refinancing and improvement bonds. Morgan Stanley.Grossmont Union High School District, Calif., $51 million of general obligation bonds. Stifel Nicolaus.Illinois Toll Highway Authority, $400 million of revenue bonds. Ramirez.Kentucky State Property and Buildings Commission, $111 million of revenue and revenue refinancing bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Long Island Power Authority, N.Y., $117.2 million of electric system general revenue bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Maryland Department of Housing and Community Development, $67.2 million of Community Development Administration residential revenue bonds. RBC Capital Markets. Massachusetts Housing Finance Agency, $112.6 million of single family housing revenue bonds. RBC Capital Markets. Massachusetts School Building Authority, $718 million of sales tax refunding bonds. Bank of America.Miami Beach, $193 million of resort tax revenue bonds. Bank of America.Miami Beach Redevelopment Agency, $343.4 million of revenue refinancing bonds. Morgan Stanley.Mississippi, $116.3 million of general obligation bonds. Piper Jaffray. Mississippi, $177.3 million of general obligation bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Missouri Health and Educational Facilities Authority, $100 million of educational facilities revenue bonds. Barclays Capital. Missouri Housing Development Commission, $56 million of single-family mortgage revenue bonds. George K. Baum.New Hampshire Housing Finance Authority, $50 million of debt securities. George K. Baum. New Jersey Transportation Trust Fund Authority, $626.8 million of transportation program bonds. RBC Capital Markets. New York City Municipal Water Finance Authority, $338.6 million of water and sewer system revenue bonds. Ramirez.Oakland State Building Authority, Calif., $59 million of lease revenue refinancing bonds. Ramirez. Palm Beach County, Fla., $122.2 million of public improvement revenue bonds. Goldman Sachs.Phoenix Civic Improvement Corporation, $117 million of airport revenue and refinancing bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.San Clemente, Calif., $58.9 million of special tax bonds. Stifel Nicolaus.San Diego Unified School District, $450 million of debt securities. Citigroup Global Markets.San Francisco State Building Authority, $102.9 million of lease revenue refinancing bonds. Ramirez.Tom Green County, Tex., $53.5 million of combination tax and limited surplus revenue certificates of obligation. Wells Fargo Securities.Troy Capital Resource Corporation, N.Y., $75 million of Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute project debt securities. KeyBanc Capital Markets. Tustin Control Flood District, Calif., $51.8 million of special tax refinancing bonds. First Southwest.Wisconsin Housing and Economic Development Authority, $73 million of housing revenue bonds. Bank of America.Advertisement