AdvertisementSupported byBy Kate GalbraithSAN FRANCISCO — As Volkswagen faced a court-mandated deadline to reach an agreement with regulators on a plan to fix its polluting diesel cars last month, one lawyer for the German automaker mentioned that he had probably never worked harder in his career.“I’m optimistic that you’ll be able to break your record in the next month,” Charles R. Breyer, the federal judge presiding over the hearing in San Francisco, replied. “That’s my goal.”Judge Breyer, who is overseeing the class-action lawsuits brought by American car owners, then gave Volkswagen until April 21 to present a proposal as the first step in the litigation. The company admitted in September to installing software on diesel vehicles to cheat on emissions tests, but hundreds of thousands of its cars remain on American roads, spewing excess pollution.If Volkswagen does not present a plan that is approved by regulators by Thursday, it could conceivably face a trial before Judge Breyer this summer.“He’s put the hammer down, and he’s said, ‘I want to know what Volkswagen’s answer is,’ ” said Erik Gordon, a professor at the Ross School of Business at the University of Michigan who studies federal multidistrict litigation. The judge, he added, is “not in the mood for stalling, that’s for sure.”Volkswagen admitted that 11 million of its vehicles were equipped with software that was used to cheat on emissions tests. This is how the technology works and what it now means for vehicle owners.Widely described by lawyers in California as fair, pragmatic and creative, the judge, the younger brother of Justice Stephen G. Breyer, holds sway over whether and how Volkswagen fixes the cars and how vehicle owners will be compensated.Judge Breyer, 74, who says he has no ambitions to be appointed to a higher court, is presiding over complex litigation involving hundreds of thousands of car owners who want the company to fix their cars or buy them back, as well as civil suits brought by car dealers and by the Department of Justice.It is a career highlight for someone who had long aspired to be center stage, just not always in the courtroom.While his brother followed their father, a longtime counsel to the San Francisco school board, into law, Judge Breyer initially hoped to pursue a career in acting. After graduating from Harvard University with an economics degree, he spent the summer auditioning, including on Broadway.“I never got a callback,” he said wryly in an interview last week.Instead, he went to law school at the University of California, Berkeley, and found that trial law “was theatrics by another name.”He cut his teeth as an assistant district attorney in San Francisco, often prosecuting homicide cases. Then, in a forerunner to the Watergate scandal, burglars broke into a psychiatrist’s office in California in search of records that could damage Daniel Ellsberg, who had leaked the Pentagon Papers and antagonized the Nixon administration. He prosecuted several Nixon aides, who became central figures in the Watergate case, for that break-in.“It was fascinating,” he recalled. “You did have a sense that you were engaged in a significant inquiry. You had no sense whatsoever of whether you were going to be successful. None.”Judge Breyer later became a trial lawyer in San Francisco, with clients ranging from the American Cigar Company to the estate of Elvis Presley. He remained mostly in private practice until Bill Clinton appointed him to the federal bench in 1997.He still has a passion for performance. Judge Breyer has been known to quote Shakespeare in his courtroom, and, like his brother, he regularly draws chuckles in court.Last month, when a lawyer for Volkswagen, Robert J. Giuffra Jr., mentioned that his son disliked the case because his father was never home, Judge Breyer responded: “In a month’s time, we will reintroduce you to your family. They can all come to San Francisco for an environmentally correct holiday.”Last year, Judge Breyer presided over a long-running case between Hewlett-Packard and its shareholders over an acquisition. The technology company filed several motions to seal already heavily redacted documents, which he denied — with his own reasoning redacted.That was “pretty Breyerish,” said Josh A. Cohen, a former clerk for Judge Breyer who now works for the law firm Clarence, Dyer & Cohen in San Francisco. A settlement in the Hewlett-Packard case was reached last year.Judge Breyer is “just very, very effective at cutting straight to the core of an issue, and wading through the marginal, peripheral atmospherics,” Mr. Cohen said. The judge, he added, likes to move things along quickly and naturally, and toward a settlement if possible.As a senior district judge for the Northern District of California, Judge Breyer has presided over a long line of complex litigation that has often ended in settlements. Last year, he approved settlements in a major class-action case involving accusations of price-fixing in the airline industry. In another major case, involving liability claims regarding two painkillers made by Pfizer, a settlement was announced in 2008.While he rarely gets automotive cases, in 2014, Judge Breyer dismissed a complaint by shareholders of Tesla Motors claiming that the electric carmaker had made false statements about the fire risks of the car batteries. In dismissing it, Judge Breyer said he was at a “total loss” for “understanding the basis for this lawsuit.” The case is being appealed.A multidistrict panel of judges assigned the Volkswagen case to Judge Breyer, in part because California has a higher number of affected cars than other states. Perhaps more important, he is “thoroughly familiar with the nuances of complex, multidistrict litigation,” the panel stated.Judge Breyer, known for his bow ties and a love of baseball, declined to comment on the Volkswagen case during the interview in his spacious 17th-floor chambers, which overlook downtown San Francisco. The office contains a host of figurines and knickknacks, a wall of legal books and a small aquarium.Asked whether his deadline of Thursday would be met, he replied simply, “I hope so.”If it is not, a summer trial could be an uncomfortably rapid timeline for Volkswagen, which is already under immense pressure to find an engineering fix for its cars — if one exists.Jeannine Ginivan, a spokeswoman for the Volkswagen Group of America, wrote in an email that the company is “committed to resolving the U.S. regulatory investigation as quickly as possible,” and to working to earn back the trust of its customers and dealers.Many legal observers expect the case to eventually settle rather than go to trial.Soon after he began presiding over the litigation, Judge Breyer appointed the former F.B.I. director and longtime lawyer Robert S. Mueller III to help the various sides come together.In his January order appointing him, the judge said that Mr. Mueller had the authority to schedule settlement discussions, and to determine the location and other details of those talks. Mr. Mueller is providing regular progress reports to Judge Breyer.“Appointing Mueller so early and putting him to work — it just shows you, you’ve got a judge who has a plan,” said Alan Schulman, a professor in residence at the University of San Diego School of Law. “He’s going to move this case forward, rather than let it languish in his court for a decade.”Advertisement