AdvertisementSupported byBy Jack EwingVolkswagen is close to completing a deal to resolve claims in the United States over its admission that it rigged vehicles to cheat on pollution tests, according to three people involved in the case.A deal, if completed, is expected to include fines from regulators and compensation to owners that could collectively cost Volkswagen billions of dollars. The three people spoke on the condition of anonymity, citing the continuing legal matter.Even at a high price, a settlement would be a major relief to the car company. The uncertainty over the financial impact of the deception has delayed its earnings reports and impaired its ability to raise money on the markets.Judge Charles Breyer of the United States District Court in San Francisco had given Volkswagen until Thursday to reach a settlement with the federal government and with vehicle owners in the United States. The judge has scheduled a hearing in the case for Thursday morning.The people said that the talks had been delicate and complex, and that terms could change or the parties might need more time to seal an agreement.The final cost to Volkswagen could be significant.On the regulatory side, Volkswagen faces a theoretical maximum penalty of $18 billion in the United States. While lawyers in the case predict the actual fine imposed on Volkswagen to be much less, it would still set a record for an automaker accused of clean-air violations. The largest comparable fine was $100 million imposed on the Hyundai-Kia group in 2014 for violating standards on greenhouse gas emissions.Any settlement would also include provisions to fix nearly 600,000 cars in the United States that are still on the road, seven months after Volkswagen admitted cheating on emissions tests. Additionally, it will most likely include financial incentives to ensure that owners bring the cars back to dealers to be repaired.Volkswagen admitted that 11 million of its vehicles were equipped with software that was used to cheat on emissions tests. This is how the technology works and what it now means for vehicle owners.In some cases, Volkswagen will not be able to fix the cars and will have to buy them back from owners. Kelley Blue Book, a research firm, estimated the cost of buying back the cars in the United States at $7 billion.Volkswagen may face other expenses, too. This settlement would apply only to the 600,000 affected cars in the United States. Volkswagen has admitted that it installed the so-called defeat device on more than 11 million cars worldwide.The defeat device allowed Volkswagen to cheat on the emissions tests in the United States by recognizing when cars were being monitored and changing the exhaust settings. In testing, the cars dialed up pollution controls.But on the road, pollution controls were dialed back to enhance performance and fuel mileage, and to protect emissions equipment from wear. When that happened, the cars spewed as much as 40 times the allowed amounts of nitrogen oxides, a pollutant that poses health hazards.Judge Breyer is overseeing all of the litigation in the United States, including claims filed by federal and state governments as well as Volkswagen owners. Separate suits by Volkswagen dealers and by dealers of competing brands, who say the cheating gave Volkswagen an unfair advantage in the market, would probably not be part of the initial settlement.Of 11 million Volkswagen vehicles with illegal software, an overwhelming majority are in Europe. But Volkswagen’s legal troubles are focused in the United States, where limits on nitrogen oxides are more stringent and the penalties more severe.In addition, United States law gives owners significant scope to seek redress in court. The American owners are seeking compensation for the declines in the resale value of their cars. The models with the cheating software include Volkswagen, as well as Audi and Porsche cars with 2-liter or 3-liter diesel engines from the model years 2008 to 2015.Germany and most other European countries do not allow class-action suits like those filed by Volkswagen owners in the United States. In Germany, Volkswagen shareholders have sued the company, claiming that top executives violated their duty to report information that could affect the share price.In court filings, Volkswagen has admitted that Martin Winterkorn, the former chief executive, was informed in 2014 that the company faced questions from regulators about possible emissions cheating. But the company did not say anything publicly about the issue until after it was disclosed in the United States by the Environmental Protection Agency on Sept. 18, 2015. Mr. Winterkorn resigned less than a week later.Advertisement