AdvertisementSupported byBy Emily SteelOn one level, the dispute between Dish Network and Viacom that brought the companies to the brink of a television blackout on Wednesday resembles others that have become relatively routine in the industry and a common annoyance for customers.While such negotiations between TV companies and their cable and satellite distributors used to take place behind closed doors, they have erupted into messy public battles in recent years as the television industry has come under more pressure. Both sides are trying to secure their positions and profit against the backdrop of a rapidly changing television landscape where ratings are in steep decline and cable and satellite companies are battling against a tide of so-called cord cutters.Yet this specific clash is particularly crucial for Viacom.Already, the company is facing significant turbulence. There are major concerns over its leadership, accentuated by a legal battle over the mental competency of its controlling shareholder, Sumner M. Redstone. At the same time, Viacom has reported persistently weak earnings.The threat that Dish could drop Viacom channels from its service has been hanging over Viacom for the last several months. In 2014, more than 60 small cable operators, which account for about two million pay television subscribers in the United States, dropped Viacom’s channels, a longtime anchor of cable TV offerings. That stoked fears that larger cable and satellite companies like Dish might follow their lead.“People that have taken Viacom down in the past have done just fine,” Charles W. Ergen, chief executive of Dish, said in a conference call on Wednesday, hours before Dish’s contract to carry Viacom’s bundle was set to expire at midnight. “Best I can tell, they don’t regret the decision.”Should the two sides fail to reach an agreement, about 14 million Dish customers would experience a blackout of 18 Viacom channels, including MTV, Nickelodeon and Comedy Central.The dispute stems from Viacom’s wanting Dish to pay increases, which Dish argues are not justified given deteriorating ratings at the networks as well as the wide availability of Viacom programming on streaming services like Hulu and Netflix. The two companies have been operating under a short-term extension of a deal that expired in January.Mr. Ergen said on Wednesday that the company was prepared to drop Viacom channels from its lineup, especially after negotiations between the two companies hit a standstill last week. He said that discussions had been more productive this week.“There actually probably is a path to continue carriage, but it’s not done yet,” he added. “And obviously, the devil’s in the details.”In a statement Wednesday afternoon, a Viacom spokesman, Jeremy Zweig, said the company was hopeful a deal could be reached, noting that its networks represented about a fifth of cable viewership on Dish. Viacom highlighted “SpongeBob SquarePants,” “Lip Sync Battle,” “The Daily Show” and “Inside Amy Schumer” as shows that customers would miss.Benjamin Swinburne, an analyst with Morgan Stanley Research, said Dish’s comments that it would replace Viacom channels with other content suggested that “it may not intend to pick those networks back up at a later date.”Analysts estimate that if Dish dropped Viacom networks permanently, Viacom could be forced to make large cost cuts and could experience significant profit declines. Todd Juenger, an analyst with Sanford C. Bernstein & Company, predicted that Viacom stock would be worth about $28 — down from about $37 on Wednesday.“Even if Dish and Viacom ultimately reach a distribution renewal, we believe the terms will be onerous for Viacom,” Mr. Juenger said in a research note, “which bodes poorly for future Viacom renewals.”Dish also has much at stake. The smaller cable companies that dropped Viacom networks experienced significant subscriber declines. When the rival satellite television provider DirecTV faced a similar dispute that led to a 10-day blackout of Viacom networks in 2012, the company reported an 80 percent decline in subscriber additions that quarter.Advertisement