
Breakingviews By                     
JENNIFER SABA

APRIL 20, 2016
Yahoo’s first quarter is the last straw. An 11 percent drop in revenue for the first three months of the year puts an exclamation point on the lack of progress in almost four years with Marissa Mayer as chief executive. Google and Facebook are cleaning up in digital advertising, especially mobile. It’s time to offload Yahoo’s core business before bidders like Verizon lose interest.Ms. Mayer’s enthusiasm is unflagging. Even after the poor showing reported on Tuesday, which included an operating loss of $167 million, she keeps talking about her ability to kick-start growth while considering other alternatives. It’s hard to see what options are left.Jeffrey Smith, the chief executive of Starboard Value, last week discussed tensions between Yahoo and its most outspoken shareholder.Yahoo’s so-called mavens are moving at an analog pace. This Mayer-named collection of mobile, social, native and video ads represent a little more than a third of Yahoo’s top line and grew only 7 percent in the first quarter. By comparison, Facebook’s mobile-ad revenue increased 81 percent in the fourth quarter from a year earlier and accounted for nearly the entire $5.8 billion generated.Most companies put a gloss on themselves when they are up for sale to woo suitors. Yahoo, a $35 billion company that has lurched from strategy to strategy, is struggling to manage even that. Ms. Mayer is making potential bidders listen to prerecorded messages while providing little financial detail, according to media reports. It suggests that there may be something messy inside or that the chief executive isn’t especially keen to sell.Despite having to press for the pitch book, suitors are showing interest nonetheless. The telecom titan Verizon Communications signaled it would bid in an attempt to marry Yahoo with AOL, which it acquired last year for $4 billion. The private-equity firm TPG Capital and the digital-advertising remains of the phone-book publisher Yellow Pages also may be in the mix.Some potential bidders have already hung up on Yahoo. Comcast, AT&T, Time and Barry Diller’s Internet hodgepodge IAC are among those that media reports say considered making offers but did not.Yahoo expects the second quarter to be even worse, with at least a 12 percent decline in sales from a year ago. Given that outlook, Ms. Mayer has only one last job to do at Yahoo. She may be running short on time, however, to get this one right.Jennifer Saba is a columnist for Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »