AdvertisementSupported byBy Emily SteelIn yet another twist to an already tangled case, a judge on Wednesday rejected a petition by the granddaughter of the media mogul Sumner M. Redstone to join his former companion in the legal battle over his mental competency.The petition was made by Keryn Redstone, the 34-year-old daughter of Brent Redstone, Sumner’s son. And it essentially puts her in conflict with her aunt, Shari Redstone, who after public disagreements with her father over the years has said that she has reconciled with him.Keryn Redstone could still act as a witness in the case.Shari Redstone has spent the last several months challenging the suit, which was filed in November by Manuela Herzer, the former companion and onetime romantic partner of the elder Mr. Redstone. Ms. Herzer asserts that Mr. Redstone, 92, was not mentally competent in October when he removed her from a directive that would have put her in charge of his health care.A deposition of Ms. Herzer was scheduled for Thursday, but was delayed until next week because her lawyer said she had strep throat.The development comes after settlement talks between the two sides fell apart in recent weeks.Ms. Herzer says she is concerned with Mr. Redstone’s well-being. His lawyers state that she is motivated by greed. On the same day that Mr. Redstone changed his health care plan, he also removed Ms. Herzer from his personal estate in which he had planned to leave her $50 million and his $20 million Los Angeles mansion.In court documents, lawyers for Mr. Redstone called Keryn Redstone’s effort to join the proceeding “disappointing but not altogether surprising” because Ms. Herzer and Keryn Redstone are “the two individuals with a financial interest in setting aside Mr. Redstone’s October 2015 estate plan.”Like his sister, Shari, Brent Redstone has had an uneven relationship with his father. He sued Mr. Redstone in 2006, saying that his father favored his sister and froze him out of the family business. They settled in 2007, when Brent Redstone’s share of the business was bought out.In a declaration to the court, Keryn Redstone, who lives in Los Angeles, described her grandfather as a “prisoner in his own home” and said that she had been restricted from visiting him since February. She described her relationship with her grandfather, whom she called “Grumpy,” as close and affectionate and recalled childhood memories of playing the piano and tennis together.In contrast, Keryn Redstone called the relationship between Mr. Redstone and Shari Redstone “very tempestuous and difficult” and said that Shari Redstone had “consistently expressed hostility toward me, my father, and Grumpy in sometimes dark, threatening ways.” She described several fights with her aunt over the years about the care of her Aunt Cecelie and seating arrangements at Mr. Redstone’s 91st birthday party.In the declaration, Keryn Redstone described “distressing changes” in her grandfather’s behavior shortly before and after Ms. Herzer was thrown out of his home, including extreme mood shifts, disorientation, blank expressions and crying for no apparent reason.In a statement, Shari Redstone said, “This is not the first time that Keryn has sued an elderly relative for her own financial gain.”“I am sad and disappointed that Keryn has chosen to align herself with Herzer against my father,” she added. “I will not dignify the absurdity of Keryn’s false claims with any further response.”A trial is scheduled for May 6.Advertisement