By AMIE TSANGAPRIL 20, 2016
HONG KONG — Lexmark, the printing and software company, agreed Wednesday to be sold to a consortium led by Apex Technology of China and PAG Asia Capital, a private equity firm, for $3.6 billion, including debt.Lexmark had been looking into strategic alternatives for a while. The consortium buying it, which also includes Legend Capital Management, a venture capital firm, will pay $40.50 a share in an all-cash transaction. Lexmark said the deal represented a 30 percent premium to its closing price on Oct. 21, when it became known that the company was looking into its options.Lexmark said the deal would allow it to expand in Asia.“With the Consortium’s resources, we will be able to continue to invest in and grow the business to more fully penetrate the Asia Pacific market for hardware, software and managed print services,” Paul Rooke, Lexmark’s chairman and chief executive, said in a news release.Jackson Wang, the chairman of Apex, added that the two businesses were likely to be complementary, as Apex manufactures parts for ink cartridges. “Apex has traditionally been successful in emerging markets and in cost-effective production,” Mr. Wang said in a news release. “We are excited to work alongside Lexmark as they continue to invest in advanced technologies and solutions to best serve their customers and business partners, while simultaneously pursuing untapped opportunities in emerging markets particularly in Asia for future growth.”AdvertisementLexmark said that it intended to keep its company headquarters in Lexington, Ky., and that Mr. Rooke would remain in his current role. Shares rose about 11 percent in after-hours trading.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The deal continues a stream of prolific deal making among Chinese companies, including the sale of the technology distributor Ingram Micro for $6 billion to Tianjin Tianhai, a Chinese shipping group. Some deals, like the attempts to buy Fairchild Semiconductor and Starwood Hotels, have fallen apart, but China has still been racking up acquisitions. Outbound deals from China were worth $92.2 billion in the first quarter of this year, compared with $106 billion in all of 2015, according to Dealogic.Lexmark’s board has approved the transaction, but it is still subject to shareholder and regulatory approval from agencies including the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States. The deal is expected to close in the second half of 2016.AdvertisementMoelis & Company acted as financial adviser for the consortium, while Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom acted as legal counsel. Lexmark was advised by Goldman Sachs and Wachtell, Lipton, Rosen & Katz.An article on Thursday about the purchase of Lexmark, the American printing and software company, by a Chinese consortium misstated the period of time during which Chinese companies negotiated $106 billion worth of outbound deals. It was all of 2015, not just the first quarter of that year.A version of this article appears in print on April 21, 2016, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: Chinese Consortium in Deal for Lexmark.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.