By CHAD BRAYAPRIL 20, 2016
LONDON — Barclays announced on Wednesday that a veteran of its Barclaycard business would be the permanent head of its credit card and payment operations.Amer Sajed, who joined Barclays from Citigroup in 2006, becomes chief executive of the Barclaycard business immediately, the British bank said.“I’ve been impressed by Amer’s deep understanding of the global payments landscape,” James E. Staley, the Barclays chief executive, said in a news release. “Barclaycard enjoyed its most successful year in 2015, and I am confident that, under Amer’s leadership, the business will continue to go from strength to strength.”Since joining the bank, Mr. Sajed has been as chief executive of the Barclaycard business in Britain and the United States. He has also served as interim chief executive of the overall Barclaycard business since May 2015.AdvertisementMr. Sajed is the latest addition to the management team under Mr. Staley, who joined Barclays as chief executive in December.AdvertisementUnder Mr. Staley’s leadership, Barclays is looking to reshape itself by selling underperforming businesses and focusing on what it considers its core operations, such as Barclaycard.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The bank’s new strategy is focused around two divisions: the British consumer bank, and the corporate and investment bank. As part of that shift, Barclays has said that it planned to scale back the size of its business in Asia and to focus on its home markets in Britain and the United States.Barclays previously announced that it would bring in two JPMorgan veterans to join its management team this year.In January, the bank said that C. S. Venkatakrishnan, the head of operational risk at JPMorgan, would join Barclays in May as its chief risk officer. In February, the bank said that Paul H. Compton, who most recently served as JPMorgan’s chief administrative officer, would come aboard in May as chief operating officer.Mr. Staley, who is known as Jes, spent more than 30 years at JPMorgan, including as the top executive in its investment banking and asset management units. Mr. Staley left JPMorgan in 2013 to join the hedge fund BlueMountain Capital Management.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.