By CHAD BRAYAPRIL 20, 2016
LONDON — Credit Suisse has hired Henrik Aslaksen, a former top banker at Deutsche Bank, as the Swiss bank continues to reshape its investment banking business.Mr. Aslaksen, the former global head of mergers and acquisitions at Deutsche Bank, will join the Swiss bank on Monday in a new position as a managing director and head of strategic client coverage in the bank’s investment banking and capital markets division for Europe, the Middle East and Africa, according to an internal memorandum reviewed.He will focus on the bank’s largest global clients and be based in London, the memo said.Since joining the bank as chief executive in July, Tidjane Thiam, the former chief executive of the British insurer Prudential, has announced that Credit Suisse will raise billions of dollars in new capital, reduce the size of its investment bank and slash costs.Credit Suisse, which is based in Zurich and has large operations in New York and London, is placing greater emphasis on its wealth management business, particularly in Asia and other emerging markets.AdvertisementIn March, Mr. Thiam said that executives had been caught off guard by the size of large, risky positions taken in its trading business, forcing them to accelerate the bank’s cost-cutting drive and to further shrink the investment bank.The Swiss bank is seeking to cut costs by billions of dollars by the end of 2018, including eliminating 6,000 positions held by employees and contractors. The lender employed about 48,000 people worldwide at the end of last year.AdvertisementCredit Suisse reported a loss of 5.83 billion Swiss francs, or about $6.06 billion, in the fourth quarter. The loss was driven primarily a write-down of 3.8 billion francs after Credit Suisse reassessed the value of its investment bank as part of the continuing overhaul.Mr. Thiam, the Credit Suisse’s chief executive, has said that the investment bank, in a smaller form, remains a crucial part of the bank’s strategy going forward.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Aslaksen is the latest in a series of strategic hires that Credit Suisse has made in its investment bank as it moves to reshape the business.James Peterkin, a former Barclays banker, joined the bank in March as head of oil and gas for Europe, the Middle East and Africa, and Patrick Porritt, a former Bank of America Merrill Lynch banker, joined Credit Suisse this month as vice chairman of its financial institutions group.Mr. Aslaksen has more than 20 years experience in investment banking, including stints at Deutsche Bank and Bank of America Merrill Lynch.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.