By EMILY STEELAPRIL 21, 2016
The Spanish-language broadcaster Univision announced Thursday that it had acquired full control of Fusion, the joint venture it started with the Walt Disney Company in 2013.Fusion is an English-language digital news service and cable channel that aims at millennial audiences. The company will anchor Univision’s new Fusion Media Group, to be distributed on a mix of digital and traditional media. The group includes Univision’s stake in the El Rey cable network as well as the digital properties The Root, The Onion, A.V. Club, Clickhole, Starwipe and Flama.Terms of Disney’s exit were not disclosed. Starting immediately, Univision will take over distribution, advertising sales and editorial control of Fusion.“Fully integrating Fusion into our portfolio closely aligns with our desire to engage with our growing audience wherever they are, whenever they want and in their language of preference,” said Randy Falco, chief executive of Univision Communications. “F.M.G. is extremely well positioned to reach this young, diverse audience at scale and with passion, irreverence and authenticity.”AdvertisementUnivision was expected to conduct an initial public offering late last summer, and that is still paused. Since then, the share prices for major media companies have been hit hard because of broader concerns about the future of the television business, making it a tough time to take a company public.AdvertisementSince its start almost three years ago, Fusion has struggled to define its identity and deliver large audiences. The cable channel started while television networks are battling sharp ratings declines, especially among younger viewers.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The distribution for Fusion’s cable networks was nearly 40 million households, according to a note to staff sent in October by Isaac Lee, Fusion’s chief news and digital officer. In December news organizations reported that Disney was in talks to sell its stake to Univision.The website, meanwhile, was originally aimed at young Latinos who spoke English, but over time it shifted to target young viewers of all ethnicities. While it had a hard time finding its niche, the site has been expanding its audience of late.Univision says that Fusion now reaches a total of 27 million people each month across all platforms and that its website, Fusion.net, grew more than threefold in 2015 to now attracting about 10 million monthly unique visitors.After reporting losses during the first full year of operations, Fusion had projected that its television network would be profitable in 2016 and that its digital operations would be ahead of business plans.“The face of America is changing and we are focused on serving a new majority whose influence is rapidly growing — affecting everything from politics and the economy to our culture,” Mr. Lee said in a statement.A version of this article appears in print on April 22, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Univision Buys Disney Stake in Their Joint Venture Fusion.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.