
Wheels By                     
 BILL VLASIC
 
APRIL 21, 2016
DETROIT — SINCE going bankrupt in 2009 and needing a government bailout to survive, General Motors has methodically rebuilt itself as a profitable automaker that has capitalized on surging sales in the United States market.But despite reporting on Thursday that its first-quarter earnings had more than doubled from a year ago, G.M. still apparently has a lot to prove to investors.The company’s stock price hardly budged from its recent level of $32 on the news that G.M. earned $1.95 billion in the quarter, compared to $945 million in the same period in 2015.Industry analysts have been generally impressed by G.M.’s comeback from its financial problems and its recent safety crisis over faulty ignition switches linked to 124 deaths.AdvertisementYet much of the credit for the healthy earnings is attributed to the strong market in the United States for new cars, rather than G.M.’s improving balance sheet and new models.AdvertisementNow G.M., with its domestic rivals Ford Motor and Fiat Chrysler, is pushing hard to be a major player in the industry’s high-technology revolution centered on autonomous vehicles and electric cars.And rather than try to develop all the technology itself, G.M. is spending freely to acquire and work with Silicon Valley companies that can accelerate its transformation from an old-line automaker into a leader in all aspects of personal mobility.“They are investing in companies that are further along than they are in new technology,” said Karl Brauer, an analyst with Kelley Blue Book. “And that’s something G.M. would never have done back before its bankruptcy.”Investing in companies like the Lyft ride-hailing service is part of an effort by G.M. to shed its reputation as a plodding bureaucracy that is slow to keep up with the newest trends in the industry.The motivation to take more risks can be directly attributed to the emergence of Apple and Google as potential automakers, and the stunning success of Tesla Motors in electric cars.“The forces of change like Google and Tesla have motivated G.M. and other older automakers to defend their turf,” Mr. Brauer said.Mary T. Barra, G.M.’s chief, said on Thursday that the company intended to be a leader in autonomous cars and electric vehicles, even if that meant spending big for companies like Cruise Automation, a tiny software business that customizes cars with self-driving equipment.Advertisement“We see a significant opportunity, and that’s why we are moving so aggressively on all fronts,” Ms. Barra said in a conference call with analysts.The company is also preparing to go head-to-head in competition with Tesla for customers for the first midpriced electric cars with a driving range of 200 miles.Tesla has garnered more than 325,000 orders for its Model 3, which will not be available until at least 2017. G.M. is set to begin production late this year on its Chevrolet Bolt, which has a comparable price and driving range as the new Tesla.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Still, Tesla has a high-tech cachet from the success of its luxury cars. And G.M. is committed to selling the Bolt in Chevrolet showrooms that cater to mass-market consumers.“The electric car is integrated into the portfolio,” Ms. Barra said.That strategy is counter to what some other big automakers are doing. Honda on Thursday said it would offer vehicles powered by fuel cells or batteries.Establishing a product line dedicated to advanced, low-emission models “will help create a new volume pillar for electrified vehicle sales,” said John W. Mendel, of Honda’s American division.As G.M. tries to carve out a larger business in electric cars, it is also acting to improve profit margins in its core North American business.The company is pulling back on less profitable sales of vehicles to rental fleets, and taking advantage of consumer demand for trucks by introducing variants such as its midsize pickup and a Chinese-built small sport utility vehicle.In the first quarter, G.M. increased its pretax profit in North America by 5 percent, from a year ago, to nearly $2.3 billion.AdvertisementIt also improved in other regions, particularly in Europe, where it reduced losses to $6 million in the quarter, compared to a loss of $239 million in the same period in 2015.Still, analysts remain mixed on G.M.’s outlook.Some are praising the company for its postbankruptcy restructuring that has left it in far better position to weather a slowing of domestic sales.“The great story about G.M. is that even if a sales slowdown occurs, the company is in position to still remain profitable due to an improved balance sheet, flexible production, and disciplined decision making,” said David Kudla, chief executive of the investment firm Mainstay Capital Management.Other analysts said G.M. was vulnerable if the market began slipping below last year’s record sales of 17.5 million vehicles in the United States.In a research note on Thursday, a Morgan Stanley analyst, Adam Jonas, warned that big profits in the American market were unsustainable in the long term because of an inevitable slowdown in consumer demand.Yet with another strong quarter behind it, G.M. may be starting to change some of the negative perceptions that have dogged it since its bankruptcy.“A strong start to the year once again shows why G.M. is a fundamentally different company than it once was,” the Citibank analyst Itay Michaeli said in a research note.A version of this article appears in print on April 22, 2016, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Despite Strong Profit, G.M. Has Much to Prove to Investors.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »