AdvertisementSupported byBy Leslie PickerLast year’s record in mergers and acquisitions may not yet be trickling into the coffers of advisory shops.Lazard — which is often seen as a bellwether for the deals industry – reported on Thursday that first-quarter revenue from its financial advisory business fell 12 percent, to $266 million.The firm said the decline was because of a lower level of transaction closings compared with a year ago. Bankers typically get paid the bulk of their advisory fees only after a deal has been completed.“The M.&A. cycle is never a straight line,” Kenneth M. Jacobs, the chairman and chief executive of Lazard, said in a phone interview. “It’s not surprising to see a bit of a blip here.”The firm was paid for a handful of multibillion-dollar deals that were completed in the quarter, including advising Shell on its $79 billion acquisition of BG. But other large transactions — including Dell’s $67 billion purchase of EMC and Anheuser-Busch InBev’s $106 billion deal with SABMiller – had yet to receive their necessary approvals.The quarterly numbers are somewhat surprising after a record year for deal-making, with nearly $5 trillion worth of deals announced. Lazard was a major player in the year, ranking sixth worldwide, behind Goldman Sachs, Morgan Stanley, JPMorgan Chase, Bank of America and Citigroup, according to data compiled by Thomson Reuters.Lazard’s financial advisory revenue also included a bump from restructuring work, which generated $43 million in the first quarter, almost double the amount from the same period last year. The activity has picked up as plummeting commodity prices have strained energy companies.Including fees generated from both advisory and asset management, Lazard generated $506 million in revenue in the quarter, a decrease of 13 percent. The firm cut costs in areas like compensation but not enough to offset the decline in revenue.Over all, adjusted net income declined 35 percent to $67 million, or 50 cents a share. Analysts had expected earnings of 65 cents a share, according to Thomson Reuters.It is shaping up to be another grim year for the nation’s biggest banks. They were hit hard by a bad environment for trading and deal-making.Lazard made several prominent hires over the course of the quarter, including Peter R. Orszag, who previously served as the director of the Office of Management and Budget in the Obama administration. Mr. Orszag was also at Citigroup, where he was the vice chairman of corporate and investment banking. He will join Lazard on May 16 as vice chairman of investment banking.The firm also hired Ken Ziman from Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom as a managing director in restructuring, as well as David Burlison from KPMG to lead the restructuring team in London.Lazard announced that it had increased its quarterly dividend by 9 percent, to 38 cents a share and buyback authorization to $300 million. Its stock dipped about 5 percent over the course of the quarter.Still, Mr. Jacobs is optimistic about what the rest of the year might bring. The firm advised on four of the 10 largest transactions announced in the first quarter. He believes that the drivers from mergers and acquisitions have not changed, such as an economic environment that has been encouraging companies to come together to find growth.“What we’re seeing here now is a pause because of the volatility in the markets,” Mr. Jacobs said. “As long as people stay constructive about the macro cycle and we have this catalyst in place, I think we’ll see a decent level of activity.”Advertisement