By DIANE CARDWELLAPRIL 21, 2016
SunEdison, which started out making chemicals and components for solar modules but grew into a giant of renewable energy, has filed for bankruptcy protection, the company said on Thursday. The filing, under Chapter 11 in the Southern District of New York, brings to an end the company’s ambition to become the world’s leading renewable energy development business.Although some of its subsidiaries were included in the filing, it said, TerraForm Power and TerraForm Global, its publicly traded units known as yieldcos, were not.“Our decision to initiate a court-supervised restructuring was a difficult but important step to address our immediate liquidity issues,” Ahmad R. Chatila, the company’s chief executive, said in a statement. “The court process will allow us to right-size our balance sheet and reduce our debt, providing the opportunity to support the business going forward while focusing on our core strengths.”Mr. Chatila, who had overseen a series of acquisitions that racked up $11 billion in debt by the end of the third quarter of last year, said that the company would shed assets in an effort to become more streamlined and efficient. The company also announced that it had secured up to $300 million in financing to pay for day-to-day operations as it goes through the restructuring.AdvertisementSunEdison’s troubles stemmed from its rapid growth across several areas, analysts say. It expanded its financing options with the formation of the yieldcos. It bought several companies as it moved into different kinds of energy projects, including forays into wind, energy storage and residential solar, while at the same time looking to expand its manufacturing operations in large markets like Brazil, China and India.AdvertisementThe company’s situation became precarious last summer as investors lost confidence in the alternative energy sector and as SunEdison decided to move into the residential rooftop solar business by trying to acquire Vivint Solar, a deal that drew resistance from the start and ultimately fell apart.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.At the same time, its relationship to its yieldco subsidiaries frayed. The yieldcos, public companies that exist to help raise cheaper capital by buying the power plants their parents develop, collect the electricity payments and then pay out the bulk to investors as dividends.But as SunEdison’s fortunes tumbled, investors complained that it was improperly using their cash and striking deals that were more favorable to the parent company.After SunEdison was unable to meet its financial reporting deadlines this year — which hurt it with creditors — the situation worsened, and TerraForm Global raised the possibility of a SunEdison bankruptcy in a public filing.Its legal troubles also mounted. SunEdison recently acknowledged that it was under investigation by the Securities and Exchange Commission and the Justice Department in several areas. And it faces lawsuits from Vivint over the failed acquisition, investors, creditors and TerraForm Global.In the end, SunEdison was a case of its ambitions outpacing the reality.“You take things that would make any company start to look more and more risky to investors, and you cross that with an alternative energy story — which still carries a risk label — and you get this big amplifier effect,” said Erik Gordon, a clinical assistant professor at the Ross School of Business at the University of Michigan. “One of these days, we’ll have a crop of companies with business models that aren’t fragile. Business models with piles of debt are fragile, and, boy, that’s the last thing you want when you’re going through a technology change and a market paradigm change.”A version of this article appears in print on April 22, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Chapter 11 Bankruptcy for Once-Hot SunEdison.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.