AdvertisementSupported byBook EntryBy Jonathan A. KneeNo part of the media and entertainment industry has seen a more substantial economic transformation than sports.In little more than a generation, sports has gone from representing a marginal corner of the business to center stage. Today, sports not only drives the existential battles between media content and distribution leaders, but it is playing an increasing role in the struggle for dominance among the competing technology platforms. Earlier this month, Twitter beat out Amazon and Facebook for the digital streaming rights to National Football League Thursday night games.It is hard to believe that in 1990, when Hearst bought 20 percent of ESPN for a song, RJR Nabisco had long been trying to unload the stake. The remaining 80 percent share today represents the largest part of the largest media conglomerate in the world: the Walt Disney Company. And sports plays an increasing role in more than just the corporate realm. The seemingly perpetual growth of the price of sports rights has relegated a shocking percentage of American families to effective poverty once they have paid for the basic cable video bundle that incorporates these costs. This phenomenon implicates public policy considerations as well.Given this backdrop, the subtitle of a new book by Matthew Futterman, “Players: The Story of Sports and Money, and the Visionaries Who Fought to Create a Revolution” (Simon & Schuster), could not be more timely. Mr. Futterman, a sportswriter for The Wall Street Journal, takes us on a half-century tour spanning a variety of widely recognized and lesser-known sports figures and competitions that have played roles in the industry’s development. Mr. Futterman is right that understanding the history is crucial to understanding the current state of sports and the possibility of change.As enjoyable as the journey sometimes is, the problem with the book is reflected in the title itself of “Players.” Mr. Futterman focuses on one level of a complex, multilayered industry whose economics are not primarily driven by how individual athletes negotiate their salary and licensing deals.Much more consequential is the structure of the games, teams, leagues and federations and their relationships with brands, broadcasters, cable channels and increasingly diverse potential distribution outlets. It is simply not possible to tell “the story of sports and money” without broadening the narrative.Unfortunately, half of the book is taken up with tales of the players in golf, tennis and baseball who fought pivotal battles to improve their respective sports’ compensation structures. The topic of escalating rights fees is taken up, only in the final chapter, and then perfunctorily. There is no mention at all, for instance, of the young Fox network’s unexpected decision to submit a huge pre-emptive bid for N.F.L. rights in 1993. That move upended a relationship between football and CBS that dated back to the 1950s and fundamentally altered the trajectory of the cost of all sports rights since.Mr. Futterman’s emphasis on the players has the virtue of lending itself to interesting personal histories. But the frequent flashbacks are disorienting, and the detailed descriptions of various sports matches are only sometimes relevant to the plot. The success of a goofy show in the 1970s called “The Superstars” in which famous athletes from diverse disciplines competed against each other in a series of haphazardly organized events makes a good story. It demonstrated the increasing importance of the individual athletes’ celebrity relative to the games or teams themselves. This point could be made, however, without a play-by-play of the relay races or tug-of-war competition.As a practical matter, emphasizing the players at the expense of structural considerations makes it impossible for the reader to follow the money. Four of the five best compensated players in the world are from boxing and soccer — sports that Mr. Futterman either ignores entirely or discusses briefly. By contrast, none of the top 10 salaries are found in either football or baseball, two sports examined closely.“Players” does not provide readers with the tools to understand why this might be. There is also no mention of the overall size of the industry or the mix of revenues between gate, media rights, sponsorships and merchandising. And the relative size of the various sports within the industry is not discussed and bears no relation to how much time Mr. Futterman spends on each.Mr. Futterman is as much a sports fan as he is a sportswriter, and the narrow preoccupations of “Players” reflect this perspective. The early chapters champion the interests of the exploited players who dare to wrestle a fair share of the pie from the team owners and leagues. Mr. Futterman argues that “empowering” the players “allowed them to transform modern sports” by improving the quality of play and professionalism of the overall enterprises.The tone changes in the latter part of the book as the impact of excessive focus on individual celebrity comes at the expense of team performance and the broader values that sports should promote.In the end, Mr. Futterman is unable to reconcile these two conflicting considerations fully. “Money in sports isn’t, on its own, a bad thing,” he insists, “but when money becomes the motivating goal and purpose in sports, that is a bad thing.”In the absence of a fuller examination of the overarching industry structure, Mr. Futterman can only offer exhortations rather than any solutions: “Fans, who have sustained the industry … don’t want much – just the ability to enjoy the games they love and the athletes they admire without getting ripped off, lied to, or insulted, either by the athletes who play sports or the people who run them.”Who could argue with such sentiments? Although it may not seem like much to ask for, nothing in “Players” suggests that it will be made available any time soon.Jonathan A. Knee is professor of professional practice at Columbia Business School and a senior adviser at Evercore Partners.Advertisement