AdvertisementSupported byBy John KoblinAl Jazeera America may have shut down last week but that has not protected the network from further unwelcome news.The network’s executive vice president of finance, Anand Gupta, filed a lawsuit on Thursday in Federal District Court in Manhattan asserting that he had not been given a promised promotion and salary raise because of racial discrimination.In the suit, Mr. Gupta also laid out specific details about how much the network suffered financially in its brief existence. In the network’s first year on the air in 2013, the suit asserts, citing tax returns, it had a net operating loss of $250 million, and in 2014 it lost an additional $335 million.Mr. Gupta, who is Indian, said Al Jazeera America’s chief executive, Al Anstey, had reneged on a promise made by his predecessor, Ehab Al Shihabi, that would have elevated Mr. Gupta to the position of chief financial officer.Mr. Gupta also asserted that the network had tried to push him out of his job after he formally complained about Mr. Anstey. He is seeking lost wages and damages, among other things.Al Jazeera America announced in January that it was shutting down, saying it did not have a sustainable business model. It is owned by the global news organization Al Jazeera, which is facing its own challenges and recently eliminated 500 positions.In the suit, Mr. Gupta asserts that, among other freewheeling spending habits, the network continued to pay more than $11,000 a month for an apartment intended for Mr. Shihabi, which went empty after he was ousted last year. It also asserts that Al Jazeera America is responsible for more than $800 million in the process of winding down, if it pays out its contracts to cable operators in full.“We strongly disagree with the allegations made in Mr. Gupta’s complaint, which contains many factual inaccuracies, and we intend to vigorously defend the company’s position,” Molly Morse, a spokeswoman for Al Jazeera America, said in a statement on Friday.She said the former network “firmly believes it acted appropriately and properly in its interactions with Mr. Gupta at all times, and Mr. Anstey has worked tirelessly to ensure that all employees were treated fairly during their employment since he came on board last year.”Al Jazeera America’s final broadcast was 10 days ago, which seemed to put a bookend on its short and turbulent life. Mr. Shihabi was let go after employees spoke about a “culture of fear” within its newsroom. The network was sued by two former employees last year who complained about Al Jazeera’s work environment.Advertisement