AdvertisementSupported byBy Jack EwingFRANKFURT — The European Central Bank left its main interest rates and stimulus tools unchanged at its meeting on Thursday, with its president forcefully arguing that the bank’s aggressive monetary policy moves had bolstered economic growth and warded off negative inflation in the eurozone.The decision by the central bank’s Governing Council, its main policy board, to stand pat was expected by analysts as the bank measures the impact of a wide-ranging set of aggressive moves it took last month to stimulate the eurozone’s moribund economy: to pump money into the economy, encourage lending by banks and raise inflation from levels considered dangerously low.“Our policies are the necessary policies for the return of the inflation rate to our objective,” Mario Draghi, the European Central Bank’s president, said at a news conference in Frankfurt after the interest rate decision.He added that the policies had provided “the necessary conditions for the return of growth to a higher level, and the necessary conditions for the return of interest rates to a higher level.”“Our monetary policies have been supporting growth,” he said.Mr. Draghi reacted with vehemence when asked about criticism of central bank policy last week by Wolfgang Schäuble, the German finance minister. Mr. Schäuble was quoted blaming low interest rates, which he said hurt German savers, as a factor in the rise of right-wing populist parties in the country. He later said that was not what he meant.“Criticisms of a certain type could be viewed as endangering the independence of the E.C.B.,” Mr. Draghi said. Such criticism would only undercut the effectiveness of central bank policy and force it to do even more, he said.Mr. Draghi faulted political leaders for not doing enough to improve their economies. “If there were also structural reforms, the effect of these policies would be quicker,” he said.Arguing that countries had to do more to overhaul their economies and provide fiscal stimulus, he added, “Our monetary policy has been the only policy in the last four years to support growth.”Mr. Draghi said that an internal central bank study indicated that economic growth from 2016 to 2018 would have been lower if it had not put in place the measures over the past two years, and that inflation would have been negative this year.At its last monetary policy meeting, on March 10, the central bank surprised economists and investors with an array of moves that in some cases had never been deployed by a major central bank. Those included a program that allows banks to draw central bank money for free, and then to receive a bonus if they lend the money to businesses and individuals. Banks have to meet certain benchmarks to qualify for the bonus.At the March meeting, the central bank cut its benchmark rate to zero from 0.05 percent. It also increased the penalty it charges banks to park money in its vaults — a so-called negative interest rate — to 0.4 percent from 0.3 percent.Mr. Draghi said on Thursday that a program to buy corporate bonds, in addition to existing purchases of government debt, had been expanded as announced by the bank last month, with the European Central Bank now buying 80 billion euros, or about $90 billion, of bonds each month. Known as quantitative easing, the purchases are made with newly created money and are intended as a way to lower market interest rates and increase the amount of money circulating in the economy.Some analysts have expressed concern that the central bank could run short of bonds to buy because the market supply is finite.But Mr. Draghi dismissed those concerns, saying the bank did not “see risks of scarcity.”Despite the array of measures, inflation in the eurozone has been stubbornly low. It has not exceeded 0.5 percent in two years and has fallen below zero on several occasions.The fear is that the eurozone could become trapped in deflation, a vicious downward cycle of falling prices that leads people to delay purchases in hopes of even lower prices. The result could be a rise in unemployment as corporations cut costs in the face of falling sales.“In the current context, it is crucial to ensure that the very low inflation environment does not become entrenched,” Mr. Draghi said.The central bank’s policies, he said, “had the effect of avoiding the second round effects” of low inflation filtering into wage negotiations and the determination of prices.Economists have even begun to debate the wisdom of so-called helicopter money, which would be printed by the central bank and handed out to citizens or used to finance public works. Once considered a radical idea, helicopter money has become a more mainstream proposal the longer inflation has resisted central bank remedies.But members of the central bank’s executive board have ruled out helicopter money, a position that Mr. Draghi highlighted on Thursday.“The concept is fraught with operational, legal and institutional difficulties,” he said. “But the bottom line is, we have never discussed it.”“It would become very difficult after that to control expectations,” analysts at Bank of America Merrill Lynch said in a note to clients on Wednesday. “We would also be very surprised if Draghi had the Governing Council’s majority backing to explore this publicly.”Advertisement