By STACY COWLEYNOV. 17, 2015
Jeff Chapin, the chief product officer at Casper, has 30 prototype pillows strewn around his bedroom. One of them, the end result of a design and testing process that lasted more than a year, is what Casper hopes will be the holy grail of bedding: one pillow, perfect for all sleepers.There is no variant for side or back sleepers. No choice of firmness. Buyers who prefer specific materials — down or latex or cotton or wool, or perhaps buckwheat — are out of luck. Every Casper pillow is filled with the same synthetic fibers, stuffed to the same density and wrapped in an interchangeable white percale cover.The pillow is an experiment for both the bedding industry, where products have grown ever more specialized and complex, and for Casper, a start-up that sells mail-order mattresses. Nineteen months ago, Casper began selling its first product, a single-model memory- and latex-foam mattress. Priced from $500 for a twin to $950 for a king, shipping included, and sold only online, the Casper mattress was meant to appeal to those who hate mattress shopping.“Our forecast was that we would sell a couple hundred within the first few months,” said Philip Krim, Casper’s chief executive. “We sold that within days.” The mattress’s simplicity, Instagram-friendly packaging and extensive marketing struck a chord. Sales reached $1 million in the first month, and recently topped a cumulative $100 million.AdvertisementNow, Casper is poised to test whether its early success will translate to other product categories. On Tuesday, it will begin selling the new pillow, as well as sheets.Advertisement“We never viewed ourselves as a mattress company,” Mr. Krim said. “We always talked about it in the broader context of sleep.”Casper, whose five founders are all in their 20s or 30s, was not the first online mattress retailer with a pitch tailored for millennials, but its success helped supercharge the market, which has now become something of a frenzy. Shoppers have at least a dozen brands to choose from and new entrants pop up each month. Saatva, which opened in 2011, expects to triple its sales this year, to $85 million, while one of the newest arrivals, Leesa, which began shipping late last year, said it was on track for sales of $30 million this year. Tuft & Needle, another popular brand, said its sales were on pace to quadruple this year, to at least $40 million.Investors are pouring money into the new ventures, which are sometimes referred to as “Mattress 2.0” companies. Casper has raised nearly $70 million from investors at a valuation of $550 million. In contrast, Mattress Firm, the industry’s biggest specialist retailer, had annual sales of $2.3 billion last year; its market capitalization is $1.6 billion.“It’s a modern-day gold rush,” said David Perry, the executive editor of Furniture Today, a trade publication.How that gold rush pans out remains to be seen. Mattress-industry veterans point out that Casper’s share is still a tiny sliver of a $14 billion-a-year market — and its long-term prospects are hard to judge.“It’s trendy to say Casper is an industry disrupter,” Mr. Perry said. “What I would say is that they’re a potential disrupter. Comfort is very subjective. There are many advantages to trying a mattress out in a store. The idea that the Casper bed is perfect for everyone doesn’t fit with what the industry experience has been, but clearly, that message is resonating with consumers.”Casper started working on its pillow the day after it shipped its first mattresses. The company, based in New York City, began its research by buying dozens of well-reviewed pillows, tearing them apart and experimenting with the components. Early user tests revealed a surprise: Foam, the material that worked well for Casper’s mattresses, bombed.AdvertisementCasper’s experiments included a few departures, like a “pillow of pillows” — dozens of small pillows stuffed inside a shell — and a puzzle-like adjustable pillow stacked with configurable layers. But the design that Casper homed in on is fairly traditional. Visually, the pillow’s only unusual feature is its dual-layer construction: A thick, washable outer layer surrounds a springy inner core, a structure intended to prevent the pillow from flattening too much.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Like Casper’s mattress, the pillow comes in only one model, priced at $75 for a standard and $85 for a king. The company initially considered making variations, but user tests showed that most people gravitated toward the same feel.“A lot of products are marketed around, ‘Are you a front sleeper, or a back or side sleeper?’ ” said Luke Sherwin, Casper’s chief creative officer. “But all the data shows that everyone moves. You may fall asleep in one position, but you don’t stay there.”Simplicity is the core of Casper’s sales pitch. People shopping for bedding are overwhelmed with information, much of it impenetrably technical, but in the end, most will be happy with well-made basics, the company thinks. It is a sales approach that is as focused on consumer psychology as it is on product design.In the mattress field, that approach turned out to work quite well.“When the good is extremely complex and you have the feeling, as a consumer, that there is expertise and you don’t have it, the single option may be attractive,” said Barry Schwartz, a psychology professor at Swarthmore and the author of “The Paradox of Choice: Why More Is Less.”But Mr. Schwartz is skeptical about how far the one-model-fits-all approach can extend. Some people have strong feelings about sheets and pillows, but those items are not the same kind of fraught, expensive, once-a-decade purchases as a mattress.“There’s pretty good research that the right answer to the ‘how much choice’ question is not no choice,” he said. “I think this is a fad, and I don’t think it will last.”Some of the new bedding ventures, though, have become cult brands. Word-of-mouth drives their sales, and happy shoppers chatter on social media and review websites about their experiences. When Casper created Casper Labs, a testing program for new products, it expected that a few hundred of its customers would enroll. More than 15,000 did.Derek Hales, the founder of Sleepopolis, a news and reviews site, said that each major company had attracted a core of fervent followers.Advertisement“It’s interesting to think of people being loyal to a mattress brand, when it’s something you’re only buying every eight to 12 years, but the response has been intense,” he said. “Every company is considering pillows or sheets or foundations, and I think their top customers will be eager when they start launching new products.”Casper’s founders acknowledge that they do not really know what to expect with the pillow and sheets.“When we placed our initial pillow and sheet orders, we joked that the only thing we’re certain about is that the number we ordered is wrong,” Mr. Krim said. “We just don’t know which direction we’ll be wrong in.”A version of this article appears in print on November 17, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Casper Hopes Its ‘One for All’ Concept Translates to One Pillow.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.