By PETER EAVISNOV. 16, 2015
The black population of Baltimore is double that of the white population. Yet in 2013, banks made more than twice as many mortgage loans to whites in the city as they did to blacks.The stark difference in mortgage lending, derived from the most recent government mortgage data, is the focus of a new study that will be released on Tuesday by the National Community Reinvestment Coalition, a consumer advocacy group.Given that the government does not collect certain important types of data on borrowers, researchers have long found it difficult to determine the degree to which race affects mortgage lending.Still, the coalition says its analysis shows that the racial makeup of a neighborhood — and not income, for instance — is the most significant predictor of whether a loan gets made in Baltimore.AdvertisementExploring the causes of the economic differences between blacks and whites in Baltimore has taken on an added urgency after the protests and riots in the city this year. The unrest followed the death in April of Freddie Gray, who died after suffering a spinal cord injury in police custody. Unemployment is higher than the national average in Baltimore, and particularly so among younger blacks in the city.Advertisement“If lenders are not making loans in a community, the opportunities for people to work their way out of poverty is pretty slim,” said John Taylor, the coalition’s president. “In Baltimore, the prevailing factor behind who gets a mortgage is the racial composition of the neighborhood.”Mortgages have broadly become less available since the financial crisis of 2008. But some bankers and industry representatives say it is not the banks but the government that deserves much of the blame. Currently, banks make the mortgages to borrowers but the taxpayer stands behind most mortgages with a guarantee against losses. The government has demanded stricter terms for its guarantee.Some bankers contend that the tougher stance of the government has reduced the number of borrowers who qualify for loans and increased the likelihood that the banks will have to take losses if they take back loans backed by the government. As a result, according to these critics, less-creditworthy borrowers, many of them minorities, are being denied mortgages.Still, for the United States as a whole, it has long been the case that the rate at which blacks get denied a mortgage is higher than that for whites. In 2013, for instance, blacks were denied on 25.5 percent of their applications for mortgages to purchase a home, compared with 12.2 percent for whites, according to an analysis of the government mortgage data by the Federal Reserve. The higher denial rate for blacks might, for instance, be explained by differences in credit history and the amount of money that borrowers can put down as a deposit.Indeed, according to the Fed’s analysis of the government mortgage data from 2013, banks said credit history was the reason behind 30 percent of their denials of black borrowers. For whites, banks said it was the cause in 22.5 percent of the cases.Still, the reasons for the high rate of denials remain murky.The government mortgage data does not contain information that would make it possible to verify the reasons that the banks give for denying mortgages. It does not, for instance, include credit scores of borrowers, which would allow researchers to better assess the creditworthiness of the potential borrowers who were denied.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A government agency, the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, recently introduced a rule that requires the banks to include more types of mortgage data, including credit scores, but it is not clear how much of the new data will be made public. And there will be a long wait for much of the new data; banks will have to start reporting it for loans made in 2018.As a result, questions will continue to hang over the high denial rate for blacks and the low level of lending in neighborhoods where blacks or other minorities are the majority. And these questions were in part behind the coalition’s analysis of Baltimore, a city that has in the past suffered from redlining — the term given to policies and practices that made it very difficult for blacks to obtain mortgages or take out home loans at the same terms as whites.AdvertisementThese days, banks are not making many loans to blacks in Baltimore.In 2013, 797 loans were made to blacks in the city, a seemingly tiny number considering that Baltimore’s black population totals almost 400,000. Some 2,000 loans were made to the city’s 175,000 whites.The coalition also used census data, yielding some notable findings.In lower-income areas of Baltimore where minorities made up 10 to 19 percent of the population, 72 percent of mortgage applications were approved. But in lower-income areas where minorities made up more than 80 percent of the population, only 59 percent of applicants were approved.One of the chief concerns among consumer advocates is that banks have effectively written off certain neighborhoods. Lenders, for instance, may shun creditworthy borrowers in neighborhoods where blacks are the majority because they may not believe that house prices will rise by much in such areas. But if banks avoid economically challenged areas for that reason, it could make it more unlikely that house prices will rise.In exploring this question, the coalition compared how often higher-income borrowers in the city were approved for a mortgage with other sets of borrowers.Higher-income borrowers in Baltimore were approved for 64 percent of the loans they applied for in areas where the minority population exceeded 80 percent. But the approval rate was 82 percent for higher-income borrowers in areas where minorities made up less than 10 percent of the population.The coalition also compared higher-income borrowers in Baltimore with borrowers in surrounding counties. In areas where minorities made up the overwhelming majority of the population, the researchers found that a lower-income borrower outside the city had roughly the same approval rates as higher-income borrowers in Baltimore.“This is indicative of the reduced importance that income plays in the city in favor of the racial composition of the area,” said the report, which was based on research by Jason Richardson and Bruce Mitchell, staff members at the coalition.A version of this article appears in print on November 17, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Study Strongly Links Baltimore Mortgage Denials to Race.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.