By THE NEW YORK TIMESAPRIL 24, 2016
This is what to expect from the week ahead.OIL INDUSTRYThis week is likely to produce evidence of the impact falling oil prices are having on oil-producing countries and businesses. On Monday, Deputy Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman of Saudi Arabia is expected to reveal his plans for reducing his country’s dependence on petroleum, a response to the fall in government revenues. His economic reform proposal may include a partial stock market listing of Saudi Aramco, the national oil company.Several of the world’s largest oil companies are also scheduled to report first-quarter earnings, with BP leading off on Tuesday. Exxon Mobil and Chevron, the two largest American oil companies, will follow on Friday. Oil prices that averaged around a third lower for the quarter than they were in the same quarter last year are likely to translate into lower earnings. Stanley ReedTECHNOLOGYPrivacy regulators from the United States, Europe and around the globe will gather in Berlin for a two-day conference starting on Monday to discuss how some of the world’s largest companies like Google and Facebook use people’s digital information. The meeting comes as tension has been mounting over a new trans-Atlantic data-transfer deal that some European regulators say does not give their citizens sufficient protection when information is moved to the United States. Mark ScottSeveral of the best-known technology companies — Facebook, Amazon, Apple and Twitter — will report earnings this week. After a disappointing string of earnings reports from Intel, Microsoft and Alphabet, the parent of Google, the tech sector could use some good news. Investors will be watching Apple’s iPhone business closely to see if the rate at which sales are falling has begun to slow. Amazon’s chief executive, Jeff Bezos, vowed recently to make bold investments, which could come at the expense of profits. Investors would love to see growth in Twitter’s user numbers, while there is wide anticipation that Facebook will continue to show strength as an Internet advertising juggernaut. Nick WingfieldAdvertisementECONOMYWhy is this Federal Reserve meeting less important than most Fed meetings? Because at this Fed meeting, on Tuesday and Wednesday in Washington, the central bank’s policy-making committee is unlikely to raise interest rates and is unlikely to say much about its plans for future rate increases. The Fed has already signaled that it isn’t planning a second step on the road to higher rates any earlier than June. The Fed will also not update its economic forecasts at this meeting, and the Fed’s chairwoman, Janet L. Yellen, will not hold a news conference. Those who closely watch the Fed will parse the post-meeting statement for clues. Everyone else can safely pass over this one. Binyamin AppelbaumAdvertisementBANKINGIt should be a busy week for earnings reports in Europe as several of the region’s biggest banks are expected to share their first-quarter results. Barclays, Deutsche Bank, the British lenders Royal Bank of Scotland and Lloyds Banking Group and Banco Santander of Spain are all expected to update investors on their results. The first quarter hasn’t been kind to banks this year as uncertainty in the financial markets and problems in the oil and gas industry have weighed on results at the biggest American banks, including JPMorgan Chase, Bank of America and Goldman Sachs. Europe’s largest lenders haven’t been spared the pain of their American counterparts and are expected to report similarly weak numbers. Chad BrayPlease verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.ECONOMYOn Thursday, at 8:30 a.m., the Commerce Department will release its initial estimate of economic growth in the first quarter of 2016. Wall Street is looking for a growth rate of 0.6 percent, well below the 1.4 percent annual rate of growth recorded in the fourth quarter of 2015. The likely slow pace of expansion comes despite healthy hiring, and if the economy did indeed stumble early this year, it would repeat the pattern of first-quarter deceleration seen in 2014 and 2015. As was the case in those years, most economists expect growth to quicken in the current second quarter. Nelson D. SchwartzEurozone finance ministers could meet on Thursday as part of efforts to prevent Greece from returning to the brink of bankruptcy. Though Greece agreed to a third bailout last year, the country must still enact additional reforms to obtain funds to pay back debt that matures in July. A deal is also needed to allow the International Monetary Fund to contribute to the bailout and for the lenders to start negotiations on ways to ease the country’s debt burden. There were signs of progress at a meeting late last week in Amsterdam where the eurozone and the I.M.F. agreed to hold Greece to a supplementary set of reforms. JAMES KANTERAUTO INDUSTRYVolkswagen will hold a news conference on Thursday in Wolfsburg, Germany, to provide more details about the record loss it reported on Friday. The carmaker said it lost $6.2 billion after setting aside $18 billion to cover costs stemming from its admission last year that it programmed diesel cars to thwart emissions tests. Jack EwingMEDIAAfter battling a glum outlook for the past several months, Viacom has secured a bit of sunshine going into its earnings report on Thursday. The media company announced last week that it had struck a multiyear agreement for Dish to continue to carry Viacom’s bundle of TV networks, which include MTV, Nickelodeon and Comedy Central. Viacom stock, which is down about 36 percent in the past year, was up about 14 percent on the news last week. Yet the company still has much to prove to Wall Street. It has reported persistently weak earnings in recent quarters and investors will watch for whether the TV and film company has been able to reverse its fortunes.Wall Street will also be watching earnings reports this week from Charter Communications and Time Warner Cable for an update on their proposed merger. Emily SteelA version of this article appears in print on April 25, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Tech and Banking Sectors to Give Earnings Reports.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.