AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Jennifer SabaThe great newspaper roll-up has commenced.The $815 million unsolicited offer by the Gannett Company to buy the Tribune Publishing Company does not just make financial sense for the buyer. It would also allow the target’s shareholders to escape flatlining revenue at a headline-grabbing 63 percent premium to its current market value.Gannett has been on a buying spree since it was broken off from its American local broadcast division, now known as Tenga, last June. It snapped up the owner of The Milwaukee Journal Sentinel, for example, for about $300 million this month. The company disclosed on Monday that it approached Tribune, the publisher of The Los Angeles Times and The Chicago Tribune, about a deal on April 12. Gannett’s chief executive, Bob Dickey, said that so far he had been “disappointed” by the response.It’s understandable that Tribune Publishing, led by Justin C. Dearborn, might initially be shy of new owners yet again. The company, based in Chicago, has never fully recovered from the disastrous $13 billion sale to the real estate mogul Sam Zell almost a decade ago. Tribune Publishing took on so much debt that the company went bankrupt a year later and did not emerge until 2012.The company has also just undergone yet another management change, instigated after Michael Ferro became its largest shareholder in February. But Tribune Publishing’s outlook is not rosy. Its own plans to buy rivals were squelched recently after trustbusters signaled they would fight its attempt to grab the publisher of The Orange County Register. And revenue is likely to decline in each of the next three years, according to Thomson Reuters estimates.Gannett has better prospects. As the largest chain in the United States, it publishes in more than 100 markets. That gives it greater ability to negotiate on newsprint prices and consolidate back-office and news-production functions. Tribune Publishing’s big city papers in Chicago, Baltimore and Orlando can feed into the national USA Today.Gannett reckons it can cut $50 million of costs a year. Those are worth around $300 million to shareholders once taxed and capitalized and easily cover the $160 million premium it has put on the table. If Tribune’s owners do not leap at the offer, their papers could become tomorrow’s fish wrap.Jennifer Saba is a columnist for Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.Advertisement