AdvertisementSupported byBy Katie ThomasValeant Pharmaceuticals International announced on Monday that Joseph C. Papa, the head of the drug maker Perrigo, would take over as chief executive, replacing the embattled J. Michael Pearson.Mr. Papa, who will begin in May, takes over at a time of turmoil for Valeant, which has seen its stock tumble from once-dizzying heights after a series of investigations into its drug-pricing and accounting practices. Valeant is also struggling under more than $30 billion in debt and is facing default from its bondholders after failing to file its annual report on time.The company’s decision to appoint Mr. Papa, a seasoned pharmaceutical executive with more than 35 years of experience in the industry, represents a marked departure from the leadership of Mr. Pearson, a former consultant for McKinsey who had no history of leading a drug company before he became Valeant’s chief in 2008.Mr. Pearson is regarded as the mastermind behind the company’s once-heralded business model of buying undervalued drugs, slashing business costs and raising prices. Under his tenure, the stock climbed as high as $263 last summer but tumbled last fall after a series of revelations about its business practices. The company has said it is under investigation by Congress, two federal prosecutors and the Securities and Exchange Commission.On Wednesday, Mr. Pearson is scheduled to testify before the Senate Special Committee on Aging, where he is expected to be asked pointed questions about Valeant’s drug-pricing practices. The company has also said it plans to file its long-delayed annual report before Friday.In December, Mr. Pearson took a medical leave for what the company said was severe pneumonia. He returned in February.Robert Ingram, chairman of Valeant’s board, described Mr. Papa as an “ideal leader” in a news release, adding that “he has a strong shareholder orientation, a background in science and an unmatched track record of accomplishments.”He also alluded to Valeant’s recent legal troubles, noting that “fostering an ethical culture and creating opportunities for professional development have always been high priorities for Joe.”Mr. Papa, 60, has been chief executive of Perrigo since 2006 and has a long career as a pharmaceutical executive, with previous stints at Novartis, the generic drug company Watson Pharmaceuticals and Cardinal Health, the drug distributor.When news of his potential appointment circulated Friday, after it was reported by The Wall Street Journal, some analysts welcomed his experience even as they noted that he was not known for his skills as a turnaround expert.Vicki Bryan, an analyst at the credit research firm Gimme Credit, said Mr. Papa could be just what Valeant needed: “Mr. Papa’s management style evokes a dramatically more positive tone/culture versus the toxic ‘do it or else’ environment revealed as so pervasive at Valeant,” she wrote in a note on Friday.Adam J. Fein, president of Pembroke Consulting, a management advisory and business research company based in Philadelphia, said Mr. Papa may help Valeant re-establish trust with insurers and pharmacy-benefit managers, which is sorely needed. Top pharmacy-benefit managers, including Express Scripts and CVS/Caremark, had recently said they were removing many of Valeant’s products from their list of covered drugs.“I think he has a lot more credibility with payers, certainly than Mr. Pearson does,” he said. “My sense is it’s a very solid pick.”Others found the news surprising, considering that Mr. Papa and Perrigo have recently faced their own challenges since fending off a hostile takeover by Mylan last year.David Maris, an analyst for Wells Fargo, said Valeant would probably need to sell off business units in the coming months to help get its debt under control. He said Mr. Papa did not appear to have much experience doing that. “We believe the new C.E.O. has experience acquiring, but not restructuring companies,” he said in a note on Monday.Shares of Perrigo, which specializes in store brand over-the-counter products and dermatological creams and ointments, have fallen nearly 40 percent over the last year.Perrigo’s biggest recent struggle has been to maintain sales of its branded over-the-counter medicines in Europe, which it sells through Omega, a subsidiary it acquired last year. In a call with analysts in February, Mr. Papa acknowledged problems with the division, saying, “It’s a personal disappointment, but clearly it’s something we know we can fix.”Perrigo’s stock fell Monday morning, while Valeant’s rose.“Frankly, this seems out of character that he would leave without ‘righting the ship,’ ” David Steinberg, an analyst for Jefferies, said in a note to investors on Friday.Advertisement