By ALEXANDRA ALTERAPRIL 27, 2016
When Leonard Riggio bought Barnes & Noble in 1971, it consisted of a single struggling store in Manhattan. Over time, with swagger and an unwavering belief in the value of physical bookstores, he turned it into the country’s largest bookselling chain.On Wednesday, the company announced that Mr. Riggio, the founder and executive chairman of Barnes & Noble Inc., would retire in September.He initially planned to retire at 40, but got swept up in the excitement of building the company, Mr. Riggio, now 75, said in an interview on Tuesday.“I had never planned to be a business person for life,” he said. “I had always wanted to do something different after I’d been in business for a while and made some money.”AdvertisementDuring his tenure, Mr. Riggio steered the company through heady days of explosive growth in the 1980s and 1990s, when Barnes & Noble expanded nationally and opened its first superstores.Brash and sporting a sleek mustache, Mr. Riggio brought outsize ambition to the bookselling trade as he built his retail empire. His biggest innovation — turning his bookstores into a destination where people could meet up and linger — helped transform bookselling from a genteel, fusty calling into big business.In recent years, he has also been the company’s most stable and visible leader during a prolonged period of turmoil. The company has closed 80 of its outlets around the country in the last six years, leaving a base of 640 retail stores. Barnes & Noble shares, which traded above $45 in 2006, closed at $12.42 on Tuesday.Its heavy investments in the Nook e-reader and its doomed effort to take on tech giants like Amazon and Apple in the digital book market proved financially disastrous. Last summer, the company brought in a new leader, Ron Boire, who became Barnes & Noble’s third chief executive in just six years.Despite those setbacks, Mr. Riggio says he feels confident that the company he built will recover its footing, as it continues to cut losses from the Nook and experiments with a new store prototype. “The company’s in a very good position,” he said. “We’ll continue to be the best bookseller we can be.”AdvertisementMr. Riggio, who will keep a seat on the board, said he has no plans to sell his stock. He remains the company’s largest individual shareholder, with 17.5 percent.Born in Little Italy, Mr. Riggio grew up in Bensonhurst, the son of a professional boxer turned cabdriver. His career as a bookseller began in the early 1960s, when he took a job at New York University’s college bookstore to help pay for his tuition. He dropped out of college to open a rival bookstore, SBX, for Student Book Exchange, and started managing several other campus bookstores. A few years later, he bought Barnes & Noble, a bookstore on Fifth Avenue, with a $1.2 million loan.In the mid-1970s, Mr. Riggio began acquiring smaller chains. In 1986, he bought the B. Dalton bookstore chain and took over its roughly 800 stores across the country.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Riggio took Barnes & Noble public and became the chief executive in 1993. He held the post until 2002.With its ubiquitous outlets — giant stores with comfy seats, a cafe and bathrooms with changing tables — Barnes & Noble became a place to loiter as much as buy books. Some in the literary world scoffed at Barnes & Noble’s deep discounts and its cookie-cutter, superstore formula, but Mr. Riggio saw the store’s nationwide expansion and low prices as a “democratization” of the marketplace.“Our bookstores were designed to be welcoming as opposed to intimidating,” Mr. Riggio said. “These weren’t elitist places. You could go in, get a cup of coffee, sit down and read a book for as long as you like, use the restroom. These were innovations that we had that no one thought was possible.”The strategy worked so well that for a time, Barnes & Noble was vilified as a greedy monopolist that was crushing independent booksellers. Thousands of independent stores closed during the mid- to late 1990s, as Barnes & Noble expanded. It opened multifloor superstores with more than 100,000 titles.Mr. Riggio still bristles slightly at the criticism. “They would say, ‘You’re homogenizing bookselling,’ which was ridiculous because we were carrying 5,000 to 10,000 more titles than would be in a typical bookstore,” Mr. Riggio said.But lately, as independent bookstores have enjoyed a resurgence, Barnes & Noble has itself become something of an underdog.AdvertisementThe company waged a fierce battle for dominance in the e-book marketplace, and was badly beaten by Amazon.“We’re great booksellers; we know how to do that,’’ Mr. Riggio said. “We weren’t constituted to be a technology company.”Mr. Riggio said that once he retires, he might write a book, though not a conventional business memoir. He wants to travel to South America and visit museums and galleries (he is a passionate art collector).“I don’t want to run any more businesses,” he said. “I have a great idea for a sock store, but I’m not going to do it. I’m done making money.”A version of this article appears in print on April 27, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Chapter Ends for Man Who Navigated  Triumphs and Trials of Barnes & Noble.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.