By CHAD BRAYAPRIL 25, 2016
LONDON — Ball Corporation said on Monday that it and Rexam had agreed to sell a variety of assets in Brazil, Europe and the United States to the packaging company Ardagh Group for $3.42 billion to satisfy regulatory concerns about Ball’s takeover of Rexam, a British maker of aluminum cans.Ball, based in Broomfield, Colo., agreed in February 2015 to acquire Rexam in a deal that would combine two of the world’s largest makers of cans for drinks, and it has been trying to win regulatory approval for the deal. The transaction would value Rexam at 4.4 billion pounds, or about $6.3 billion.Under the divestiture agreement, Ardagh, based in Luxembourg, would acquire eight Rexam plants in the United States; 10 Ball plants and two Rexam plants in Europe; and two Ball plants in Brazil. It would also acquire innovation and support functions in Brazil, Britain, Germany, Switzerland and the United States.The divested assets had revenue of about $3 billion in 2015, Ball said.Ardagh operates 89 glass and metal manufacturing production facilities in 21 countries. It had 19,000 employees and posted revenue of 5.2 billion euros, or about $5.8 billion, in 2015.AdvertisementThe asset sale is subject to a number of conditions, including regulators and shareholders signing off on the Rexam acquisition. Ball expects to close its deal for Rexam by the end of June.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.After the Rexam acquisition, Ball would operate 75 metal beverage container manufacturing plants and joint ventures in Asia, Europe and the Americas. The combined company would be based in Broomfield.AdvertisementRexam’s biggest clients include PepsiCo, the Coca-Cola Company, Anheuser-Busch InBev, Carlsberg Group and Heineken. Rexam employs about 8,600 people and posted sales of £3.93 billion in 2015.The companies said they anticipated to achieve more than $300 million in annual cost savings in the third year of their operations being combined. The companies said they expected to incur about $280 million in nonrecurring integration costs during that period.Ball makes cans for beverages, foods, aerosols and paint, as well as materials for the aerospace industry. It employs about 15,000 people and had sales of $8 billion in 2015.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.