AdvertisementSupported byBy Vinod SreeharshaRIO DE JANEIRO — A justice on Brazil’s high court has freed André Esteves, the former chief executive of the Brazilian investment bank BTG Pactual, his lawyer said in an interview on Tuesday.Mr. Esteves is accused of obstructing justice in a broad corruption investigation of the state-owned oil giant Petrobras. The investigation involves accusations that members of the leftist Workers Party of Brazil’s president, Dilma Rousseff, conspired with top Petrobras executives and outside contractors in an elaborate money laundering and bribery ring that involved bricks of cash, Rolex watches and expensive bottles of wine, among other luxuries.The scandal has shaken Brazil’s political and business establishment and sent many people to jail. The fallout, combined with the country’s prolonged recession, has eroded Ms. Rousseff’s support so much that she faces impeachment proceedings. Brazil’s Senate is expected to vote next month whether to begin an impeachment trial over allegations of fiscal crimes.Mr. Esteves, a billionaire who built BTG Pactual into a banking powerhouse, is under suspicion of conspiring with a leader of the Senate, Delcídio do Amaral, to interfere with testimony regarding the kickbacks at Petrobras. He was accused of financing the silence of a key witness and former Petrobras executive. Mr. do Amaral — who was arrested on Nov. 25, the same day as Mr. Esteves — was freed after he agreed to a plea deal in which he implicated both Ms. Rousseff, his former political ally, and a former Brazilian president, Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva.In December, Brazil’s highest court ordered that Mr. Esteves be released from jail but placed under house arrest and barred from taking any management roles.On Monday, Justice Teori Zavascki lifted the orders that had placed Mr. Esteves under house arrest and barred from work. The lifting of multiple injunctions restricting his movement and activity is preliminary and requires upholding by other high court justices, but it allows Mr. Esteves to return to work immediately, his lawyer, Antonio Carlos de Almeida Castro, said in the telephone interview Tuesday.BTG Pactual declined a request for comment. Its shares rose by over 6 percent by early afternoon on Tuesday on the São Paulo bourse after reports of Justice Zavascki’s decision.The broader investigation brought on by Brazil’s attorney general that accuses Mr. Esteves of obstruction of justice is still underway, but Mr. Almeida Castro said that he continued to work on clearing his client’s name of all charges and that Monday’s decision gave him hope that could happen.“Yesterday’s decision is recognition that André did not have anything to do with this case, what we have always argued,” Mr. Almeida Castro said. In making that argument, he cited testimony by Mr. do Amaral, who later said that he had lied about Mr. Esteves’s role, though his credibility has come under question.As to what comes next for Mr. Esteves, who faces other accusations, his lawyer declined to comment. He said that as a result of Monday’s ruling, he could return to BTG Pactual if he wanted to, but that was a decision for him and the bank’s current management to make.In December, after his arrest, and in a move to protect the bank, Mr. Esteves ceded control in a share swap with a group of seven partners. Around that time, Marcelo Kalim and Roberto Sallouti were made co-chief executives.A spokeswoman at the Supreme Federal Tribunal, Brazil’s highest court, declined to comment on Tuesday, saying that the ruling was under seal.Advertisement