AdvertisementSupported byBy Jack EwingFRANKFURT — A PowerPoint presentation was prepared by a top technology executive at Volkswagen in 2006, laying out in detail how the automaker could cheat on emissions tests in the United States.The presentation has been discovered as part of the continuing investigations into Volkswagen, according to two people who have seen the document and who spoke on the condition of anonymity because of the legal action against the company. It provides the most direct link yet to the genesis of the deception at Volkswagen, which admitted late last year that 11 million vehicles worldwide were equipped with software to cheat on tests that measured pollution in emissions.It is not known how widely the presentation was distributed at Volkswagen. But its existence, and the proposal it made to install the software, highlight a series of flawed decisions at the embattled carmaker surrounding the emissions problem.Those decisions exposed the company to billions of dollars in fines as well as criminal investigations. Last Friday, Volkswagen reported a record $6.2 billion loss, after setting aside $18 billion to cover the costs of fines, legal claims and recalls. As a first step in a broader settlement under negotiation, Volkswagen agreed to fix or buy back 500,000 diesel vehicles in the United States, beginning with model year 2009.At various junctures over the last decade, executives at Volkswagen ignored or underplayed warning signs.As the PowerPoint underscored, people inside Volkswagen were aware that its diesel engines were polluting significantly more than allowed. Yet company executives repeatedly rejected proposals to improve the emissions equipment, according to two Volkswagen employees present at meetings where the proposals were discussed.Volkswagen admitted that 11 million of its vehicles were equipped with software that was used to cheat on emissions tests. This is how the technology works and what it now means for vehicle owners.Even when regulators started asking questions in 2014, Volkswagen continued to install the cheating software for more than a year. And the company further compounded its problems by underestimating the potential penalties and the risks to its reputation, according to court documents obtained by The New York Times.Volkswagen declined to comment, citing the continuing investigation. The company has said that top management was not aware of the cheating software, known as a defeat device. Ansgar Rempp, a partner at Jones Day, the law firm heading Volkswagen’s internal inquiry, also declined to comment.What is now clear is that the current crisis at Volkswagen traces back to the PowerPoint presentation a decade ago.Volkswagen engineers at the company’s research and development complex in Wolfsburg realized that the emissions equipment in their newest diesel engine would wear out too quickly if it were calibrated to meet American pollution standards. The emissions rules in the United States are more stringent than those in Europe.A technology expert at Volkswagen offered a solution in the PowerPoint presentation. Just a few pages long, the 2006 presentation included a graph that explained the process for testing the amount of pollution spewing from a car. In a laboratory, regulators would try to replicate a variety of conditions on the road.The pattern of those tests, the presentation said, was entirely predictable. And a piece of code embedded in the software that controlled the engine could recognize that pattern, activating equipment to reduce emissions just for testing purposes.Elements of the presentation were reported earlier by Süddeutsche Zeitung newspaper and several German broadcasters. Under German privacy law, the executive cannot be named.The software evolved over the years. It was later upgraded to detect other telltale signs of a regulatory test, like a steering wheel that was not moving, according to Felix Domke, a computer expert and self-described hacker who has analyzed the software.During regulators’ tests, the engine software would turn up the pollution controls. When it was on the road, equipment designed to neutralize harmful nitrogen oxides would turned down, resulting in emissions that were up to 40 times the legal limit.Volkswagen had a growing awareness of that emissions discrepancy in recent years.In a court filing, the company lawyers, as part of a defense in a shareholder lawsuit, suggest that the discrepancy was common knowledge within the industry. “The vehicles of all manufacturers exceed various emissions limits in normal street use,” Volkswagen lawyers said in a court filing, which was obtained by The Times. They further argued that the differences between road emissions and lab emissions were tolerated by regulators.The management board led by Martin Winterkorn, the chief executive who resigned in September after the admission of cheating, repeatedly rebuffed lower-ranking employees who submitted technical proposals for upgrading the emissions controls, according to the two people who attended meetings where the proposals were discussed. The management board rejected the proposals because of cost, the people said.Lawyers for Mr. Winterkorn did not respond to requests for comment.More effective emissions equipment would have made Volkswagen vehicles hundreds of dollars more expensive, without providing a benefit that customers could perceive. In the United States, even a modestly higher sticker price would have made it more difficult for Volkswagen to compete with rivals like Toyota and Honda.But cleaner diesel would also have spared Volkswagen a scandal that has already caused sales in the United States to plunge 13 percent from January through March. And repairing diesels in the United States will cost additional hundreds of millions, if not billions, of dollars.Court documents filed in Germany by lawyers for Volkswagen show how the company vastly underestimated the potential penalties.After American officials began asking questions about Volkswagen emissions, company executives, including Mr. Winterkorn, thought they could deal with the problem quietly at a relatively low cost, according to the court documents that were obtained by The Times.An American law firm hired by Volkswagen to examine regulatory issues, Kirkland & Ellis, told the carmaker in an August 2015 memo that the previous record penalty was $100 million. The fine was imposed on Hyundai-Kia in 2014 for violating the limits on greenhouse gas emissions involving 1.1 million vehicles, or nearly twice as many cars as in Volkswagen’s case.At that level, the penalties could have easily been absorbed by Volkswagen, which had sales of 213 billion euros last year, or around $240 billion. But the potential fine for Volkswagen is likely to dwarf the previous record, based on what the company has already set aside.Court documents filed by Volkswagen indicate that the technicians thought the chances of being caught cheating were slim when the deception began in 2006. While technology to test cars under road conditions was available, it was not widely used by regulators.“The seemingly small danger of discovery may have been a factor in tempting the VW engineers to make the impermissible software alteration,” Volkswagen lawyers said in the court documents.In recent years, the chances of discovery increased. It became easier to buy emissions testing equipment from suppliers, and numerous environmental groups or independent laboratories did so to show that many carmakers were understating diesel emissions.Signs of irregularities in Volkswagen cars were discovered in 2014 by a nonprofit group, the International Council on Clean Transportation, based on testing performed at West Virginia University. Still, Volkswagen continued to install defeat devices in its cars, including some Audi and Porsche models, until last year.Volkswagen also underplayed the potential threat of the diesel problems, as well as the wrath of American regulators. Mr. Winterkorn and other top managers were used to deferential treatment by government officials in Germany, where it is one of the largest employers.After the American regulators started looking into the emissions issue in 2014, the company didn’t give the problem much weight.Mr. Winterkorn received a two-page memo in November 2014 that summarized the technical problems with Volkswagen vehicles in various locations. Plans to recall about 500,000 diesel vehicles in the United States because of the emissions issue were granted a single terse paragraph at the bottom of the second page, according to the memo, which was obtained by The Times.The emissions problem was not corrected with the recall. And despite the regulators’ growing impatience, Volkswagen did not appear alarmed by the possible consequences.During a meeting in July 2015 of high-ranking Volkswagen managers to discuss regulatory issues around the world, diesel engines in the United States was one item out of six on the agenda. It was allocated 10 minutes, in a meeting that was set to last 1 hour and 45 minutes, according to a copy of the agenda obtained by The Times.On Sept. 3, 2015, Volkswagen finally admitted to American regulators that diesel vehicles had a defeat device. Still, executives were shocked at the response.Stuart Johnson, a Volkswagen executive responsible for relations with American regulators, said in a memo in January that the Environmental Protection Agency gave him half an hour’s notice before announcing on Sept. 18 that the carmaker had admitted installing defeat devices in diesels.Although more than a year had passed since the E.P.A. first raised suspicions about Volkswagen diesels, Mr. Johnson said in a Jan. 19 internal memo, which was obtained by The Times, that he believed that Volkswagen still had four months “where we could discuss the issue privately.”“I was very disappointed by this turn of events,” Mr. Johnson wrote. He did not reply to a request for comment. A spokeswoman for Volkswagen in the United States declined to comment.Advertisement