AdvertisementSupported byBy John KoblinKelly Ripa returned to her morning show on Tuesday and declared, with a smile, that “our long national nightmare is over.”Ms. Ripa’s return to “Live With Kelly and Michael” ended a weeklong saga after she was said to have felt blindsided by ABC’s announcement that her co-host, Michael Strahan, would leave the show for “Good Morning America.”The fallout from the last week will also hasten Mr. Strahan’s departure: An ABC spokeswoman confirmed later on Tuesday that he would leave “Live” in two and a half weeks, about four months ahead of schedule. His final day on the show will be May 13.Mr. Strahan will make appearances on “Good Morning America” throughout the summer and will formally join as co-anchor in September, the spokeswoman said.After it was announced that Mr. Strahan would be leaving, Ms. Ripa did not appear on three episodes of the show last week. That touched off speculation in the news media about when she would return and whether her relationship with Mr. Strahan was actually as carefree as it appeared to be every weekday morning on television.Ms. Ripa walked onto the “Live With Kelly and Michael” stage on Tuesday, holding hands with Mr. Strahan, before walking off to a side of the stage by herself, with the camera firmly fixed on her. Mr. Strahan was not shown.After an extended ovation, Ms. Ripa, standing in a red sleeveless jumpsuit, addressed the crowd.“I’m going to be perfectly honest,” she said. “I’m fairly certain that there are trained professional snipers with tranquilizer darts in case I drift too far off-message.”The crowd laughed, and Ms. Ripa talked about what she described as this “bizarre time.”“I needed a couple days to gather my thoughts,” she said. “After 26 years with this company, I earned the right. Let’s be honest, I know half of you called in sick to be here, so we get each other.”Last Tuesday, ABC announced what seemed like a perfectly routine personnel move: In September, Mr. Strahan would leave “Live” for its corporate cousin “Good Morning America.”Behind the scenes, Ms. Ripa was incensed. She was angry that she was given next to no warning about the announcement and she was said to be frustrated that her show was being slighted.Ms. Ripa has been host of the show since 2001 (and was previously an actress on “All My Children,” a show produced by ABC). This year, Ms. Ripa celebrated her 15th anniversary as host on the show.After Ms. Ripa skipped episodes of “Live” last Wednesday and Thursday — Friday’s show was taped on Thursday, and she had a scheduled day off Monday — she informed the staff late Friday night that she would return for Tuesday’s show.Ms. Ripa said that “apologies have been made” and that the brouhaha started “a much greater conversation about communication and consideration, and most importantly, respect in the workplace.”She then put something firmly, and pointedly, on the record: Executives at Disney, the owner of ABC, had told her that “Live” was important to the company.“The best thing to come out of this, you guys, is that our parent company has assured me that ‘Live’ is a priority,” she said, with the muffled sound of Mr. Strahan applauding in the background. “Guys, calm down; they didn’t say anything about Christmas bonuses.”Ms. Ripa congratulated Mr. Strahan, who was still off-camera, and said twice that she was “thrilled” for him.After about five minutes, Ms. Ripa said: “This is entertainment. It’s supposed to be entertaining. So let’s get back to what we do best and start the show. Oh, wait, incidentally, I just want to say one more thing. My dad was a bus driver for 30 years, and he thinks we’re all crazy. I think he’s right. I think he’s right.”Ms. Ripa returned to the desk with Mr. Strahan and they moved on with the show as they have for the last four years. They spoke about Ms. Ripa’s 20th wedding anniversary — which she celebrated while she was away from the show — Snapchat, Tom Brady’s suspension, Prince and bedbugs.A series of co-hosts will begin appearing on “Live” with Ms. Ripa after Mr. Strahan departs. After Regis Philbin retired from “Live” in 2011, more than a dozen guest co-hosts cycled through the show before Mr. Strahan was chosen as his successor about 10 months later.Advertisement