AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy John FoleyThe $60 billion implied valuation of the Chinese financial technology group Ant Financial sounds like a case of disruption on steroids.That price tag, implied by a funding round the company disclosed Tuesday, easily tops the $48 billion market capitalization of the United States payments giant PayPal. But look under a metaphorical microscope, and it’s clear that these are different species. The pumped-up Ant Financial rests on uniquely Chinese characteristics.Ant Financial is best known as the financial affiliate of the e-commerce giant Alibaba and the owner of China’s dominant online payment engine, Alipay. A planned initial public offering of stock would therefore be a good way for investors to get their tentacles into a rapidly growing, and slowly liberalizing, market for consumer finance in China. Its $4.5 billion funding round suggests Ant Financial is already following a similar route as its former parent Alibaba, whose valuation rose as it edged toward an I.P.O. in 2014.Though the injection of funds into Ant Financial doesn’t necessarily mean the whole is really worth $60 billion, it’s possible to rationalize that kind of valuation. PayPal has fewer than half the users of Alipay, and it processed $282 billion of transactions in 2015. By 2018, Credit Suisse reckons, Ant Financial will be handling $1.7 trillion.Then again, there are no public numbers to help understand exactly how Alipay makes money, or whether the rest of Ant Financial is a solid finance business or a collection of potentially bad Chinese loans.One thing is clear, though. The group’s fortunes look to be tied more closely to the vagaries of Chinese state capitalism than to private-sector disruption. The backers in Ant Financial’s latest funding round are Chinese state-backed vehicles, not Silicon Valley capitalists. Both Ant Financial and Alibaba exist because Beijing lets them.Ultimately, Ant Financial’s returns and value will depend on many things that outsiders cannot yet see, like how its relationships with Alibaba and the government pan out. This ant is destined for bigger things, but it would be unwise to confuse it with the standard variety tech-industry unicorn.John Foley is Reuters Breakingviews editor for Europe, the Middle East and Africa. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.Advertisement