By CHAD BRAYAPRIL 26, 2016
LONDON — Standard Chartered, an Asia-focused bank based in London, said on Tuesday that its pretax profit fell 59 percent as the lender continued to face “challenging” trading conditions in the first quarter.The bank said that its first-quarter results reflected a trading environment that included depressed commodity prices, volatility in the Chinese markets and weak investor sentiment about emerging markets.Despite the decline in profit, investors reacted positively to the update on the bank’s progress. Shares of Standard Chartered rose more than 7 percent in midmorning trading in London on Tuesday.Slowing growth in Asia, bad loans and lower commodity prices have hurt the bank’s results in the past two years, driving it to a large loss of $2.36 billion in 2015.AdvertisementStandard Chartered is revamping under William T. Winters, who joined the bank as chief executive last year and is looking to turn around the lender’s prospects. As part of its overhaul, the bank said in November that it would raise up to $5.1 billion in new capital, shed 15,000 jobs and cut costs.AdvertisementThe bank took about $123 million in restructuring charges in the quarter. After $1.8 billion in charges last year, Standard Chartered expects its total restructuring charges to come to about $3 billion by the end of this year.“We feel this is an important quarter for demonstrating the strategic objectives that we set out, the operational objectives we set out, are on track,” Mr. Winters, the former head of JPMorgan Chase’s investment bank, said on a conference call with reporters.“It’s equally clear to all of us that we still remain in very difficult and volatile times,” he added. “We feel we are well prepared for that from a capital perspective, a liquidity perspective.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In a news release, Standard Chartered reported a pretax profit of $589 million for the three months ended March 31, from a profit of $1.44 billion in the first quarter of 2015.The bank’s operating income, which is similar to revenue in the United States, declined 24 percent to $3.3 billion in the first quarter, from $4.4 billion in the same period a year earlier. Operating expenses declined 10 percent to $2.2 billion in the quarter, from $2.5 billion in the first quarter of 2015.Impairments for loans and other credit risks declined about 1 percent to $471 million in the first quarter, from $476 million in the same period a year earlier, the bank said.Standard Chartered has faced increased regulatory scrutiny in the United States in recent years over its monitoring of suspicious transactions, and it has paid hundreds of millions of dollars in fines.Its regulatory costs rose 9 percent to $243 million in the quarter, from $222 million in the first quarter of 2015. The bank said it would continue to invest in improvements in its compliance and control infrastructure in 2016.Mr. Winters said the search for a successor to John W. Peace, the Standard Chartered chairman, was continuing. Mr. Peace is expected to leave the bank this year.Advertisement“We’re making good progress,” Mr. Winters said. “As soon as we have something to report, we most certainly will.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.