By CHAD BRAYAPRIL 26, 2016
LONDON — The investment company Atlas Mara Limited, backed by the former Barclays chief executive Robert E. Diamond Jr., confirmed on Tuesday that it was in discussions with a group of investors exploring a bid for Barclays’ business in Africa.In March, Barclays said that it planned to sell down its 62.3 percent interest in Barclays Africa Group over the next two to three years, in a strategy shift by James E. Staley, its new chief executive.On Tuesday, Atlas Mara said that the consortium of investors was exploring an acquisition of Barclays’ stake in the African business to combine it with Atlas Mara, which was formed in 2013 to invest in financial services companies in Africa.The consortium includes Atlas Merchant Capital, a financial services investment company Mr. Diamond founded with David Schamis. Another participant is Ashish J. Thakkar, an entrepreneur whose Mara Group conglomerate has technology, manufacturing and real estate interests in 19 African countries, Atlas Mara said. Mr. Thakkar is one of Atlas Mara’s co-founders.Advertisement“Given the significant complexity and early stage of the discussions with the consortium, there can be no assurance that the transactions discussed above, including the potential combination, will be completed,” Atlas Mara said in a news release on Tuesday.AdvertisementSky News reported on Sunday that the private equity giant Carlyle Group was teaming up with Mr. Diamond on a potential bid. The parties have declined to comment.The Barclays African business is listed on the Johannesburg Stock Exchange and holds majority stakes in banks in 10 countries, with offices in two others. The business’s biggest profit driver is South Africa.The African business was formerly considered one of four pillars of Barclays’ strategy, alongside its credit card and its consumer and investment banking operations, under Antony Jenkins, who was ousted as chief executive in July.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But it has proved a regulatory drag on the British bank and is no longer considered a core business under Barclays’ new leadership.Barclays, which has operated in the region for more than a century, wants to reduce its stake in the African business to below a controlling level or to sell the stake entirely. The goal is to free Barclays from regulatory and capital requirements that have dragged on its balance sheet.Mr. Staley, who joined Barclays in December, is seeking to turn around the bank by accelerating the sale of businesses it does not consider core operations and by focusing its strategy around two divisions: the British consumer bank, and the corporate and investment bank.For Atlas Mara — and Mr. Diamond — it would be a major coup to acquire Barclays Africa Group and would greatly expand its reach on the continent.Mr. Diamond helped spearhead a period of growth at Barclays as head of its investment bank and, later, its chief executive.But he was forced out as Barclays’ chief executive in 2012 as the lender faced pressure from regulators over its admission that traders had conspired to manipulate a global benchmark interest rate known as the London interbank offered rate, or Libor.AdvertisementSince its founding in 2013, Atlas Mara has made four acquisitions and has operations in seven countries in sub-Saharan Africa.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.