By MARGALIT FOXAPRIL 27, 2016
It was born in Philadelphia but is as much a part of New York’s aural landscape as taxi horns, “that heavenly coffee” and “watch the closing doors.”An annual herald of summer for more than half a century, it is exquisitely Pavlovian, triggering salivation or shrieking — sometimes both at once. It is the textbook embodiment of an earworm: once heard, never forgotten.It is the Mister Softee jingle, which for generations has sprung from ice cream trucks throughout the metropolitan area and beyond after first springing from the mind of Les Waas, a Philadelphia adman who died on April 19 at 94.Broadcast from a loudspeaker atop each truck, with strains that recall an old-fashioned music box, the jingle has words and music by Mr. Waas.AdvertisementThe trucks play an instrumental version. The words run thus:The CREAM-i-est DREAM-i-est SOFT ice CREAMyou GET from MIS-ter SOF-tee.FOR a re-FRESH-ing de-LIGHT su-PREMELOOK for MIS-ter SOF-tee. …Mister Softee was established in Philadelphia in 1956. Now based in Runnemede, N.J., it is one of the country’s largest soft ice cream franchises, with more than 650 trucks plying 15 states; the company also operates in China.AdvertisementMr. Waas wrote the jingle in 1960 for Mister Softee’s radio advertisements. At the time, he could scarcely have realized that the jaunty genie he loosed on the region would refuse to go back in the bottle.Over the years, his tune has become a totem of American popular culture — revered, reviled, featured on television and in film, and noted as the subject of a high-profile civic battle in early-21st-century New York.Lester Morton Waas was born in Philadelphia on May 18, 1921. His father, Lester, ran a theatrical costume shop; his mother, the former Alice Maybaum, was a schoolteacher.The younger Mr. Waas was a sheet metal worker at the Philadelphia Navy Yard before enlisting in the Army Air Forces after the United States entered World War II. He served as a pilot in the Pacific Theater.In the 1950s, with no experience beyond great linguistic facility and constitutional waggishness, Mr. Waas established his own advertising agency, Waas Inc., in Philadelphia.In nearly a thousand jingles, he celebrated the virtues of clients including Holiday Inn, the Philadelphia Phillies and at least one local food manufacturer. (“Give me a little Kissling’s Sauerkraut,/It’s fresh and clean, without a doubt./In transparent Pliofilm bags it’s sold,/Kissling’s Sauerkraut, hot or cold.”)But none captured the public — and held it captive — like the Mister Softee song, which the Oxford Handbook of Mobile Music Studies, Volume 2 (2014), calls “today’s best-known ice cream truck tune,” and of which Mr. Waas remained proud to the end of his life.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The music has been featured on an episode of “Curb Your Enthusiasm,” in which the very sound of it triggers a traumatic flashback for Larry David, and in the 2004 Bernie Mac film “Mr. 3000.” It was recorded by the thrash-metal band Nuclear Assault and inspired the composer Jed Distler’s String Quartet No. 1: “The Mister Softee Variations.”AdvertisementPerhaps most famously, Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg, in an attempt to rid the city of noise, tried to ban the song outright in 2004 — a sacrilege, akin to banning Frank Sinatra’s recording of “New York, New York,” that elicited howls of protest from the jingle’s adherents.In 2005, the city struck a compromise, applying to all ice cream vendors, in which trucks may play music only while in motion.Nor were the challenges to the tune limited to New York. In 2002, a community court judge in Hartford ruled that Mister Softee trucks could play their song only six times in a row on any given block. A state court later declared the ruling invalid.Mr. Waas’s wife, the former Sylvia Wasserman, whom he married in 1951, died in 2004. A resident of Huntingdon Valley, Pa., he is survived by a sister, Helen Bette Klein; a son, Murray; a daughter, Sherri Waas Shunfenthal, who confirmed his death, in Warminster, Pa.; and three grandchildren.A semiprofessional prankster, Mr. Waas was a founder of the Procrastinators’ Club of America. Among its activities was a peace march at Philadelphia City Hall in 1966.On all historical evidence, the march was a success: It had sought to end the War of 1812.A version of this article appears in print on April 28, 2016, on Page A17 of the New York edition with the headline: Les Waas, 94, Adman Who Gave Mister Softee a Soundtrack.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.