AdvertisementSupported byBy Liz MoyerRemember Steven L. Rattner’s return to investment banking? Never mind.The former financier, who in 2010 was barred from the business for two years and sought re-entry in 2013, withdrew his long-stalled request for reinstatement, according to an April 8 letter informing regulators of the decision.The withdrawal occurred within weeks of the Securities and Exchange Commission’s order that cleared his path to affiliate with the advisory firm Guggenheim Securities.Representatives of Mr. Rattner said Wednesday that the S.E.C.’s March 14 order approving his application to affiliate with Guggenheim had been stayed while the agency’s commissioners reviewed the work of the trading and markets division staff, which had approved the March order.Because Guggenheim and Mr. Rattner withdrew the application, that review never took place, the representatives said. The Wall Street Journal reported on Tuesday that the S.E.C. was planning to reverse its earlier decision. A spokeswoman for the S.E.C. said the agency declined to comment.Davidson Goldin, a spokesman for Mr. Rattner, disputed The Wall Street Journal’s report and issued a statement Wednesday. “There was no reversal by the S.E.C.,” it said. “The commissioners decided to review the staff decision to approve Steve’s application, which automatically put a temporary stay on the staff approval order pending review.”Steve Severinghaus, a spokesman for The Wall Street Journal, said in a statement, “We stand by our story, and nothing in the statement released by Mr. Rattner’s reps contradicts our reporting.”Since 2010, Mr. Rattner’s day job has been managing the family fortune and philanthropic assets of Michael R. Bloomberg, the former mayor of New York, at Willett Advisors, where he intends to continue working, Mr. Goldin said in the statement Wednesday. “Steve no longer has any interest in what he first applied for more than three years ago.”The S.E.C.’s order clearing his return surprised many, possibly because it had been so long since the scandal that ensnared the prominent media banker. He was barred from certain Wall Street jobs for two years after settling civil claims stemming from an investigation in 2010 into kickbacks involving the New York State Common Retirement Fund while he was an executive at Quadrangle Group, a private equity firm he founded. He did not admit or deny wrongdoing.In March, when the S.E.C. issued its approval for Mr. Rattner’s return to the securities business, Mr. Goldin said, “Should he choose in the future, this enables Steve to engage in investment banking activities.” But he added that Mr. Rattner “anticipates remaining fully committed to his position as chairman of Willett Advisors.”In being able to affiliate with Guggenheim Securities, the investment banking arm of Guggenheim Partners, Mr. Rattner had a way back into the business if he decided to go there. The New York firm is led by Mark R. Walter, who is also the managing partner of Guggenheim Baseball Management, one of the owners of the Los Angeles Dodgers, and Alan Schwartz, the former head of Bear Stearns.A spokesman for Guggenheim Securities declined to comment on Wednesday.The reinstatement application was actually made by Guggenheim Securities, which filed it with the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority in April 2013. The decision to withdraw it was a joint one, according to an April 8 letter to the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority and the staff of the S.E.C.’s division of trading and markets.“Mr. Rattner is now fully engaged with his responsibilities as Chairman of Willett Advisors LLC and intends to remain so for the foreseeable future,” the letter said. “Accordingly, Guggenheim and Mr. Rattner together decided that withdrawal of the application was therefore appropriate.”Mr. Rattner led the Obama administration’s auto industry overhaul. Until his regulatory troubles, he was viewed as a star banker to powerful media and communications companies at Morgan Stanley, Lazard Frères & Company and Lehman Brothers. He began his career as a reporter for The New York Times, and now contributes to its opinion pages.He went on to found Quadrangle, a private equity firm, which is now led by Michael Huber.OpinionSteven RattnerOpinionSteven RattnerAdvertisement