AdvertisementSupported byBy Emily Steel and Brooks BarnesA year ago, Comcast was licking its wounds.The media giant had suffered an embarrassing blow when its $45 billion takeover of its rival Time Warner Cable collapsed under regulatory scrutiny.Since then, the company has been relatively quiet. As the rest of the media business was engulfed in turmoil over the fate of television in a digital world, Comcast continued to deliver strong, consistent results across its cable, television and film businesses. Some analysts said they expected Comcast to shift gears and pursue a new megadeal to expand its global footprint or enter the wireless business. But no significant deal materialized.Until now.News emerged late Tuesday that Comcast was in talks to buy DreamWorks Animation, the boutique studio run by Jeffrey Katzenberg. The potential deal, which still could fall apart, values DreamWorks Animation at about $3 billion, according to people with knowledge of the talks who spoke on the condition of anonymity because they were not authorized to discuss them.If completed, the deal would underscore the constant balancing act required of Comcast. On one side is its cable and broadband business, which controls the pipes that deliver content to people’s homes, and which faces increased regulatory scrutiny. On the other is the NBCUniversal entertainment business, which spans broadcast and cable television, film and theme parks.The acquisition of DreamWorks Animation would fit squarely into the entertainment strategy, allowing Comcast to build on an already successful part of the company.“It has been very clear that they can’t do many deals within cable, so their focus is on organic growth and operational excellence,” said Amy Yong, an analyst with the Macquarie Group.She noted that the company had made a series of deals on the entertainment side, acquiring a majority ownership stake of the Universal Studios Japan  theme park and investments in the digital outlets Vox and BuzzFeed.“DreamWorks would be big in the context of the studio business, Ms. Yong said.During a conference call Wednesday morning, Comcast executives declined to comment on the speculated deal activity. In response to a question about the relative values of the distribution and content businesses, Brian L. Roberts, the chairman and chief executive of Comcast, said that the company was stronger because of its position in both.“These things go up and down, and the relationship between the two in terms of carriage disputes and other things,” he said. “At any one time, one part of the ecosystem could be doing better than the other part of the ecosystem. But in the end, we’re bringing great experiences to consumers in either content, in innovative distribution technologies, and that’s how we’re running our company.”He spoke as Comcast reported first-quarter results, once again beating expectations, with net income up 3.6 percent to $2.1 billion. Total revenues increased 5.3 percent to $18.8 billion, fueled by growth in the cable and entertainment businesses.Comcast’s cable business reported revenue growth of 6.7 percent for the quarter, adding 53,000 video customers and 438,000 high-speed-Internet customers.Revenues increased 3.9 percent in the NBCUniversal group, driven by an uptick in revenues in its cable television and theme park businesses.In some ways, DreamWorks Animation is a why-not acquisition for Comcast. The price would be small. To put it in perspective, a deal for DreamWorks Animation would be about one-fifteenth the size of Comcast’s failed bid for Time Warner Cable and about a tenth the size of its $30 billion acquisition of the entertainment group NBCUniversal, which closed five years ago.Also, very few content companies, particularly in family entertainment, are available to purchase.DreamWorks Animation would give Comcast’s entertainment business an immediate lift, with its established animation studio and a growing television business. It also has a grasp on the elusive millennial market with its part ownership of AwesomenessTV, the producer and distributor of programming aimed primarily at teenage girls.At the same time, it would give Comcast a gateway to international growth. DreamWorks Animation has aggressively courted Chinese regulators and audiences, building an animation studio in Shanghai called Oriental DreamWorks.DreamWorks Animation is perhaps most valuable to Comcast as a way to compete with the Walt Disney Company in the theme park business. Since buying NBCUniversal, Comcast has poured billions into its Universal resorts.But Universal does not own many family movie franchises, the kind that can be turned into popular theme park rides and fill hotel rooms, and has instead had to pay steep fees to rent characters, including its most popular draw, Harry Potter, which belongs to Warner Bros.DreamWorks Animation would provide Comcast with the rights to “Shrek,” “Kung Fu Panda” and “Madagascar.” Comcast is also building a $3.3 billion theme park in Beijing. Unfettered access to “Kung Fu Panda” could assist that effort, analysts said.During the conference call on Wednesday, Stephen B. Burke, NBCUniversal’s chief executive and senior vice president of Comcast, said that focusing on building film franchises had been an explicit strategy for the company. He noted that Comcast had only one franchise five years ago in “The Fast and the Furious” action films, and it now has eight and is trying to build more. He said the company reviewed its five-year plan for the film group on Tuesday and spent half the time talking about “how to take care of franchises.”A Comcast takeover of DreamWorks Animation is not without challenges. A deal would put Comcast in business with some of its fiercest rivals: DreamWorks Animation is a big supplier of television cartoons to Netflix, which offers a low-cost alternative to paying for traditional television and was a vocal opponent of Comcast’s Time Warner Cable deal. And AwesomenessTV is part owned by Verizon, which sells competing television and Internet services.The deal would require that Comcast executives return to Washington to, once again, lobby for approval.“It probably doesn’t present as big of a regulatory issue,” Ms. Yong said, “but it could present a conflict of interest because of DreamWorks’ agreement with Netflix and the ownership of AwesomenessTV.”Advertisement