By EILENE ZIMMERMANAPRIL 27, 2016
Entrepreneurs face many obstacles in starting a new business, but the founders of Slyde Handboards face a particularly daunting one: how to create a market for a product most people have never heard of, and for a sport they know nothing about.Yet over the course of five years, Slyde Handboards has grown into a robust company through the use of creative marketing tactics that tap into a world where GoPro videos celebrate unusual sports and start-ups can harness social media — and their fans — to spread the word.The idea for Slyde was born on a beach in Durban, South Africa, where Steve Watts spent his childhood surfing and swimming. He and his friends especially liked to bodysurf the coastline known for its challenging surf, with the help of flat, wave-riding objects like flip-flops, Frisbees and even fast-food trays.When their surfboards became too worn and waterlogged to use, they broke them apart, took off the fiberglass, and shaped the foam inside into five or six different hand-held boards. These handboards allowed users to move faster and have more control in the water.AdvertisementBy the time he was 16, Mr. Watts wanted to create his own line of bodysurfing handboards.“There was no brand associated with them back then,” he said. “You had to make your own if you wanted one.”AdvertisementAfter studying product design in London and San Francisco, Mr. Watts eventually made his way to Los Angeles. In 2010, he won the green card lottery.The same week he signed the paperwork for United States residency, he also introduced Slyde, and was soon helped by a surfing student of his, Russell Ellers. Mr. Ellers had become a close friend and lent Mr. Watts both $130,000 and his Venice Beach garage to start the company. That investment converted to equity and Mr. Ellers is now a co-founder and 30 percent owner.Slyde released its first handboard, the Wedge, in 2011, a far more sophisticated version of the boards Mr. Watts, now 39, made as a teenager from the foam inside old surfboards.The company’s third co-founder, Angela Ferendo, who is now Mr. Watts’s wife, joined the company in 2013. Ms. Watts had worked for two other start-ups, one a food delivery service and the other a tech company, and understands the inherent challenges in introducing a new product to a market.But at Slyde, there was the added burden of inventing a market for a product and popularizing a sport.Few people know about handboarding because it has been a niche within surfing since the early 1990s, said Sean Smith, executive director of the Surf Industry Manufacturers Association, a nonprofit trade association. And bodysurfing as a sport tends to be “very cliquish and hard-core,” Mr. Smith said. “It’s considered one of the purest forms of surfing.”New products in the surfing market generally must be perceived as “cool” to succeed. Although they are still a very small part of that market, in the last two years Mr. Smith has noticed increasing interest in bodysurfing handboards. “We’re seeing them sold in mainstream surf shops now,” he said.AdvertisementThe Wattses also wanted to distance Slyde’s products from the aura of exclusivity that often surrounds surfing in order to draw in participants of varying ages and experience levels.They did not set out to appeal to just the “die-hard surfer with the long beard and the VW bus.” Ms. Watts said Slyde’s handboards gave customers “a surfing experience no matter what skill level or age and the brand behind it makes you feel cool.”Like other start-up founders, the Wattses had very little money for marketing, so have turned to low-cost ways of marketing their products and building brand loyalty. They rely heavily on Google AdWords, as well as Facebook and Instagram and personally answer every email and phone call. In addition, each order includes a handwritten thank-you note.Slyde’s website features verified reviews from customers and Mr. Watts does “off-the-cuff guerilla-style marketing,” he said. Among those include posting a photo of a one-of-a-kind handboard on Instagram with the note: “If you want this email us and the first person gets it.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Those boards sell within 10 minutes, he said. But it’s the company’s “ambassador” program that has been its most effective strategy, Ms. Watts said. This special category of customer combines the idea of a brand ambassador with a loyalty rewards program. Ambassadors are customers so passionate about the company’s handboards — and so active on social media — that they gain access to a special Facebook group and a 30 percent discount on boards, which range in price from $119 to $199.The ambassadors, of which there are now about 50, are considered part of the Slyde team, Ms. Watts said. “We invite them around for brainstorm sessions and they are our first focus group. They post their videos and photos on social media and send them to us too.” Slyde also has an employee dedicated to managing social media and staying connected to customers.Another big break for the company came after its appearance on the television show “Shark Tank” in mid-April. There, too, the firm faced skeptical questions about its ability to break into the mainstream surf market.During the episode, the investor Robert Herjavec stressed the difficulties faced by a similar company in which he is invested, called Hamboards. That firm, which makes longboard skateboards and street stand-up paddleboards for “landsurfing,” spent a lot of time trying to get its products into independent surf shops, which is one way to sell to a broader audience while still maintaining a product’s edge.Steve and Angela Watts appeared on the TV show “Shark Tank” in mid-April, resulting in an investment of $200,000 from Mark Cuban and Ashton Kutcher.“We’re going to be old and gray by the time we make any real money doing this,” said Mr. Herjavec, and he cautioned the couple not to go too wide too soon. “You’ve got to build with the right stores, you’ve got to be authentic,” he said.AdvertisementBut as a result of their pitch, the celebrity investor Mark Cuban and the actor Ashton Kutcher invested a combined $200,000, with each taking an 11 percent ownership in return.Mr. Cuban said Slyde could gain exposure through Tower Paddle Boards, the stand-up paddle board company in which he is an investor. “You’d walk right into a huge customer base,” he told the couple on the episode. Mr. Kutcher, who is also a co-founder of the Los Angeles venture capital firms A-Grade Investments and Sound Ventures, suggested that he could build out a Facebook marketing strategy for their online retailing operations.In 2011, when Slyde’s first board hit the market, revenue was $20,000 and Mr. Watts was hand-shaping each board in Mr. Ellers’s Venice Beach garage.Today, it has two other full time employees, and projects 2016 revenue will be about $1 million, in large part as a result of its success on “Shark Tank.” (Without the exposure and investment, Ms. Watts estimated revenue would be closer to $295,000.) The boards are made in a family-run factory in Taiwan and Slyde has moved to San Clemente, Calif. Last year, revenue was $180,000.Mr. Kutcher said in an interview that Slyde was not his typical investment. He tends to focus on consumer software, and some of his previous investments include Skype, Uber, Airbnb and Spotify.But he was impressed that the couple put off their wedding and used the money to build their company instead. “They put their personal needs aside for the business and that showed me they have an absolute passion and drive for what they are building,” Mr. Kutcher said. “And I think at its core, every big company is built by founders that have that kind of passion.”A version of this article appears in print on April 28, 2016, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: A Start-Up Is Selling Surfers on a New Way to Ride the Waves.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.