By VINOD SREEHARSHAAPRIL 27, 2016
RIO de JANEIRO — André Esteves has rejoined the investment bank BTG Pactual as an adviser, a significant step toward a full return to finance after he was arrested and jailed less than six months ago as part of a corruption scandal that has shaken Brazil’s political and business elite.BTG Pactual, based in São Paulo, which Mr. Esteves helped build and led as chief executive until December, said in a statement on Wednesday that he would take on a role as a “senior partner” focused on partnership matters, advise it on strategy and support the development of its activities and operations.For now, Mr. Esteves is not taking on any executive role. BTG Pactual said that it was maintaining its current management and shareholder structures. Marcelo Kalim and Roberto Sallouti will continue to serve as co-chief executives, and Pérsio Arida will remain chairman of the board.The group of seven partners who swapped shares with Mr. Esteves in December to take control of the bank in an effort to save it will remain its controlling shareholders.AdvertisementThe return of Mr. Esteves became possible only after a ruling on Monday by Justice Teori Zavascki, justice on Brazil’s high court. Justice Zavascki lifted orders that had placed Mr. Esteves under house arrest and barred him from work, his lawyer, Antônio Carlos de Almeida Castro, said in a telephone interview on Tuesday.AdvertisementThe financier was accused of obstructing justice in a broad corruption investigation surrounding Petrobras, the state-owned oil giant. The investigation has been examining allegations that members of the leftist Workers Party of Brazil’s president, Dilma Rousseff, conspired with top Petrobras executives and outside contractors in an elaborate money laundering and bribery ring.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Esteves, a billionaire who turned BTG Pactual into a banking powerhouse, is under suspicion of conspiring with a leader of the Senate, Delcídio do Amaral, to interfere with testimony regarding the kickbacks at Petrobras. He was accused of financing the silence of a major witness and former Petrobras executive.Brazil’s highest court ordered in December that Mr. Esteves be released from jail but placed under house arrest. At that time, he was barred from taking any management roles.Justice Zavascki’s ruling on Monday lifted multiple injunctions restricting Mr. Esteves’s movement and activity. It is not final but it allowed him to return to work immediately, his lawyer said.The broader investigation brought on by Brazil’s attorney general that accuses Mr. Esteves of obstruction of justice is still underway and the full high court has yet to rule on whether to accept charges against Mr. Esteves.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.