By ALEXANDRA STEVENSON and MATTHEW GOLDSTEINNOV. 16, 2015
Some of the richest investors on Wall Street on Monday gave the world a glimpse of how they make their money. Or, in the case of the last quarter, how many of them lost money for their clients.Investors like William A. Ackman, Larry Robbins, Leon G. Cooperman, Daniel S. Loeb, David Einhorn, Jeffrey W. Ubben and many more lost billions of dollars in large measure because the shares of the companies they placed bullish bets on plummeted over the summer and fall.Grantham Mayo Van Otterloo, the investment management firm co-founded by Jeremy Grantham, increased its stake in Valeant Pharmaceuticals just as the Canadian drug company came under siege and its shares tumbled. In the third quarter, the Boston-based firm added 6.5 million shares of Valeant to its portfolio, making it one of the firm’s largest stock holdings.Viking Global, the hedge fund led by O. Andreas Halvorsen, also added more Valeant stock to its portfolio during the same period, making it one of the top 20 shareholders. ValueAct, the multibillion-dollar firm founded by Mr. Ubben, held on to its position as a top shareholder. John A. Paulson, meanwhile, sold 110,000 shares in Valeant but still holds 8.9 million.AdvertisementShares of Valeant fell by more than 28 percent over the quarter that ended Sept. 30. They have plunged further into the red since then and are down 59 percent since the end of the third quarter.These investors were among the thousands of hedge funds and other investment firms that made public information about which stocks they bought when they filed regulatory disclosures to the Securities and Exchange Commission on Monday. Known as 13Fs, the reports are filed four times a year. They offer investors a chance to see which sectors these traders were betting on when the quarter ended, roughly 45 days ago.Valeant has been a feature in this quarter’s filings. In early August, the company rewarded investors as its shares surged to an all-time high of $262. But since then Valeant has ranked as one of the worst performing pharmaceutical stocks, facing concerns about a federal investigation into the company’s drug pricing policies and its reliance on a little-known mail-order pharmaceutical firm to distribute some of its products.Other stocks have suffered, too. Some of the more popular names within the $3 trillion hedge fund industry — stocks like Platform Acquisition Holdings, Cheniere Energy and Community Health Systems — were among the worst performing big market-capitalization stocks in the third quarter.While closely watched, the filings are an imperfect window into the holdings of money managers because they are inherently backward-looking. They include only stocks traded in the United States and do not include short positions, or bets managers might have made that a stock will fall in price. The filings also do not disclose what price a firm bought or sold a stock at, making it difficult to determine how much a hedge fund lost or made in trading a given stock.AdvertisementMr. Cooperman’s Omega Advisors, for instance, disclosed that it bought 485,000 shares of Valeant in the third quarter. But the firm did not appear to hold on to them for long. Steven G. Einhorn, Omega’s vice chairman, speaking at the Reuters Investment Summit on Monday, said the hedge fund had since sold its shares in Valeant.But one thing the filings do show is that Wall Street’s biggest and wealthiest money managers continue to look a bit like a thundering herd when it comes to the stocks they buy and sell.Take Kraft Heinz, the giant food conglomerate.Joining Warren E. Buffett in his bet on Kraft Heinz, several managers added positions in the company, which was formed this year from the merger of H. J. Heinz and Kraft as part of a deal coordinated by Mr. Buffett and the Brazilian private equity firm 3G Capital. Mr. Cooperman, Mr. Loeb of Third Point, York Capital Management and Coatue Management were among the investors who added Kraft Heinz as a new position in their portfolios during the quarter.Mr. Loeb also continued to build up his position in Baxter International, the medical equipment maker, and now has a 9.8 percent stake in the company. In August, he announced he was seeking two seats on the board of directors. Citadel, which was founded by the billionaire Kenneth C. Griffin and York Capital also bought shares in Baxter, which makes devices like intravenous pumps and dialysis systems. Jana Partners, the hedge fund founded by Barry Rosenstein, became one of the company’s biggest shareholders, buying up a 2.3 percent stake.Starwood Hotels, which on Monday agreed to be acquired by Marriott International, was another favorite in the quarter. Paulson bought 3.6 million shares, making it the biggest shareholder in the Starwood. Viking built a new 3.1 percent stake, while Citadel now owns a 2.4 percent stake after scooping up shares in the quarter.The renewable energy company SunEdison is another stock that has been called a hedge fund hotel for its popularity with investors. But both Omega and Third Point sold out of their positions.SunEdison has been a favorite of David Einhorn of Greenlight Capital, who recently called it one of the few stocks that was a “successful winner” in a portfolio that has lost investors billions. Glenview Capital, the hedge fund founded by Mr. Robbins, sold 1.6 million of its shares but stills has a 3.1 percent stake.On Monday, Mr. Einhorn also disclosed that Greenlight had sold some of its position in SunEdison. But he is still the company’s third-biggest shareholder, with a 5.9 percent stake.An article on Tuesday about money-losing bets placed by some investment firms in the last fiscal quarter described incorrectly the business of Grantham Mayo Van Otterloo, the Boston-based financial firm co-founded by Jeremy Grantham. It is an asset management firm that runs hedge fund portfolios, mutual funds and other investment products; it is not a hedge fund.A version of this article appears in print on November 17, 2015, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Filings Detail a Rocky 3rd Quarter for Many Hedge Funds.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.