AdvertisementSupported byBy Katie ThomasWASHINGTON — The chief executive of Valeant Pharmaceuticals International, which has been harshly criticized for its practice of raising prices on old drugs, said during a tense hearing on Capitol Hill on Wednesday that the company had made “mistakes,” while lawmakers accused him and others connected to Valeant of favoring profits over patients’ needs.“Let me state plainly that it was a mistake to pursue, and in hindsight I regret pursuing, transactions where a central premise was a planned increase in the prices of the medicines,” J. Michael Pearson, the chief executive, said at the hearing.The Senate Special Committee on Aging, which held the hearing, has been investigating companies that have raised prices on old drugs to exorbitant heights. Mr. Pearson, who will soon step down as chief executive, appeared subdued and sometimes slumped in his seat as he answered questions.Some of the senators appeared unmoved by Mr. Pearson’s expression of regret. Senator Claire McCaskill of Missouri, the ranking Democrat on the committee, said the company’s policy was “using patients as hostages. It’s immoral. It hurts real people and it makes Americans very, very angry.”Valeant’s story — once a Wall Street darling, now a scorned outcast whose stock is in shambles — has functioned as a riveting soap opera for the rest of the pharmaceutical industry. But the company’s troubles have also  heightened scrutiny for how the industry prices its products. The Senate committee is one of two congressional inquiries into drug pricing, and presidential candidates have also seized on the topic as a campaign issue.The roster of speakers on Wednesday seemed tailored to serve up drama, and it largely delivered. In addition to Mr. Pearson, the mastermind of Valeant’s now-condemned business strategy, the panel also featured William A. Ackman, the hedge fund mogul whose all-in bet on Valeant has cost him and his investors billions. Mr. Ackman recently joined Valeant’s board and is widely viewed as having used his influence to push out Mr. Pearson, who is departing as chief executive.Howard Schiller, the former chief financial officer, also spoke. Valeant has accused him of “improper conduct,” and he has refused the company’s request to resign from the board.Senators directed many of their questions toward Mr. Ackman, whose firm, Pershing Square Capital Management, is Valeant’s third-largest investor. He sought to distance himself from the company’s practices, telling the committee that he was a passive investor until news reports drove down Valeant’s stock, and that he had joined the company’s board of directors only in March.He acknowledged that he did not adequately research Valeant’s policy of buying old drugs and sharply raising their prices. “I regret we didn’t do more due diligence on pricing at Valeant,” he said. “For sure.”But again, the senators appeared unpersuaded. “It’s been their business model from Day 1,” Ms. McCaskill said. “It’s a little hard for me to swallow that you were not aware that their model was one of price increases.”Valeant is facing multiple federal investigations for its practice of buying companies, slashing costs and raising prices, as well as its relationship to a mail-order pharmacy, Philidor. It has since cut ties with Philidor.The company’s stock has lost 90 percent of its value since last summer, and it is facing $30 billion in debt. Valeant could face default on some of its bonds if it does not file its annual report by the end of May. The company has said it plans to file the report by the end of this week.Much of the hearing focused on a handful of older drugs whose prices have risen sharply, including Nitropress and Isuprel, which Valeant acquired in 2015 from Marathon Pharmaceuticals. Mr. Pearson said he raised the prices because the company learned that the drugs would soon face competition from cheaper generic versions, and he followed the industry practice of raising prices before generics enter the market.“In retrospect, I believe our acquisition of these products was a mistake,” he said.He also said he regretted the company’s pricing of Cuprimine, which treats a rare genetic disorder called Wilson’s disease. Last summer, Valeant quadrupled the price of Cuprimine, which has been around for 55 years.Mr. Pearson said the company no longer planned to pursue its previous drug-pricing strategy and that it was offering discounts to hospitals that use Nitropress and Isuprel.But senators and a doctor who had testified earlier in the day challenged those claims. Ms. McCaskill said she surveyed several hospitals in her state and none of them were offered or had received such discounts.Dr. Richard I. Fogel, chief clinical officer of St. Vincent, a health system in Indiana that is a member of Ascension, the nation’s largest nonprofit Catholic health system, testified that Ascension had also not received any such discounts despite efforts to reach Valeant. “The emails went unanswered, the phone calls went unanswered,” he said.Other witnesses highlighted the real-world repercussions of Valeant’s policies. One doctor, Dr. Fred Askari, who said he treats about 400 patients with Wilson’s disease at the University of Michigan, said he had to hire two full-time employees to handle the red tape associated with Valeant’s price increases on Cuprimine and Syprine, another related drug that the company owns.“We’re not just talking about costs here,” Dr. Askari said, noting that some patients who do not get these drugs can die. “We’re talking about human lives if they don’t get access to the drugs.”Mr. Ackman said he planned to meet with the board of directors on Thursday to discuss the company’s pricing policy, including whether to lower the price of some drugs. “I totally get it,” he told the committee. “We’re going to come up with an appropriate price, based on an appropriate rationale.”Mr. Ackman also noted that since taking a seat on the board, he has exerted his influence in several ways, including the departure of Mr. Pearson. Mr. Ackman said the new chief executive, Joseph C. Papa, would take over on Monday.“These enormous and unwarranted price hikes have had far-ranging and severe impacts on patients, hospitals, and our health care system,” Senator Susan M. Collins, Republican of Maine and the chairwoman of the committee, said in opening remarks. “Valeant’s monopoly model operates at the expense of real people.”Advertisement