
Breakingviews By                     
JENNIFER SABA

APRIL 27, 2016
Comcast’s chief executive, Brian L. Roberts, is not one to sit idly by. His company is in talks to acquire DreamWorks Animation for $3 billion, according to reports.Adding animated-movie franchises like “Shrek” and “Kung Fu Panda” to its mix will only strengthen Comcast in its competition with the Walt Disney Company, which it tried to buy in 2004. The transaction could also ease the pain of losing out on Time Warner Cable.Comcast’s failed $45 billion bid for Time Warner Cable may have spurred Mr. Roberts to get back in the deal-making game. The possible offer for DreamWorks is small in comparison but is a significant step in Comcast’s efforts to bolster its family-friendly offerings.Since the company’s $54 billion hostile offer for Disney fell short more than a decade ago, Comcast has essentially tried to copy the Magic Kingdom’s strategy. It snapped up NBC Universal, a direct competitor to Disney’s ABC Networks. It also expanded its theme-park business, including park attractions based on the Harry Potter movies, which is in the backyard of Disney World in Orlando, Fla.AdvertisementDreamWorks is no Pixar, the studio behind the movie “Cars,” which Disney bought for $7.4 billion in 2006. DreamWorks Animation, a spinoff from DreamWorks SKG, the entertainment company founded by Jeffrey Katzenberg, Steven Spielberg and David Geffen, has been in search of a buyer for some time. Mr. Katzenberg cut about 19 percent of the studio’s staff last year.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Comcast reported on Wednesday that it added 53,000 pay-TV subscribers in the first quarter, defying the trend of consumers dropping their cable subscriptions. That cord-cutting is hurting Disney and its lucrative sports network ESPN.AdvertisementMr. Roberts’s strategy of doubling down on content and distribution seems to be working. Comcast is trading at about 17 times forward earnings, a bit behind Disney’s 18 times, according to Thomson Reuters data.There are significant differences between the companies, of course. Disney does not have a cable division, for example, a business that accounted for 65 percent of Comcast’s $18 billion in first-quarter revenue and for three-quarters of its $6.4 billion in quarterly operating cash flow.Still, the performance suggests that Mr. Roberts is beginning to benefit from a little Magic Kingdom-style wizardry.Jennifer Saba is a columnist for Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »