By LIZ MOYERNOV. 16, 2015
AR Capital, the real estate investment company built by Nicholas S. Schorsch and William M. Kahane, said Monday that it would stop creating new investment products and close existing ones to new investors to focus on managing the $19 billion it has in current investments.The company cited “regulatory and market uncertainty” that was affecting its ability to raise investor money.The New York-based firm, once called American Realty Capital, is one of the biggest sponsors of nontraded real estate investment trusts, but it is in the center of a maelstrom.Its most recent troubles began with the collapse a week ago of a $378 million deal to sell a 60 percent stake of a newly formed company holding the $19 billion of assets to the private equity giant Apollo Global Management.AdvertisementThen on Thursday, Massachusetts’s securities regulator accused an affiliate of the firm — Realty Capital Securities — of faking proxy votes for a September special meeting of shareholders in one of AR Capital’s sponsored investment vehicles.AdvertisementRealty Capital Securities is part of RCS Capital, a publicly traded broker that said last week it was facing possible delisting by the New York Stock Exchange. Its share price has slumped since an accounting scandal at one of Mr. Schorsch’s investment vehicles forced him to resign from the management of American Realty Capital Properties and boards of affiliated entities last year.In its administrative complaint on Thursday, the Massachusetts securities division said the faked votes were for a shareholder meeting that was a prerequisite to having the deal with Apollo move forward.AR Capital said on Monday that Realty Capital Securities would discontinue proxy activities for AR Capital-sponsored vehicles because of the Massachusetts investigation.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.AR Capital’s woes come as regulators take a closer look at how nontraded REITs are sold to investors. Nontraded REITs, which invest in various types of real estate, are typically sold through advisers. Unlike publicly traded REITs, nontraded REITs are difficult to sell or liquidate.“There were serious problems with their lack of transparency and the interrelationship with affiliated companies,” said Michael Kitces, the director of financial planning at Pinnacle Advisory Group in Columbia, Md.In September, the broker LPL Financial agreed to pay $1.4 million in a settlement with state regulators regarding its sales practices for nontraded REITs.Regulators have proposed new fiduciary standards for advisers and mandated new disclosures on fees and costs that cut into investors’ principal. AR Capital seems to be saying, Mr. Kitces said, “now that the market is requiring transparency, we don’t think we can sell these any more.”Mr. Kahane, AR Capital’s co-founder, said in a statement on Monday regarding the regulatory changes, “Until there is greater clarity, we have decided to sit this one out.”AR Capital said it would stop taking new money at year end for Business Development Corporation of America II, ARC Healthcare Trust III, New York City REIT II, ARC Hospitality Trust and ARC Global Trust II.A version of this article appears in print on November 17, 2015, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: REIT Retreat.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.