By BEN PROTESSAPRIL 28, 2016
Robert E. Linton, a prominent Wall Street executive who led the swashbuckling investment bank Drexel Burnham Lambert in the years before it imploded in scandal but who was largely untainted himself, died on Tuesday in Manhattan. He was 90.The cause was heart failure, his son Jeffrey said.During his tenure atop Drexel in the early 1980s, Mr. Linton oversaw the firm’s rapid expansion into one of the nation’s biggest — and most profitable — investment banks. At its height, Drexel pioneered the junk bond industry and came to symbolize the 1980s “greed is good” mentality on Wall Street, inspiring movies and books that detailed the risk-taking of that era.Eventually, however, the federal authorities suspected that something worse than greed was afoot.In 1989, prosecutors filed six felony counts of mail and securities fraud against the firm, which pleaded guilty and later dissolved. Michael R. Milken, the “Junk Bond King” and a central figure in the case, also admitted to crimes, providing the capstone to what was then the largest criminal prosecution in Wall Street history.Although Mr. Linton was a board member during much of that period, he was no longer C.E.O. And Mr. Linton, who was never accused of wrongdoing in the case, had previously denounced some of Wall Street’s excesses.Advertisement“Greed is behind every debacle in the Street involving futures trading,” he told The New York Times in 1977.AdvertisementRobert Edward Linton was born on May 19, 1925, in Manhattan. After graduating from Phillips Exeter Academy in New Hampshire and forgoing college, he enlisted in the Army in 1943 and served in World War II, attaining the rank of second lieutenant in the Army Air Forces.After the war, Mr. Linton returned to New York, raising his family in Rye. At the time of his death, he had homes in Manhattan and Purchase, N.Y.Besides his son Jeffrey, he is survived by his wife of 63 years, the former Margot Tishman; two daughters, Roberta L. Bennett and Elizabeth M. Linton; another son, Thomas; a sister, Marion Benson; and five grandchildren.In 1946, Mr. Linton joined a predecessor to Drexel, then a small brokerage house, as a runner delivering stock certificates around Wall Street. More than three decades later, he was named chairman and chief executive. He was also a director of the New York Stock Exchange and led a Wall Street trade group, known then as the Securities Industry Association.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Long before banks were too big to fail, Mr. Linton and his trade group fought to protect the Glass-Steagall Act, the Depression-era law that separated commercial banks from investment banks. Mr. Linton’s efforts, which included testifying twice before Congress, came as big commercial banks were looking to expand into investment banking territory.Whether as a shrewd businessman or a prudent steward of the economy — or both — Mr. Linton cried foul. Congress repealed Glass–Steagall in 1999, opening the door to the sort of megabanks that ultimately took billions of dollars in bailouts during the 2008 financial crisis, an outcome that arguably vindicated Mr. Linton.At Drexel, it was the junk bond business that drove much of the growth. Drexel designed the instruments to finance companies that were riskier bets. For a time, these bonds outperformed investment-grade securities as they fueled a wave of corporate takeovers.But when one of the firm’s clients, Ivan F. Boesky, was swept into a federal investigation, so was Drexel. Rudolph W. Giuliani, the United States attorney in Manhattan at the time, led a nearly three-year investigation that focused on the firm’s insider trading and stock manipulation. In addition to pleading guilty, Drexel paid the government $650 million in penalties, a record at the time.Advertisement“The Junk Bond King,” Mr. Milken, indicted on 98 counts of racketeering, securities fraud and other charges, initially challenged the case. He later pleaded guilty to six charges and agreed to pay hundreds of millions of dollars in fines.Mr. Linton, who remained friendly with Mr. Milken over the years, was not charged or accused of wrongdoing, though the New York Stock Exchange barred him from associating with any member firms of the exchange for one year, saying he had inadequately supervised employees.Despite his prominent role on Wall Street, Mr. Linton largely avoided the spotlight.As a rival banker told The Times in 1977, “Bob has been married to the same lady for 25 years, has had the same secretary for 22 years since he became an officer of his house, has a 14-year-old dog,” four children and “lives quietly in Rye.” In other words, the executive said, he was a “steady sort who gets things done without much fuss.”A version of this article appears in print on April 29, 2016, on Page A16 of the New York edition with the headline: Robert Linton, 90, a Pioneer in Junk Bonds.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.