AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael J. de la Merced and Andrew PollackSAN FRANCISCO — In Silicon Valley, being a unicorn is no guarantee of financial success. But an eight-year-old drug maker focused on novel cancer treatments has landed itself and its investors a windfall by selling itself to a bigger competitor.AbbVie said on Thursday that it would buy Stemcentrx for $5.8 billion in cash and stock. That’s up about 16 percent from the $5 billion valuation that the start-up fetched during its last fund-raising round. It also appears to be one of the highest prices ever paid for a privately held biotechnology company, if not the highest.At a time when another once-vaunted medical start-up, Theranos, faces serious questions about its core technology and its $9 billion valuation, Stemcentrx appears to have validated the hopes of its backers, including venture capitalists not normally known for investing in biotechnology companies.Under the terms of the deal, AbbVie will pay about $2 billion in cash and finance the remaining amount with newly issued shares. Stemcentrx’s backers could receive up to $4 billion in additional cash if the business hits certain performance milestones.Such is the size of the payoff that one of Stemcentrx’s staunchest investors, the venture capital firm Founders Fund, appears able to return its entire $625 million fourth fund and more than half of its $1 billion fifth fund.Another big winner is Artis Ventures, which invested early in Stemcentrx, in 2011, when it had a valuation of only about $100 million. Artis is known more for investing in YouTube than in life sciences.Behind AbbVie’s willingness to pay up is the drug maker’s big push into cancer treatment, in part because it is an attractive area of the pharmaceutical business, and because its blockbuster autoimmune disease drug Humira will face competition from cheaper, related versions known as biosimilars in the coming years, though just when will depend on how patent litigation plays out.AbbVie acquired Pharmacyclics last year for a huge price of $21 billion to obtain the cancer drug Imbruvica.“AbbVie is committed to continued innovation in oncology, a critical component of our long-term growth and an area of significant need to millions of patients worldwide,” said Richard A. Gonzalez, AbbVie’s chairman and chief executive, in a statement. “We believe the acquisition of Stemcentrx will strengthen and accelerate our ability to deliver innovative therapies that will have a remarkable impact on patients’ lives.”Stemcentrx is developing drugs aimed at killing cancer stem cells, which some scientists believe give rise to cancers. Under this theory, merely killing most cancer cells is not sufficient because if the stem cells survive, they can give rise to the cancer again. So drugs are needed specifically to kill the root stem cells, which are thought to account for only 2 percent of all the cancer cells and might be resistant to conventional chemotherapy.Stemcentrx’s main offering so far is rovalpituzumab tesirine, known as Rova-T, a drug in late-stage testing for treatment of small-cell lung cancer. The disease accounts for about 15 percent of all lung cancers and is very hard to treat, with a poor prognosis.In an early clinical trial, tumors shrank significantly in 44 percent of patients whose tumors made a particular protein that the drug latches onto. However, if the idea is to kill the tiny cadre of stem cells, then merely saying that the drug shrank tumors, presumably by killing the nonstem-cell masses, doesn’t indicate that much.But AbbVie said in slides it provided to investors that “compelling” data about how long people taking the drug live will be presented at a cancer conference soon. It said Rova-T could reach the market in 2018 and eventually achieve sales of billions of dollars a year, justifying the price AbbVie paid.Stemcentrx has four other drugs in earlier-stage clinical trials, including treatments for breast, ovarian and other types of lung cancers.“We are thrilled to be joining the AbbVie team and believe that, together, we can bring much-needed therapies to cancer patients,” said Brian Slingerland, Stemcentrx’s founder and chief executive, in a statement. “We have worked for eight years exploring the origins of cancer and drivers of its recurrence and have discovered novel therapeutic targets to attack the most difficult-to-treat tumors.”But the theory of cancer stem cells is not universally accepted, and there are no assurances this approach will work. Other companies are developing drugs aimed at killing cancer stem cells and have suffered setbacks in clinical trials. One of them, OncoMed Pharmaceuticals, has a market value of less than $400 million. Another, Verastem, has a market capitalization of around $60 million.The deal for the eight-year-old Stemcentrx, which is based in South San Francisco, represents a windfall for the company’s backers, who have invested close to $500 million. Those investors include Founders Fund, which was co-founded by the billionaire Peter Thiel; Sequoia Capital; Silicon Valley Bank; and the mutual fund giant Fidelity Investments.For Founders Fund, the investment was a validation of the firm’s belief in the start-up despite not being a specialist investor in biotechnology, according to Brian Singerman, the partner who oversaw the investment.Mr. Singerman said that Founders Fund first began investing in Stemcentrx in 2012, intrigued by the novel approach to fighting cancer. As the start-up continued to grow, the venture capitalists continued to double down, eventually investing roughly $300 million in the drug maker.“Once we see a company performing and exceeding even our lofty expectations, we go big,” he said in an interview.When Stemcentrx unveiled new performance data at an industry conference last year, the company had gained plenty of interest from potential buyers, Mr. Singerman said. At the same time, the start-up was ready to find a partner to begin commercializing its products.Mr. Singerman declined to comment on the firm’s return from the AbbVie transaction.The Stemcentrx deal is expected to dilute AbbVie’s earnings this year by about 20 cents a share, and will begin adding to them in about four years.Advertisement