AdvertisementSupported byBy Leslie PickerAbbott agreed on Thursday to acquire St. Jude Medical for $25 billion, bringing together two manufacturers of devices for cardiovascular disease.In combining the two, Abbott and St. Jude Medical will capture a larger position across the market for cardiovascular devices, the two Midwestern companies said in a news release. They expect sales in that market to be about $8.7 billion if the transaction is completed.The deal shows Abbott’s appetite for acquisitions after agreeing to acquire Alere about three months ago for $5.8 billion. Since then, the transaction has gotten somewhat messy, with Alere delaying its annual filing and announcing a Department of Justice investigation for operations in foreign markets. When asked on the earnings call last week whether Abbott was committed to completing the deal, Miles D. White, Abbott’s chairman and chief executive, declined to comment.As was the case with Alere, Abbott is offering a premium for St. Jude Medical. Under the agreement, St. Jude Medical shareholders will get $46.75 in cash and 0.8708 shares of Abbott, amounting to about $85 a share. That represents a 37 percent gain from St. Jude Medical’s closing stock price on Wednesday. In the Alere deal, the premium was more than 50 percent.Abbott said it had received a commitment letter from Bank of America Merrill Lynch to finance the full cash portion of both transactions. Abbott also announced that it would issue about $3 billion of common stock to adjust its capital structure.St. Jude’s acquisition is expected to be accretive to Abbott’s adjusted earnings per share in the first year after the deal closes, which should be during the fourth quarter, the statement said. The companies are expecting about 21 cents of accretion in 2017 and 29 cents in 2018.The combination would allow the two companies to cut about $500 million in costs, both on the sales and operational sides. Abbott also plans to assume or refinance St. Jude Medical’s $5.7 billion in net debt.The transaction is subject to the approval of St. Jude Medical shareholders and regulators.Evercore advised Abbott, as did Bank of America, in addition to providing financing. Guggenheim Securities served as the financial adviser to St. Jude Medical. Wachtell, Lipton, Rosen & Katz provided legal counsel to Abbott, and Gibson, Dunn & Crutcher worked with St. Jude Medical.Advertisement