By NELSON D. SCHWARTZAPRIL 28, 2016
The nation’s gross domestic product advanced at a mere 0.5 percent annual growth rate during the first quarter after a mediocre increase for the final quarter of 2015, the Commerce Department reported on Thursday, suggesting that the economy is stalled.But the job market, according to Labor Department figures released in recent months, appears to be at its healthiest point since the boom of the late 1990s.Which picture is right?On one side of the equation, hiring and wages — of particular importance to the 95 percent of the labor force that already has a job — are moving firmly in the right direction. On the other, the economy’s expansion continues to be lackluster: The pace of growth in the first quarter was the slowest in two years.Both yardsticks contain a measure of truth. And the explanation is the apparent lack of improvement in productivity — the output of individual workers — despite dazzling advances in Silicon Valley, America’s technological frontier, and a continuing economic recovery that is nearing its seventh anniversary.AdvertisementFor now, at least, many businesses, are finding it more advantageous to hire more workers than to invest in new technology or equipment to increase output and meet growing demand.AdvertisementIn the short term, this could be seen as a positive, especially with millions of Americans just now coming back into the job market after being sidelined during and after the Great Recession.But in the long term, this phenomenon threatens to undermine the nation’s prosperity, said Michael Gapen, chief United States economist at Barclays.“Economists view productivity growth and technological change as driving improvements in standards of living over time,” Mr. Gapen said. “A permanent slowdown in productivity growth would suggest that living standards rise more slowly.”He noted that productivity had been increasing at an annual rate of about half a percentage point over the last five years. That is well below the Internet-driven 2.5 percent gains recorded annually in the second half of the 1990s, and below the more typical 1.5 percent rate of productivity gains in previous decades.“We can tell stories about why it’s so weak, but nobody really knows,” Mr. Gapen said. ““I think productivity growth can rebound, but the fear is that it won’t.”Whatever the answer, it’s clear that businesses have grown much more wary of new investments recently, and the clearest evidence of that has emerged in the last two quarters.Much of the recent downturn in business spending is a result of much lower prices for oil, metals and other commodities, and fears of a slowdown in China and elsewhere around the world that are putting a crimp on investment opportunities.Advertisement“It doesn’t look like there’s any danger of recession, but the global economy and commodities are weak,” said Kevin Logan, chief United States economist at HSBC. “The global commodity shock has affected growth in the U.S. in a way that was unexpected, especially in terms of the energy industry.”Still, Mr. Logan said, “The consumer is fundamentally sound, as is the housing market.”He added: “Things are O.K. domestically, with growth in sectors like leisure, health care and technology, and spending is moving along steadily.”In a separate report on Thursday, the Labor Department said initial claims for unemployment benefits last week rose by 9,000 to 257,000. Despite the increase, the number was slightly smaller than expected, and new jobless claims remained very close to lows last seen in the early 1970s.The first-quarter results reinforced what has become something of an annual economic rite in recent years — a weak first quarter, followed by optimistic predictions that a rebound is just around the corner. (The gross domestic product report on Thursday is the first of three estimates; subsequent revisions could move the number significantly higher or lower.)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In 2015, the economy barely grew early on, recovered its footing in the spring and summer, but finished the year with a mediocre growth rate of 1.4 percent in the fourth quarter.The optimists may be right that growth will pick up for the rest of 2016 as it did last year, but the trajectory of the economic recovery remains frustratingly uneven. And over all, the growth in the United States has been lackluster ever since the nation pulled out of recession in 2009.After a shaky start to this year, the stock market has rebounded and energy prices have stabilized, providing some comfort to the oil industry, which has undergone big cuts in hiring and investment in Texas, Oklahoma and other oil patch areas.
            Weekly number of people who have filed for unemployment benefits for the first time.        400,0004-week moving average300 2001000NDJFMAAPRIL 28, 2016
Recession fears, which dominated the headlines and fixated traders on Wall Street three months ago, have largely faded. Volatility in Europe and Asian markets has also eased.In the United States, after years of stagnation, wages are perking up.New research released earlier this month by ADP, which compiles payroll data from hundreds of thousands of corporate clients, showed wages rising at an annual rate of 4.6 percent last quarter for full-time employees who have been working for at least one year. In the last quarter of 2015, wages for this group rose 4.1 percent.AdvertisementWhile ADP’s figures show a bigger increase than similar government metrics for the entire working population, the basic message from the data is the same: As labor markets tighten, American workers are finally getting a raise.“We have good momentum in terms of the job market,” said Ahu Yildirmaz, ADP’s head of research.On Wednesday, Federal Reserve policy makers put off any move to raise interest rates, in part because of the persistent weakness in growth. But in a statement after the meeting, they acknowledged crosscurrents in the economy.“Labor market conditions have improved further even as growth in economic activity appears to have slowed,” the Fed concluded, adding that household income, consumer sentiment and the housing sector all looked reasonably healthy.Despite the overall improvement, there is plenty of pain in some corners of the economy.Factories shed nearly 50,000 jobs in February and March, wiping out all of the gains recorded last year. The proportion of Americans in the active labor force remains depressed by historical standards, and more than six million workers say they are in part-time positions because they cannot find full-time work.But for the winners in the American economy, be they individuals or companies, there is a lot less to complain about these days.“Since we launched four years ago, our business has been growing like a rocket ship,” said Bayard Winthrop, chief executive of American Giant, which makes sweatshirts, T-shirts and other types of activewear at mills in North Carolina.American Giant is focused on casual, comfortable clothes, and eschews stores in favor of direct sales through its website. “Made in U.S.A. really appeals to people,” Mr. Winthrop said.His company has more than 300 employees and “we are hiring sewers as fast as we can,” Mr. Winthrop said. “Growth has not been our problem.”A version of this article appears in print on April 29, 2016, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Two Sides to Economic Recovery: Growth Stalls, While Jobs Soar.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.