By EMILY STEELAPRIL 28, 2016
Viacom isn’t out of the woods yet.Viacom, the media group that includes the MTV, Comedy Central and Nickelodeon cable television networks and the Paramount Pictures film and television studio, reported a 3 percent drop in revenue during the latest fiscal quarter, dragged down by continued declines in both its television and film businesses.Adjusted profit declined 35 percent to $303 million for the three months that ended on March 31, the company’s second fiscal quarter, compared with the same period last year, Viacom reported on Thursday. The results were adjusted to account for a $784 million charge the company took during the same period last year for underperforming programming and job cuts.Most concerning, analysts said, was the company’s slowdown in domestic advertising sales during the quarter despite past promises from executives for improvement in that area. The deceleration was particularly stark given that there was an improved advertising market across the rest of the TV industry.“There are a lot of moving pieces in that company right now,” said Michael Nathanson, a media analyst with MoffettNathanson Research. “Everyone is just waiting to get to a place where we can start looking at things on a more normalized basis, if there is ever a time.”AdvertisementThe earnings provide a glimpse into the state of the media business during a rocky period for the company. Viacom has faced questions about its management in recent months after struggling with persistent ratings declines, weak advertising sales and a lackluster film slate — reporting quarter after quarter of weak earnings.Advertisement“We are responding to industry consumption shifts with innovative, thoughtful and long-term strategic solutions and are generating meaningful results in many important areas, including content creation, data-based audience measurement and distribution innovation,” Philippe P. Dauman, Viacom’s chief executive, said in a statement.“There is much more work to be done, but we see the path to growth ahead and are very optimistic about our future,” he said.At the same time, a legal battle is underway in Los Angeles over the mental capacity of Sumner M. Redstone, who controls about 80 percent of the voting stock in Viacom and CBS. While the lawsuit brought by a former companion of Mr. Redstone concerns his personal life, it could have implications for the future of the two companies. A trial is scheduled for May 6.Viacom’s share price has plunged nearly 40 percent in the last year. Since the start of 2016, though, Viacom stock is up about 4 percent. That is in large part because of the multiyear agreement Viacom signed with the satellite provider Dish Network last week to continue to carry Viacom’s bundle of television networks.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.As part of the deal, Dish will include some Viacom programming in its Sling TV streaming services, which offer a slimmer bundle of networks starting at $20 a month. Mr. Dauman said during a conference call on Thursday that Viacom’s children’s television network, Nickelodeon, would not be included on the Sling service.During the most recent quarter, total revenue was $3 billion.Sales in Viacom’s media networks segment, which includes its TV networks, declined 3 percent to about $2.4 billion because of declines in both advertising and affiliate sales.Domestic advertising sales declined 5 percent, with ratings declines at some networks offsetting price increases. The results represent a sequential decline from the previous quarter, when domestic advertising sales declined 4 percent. Mr. Dauman has said that the company expected continued improvement in that area this year.Domestic affiliate sales declined 2 percent, which the company attributed to a “modest decline” in subscribers as well as a rate adjustment with a major distributor.AdvertisementFilmed entertainment revenue dipped 1 percent to $655 million in the quarter. Mr. Dauman called the results “disappointing.”Films released during the quarter included “Whiskey Tango Foxtrot,” “Zoolander 2” and “10 Cloverfield Lane.”Mr. Dauman has said that Paramount’s output would increase to a 15-film slate in the current fiscal year. He said the company was looking forward to the release of “Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles: Out of the Shadows” and “Star Trek Beyond” this summer.Viacom is in the midst of shopping a minority stake in Paramount. Mr. Dauman said that the company continues to expect to enter into an agreement by the end of June.A version of this article appears in print on April 29, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Its Ad Sales Struggling, Viacom Reports Drops in Revenue and Profit.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.