AdvertisementSupported byBy Sam RobertsRemo Belli, a precocious musician who was credited with developing the first commercially successful synthetic drumheads — saving the hides of countless animals, turning millions of finger-tapping novices into accomplished percussionists and feeding rock ’n’ roll fever in the 1960s — died on April 25 in Pasadena, Calif. He was 88.His death was confirmed by Brock Kaericher, the president of Remo Inc., the drum manufacturer that Mr. Belli, who was universally known by his first name, founded and served as chief executive. The company said the cause was complications of pneumonia.In 1957, along with his collaborators, Mr. Belli (pronounced belly) perfected and started marketing what has been described as the first successful artificial drumhead, the membrane that stretches over the open end of a drum.He replaced animal hides — usually calfskin, which could be finicky in high humidity — with a durable, acoustical polyester film manufactured under various brand names, including Mylar, made by DuPont. Initially used for weather-resistant film on nighttime military reconnaissance flights, it was later incorporated into products as varied as nail polish and spacesuits.(The first Mylar drumhead was made in 1953 by Jim Irwin, a chemical engineer for what is now known as the 3M Company, for the jazz drummer Sonny Greer, according to “The Drum Book,” published by Geoff Nicholls in 1997, and the 2007 Encyclopedia of Percussion, edited by John H. Beck.)After opening Drum City, a musical instrument store in Hollywood, in 1952, Mr. Belli was introduced to Mylar on a visit to the Slingerland Drum Company in Chicago, which was experimenting with it.“But they didn’t know what to do with it,” he told The Los Angeles Times in 2010.He bought some Mylar when he returned to California, stapled it to a drum’s wooden hoop and immediately realized its potential. His accountant, Sid Gerwin, introduced him to Samuel Muchnick, a chemist, who developed a process to mass-produce synthetic drumheads by using a quick-setting liquid resin that bonded the plastic film to an aluminum hoop.“The synthetic drumhead revolutionized things” when rock musicians “introduced a rhythm that people responded to,” Mr. Belli told Inc. magazine in 2011. “That changed everything in the whole musical instruments category. It was no longer woodwinds and brass winds and strings. It became guitars and amplification and drums.”Mr. Belli’s enterprise eventually expanded from a 500-square-foot store to a factory of more than 210,000 square feet in Valencia, Calif., a neighborhood of Santa Clarita, where he lived with his wife, Ami Belli, a doctor.The company declined to provide information on his survivors.His company developed a broader selection of percussion instruments, including drums made from recycled wood fiber as well as tambourines, congas and baby rattles. He also became an advocate for drumming as therapy for children, older people and anyone facing physical or emotional afflictions.Remo Delmo Belli was born in Mishawaka, Ind., near South Bend, on June 22, 1927.Enraptured by his uncle’s polka band, which played at a local Italian-American club, he was urged by his father to learn the accordion, but he preferred the snare drum.He began drumming when he was 12, hanging around the Leedy & Ludwig drum factory in nearby Elkhart. With World War II on and most drummers in northern Indiana drafted, he started playing jazz professionally when he was 16 and still in high school.“My education is high school, period,” he said. “The rest is what I picked up by living life.”After serving in the Navy (he enlisted and was assigned to a band), he arrived in California with $60, played in strip clubs and saloons, and toured with the singer Anita O’Day and the bandleader Billy May. He borrowed $2,300 from his parents to open his first store on Santa Monica Boulevard with another drummer, Roy Harte.“Our shop was like a master class for me,” Mr. Belli recalled. “I kept my mouth shut and my ears open.”To dispel any doubts about his Weather King drumhead (so named because it was impervious to humid conditions in places like Atlantic City and New Orleans), Mr. Belli solicited endorsements from eminent musicians, including Gene Krupa and Buddy Rich.Roy Burns, a drummer, teacher and instrument maker, recalled Mr. Belli once saying that “when rock ’n’ roll hit, there were not enough calf drumheads to meet the demand for all of the drum sets being sold.”Mr. Belli’s plastic drumheads, he added, “bridged that gap.”The original synthetic drumheads were calfskin look-alikes, but later versions were transparent and double-ply for durability.Mr. Belli and his wife also worked with neurologists and educators to incorporate rhythm into wellness regimens. They developed the Rhythm Pal drumhead as an educational tool; it fit on ordinary pails sold in hardware stores and helped connect a child’s experience of simply banging on a bucket to playing a drum.That lid now generally sells for $39.95. Some Remo instruments have sold for hundreds of dollars and, in at least one case, for far, far more. The Remo 20-inch bass drumhead seen on Ringo Starr’s Ludwig kit when the Beatles made their American debut on “The Ed Sullivan Show” in 1964 was auctioned last year for more than $2.1 million.Advertisement