AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressValeant Pharmaceuticals resolved its default on some of its $30 billion in debt by finally filing on Friday its long-overdue United States financial report for 2015. The badly tarnished Canadian drug maker also announced a number of mostly new nominees for elections to its board in June.The moves briefly nudged up Valeant’s battered shares, but they closed down more than 5 percent in a broader market sell-off.The report did not reveal new problems with Valeant’s accounting practices, but the new board and executives will still face many problems, said Les Funtleyder, health care portfolio manager at E Squared Asset Management.“They’re being investigated by everybody under the sun,” Mr. Funtleyder said. “That’s going to distract the company for a year at least. That’s assuming they don’t find anything.”Agreements with its creditors required Valeant to file its annual financial report in March. When it did not, some debt holders declared Valeant in default and wrung higher interest rates out of the company.Valeant is dealing with three federal investigations into its accounting and business practices, a huge plunge in its stock price and rising demands for bigger discounts from its inflated drug prices.The activist investor William A. Ackman and his Pershing Square Capital Management, one of Valeant’s largest shareholders, is trying a turnaround. The fund recently took over two positions on Valeant’s board, which is replacing J. Michael Pearson, the chief executive behind Valeant’s run of serial acquisitions and staggering drug price increases.On Friday, the company announced 11 nominees to Valeant’s board, including Mr. Ackman and the incoming chief, Joseph C. Papa, the chairman and chief executive of the drug maker Perrigo. Mr. Papa takes over in early May, and board elections are set for an annual meeting on June 14.Valeant disclosed months ago that it improperly reported about $58 million in revenue late in 2014, by recording sales when medicines were delivered to its former partner, the now-defunct mail-order pharmacy Philidor, rather than when patients received those medicines. Valeant cut ties with Philidor last fall.Valeant’s corrected 2015 financial report states that it had a net loss of $291.7 million, versus net income of $880.7 million in 2014. Revenue totaled $10.45 billion, up 27 percent from a restated $8.21 billion in 2014.The documents included restatements involving two of Valeant’s key brand-name drugs in the fourth quarter of 2015.Valeant reduced by $16 million sales of Addyi, the first pill for enhancing female libido, and will now record Addyi revenue when the drug is sold to patients, rather than delivered to wholesalers. It also reduced by about $5 million sales of the antibiotic Xifaxan, because of estimated returns by wholesalers.Advertisement