AdvertisementSupported byBy Margalit FoxAct now! Be the first on your block to read this obituary of the marketing guru who — as seen on TV — sliced, diced and polkaed his way to fortune!Reared in penury, he bewitched and beguiled the public to become an international tycoon, only to lose everything and then, undaunted, make it back again!Just two dollars and five thin dimes at any New York City newsstand gets you the print edition of this obituary — along with dozens more articles at no extra charge — commemorated with the date and suitable for framing! Quantities are limited, so don’t delay!Philip Kives, a Canadian entrepreneur whose company, K-tel, saturated North American airwaves for decades with ads for a gaggle of gadgets (the Patty Stacker, the Miracle Brush and the emblematic Veg-O-Matic) and a cornucopia of compilation albums (“Hit Machine: 20 Original Hits, 20 Original Stars,” “25 Polka Greats” and “A Musical Journey: Pan-Flute”), died on Wednesday in Winnipeg, Canada. He was 87.His family confirmed the death.An accomplished salesman from the age of 8, Mr. Kives (pronounced KEY-vis) was an early master of an influential midcentury art form — the televised product demonstration — in which mass communication and mass material culture conspicuously converged.Throughout the 1960s, ’70s and beyond, K-tel commercials were as omnipresent a part of the American experience as long sideburns, wide ties and leisure suits. In some markets, they were broadcast more than 120 times a week on television and radio combined.“The commercials were blunt, grainy and loud, much louder than the old movies they interrupted,” The New York Times wrote in 1979. “In fact, they gave advertising the phrase ‘to K-tel’ a product.”Written and directed by Mr. Kives — typically with voice-overs by the Winnipeg disc jockey Bob Washington that were at once urgently histrionic and calmly reassuring — the ads were pilloried, parodied and seldom out of the collective consciousness.Who among us can fail to recall the Veg-O-Matic, which “chops a whole onion without shedding a tear”? (It was one of many products supplied to K-Tel by the American inventor Samuel J. Popeil, whose son, Ron, would found the direct-marketing company Ronco.)Then there was the Patty Stacker (“Your hands need never touch the meat!”), which let consumers construct a tower of hamburger patties of uniform size.And there was the Miracle Brush (“Removes lint! Dust! Dandruff!”), which has sold more than 28 million units.There was also the Bonsai Blade, the Bottle Cutter, the Go-Go Comb, the Comb Gray Away comb and much, much more.If K-tel’s rhetoric seemed sprung from the lips of an old-time midway barker, there was a reason: As a young man, Mr. Kives had plied that trade, hawking cookware and other goods at county fairs and on the boardwalk of Atlantic City.By all accounts as skilled a salesman in person as he was en masse, he was one of the last living links between the “Step right up!” pitchman of the early 20th century and his expansive electronic-age heir.Philip Kives was all but born scrappy, in a Jewish agricultural colony near Oungre, Saskatchewan, on Feb. 12, 1929. His parents, Kiva and the former Lily Weiner, had met and married in Turkey, where they had been settled by the Jewish Colonization Association to avoid persecution in their native Eastern Europe.In 1926, the organization resettled the Kives family once more — to a farm on the Canadian prairie with neither electricity nor running water.Amid the Depression, they battled drought, crop failure and insect infestations that seemed to rival the biblical plagues, living for many years on welfare. Philip grew up milking cows, hauling drinking water and earning money by trapping weasels and selling their fur.In 1957, the young Mr. Kives left the farm for Winnipeg, where he worked as a cabby and a short-order cook. He began selling sewing machines and vacuum cleaners door to door, following the wires strung over newly electrified parts of town to find and court his customers.He soon became a Paganini of pitchmen, hawking products at fairs throughout Canada and the United States. In 1961 he made his way to Atlantic City to demonstrate pots and pans at a Woolworths on the boardwalk.“I thought I knew it all, but that’s when I really got an education,” Mr. Kives said in the 2006 documentary “As Seen on TV: The K-tel Story.” “You’re selling to people out of New York, out of New Jersey, and they’re tough. If I didn’t produce, there were 10 people behind me ready to take my spots.”But the hours he spent with a pan in his hand were golden: They helped him cultivate horse sense and a cool head and a keen eye.They also gave him an epiphany. While he could reach a few dozen customers at a time in person, he could reach thousands through the newly ubiquitous medium of television. Returning to Canada in 1962, he established what became K-tel and took to the airwaves.His first outing was a five-minute commercial for a nonstick skillet, broadcast live that year on Canadian TV. It was an early instance of what would now be called an infomercial.No operators were standing by: Consumers had to visit a store to buy the product. And buy they did, snapping up the skillet by the thousands. No matter that its nonstick surface was inclined to peel off (“In those days, there were a lot of fried eggs that were Teflon-coated,” Mr. Kives later said cheerfully), he had found his medium.Many of his early sales pitches were for Popeil products, among them the Pocket Fisherman. (“It’s the fishing invention of the century!”) But by the mid-1960s, Samuel Popeil, deeming Mr. Kives too big for comfort, declined to furnish him with more.He responded by branching into recorded music, assembling K-tel compilation albums that offered consumers a sliced-and-diced smorgasbord of multiple artists on a single disc: “20 Dynamic Hits,” “20 British Hits of the 60’s,” “20 Great Truck Drivin’ Songs.”The company also produced original recordings. Among its best-selling, begun in the early ’80s, was the Hooked on Classics series, in which the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra of London played the likes of Bach, Beethoven and Brahms to a disco backbeat.K-tel suffered reversals in the mid-1980s, after a series of ill-fated investments in oil, gas and real estate. In 1984, the company, whose main offices are now in Winnipeg and Plymouth, Minn., filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection in the United States.Mr. Kives rebounded, starting a new concern, K-5 Leisure Products, that marketed sports and fitness gadgets including the Gut Trimmer and the Power Driver, a golf aid. After reorganization, K-tel emerged to renewed profitability.Today, the company’s primary business is the licensing of its music library to films and television and the sale of music downloads through platforms like iTunes.Mr. Kives resided in Winnipeg. His survivors include his wife, the former Ellie Corman, whom he married in 1971; two daughters, Samantha Kives and Kelly Kives; a son, Daniel; a brother, George; and three grandchildren.Throughout Mr. Kives’s career, what sustained him was the certain knowledge, gleaned on the midway, of a singular aspect of human nature.“People love a gimmick,” he told Forbes in 1993. “It was that way 20 years ago; it’ll be that way 20 years from now.”But wait: There’s more! This entire article — complete with never-before-seen-in-one-place audio and video enhancements — is only a click away online at nytimes.com/obituaries!Advertisement