By LESLIE PICKERAPRIL 29, 2016
As television moves to the cloud, two companies are coming together to try to find the silver lining.TiVo, known for its devices that can record and stream television, agreed to be acquired by the Rovi Corporation, which makes the guides that allow users to scroll and click to watch shows. The $1.1 billion deal, announced on Friday, is a turning point for two companies that have fought ferociously to maintain their places in a rapidly changing industry.More and more television viewers are migrating to YouTube or Netflix, creating a vulnerability for companies like TiVo and Rovi whose business models rely on traditional TV viewing habits. Adding TiVo’s 10 million households to Rovi’s 18 million, as well as its research and development team and patent trove, arms the combined company to compete, analysts said.“There are real questions around durability of what these guys have created, so they’re coming together to fight the good fight,” said Barton Crockett, an analyst at FBR Capital Markets, by phone. “They’re in a place of tremendously large question marks right now.”AdvertisementThe deal may not happened without recent decisions by two men.The first is Glenn W. Welling, an activist investor at Engaged Capital who successfully claimed two seats on Rovi’s board last year and pushed the company to consider a merger with TiVo, people briefed on those discussions said last month.The second, Thomas S. Rogers, led TiVo as chief executive for more than a decade until he announced in November that he was stepping down. He stayed on as chairman as Naveen Chopra, TiVo’s chief financial officer, stepped up as interim chief executive. The management shuffle gave Rovi a chance to make its move.The combined company will take the TiVo name and be led by Thomas Carson, the chief executive of Rovi.“By working together, Rovi and TiVo will revolutionize how consumers experience media and entertainment, and at the same time build value for our stockholders,” Mr. Carson said in a statement on Friday.The TiVo of today is not merely the device that rose to popularity in the early 2000s by giving TV watchers the ability to fast-forward through commercials. TiVo technology has gained traction with cable operators around the world because it can also stream video from sites like Netflix in their own boxes. Many of the larger cable providers, however, have opted to create their own versions of TiVo rather than work with the company.AdvertisementUnder the terms of the deal, Rovi will pay about $10.70 per share in cash and stock. TiVo shareholders will receive $2.75 per share in cash, and the remaining $7.95 will be paid in common stock of the combined company.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The stock component of the transaction includes an option that will give TiVo shareholders fewer shares if Rovi’s stock price goes up to a certain average price, and more shares if Rovi’s stock price falls to a certain threshold.The deal is expected to increase Rovi’s earnings within the first 12 months after closing, something its shareholders applauded on Friday. Rovi’s stock price gained 1.6 percent to close at $17.62. TiVo’s shares gained almost 6 percent, to $9.98.“We had a higher valuation for TiVo than was the takeout price,” said Thomas Eagan, an analyst with Telsey Advisory Group LLC. “I see TiVo as a product company that has some patents and Rovi is a patent company searching for a product, and that’s why this isn’t a bad match.”A combined company would generate about $800 million in revenue this year, on a pro forma basis, according to the companies’ estimate. The two also said they could save about $100 million in annual costs.In addition to announcing the deal, Rovi reported a slump in revenue and wider net losses in the first quarter compared with a year ago. And it sued Comcast over intellectual property during the quarter after the cable provider neglected to renew their contract.The combined company will have more than 6,000 patents and pending applications. Both have been able to generate billions of dollars from intellectual property licensing and awards from patent-related lawsuits.“A very big part of the value in TiVo and Rovi is tied to patents and their willingness to file and litigate around their patents,” said Mr. Crockett.The transaction is subject to approvals by both sets of shareholders as well as regulators. The companies said they expected to close the transaction by the third quarter of this year.Evercore provided financial advice to Rovi, and LionTree Advisors worked with TiVo. The law firm Cooley was Rovi’s legal adviser, and TiVo received legal advice from Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.