AdvertisementSupported byAnother ViewBy David ZaringThe United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit has shut down a nascent but necessary effort by trial judges to supervise deferred prosecution agreements.Prosecutors increasingly rely on the agreements, which usually impose monitoring and compliance obligations on businesses accused of financial crimes or corruption, as an alternative to trying to convict the defendant.Under a deferred prosecution agreement, if the problem was, say, sanctions evasion by a bank, a team of compliance officers in and outside the bank would spend a few years to make sure that business with the wrong sort of countries is not missed. If it was bribery, corporate compliance officers would set up a plan to track corporate expenditures better.This minibureaucracy is administered by the prosecutor’s office, and it often includes a special monitor to oversee the day-to-day work of the project. The defendant’s own compliance officers are the front line of the enterprise, committing themselves and their company to better oversight, and reporting to the prosecutors or the monitor on their efforts. If the business fails to eliminate the bad conduct, then it is back to court for a criminal prosecution.It all looks a little bit like the minibureaucracies formed under consent decrees in institutional reform litigation. In those cases, prisons, school districts and other government institutions would agree to reform themselves and would agree to permit those aggrieved by failures in their reform efforts to go to court to enforce compliance with the decree.Think of school desegregation orders that required busing, or funding requirements to turn prisons that looked like plantations into prisons that looked more like, well, prisons. Brandon L. Garrett, a professor at the University of Virginia law school, has explicitly analogized deferred prosecution agreements to these sorts of reform arrangements – he calls the phenomenon structural reform prosecution.But for institutional reform cases, courts approved consent decrees and supervised their fulfillment. So far, they have had no role over the approval or the supervision of deferred prosecution agreements.Two district court judges have tried to change this script. Judge John Gleeson in Brooklyn approved a deferred prosecution agreement in the case of charges of money laundering by HSBC. The judge declared that he was not a “potted plant” and that he would “maintain supervisory power over the implementation” of the agreement. He directed the government to file quarterly reports on HSBC’s compliance.Judge Richard J. Leon in Washington, D.C., evinced repeated skepticism about the laxity of a deferred prosecution agreement imposing penalties on a Dutch air services company for evading sanctions laws. Judge Leon declared that he was entitled to inspect the agreement to “protect the integrity of the judicial process” because the “parties are, in essence, requesting the court to lend its judicial imprimatur to their D.P.A.” He rejected the agreement for “prosecuting so anemically” the defendant.The new era of supervision, however, is in trouble. Earlier this month, the appeals court in the District of Columbia reversed Judge Leon. The court reasoned that rejecting a deferred prosecution agreement was improper because the decision to prosecute a case or to wait before prosecuting the case lay in the discretion of the prosecutor. Indeed, it found that a different interpretation “would impinge upon the executive’s constitutionally rooted primacy over criminal charging decisions.”Judge Gleeson’s supervisory effort is also now on appeal.I think the appellate court has gotten it wrong. Judicial supervision of regulation – and that is precisely what a deferred prosecution agreement is, a small bore effort at regulation – is consistent with some of the most fundamental principles of administrative law.The government has a tolerable argument. Courts do not reach into prosecutors’ offices to review when and who they decide to charge. That is the job of the prosecutor and, ultimately, the attorney general.Nonetheless, something must change in the world of deferred prosecution agreements. They are increasing in number every year. The threat of punishment for noncompliance with a deferred prosecution agreement is a court order. Professors who have looked at the way prosecutors supervise deferred prosecution agreements do not like what they see. Prosecutors, moreover, have little experience with the oversight of a bureaucratic effort, even a little one.It is no way to run an oversight process. If the government is going to set up compliance programs with the specter of a court order looming at the end, then it should not expect that courts will stay out of the process from the beginning. That is how regulation works in this country, and if prosecutors are going to fashion themselves as regulators, then they are going to have to take the bitter with the sweet.There is a good argument for judicial supervision of a deferred prosecution agreement, too. The case remains on the court’s docket, “pursuant to written agreement with the defendant, with the approval of the court, for the purpose of allowing the defendant to demonstrate his good conduct,” as the Speedy Trial Act puts it. If matters like these remain on a court’s to-do list, judges should be expected to do something with them.David Zaring is associate professor of legal studies at the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania.Advertisement