
Another View By                     
CHRIS SAGERS

APRIL 29, 2016
The White House recently issued an executive order, supported by a report from the Council of Economic Advisers, discovering that monopoly is on the rise and directing federal agencies to look for ways to bolster competition and control specific anti-competitive abuses.The announcement invited an appreciative post in The New York Times by Paul Krugman and has prompted some days of debate among economists and antitrust lawyers. It no doubt reflected the growing frustration of voters, increasing evidence of serious problems in domestic competition and the increasingly substantiated possibility that the lack of it contributes to America’s alarming income inequality.Things are bad enough that calls for tougher competition are heard from such unlikely sources as The Economist and reportedly “establishment” presidential candidates.The order, however, is all rather frustrating to those toiling in the regrettably dusty precincts of antitrust policy, especially coming from a president who so raised our hopes. In his first presidential campaign, Mr. Obama promised to direct his administration “to reinvigorate antitrust enforcement,” since “antitrust is the American way to make capitalism work for consumers.”AdvertisementIt would be frustrating enough that the initiative seems certain of fairly complete failure, for reasons backed by a hundred years of history and evidence. It is directed to sector-specific federal agencies, which by and large have no antitrust enforcement power and have almost always used their powers to keep competition at bay.AdvertisementMoreover, initiatives under the order will probably be piecemeal, small and easily evaded. Consider what apparently is the sole initiative the government has planned so far, a call on the Federal Communications Commission to regulate cable TV boxes. (A request to be made by that stalwart champion of the consumer interest, the Commerce Department.) Those boxes may be overpriced, but will controlling that one little thing really keep cable companies from making it up somewhere else?But the real reason this effort is so stinging is that it comes as an all but explicit admission of the administration’s failure to enforce the antitrust laws, which have been on the books for 130 years.By taking steps like approving an airline merger that on one estimate will cause consumer injury of a $1 billion or more a year (an estimate I extrapolate from Table 7 of this remarkable report, by no less than a former Obama antitrust official, who was not involved in approval of the deal and has called it a mistake), administrations of both parties for some decades have painted us into a corner.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Markets are now so concentrated and ripe for abuse, and the political will for enforcement so lacking, that our antitrust laws seem increasingly hopeless. So we resort instead to some small regulatory interventions to tame a beast we could have kept from creating by just enforcing antitrust in the first place.Perhaps worst is that this new step breaks with what was a proudly liberal tradition. However much Republicans may congratulate themselves for “deregulation,” the movement to displace our onetime system of rate-and-entry regulation and replace it with antitrust was an affair dominated by liberal heroes: Ralph Nader; Senator Howard Metzenbaum; Senator Ted Kennedy; the economist and airline regulator Alfred Kahn; Jimmy Carter’s antitrust chief, John H. Shenefield; and above all, President Carter himself. (See this nice historical snapshot.)To the administration’s credit, the Council of Economic Advisers report itself was a welcome document. It collects recent evidence of rising market power, and it contains several muted but unmistakable calls for greater antitrust enforcement. And in fairness, the administration can hardly be blamed alone for the death of antitrust. It can’t really be blamed for not bringing cases it could not win, and the law has been made much, much harder to enforce by our now quite conservative federal judiciary.But neither the report nor the order is any real sign that the government means now, seven years into the president’s administration and at a time when most presidents issue slugs of pardons and other last-minute chores, to change much of anything. The Justice Department just recently approved another very big merger, Charter Communications’ acquisitions of Time Warner Cable and Bright House Networks, in a very concentrated and troubled industry. It was a move opposed by a whole coalition of consumer groups because it creates a national duopoly controlling 90 percent of high-speed broadband.In the end, this move keeps alive an old criticism of American competition policy. We all — across the political spectrum — are quite certain we want to have an antitrust law and to speak of it with due reverence. The one thing most of us really don’t want to do is actually use it.Politically, it would have been better for the president’s legacy just to have continued quietly doing nothing than to come out and admit it.Chris Sagers is James A. Thomas Distinguished Professor of Law at Cleveland State University.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »