
Street Scene By                     
WILLIAM D. COHAN

APRIL 29, 2016
It’s not so fun working on Wall Street these days. The hours are long, the pay is not nearly what it once was (though it is still very good, all things considered), and the public’s animosity toward the industry has become all too familiar. Even worse than working at an investment bank, however, is investing in one.For starters, there are few public companies that are less shareholder friendly than a Wall Street one. They seem to exist primarily for the benefit of the people who work at them, not the people who own them. Generally speaking, 40 percent to 50 percent of every dollar of revenue generated by these companies goes to employee compensation, which leaves far less net income for shareholders.Wall Street’s profitability is a shadow of what it once was. In the first quarter, Goldman Sachs’s return on equity was 6.5 percent and Morgan Stanley’s was 6.4 percent. For comparison, in the years before Goldman went public in 1999, its return on equity was often around 70 percent. As a result of this shift, Wall Street companies trade at a fraction of their book values.Despite all this, J. Daniel Plants, a former mergers banker at Goldman Sachs and JPMorgan Chase, smells opportunity. Mr. Plants is the founder of Voce Capital Management, a small hedge fund based in San Francisco that occasionally engages in shareholder activism. (Disclosure: Mr. Plants and I used to work together at JPMorgan more than 15 years ago.)AdvertisementVoce has started a proxy fight at an Arlington, Va., investment bank that used to be called Friedman, Billings, Ramsey. In the last year or so, Voce has built up a 5.3 percent stake in what is now called FBR & Company. The proxy battle aims to oust three of its directors and install Mr. Plants; Jarl Berntzen, another former Goldman Sachs banker; and Michael J. McConnell, a former managing director at Shamrock Capital Advisors’ $1 billion activist fund and a former banker at Kidder, Peabody. FBR’s annual meeting, while not yet scheduled, has traditionally been in late May.AdvertisementFBR was once a big success, but its glory days seemed to have faded with the departure over time of its three founders. The company has a market value of around $140 million. But it also has cash on its balance sheet of $70 million, plus private equity and hedge fund investments that it values at another $90 million or so, leading Mr. Plants to conclude that the market is valuing the company’s banking business at close to zero. In a 67-page presentation, he says the company is worth less today than when the current management team took over in January 2009.Voce is FBR’s third-largest investor, behind NWQ Investment Management and the Robeco Group’s Boston Partners. (Management owns about 15 percent of FBR on a fully diluted basis.) Mr. Plants has met with the company more than 10 times in the last year to try to understand its strategy. But after months of trying to persuade FBR’s management to return to the company’s highly profitable roots as the leading underwriter of arcane privately placed securities that big institutional investors can trade among themselves, Mr. Plants has gotten nowhere.This month, he decided to take his campaign public. With some hyperbole, Mr. Plants says FBR is a “Tiffany brand” that “has lost its way” but “can still be saved.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A spokesman for FBR declined to comment.Mr. Plants directs much of his frustration as a shareholder toward Richard J. Hendrix, FBR’s chief executive. Mr. Plants says that from the outset of Mr. Hendrix’s tenure, he has not been content with running a boutique investment bank. Instead, he has tried to mimic other investment banks like the former Donaldson Lufkin & Jenrette, which was bought by Credit Suisse in 2000, or Jefferies, a subsidiary of the Leucadia National Corporation, Mr. Plants says.“The company’s gone on a massive hiring and acquisition spree to try to become the next D.L.J. or Jefferies,” Mr. Plants tells me, “even though there’s no possible way that will ever succeed.” He says he thinks FBR has made a big mistake taking on high-end office real estate such as 299 Park Avenue in Manhattan, 1 International Place in Boston and 1 Embarcadero Center in San Francisco. He is especially critical of Mr. Hendrix’s compensation, which has added up to “more than $21 million” since he became chief executive in 2009, Mr. Plants says, “despite negative shareholder returns.”Mr. Plants argues that FBR should return to its roots in underwriting private placement securities and focus on its traditional strengths advising companies in the real estate and financial services industries. It should abandon its efforts, he says, in the consumer, media, telecom, technology and health care industries, where the competition from bigger banks is fierce.He says he also thinks FBR’s compensation is out of control. In 2015, $77 million, or 64 percent of FBR’s net revenue of $120 million, was paid out in compensation and benefits. Contrast that with FBR’s seeming failures as a mergers and acquisitions adviser. In 2015, the company generated a mere $9.5 million in advisory fees.“You raise a billion dollars for some company and you can’t get hired to do M.&A. for them?” he says. “They are just leaving money on the table by not mining their relationships.”It is unclear how Mr. Plants’s assault on FBR will play out, of course – he has lost around $1.5 million on his investment so far — but at a time when so many people are making assertions about the future of Wall Street, it is refreshing to see one activist investor put forward a blueprint to return one wayward company to the roots of its former glory.William D. Cohan is a former senior mergers and acquisitions banker who has written three books about Wall Street. His latest book is “The Price of Silence: The Duke Lacrosse Scandal, the Power of the Elite, and the Corruption of Our Great Universities.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »