By LESLIE PICKERAPRIL 29, 2016
Medivation, which makes drugs for prostate cancer, has a message for the French drug company Sanofi: The $9.3 billion cash takeover offer was not good enough.On Friday, David Hung, the founder, president and chief executive of Medivation, called Sanofi’s proposal “opportunistically timed.” The board of Medivation, a biotechnology company based in San Francisco, determined that the offer “substantially undervalues Medivation” and was “not in the best interests of the company and its stockholders.” The board unanimously rejected it.On Thursday, Sanofi went public with the offer it had made several weeks ago to Medivation, apparently wanting to apply pressure to the company to accept it. Medivation had not responded to the letter other than to acknowledge its receipt, so Sanofi hoped to appeal to Medivation’s shareholders. Under the terms, Sanofi would pay $52.50 a share in cash, which was a 50 percent premium over Medivation’s two-month volume-weighted average, Sanofi said.Medivation’s shares were falling earlier this year, reaching about $27 in February, almost half of where they traded a year earlier. The lower value presented an opportunity for Sanofi, which sought to acquire biotechnology companies that could strengthen its portfolio. Sanofi first discussed a possible takeover in a call with Mr. Hung on March 25 and again on April 3. Although Medivation was not interested in discussing a transaction, Sanofi sent its offer letter on April 15, and it received no definitive answer until Friday. Recently, Medivation has been trading around $56.AdvertisementDespite the rejection, Sanofi is not walking away.“While to date Medivation has chosen not to enter into discussions regarding this value-creating transaction, Sanofi remains committed to the combination and looks forward to engaging directly with Medivation shareholders with regard to our proposal,” Sanofi said in a statement.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Medivation produces Xtandi, a prostate cancer drug that has generated billions of dollars in sales since it was approved four years ago. The treatment is protected by a patent that extends for another decade, and the company is expecting even greater adoption by urologists this year.The company has an additional treatment in the pipeline that could treat breast cancer, ovarian cancer, prostate cancer and small-cell lung cancer.AdvertisementThis set of facts led the board to determine that Sanofi’s offer undervalued Medivation. Investors did not appear surprised by Medivation’s decision, and shares were trading flat on Friday.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.