AdvertisementSupported byBy Robert SimonsonRobert J. Cooper, whose unusual elderflower liqueur, St-Germain, introduced in 2007, was so completely embraced by the cocktail community that it became known as “bartender’s ketchup,” died on Monday in Santa Barbara, Calif. He was 39.His death was confirmed by Robyn Greene, the senior vice president for marketing and innovation at the Cooper Spirits Company, who said the cause was not immediately known.Mr. Cooper was a scion of the family that owns Charles Jacquin et Cie, an old cordials and liqueurs house based in Philadelphia. By his account, his father, Norton J. Cooper, gave him the cold shoulder when he suggested creating an elderflower liqueur like the ones he had encountered in bars in London.The younger Mr. Cooper persisted, however, going so far as to leave the family business to pursue his dream.“He said, ‘I’ll hire you back in a year when you fail,’” Mr. Cooper once recalled.He didn’t fail. St-Germain, packaged in a striking Art Deco bottle, landed like a thunderclap in the then-burgeoning cocktail world. Cocktail bartenders, hungry for new ingredients and flavors to work with, tossed it into every other new drink. By 2008 it was ubiquitous. In broader terms, it helped resuscitate the dormant liqueur business.Mr. Cooper proved to be a savvy marketer. He curried favor with influential young mixologists, sponsored cross-country bartender exchanges in which New York bartenders would guest-bartend at San Francisco bars, and vice versa, hired prominent bartenders as brand ambassadors and held an annual Jazz Age lawn party on Governors Island.In 2012, he sold St-Germain to Bacardi Ltd. The sum was not revealed, but Mr. Cooper said it was “more than I expected to see in a lifetime.’’Mr. Cooper went on to return to circulation bygone bar ingredients like Crème Yvette, a berry-violet liqueur, and Hochstadter’s Slow & Low, a form of the common 19th-century drink rock and rye. He anticipated the boom in rye whiskey by buying barrels of prime Canadian stock and then sitting on the liquid for years before releasing Lock Stock & Barrel, a 13-year-old straight rye whiskey, in 2013.Robert James Cooper was born on Aug. 3, 1976, in Manhattan. He graduated from the University of California, Santa Barbara with a bachelor’s degree in English and creative writing.He is survived by his wife, the former Kaitrin Cramm, and their two children, William and Charlotte.Mr. Cooper attributed his success in part to timing. PDT and Death & Co, two prominent New York cocktail bars, opened around the same time he introduced St-Germain.“It was lucky,” he said. “They wanted something different they could work with that had integrity. Now you can go to Whole Foods and get elderflower soft drinks.”Advertisement