AdvertisementSupported byBy Chad BrayLONDON — The Royal Bank of Scotland said on Friday that its losses widened in the first quarter compared with a year earlier, after it made a payment of 1.19 billion pounds, or about $1.7 billion, to the British government to fulfill a condition of its bailout package.In March, the bank, which is based in Edinburgh, made a final payment to end the so-called dividend access program, which gave the government priority for dividend payments. The government still owns about 73 percent of the bank.By ending the program, R.B.S. moved a step closer to being able to resume dividend payments to its shareholders. The lender, which received a £45 billion bailout during the financial crisis, has not paid a dividend since 2008.R.B.S. is in the middle of a large restructuring as it shifts away from being a lender with global ambitions to focus on retail and corporate banking in Britain and Ireland. It announced plans last year to dismantle its global investment bank and to reduce the number of countries in which it operates.For the three months ended March 31, R.B.S. reported a loss of £968 million, compared with a loss of £459 million in the first quarter of 2015.“This is another year of heavy lifting, and there will continue to be a lot of noise in our results,” Ross McEwan, the R.B.S. chief executive, said on a conference call with journalists. “But underneath that noise, you’ll see we’re on track and delivering on our plan.”On an operating basis, R.B.S. said that it posted a pretax profit of £421 million in the first quarter.Net interest income, the measure of what a bank earns on its lending after deducting what it pays out on deposits and other liabilities, declined 2 percent to £2.16 billion in the quarter, from £2.2 billion in the first quarter of 2015.Over all, revenue fell 13 percent to £3.06 billion in the first quarter, from £3.52 billion in the same period a year earlier.Operating expenses were down 33 percent to £2.42 billion in the quarter, from £3.61 billion in the first quarter of 2015.The lender recorded restructuring charges of £238 million in the first quarter, from £447 million in the same period a year earlier.On Thursday, R.B.S. said that there was “significant risk” that it might not meet a deadline set by European regulators to spin off its Williams & Glyn branch network by the end of 2017.The bulk of its restructuring costs in the first quarter related to the separation of Williams & Glyn. R.B.S. also incurred £630 million in costs last year related to the separation of the business.R.B.S. said on Thursday that it was exploring “alternative means to achieve separation and divestment” of the business. The bank declined to say on Friday what form the divestment might take.During the quarter, R.B.S. took £31 million in costs for potential settlements and fines in the first quarter.Advertisement