AdvertisementSupported byBy Mary Williams WalshGov. Alejandro García Padilla of Puerto Rico said Sunday that he had ordered a debt moratorium, blocking a $422 million payment due on Monday.The missed payment is the biggest yet in a continuing series of defaults by the struggling United States territory, and a warning that Puerto Rico will probably default on even larger and more consequential payments due on July 1, unless Congress enacts rescue legislation before then.On that date nearly $2 billion is due, roughly $800 million of which consists of general-obligation bonds that carry an explicit guarantee by the Puerto Rican Constitution. Missing a major payment on such debt would not only set off a wave of creditor lawsuits, but it could also cast a shadow over America’s $3.7 trillion municipal bond market, for decades an essential source of financing for public works.“This was a painful decision,” the governor said in a televised speech on Sunday, in which he struck a nationalistic tone and said he had to invoke his emergency powers under Puerto Rican law because help from Washington was not forthcoming.“We would have preferred to have had a legal framework to restructure our debts in an orderly manner,” he said.Federal law bars Puerto Rico from restructuring under Chapter 9, the part of the bankruptcy code that insolvent cities and other local governments can use. Lawmakers in the House of Representatives, under the direction of Speaker Paul D. Ryan, have been trying to draft a special law to give Puerto Rico legal powers to abrogate debt, something normally available only in bankruptcy.But the bill is contentious and important provisions are still being negotiated.The governor said the process was too slow. In his speech he blamed unnamed “opponents of the people of Puerto Rico,” who, he said, “have unleashed a brutal campaign of racial discrimination and lies against us,” convincing some members of Congress that Puerto Rico needed austerity rather than debt relief.“Puerto Rico needs Speaker Paul Ryan to exercise his leadership and honor his word,” he said. “We can’t wait longer. We need this restructuring mechanism now.”The governor also expressed skepticism about a core principle of the rescue legislation: that to get extraordinary powers to reduce debt, Puerto Rico must first come under federal oversight. Mr. García Padilla said he would welcome oversight that assisted the island’s elected government, but would strongly oppose any federal oversight board that could overrule the government on matters like taxation, or on which creditors ought to be paid first.“It could become a public embarrassment for the United States to admit, before the international community, that while it fights for democracy in foreign lands, it denies democracy it in its own backyard,” he warned.The $422 million payment due on Monday was owed by the island’s powerful Government Development Bank, which for decades has raised money for various branches of government and performed other critical tasks. Its creditors include many local credit unions on the island, which late last week agreed in effect to roll their debt forward for another year.But other creditors appeared late Sunday to be holding out for cash. Until the moratorium was invoked the Government Development Bank had until the close of business Monday to pay, because the due date, May 1, fell on a Sunday.Early in April, a group of hedge funds sued the bank, arguing that it was insolvent and was using its scarce resources to “prop up” other parts of the government. The hedge funds asked the federal court in San Juan to freeze the bank’s assets, other than those paid out to support the basic safety and well-being of the island’s residents.A few days later, Puerto Rico’s legislature gave the governor the power to do much the same thing: to halt debt payments, to save cash for essential public services.“What we will never do is put the lives and safety of our people in danger,” said Mr. García Padilla in his televised speech. “They are, and will continue to be, our priority.”Advertisement