
Fair Game By                     
 GRETCHEN MORGENSON
 
APRIL 29, 2016
When a deeply troubled company replaces its chief executive, it makes sense to expect the new C.E.O. to bring a fresh take to its operations. A clean sweep, so to speak.But if shareholders in Valeant Pharmaceuticals International envisage a vastly different approach by Joseph C. Papa, the company’s incoming chief executive, they may be disappointed. That’s because in the almost 10 years that Mr. Papa headed Perrigo, a maker and distributor of over-the-counter and generic prescription drugs, the company pursued a series of strategies that were very Valeant-esque.They include a merger with a foreign company that allowed Perrigo to slash its tax rate, a tendency to pay up for acquisitions and an assiduous use of fantasy accounting that excludes real business costs.Maybe it’s too much to ask Valeant to bring in a chief executive who has done none of the above. After all, the similarities between Perrigo and Valeant are to some degree the result of practices that prevail across the drug industry. Pharmaceutical company managers are aggressive deal makers and love tax inversions. They are also big on presenting financial results that are calculated using their preferred arithmetic, not generally accepted accounting principles.AdvertisementStill, given that Valeant’s business model has been so thoroughly discredited, it would have been nice to see the company hire a manager who has eschewed such practices.AdvertisementI asked to speak to Mr. Papa about how he planned to right the S.S. Valeant, but through a spokeswoman he declined to be interviewed. That’s understandable; the ship he is skippering is listing severely.Of course, there is one crucial difference between the management styles of Mr. Papa and J. Michael Pearson: Perrigo does not have Valeant’s reputation for buying old drugs and jacking up their prices to generate plush profits. That’s a good thing.Valeant investors are also surely hoping that Mr. Papa has a moral core, something Mr. Pearson apparently lacked while he was running the company. Now that Mr. Pearson is on his way out, he has begun to express regret over the company’s drug-pricing practices. He started wearing this hair shirt when he testified before Congress on Wednesday.In recent investor filings, Valeant conceded that under Mr. Pearson, the “tone at the top of the organization and the performance-based environment” had contributed to its woes. This theme continued with the announcement on Monday of Mr. Papa’s hiring.“Fostering an ethical culture and creating opportunities for professional development have always been high priorities for Joe,” said Robert Ingram, Valeant’s chairman, in a statement about the hire. For his part, Mr. Papa said he was excited to help the company “chart a new course.” A major board shake-up at Valeant is also in progress.A new course is obviously what’s needed at Valeant. Yet the commonalities between it and Perrigo are disconcerting.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Both Perrigo and Valeant have reduced their tax bills by merging with foreign entities. In 2013, Perrigo acquired the Elan Corporation, a biotechnology company, and moved its headquarters to Ireland. As a result of this move, Perrigo’s tax rate dropped; recently the company said its anticipated tax rate for 2016 was 14 percent.Another parallel between the companies is a predilection for paying up for acquisitions, a hallmark of Mr. Pearson’s years at Valeant. During the company’s heyday, its costly deals were no problem, but now that Valeant must dispose of some assets to help pay down its $31 billion in debt, the premiums it paid are likely to hurt the company’s attempts to shore up its balance sheet.AdvertisementA recent acquisition by Perrigo also appears to have been overpriced. In March 2015, Perrigo paid $4.5 billion for Omega Pharma Invest, a marketer of over-the-counter health care products based in Belgium. The company has already written down the acquisition by $185 million, but on Monday Perrigo said it had identified additional “indicators of impairment” among certain intangible assets acquired in the deal.The size of the impairment is not yet known, but charges associated with it “could be material and have a significant impact on the company’s financial results,” Perrigo said.Perhaps the most significant similarity between the companies is their use of fantasy accounting.A recent study by The Analyst’s Accounting Observer noted that Perrigo topped the list of 30 companies in the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index with the largest gulf between net income as calculated under standard accounting rules and profits reported by the companies excluding certain costs. Last year, Perrigo reported a loss of $32.8 million under generally accepted accounting practices, or GAAP, but showed a profit of $1.1 billion doing the math its own way.As the incoming chief executive at Valeant, Mr. Papa is in for a heavy lift, said Irina Koffler, an equity analyst at Mizuho Securities who has 10 years of experience in the pharmaceutical industry. One thing’s for sure: He is being well paid for his efforts. On Wednesday, the company said Mr. Papa would earn salary, target bonus and stock grants worth about $67 million.Ms. Koffler said that because Valeant’s practice was to buy older drugs that were soon to go off patent, the company’s portfolio is chock-full of products whose profits are headed for the cliff. “They need either an internally developed pipeline that will take the place of those things or they need to buy assets,” she said. “But Valeant can’t buy assets because they are underwater with their debt.”So what’s in the company’s pipeline? Ms. Koffler pointed to a glaucoma drug that has promise and a psoriasis treatment, but said that “other than that, they don’t have a lot.”Even worse, Ms. Koffler noted recent assurances made by company representatives about changing Valeant’s reviled drug pricing. Testifying before Congress on Wednesday, William A. Ackman, the head of Pershing Square Capital Management, a hedge fund with a huge stake in Valeant and a strong presence on its board, said he would recommend that the company cut prices on some of its high-cost drugs. While patients will appreciate such an action, it will not do much for the company’s financial health.Which is perhaps the point. For years, Valeant was beloved by investors for its laser focus on so-called shareholder value. Now that it is being forced to add social values to its DNA, it’s anybody’s guess where this company will end up.A version of this article appears in print on May 1, 2016, on Page BU1 of the New York edition with the headline: At Valeant, New Skipper, Same Tack.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »