By MICHAEL CIEPLYMAY 1, 2016
LOS ANGELES — Some will watch “Hell or High Water” at the Cannes Film Festival in mid-May and see diversity. Gil Birmingham, one of its stars, is a Native American, of Comanche ancestry.Others will notice political currency. A contemporary Western set in Texas (and shot in New Mexico), the film finds brothers played by Chris Pine and Ben Foster settling scores with a bank, and perhaps the 1 percent, over a mother’s reverse mortgage gone wrong.But cineastes may spot something else.That might be — depending on your critical sense, and tolerance for West Texas humor — one of the top diner or deli scenes in movie memory, right up there with the chicken salad sandwich order in “Five Easy Pieces” and Meg Ryan’s faked orgasm at a deli in “When Harry Met Sally.”The scene stealer in “Hell or High Water” is a waitress played by Margaret Bowman, who is 88 and appears to be just a little more grizzled than Jeff Bridges. For the record, Mr. Bridges is pretty grizzled as a Texas Ranger, near retirement, trying to get a bite in the “world famous” T-Bone Cafe, set in Coleman, Tex.Advertisement“Howdy, ma’am. How are you today?” Mr. Bridges opens, innocently enough.“Hot. And I don’t mean the good kind,” Ms. Bowman says, getting down to business. “So, what don’t you want?”AdvertisementTo say more would get deep into spoiler territory. Suffice it to say, Mr. Bridges’s character gets off easier than a guy from New York who once walked into the T-Bone and tried to order fish.Previously titled “Comancheria,” “Hell or High Water” is based on a script by Taylor Sheridan. Mr. Sheridan also wrote “Sicario,” a story of the border drug wars, and had a recurring role as Deputy Chief David Hale in the television series “Sons of Anarchy.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.CBS Films is expected to release “Hell or High Water” in partnership with Lionsgate in late summer, but has not yet set a date.A bit unexpectedly, the movie is directed by David Mackenzie, a Scottish filmmaker who first gained notice with the 2003 film “Young Adam,” a drama set in working-class Glasgow, with Ewan McGregor, Tilda Swinton and Emily Mortimer in its cast.“The movie has a lot of themes that are running in the American election, really: guns, oil, banks,” Mr. Mackenzie said, speaking last week from his home in Glasgow.West Texas, Mr. Mackenzie said, first captivated him during a stay with a friend in Alpine. As for Ms. Bowman, a Texas native who began acting when she was 60 and had a small part in “No Country for Old Men,” Mr. Mackenzie said he knew what he should do as soon as his casting staff had her read for the part.“My job as a director was to put it in the right place, and let it run,” he said.A version of this article appears in print on May 2, 2016, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: Sandwiched in a Cannes Contender, a Diner Scene for the Ages.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »