AdvertisementSupported byBy Mary Williams WalshPuerto Rico’s default on most of a $422 million debt payment on Monday puts the spotlight back on Washington to enact a rescue package for the island, and congressional aides said a revised bill would be introduced next week.On Monday, Treasury Secretary Jacob J. Lew renewed his call on Congress to act swiftly, warning in a letter to House Speaker Paul Ryan that without a legal framework for a debt restructuring, Puerto Rico is in danger of getting caught in “a series of cascading defaults” that could lead to a taxpayer bailout.“This is not just a matter of financial liabilities and litigation,” Mr. Lew said in the letter, which was circulated to other lawmakers and released publicly. Late last year, Mr. Ryan instructed the relevant House committees to find a “reasonable solution” for Puerto Rico.Mr. Lew, in Monday’s letter and in an interview last month with the Spanish-language television station Univision, cited signs of mounting woes, including the closing of hospital facilities on the island and the struggle to contain the spread of the Zika virus with scant financial resources available. “The human costs for the 3.5 million Americans in Puerto Rico are real. And they are escalating daily,” Mr. Lew wrote.On Sunday, Gov. Alejandro García Padilla gave a televised address in which he announced the payment default — the biggest to date in Puerto Rico’s worsening debt crisis — and said he had to order it because Washington had failed to help in time.“We have repeatedly traveled to Washington to convey the urgency of the situation,” the governor said. “So far, no action has been taken. The crisis escalates each passing day.”Puerto Rico did pay $23 million, representing interest due on Monday. The remaining $399 million that was not paid was to cover the principal.Congressional aides said on Monday they agreed that the latest default showed an urgent need to establish federal oversight and restructuring powers for Puerto Rico, but they could not see a way to speed up the process. In 1984 Congress explicitly barred Puerto Rico from restructuring debt in bankruptcy, without leaving any rationale for doing so.Now that they must design some other restructuring framework for Puerto Rico, lawmakers are intent on leaving a full paper trail, which takes time, said Parish Braden, a spokesman for the Republican majority of the House Natural Resources Committee, which is drafting the bill in consultation with House Democrats and the Obama administration.The payment on Monday came from the island’s powerful Government Development Bank. That institution has been involved in virtually all public borrowing by Puerto Rico and performs other critical tasks as well, such as holding cash on deposit for municipalities and government agencies.In November the bank was found to be insolvent, and in April it was sued by a group of hedge funds calling for its assets to be frozen.Legislators on the island thought a bank run might ensue, and they raced to enact a measure giving the governor the power to halt debt payments by the development bank. Other, smaller debt payments were also due from other branches of government on Monday, but the moratorium law was initially written to halt only debt payments by the Government Development Bank.That means Puerto Rico did not default on Monday on a $1.5 million monthly payment on its general-obligation debt, said Matt Fabian, a managing director at Municipal Market Analytics. General-obligation debt is given top priority by the Puerto Rico Constitution, and if the island skipped that type of payment it would face lawsuits from its creditors.“It’s all about avoiding powerful litigation for as long as possible,” Mr. Fabian said, explaining why he thought Puerto Rico made one payment and defaulted on the other.But the new law does allow the governor to declare a moratorium on other types of debt payments that come due on July 1. Those payments total about $2 billion, including about $800 million related to general-obligation debt.One of the sticking points in the rescue legislation has been how to handle the highest-priority debt. The Treasury Department has argued that Puerto Rico’s restructuring will not be successful if all debts are not on the table. But some lawmakers are concerned about overriding Puerto Rico’s Constitution, or setting a precedent that deeply indebted states might one day try to follow.While waiting for Congress, some creditors have also been dickering with Puerto Rico over voluntary debt adjustments. One group, made up of credit unions that hold some of the development bank’s debt, agreed to a one-year deferral of $33 million of the total $422 million payment.And in a statement issued just before midnight on Sunday, the development bank said that a second group of creditors was considering whether to settle their accounts with the bank for about 47 cents on the dollar. The details of any such settlement are unknown, but while deliberations continued, the bank said, the creditors agreed to not sue over the missed payment on Monday.Advertisement