By LESLIE PICKERNOV. 16, 2015
Arne Sorenson, the chief executive of Marriott, on the $12.2 billion deal to buy Starwood Hotels and create the world’s largest hotel company.When Marriott International’s $12.2 billion bid for Starwood Hotels and Resorts Worldwide was announced on Monday morning, investors and analysts were surprised.It was not the sale itself — Starwood, whose brands include Westin, W and Sheraton, had effectively put itself up for sale in late April — but that the buyer was Marriott.Of all the rumored suitors — Hyatt Hotels Corporation, InterContinental Hotels Group and a few Chinese companies — Marriott had not been seen as being in the mix. On Marriott’s earnings call on April 30, the company’s chief executive, Arne Sorenson, waved off a question about a combination, saying it was inconsistent with its previous acquisition strategy.The hotel industry has changed since the spring, however. The stocks of Marriott and Starwood have declined at least 9 percent since that time, and trends like the stronger dollar and competition from the room-sharing start-up Airbnb have made consolidation more attractive, according to analysts.Our columnist Andrew Ross Sorkin and his Times colleagues help you make sense of major business and policy headlines — and the power-brokers who shape them.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.That changed the dynamics of a deal. Hyatt was a competitive bidder almost to the end, people briefed on the negotiations said. But the unexpected suitor, Marriott, had an offer that was similar to Hyatt’s, and the Starwood board ultimately concluded that Marriott’s stock had greater potential, said these people, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because the proceedings were private.AdvertisementAs it became clear that Marriott would prevail, the advisers to the two companies met and reached a deal in New York through the weekend, the people said.AdvertisementOn Monday, Marriott announced that it would acquire Starwood for $11.9 billion in stock and $340 million in cash. That means cash was used for a mere 2.8 percent of the deal, which is the seventh-lowest percentage on record for cash-and-stock deals greater than $10 billion, according to data compiled by Dealogic.The deal creates the world’s largest hotel company, with more than 5,500 owned or franchised hotels with 1.1 million rooms around the world.The agreement represented a premium of about 6 percent above the average of where Starwood’s stock had traded in the 20 days before Nov. 13, according to a statement Monday. The premium was 19 percent using the same period through Oct. 26 when the recent takeover speculation began.Given the competitive sales process, investors were disappointed by the lower-than-expected premium, and Starwood’s shares fell 3.6 percent on Monday. Marriott’s shares gained 1.4 percent. That is the opposite effect of what traditionally happens after a takeover is announced.Still, Starwood’s premium was higher than what Blackstone agreed to spend in September on Strategic Hotels — which owns the Four Seasons hotels and resorts in Silicon Valley, Washington and Jackson Hole, Wyo., the Fairmont and Intercontinental hotels in Chicago, and the JW Marriott Essex House Hotel in Manhattan. That $6 billion deal came at a 13 percent premium to the company’s price on July 23, before an article was published about a potential transaction.It seems unlikely, although possible, that Starwood will get another bidder at this stage. The merger agreement said Starwood would have to pay Marriott a $400 million fee to get out of the deal and did not grant Starwood the ability to shop the offer around.Mr. Sorenson would remain president and chief executive of Marriott after the transaction closes and the headquarters will continue to be in Bethesda, Md. Marriott’s board of directors will increase to 14, with the addition of three members from Starwood.AdvertisementLazard and Citigroup provided financial advice to Starwood, while Deutsche Bank advised Marriott. Cravath, Swaine & Moore served as legal counsel for Starwood and Gibson, Dunn & Crutcher counseled Marriott.The two companies say that they are stronger together than apart.The combined hotelier would have posted more than $2.7 billion in fee revenue for the 12 months that ended Sept. 30. The transaction would enable $200 million in annual cost savings in its second full year after closing by leveraging back-office and operational efficiencies.The deal came after Starwood announced last month that it would spin off its time-share business, Vistana Signature Experiences, and merge it with a subsidiary of the Interval Leisure Group. Starwood shareholders are to receive $7.80 a share, or about $1.3 billion, as part of that transaction.One of the biggest challenges that Marriott will have to confront is Starwood’s Sheraton brand, which has been struggling, according to Robert LaFleur, an analyst with JMP Securities.“One of the reasons Starwood went on this review to begin with was the Sheraton brand,” Mr. LaFleur said by telephone. “If there’s anyone who can fix it, it would be Marriott. I think it will take a couple of years for these companies to realize these synergies broadly.”The deal could also prompt a series of other transactions. Marriott could either decide to turn around the Sheraton brand or sell it outright, said Wouter Geerts, a travel analyst with Euromonitor International.“The announcement of this acquisition continues the consolidation trend in the travel industry,” Mr. Geerts said by email. “It is unlikely that it stops here.”Chad Bray contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on November 17, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Marriott’s Bid for Starwood Is Successful.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.