By LESLIE PICKERMAY 2, 2016
GNC Holdings, the vitamins and health-supplement chain with 9,000 stores, may be looking to sell itself.GNC said that it had hired Goldman Sachs and the law firm Wachtell, Lipton, Rosen & Katz to advise on “strategic and financial alternatives,” according to a statement Monday. The review will look at the company’s current plan, as well as other strategies such optimizing the capital structure, partnerships or a potential sale.GNC has a total enterprise value of about $3.1 billion, according to Standard & Poor’s Capital IQ.The announcement comes days after GNC announced earnings and projections that disappointed investors, sending the stock 29 percent lower on Thursday.Revenue, same-store sales and net income were all lower in the first quarter from a year ago. Management blamed a need to mark down prices for expiring products and lower demand for Vitapak, a vitamin aimed at athletes, for the “unacceptable” results.After speaking with a range of shareholders, GNC decided to pursue a review of the company’s alternatives, the company’s chairman, Michael F. Hines, said in the release.Advertisement“We are in the early stages of a broad review and will take the time we need to thoroughly evaluate our opportunities to achieve the best results for our shareholders, business partners and associates,” Mr. Hines said. “While the review is ongoing, GNC will continue to act with the necessary urgency to deliver improved financial performance by addressing our near-term challenges and continuing to execute our strategic initiatives.”AdvertisementGNC’s stock gained about 6 percent in early trading Monday.Contributing to GNC’s sluggish demand is the constant string of headlines about how regulators are cracking down on the dietary-supplement industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Justice Department said in November that it had filed criminal and civil enforcement actions against companies and individuals in the industry. Although GNC was not named in any of the cases, the company did have recent run-ins with the Oregon and New York attorneys general over their ingredients and testing procedures. GNC said the Oregon lawsuit was made “without merit” and reached an agreement with the New York attorney general.Still, the negative publicity surrounding the industry has affected many consumers’ impressions about the safety and necessity of vitamins and dietary supplements.GNC started 80 years ago as a health food store in downtown Pittsburgh, soon expanding to multiple locations, while manufacturing its own vitamins and supplements. The company was passed around among various private equity firms, starting in the late 1990s, until Ontario Teachers’ Pension Plan and Ares Management took the company public five years ago.A version of this article appears in print on May 3, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Earnings Slide Prompts GNC to Consider Its Options, Including a Potential Sale.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.